THE WHITE DEVIL, OR THE HYPOCRITE UNCASED: IN A SERMON Preached at PAVLS
Cross, March 7. 1612.

BY THOMAS ADAMS Minister of the Gospel at Willington, in Bedford-shire.

JOHN 6. 70. Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil?

LONDON, Printed by MELCHISEDECH BRADVVOOD for RALPH MAB, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Angel.

1613.

TO THE VERY WORTHY AND NOBLY-DISPOSED GENTLEMAN Sir THOMAS CHEEK Knight.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
This Sermon bears so strange a title in the forhead, that I durst not (a
while) study for a Patronage to it, but intended to send it to the broad world,
to shift for it self, as fearing it would not be owned: for it taxes many
vices; specially the Black Evil, secret Theeuery, and the White Devil, sly
Hypocrisy; whence it takes the denomination, now what ambitious Courtier,
would grace such a Stranger? what vicious Greatness would entertain such a
Page? what corrupted Lawyer, such a Client? what covetous Gentleman, such a
Tenant? what usurious Citizen, such a Chapman? Indeed what guilty man, such a
Book, as will tell him to his face, thou art the man? yet because, first
generally, the world would think, I had brought forth a strange Child; that I
could get no Godfather to it; And especially, because you (rare in these
Apostate times) are known free from the aspersion of these speckled stains,
the world bestowing on you, that worthy (not undeserved) Character of Virtue:
so that with a clear and vn-clouded brow (the argument of an innocent soul)
you may read these lines; I have been bold, at once, to offer this to your
Patronage, and my self to your service. To this, your affection to divine
Knowledge, good profection in it, and much time spent toward the perfection of
it, (a disposition worthy your blood) have prompted me with encouragement. It
is not the first of this nature, that I have published, (perhaps the last) but
if I had not judged it the best, I would not have been so ambitious, as to
present it to the view of so approved a Judgment. Thus in affiance, of your
good acceptance; I humbly leave you to him, that never leaves his.

Your worships in my best of services, THOMAS ADAMS.

To the Reader.
HOnest and understanding Reader; (if neither, hands off) I never saluted thy
General name by a special Epistle, till now: and now, perhaps, soon enough:
but if Honesty be Usher to thy understanding, and understanding Tutour to thy
Honesty; as I cannot fear, so I need not doubt, or treat with thee for Truce:
Truce, of what? of Suspense, not of Suspension; it belongs to our Betters:
Suspend thy censure, do not suspend me by thy censure. I do not call thee
aside, to ask, with what applause this Sermon passes, but (it is all, I would
have and hear) with what benefit. I had rather convert one soul, then have
an hundredth praise me. Whereof, if I were (so besotted to be) ambitious, by
this I could not hope it: for it pulls many tender and tendered sins out of their
downy neasts; and who strikes vice, and is not stricken with calumnies? I must
rather think, it has passed from one press to another, to a worse, hazarding
it self to be pressed to death with censures: which yet (though I lowly hope
better) I cannot fear; since it speaks no more, nor other, then justifiable
truth. What has been objected already, I must breefly answer. It is excepted,
that I am too merry, in describing some vices. Indeed, such is their ridiculous
nature, that their best conviction is derision; yet I abominate any
pleasantness here, but Christian; and would provoke no smile but of Disdain:
wherein the gravity of matter, shall free my form of words from lightness.
Others say, I am other-where too Satyrically-bitter. It is partly confessed: I am
bitter enough to the sins, and therein (I think) better to the sinners, more
charitable to the persons. Some wish I would have spared the Church-theeues,
because it is not yet generally granted, that Impropriations of Tithes, are
appropriations of wrongs; but if there be a competent maintenance to the
Minister, and not to him neither, except of worthy gifts, (provided, that they
judge of his gifts and competencie) it is enough: well, if any such be grieved,
let him allow his Minister a Sufficiency, under which he cannot live, without
want to his family, or disgrace to his profession (at least, so taken.) and
heerof certified, I will take counsel to draw the books, and put his name out
of the Catalogue of Thieves: But it would be strange if any of these Ziba's
should yield to Mephibosheth a division of his own lands or goods; when they
do, I will say, David is come again to his Kingdom, or rather, the Son of
David is come to Judgment. Others would have Inclosers put out, because
(commonly) great men, but therefore the greater their finnes, and deserving the
greater taxation. Nay some would persuade Usury to step in, to trauerse his
Indictment, and prove himself no Thief, by the verdict of the Country;
because Sub Iudice lis est, it is not yet decided, that Usury is a Sin. It is
Sub Iudice indeed, but the Judge has already interposed his Interlocutory, and
will one day give his Definitive Sentence, that Usury shall never dwell in his
holy Mountain. Others blunder in their verdict, that I have too violently
baited the Bag at the stake of Reproach, and all because I want it: I will not
return their censure, that they are hence known to have it, that speak
against me, for speaking against it: who yet, if they would light the candle of
their Speech, at the fire of their Understandings, would easily see and say,
that it is not the fullness of the Bag, but the fowlenesse of the
Bagge-bearer, that I reprove: I could allow your purses fuller of
wealthinesse, so your minds were emptier of wickedness: but the Bags
effects, in our affects, usually load us, either with parcimony or
prodigallity; the lightest of which burdens, says Saint Bernard, is able to
sincke a Ship. Others affirm, that I have made the Gate of Heaven too
narrow, and they hope to find it wider; God and the Scriptures are more
merciful. True it is, that Heauen-Gate is in it self wide enough; and the
narrowness is in respect of the Enterer: and though thy sins cannot make that
too little to receive thee, yet they make thee to gross and unfit, to get into
that: thus the Straitenesse arises from the deficiency, (not of their Glory,
but) of our Grace. Lastly, some have the Title sticking in their stomachs; as
if Christ him self had not called Judas a Devil; and likened an Hypocrite to
a Whited Sepulcher: as if Luther did not give Judas this very Attribute; and
other Fathers of the Church, from whom Luther deriues it. Good Christian
Reader, leave cauils against it, and fall to caueats in it: read it through: if
there be nothing in it to better thee, either the fault is in my hand, or in
thy heart. Howsoever, give God the praise; let none of his. Glory cleave to us
earthen Instruments. If thou likest it, then (quo animo legis, obserua, quo
obseruas, serua) with the same affection thou read it, remember it, and with
the same thou remembrest, practice it. In hope of this, and prayer for this, I
commend this Book to thy Conscience, and thy conscience to God. Willington,
March. 27. 1613.

Thine if thou be Christ's T. A.

THE WHITE DEVIL OR THE HYPOCRITE UNCASED: In a Sermon preached at PAVLS
Cross, March the seventh, 1612.
JOHN 12. 6. This he said, not that he cared for the poor: but because he
was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein.
IAm to speak of Judas, a Devil by John 6. 70.
the testimony of our Savior: have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is
a Devil? yet so transformed into a show of sanctimony, that he, who was a
Devil in the knowledge of Christ, seemed an Angel in the deceived judgment
of his fellow-Apostles. A Devil he was, black within and full of ranckour, but
white without, and skinned over with hypocrisy; therefore to use Luthers word,
we will call him the white Devil. Even here he discouers himself, and makes
good this title: Consider the occasion thus.

Christ was now at supper among his friends, where every one showed him
several kindness; among the rest Marie powers on him a box of ointment: take
a short view of her affection. 1. She gave a precious unction, Spikenard:
Judas valued it at 300. pence, which (after the best computation) is with us,
above 8. pounds; as if she couldnot be too prodigal in her love. 2. She gave
him a whole pound, verse 3. she did not cut him out devotion by peece-meale or
remnant, nor serve God by the ounce: but she gave all; for quality, precious;
for quantity, the whole pound: Oh that our service to God were answerable! We
rather give one ounce to lust, a second to pride, a third to malice etc. so
dividing the whole pound to the Devil: she gave all to Christ. 3. To omit her
anointing his feet, and wiping them with the hairs of her head: when her
humility and zeal met: his feet as unworthy to touch his head: with her
hairs, as if her chief ornament was but good enough to honor Christ withal;
the beauty of her head to serve Christ's feet; she brake the box, tanquam ebria
amore; and this of no worse then Alablaster, that Christ might have the
remaining drop: and the whole house was filled with the odor: at this repines
Judas, pretending the poor, for he was white; intending his profit, for he
was a Devil.

The words contain in them a double

Censure, 1. Judas censure of Mary: this repeatingly folded up: (...): he said
thus; with reference to his former words: verse 5. why was not this etc. 2.
Gods oensure of Judas: this Partly 1. Negative: he cared not for the poor: to
convince his hypocrisy, that roaued at the poor, but leuelled at his profit;
like a Ferry-man, looking toward charity with his face, rowing toward
couetosnesse with his arms. 2. Affirmative, demonstrating his 1. Meaning: he
was a thief. 2. Means: he had the bag. 3. Maintenance: he bare what was
given; or put therein.





In Judas censure of Mary, many things are obseruable, to his shame, our
instruction; and these. 1. some more general. 2. some more special and
personal; all worthy your attention, if there wanted nothing in the
deliverance.

1. Observe that Saint John lays this fault on Judas Generally. Matt. 26. 8.
Mark. 14. 4.
only: but Saint Matthew and Mark charge the Disciples with it, and find them
guilty of this repining: and that (in both, (...)) not without Indignation.
This knot is easily untied; Judas was the ringleader, and his voice was the
voice of Jacob, all charitable; but his hands were the hands of Esau, rough and
injurious: Judas pleades, for the poor, the whole Synod, likes the motion
well; they second it with their verdits: their words agree; but their spirits
differ: Judas has a further reach; to distill this ointment through the
Limbecke of hypocrisy into his own purse; the Apostles mean plainly: Judas
was malicious against his master; they simply thought the poor had more need.
So sensible and ample a difference do circumstances put into one and the same
action: presumption or weakness, knowledge or ignorance, simplicity or craft
do much aggrauate or mitigate an offense. The Apostles consent to the
circumstance, not to the substance, setting as it were) their hands to a
blancke paper: it was in them pity, rather then piety, in Judas neither pity
nor piety, but plain perfidie, an exorbitant and transcendent sin, that
would have brought innocence it self into the same condemnation: thus the
aggregation of circumstances, is the aggrauation of offenses. Consider his
couetise, fraud, malice, hypocrisy, and you will say, his sin was monstrous;
sine modo, like a Mathematical line, (diuisibilis in semper diuisibilia)
infinitely diuisible. The other Apostles receive the infection, but not into so
corrupted stomachs, therefore it may make them sick, not kill them: sin
they do, but not unto death. It is a true rule even in good works: finibus
non officijs, discernendae sunt virtutes a vitijs: virtues are discerned from
vices not by their offices, but by their ends or intents: neither the outward
form, no nor (often) the event, is a sure rule to measure the action by: the
eleven Tribes went twice by Gods special word and warrant against the
Beniamites, yet in both assaults received the overthrow. Cum Pater Aug.
filium, Christus corpus, Judas Dominum, res eadem, non causa, non intentio
operantis: when God gave his son, Christ gave himself, Judas gave his
Master; here was the same work, not the same cause nor intention in the
workers: the same rule holds proportion in offenses: here they all sin, the
Apostles in the imprudence of their censure, Judas in the impudence of his
rancour. John. 8, 7.


I might here first lead you into the distinction of sins, secondly, or
trauerse the Indictment with Judas, whereby he accuses Mary, justifying her
action conuincing his slander. thirdly, or discover to you the fowlnesse of
rash judgment, which often sets a rankling tooth into virtues side; often calls
chastity her self an harlot, and with a guilty hand throws the first stone
at Innocence.

But that which I fasten on, is the power and force of example: Judas with a
false weight sets all the wheels of their tongues a going: the steward has
begun a health to the poor, and they begin to pledge him round. Authority
shows it self in this, to beget a likeness of manners: Tutum est peccare
autoribus illis: It is safe sinning after such authors: if the Steward say the
word, the fiat of consent goes round. Imperio maximus, exemplo mayor A great
man is not powerful in his praesidency, as in his prae cedency.
. He that is greatest in his government, is yet greater in his precedent. A
great man's livery is countenance enough, to keep drunkenness from the stocks,
whoredom from the post, murder and stealth from the gallows: such double
sinners shall not escape with single judgments: such leprous and contagious
spirits, shall answer to the justice of God, not only for their own sins, but
for all theirs, whom the pattern of their precede^cy has induced to the like,
to the like, said I? nay, to worse: for if the master drink (ad plenitudine^)
to fullness, the servant will (ad ebrietate^) to madness: the imitation of good
comes for the most part short of the pattern, but the imitation of ill exceeds
the example: a great man's warrant is like a charm or spel, to keep quick and
stirring spirits within the circle of combined mischief: a Superiors example
is like strong or strange physic, that ever works the servile patients to a
likeness of humors, of affections: thus when the mother is an Ezekiel. 16. 15.
Hittite, and the father an Amorite, the daughter seldom proves an Israelite.
Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. Greatness is a copy, which every
action, every affection strives to write after. The Son of Nebat is b 1.
King 15. 30. and 16. 19. etc.
never without his commendation following him, he made Israel to sin. The
imitation of our Governors manners, fashion, vices, is styled obedience: if
Augustus Caesar loves poetry, he is no body that cannot versifie: now (says
Horace:) Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim.
when Leo lived, because he loved merry fellows, and stood well affected to
the Stage, all Rome swarmed with iuglers, singers, plaiers. To this, I think,
was the proverb squared: Confessor Papa, confessor populus. If the Pope be an
honest man, so will the people be. In vulgus Cypr.
manant exempla Regentum. The common people are like tempered wax, whereon the
vicious seal of greatness makes easy impression. It was a custom for young
gentlemen in Athens to play on Recorders: at last Alcibiades seeing his blown
cheeks in a glass, threw away his pipe, and they all followed him: our
gallants in steed of Recorders embrace scorching lust, staring pride,
staggering drunkenness, till their souls are more blown, than those Athenians
cheeks; I would some Alcibiades would begin to throw away these vanities, and
all the rest would follow him. Thus spreads example, like a stone thrown into
a pond, that makes circle to beget circle, till it spread to the banks. Judas
train soon took fire in the suspectlesse Disciples; and Satan's infections
shoot through some great star, the influence of damnation into the air of
the communaltie. Let the experience hereof make us fearful of examples.

Observe, that no society has the privilege to be free from a Judas: no, not
Christ college it self: I have chosen you twelve, and behold one of you is a
Devil: and this no wors man than the Steward, put in trust with the bread of
the prophets. The Synod of the Pharisees, the Convent of Monks; the
Consistory of Jesuits, I mean those, that have the Pope amongst them.
the Councels of Bishops, the holy Chair at Rome, the sanctified parlour at
Amsterdam, is not free from a Judas. Some tares will show, that the envious man
is not a sleep. They heard him preach that Ioh. 6. 68.
had the words of eternal life: they attended him, that could Ioh. 6. 51.
feed them with miraculous bread: they followed him, that could Matt. 8 26.
quiet the seas, and control the winds: they saw a precedent, in whom there
was no defect, no default, no sin, no guile; yet behold, one of them is an
hypocrite, an Iscarioth, a Devil: what, among Saints? 1. Sam. 10. 12.
Is Saul among the Prophets? Among the Jews a wicked Publicane, a dissolute
soldier was not worth the wondering at: for the publicans, you may judge of
their honesty, when you always find them coupled with harlots, in the
Scripture: for the soldiers (that roabed Christ in jest, and robbed him in
earnest) they were irreligious Ethnickes: but amongst the sober, chaste, pure,
precise Pharisees, to find a man of sin, was held uncouth, monstrous: they
run from their wits, then, that run from the Church, because there are
Iudasses. Thus it will be, till the great Judge Matthew. 3. 12.
with his fan shall purge his floor; till the Matt 13. 30.
Angels shall carry the wheat into the barn of glory. Until that day comes,
some rubbish will be in the net, some goats among the sheep, some with the
mark of the Beast, in the congregation of Saints; one Ismael in the family of
Abraham, one without his wedding garment, at the marriage Feast; among the
Disciples a Demas, among the Apostles a Judas. Thus generally.

1 Observe: Judas is bold to reprove a lawful, laudable, Specially.
allowable work: he said this. I do not read him so peremptory in
opportunity, he could swallow a gudgeon, though he keckes at a sly: he could
observe, obey, flatter the compounding Pharisees, and thought, he should get
more by licking, than by biting; but here because his mouth waters at the
money, his teeth rankle the woman's credit: for so I find malignant reprouers
styled: corrodunt, non corrigunt; correptores, immo corruptores: they do not
mend but make worse; they bite, they gnaw: thus was Diogenes surnamed Cynicke
for his snarling; Conuitiorum canis: the dog of reproaches: such forget that
(monendo plus, quam minando possumus) mercies are above menaces: many of the
Jews, whom the thunders of Sinai, terrors of the Law Humanas motura tonitrua
mentes.
moved not, John Baptist wins with the songs of Sion Judas could feign and
sawne, and fan the cool wind of flattery on the burning malice of the
consulting Scribes: here he is hot, sweats and swells without cause: either he
must be unmerciful or ouermercifull; either wholly for the raines, or all upon
the spur: he has soft and silken words for his masters enemies, course and
rough for his friends: there he is a dumb dog and finds no fault, here he
is a barking curre, and bites a true man in stead of a thief; he was before an
ill mute, and now he is a worse consonant. but (as Pierius ambitious daughters
Metam.
were turned to meg-pies for correcting the muses, so) God justly reprooues
Judas, for unjustly reproouing Marie. Qui mittit in altum lapidem, recidet in
caput eius. A stone Iero. ad Rust. monath.
thrown up in a rash humor, falls on the throwers head, to teach him more
wisdom: he that could come to the Pharisees (like Martials parrat, (...); or
like Jupiters priest to Alexander with a love sat) commending their piety,
which was without mercy, here condemns mercy, which was true piety and pity.

I could here find cause to praise reprehension: if it be reasonable,
seasonable, well grounded for the reproouer, well conditioned for the
reproved. I would have no profession more wisely bold than a Ministers; for
sin is bold, yea saucy and presumptuous: it is miserable for both, when a
bold sinner, and a cold Priest shall meet: when he that should lift up his
voice like a trumpet, does but whisper through a trunk. Many men are dull
beasts without a goad, blind Sodomites without a guide, deaf Adders and Idols
without ears, forgetful like Pharaohs Butler without memories: our conniuence
is sinful, our silence banefull, our allowance damnable. Of sin neither the
fathers, factors, nor fautors are excusable: nay Romans 1. 32.
the last may be worst, whiles they may and will not help it. Let Rome have
the praise without our envy or riualrie: Peccat is Roma patrocinium est.
Sodomie is licenced, sins to come pardoned, drunkenness defended, the Stews
maintained, perjury commended, treason commanded: as sinful as they think us,
and we know ourselves, we would blush at these. Nihil interest sceleri Sin.
an faue as, an illud facias: there is little difference between permission
and commission: between the toleration and perpetration of the sin: he is an
abettor of the evil, that may and will not better the evil. Amici vitia, fi
feras, facis tua, thy unchristian sufferance adoptes thy brothers sins for
thine own; children of thy fatherhood, of so great a parentage is many a
sinne-fauouring Magistrate; he begets more bastards in an hour, then Hercules
did in a night; and except Christ be his friend, Gods Sessions will charge him,
with the keeping of them all: no private man can plead exemption from this
duty: for amicus is animi custos; he is thy friend, that brings thee to a fair
and free end. Does humane charity bind thee to reduce thy neighbors straying
beast, and shall not Christianity double thy care to his erring soul? cadit
afina, and est qui subleuet, perit anima, non est qui recogitet. The fallen
beast is lifted up, the burdened soul is let sink under her load.

2. Observe his deuillish disposition, bent and intended to stifle goodness in
others, that had utterly choakt it in himself? Is the Apostle Judas an
hinderer of godliness? surely man has not a worse neighbor, nor God a worse
servant, nor the Devil a better factor, than such a one: an Aesops dog, that
because he can eat no hay himself, lies in the manger and will not suffer the
horse. he would be an ill porter of heaven gates, that having no lust to enter
himself, will not admit others: as Christ Luke 11. 52.
reported and reproved the Lawyers. Here fruitless trees, that Luke 13. 7.
cumber the ground: cockle and darnell that hinder the good corns growth:
malicious devils, that plot to bring more partners to their own damnation: as
if it were, (aliquid socios habuisse doloris) some ease to them, to have
fellows in their misery.

Let me paint out a short complaint against this sin: dolendum a medico, quod
non delendum a medicina: we may bewail, where we cannot prevail. The good old
man must weep, though he cannot drive away the disease of his child with
tears. Thou that hindrest others from good works, make their sins thine,
which, I think thou need not do, for any scarsity of thine own: whiles
thou temptest to villainy, withstandest his piety, thou at once pullest his
sins, and Gods curses on thee. For the author sins more, than the actor, as
appears by Gods Judgment in Genesis 3. 14. etc.
Paradise; where three punishments were inflicted on the Serpent, as the
original plotter; two on the woman as the mediate procurer, and but one on
Adam, as the party seduced. Is it not enough for thee, oh Judas, to be a
villain thy self, but thou must also cross the piety of others? have thou
spoiled thy self, and would thou also mar Mary?

3 Nay observe; he would hinder the works of piety through color of the works
of charity: diuerting Mary's bounty from Christ to the poor; as if respect to
man, should take the wall of Gods service? thus he strives to set the two
tables of the Law, at war, one against the other; both which look to Gods
obedience as the Exodus 25. 20.
two cherubins to the mercie-seat; and the Catholic Christian has a Catholic
care. I prefer not the laws of God one to the other: one star, here,
differs not from another star in glory. Yet, I know, the best distinguishers
caution to the Lawyer: Matthew. 22. 38.
this is the great Commandment, and the other is (but) like unto it. Indeed I
would not have Sacrifice turn Mercy out of doors, as Sara did Agar; nor the
fire of zeal drink up the dew and moisture of charity; as the fire from
heaven dried up the water at King. 18. 38.
Eliahs sacrifice: neither would I that the precise observation of the second
table, should guild over the monstrous breaches of the first. Yet I have heard
Divines (reasoning this point) attribute this privilege to the first Table
above the second; that God never did (I will not say, never could) dispense
with these commandments which have himself for their proper and immediate
object. For then (say they) he should dispense against himself, or make
himself no God, or more: He never gave allowance to any, to have. 1. another
God. 2. another form of worship. 3. the honor of his name he will not give
to another. 4. nor suffer the prophaner of his Holy Day to escape unpunished.
For the second table, you have read him, commanding the brother Deuteronomy. 25. 5.
and Matthew. 22. 24.
to raise up seed to his brother: notwithstanding the Law, Thou shall not
commit adultery: commanding the Israelites to Exodus 11. 2.
rob the Egyptians, without infringing the law of stealth, all this without
wrong: for, the earth is his, and the fullness thereof. Thou art a father of
many children; thou say to the younger, sirrah, wear you the coat to day
which your other brother wore yesterday; who complains of wrong? we are all
(or at least, say we are all) the children of God: have earthly Parents a
greater privilege than our heavenly? if God then have given dispensation to
the second Table, not to the first; the observation of which (think you) best
pleases him?

Let not then, oh Judas, charity shoulder out piety: nay charity will not,
cannot: for Galat 5^ 6.
faith works by love. And love never dined in a conscience, where faith had
not first broken her fast. Faith and love are like a pair of compasses; whilst
faith stands perfectly fixed in the center, which is God; love walks the
round, and puts a girdle of mercy about the loins: there may indeed be a
show of charity without faith, but there can be no show of faith without
charity: Man judges by the hand, God by the heart.

Hence our Policies in their positive laws, lay severe punishments on the
actual breaches of the second Table, leaving most sins against the first, to
the hand of the Almighty Justice. Let man's name be slandered. Currat lex, Act.
19. 38.
the law is open; be Gods name dishonouted, blasphemed, there is no punishment
but from Gods immediate hand. Carnal fornication speeds (though not ever bad
enough, yet) sometimes worse than spiritual: which is idolatry. Yet this last
is ( 2 Cro. 21. 11
maius adulterium) the greater adultery: because ( 1. Cor. 6. 15.
non ad alteram mulierem, Hos. 2. 2.
sed ad alterum Deum) it is not the knitting of the body to another woman, but
of the soul to another God. The poor slave, is conuented to the spiritual
court, and meets with a shrewd penance for his incontinence: the rich noble
man, knight or gentleman (for Papists are no beggars) breaks the Commissaries
cords as, easily as Sampson the Philistines withes, and puts an Excommunication
in his pocket. All is answered, who knows the spirit of man, but the spirit of
man? and Romans 14. 4.
he stands or falls to his own master. Yet again, who knows whether bodily
stripes may not procure spiritual health? and a seasonable blow to the estate
may not 1. Cor. 5. 5.
save the soul in the day of the Lord Jesus. often (detrimentum pecuniae and
sanitatis, propter bonum animae) Th. Aquin.
a loss to the purse, or a cross to the corpse, is for the good of the
conscience. Let me then complain. 1. are there Mandat. prim.
no laws for Atheists; that would scrape out the deepeingrauen characters of
the souls eternity, out of their consciences; and think their souls as
vanishing as the spirits of dogs: not contenting themselves to lock up this
damned persuasion in their own bowels, but belching out this unsavory breath
to the contagion of others (witness many an Ordinary that this is an ordinary
custom); that in despite of the Oracles of heaven, the Prophets; and the
Secretaries of nature, the philosophers; would enforce, that either there is no
God, or such a one, as had as good be none: nominall Protestans, verbal
Neuters, real Atheists. 2. Are there no laws for image-worshippers, Secund.
secret friends to Baal, that eat with us, sit with us, play with us, not pray
with us, nor for us, unless for our ruins. Yes, the sword of the Law is
shaken against them: (alas that, but only shaken:) but either their breasts are
inuulnerable, or the sword is obtuse, or the strikers troubled with the palsy
and numnesse in the arms. 3. Are Tertium.
there no laws for blasphemers, common swearers, whose constitutions are so
ill tempered of the four elements, that they take and possess several seats
in them: all Earth in their hearts, all Water in their stomachs, all Air in
their brains, and (says Saint James) Iam. 3. 6.
all Fire in their tongues: they have heavy earthen hearts, watery and surfetted
stomaches, light, aierie, mad-braines, fiery and flaming tongues. 4. Are there
no laws to compel them on these Quart.
days, that Luke 14. 23.
Gods house may be filled? no power to bring them from the puddles to the Ier.
2. 13.
springs? from walking the streets, sporting in the fields, quaffing in
tauernes, slugging, wantonizing on couches, to watch with Christ Mat. 26. 40.
one hour in his house of prayer? why should not such blisters be launced by
the knife of authority, which will else make the whole body of the
Commonwealth (though not incurable, yet) dangerously sick? I may not seem to
prescribe, give me leave to exhort: non est meae humilitatis dictare Bern.
vobis etc. It suites not with my mean knowledge, to direct you the means,
but with my conscience to rub your memories: oh let not the pretended equity to
men, countenance out our neglected piety to God!

4. Lastly observe his unkindness to Christ: what, Judas, grudge thy master a
little unction? and which is yet viler) from another purse? with what
detraction, derision, exclamation would thou have permitted this to thy
fellow servant, that repinest it to thy master? how hardly had this been
derived from thy own estate, that did not tolerate it from Mary's? what?
thy master, that honored thee with Christianity, graced thee with Apostleship,
trusted thee with Stewardship, will thou deny him this courtesy, and without
thine own cost? thy Master, Judas, thy friend, thy God, and yet in a sweeter
manner, thy Savior, and can not endure an other gratuitall kindness toward
him? shall he power forth the best unction of his blood, to bath and comfort
thy body and soul, and thou not allow him a little refection? has Christ
hungered, thirsted, fainted, swet, and must he instantly bleed and die, and is
he denied a little unction? and do thou, Judas, grudge it? it had come more
tolerably from any mouth: his friend, his follower, his Professor, his
Apostle, his Steward! unkind, unnatural, unjust, unmerciful Judas.

Nay, he terms it no better then a waste and a loss: (...)? ad quid perditio
haec? Math. 26. 8.
Why is this wast? What, lost and given to Jesus? can there be any waste in
Tertull. apol. 39.
the creatures due service to the Creator? no: pietas est, pro pietate sumptus
facere: this is godliness, to be at cost with God: therefore our fathers left
behind them (deposita pietatis) pledges, evidences, sure testimonies of their
Religion, in honoring Christ with their riches: (I mean not those in the
days of Popery, but before ever the locusts of the Papal sea made our Nation
drunk with her enchanted cup:) they thought it no waste either (noua
construere, aut vetera conseruare) to build new Monuments to Christ's honor, or
to better the old ones: we may say of them, as Rome bragged of Augustus Caesar:
quae inuenerunt lateritia, reliquerunt marmorea: what they found of Brick,
they left of Marble; in imitation of that precedent in Esaias, though with
honester hearts: Esaias 9. 10.
The brickes are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the
Sycomores are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars. In those days,
charity to the Church was not counted waste: The people of England, devout like
those of Israel, cried one to another (afferte) Bring ye into Gods house;
till they were stayed with a statute of Mort-maine, like Exodus 36. 6.
Moses prohibition, the people bring too much, but now they changed a letter,
and cry, (Auferte) take away as fast as ever they gave, and no Inhibition of
God or Moses, Gospel or statute, can restrain their violence: till the
Alablaster box be as empty of oil, as their own consciences are of grace. We
need not stint your devotion, but your deuoration: every contribution to Gods
service is held waste: ad quid perditio haec? now any required ornament to the
church is held waste: but swallowing down (I say not, of ornaments, as things
better spared, but) necessary maintenance, Tithes, Fruits, Offerings, are all
too little: Gentlemen in these cold Countries have very good stomachs, they
can devour (and digest too) three or four plumpe Personages; in Italy,
Spain, and those hot Countries, (or else nature and experience too lies) a
Temporal man cannot swallow a morsel or bit of a spiritual preferment, but
it is reluctant in his stomach, up it comes again: surely these Northern
Countries, coldly situate, and nearer to the Tropicke, have greater appetites:
the Affricanes think the Spaniards gluttons, the Spaniards think so of the
Frenchmen, French men and all think and say so of Englishmen; for they can
devour whole Churches: and they have sed so liberally, that their poor
seruitors (ashamed I am to call them so) the Vicars have scarce enough left to
keep life and soul together: nor so much as (sitis and fames and
frigoraposcunt) the defense of hunger and thirst and cold requires: your
fathers thought Iuven. sat. 14.
many Acres of ground well bestowed, you think the Tithe of those Acres a
waste: Oppression has played the Judas with the Church, and because he would
prevent the sins incurable by our fullness of bread, has scarce left us
bread to feed upon, Daniels dict among the Lions, or Elias his in the
wilderness. I will not censure you in this, ye Citizens; let it be your
praise, that though you Hag. 1. 4.
dwell in sieled houses your selves, you let not Gods house lie waste: yet
sometimes it is found, that some of you so careful in the City, are as
negligent in the Country, where your lands lie; and there the Temples are often
the Monumenta rapinae.
ruins of your oppression; your poor, undone, blood-sucked Tenants, not being
able to repair the windows or the leads, to keep out rain or birds: if a
leuy or taxation Canescunt tur^i Templa relicta s^^^. Ovid.
would force your benevolence, it comes maleuolently from you, with a Why is
this wast? Raise a contribution to a lecture, a collection for a fire, an alms
to a poor destitute soul, and lightly there is one Judas in the congregation
to cry, ad quid perditio haec? why is this waste? Yet you will say, if Christ
stood in need of an unction, though as costly as Mary's, you would not grudge
it, nor think it lost: Cosen not your selves, ye hypocrites; if ye will not
do it to his Mat. 25. 40.
Church, to his poor ministers, to his poor members, neither would you to
Christ: if you cloth not them, neither would you cloth Christ if he stood naked
at your doors. Whiles you count that money lost, which Gods service receaueth
of you, you cannot shake away Judas from your shoulder. What would you do, if
Christ should charge you, as he did the yoong-man in the Gospel Matt. 19. 21.
Sell all, and give to the poor, that think your superfluities a waste? oh,
durus sermo! a hard sentence! Indeed Mat. 10. 42.
a cup of cold water is bounty praised and rewarded, but in them that are not
able to give more: Luke 21. 4.
the Widows two mites are accepted, because all her estate. If God thought it
no waste to give you plenty, even all you have, think it no wast to return
him some of his own. Think not the Exo. 25. 6.
Oil waste, which you power into the Lamp of the Sanctuary: think not the
Eccle. 11. 1.
bread waste, which you cast on the waters of Adversity: think nothing lost,
whereof you have feossed God in trust. But let me teach you soberly to apply
this, and tell you what indeed is waste.

1. Our immoderate diet: indeed not diet, for that contents nature, but
surfeit, that overthrows nature: this is waste. Plain 1. Sam. 25. 36 Luke 16.
Mr. Naball made a feast like a Prince. Dives has no other arms to prove
himself a Gentleman; but a scutchion of these 3. colors: first he had money
in his purse: he was rich: secondly, he had good rags on his back, clothed in
purple: thirdly, dainties on his table; he fared deliciously, and that, every
day: this was a Gentleman without Heraldry. It was the rule: ad alimenta; vt ad
medicamenta: to our meat, as to our medicine: man has the least mouth of all
creatures: (malum non imitari, quod sumus.) Therefore it is ill for us, not to
imitate that which we are; not to be like our selves: there are many shrewed
contentions between the appetite and the purse; the wise man is either a
Neuter, or takes part with his purse: to consume that at one banquet, which
would keep a poor man with convenient sustenance all his life, this is waste.
But alas our slavery to Epicurisme is great in these days, mancipia seruiunt
dominis, domini cupiditatibus: servants are not more slaves to their masters,
then their masters are slaves to lusts. Tim^^reons Epitaph fits many:

Multa bibeus, and multa vorans, mala plurimadicens etc. he eat much, and
drunk much, and spoke much evil: we sacrifice to our palates as to Gods: the
rich feast, the poor fast: the dogs dine, the poor pine: ad quid perditio
haec? Why is this waste?

2. Our unreasonable ebrieties. -- Tenentque Pocula saepe homines, and
inumbrant ora coronis.
They take their fill of wine here, as if they were resolved with Dives, they
should not get a drop of water in Hell: Eat, drink, play: quid aliud sepulchro
bouis inscribi poterat? what other epitaph could be written on the sepulcher of
an Ox? Epulonum crateres, sunt epulonum carceres: their boules are their
bolts: there is no bondage, like to that of the Vintage. The furnace beguiles
the oven; the Celler deceiues the Buttery: we drink away our bread, as if we
would put a new petition into the Lords prayer, and abrogate the old; saying no
more with Christ, give us this day our daily bread, but give us this day our
daily drink: quod non in diem, sed in mensem sufficit: which is more then
enough for a day, nay would serve a month. Temperance, the just Steward, is
put out of his office: what place is free from these Alehouse recusants? that
think better of their drinking-roome, then Peter thought of Mount Tabor, Math.
17. 4.
bonum est esse hic: it is good being here; vbi nec Deus, nec Demon; where
both God and the Devil are fast a sleep. It is a question, whether it be
worse to turn the image of a Idolaters.
beast to God, or the image of Drunkards.
God to a beast: if the first be Idolatry, the last is impiety. a voluptuous
man is a murderer to himself, a covetous man a thief, a malicious a witch, a
drunkard a devil thus to drink away the poores relief, our own estate; ad
quid perditio haec? why is this wast?

3. Our monstrous pride, that turns hospitallity into a dumb show: that which
fed the belly of hunger, now feeds the eye of lust: akers of land are
metamorphised into trunkes of apparel; and the soul of charity is
transmigrated into the body of bravery: this is wast: we make our selves the
compounds of all Nations: we borow of Spain, Italy, Germany, France, Turkey
and all; that death when he robs an Englishman, robs all Countries: where lies
the wealth of England? in three places: on Citizens tables, in Usurers coffers,
and upon Courtiers backs: God made all simple, therefore woe to these
compounded fashions: God will one day say, (hoc non optas meum nec imago mea
est.) this is none of my workmanship, none of my image. One man wears enough
on his back at once, to cloth two naked wretches all their lives: ad quid etc.
why is this wast?

4. Our vaineglorious building, to emulate the skies, which the wiseman calls,
Pro. 17. 19.
the lifting up of our gates too high. Houses built like palaces; Tabernacles,
that in the Masters thought, equal the Mansion of heaven: structures to whom
is promised eternity, as if the ground, they stood on, Heb. 12. 26.
should not be shaken. Whole towns depopulate to rear up one man's walls;
chimneyes built in proportion, not one of them so happy as to smoke; brave
gates, but never open: sumptuous parlours, for Owls and Battes to fly in,
pride begun them, riches finished them, beggary keeps them: for most of them
moulder away, as if they were in the dead builders case, a consumption. Ier. 22.
Would not a less house, Ieconiah, have served thee for better hospitality?
our Fathers lived well under lower roofes: this is wast, and wast indeed, and
these worse then the Devil: the Devil had once some charity in him, to turn
Math. 4. 3.
stones into bread, but these men turn bread into stones; a trick beyond the
Devil: ad quid perditio haec? Why is this waste?

5. Our ambitious seeking after great alliance: the son of the 2. King. 14. 9
Thistle must match with the Cedars daughter: The father tears dear years
out of the Earthes bowels, and raises a bank of usury, to set his son upon,
and thus mounted, he must not enter save under the noble roof: no cost is
spared to ambitious advancement: ad quid etc. why is this waste.

Shall I say? our upholding of Theaters to the contempt of Religion: our
maintayning Ordinaries to play away our patrimonies: our foure-wheeled Porters:
our Anticke the fashion: our smoky consumption; our perfumed putrefaction: ad
quid perditio haec? Why are these wastes? experience will testify at last, that
these are wastes indeed; for they waste the body, the blood, the state, the
freedom, the soul it self, and all is lost, thus laid out: but what is
given (with Mary) to Christ, is lost like sown grain, and shall be found
again at the harvest of Joy.

We have heard Judas censuring Mary: let us now hear Gods censure: 1. Negative.
God censuring Judas; and that first negatiuely: he cared not for the poor.
For the poor he pleads, but himself is the poor, he means well too: but
let his pretense be what it will, Gods witness is true against him; he cared
not for the poor.

1. Observe: does Christ condemn Judas for condemning Mary? then it appears,
he does justify her action: he does, and that after in express terms: Let
her alone: etc. ver. 7. Happy Mary that have Jesus to plead for thee: blessed
Christians, for whom 1. John 2. 1.
Jesus Christ is an Advocate. Esaias 50. 8.
He is near me, that iustifies me, who will contend with me? verse 9. behold
the Lord will help me, who is he that can condemn me? hence David resignes
his protection into the hands of God. Psalm. 43. 1.
Judge me, oh God, and defend my cause against the unmerciful people. And Paul
yet with greater boldness, sends a frank defiance and challenge to all the
actors and pleaders that ever condemnation had, that they should never have
power to condemn him, Romans 8. 33.
since Jesus Christ iustifies him. Happy man, whose cause God takes in hand to
plead. Here is a Judas to accuse us, a Jesus to acquit us: Iudasslanders, Jesus
cleares: wicked men censure, the just God approues: earth judges evil, what
is pronounced good in heaven! oh then do well, though (fremant gentes) great
men rage, though perverseness censures, impudence slanders, malice hinders,
tyranny persecutes; there is a Jesus, that approues: his approbation shall
outweigh all their censures: let his spirit testify with me, though the whole
world oppose me.

2. Observe: It is the nature of the wicked to have no care of the poor. Sibi
nati, sibi viuunt, sibi moriuntur, sibi damnantur: they are all for themselves,
they are borne to themselves, live to themselves, (so let them) die for
themselves, and go to Hell for themselves. The fat Bulls of Bashan, love Amos
6. 4.
the lambs from the flock, and the Calves from the stall etc. But think not
on the affliction of Joseph. Your gallant thinks not the distressed, the
blind, the lame to be part of his care: it concerns him not: true and
therefore heaven concerns him not: it is infallible truth, if they have no
Heb. 13. 3.
feeling of others miseries, they are no members of Christ: go on now in thy
scorn, thou proud Royster: admire the fashion and stuff, thou wearest; whiles
the poor mournes for nakedness: feast royally Dives, whiles Lazarus can get no
crummes: Apply, Absolon, thy sound, healthful limbs to lust and lewdness,
whiles the lame, blind, maimed cannot derive a penny from thy purse, though he
move his suit in the name of Jesus; thou give testimony to the world, to thy
own conscience, that thou art but a Judas. Why, the poorest and the proudest
have though not Uestem communem, yet cutem communem? there may be difference in
the fleece, there is none in the flesh: yea perhaps, as the gallants perfumed
body is often the sepulcher to a putrified soul: so a white, pure, innocent
spirit may be shadowed under the broken roof of a maimed corpse. Nay, let me
terrify them: 1. Cor. 1. 26.
not many rich, not many mighty, not many noble are called: It is Paul's thunder
against the flashes of greatness: he says not, not any, but not many: for
seruatur Lazarus pauper, Aug. in Psalm. 5.
sed in finu Abrahami Diuitis: Lazarus the poor man is saved, but in the
bosom of Abraham the rich. It is a good saying of the son of Sirach: Eccl.
11. 27.
The affliction of one hour will make the proudest stoop, sit upon the
ground, and forget his former pleasure, a piercing misery will soften your
bowels, and let your soul see through the breaches of her prison, in what need
distress stands of succor. Then you will be charitable or never, as physicians
say of their Patients, take whiles they be in pain; for in health nothing will
be wrung out of them. so long as health and prosperity clothe you, you recke
not the poor: Naball looks to his sheep, what cares he for David? if the
truth were known, there are many Nabals now, that love their own sheep,
better than Christ's sheep: Christ's sheep take coats, their own sheep give
coats. Say some that cavil, if we must care for the poor, then for the
covetous; for they want, what they possess, and are indeed poorest: no, pity
not them, that pity not themselves; who in despite of Gods bounty will be
miserable: but pity those, whom a fatal distress has made wretched.

Oh, how unfit is it among Christians, that 1. Cor. 11 21.
some should surfeit, whiles others hunger? that one should have Luke 3. 11.
two coats, and another be naked, yet both one man's servants. Remember that God
has made many his stewards, none his Treasurer: he did not mean, thou
should hoord his blessings, but expend them to his glory: he that is
infinitely rich, yet keeps nothing in his own hands, but gives all to his
creatures: at his own cost and charges he has maintained the world, almost
6000. years: he will most certainly admit no hoorder into his kingdom: yet,
if you will needs love laying up, God has provided you a coffer: the poor
man's hand is Christ's treasury. The besotted wordling has a greedy mind, to
gather goods, and keep them; and lo, his keeping loses them: for they must
have either (finem tuum, or finem suum) thy end, or their end: Job. 1.
Job tarried and his goods went; but the Luke 12.
rich man went, and his goods tarried. Si vestra sunt, tollite vobiscum: if
they be yours, why do you not take them with you? no, hic acquiruntur, hic
amittuntur: here they are gotten, here lost. But God himselfebeing witness
(nay he has past his word) what we for his sake give away here, we shall
find again hereafter; and the charitable man dead and buried, is richer
under the ground, than! was above it. It is an usual song, which the Saints
now sing in heaven. That we gave;
That we have.
This riddle poseth the worldling, as the Fishermens did Homer: Quaecepimus,
reliquimus: quae non cepimus, nobiscum portamus: what we caught, we left
behind us; what we could not catch, we carried with us. So, what we loose,
we keep: what we will keep, we shall loose. Matt. 10. 39.
he that loses his goods, his lands, his freedom, his life for Christ's sake
shall find it. This is the charitable man's case: all his alms, mercies,
relieuings are (wisely and without executorship) sown in his life time; and
the harvest will be so great, by that time he gets to heaven, that he shall
receive a thousand for one: God is made his debtor, and he is a sure paymaster.
Earth has not riches enough in it to pay him, his requital shall be in heaven,
and there with no less degree of honor, than a kingdom.

Judas cares not for the poor: Judas is dead, but this fault of his lives
still: the poor had never more need to be cared for: but how: there are two
sorts of poor, and our care must be proportionable to their conditions, there
are. 1. some poor of Gods making. 2. some of their own making: let me say,
there are Gods poor and the Devils poor: those the hand of God has crossed;
these have forced necessity on themselves by a dissolute life. The former must
be cared for by the compassion of the heart, and charity of the purse: Gods
poor must have good alms; a seasonable relief according to thy power; or else
the Apostle fearfully and peremptorily concludes against thee: 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
the love of God is not in thee. If thou can not find in thy heart to
diminish a grain from thy heap, a penny from thy purse, a cut from thy loaf,
when Jesus Christ stands at thy door and calls for it, profess what thou will, the love of earth has thrust the love of heaven out of thy conscience.
even Judas himself will pretend charity to these.

For the other poor, who have pulled necessity on themselves with the cords of
Idleness, riot, or such disordered courses, there is another care to be
taken; not to cherish the lazy blood in their veins by abusiue mercy; but
rather chafe their stonied sinews by correction, relieve them with punishment,
and so recover them to the life of obedience. The sluggard lusts, and has an
empty stomach: he loves sustenance well, but is loath to set his foot on the
cold ground for it. The laws sanction, the good man's function says, if he
will not 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10
labor, let him not eat. For experience tells that where sloth refuses the
ordinary pains of getting, therelust hunes for it in the unbeaten paths of
wickedness; and you shall find, that if ever occasion should put as much
power into their hands, as idleness has put villainy into their hearts; they
will be ready to pilfer your goods, fire your houses, cut your threats. I have
read of the King of Macedon, deserying two such in his dominions, that (alterum
e Macedonia fugere, alterum fugare fecit.) he made one fly out of his
kingdom, and the other drive him. I would our Magistrates would follow no
worse a precedent: indeed our laws have taken order for their restraint;
wheresoever the fault is, they are rather multiplied; as if they had been
sown at the making of the statute, and now (as from a harvest) they arise ten
for one: surely our laws make good wills, but they have bad luck for
executors: their wills are not performed; nor their legacies distributed; I
mean the legacies of correction to such children of sloth, Impunitas delicti
inuit at homines ad malignandum: Since chief encouragement is the want of
punishment: favor one, harten many. It is fit therefore, that (poena ad
paucos, met us ad omnes perueniat) penalty be inflicted on some, to strike
terror into the rest.

It was Saint Augustines censure: Illicit a non prohibere, consensus erroris
est, not to restrain evil, is to maintain evil. Epist 182. ad Bonif.
The common wealth is an Instrument, the people are the strings, the magistrate
is the musician: let the musician look, that the instrument be in tune, the
iarring strings ordered; and not play on it, to make himself sport, but to
please the ears of God. Doctores, the ministers of mercy now can do no good,
except Ductores, the ministers of justice put to their hands. We can but
forbid the corruption of the heart; they must prohibit the wickedness of the
hand. Let these poor be cared for, that have no care for themselves:
runnagates, renegates, that will not be ranged (like wandering planets) within
the sphere of obedience: yet a little more sleep, says the sluggard: but
(modicum non habet modum) their bunch will swell to a mountain; if it be not
prevented and pared down. Care for these ye magistrates, lest you answer for
the subornation of their sins: for the other, let all care, that care to be
received into the arms of Jesus Christ.

3. Observe: Judas cares not for the poor; what, and yet would he for their
sakes have drawn comfort from the Son of God? what an hypocrite is this?
could there be so deep dissimulation in an Apostle? yes in that Apostle, that
was a Devil. Lo still I am haunted with this white Devil, Hypocrisy: I
cannot sail two leagues, but I rush upon this rock; nay, it will encounter,
incomber me quite through the voyage of this verse. Judas said, and meant not,
there is hypocrisy: he spoke for the poor, and hates them, there is
hypocrisy: he was a privy thief, a false steward, etc. all this not without
hypocrisy. shall I be rid of this Devil at once, and conjure him out of my
speech? God give me assistance, and add you patience, and I will spend a
little time, to uncase this white Devil, and strip him of all his borrowed
colors.

Of all bodily creatures, man (as he is Gods image) is the best: but basely
dejected, degenerated, debauched, the (simply) worst: of all earthly creatures
a wicked man is the worst, of all men a wicked Christian, of all Christians a
wicked professor, of all professors a wicked hypocrite, of all hypocrites a
wicked, warped, wretched Judas. Take the extraction or quintessence of all
corrupted men, and you have a Judas: this then is Judas a man degenerate, a
Christian corrupted, a professor putrified, a gilded hypocrite, a white-skind
Devil. I confess I am sparingly affected to this point, and would feign shift
my hands of this monster, and not encounter him: for it is not to fight with
the Unicornes of Assyria, nor the Bulls of Samaria, nor the Beasts of Ephesus:
neither absolute Atheists, nor dissolute Christians, nor resolute ruffians: the
horns of whose rapine and malice are no less manifest, than malignant; but at
once imminent in their threats, and eminent in their appearance. But to set
upon a Beast, that has with the heart of a Leopard, the face of a man, of a
good man, of the best man; a star placed high in the orb of the Church,
though swooped down with the Dragons tail, because not fixed; a darling in
the mothers lap, blessed with the Churches indulgence, yet a bastard: a
brother of the fraternity, trusted sometimes with the Churches stock, yet no
brother, but a broker of treacheries, a brocher of falsehoods: I would willingly
save this labor, but that the necessity of my Text ouer-rules my disposition.

I know, these times are so shameless and impudent, that many strip of the
white, and keep the Devil; wicked they are, and without show of the contrary:
men are so far from giving house-roome to the substance of religion, that
they admit not an out-roome for the show; so backward to put on Christ, that
they will not accept of his liuerie; who are short of Agrippa, scarce Act. 26.
28.
persuaded to seem Christians, not at all to be: these will not drink hearty
draughts of the waters of life, nay scarce vouchsafe (like the dogs that
run by Nilus) to give a lap at Jacobs well: unless it be some, as they
report, that frequent the sign of it, to be drunk: they salute not Christ at
the Cross, nor bid him good morrow in the Temple, but go blustering by, as if
some serious business had put haste into their feet, and God was not worthy to
be staid and spoke withal: if this be a riddle, show me the day, shall not
expound it by a demonstratiue experience. For these I may say, I would to God,
they would seem holy, and frequent the places, where sanctimony is taught, but
the Devil is a nimble, running, cunning fencer, that strikes on both hands,
duplici ictu, and would have men either (non sanctos, aut non parum sanctos)
not holy, or not a little holy, in their own opinion, and outward ostentation:
either no fire of devotion on the harth, or that that is, in the top of the
chimney: That subtle winnower persuades men, that they are all chafe, and no
wheat, or all wheat and no chafe; and would keep the soul either lanke with
ignorance, or rank with insolence: let me therefore woo you, win you to reject
both these extremes, between which, your hearts lie, as the grain betwixt both
the milstones.

Shall I speak plainly? You are sick at London of one disease (I speak to
you settled Citizens, not extrauagants) and we in the Country of another: a
Sermon against hypocrisy in most places of the Country, is like phlebotomy to
a consumption (the spilling of innocent blood) our sicknesses are cold palseys
and shaking agues: yours in the City are hotter diseases, the burning fevers of
fiery zeal, the inflammations and impostumes of hypocrisy: we have the
frosts, and you have the lightnings; most of us profess too little, and some
of you profess too much, unless your courses were more answerable; I would
willingly be in none of your bosoms; only I must speak of Judas. His
hypocrisy was vile in 3. respects.

1. He might have been sound: I make no question but he heard his Master
preach, and preached himself, that Gods request is the heart: so Christ
schools the Ioh. 4.
Samaritane woman; so prescribed the Scribe. Mark. 12. 30.
Thou shall love the Lord with all thy heart, etc. cord Judas, with the heart,
which thou reseruest like an equiuocating Jesuit: nay, (toto cord, for it is
not tutum, except it be totum) with the whole heart, which thou never stoodest
to divide, but gave it wholly to him, that wholly killed it, thy masters
enemy, and none of thy friend, the Devil. Thou heardest thy master, thy
friend, thy God denounce many a fearful, fatal, final woe against the
Pharisees; (hac appellatione, and ob hanc caussam) under this title, and for
this cause) hypocrites, and because hypocrites. As if his woes were but words,
and his words wind, empty and aerie menaces, without intention of hurt, or
extention of a reuengefull arm, behold thou art an hypocrite: thou art
therefore the worse, because thou might be better.

2. He seemed sound: (spem vnltu simulat, premit altum cord dolorem; nay dolum
rather) craft rather than grief, unless he grieved, that out of his cunning,
there was so little coming, small prize or booty: yet like a subtle gamester,
he keeps his countenance, though the dice do not favor him. And as Fabius
Maximus told Scipio preparing Liu. annal. li. 13
for Africa concerning Syphax: Fraus fidem in paruis sibi perstruit, vt cum
operaepretium sit, cum magna mercede fallat. Judas creepes into trust by
justice in trifles, that he might more securely cheat for a fit advantage.
Without pretense of fidelity how got he the stewardship? perhaps if need
required, he spared not his own purse in Christ's service; but he meant to put
it to usury: he carried not the purse, but to pay himself for his pains:
thus iactura in loco, res quaestuosissima:) a seasonable damage is a
reasonable vantage: in this then his vileness is more execrable, that he
seemed good.

If it were possible, the Devil was then worse than himself, when he came in
Samuels mantle. Iesabels paint made her more ugly: if ever you take a fox in
a lambs skin, hang him up, for he is the worst of the generation: a Gibeonite
in his old shoes, a Seminary in his hairecloth, a Ruffian in the robes of a
Iacobine, fly like the plague: these are so much the worse Devils, as they
would be holy Devils: true Traitors that would fight against God with his
own weapons; and by being out of cry religious, run themselves out of
breath to do the Church a mischief.

3. He would seem thus to his master; yet knew in his heart, that his master
knew his heart: therefore his hypocrisy the worst. Had he been an Aliant to
the common wealth of Israel, and never seen more of God, than the eye of nature
had discovered, (yet says even the Heathen: (...); God has a revenging eye.)
then no marvel, if his eyes had been so blind, as to think Hom.
Christ's blind also, and that he, which made the eye, had not an eye to see
withal: but he saw that son of David give sight to so many sons of Adam
casually blind, to one naturally and borne blind; Ioh. 9. 32.
miraculum inauditum, a wonder of wonders: and shall Judas think to put out
his eye, that gave them all eyes? oh incredible, insensible, invincible
ignorance!

You see his hypocrisy: me thinks even the sight of it is disswasion forcible
enough, and it should be needless to give any other reason than the
discovery. yet whiles many censure it in Judas, they condemn it not in
themselves, and either think they have it not, or not in such measure. Surely
we may be no Iudasses, yet hypocrites: and who will totally clear himself?
let me tell thee, if thou do, thou art the worst hypocrite, and but for
thee, we had not such need to complain. He that cleares himself from all
sin, is the most sinner, and he that says, he has not sinned in hypocrisy,
is the rankest hypocrite: but I do admit a distinction. All the sons of Adam
are infected with this contamination, some more, some less, here is the
difference; all have hypocrisy, but hypocrisy has some: aliud habere
peccatum, aliud haberi a peccato. It is one thing for thee to possess sin,
another thing for sin to possess thee. All have the same corruption, not the
same eruption: in a word, all are not hypocrites, yet who has not sinned in
hypocrisy? Do not then send your eyes like Dinahs gadding abroad, forgetting
your own business at home: strain not courtesy with these banquets, and
having good meat carved thee, lay it liberally upon another man's trencher, be
not sick of this plague and conceal it, or call it by another name:
hypocrisy is hypocrisy, whatsoever you call it: and as it has learned to
leave no sins naked, so I hope, it has not forgot to clothe it self: it has
as many names as Garnet had, and more Protean shapes than the Seminaries: the
white Devil is in this a true Devil; multorum nominum, non boni nominis: of
many names, but never a good one. The vileness of this white Devil appears
in 6. respects.

1. It is the worst of sins, because it keeps all sins: they are made sure
and secure by hypocrisy. Indeed some vices are quarter masters with it, and
some Sovereigns over it: for the hypocrisy is but another sins pandar:
except to content some affected guest, we could never yield to this filthy
Math. 14. 9.
Herodias. It is made a stawking horse for covetousness, under long prayers
many a Pharisie deuours the poor, houses, goods and all. It is a complexion
for lust, who, were she not painted over with a religious show, would appear
as loathsome to the world, as she is indeed. It is a sepulcher of rotten
impostures, which would stink like a putrified corpse, if hypocrisy were not
their cover. It is a mask for treason, whose shop-full of poisons, pistols,
daggers, gunpowder-traines, would easily be spied out, had hypocrisy left
them barefaced. Treachery under this visard thrusts into Court-reuels, nay,
Court-councels; and holds the torch to sports, nay the books to serious
consultations; deuiseth, advises, plots with those that provide best for the
Commonwealth, Thus are all sins beholding to hypocrisy: she maintains
them at her own proper costs and charges.

2. It is the worst of sins, because it counterfets all virtues: he that
counterfets the Kings coin, is liable to death, if hypocrisy find not death,
and (mortem sine morte) death without death, for counterfeting the king of
heavens Seal manual of grace, it speeds better then it merits: vice is made
virtues ape in an hypocrites practice. If he see Chusi run, this Ahimaaz will
outrunne him: he mends his pace, but not his path: the goodman goes slower, but
will be at heaven before him: thus thriftinesse in a Saint, is counterfetted by
niggardliness in an hypocrite. be thou charitable, behold he is bountiful,
but not except thou may behold him: his vaineglorious pride shall emulate thy
liberality: thou art good to the poor, he will be better to the rich: he
follows the religious man a far of, as Peter did Christ, but when he comes
to the cross, he will deny him. Thus hypocrisy can but put blood into your
cheeks, (like the Aliptae) and better your colors; but you may be sick in
your consciences, and almost dead at the heart, and (non est medicamen in
hortis) there is no medicine in this drugsters shop can cure you.

3. An hypocrite is a kind of honest Atheist: for his own Good is his God: his
heaven is upon earth, and that not the Philip. 4. 7.
Peace of his conscience, or Romans 14. 17.
that kingdom of heaven, which may be in a soul living on earth, but the
secure peace of a worldly estate: he stands in awe of no Judge, but man's eye;
that he observes with as great respect, as David did the eyes of God; if man
takes notice, he cares not, yet laughes at him for that notice, and kills his
soul by that laughter: so Pigmalion-like, he dotes on his own carved and
painted piece: and perhaps dies Zeuxis death, who painting an old woman, and
looking merrily on her, brake out into a laughter that killed him. if the world
does not praise his doings, he is ready to challenge it, as the Jews God, Esaias
58. 3.
wherefore have we fasted, and thou see it not? he crosses Christ's precept:
the Matthew. 6. 3.
left hand must be privy to the right hands charity, he dares not trust God
with a penny, except before a whole congregation of witnesses, lest perhaps,
God should deny the receipt.

4. An hypocrite (at last) is hated of all, both God and man: the world hates
thee, Judas, because thou retainest to Christ, Christ hates thee more because
thou (but) only retainest, and do no faithful service. The world cannot
abide thee, thou hypocrite, because thou professest godliness; God can worse
abide thee, because thou do no more than profess. It had been yet some
policy, on the loss of the worlds favor to keep Gods; or if lost Gods, to
have (yet) kept in with the world: thou art not thy own friend, to make them
both thy enemies: miserable man, destitute of both refuges, shut out both from
Gods and the worlds doors. Neither God nor the Devil loves thee, thou have
been true to none of them both, and yet most false (of all) to thy self. So
(this white Devil) Judas, that for the Pharisees sake betrayed his master, and
for the Devils sake betrayed himself, was in the end rejected of Pharisees and
master; and like a ball, tossed by the rackets of contempt and shame, bandyed
from the Pharisees to Christ, from Christ to the Pharisees, from wall to wall,
till he fell into the Devils hazard; not resting like a stone, till he came to
his center, (...); Acts. 1. 25.
into his own place. Purposes he to go to Christ? his own conscience gives
him a repulsiue answer: no, Matthew. 27. 4.
thou have betrayed innocent blood. Goes he to the chief Priests and Elders?
cold comfort: what is that to us? see thou to that. Thus (your ambi-dexter
proves at last ambo-sinister) he that plays so long on both hands, has no
hand to help himself withal. This is the hypocrites misery; because he
wears Gods liuerie, the world will not be his mother; because his heart,
habit, service is sin-wedded, God will not be his father: he has lost earth
for heavens sake, and heaven for earths sake; and may complain with Rebeccaes
fear of her two sons; Genesis 27. 45.
why should I be deprived of you both in one day? or as sorrowful Jacob
expostulated for his, Genesis 42. 36.
Me have you robbed of my children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and will
you take Benjamin also? all these things are against me. This may be the
hypocrites mournful Dirge: My hypocrisy has robbed me of all my comforts:
my Creator is lost, my Redeemer will not own me; and will ye take away (my
beloved Benjamin) the world also? all these things are against me. Thus an open
sinner is in better case, then a dissembling Saint. There are few that seem
worse to others, then they are in themselves: yet I have both read and heard of
some, that have with broken hearts, and mourning bowels, sorrowed for
themselves, as if they had been reprobates; and not spared so to proclaim
themselves, when yet their estate was good to godward, though they knew it not:
perhaps their wickedness and ill life has been grievous, but their repentance
gracious: I may call these black Saints. The hypocrite is neat and curious in
his religious outside, but the linings of his conscience are Esaias 64 6.
filthy and polluted rags: then I say still, a black Saint is better than a
white Devil.

5 Hypocrisy is like the Devil, for he is a perfect hypocrite: so he begun
with our first Parents, to put out his apparent horns in Paradise: non
moriemini, ye shall not Genesis 3. 4.
die: yet he knew this would kill them. An hypocrite then is the child of the
Devil, and (quoth Time the midwife) as like the father, as it may possibly
look, he is the Ioh. 8. 44.
father of lies; and there is no lier like the hypocrite, for as Peter to
Ananias, Act. 5. 4.
thou have not lied to men, but to God. Nay, the hypocrite is his eldest son.
Now, the privilege of primogeniture by the law, was to have a Deuteronomy. 21. 17. 2.
Chron. 21. 3
double portion: wretched hypocrite in this eldership: (Math. 24. 51.) Satan is
called a Ioh. 16. 11. and Ephesians. 2. 2.
Prince, and thus stands his monarchy, or rather Anarchie. The Devil is king,
the hypocrite his eldest son: the usurer his younger; Atheists are his
viceroyes in his several provinces, for his dominion is beyond the Turks for
limits: Epicures are his Nobles: Persecutors his Magistrates; Heretics his
ministers, Traitors his executioners: sin his law; the wicked his subjects,
Tyranny his government: hell his court, and damnation his wages. Of all these
the hypocrite is his eldest Son.

6 Lastly, an hypocrite is in greatest difficulty to be cured. Why should the
minister administer physic to him, that is perfectly sound? or why should
Christ give his blood to the righteous? well may he be hurt and swell, swell
and rankle, rankle and fester, fester and die, Mat. 9. 12. 13.
that will not bewray his disease, least he betray his credit. Stultorum
incurata pudor malus vlcera celat.
A man of great Profession, little Devotion, is like a body so repugnantly
composed, that he has a hot liver, and a cold stomach: that which heates the
stomach, ouerheates the liver: that which cooles the liver, ouercooles the
stomach: so, exhortations, that warm his conscience, inflame his outward
zeal: desuasiues to cool his hypocrisy, freese his devotion, he has a
flushing in his face, as if he had eaten fire: zeal burns in his tongue, but
come near this gloeworme, and he is cold, dark, squallid. Summer sweates in
his face, winter freeseth in his conscience: March, many forwards in his words,
December in his actions: pepper is not more hot in the tongues end, nor more
cold at heart: and (to borrow the words of our worthy Divine and best
Characterer) we think him a Saint, he thinks himself an Angel, flatterers
make him a God, God knows him a Devil.

This is the white Devil, you will not think how glad I am, that I am rid of
him: let him go; yet I must not let you go, till I have persuaded you to hate
this monster, to abhor this Devil. Alas! how forget we (in these Ier. 22.
days) to build up the cedar work of piety, and learn only to paint it
over with vermillion! we white and parget the walls of our profession, but the
rubbish and cobwebs of sin hang in the corners of our consciences: take heed, a
Bible under your arms, will not excuse a false conscience in your bosoms:
think not you fadome the substance, when you embrace the shadow: so the fox
seeing sweet meats in the violl, licked the glass, and thought he had the
thing: so the ignorant sick man eats up the Physicians bill, instead of the
receipt contained in it. It is not a day of seven, nay an hour of seven days,
the grudged parting with an alms to a fire, the coniuring of a paternoster,
(for the heart only prays) or once a year renewing thy acquaintance with God
in the sacrament can privilege or keep impune thy injuries, vsuries,
periuries, frauds, slanders, oppressions, lusts, blasphemies. Beware of this
white Devil, lest your portion be with them in hell, whose society you would
defy on earth, Act. 23. 3.
God shall smite thee, thou painted wall; and wash of thy vermilliondye with
the rivers of brimstone. You have read of some, that heard Christ preach in
their pulpits, feasted at his Luke 13. 26.
communion table, cast out devils in his name, yet not admitted: whiles they
wrought miracles, not good works, cast out devils from others, not sins from
themselves, they miss of entrance. Go then and solace thy self in thy bodily
devotion, thou hear, read, receauest, releeuest; where is thy conscience,
thy heart, thy spirit? God asks not for thy liuerie, but thy service: he
knows none by their confession, but by their conversation. Your looks are the
objects of strangers eyes, your lives of your neighbors, your consciences of
your own, all of Gods. Do not Ixion-like take a cloud for Juno, a mist of
presumption for a sound and solid faith: more can say the Creed, than
understand it, more feel it than practice it. Go into your grounds in the
dead of winter, and of two naked and destitute trees, you know not which is the
sound, which the doted: the summer will give Christ's mark: Mat. 7. 20.
By their fruits you shall know them.

I speak not to discourage your zeal, but to harten it, but to better it.
Your zeal goes through the world, ye worthy Citizens: Who builds hospitalls?
the City. Who is liberal to the distressed Gospel? the City. Who is ever
faithful to the Crown? the City. Beloved your works are good; oh do not
loose their reward through hypocrisy. I am not bitter, but charitable: I would
feign put you into the Chariot of grace with Elias, and only 2. King 2. 13.
wish you to put off this Mantle. Oh that it lay in my power to prevail with
your affections, as well as your judgments: you loose all your goodness, if
your hearts be not right, the ostentation of man shall meet with the
detestation of God. You loose your attention now, if your zeal be in your eye,
more than heart. You loose your prayers, if, when the ground has your knee,
the world has your conscience: as if you had two gods: one for Sundaies,
another for work days; one for the Church, another for the Change. You loose
your charity whiles you give glosingly, illiberally, too late: not a window
you have erected, but must bear your names: but some of you rob Peter to pay
Paul, take Tenths from the Church, and give not the poor the Twentiths of
them. It is not seasonable, nor reasonable charity, to undo whole towns by
your vsuries, enclosings, oppressions, impropriations; and for a kind of
expiation, to give three or four the yearly pension of Twenty marks: an
Almeshouse is not so big as a village, nor thy superfluity whereout thou
give, like their necessity whereout thou extortest: he is but poorly
charitable, that having made a hundred beggars, releeues two. You loose all
your pious observations, whiles you loose your integrity: your solemn
censuring, mourning for the times evil, whiles your selves are the evil cause
thereof: your counterfeit sorrow for the sins of your youth, whiles the sins
of your age are worse; your casting salt and brine of reproof at others
faults, whiles your own hearts are most unseasoned; all these artificial
whitings, are but thriftie leasings, sick healths, bitter sweetes, and more
pleasing deaths. Cast then away this bane of religion, hypocrisy; this candle
with a great wicke and no tallow, that often goes out quickly, never without
stench; this fair, flattering, white Devil. How well have we bestowed this
pains, I in speaking, you in hearing, if this Devil be cast out of your
consciences, out of your conversations: It will leave some prints behind it in
the best, but bless not your selves in it, and God shall bless you from it:
Amen.

The affirmative part of Gods censure, stands next to 2. Affirmative.
our speech; Describing his. 1. meaning. 2. means. 3. maintenance. His meaning
was, to be a thief, and sharke for himself, though his pretense pleaded
(forma Pauperis) His meaning.
in the behalf of the poor. He might, perhaps, stand upon his honesty, and
rather than loose his credit, strive to purge himself by his suspectlesse
neighbors: but there need no further Jury pass upon him, God has given
testimony, and his witness is beyond exception, Judas is a thief. A thief:
who saw him steal? he that has now condemned him for his pains. Indeed the
world did not so take him, his reputation was good enough: yet he was a
thief, a crafty, cunning, cheating thief. Ioh. 13. 29.


There are two sorts of thieves: public ones, that either with a violent hand
take away the passengers money, 1
or rob the house at midnight: whose Church is the highway; there they pray
(not to God, but) on men: their dwelling like Cains, very unsure; they stand
upon thorns whiles they stand upon certenties: Their refuge is a wood, the
instrument of their vocation a sword: of these some are land-theeues, some
sea-theeues: all roaue on the sea of this world, and most commonly suffer
shipwreck, some in the deep, some on a hill. I will say little of these as
not pertinent to my text, but leave them to the Jury: And 2
speak of thieves like Judas, secret robbers, that do more mischief with
less danger to themselves. These ride in the open streets, whiles the other
lurk in close woods. And to reason, for these private thieves are in greater
hazard of damnation: the grave exhortations of the Judge, the serious counsel
of the assistant minister, together with the sight of present death, and the
necessity of an instant account with God, work strongly on a public theefes
conscience, all which the private thief neither has, nor has need of in the
general thought. The public thief wants but apprehension, but this private
thief needs discovery: for they lie close as treason, dig low like pioners,
and though they be as familiar with us, as familiars, they seem stranger than
the Indians.

To define this manner of thieves: A private thief is he, that without danger
of law robbes his neighbor; that sets a good face on the matter, and has some
profession to countenance it: a justifiable cloak hides a damnable fraud; a
trade, a profession, a mystery, like a Rome-harted Protestant, hides this
Deuillish Seminary under his roof without suspicion. To say truth, most of our
professions (thanks to ill professors) are so confounded with sins, as if
there went but a pair of sheeres between them: nay they can scarce be
distinguished: you shall not easily discern between a hot, furious professor
and an hypocrite; between a covetous man and a thief; between a Courtier and
an aspirer: between a gallant and a swearer; between an officer and a
bribetaker: between a seruitour and a parasite: between Farmers and
poore-grinders: between gentlemen and pleasure-louers: between great men and
mad men: between a tradesman and a fraudesman: between a monied man and an
usurer; between an usurer and the Devil. In many arts, the more skillful, the
more ill-full: for now-adaies: armis pollentior astus: fraud goes beyond force:
this makes Lawyers richer than soldiers, usurers than Lawyers, the Devil than
all. The old Lion (says the Fable) when his nimble days were over, and he
could no longer pray by violence, kept his den with a fained sickness: the
suspectlesse beasts drawn thither to a dutiful visitation, thus became his
pray: cunning served his turn, when canning did no good. The world, whiles it
was young, was simple, honest, plaine-dealing: gentlemen then delued in the
ground, now the soles of their feet must not touch it: then thy drunk water,
now wine will not serve, except to drunkenness: then they kept sheep, now they
scorn to wear the wool; then Genesis 43. 12.
Jacob returned the money in the sacks mouth, now we are ready to steal it and
put it in. Plain-dealing is dead, and what we most lament, died without issue.
Virtue had but a short reign, and was soon deposed: all the examples of sin
in the Bible are newly acted over again, and the interest exceeds the
principal, the counterpaine the original. The Apostasy, now, holds us in our
manners: we leave God for man, for Mammon. Once, Orbis ingemuit, factum se
videns Arrianum; the world groned, seeing it self made an Arrian: It'may now
groan worse, factum se videns Machiauellum, seeing it self made a Machiauell.
nisi Deus opem praestat, deperire restat. Grieved devotion had never more cause
to sing, Mundum dolens circuiui; fidem vndique quaesiui, etc. The world I
compassed about,
Faith and honesty to find out:
But Country, City, Court and all,
Thrust poor Devotion to the wall:
The Lawyer, Courtier, Merchant, Clown
Have beaten poor Devotion down,
All wound her; till for lack of breath,
Fainting Devotion bleeds to death.


But I am to deal with none but thieves, and those private ones: and because
Judas is the precedent, I will begin with him, that is most like him: according
to the proverb, which the Graecians had of Philo Iudaeus: ((...): aut Plato
Philonem sequitur, Ier. in cat. script eccl.
aut Platonem Philo.) Either Plato followed Philo, or Philo imitated Plato. Let
me only change the names: Either Judas played the Pope, or the Pope plays the
Judas. This is the most subtle thief of the world, and robbes all Christendom
under a good color: who can say, he has a black eye, or a light finger? for
experience has taught him, that cui pollis Leonina non sufficit, vulpina est
assuenda: when the Lions skin cannot threat, the foxes skin can cheat. Pope
Alexander was a beast, that having entered like a fox, he must needs reign like
a Lion, worthy he was to die like a dog: for, vis confilij expers, moleruit
sua, power without policy is like a piece without powder: many a Pope sings
that common Ballad of hell: Ingenio perij, qui miser ipse meo: Wit, whither
will thou? woe is me: my wit has Ovid.
wrought my misery.

To say truth their Religion is nothing in the circumstance but craft; and
policy maintains their Hierarchy; as Judas subtlety made him rich. Judas was
put in trust with a great deal of the Devils business; yet not more than the
Pope. Judas pretended the poor and robbed them: and does not the Pope think
you? Are there no almes-boxes rifled and emptied into the Popes Treasury? Our
Fathers say that the poor gave Peter Pence to the Pope, but our grandfathers
cannot tell us, that the Pope gave Caesar-pence to the poor: did not he sat in
the holy chair, (as Augustus Caesar in his imperial throne) and cause the
whole Christian world to be taxed: and what? Luke 2. 1.
did they freely give it? no, a taxation forced it; what right then had the
Pope to it? just as much as Judas had to his masters money? was he not then a
thief? yet, what need a rich man be a thief? the Pope is rich, and needs
must, for his commings in be great: he has rent out of heaven, rent out of
hell, rent out of purgatory: but more sackes come to his mill out of purgatory,
than out of hell and heaven too; and for his toling, let the world judge:
therefore says Bishop Jewel, he would be content to loose hell and heaven too,
to save his purgatory. Some by pardons he preuents from hell: some by
Indulgences he lifts up to heaven; and infinite by merits he ransomes from
purgatory: not a jot without money; cruces, altaria, Christum: he selles
Christ's cross, Christ's blood, Christ's self; all for money. Nay, he has rent
from the very Stews a hell above ground, and swells his coffers by the sins
of the people: he suffers a price to be set on damnation; and maintains lust
to go to Law for her own; gives whoredom a toleration under his seal; that
Lust the son of Idleness, has free access to Liberty the daughter of Pride.

Judas was a great Statesman in the Devils Commonwealth; for he bore four
maine offices: either he begged them shamefully, or he bought them bribingly,
or else Beelsebub saw desert in him, and gave him them gratis, for his good
parts; for Judas was his white boy. he was 1. an hypocrite. 2. a thief. 3. a
traitor. 4. a murderer. Yet the Pope shall vie offices with him, and win the
game too for plurality. The Pope sits in the holy chair, yet a Devil:
perjury, Sodomie, sorcerie, homicide, parricide, patricide, treason, murder,
etc. are many and essential things to the Pope. He is not content to be
Steward, but he must be Uicar, nay indeed, Lord himself: for what can Christ
do, and the Pope cannot do? Judas was no body to him. He has stolen Truths
garment, and put it on Errors back, turning poor Truth naked out of doors.
he has altered the primitive institutions, and adulterated Gods sacred laws;
maintaining vagas libidines: he steals the hearts of subjects from their
Sovereigns, by stealing fidellity from the hearts of Subjects: and would steal
the crown from the kings head, and all under the shadow of religion. This is a
thief; a notable, a notorious thief, but let him go: I hope he is known
well enough, and every true man will bless himself out of his way.

I come to our selves: there are many kinds of private Thieves in both the
houses of Israel and Aaron: in foro and choro, in Change and Chancell;
Commonwealth and Church. I can tax no man's person; if I could, I would abhor
it, or were worthy to be abhorred: the Sins of our Times are the Thieves, I
would arraigne, testify against, condemned, have executed, the persons I would
have saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

1. If there be any magistrates (into whose mouths God has put the
determination of doubts; and the distribution of right into their hands:) that
suffer popularity, partiallity, passion to rule, overrule their judgments,
these are private thieves: they rob the poor man of his just cause, and
equities relief, and no law can touch them for it: thus may causes go, not
according to right, but friendship: as Themistocles boy could say, As I will,
the whole Senate will: for as I will, my mother will; as my mother will, my
father will; as my father will, the whole Senate will. Thus as a groom of the
chamber, a Secretary of the closet, or a porter of the gate will, the cause
must go: this is horrible theft, though not araignable, hence a knot is found
in a bulrush: delay shifts of the day of hearing; a good paint is set on a
foul pastbord; circumstances are shuffled from the bar; the Sun of truth
is clouded: the poor confident Plaintiff goes home undone: his moanes, his
groans are vented up to heaven: the just God sees and suffers it, but he will
one day judge that Judge. Who can indite this thief? what law may pass on
him? what Jury can find him? what Judge can fine him? none on earth: there is
a bar he shall not escape: if there be any such, (as I trust there is not)
they are thieves.

2. If there be any Lawyer, that takes fees on both hands, one to speak,
another to hold his peace: as (Demosthenes answered his bragging fellow Lawyer)
this is a thief, though the law does not call him so: a mercenarie tongue and
a money-spel'd conscience, that undertakes the defense of things known to his
own heart to be unjust, is only proper to a thief: a double thief, he robs
both sides: the adverse part in pleading against the truth, his own client in
drawing him on to his further damage. If this be not, as the Roman complained,
latrocinium in foro, theeuery in the Hall, there is none: happy Westminster
hall, if thou were freed from this kind of cutpurses. If no plummets, except of
unreasonable weight, can set the wheels of their tongues a going: and then if
a golden addition can make the hammer strike to our pleasure: if they keep
their ears and mouths shut, till their purses be full; and will not
understand a cause till they feel it: if they shuffle difficulties into
plainness, and trip up the Laws heels with tricks: if they Surgionlike keep
the Clients disease from healing, till he has no more money for salve: then to
speak in their own language, Noverint vniuersi, Be it known to all men by
these presents that these are thieves: though I could wish rather, that
Noverint ipsi, they would know it themselves, and reform this deformity.

3. If there be any officer, that walks with unwashed hands, I mean, with the
foul fingers of briberie, he is a thief: be the matter penal or capital, if
a bribe can pick Justices lock, and plead against the innocent, or for
himself being nocent, and prevail, this is theft. Theft? who is robbed? the
giver? does not the freedom of his will transfer a right of the gift to the
receiver? no; for it is voluntary or willing will: but as a man gives his
purse to the ouer-mastring thief, rather than ventures his life; so this his
bribe, rather than endanger his cause: shall I say, the thief has as much
right to the purse, as the officer to the bribe; and they are both, though not
equally palpable, yet equally culpable thieves. Is the giver innocent or
nocent? innocent, and shall not innocence have her right without a bribe?
nocent; and shall gold conceal his fault, or cancel his punishment? Do thou
not know whether, and will thou blind thy self before hand with a bribe? for
bribes are like dust thrown in the eyes of Justice, that she cannot without
pain look on the Sunshine of truth. Though a second to thy self receive
them, wife or friend, by thy allowance, they are but stolen goods, coals of
fire put in the roof of thy house: Job 15. 34.
for fire shall devour the houses of bribes. And there have been many houses
built by report, the first stone of whose foundation was hewn out of the
quarrey of briberie. These are thieves.

4. There is theeuerie too among Tradesmen: and who would think it? many (they
say) rob us, but we rob none: yes, but they think that (verba lactis will
countenance frandom in factis) smooth words will smoother rough deeds. This web
of theft is many ways wouen in a shop or a warehouse, but three especially.

1. By a false weight, and no true measure, whose content or content is not
justifiable by law; or the cunning conueyances in weighing or metting, such as
cheat the buyer: Deuteronomy. 25. 13.
are not these pretty tricks to pick men's purses? the French word has well
expressed them: they are Lieger dumaines. Now had I not as good loose my purse on
Salisburie plain, as in London Exchange? is my loss the less, because
violence forbeares and craft pickes my purse? Prou. 11. 1.
The highway thief is not greater abomination to God, than the shop-theefe:
and for man, the last is more dangerous: the other we knowingly fly; but this
laughes us in the face, whiles he robs us.

2. By insufficient wares, which yet with a dark window and an impudent
tongue, will appear good to the buyers eye and ear too. Sophistry is now
fled from the schools into shops: from disputation to merchandising: he is a
silly tradesman, that cannot sophisticate his wares, as well as he has done
his conscience; and wear his tongue with protestations, barer than trees in
Autumn, the head of old age, or the livings of Churchmen. Oaths indeed smell
too rank of infidelity; marry, we are Protestants, and protest away our
souls: there is no other way to put off bad wares, and put up good moneys: are
not these thieves?

3. By playing or rather praying upon men's necessities: they must have the
commodity, therefore set the dice on them: vox latronis: the advantage taken of
a man's necessity is a trick of a worse Devil than Judas: Thou should
rather be like Job, a foot to lame necessity, and not take away his crutch: or
perhaps God has put more Job 29. 15.
wit into thy brains, than his, thou see further into the bargain: and
therefore take opportunity to abuse his plainness: thou seruest thy self
in gain, not him in love: thou may, and laugh at the law; but there is a
law, thou have transgressed, that without Jesus Christ shall condemn thee to
hell.

Go now, and applaud your selves, ye sons of fraud, that eagle-eyed
scrupulositie cannot find you faulty, nor the Lyon-handed law touch you,
please your selves in your security. You practice belike, behind the hangings,
and come not on the public stage of Injury: yet you are not free from
spectators: testante Numine, homine, Daemone: God, man, Angels, Devils shall
witness against you: ex cordibus, ex codicibus: by your hearts, by your
books, God shall judge you. Injury is often in the one, perjury in the
other: the great Justice will not put it up: they shall be convicted thieves.

5. There are thieves crope into the Church too; or rather they incroach on the
Church; for Ministers cannot now play the thieves with their livings, they have
nothing left to steal: but there are secret Iudasses, can make shift to do
it. Difficilis magni custodia census. The Eagles flock to a carcass, and
thieves hanker about rich doors: at the dispersion of church-liuings, they
cried as the Babylonians, to the spoil, to the spoil. The Church was once
rich, but it was (diebus illis) in the golden time: when honesty went in good
clothes; and ostentation durst not give religion the check-mate, now they plead
prescription, and prove them their own by long possession. I do not tax all
those for private thieves, that hold in their hands, lands and possessions,
that were once the Churches; but those that withhold such as are due to
Churchmen. Their estates were once taken away by (more than) Gods (mere)
sufferance, for a just punishment of their idleness, Idolatry, lusts: sure
there is some Achanisme in the camp of the Levites, that makes this
plague sore to run still: there is some disobedient and fugitive Ionasses
that thus totter our ship. I complain not, that claustra are turned into
castra; Abbeyes into Gentlemen's houses; places of monition, to places of
munition: but that men rob (aram dominicam) Gods house, to furnish (haram
domesticam) their own house, this is theft, and sacrilegious theft: a
succession of theft; for the fingers of the sons are now heauyer than the
loins of their fathers: those were (improbi Papistae) wicked Papists, and
these are (improbirapistae) ungodly robbers. B^za.


This is a monstrous theft, and so exceeding all thefts, as (non nisi in Deum
fieri potest) it can be committed against none but God. When Scipio robbed the
temple of Aug.
Tholossa, there was not a man, that carried away any of the gold, who ever
prospered after it: and I pray you tell me, how many have thriued with the
goods of the Church? they go from man to man without rest, like the Arc among
the Philistines, which was removed from 1. Sam. 5.
Ashdod, to Gath; from Gath to Ekron, as if it could find no place to rest in,
but vexed the people that kept it, till it returned to the old seat in Israel.
oftentimes these goods left by Gentlemen to their heirs, prove gangrenes to
their whole estates; and Esai. 5. 8.
house is joined to house so fast, Gods house to their own, that the fire,
which begins at the one consumes the other: as the Eagle, that stole a piece of
meat from the Altar, carried a cole with it, that set her nest on fire. I am
persuaded many a house of blood in England, had stood at this hour, had not
the forced springs of impropriations turned their foundation to a quagmire. In
all your knowledge, think but on a Churchrobbers heir, that ever thriued to
the third generation: yet alas! horror to my bones, and shame to my speech!
there are not wanting among our selves, that give encouragement to these
thieves: and without question, many a man, so well otherwise disposed, would
have been reclaimed from this sin, but for their distinctions of
competencies: I appeal to their own consciences, there is not an humorist
living, that in heart thinks so, or would forbear their reproof, were he not
well provided for. These are the Cant. 2. 15.
foxes, that content not themselves to steal the grapes, but they must forage
the vine: thus yet still is Matt. 21. 13.
Gods house made a den of Thieves, without envy or partiallity they are
thieves.

6. There is more store of thieves yet: covetous Landlords, that stretch their
rents on the tenter-hookes of an evil conscience, and swell their coffers by
undoing their poor tenants: these sit close, and stare the law in the face,
yet by their leave they are thieves: I do not deny the improoument of old
rents, so it be done with old minds, I mean, our forefathers charity: but
with the Devil, to set right upon the pinacles, and pitch so high a price of
our lands, that it strains the Tenants hart-blood to reach it, is theft, and
killing theft. What all their immoderate toil, broken sleeps, sore labors
can get, with a miserable diet to themselves, not being able to spare a morsel
of bread to others, is a pray to the Landlords rapine: this is to rob their
estates, grind their faces, suck their bloods. These are thieves.

7. Ingrossers; that hoord up commodities, and by stopping their propagation
raise the price; these are thieves. Many Blocke-houses in the city, monopolies
in the court, garners in the country, can testify, there are now such thieves
abroad: we complain of a dearth; sure the heavens are too merciful to us,
that are so unmerciful one to another: scarsity comes without Gods sending:
who brings it then? even the Devil and his brokers, engrossing misers. The
Commonwealth may often blow her nails, unless she sit by an engrossers fire:
her limbs may be faint with hunger, unless she buy grain at an engrossers
price. I confess, this is a sin, which the Law takes notice of, but not in
the full nature, as theft. The picke-purse (in my opinion) does not so much
hurt, as this general robber; for they rob millions. These do not with
Joseph, buie up the superfluity of plenty, to prevent a dearth; but hoord up
the store of plenty, to procure a dearth. rebels to God, trespassers to nature,
thieves to the Commonwealth: if these were apprehended and punished, neither
City nor Country should complain as they do, Mean time, the peoples curse
is upon them, and I doubt not but Gods plague will follow it; if repentance
Prou. 11. 26.
turn it not away: till when, they are private thieves.

8. Inclosers; that pretend a distinction of possessions, a preservation of
woods, indeed to make better and broader their own territories, and to steal
from the poor commons; these are horrible thieves. The poor man's beast is his
maintenance, his sustenance, his life, to take food from his beast, is to take
the beasts food from his belly: so he that incloseth Commons is a monstrous
thief, for he steals away the poor man's living and life; hence many a
Cottager, nay perhaps Farmer, is feign (as the Indians do to Devils) to
sacrifice to the lord of the soil, a yearly bribe for a nenoceat. For though
the law forbids such enclosures: yet (quod fieri non debet, factum valet) when
they are once ditcht in, say the law what it will, I see no throwing out: force
bears out, what fraud has borne in: let them never open their mouths to plead
the Commonwealths benefit: they intend it as much as Judas did, when he spoke
for the poor: no, they are thieves, the bane of the common good, the surfeit of
the land, the scourge of the poor: good only to themselves; and that in
opinion only: for they do it, Esai. 5. 8.
to dwell alone, and they dwell alone indeed: for neither God nor good Angel
keeps them company: and for a good conscience, it cannot get through their
quick-sets. These are thieves, though they have enclosed their theft, to keep
the Law out, and their wickedness in: yet the day shall come, their lands
shall be thrown out, their lives thrown out, their souls thrown out: their
lands out of their possessions, their lives out of their bodies, their souls
out of heaven; except repentance and restitution prevail with the great Judge
for their pardon: mean time, they are thieves.

9 Many Tap-house-keepers, Tauerners, victuallers; which the provident care of
our worthy magistrates, has now done well to restrain: if at least this
Hidraes heads do not multiply. I do not speak to annihilate the profession:
they may be honest men, and doubtless some are, which live in this rank: but
if many of them should not chop away a good conscience for money, drunkenness
should never be so welcome to their doors. The dissolute wretch sits there
securely, and buies his own sickness, with great expense: which would
preserve the health of his poor wife and children at home: that lamentably
moan for bread, whiles he lauisheth all in drink. Thus the pot robbes him of
his wit, he robbes himself of grace, and the victualler robbes him of his
money. This theft might Three thieves we meet.
yet be borne: but the Commonwealth is here robbed too. Drunkenness makes so
quick riddance of the ale, that this raises the price of malt: and the good
sale of malt, raises the price of barley: thus is the land distressed, the
poores bread is dissolved into the drunkards cup. the markets are hoysed up, if
the poor cannot reach the price, the maultmaster will, he can utter it to the
rap-house: and the tap-house is sure of her old friend drunkenness. Thus theft
sits close in a drinking room, and robs all that sail into that coast. I
confess, they are (most of them) bound to suffer no drunkenness in their
houses, yet they secretly acknowledge, that if it were not for drunkenness, they
might shut up their doors, as utterly unable to pay their rents. These are
thieves.

10. Flatterers, that eat like mothes into liberal men's coats, the bane of
Greatness, are thieves, not to be forgotten in this catalogue. These rob many
a great man of his goodness, and make him rob the commonwealth of her
happiness. Does his Lord want money? he puts into his head, such fines to
belevyed, such grounds enclosed, such rents improued. Be his maintainers
courses never so foul, either he furthers them, or he smothers them: sin has
not a more impudent bawd, nor his master a more impious thief, nor the
commonwealth a more sucking horseleach. He would raise himself by his
Great-one, and cannot contriue it, but by the ruin of others. He robs the
flattred of his goods, of his grace, of his time, of his freedom, of his
soul: is not this a thief? beneficia, veneficia: all their good is poison.
They are Dominis arrisores, reip. arrosores: their Masters Spanyels, the
commonwealths wolves, put them in your Paternoster, let them never come in
your Creed: pray for them, but trust them no more than thieves.

11. There is another nest of thieves more in this City, Brokers and breakers:
I conjoyne them in my description, for the likeness of their condition.
Brokers' that will upon a good pawn lend money to a Devil: whose extortion,
by report, is monstrous; and such as to find in men is improbable, in
Christians impossible: the very vermin of the earth. Indeed man had a poor
beginning; we are the sons of Adam, Adam of dust, dust of deformity,
deformity of nothing; yet made by God: but these are bred like monsters of the
corruption of nature and wicked manners; and carry the Devils cognizance. for
Breakers, such as necessity compels to it, I censure not: if they desire with
all their hearts to satisfy the uttermost farthing and cannot; God will then
accept votall restitution for total restitution; that which is affected, for
that which is effected: the will for the deed: and in those debt is not (as the
vulgar speech is) deadly sin: a sore it may be, no sin. But they that with
a purpose of deceit, get goods into their hands in trust, and then without need
hide their heads, are thieves: for the intent to steal in their minds
directed their injurious hands. The Law arraigns them not, the Judgment seat
of God shall not acquit them. These steal more quickly and with security,
than a highway robbes all his life time and that in perpetual danger: It is
but passing their words, allowing a good price, conuaying home the wares, and
on a sudden diue under the waters: a close concealment shall save them five
hundred pounds in a thousand. They live upon others sweat, fare richly upon
others meat, and the debtor is often made a gentleman, when the creditour is
made a beggar.

Such false Gibeonites enrich Scriueners: their unfaithfulness, has banished
all trust and fidellity. Time was, that Nouerint vniuersi was unborn, the
Lawyer himself knew not what an obligation meant. Security stood on no other
legs, but promises, and those were so sound, that they never failed their
burden: but Time adulterating with the Harlot Fraud, begot a brood of
Nouerints: and but for these shackles, debt would often show credit a light
pair of heels. Therefore now (plus creditur annulis, quam animie) there is
more faith given to men's seals, than to Sen.
their souls. Owe nothing but love; says the Apostle: all Romans 13. 8.
owe this, but few pay it; or if they do, it is in cracked money, not current
in Gods Exchequer: for our love is dissimulation, and our charity is (not cold,
but) dead. But these bankrouts of both wealth and honesty, owe all things but
love, and more than ever they mean to pay, though you give them time till
Doomes-day. These are Thieves.

12. The twelfth and last sort of thieves (to make up the just dozen) are the
usurers. This is a private thief like Judas, and for the bag like Judas,
which he steals from Christ like Judas, or rather from Christians, that have
more need, and therefore worse than Judas. This is a man made out of wax: his
Paternoster is a Pawn: his Creed is, The condition of this obligation: his
religion is all religation; a binding of others to himself; of himself to the
Devil: for look how far any of the former thieves have ventured to hell,
the usurer goes a foot further by the standard. The Poet exclaimes against this
sin: Hinc vsura vorax, auidumque in tempore foenus etc.


Describing in that one line, the names and nature of usury. Foenus, quasi
foetus: It is a teeming thing, ever with child, pregnant, and multiplying:
money is an unfruitful thing by nature made only for commutation: it is a
praeternaturall thing, it should engender money: this is monstrosus partus, a
prodigious birth. Usura, quasi propter vsum rei. The nature of it is wholly
devouring: their money to necessity is like cold water to a hot ague, that for
a time refreshes, but prolongs the disease. The usurer is like the worm we
call the timber-worme; which is wonderful Teredo.
soft to touch, but has teeth so hard, that it eats timber: but the usurer
eats timber and stones too. The Prophet hedgeth it in, between Bribery and
Extortion: Ezekiel. 22. 12.
In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood: thou have taken usury and
increase: and thou have greedily gained of thy neighbors by extortion; and
have forgotten me, says the Lord. Therefore I have smitten my hands at thy
dishonest gain, etc. You verse. 13.
hear Gods opinion of it. Beware this dishonest gain: take heed lest this
casting your money into a Bank, cast not up a Bank against you: when you have
found out the fairest praetexts for it, Gods justice shall strike of all: Ephesians.
5. 6.
let no man deceive you with vain words: for, for such things Gods wrath will
fall on the children of disobedience. Infinite colors, mitigations, euasions,
distinctions are invented, to countenance on earth, heauen-exploded usury: God
shall then frustrate all, when he powers his wrath on the naked conscience.
God says, Thou shall not take usury: go now, study paintings, excuses,
apologies, dispute the matter with God: hell fire shall decide the question. I
have no other trade to live on, but usury: only the Devil first made usury a
trade. But can this plea in the thief (I have no other trade to live on but
stealing) protect and secure him from the gallows?

The usurer then is a thief: nay a double thief, as the old Roman law
censured them; that charged the thief with restitution double, the usurer with
fourfold: concluding him a double thief. Thieves steal sometimes, usurers
always. Thieves steal for necessity, usurers without need. The usurer wounds
deeper with a piece of paper, than the robber with a sword. many a young
gentleman, newly broke out of the cage of wardship, or blessed with the first
Sunshine of his one and twenty, goes from the vigilance of a restraining
Governor, into the tempting hands of a merciless usurer, as if he came out
of Gods blessing into the warm Sun. Many a man, that comes to his lands, ere
he comes to his wits, or experience of their villainy, is so let blood in his
estate by usury, that he never proves his own man again.

Either prodigallity or penury or dissembled riches borrow on usury: to rack
the poor with ouer-plus, all (but Devils) hold monstrous: to lend the
Prodigal, is wicked enough, for it feeds his issue with ill humors, and puts
Stibium into his broth, who was erst sick of the vomiting disease, and could
not digest his (Fathers ill-gotten) Patrimony. For the rich, that dissemble
poverty, to borrow on usury, (for there is that makes himself poor and has
great riches) they do it, either to defeat creditours, Prou. 13. 7.
or to avoid taxations and subsidies, or some such sinister respects. The
gentleman that borrows on usury, by racking his rents makes his Tenants pay
his usury. The Farmer so borrowing, by inhauncing his corn, makes the poor
pay his usury. The Tradesman, raises his wares, that the buier must pay his
usury. I will not tax every borrower: it is lawful to suffer injury, though
not to offer it: and it is no sin for the true man to give his purse to the
thief, when he cannot choose. To redeem his lands, liberty, life, he may (as I
suppose) give interest; but not for mere gain only which he may get by that
wicked money; lest he encourage the usurer; for a receiver vpholds a thief.
This is the priuy-pocket, whose death is the more grievous because he is
repriued till the last Sessions: a Gibbet is built in hell for him, and all the
gold in the world cannot purchase a pardon. I know there is mercy in Christ's
blood to any repentant and believing sinner, but (excepted Zacheus) show me the
usurer, that repents: for as humility is the repentance of pride, and
abstinence the repentance of surfeit, so is restitution the repentance of
vsurse: he that restores not, repents not his usury: and then (non remittitur
peccatum, Aug.
nisi restituatur ablatum) the sin is retained, till the gains of usury be
restored. This is (durus sermo, sed verus sermo) a hard saying, but true: then
we may give all; do, if they be so gotten: Dabit Deus meliora, maiora, plura:
God will give better things, God will give greater things, God will give more
things; as the Prophet to Amasiah: The Lord is able to give thee more than this.

Thus I have discovered by occasion of Judas some privy 2. Chro. 25. 9.
thieves; if without thanks, yet not without conscience; if without profit,
yet not without purpose of profit. Indeed these are the sins, which I vowed
with my self to reprove; not that others have not done it, or not done it
better then I from this place: I acknowledge both freely; yet could I not pass
this secret thief Judas, without discovering his companions, or (as it were)
breaking open the knot of Thieves, which under allowed pretenses, are arrant
cut-purses to the Commonwealth. How to punish, how to restrain, I meddle not:
it is enough to discharge my conscience, that I have endeavored to make the
sins hateful to the trespassers, to the trespassed: Deus tam faciat commodum,
quam fecit accommodum: God make it as preualent, as (I am sure) it is pertinent.

Give me leave, yet ere I leave, to speak a word of the His means, and his
maintenance.
Bag, first his means, and secondly his maintenance. I will join them
together, a fit and a fat booty makes a 1. The bag gave him means.
thief. Judas has got the bag, and the bag has got Judas: he could not
carry it, but he must make it light 2. and that you might not think it was
empty, that which was put therein, gave him maintenance.
enough for his carriage: he empties it into his own coffer; as many Stewards
rise by their good Lord and Masters fall. Judas means to be a thief, and
Satan means to fit him with a booty: for after he had once wrought
iourney-worke with the Devil, he shall not want work, and a subject to work
on. I will limit my remaining speech to these three heads. First the
difficulty, to bear the bag, and not to be covetous. Secondly the usual
incidency of the bag to the worst men. Thirdly, the progress of sin; only
faint not in this last act.

1 It is hard to bear the bag, and not to be covetous: Judas is Burser, and
he shuts himself into his pouch: the more he has the more he couets: the
Apostles, that wanted money, are not so having: Judas has the bag, and yet
he must have more, or he will filch it. So impossible is it, that these outward
things should satisfy the heart of man. Soli habent omnia, qui habent habentem
omnia. They alone possess all things, that possess the possessour of all
things. The nature of true content, is to fill all the chinkes of our desires,
as the wax does the seal: None can do this but God, for (as it is well
observed) the World is round; man's Heart three cornered: a globe can never fill
a triangle; but one part will be still empty: only the blessed Trinity can fill
these three corners of man's heart. I confess, the Bag is a thing much
reckoned of, and makes men much reckoned of, for, Pecunia obediunt omnia: all
things make obeasance to money: Et qui ex diuitijs tam magnifiant, non miror,
sihi diuitias tam magnifaciant: they may admire money, whom money makes
admired. Such is the plague and dropsy, the bag brings to the mind, that
the more covetousness drinks down, the thirstier it is: This is a true
drunkard: dum absorbet vinum, absorbetur a vino, he drinks down his wealth,
Ambr.
and his wealth drinks down him. Qui tenet marsupium, tenetur a marsupio, he
holds his purse fast, but not so fast as his purse holds him: the strings of
his Bag tie his heart faster then he ties the strings of his Bag. He is a
Iaylour to his Iaylour, a prisoner to his prisoner, he iayles up his gold in
the prison of his Coffer, his gold iayles up him in the prison of
covetousness, thus dum vult esse praedo, fit praeda: whiles he would come to a
pray, he becoms a pray. Aug.
The Devil gets his heart, as the Crab the Oyster: the Oyster lies gaping for
air on the sands, the Crab chops in her claw, and so deuoureth it; whiles the
covetous gapes for money, the Devil thrusts in his (hairy and cloven foot, I
mean his) baits of temptation, and chokes the conscience.

Thus the Bag never comes alone, but it brings with it Mat. 13. 22
cares, says Christ; 1. Tim. 6. 9..
snares, says Paul. It is better to be without riches, then like Judas,
coniured into the circle of his bag: his heaven is among his bags; in the
sight of them, he applaudes himself against all censures, reuilings, curses. It
had profited some, to have wanted the bag; and this the wicked (waked)
consciences confess dying; wishing to be without riches, so they were without
sins; yea even those, their riches have procured. It is none of Gods least
favors, that wealth comes not trolling in upon us: for many of us if our
estates were better to the world, would be worse to God. The poor labourer
has not time to luxuriate; he trusts to God, to bless his endeavors, and so
rests content: but the bag commonly makes a man either (prodigum or auarum) a
prodigal man, or a prodigious man; for (auarus, monstrum) the covetous man is
a monster: how many wretches has this bag drowned, as they swome over the
sea of this world, and kept them from the shore of blisle? be proud then of
your Bag, ye Iudasses when Gods Bailiffe death shall come with a babeas
corpus, what shall become of your bag? or rather of your selves for your
bag? your bag will be found, but your selves lost. It will be one day said
of you, as great as the bag has made you, as the Poet sung of Achilles.

I am cinis est, and de tam magno restat Achille, Ovid Met.

Nescio quid: paruam, quod non been complete vrnam.
A great man living holds much ground: the brim
Of his days filled; how little ground holds him!
Great in command, large in land, in gold richer:
His quiet ashes, now, scarce fill a pitcher.
Can your bag commit any penance in Hell? or can you by a Fine, answer your
faults in the Star Chamber of heaven? no, Judas and his bag too Acts 8. 20.
are perished. As he gave Religion the bag for the World, so the world gave
him the bag, and turned him a begging in that miserable Country, whereall the
bags in the world, cannot purchase Luke 16. 24.
a drop of water, to cool his tongue. Thus are the covetous Judas and his
bag well met.

2. The Bag is most usually given to the worst men: of all the Apostles, he
that was to betray Christ, is made his Steward. Goods are in themselves good:
Ne putentur Aug.
mala, dantur and bonis, ne putentur summa bona dantur and malis. Lest they
should be thought not good, they are given to good men; lest they should be
thought too good, they are given to evil men: doubtless, some rich-men are in
heaven, and some poor out; because some rich in the purse are poor in the
spirit; and some poor in purse are proud in spirit: and it is not the Bag,
but the Mind, which condemns a man; for the bag is more easily contemned,
then the mind conquered. Therefore foolish Crates, Aug.
to throw away his money into the Sea: ego mergamte, ne mergar a te: I will
drown thee, lest thou drown me: since wealth well employed, comforts our
selves, relieues others; and brings us (as it were) the speedier way to heaven,
and perhaps, to a greater portion of glory: but for the most part, the rich are
enemies to goodness, and the poor friends: Lazarus the poor man was in
Abraham's bosom, and it was Dives, that went to hell; the rich and not the
poor.

Search the scriptures, consult all authors, and who are they, that have
sailed through the world in the tallest vessels; and you shall meet laden with
the bag Caines, Nimrods, Chams, Ismaels, Esaues, Saul's, Ahabs, Labans,
Nabals, Demasses, Iudasses, Devils; the slime of nature, the worst of men, and
as bad as the best of Devils. What do men cast to swine and dogs, but draffe
and carions? what else are the riches that God gives to wicked men? himself is
pleased to call them by these names. If they were excellent things, they should
never be cast on those God hates (I have hated Esau) and means to condemn.
There is no privilege then, in the bag to keep thee from being a Judas: nay
therefore thou art most likely, and thereby made most likely to be a Judas. Who
has so much beauty as Absolon? who so much honor as Nebuchadnezzar? Who so
much wealth as Naball? Who the bag but Judas?

Surely God is wise in all his ways; he knows what he does: Judas shall hence
bag up for himself the greater damnation. It is then no argument of Gods
favor to be his Purse-bearer, no more, then it was a sign, that Christ loved
Judas above the other Apostles, because he made him his Steward: he gave the
rest Grace; and him the Bag: which sped best? These outward things are the
scatterings of his mercies, like the gleaning after the Vintage: the full crop
goes to his children. Ismael shall have wealth, but Ishac the inheritance: Esau
his pleasures, but Jacob goes away with the blessing. God bestows favors upon
some, but they are angry favors: they are in themselves, bona, goods; and from
God, dona, gifts; (for he is not only a Heb. 9. 14.
living God, but a Iam. 1. 17.
giving God) but to the receauers, banes. The Israelites had better have wanted
their Quails, then eaten them with such sauce. Judas had better been without
the Bag, then have had the Bag, and the Devil with it.

I would have no man make his riches an argument of Gods disfavor, and his
own dereliction; no, but rather of comfort, if he can find his affections
ready to part with them at Christ's calling. I never was in your bosoms; how
many of you lay up this resolution in your Closset among your bags? how many
(resolve said I, nay) perform this? you cannot want opportunity in these
days. I would wish you to try your hearts, that you may secure your
consciences of freedom from this Iudasme: oh, how few Good-riches there be in
these days? but one Apostle Not many by name, or by nature.
goes to hell, and he is the richest. Make then your riches a means to help
you to heaven; whither you can have no direct and ready way, till you have
gotten the Reu. 12. 1.
Moon beneath your feet, I mean, the world. Lay up your bag in the bosom of
charity, and your treasure in the lap of Christ, and then the Bag shall not
hinder, but further your flight to heaven.

3. Observe, how Judas runs through sin, from one wickedness to another
without stay: from covetousness to hypocrisy, from hypocrisy to theft, from
theft to treason, from treason to murder; for since he could not get the
Ointment bestowed on Christ, he means to get Christ Math. 26. 14. 15.
himself: and to this purpose goes instantly to the Elders and Priests, with a
quid dabitis etc. He values the ointment at 300. pence, and Christ at (but)
30. as if he was worth no more, then the interest-money, ten in the hundredth:
and herein he makes his own price, for they gave him his asking: he betraies
Jesus Christ a man, Jesus Christ his master; Jesus Christ is maker; as if he
would destroy his Savior, and mar his maker.

Thus he runs from sin to sin, and needs he must, for he, that the Devil
drives, feels no lead at his heels. Godliness creepes to heaven, but
wickedness runs to hell: Many Parliament Protestants go but a Statutepace,
yet look to come to heaven; but without more have, when the Pharisees come out
of hell. But facilis descensus Auerni: were you Lata via est, and trita via
est, quae ducit ad Oreum. Inuenit hoc, etiam seduce, cacus iter. Owen Epig.
blinder then Superstition, you may find the way to hell: It is but slipping
down a hill, and hell stands at the bottom: this is the cause, that Judas
runs so fast.

I have read of one Ruffus, that upon his Sheel'd, painted God on the one side,
and the Devil on the other: with this motto, situme nolis, isterogitat: if
thou, oh God, wilt none of me, here is one will: either God must take him
suddenly, or he will run quick to the Devil. The Gallant gallops in riot.
The Epicure reeles a drunken pace. The Lust-full scorns to be behind; he
runs from the fire of lust, to the fire of hell; as the fondly impatient fish
leapes out of the boiling pan, into the burning flame. The Swearer is there,
ear he be aware, for he goes by his tongue. The Covetous rides post, for he
is carried on the back of Mammon: The Usurer sirs still in his chair or the
Chimney-corner, lame of the gout, and can but halt; yet he will be at hell, as
soon as the best runner of them all.

Usury is a Coach, and the Devil is driuer: needs must he go, whom the
Devil drives. He is drawn to hell in pomp, by two Coach-horses, wild
spirits, with wings, on their heels, (swifter then Pegasus, or Mercury)
Covetousness, and Infidellity: what makes him put money to use, but
covetousness? what makes him so wretchedly covetous, but want of faith? Thus
he is hurried to hell in case, state, triumph: If any be worthy to bear the
Usurer company, let it be the Rioter though of contrary dispositions, yet in
this journey sitly and accordantly met: for the Usurer commonly has money, but
no Coach, and the Prodigal Gallant has a Coach, but no money: if they want
company yet, let them take in the Cheater; for he waits upon both these, and
may perhaps fail of the like opportunity.

Thus because the ways to hell are full of green, smooth, soft, and tempting
pleasures, infinite run apace with Judas, till they come to their own place.
But Heavens way is harsh and ascending, and the gate narrow. Indeed the City of
glory is capacious and roomthy: a In my fathers house John 14. 2.
there are many mansions, says Christ. Nominis immensi seeds amplissima
caelum; Omnipotens Dominus, omnipatensque domus. Ow. Epig:
It is (domus speciosa, and domus spatiosa) not, either scant of beauty, or
pent of room. But the gate has two properties. It is 1. low. 2. strait. and
requires of the entrers: 1. a stooping. 2. a stripping.

Low. Pride is so stiff, that many a Gallant cannot enter: you have few women
with the top-gallant head-tires get in here; they cannot stoop low enough; few
proud in and of their offices, that have eaten a stake, and cannot stoop: few
sons of pride, so starched and laced up, that they cannot without pain
salute a friend: a wonderful scarsity of ouer-precise, (ouer-dissolute)
factious humorists; for they are so high in their own conceits, that they
cannot stoop to this low gate. The insolent, hauty, well-opinioned of
themselves cannot be admitted: for, Ier. 44. 10.
not humbled to this day. This low gate, and an high state do not accord
Wretched fools, that rather refuse the glory within, then stoop for entrance:
as if a Souldior should refuse the honor of Knighthood, because he must kneel
to receive it.

Strait, or narrow; they must stoop that enter this low gate, so they must
strip, that enter this strait gate. No make-bates get in, they are too full of
tales and lies: God by word of mouth excludes them. Reu. 21. 27.
Into it shall enter none unclean thing, or that works abomination or lies.
Few litigious neighbors: they have so many suits, contentions, nisi-priusses
on their backs, that not get in. Some Lawyers may enter, if they be not
ouerladen with fees: you have few Courtiers taken into this Court, by reason,
there is no Coach-way to it, the gate is too narrow: no Officers, that are big
with bribes. Not an Incloser: he has too much of the poores commons in his
belly. The usurer has no hope, for besides his bags, he has too much wax
and paper about him. The Citizen hopes well, but a false measure sticks so
cross in his mouth, that he cannot thrust in his head. The Gentleman makes no
question, and there is great possibility, if two things do not cross him, a
bundle of racked rents, or a kennell of lusts and sports. The plaine-man is
likely, if his ignorance can but find the gate. Husbandmen were in great
possibility, but for the hoording of corn, and hoising of markets. Tradesmen,
if they would not swear good credit into their bad wares, might be admitted.
Ministers may enter without doubt or hinderance, if they be as poor in their
spirits, as they are in their purses. But Impropriators have such huge barnes
full of Church-graines in their bellies, that they are too great. Let all these
take the Physic of Repentance, to abate their swollen souls, or there will
be no entrance.

You hear how difficult the way is to heaven, how easy to hell; how fast sin
runs, how slowly godliness creeps; what should you then do, but b strive to
enter in at the dLuk. 13. 24.
narrow gate: which you shall the better do, if you lighten your selves of your
Bags: oh, do not (Iudas-like) for the Bag, sell your honesty, conscience,
heaven: The Bag is a continent to money, and the world is a continent to the
Bag: and they shall all perish. 1. Cor. 6. 13.
Meat for the belly, and the belly for meat: Gold for the Purse, and the Purse
for gold; and God shall destroy them both. Trust not then a wealthy bag, nor a
wealthy man, nor the wealthy world; all will fail; but trust in God, whose
mercy, endures for ever: The time shall come, that Deus erit pro numine,
Cum mundus sit pro nomine,
Cum homo pro nemine.


God shall be God, when the world shall be no world, man no man; or at least
no man, no world of our expectation, or of ability to help us. To God, then,
our only help, be all praise, power, and glory, now and for ever.

Amen.

