Abridgement OF THE LIFE OF HENRY THE GREAT, The fourth of that name: King of
FRANCE and NAVARRE.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed for NATH: BUTTER. 1637.

To the KING.
SIR,
I Have found an old Manuscript, which being in mine opinion both judicious and
true, I made bold to print and present to your Matie: which if with a quarter
of an hours time only you honor, in very few words you shall see the glorious
life of the King your Father. This life Sir can be imitated by none but your
Matie, and can be offered you by no more faithful witness of it then my self,
who not dying under the Fathers commands, have no greater ambition then to end
my life in the Sons service, and deserve by well serving to be regarded by your
Matie

Sir, as Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful subject and
servant, VIGNOLLE.

TO THE IMMORTAL MEMORY OF HENRY the Great, the fourth of that name, King of
France and Navarre.
Virtue and fortune agreed to title this Prince Great, whom the wonders of his
life have styled Incomparable. He was conceived at la Fleiche, borne at Pau,
passed his infancy at Coyrase, in sharp airs, in the most rustic exercises of
the country, that the delicacy of his breeding might not hinder the actions of
his courage. At seven years old he was brought to Court, to be educated with
those to whom by right and merit he was to succeed. The tenderness of his
first age was hardened by diverse great accidents. At nine years old, the King
his father dies, the Queen his mother being absent, his Uncle in disgrace, his
friends in distrust, and his servants in exile. At thirteen he leaves the
Court, and to obey his mother, the religion wherein he was bred. At sixteen
he is made head of a party, whose hopes being cast down by the loss of four
battles, relevated themselves under the favor of his arms, and happiness of
his presence. At nineteen he was entangled in a truly funeral wedding, which
began with the unexpected death of his mother, and was followed by the loss of
his liberty, death and proscription of his. At twenty three he was freed from
that captivity, to enter into the ordinary servitude of those who command in
civil wars. He was often constrained to make necessity a virtue, and to
entertain his army, even by his army. The dignity of General dispensed him
not from the dangers of a common soldier, until he had made his party safe by
the fifth edict of peace. At thirty one the death of the Kings only brother
raised him to the nearest degree of the Crown. The Flowers de luce turn
toward him and salute him, as the Sun rising of France. All at once this
great calm which they enjoyed, changes into a terrible storm, which poured on
him in five years ten royal armies. The battle of Coutras the orient of his
hopes, manifested that he ought to be feared by those who loved him not. Yet
the prosperity of his affairs bereaved him neither of feeling the public
miseries, nor of grief to see himself constrained to vex his King, to whom
heretofore he had offered his person and friends. The Tragedy, whereof he was
made the argument, France the theater, and strangers the authors, was
fearfully concluded by the death of two Princes, which filled the Kingdom
with fire and blood. The King being surprised at Tours, was so happily relieved
by him, that three months after he had entered victorious into his capital
City, but for that execrable parricide that ended his life. Then the true
French being quite desolate, apprehending for one King diverse Tyrants, and
acknowledging the just cause of their lawful King, cast themselves into his
arms. He seeing the most powerful forces of Europe banded against him, the
rebels insolent, and the good subjects astonished, makes as many combats as
treaties, as many sieges as lodgings. He disgests in his Cabinet incredible
griefs and perplexities, and overcomes in the field infinite dangers. Diep
receiving him, serves for an example of obedience, Arques declares him
invincible. Paris believing him vanquished, was terrified to see him at her
gates. Vendosme, le Man's, Lizieux, Evreux, Alencon, Verneuil, Honfleur are
carried away by the torrent of his arms. Meulan owes her safety to his help,
Ivry elevates his crown by a renowned victory, Mantes and Vernon open their
gates to him, Melun receives chastisement for her temerity, S. Denis is forced
to yield, which the enemy taking, is there taken and killed. Paris had been
lost, had he not feared to lose it. Corbeil by her loss ruins the enemies
army, and by him being presently re-taken, manifests his diligence. Longeval
admires his conduct, Chartres his perseverance, Noyon his courage, Louuiers his
vigilancie, Aumale is a witness of the blood which he spends for the safety
of his. Rouen reduced to extremity, sees him meet his enemies to fight with
them, Ivetot disorders them, Caudebecq covers their flight, Espargnay advances,
and Dreux augments the shame of it. All the forced towns publish his power,
the rendered his faith, the surpised his goodness. Never beaten, Always
victorious. His palms flourish in the Provinces, under the reputation of his
arms, and the good fortune of his commands. The same day that his presence
gave life to them at Ivry, his power produces them at Issoire, they stretch
forth even to Grenoble, and further draw Aix from out the servitude she sought,
and confirm the fidelity of Bourdeaux and Rennes. Under their shadow do
happily succeed the battles at Poncharra, Vignon, Beaumont, and Villenur. All
France being filled with the glory of his exploits, confesses, that what he
could or has not done, is unknown or impossible to any other. God who
conducted him by the hand to the Throne of his Fathers, fortifies his soul by
a singular foresight, to break the new designs which rendered the divisions of
France immortal. He adds to his victories that of himself. Stretches his
arms to the truth, acknowledges the Church, the sacred monument of his
Predecessors are witness of the sincerity of this action, and is sacred and
crowned Most Christian King, in the most ancient Temple of the Christian world.
At that change, the pretext which had filled the wicked with audacity, and the
good with fear, vanished. The Angel guardian of Kings saves him from a damnable
and enormous attempt on his person. Meaux, Lions, Orleans, Bourges,
acknowledging him, confirm themselves in their first fidelity. He takes Paris,
makes her sensible of the effects of his clemency, safety and felicity enter,
justice is reestablished, and the authority which sedition had taken from her,
is restored. He permits the foreign forces to issue, armed to the glory of
his generosity, who knows neither how to fear nor hate his enemies. Rouen
frees her self from their yoke, Laon is their sepulture, The towns which
followed the greatest in their revolt, imitate them in obedience. Troyes, Sens,
Again, Charteauthierry, Poictiers, Peronne, Amyens, Beauvais, Reims, S. Malo,
come and offer him the tables of the shipwreck they escaped. Every where he
abolisheth the remembrance of his own injuries, sweetens the resentment of the
public, and amongst so many proofs of a royally generous and debonnaire
mind, carefully cherished by heaven, Hell raises in Paris a monstrous one,
who hurting him with an execrable knife, leaves on his royal mouth, the mark
of the unhappy design it had against his life. He darts the fire of war
into the Estates of those who were pleased with the embrazement of France.
Luxemburg, Artois, Piedmont, Savoy, and Bresse, have tried what an offended
patience can do, under a great power. Dijon renders her self under his
obedience, draws thither all Burgundy, Fontaine-Francoise, constraines the
enemies army to sacrifice his pride at the feet of his valor. He enters the
Franche-Conte, that has nothing against him, but the remains of his trophyes.
Rome receives him, changes her anathemaes into blessings, acknowledges him
the eldest son of the Church; his heart being the Temple, and his mouth the
oracle of truth, he induces his greatest enemies to trust to his word. He
happily finisheth the civil wars, drownes in the sea of his clemency all
things past, Changes punishments into recompenses, Pacifies Provence, Daunts
the obstinacy of la Fere, Tholouze who seemed to have lost the remembrance of
her first being, resolves to regaine it, Marseille recovers her liberty by the
death of the author of her servitude. He convocates an Assembly at Rouen, that
he might provide by the advice of many, for the good of all. Spain knowing by
the regaining of Amiens, that impossibilities yielded to the justice of his
arms, asks peace by the mediation of the Common Father of Christians, and to
obtain it, forsakes all the profit of the war. Brittanny follows the good
fortune of his victories. He confirms the edicts, which assure the rest of his
Kingdom, to perfect the Peace. He leads his arms into the Alps, Montmelliam
trembles to see him, Piedmont becomes a Frontiere, Millan is afraid to be so,
Italy is astonished, but he declares, that he is armed but to recover his
own, resistance hinders not the prosperity of his conquests, his pure zeal
for the public rest, stops the course of his designs. He returns
triumphant, Marryes the most Illustrious Princess MARY, whom heaven had
declared Queen of Virtues, before she was saluted Queen of France, and the
blessing it bestows at this marriage, serve to crown the former, and render
the Flower de luces eternal. The severity of his justice was not yet known,
when the insupportable contempt of his goodness incited and constrained him to
lose what he could not amend, punishment to one only, fear to many, and to
all the example. He dissipates the malign influences prepared to trouble the
State, and subverts the intents of those, who having not made war to get
peace, would disturb the peace to renew the war. His diligence cured the
ulcers which carelessness had rendered incurable. He comes, he sees, he
triumphs. Sedan unable to suffer the lightning of this thunder, shall convince
the temerity of those who will abide the clap. His glorious name gets so much
authority, that his will is received for a law, and his counsels for infallible
precepts. The Conclave respects them, Italy honors them, the Low Countries
submit to them; And under the happy auspices of this peace, he enjoyes the rest
which he has given to all, with the price of his blood, and of thirty five
years of his life He keeps united divided spirits, tempers passions, restores
sciences, calls back by edict the exiled, by decrees repaires the ruins of
war, ends the great and sumptuous designs of his Predecessos, beautifies
France with new structures, both useful and necessary causes trade and arts
to flourish, so that it seems France was cast down by the enemies hands, but
to elevate it self higher by his victories. Always August, feared and loved.
From him six royal plints did spring forth, which heaven ordained for the
good and glory of his Crown. [ Three sons, of which the eldest proves himself
the true Inheritor of his Fathers greatness and virtue: the second his follower
to a heavenly inheritance: The third remains his brothers most worthy second.
The other three tendrest and sueetest Lillies, have by their beautiful luster
ravished all eyes, and by their vrtuous odor rejoiced the hearts of all the
world: The youngest causing a cntinuall Spring in Great Brittany, The eldest a
pleasant qualification of the heat of Hesperia, and the Middlemost an agreeable
aspect of the rudest rocks in Piedmont.] He manisests hs piety, shows his
magnificence in his buildings, his povidence in his revenues, his liberality in
his pensions, his judgment in his choice of men, his vivacity in his answers,
his magnanimity in accidents, his faith toward his allies, his moderation at
all times, his prudence in all things, his justice toward all men. Invincible
in labor, Never idle. His royal hair is not grown white but with watching
and experience. The Laurels which crown his head, were gathered in the
victorious field of three set battles, of thirty five encounters, of one
hundred and forty combats, wherein he fought with his hand, and in three
hundred sieges. And of all these is formed the great renown, which by the
singular providence of God, makes him Protector of the Public tranquillity,
Restorer of the State, Ornament of the Church, Arbitrator of Christendom, and
the Delight of the world.

AT Ivry, Coutras, Arques
immortal fame shall sing
The courage, fortune, right,
of this most valiant King:
And stoutest strangers proud,
do quake for very fear,
When of the fights of Coutras,
Ivry, Arques they hear.

FINIS.

