A Discourse and true recital of every particular of the victory obtained by
the French King, on Wednesday the fourth of March, being Ashwednesday.

Also of his good success that he has had since that time, in taking of
certain Towns.

Out of French into English.

Seen and Allowed.

BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY T O

printer's device of Thomas Orwin

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Richard Oliffe, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Crane. 1590.

A Discourse and true recital of every particular of the victory obtained by
the King of France, on Wednesday the 4. of March being Ashwednesday.
YOU understood by my last advertisement how God had given victory to the king
over his enemies: since which rhyme I have endeavored my self to learn the
truth of all things, as near as I could, of such as were present at the fight,
who say the victory as it fell out, was a miraculous work of God: for the
forces of the Duke de Maine were 4500. horse, as well armed as possible, amongst
which were 1600. Lances, and the rest Petronells armed, and 18000. footmen,
and the forces of the King were 2000. horse, and 12000. foot. The King was
advertised that the Duke de Maine was passed the River at Maunte, and that he
iornied with great boldness toward him: whereupon it was advised in counsel to
raise his siege before Dreux, which had sustained two assaults, and so upon
monday the 2. of March the King raised his siege, and encamped himself so
near the Duke, that the same night certain Marshalls of the Duke lodged in
certain Villages were dislodged by the King, and there lodged himself by
force. The next morning the King did put himself into the field in a fair
plain, and saw that the Duke was returned between Saint Andre and Yury nere
Annet, three quarters of a mile further than he was the day before, which
troubled the King much to seek him so far; which was great advantage to the
enemy, and peril to the King to approach them, which made them to leave a
Village that they held. This day was nothing performed but skirmishes. The
Wednesday morning the King caused every man to be put in array, he himself
ordered the whole, and gave order that so soon as they heard one piece of
Ordnance shot of, they should prepare themselves to the battle.

The Duke by his Espialls had discovered the sign of the Cannon, but
understood it had been to have prepared for their departure, and therefore
sought by all means to know which way the King meant to flee, and trussed up
his baggage to follow: but it fell out otherwise, for at this sign every man
was prepared.

The Tuesday before, the Duke sent to know how the King was apparelled,
whereby to know him, the better to lay to kill him. The King being advertised
hereof, sent a Trumpet to tell him, that he was sorry he took so much pain,
and that he would case him of that care, and that he gave him to understand,
that (if he had desire to see him) he should find him mounted upon a gray
horse, with a great white feather in his crest armed in blew and black, and
desired to know how he would be armed and mounted, for that he desired to
speak with him very near; unto the which he answered, he would be armed in
red, but the gallant was armed in black. The King having commanded all into
battle array, did command every one to pray, which they all gladly did in
particular. This done, the king began to march forward with some part of his
Cornet of horse, and caused one of the squadrons of his horse to approach
behind him, in the which was the Artillery, which was shot with such fury
amongst the Reisters, thrice out of every Cannon, that he made at every shot a
fair breach: notwithstanding they did not let to come to the charge, where
they were well received; and of the Cannons which the enemy discharged, there
was but one shot that hurt, wherewith was slain of the Kings Cornet four or
five persons. The Cornet of the King was so hardly assailed by 1600. horse in
4. parts, that he that bare the Cornet was thrown down, and all that troop
forced to retire. The King which was in another Cornet than in his own, having
left Chiccot apparelled like himself, saving he had two Fox tails hanging in
his Helmet, was merueilously charged, thinking it had bin the king, for the
which Chiccot did mock them, and defended himself valiantly. The King seeing
the said Cornet so hardly assailed, came to the head of the enemy encouraging
his Army, which began to retire crying Amoy enfans, it is I that am the King,
and his feather being high mounted, served fora standard, and then every one
began to return to the King, and charged the Spaniards and Wallons, which
showed themselves valiant men: but if it had not been for the coming of the
King, all his men had fled. Upon which return and charge, the Spaniards and
Wallons suddenly began to flee, who were presently pursued by the King and
his men, who gave them no time, once being broken, to join again, charging
them in sundry places. The Marshal Daumont charged the Reisters, and passed and
repassed twice through them: whereupon the faid Reisters seeing the Spaniards
and Wallons flee* which were 1600. Lances well mounted; fled also. The Marshal
Daumont pursuing them, met the Lance Knights, who charged him, and caused him
to stay to fight but the Lance Knights stood but a while, and retired into a
small Wood, whether the footmen of the King went to them, and put the^ al to
the sword.

While this battle was fighting, the Lord of Humieres of Picardie arrived
with 300* horse to the King, who charged also the Wallons, and came in good
time. The King fearing at the first he and his company had been enemies that
had come to charge him: but when he saw them to assail the Spaniards, he
rejoiced and was glad, and then sent to know what he was, and it was answered,
that it was Humieres. This man helped the King much to overthrow the Spaniards
and Wallons, who stood (...) valiantly before* and to say truth, there was
none that fought well of the enemies side that day but they: By the opinion of
those that were at the battle; that first without the help of God, and
secondarelie, the valiantnes of the King, and thirdly the happy coming of
Humieres, the battle had been lost on the Kings side. But mark a notable
miracle, in a moment out men retired, in a moment again returned, and after in
a moment put the enemies to slight: for so soon as the King had gathered
again his men together, setting upon them, the fear of God struck them,
(for by the judgment of men, they had no other occasion) and so fled: also it
was thought they feared the Marshall Byron, who all this while stood in a heap
with 600. Horse to sustain and give help to the weakest part of the Kings
bartaile, but when the King sent him word to give help to his Cornet which was
sore oppressed, he made answer; that his lying still did give more terror and
fear to the enemy making sign every mynute to set upon the^, than if he had
entered the battle, for if he had charged the enemy, they should no longer
have feared, seeing all the Kings forces to be employed. There were three
Cornets of the Kings, which at the first retired, of the which S. Bonet which
bare the corner of Captain Rowlet was one. The said Rowlet remained still in
the Kings Camp only with 12. Lasices, but afterward did put himself into
another Cornet to fight Gerponuile who carried the Cornet of the Governor of
Deep fell under his horse, whereupon one of the greatest and ritchest Barons of
Caux, being the commanders Lieftenant ran to the baggage to keep it obtaining
thereby great honor. In brief, there were many astonished, and surely had it
not been thorough the great endeavor of the King who with Marshall D'aumont and
others having their hearts and minds fully bent, still encouraging his people
all had been lost. De Maine seeing this hard onset, stayed not the charging of
himself although he had with him 500. horse but betook him to his spurs, by
Deuery upon the river of Eury, which stood by good hap for him. The Knight
D'aumal and D'namures without fight ran away, then every one pursued the
enemy by the commandment of the King. The footmen seeing the Tragedy, (that
is to sat) the Frenchmen and Switzers, kept their place, and holding down
their pikes cried for mercy. The King sent to take away their Ensigns, and
then took them to mercy: the Lance-Knights were all put to the sword for
their Treason at Arkes. De Maine ran away by the bridge of Deuery, and cast
away his Cassock and took a Mandilian of a Soldier, and passing through his
own men slew four or five whereby more easielie to pass, and caused a
Barricado to be made at the bridge and placed soldiers there to defend the
pursuit, the King coming to the said Barricado, and seeing some let being
conducted by Chiccot, who assured him that he knew the way, did return to
pass by a shallowe, and pursued De Maine to the Suburbs of Maunte, which was
7. leagues from the place. The Duke de Maine was an hour at the gates
entreating entry, which at the first they denied, telling him they feared
least the King should enter with him in the pursuit, whereupon he swear he
had killed the King with his own hands, but in truth had lost the battle,
by which means he entered, and if he had stayed but one quarter of an hour
longer he had been dispatched, and had it not bin for the Barricado at the
bridge of Deuery, which let them, and his speedy departure from the
battle, he had been either slain or taken. He saved himself from thence to
Pontois and so to Saint Denis: he caused all the Pesants to rise by the
report of his men that were prisoners, to kill al them that should flee: he
commanded all the nobility of France to be slain without sparing any: he
ordered also means to kill the King, in which God has changed his purpose.
There were taken in the place of the battle four Cannons and other small
pieces, all his baggage, powder and munition, a great number of Charriots and
horses of the Reisters Germans and Wallons: in brief, the Pesants are by
that means rich, a great number of the soldiers were drowned. The Barricado of
Deuery, was after taken by the Kings side, and many men slain there. In the
battle were slain not past 1500. but in the pursuit of the flight was the
great slaughter. The confusion was so great, that the baggage of Monsieur the
Prince of Conte were carried away by the enemy fleeing to Vernone, but
afterward were recovered. There were 60. Ensigns and 40. Cornets taken, the
white Cornet of de Maine, the King (having slain the bearer) took himself.
The King has licensed the Switzers to depart, and has given them a co^uoy to
their Cantons, allowing them six pence a day during their travel home, with
advertisement that they should come no more against the Crown of France. There
is 6000. footmen French, which have sworn service to the King, cursing de
Maine that he left them to the butcherie of the Victor, praising greatly the
King for his great mercy. The King as yet will not accept of their feruice.
The County Egmond was slain there by the hands of Marshal Daumont, who was
Colonel of the Wallons. The Duke of Brunswicke cannot be found, but is
thought to be dead: Founrden Martell dead, Bassonpierre, Chattenneraies,
Baddolphen, and diverse others dead in the place. There is of the Wallons past
at Amiens 350. or 400. whereof 120. left in the Hospital being hurt. De Maine
did send after them to Amiens to come to him by the Signeur Belleanglise: to
whom they answered, they would not return, calling de Maine Runne-away. The
King commanded all the strangers to be slain, and the French to be saved.
There are few Spaniards or Italians left alive, except those which saved
themselves by flight* for although they offered great sommes of money for their
ransume, yet were they all slain. The Pesants mocked de Maine, saying he
caused them to come to kill the Kings men, but yet killed the others, and
cried, God save the King. It is the most norable victory that of late was
heard of, and being thoroughly considered, must be confessed to come of God.

The Tuesday night before the battle, there was seen in this place two
Armies in the Sky, the one greater than the other, and the less overcame the
greater. This sight was seen at the time of the preparing of the Battle; and
the like at the same time in the Camp; and now we understand the issue thereof
by the victory. God has showed himself apparantlie to favor the cause, in
so much that they say in the Camp, that the prayers of the Hugonots are much
available in the sight of God. Vernone yielded on Friday after, and the King
entered it on Saturday: Maurte yielded upon Monday, and the King entered it upon
Tuesday. There was found 3. great Cannons with powder and shot, and there the
King refreshed himself well. The 28. day the King departed out of Maunte to go
to Corbell, Men's and Mullen, where the Duke of Longueuile has 2500. horse, and
6000. footmen: which Towns are like to be delivered to the King, the which
will be a great help to advance the parlie of them of Paris, which they seek.

Monsieur de Villeroy has bin at Maunte, and has since twice spoken with the
Marshall Byron. The King has licensed the Gentlemen of base Normandy to go
home to their houses to refresh themselves, having sufficient forces besides.
Monsieur de Tauannes fleeing from the Battle, has retired himself to Roan,
in show, to keep them assured to de Maine. Monsieur de Villiers Governor of
Newhauen coming thither, being called by the Country to take the government
and strong places, has bin repulsed by Monsieur de Tauannes and Milray. And
although they make great show to withstand the King, yet have they resolved in
their private counsel to yield, the King coming by force, not expecting any
rescue at all.

The Duke de Aumale is in Picardie, and the Duke de Maine has withdrawn him,
his wife and children out of Paris, and conveyed his wife and children to
Perone. Himself is now at Soissons gathering what forces he can; but not
likely to gather any at this present, having no other hope, but the accustomed
lies of his preachers, and other his wonted practizes.

From Deep the 20. of March. 1590.
FINIS.

