A letter written by the King of Nauarr, to the three estates of France:
Containing a most lively description of the discommodities and dangers of
civil war: and a very forcible persuasion to obedience, unity, and peace.

Together with a brief declaration upon the matters happened in France
sithence the 23. day of December. 1588.

Translated out of French, by G. R.

AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold at his shop over
against S. Sepulchers Church without Newgate. 1589.

A Letter written by the King of Nauarr to the three estates of France,
containing a declaration of the said King, upon the matters happened in France
since the 23. of December 1588.
MY Lords and Masters, when I call to mind that this four years space I
have been the argument of the tragoedies of France, the common talk of my
neighbors, the subject of civil arms, and by reason of these arms, of a world
of miseries: when I do consider that upon a casualtie to come, separated as
far from the thoughts of Frenchmen as from my desire, some men have caused this
realm to feel the presence of infinite calamities, and that upon the vain
and imaginary fear of my succession to this estate, they have framed and in a
manner erected an usurpation: when with these eyes, which God has principally
given me to have them always open for the good of my country, beholding these
continual mischiefs, I am constrained to see my country on fire, her
principal pillars burnt, her best towns consumed to ashes, and that in steed
of bringing water to quench these flames, to endeavor to save that which yet
remains sound (as I desire, and willingly would have done, in such sort that
it might never burst forth again) they do enforce me, in spite of my teeth,
to cast my self into the fire, and to make my defense almost as odious as the
violences which those men use that persecute me: either I should be of all
sencelesle men the most void of sense that ever was, or else it must needs
be, that upon consideration of the public estate my soul be tormented a
thousand times a day with vexations and greefes, such as no hell is able to
affourd the like: especially feeing I know that of all these misfortunes the
malicious make me the author, the ignorant the cause, and I my self (though I
may be very well forborne and pardoned in this case) do term my self the
occasion. But as touching my particular estate, since it is my hap to be born
in such an age) when I lay before me that which God has done for me in the
beginning, middle, and continuance of these last troubles: how many witnesses
he has affourded me of the justice of my cause and mine innocence, not only
in France, but also in foreign nations, not within the hearts of my friends,
but even within the mouths of those which are none of my wel-willers: not
within the opinion of vulgar conceits, but (God knows) within the soul and
conscience of my king: how by many effects he has caused it to appear that
he has care of me, having miraculously defended, saved, and assured me from
the forces against which there was no likelihood that I should be able to make
head: surely if I were of an other spirit than I am, I should have as much
reason to please my self with the particular of my condition, as the public
is grievous unto me: My lords and masters, I cannot do it, I will never
account basely of my country, I will always prefer the welfare thereof before
mine own: and they shall always see that my mishaps, my hindrances, and mine
afflictions, shall run before those of my country. But nevertheless I
cannot conceal the contentment which I receive, in that by all the occasions
which have been offered, I have caused it to be made manifest both by my
actions, by my words, and by my writings, how it greeues me at the very heart
to see the miseries wherein we go about to imbarque our selves: were it not
that the examples passed did make us somewhat more circumspect for that which
is to come. This you know to be true, and I believe there is no man at this
present so passionate, which can deny me this witness which comforts me not a
little, being fully persuaded, that beside the uprightness of my cause,
nothing has more assuaged the wrath of God toward me, nothing has moved
him more to defend me, than this. But if it had pleased God to have put into
the hearts of the King my souereign, and of you my Lords, that I might have
been called to the assembly, which some of your deputies held at Bloyes (as
truly me seems I ought to have been) and that I had been permitted freely
to have propounded that which I take to be for the profit of this estate, I had
caused it plainly to appear, how I had not the desire only in my heart, the
words in my mouth, but the effects and deeds ready in my hands, how I seek
no starting holes to shroud my self in, nor propositions colored with fair
words, to the which by no means I mean to tie my self. And to the contrary,
that I have a good resolution, and earnest affection to the greatness of the
King and realm, as much as may be, yea though it were with the loss of mine
own, and that when all the rest shall be disposed, he shall not need to
treat nor to capitulate with me: my conscience assuring me that nothing has
ever made me to stand aloof, but the consideration of him, and regard of mine
honor. But seeing this is not done which might very well have been performed
(and that France may count it for one of her ouersights, that she harh had no
better physicians than those which delighte to continue her sickness) I mean
to give you to understand by this discourse, both that which I think to be
my duty, as also that which I esteem necessary for the service of God, and
the King my liege, and for the good of this realm: to the end that all the
subjects of this crown may be instructed therein, and that all men may know
for my discharge my intent and innocence.

First I will represent unto you mine estate: not for to glorify myself (for
let me make never so great reckoning of my self, God may abase me) nor for to
tell you that I speak a cock-horsse and at much ease (the same God knows,
wherein rests my contentment, wherein I trust, and whereupon I principally
rely) but to the end I may manifest unto you two things: the one, The condition
of these miserable wars, the advantage that mine enemies have had against me,
how mightily they have assailed me, how greatly they have been furthered
thereby: that at least you may be forced to judge without passion, that God
has not preserved me against such huge forces without a miracle: and that
this miracl^ should not have been, if innocence and good right of justice had
not been on my side. The other that I may make you judges, whether that which I
now say, I speak of fear, whether I have occasion to use flattering words for
dread of a more souere chastisement, then that which I have already felt,
whether it be the doubt of mine own ruin that makes me complain: or to the
contrary whether it be the true sense and feeling of the miseries of my
country, the love of peace, and greatness of France, which wresteth from me
this manner of speech. I should play the soldior, if I should tell you in order
what armies within these four years have pursued me, that would cause you to
think that I went about to recount unto you my valor; No, that is not my
intent, I would to God I had never been a captain, seeing that my first
training up in arms must be learned with so great loss. I should do far
better to demand of you what chiefetains are left in France, beside those
which have been sent against me. I have seen in four years ten armies* ten
lieutenants of the King, having attending them at their heels the (...) and
strength of the goodliest kingdom of all Christendom. You take this for no
glory: it is so far from me to go about to withdraw you from this opinion,
that my self do tell you that of these ten armies, I have had to do in
effect but with one, which I have beaten and discomfited. And in this God did
perticularly use my means for their ruin: but in all the other I have not
been put to any labor at all: they have been utterly consumed before they
have seen me: and I have as soon had intelligence of their dispersing, as of
their leuying. The Angel the scourge of God has taken from them the power and
means to annoy me. It is not to me to whom the glory hereof apperteineth:
I have showed you almost nothing of mine own: but in effect, you may
understand of your deputies, which are in those provinces, where they of the
religion have had some places of retreat, what success their exploits have
had. Consider the estate wherein they stood before the war, and that wherein
they are at this hour: and judge advisedly, to what end has served this four
years space the loss of the lives of a million of men, the expenses of a mine
of gold, the ruin of the people of France: insomuch as they had made a
better market, and more easy to be compassed, if they had attempted the
discomfiture of the Ottomanes, or to join all the realms of Christendom to
our crown?

It is impossible but that these things should move you, and that you should
note hereby that this is an extraordinary work and effect. Moreover I say
this unto you, that as this ought wholly to cause you to lift your eyes and
hands to heaven, acknowledging that if you fight against God, you fight in
vain: in like sort ought I to power forth my prayers before him, that he
will keep me from being puffed up with these prosperities, and to attribute the
glory hereof to him alone: being most assured, that if I do otherwise, he will
turn his loving countenance from me, and will in two months give more
advantage to my enemies against me, then I have in four year found favor at
his hands.

I hope by his grace not to behave my self otherwise then dutifullye. And
therefore my meaning is that this discourse shall proclaim throughout all the
world in my name: That today I am as ready to request of the King my Lord,
peace, the quiet of his realm, and mine own rest, as ever I was heretofore.
I had at the beginning of these wars, regard of my conscience and honor,
which I always have, and yet do beseech his Majesty to lean to me intier.
The wars have diminished nothing therefrom, neither have they added any thing,
that may make me unwilling to give care to a motion of peace I do therefore
most humbly beseech it. and as touching you my lords and masters, I think if
you had loved the king, if you had loved his estate, if you had diserned these
evils and their remedies, you should have commanded your deputies which were
at this assembly to have begun and finished their conclusions for the
obtaining thereof. I entreat and admonish you to further it as much as you may.

I know very well that in their pamphlets they have inserted this general
maxim, That there ought to be but one religion in one realm, and that the
foundation of an estate is piety which cannot be in that place, where God is
diversely and by consequence badly served I affirm it is so: I see many people
complain thereof, few that will seek to redress it. But I have always
submitted my self to reason, and yet do offer, that if they will try the
usual and accustomed way in these cases, and if there be any extraordinary
ways that they will labor to search them out: both I and all they of the
religion will always conform our selves to that which a free general
counsel shall determine; this is the true way, this is the only way, which
has in all ages been put in practice by this way we will suffer, and with
patience endure to be condemned. But to believe that by dinte of sword this may
be obtained of us: I think (before God) that it is a thing altogether
impossible, and in truth the success and event does show no less.

It were but superfluous to discourse at large of this matter, being already
sufficiently argued and disputed. They have often summoned me to change my
religion: but after what manner? with the dagger at my throne. If I had had no
respect unto my conscience, yet the regard of mine honor would have withheld
me from consenting in that sort. Was there ever any of that opinion, that a
man might kill a Turk, a natural Pagan, kill him (I say) for his religion,
before he has assared to convert him? yet I suppose that my greatest enemies,
do not think me to be more estranged from the fear and knowledge of GOD,
then a Turk, and notwithstanding they are more cruel against me, then
against this infidel.

What would the most affectionate unto the Catholic religion report of me, if
having lived this thirty year after one sort, they should suddenly see me
change my religion, in hope of a kingdom? What would they report of me, that
have seen and tried my courage, if shamfully I should abandon for fear, the
manner wherein I have served God from the very day of my nativity? These be
reasons which touch the honor of this world. But to come to the maine point;
What conscience having been nourished, instructed, and trained up in a
profession of faith, would unadvisedly without any speech or reasoning
thereof, in a moment betake himself to the contrary side? No (my lords and
masters) that shall never be the king of Nauarr, were there thirty kingdoms
to be gained thereby: so far is it from him to go against his conscience for
the hope of one alone. Teach me better, I am not self wild; take some course
to instruct me, you shall profit thereby at length; for if you show me any
other truth, then that which I now believe, I will submit my self, and do
more then that; for I am sure there is not any one of my party, which will not
likewise yield himself together with me. You shall make a goodly gain to GOD,
and notable conquest of consciences, in vanquishing me alone. But to feed us
with words without reason, and to go about to induce us to be persuaded by
the only countenance of some; judge (my Lords and Masters) if this be
reasonable.

But to let this pass; if you simply desire my welfare, I thank you, if you
do not long for my conversion, for fear least one day I should by violence
constrayne you to alter your religion: you do me wrong to judge so, seeing I
have always misliked such kind of proceedings: the manner of my living and
behavior, both with my friends and with mine enemies, at home and in the
field, may give sufficient proof of my disposicion: the towns where I now
am, and which of late I won, can bear me record thereof. Neither is it
likely that a handful of people of my religion, can enforse an infinite number
of catholics to that pass, whereto this infinite number has not been able
to reduce this handful. And if I have with so small forces fought and
sustained this quarrel so long time: what may they then do who with such and
so great means may oppose themselves most forciblie against my constraint,
consisting of so small ability? It were no wisedo^e for me to take that course.
That matter is not at this time in question: I am not as yet in degree, (God be
thanked) to do you either good or evil, neither shall I ever (if he please)
be brought to that trial, nor you to that hazard. We have all one King, who
no doubt will leave good order for the succession, whenever the extremity of
age shall end his days. In the mean season let us not trouble our selves so
much with a thing so long to come, that we forget the present estate wherein
consists our special welfare.

God has caused this day the depth of their designements and endeavors which
troubled this estate, to be discovered: he has also laid open my intents.
None of you, none of France is ignorant hereof. Is it not a miserable thing
that there is not one from the least to the greatest in this realm, who sees
not this mischeife, who exclaimeth not against these broiles, who terms them
not the continual and mortal fever of this estate, and yet none opens his
mouth to find remedy therefore: That in all this assembly of Bloyes, none dare
pronounce this sacred word, Peace, that word, in whose effect consists the
good of this realm? Believe me (my Lords and masters) this wonderful
security, and fatal amasednesse, is one of the greatest presages and
forewarnings that God has sent a declining estate unto this relme.

Our estate is extreme sick, every one sees it: by all signs and
apparances it is judged, that the cause of this evil is the civil war; a
malady almost incurable, of which no estate did ever yet recover: or if it has
been relieved, if this appoplexie has not spread over all, it has at least
been converted into a palsy, to the ytter spoil of half of the body. What
remedy then? no other then peace: which affourdeth comfort to the heart of this
realm: which by orderly diet expels the rebellious and noisome humors,
purges corruptions, and replenisheth the body with pure blood, good humors,
and sound minds, which in sum, causes it to flourish and live. This is the
operation which peace works, which ought to be craved at Gods hands for the
only remedy, for the only means of health: who so seeks other ways in
steed of curing will poison this realm.

I then conjure you all by this writing, as well Catholics seruitors of the
King my Lord, as those which are not so: I appeal unto you as Frenchmen, I
summon you to take pity of this estate: to take pity of your selves, whose
steps are undermined in such sort, that if you do not look to your selves
betimes, ruin and destruction will overtake you: to take pity of me, whom
you constrain perforce to behold, to suffer, and to do those things, which
were it not in the midst of these arms, I had rather dye a thousand deaths
then to behold, suffer, or do. I conjure you to disperse and abandon all at
once, the miserable humors and effects of violence and wars, which do rent
and dismember this renouned estate, which do withdraw us, some by force,
others ouerwillingly from the obedience of our King: which causes us to imbrue
our selves with the blood one of another: and which has already so often made
us the laughingstocke of strangers, and in the end will make us to be their
conquest. I conjure you (I say) to acquit us of all these bitter greeuances,
to restore to us the pleasant calm of peace and unity, to incertaine again
obedient and orderly minds, and to possess your selves with the spirit of
concord: whereby the smallest estates have become mighty Empires, and ours
has along time flourished the most renowned kingdom of all Christendom.

Although I have a thousand and a thousand occasions, particularlye to
complain of those of the house of Guise, of them (say I) for my kindred, and
kindred so near, that beside those of my name, I have none nearer. And
although that in general, France has more occasion then I: yet God knows
what a grief it was to me, to see them take that course which my heart always
gave me, would never sort unto their honor. God is my witness I took them
to be commodious and profitable for the Kings service: and (I may say)
auadeable also for my self, seeing they had the honor to be of my kindred, and
that my degree was above and before theirs. I was always, and should have
been very glad to have scene them employ those means that God and nature had
affourded them, for the good and faithful service of them, whom they ought
dutifully to have served: in steed whereof, when their wicked counsels did
enforse them to a contrary kind of dealing, there were in the world (though
not my self) that did laugh at their misfortune, and would have bin full well
apaid to have scen the displeasure, declarations, and arms of the king my Lord
converted against them.

Let us not wax proud, neither the one side nor the other: as for my part
although I have received more favor of God in this war, then in all the
former: and that whereas the other two factions (what hard hap is it that I am
forced to term them so?) have we akened themselves: mine in appearance is
strengthened: yet I know very well that presentlye, and as often as I shall set
aside my duty: God will leave to bless me any longer: and I should wholye
neglect it, if without reason; and of a iolitie of heart, I should oppose my
self against my king, and trouble the quiet of his country.

As touching them, who during these four last years have loved arms better
then peace: who have first renewed the war in this estate, and have erected
the third faction, unworthy the fidelity of France and (to go a little
further) unworthy the loialtie of their Grandfathers. Seeing God has showed
them by his judgments, that their dealings are not agreeable to his will:
seeing naythelesse that he has touched the heart of our King, to receive the^
to his accustomed mildness and clemency (as himself has declared) let them
yet at the last hold themselves contented and quiet. We have all of us offered
and endured harms enough, we have bin this four year together continually
besotted, outrageous, and almost starkemad. Is not this enough, trow you? has
not God sufficiently beaten and corrected us, both the one part and the other,
to cause us to awake from our careless security, to make us wise in the end,
and to suppress our furies?

But if after this it be lawful that as a most humble and loiall subject of
the King my Lord, I may give some good advise to those which may counsel him*
who has ever heard it spoken, that that state can endure, where there are two
factions within it, always up in arms, and ready the one to assail the
other? what shall then become of ours, where there are three? how may a man
persuade the king to raise civil war, and that against two parties all at
one instant? There is no president, no history* no reason that can assure him
a good issue* and event hereof. It behooves him therefore to make a peace, and
that a general peace withal his subjects, as well of the one side as of the
other, as well of the one as of the other religion* or at least that he
reconcile, and reunite those unto him which are least estranged from his
obedience. And to that purpose let every man judge of mine intent: behold how I
entreat for a common good: how I do not labor to animate the King against his
subjects, which have been of this goodly league* and yet you may know (my
Lords) that if I would undertake to do it and (...) his necessity to afford
him my service (as I will do* if he co^mmaund me thereto) in outward appearance I
am like to cross many of their designements and easily to curb and keep them
short in their enterprises.

I appeal at this time to all thereof of our estates, who have remained
behoulders of our follies, I appeal to our nobility, to our clergy, to our
towns, to our people, these be they to whom I speak, that they will consider
what will become of France, if we run on headlong as we have begun: what
countenance this estate will carry, if this mischief continue: what the
nobility shall do, if our government be altered, as it will be undoubtedly
(being already in a fair way toward it) if the towns for fear of the
partakers against them, shall be constrained to settle and fortify themselves
within their gates, not to suffer any man to command over them, and to cantoune
themselves after the manner of the Zwit^^^. I assure my self, there is none of
that mind as yet: but the war in process of time may force them to it. And
to my great grief, I see already such beginnings springing amongst them, which
out wardly make semblance of so sweet and pleasant show, that the best and
most loyal burgesses of the world will easily suffer themselves to be carried
away there withal.

What shall become of the towns, when under a vain likelihood of liberty
they have turned topsie turuie the order of their worthy estate? when they
shall have the nobility theye enemies; the country round about repining at
them, and desirous again and again, to sack and spoil them, imagining that
within their cofers and shops, they have treasure and richesse without content
or number?

What shall the principal inhabitants do, which hold the offices of the
Monarchy, of the Exchequer, of justice, of civil policy, or of arms? Let
every one recount in the midst of their domestical fortune, that the
assurance of their estate is clean gone, if the monarchy be overthrown. Who
shall allow them the free exercise and trade of Merchandise? Who shall warrant
them possessions in the field? who shall* suppose the authority of their
justice? what decrees shall they establish? who shall command over their
armies? to be brief, what shall be theen order* even miserable abuses. This
(...) may endure for a month or two in the same sort, as it is said that the
sever nourishes the sick body* but to think that upon the foundations of
wrath and vengeance, an assured intelligence, and durable form of government
may be established: that can never be. It has never been either seen or
read, that an estate has bin changed, without the ruin of her towns, which
are always the principal props and pillars thereof.

And thou people, when the nobility and towns shall be divided, what rest
shall thou enjoy? people, the garner and storehouse of a realm: the fertile
fields of this estate, whose travail nourishes Princes, whose sweat does
water them, whose occupations do maintain them, whose industry does affourde
them delicacies for rear bankets: to whom shall thou have recourse, when the
nobility shall oppress thee: when the towns shall exact and levy
contributions of thee? For the King? he shall not be able to command over the
one or the other side: for the officers of his Justice? where shall they be
found? for his Lieutenants? What power shall they retain? for the Mayor of a
town? what authority shall he have over the nobility? for the chief of the
nobility? what order will there be amongst them? lamentable confusion,
disorder, and misery over all, And thus behold the effects of war.

It proceeds not of forgetfulness, that I speak nothing of the clergy.
Neither would I speak of them at all, misdoubting that they will not take it
in good part, because they esteem me their enemy more then I am; but that in
truth I have more cause to find my self agreeued with their order, then with
both the other orders of France. I way it not: there be some good men amongst
them. As touching their profession and religion, in some things I am contrary
to them: in nothing their enemy: in other things we are of one mind, save
where they concern the conservation of the privileges of the Church of
France against the Pope. Howsoever it be, though I were so highlye in their
books that they would affourd me all the commendations in the world* yet
would I tread* their praises under my feet at this prosent, being carried by a
more vehement consideration, to wit, of the service I owe to my King, and duty
to this estate* In the mean season, what hope they? to make war, and pay
their tenthes in those countries where they have the greatest credit, (for as
for those places where my authority stretches, I possess in a manner all they
ought to have, neither may I remedy it, but in process of time) all the
country being ouergrowne with dissension, how shall they come by any thing?

Let them regard what course our towns, our people* our nobility do take.
Let them consider (who have or ought* to have godliness in great account) if
there be any thing so contrary thereto, as vice and disorder: if there be any
thing that brings men so far out of square, as the licentious liberty of
civil war. Let them judge at last, if they, which have not been enriched
nor increased but by peace, by order, by obedience to our Kings, and by
devotion, shall not hereafter go to decay by war, by confusion, by
impiety, and by mutinous disobedience.

Having spoken to all men in particular, I will yet say this in general. Be
it that God bless the purposes of our King, and that he reduce all the
mutinies of his realm to an end: it were a lamentable case that he should
cause all those to be punished which do deserve it. What? shall he take
revenge of a great part of his towns, of a great part of his subjects? that
were to much, that were a mischief, that were a madness, sent by God into
this realm for the punishment of our transgressions. He must bear no more
displeasure to our people, and to our towns, then to a frantike fellow when
he fights, or to a mad man when he runs about stark naked.

Be it to the contrary that those of the league shall strengthen themselves
in such sort, that they shall be able to resist him (as surely there is some
likelihood, and I fear me that his pacilence is their principal force: if God
will he may exercise his judgments upon us, and we know not whether we or
they shall feel it first.) What will be said of Frenchmen?

What shame will it be to us, that we have chased away our Kings? a stain
that never spotted the garments of our fathers, and the only advantage that
we have of all the subjects of Christendom.

In the mean season is not this a great inconvenience for me that I am
constrained to remain idle? They have thrust arms into my hands perforce;
against whom shall I imploye them at this time? against my King? God has
touched his heart, he has taken upon him the quarrel in my behalf against
those of the league. Wherefore should I, which publish and persuade peace in
France, aggreuate the King against them: and by bringing my forces into the
field, seem to endeavor to take away from him his gentle forbearance, and
from them all hope of reconciliation. Behold the straight whereinto I am
driven: for if I continue quiet, either they shall make an agreement to my cost
(as I have seen it already twice or thrice to happen) or else they shall so
weaken the King, and make themselves so strong* that after his ruin, I shall
have no more force or ability to impeache mine own overthrow.

My Lords, and masters, I speak also to you, whom I know to my unspeakable
sorrow, not to be composed all of one humor. The declarations of the King my
Lord, and especially his last, do sufficiently manifest, that there are some of
your deputies, and almost the greatest part at the devotion of other, then of
the King.

If you have never so small judgment, you cannot but believe with me, that I
am in great hazard, that the King is so, that the third party is so, that
your selves in general and each one in particular are so. We are all within
one house which is now a falling; we are all within one ship which is ready
to (...) and there is no remedy, that can be imagined but only peace, let
them search for other as long as they list.

In conclusion then, having better (as I may say) and more interest in this
then all you, I demand peace of the king my Lord in the name of all: I demand
it for my self, for those of the league, for all Frenchmen, for France it
self* Who so demands it otherwise does not well. I protest to yield my self
more tractable then at any time heretofore. If I have at any time been hard
to be dealt withal, I will serve at this present for an example to others by
obedience, which I will show to my King. But having so often and sundry times
protested and uttered that which is my duty, and that which is for our common
profit: I will now declare, first to those which are of the King my Sovereign
his side, that if they do not order themselves with me, if they do not accord
to this sacred deliberation, not to make war against the league, or those of
Lorraine, not against Parris, Orleance, or Toulouse: but against those which
hinder peace, and the obedience due to this Crown: that then they alone shall
be guilty of the mischiefs which shall betide the King and this realm: and
that I on the contrary shall be blameless, having discharged my fidelity to
my Prince, whose hurt as much as in me lies, I do and will withstand, yea
though himself were careless thereof.

And as touching those which still retain the name and party of the league, I
conjure them as Frenchmen hereunto: I would willinglye command them, yet as
those which have the honor to be of my kindred; whose Fathers (I am assured)
would have taken such a commandment for a very great favor. But if this be
not done after this sort, I my self (as the chief Prince and greatest*
Magistrate next the King in France) will bring to pass, that they shall have
enough to do to look unto themselves: and rest content with their own
private loss for a public benefit: that they shall tame and bridle their
passions, their quarrels, their revenge, and their ambicion, for the good of
France their ^^^ther for the service of their King, and for their own quiet
and ours. Beside this, if they do otherwise, I hope that God will not
altogether abandon the King, that he will not execute his wrath upon him, nor
make him loath to call his servants about him, as my self (...) first, who do
desire no other title. And they which shall come for this purpose, shall have
power enough, and assured right for to aid and assist him, to abolish the
memory of these men out of the world, and out of their native country of
France.

Finallye having done my duty in this so solemn protestation, which I have
made, if I perceive both the one and the other so hardened, or so badlye
affected, that none of them are moved hereby: I will call God to witness of
my actions passed, and to my aid for those;e to come. And you true servants of
my King: you true Frenchmen, worthy of as much honor as I inioye, to be the
chief* Princes of this realm* though all the world had conspired his ruin, I
protest before God and men, that to the hazard of a thousand lives, I will
assay all alone to uphold it.

I call to my assistance all those which have this goldy desire, of what
condition or quality* soever they be* hoping* that if God bless my indeuores
so much courage as I show in interprising hereof, so much fidelity and
constancy shall I have in atchieuing the end, rendering to my King my
obedience, to my country my deuoire, to my self my rest and contentment,
together with the liberty of all good men.

And in the mean while till it shall please God to give leisure unto the King
my Lord to take order for the affairs of his estate, establishing peace, which
is so necessary, I do affirm (as he that has the honor to hold the cheifest
place of account under his obedience) that if I cannot serve him so well in his
absence, as to cause his authority throughout all his realm to be received* I
will at least in part bring to pass that in those places where my power and
ability extends, they shall acknowledge it. And for that intent I receive
into (...) of what quality, religion, or condition that they be, as well of the
nobility, of the clergy* of the towns, as of the people, that will link
and unite themselves to me in this good and honorable resolution: not
permitting that their bodies or goods shall be touched in any manner or sort,
otherwise then in time of perfect peace, and when the laws of the realm have
accustomed to deal with them.

And although that more then any other I grieve to see the difference of
religion, and that more then any other I wish it remedied: nevertheless,
acknowledging that this must come from God alone, (whose succor heerin we must
needs attend) and not to enforce it by arms or by violence: I protest before
God, and in this protestation do pawn my faith and honor (which by his grace
I have hitherto kept undefiled) that in the same manner as I have not endured,
that they should enforce mine own conscience: in like sort I will never
suffer nor permit, that the catholics shall by constraint be drawn from
theirs, nor from the exercise of their religion. Declaring further, that in
those towns which together with me shall persist in this mind, and shall
subject themselves under the obedience of the King my Lord, and my authority*
I will not endure that any thing shall be innouated, either in the politic
estate, or in the church, except in as much as it shall concern every man's
liberty. Taking again as well the persons as the goods of the Catholics, and
especially of the ecclesiasttcall sort under my protection and sauegard. Having
learned long a go, that the true and only means to reunite the people, to
reduce them to the service of God* and to establish piety in any estate, are
mildness, peace* and good examples: not war, nor discord: and that by the
disorder of war, vices and all manner of wickedness do grow up in the world.
Given at Chattelleraut, the 4. of March. 1589.

FINIS.

