A Brief discourse of the merueylous victory gotten by the King of Navarre,
against those of the holy League, on the twentieth of October. 1587.

Both in English, and in French as it was printed in France.

Whereunto is added as soon as it came to my hand since the first Impression,
The true copy of a Letter sent by the King of Navarre to his Secretary at
Rochil, as well in confirmation of the victory against the Duke Ioyeuse, as also
the overthrow that the Switzers gave to the Duke of Guise.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf dwelling in Distaffe Lane near the sign of the
Castle. 1587.

A brief discourse of the merueylous victory gotten by the king of Navarre
against those of the holy league, on the twentieth of October. 1587.
THe King of Navarre took his way toward his Army, being strangers, by the
borders of those provinces which favored him most: and to this purpose, he was
to pass the rivers of Drougne, and Lile.

The Duke of Ioyeuse had in charge to hinder the abouesaid passages,
notwithstanding all dangers that might ensue, thinking, that having over
thrown the king of Navarre, by all likelyhoods of reason, the army that was
come out of Germany, and from other places to his aid, should not be able to
do any good.

The King of Navarre, accompanied with the Prince of Conde, and the Earl of
Soysson, determined resolutely to pass the said rivers. But the Duke of
Ioyeuse opposed himself to hinder them, being strong, and having a great
number of horsemen with him, which the King of France had sent him.

The Duke of Ioyeuse took up his lodging at Barbezieux, and afterward at
Chalais: The King of Navarre took his up at Archiac: and afterward at Monlieu,
and the nearest places thereunto: both parties having fully determined to get
the passage of the river of Drougne, and especially the lodging of Coutras,
whereas most conveniently they might pass.

There passed many occasions of fighting by the way, and the King of Navarre,
according to his wonted diligence got the lodging called Coutras upon Drougne,
an hour before the Duke Ioyeuse could come: Who had already sent certain
light horsemen to take the place, who at the coming of the King left it. This
was on Monday in the evening, being the nyntenth of October.

On Tuesday next following betimes in the morning the Duke of Ioyeuse marched
forward and encamped himself between the Roch Chalais and Coutras, with all
his army: and pointed to fight his field half a league from Coutras, with the
most vantage that might be.

The king of Nauar on the otherside of Coutras, goes and sets his men
forward in battle ray, causes his ordinance to pass the river, the which
the evening before he could not do, and caused them to be brought before him,
and determined with all his men to be ready to fight, whom he found very
willing and forward. He caused every company first to enter into prayer to
almighty God.

He appointed his army in such sort, that all his ordinance might do him
service without hurting any of his own men.

In so much that indeed his ordinance did that which was done to great good
purpose, ye Harchebuses did ye like, so that there was not any one part of his
army, but that got great benefit of victory. And yet the king (by the
judgment of men) had the chiefest victory of all.

So that about eight of the clock the ordinance began to play, and before
nine of the clock they came to handy strockes. The battle was quickly ended
(being a thing most strange by means of the great difference that was in the
multitudes of the Duke Ioyeuse his men) so that at ten of the clock there was
not one man amongst the enemies that did fight. Although that in this most
notable euerthrow as yet there appears not above twenty men lost on the King
of Nauars side, nor any man of calling, or that had any government under him.

The King of Navarre was so forward that grasping with the enemy endaungered
himself greatly. The Prince of Conde had his horse stain under him. The Earl
of Soysson took with his own hand diverse prisoners. The Lord of Turenes horse
was slain under him.

God who had appointed the success of the battle, gave the victory to the
King of Navarre, in the which ye Duke Ioyeuse was slain. All his chief men
were either slain or taken, except the Lord of Lauerdin, of whom as yet they
know not what is become. Many ancients and standards were taken, and amongst
them the chief standard of al. The footmen all slain. The ordinance taken.
The carriage lost. About three hours after the battle was done, being
returned to the place where the battle was fought: they rendered great thanks
unto God. They buried the dead. They burned the lodgings of the enemy. And they
did all other things that might beseem such a notable victory. God of his
goodness grant that in like sort it may continue to the benefit of this Realm.

The King of Navarre notwithstanding his good success seeks to win his
adversaries by his great curtefie, having entreated his prisoners and such as
were wounded in such sort, as that they have great cause to acknowledge and
confess that he loves France and French men, and knows well how to discern
those that are of the League. being enemies of the country, as he would do
if he could, even in the midst of the greatest force of the battle.

The names of such as were slain.
Monsieur de Ioyeuse. Monsieur de Saint Sauueur his brother. Monsieur de la
Roche du Maine the younger. Monsieur le Comte de la Suze. Monsieur de Fumel.
Monsieur de Roussay the youngest de Piennes guidon de Monsieur de Ioyeuse.
Monsieur de Nensuy de perigort the elder. Monsieur le Comte de Gouallo.
Monsieur le Comte Daubijou. Le Sieur de Coullons brother to the Comte de la
Suze. Le Sieur de Brize the bearer of the Cornette blanch. Le fills du Sient de
Rochefort Croyzette. Le Sieur de Guzacq. Cornette de Maumont. Le Sieur du
Bourdet de Xaintonge standard bearer of Saint Luc. Le Sieur de Vaux Lieutenant
de la compagnie de Monsieur de Belle-garde. Lenseigne du Sieur de Montigni.
Tarcelin Maistre de Camp. Le Chesnel his chief Captain. La Vallade one of
his Captains. Le Captain Boculaud. Le Ieune Campelz qui portoit un drapeau.
Le Sieur de Pleuiault. Le Sieur de Saint Fort guidon de Saint Luc. Le Baron
de Theunes. La Brangere.
All these were men that had charge under them.

Prisoners taken, and some of them wounded.
Monsieur de Belle-garde taken and hurt. Monsieur de-Sainct Luc. Monsieur de
Sansac. Monsieur de Cypierre. Monsieur le Marquis de Piennes. Monsieur de
Gautrel, Monsieur de Montigny Captain de la Port. Monsieur de Ville-comblin
Lieutenant de Monsieur de Souuray. Monsieur de Chasteaurenard guidon du Sieur
de Sansae. Monsieur de Mouuent Captain of the light horsemen. Monsieur le
Comte de Monsoreau taken and hurt. Monsieur de la Patriere guidon de Monsieur
Lauerdin. Monsieur de Chasteau-meux. Monsieur de Chastelu. Monsieur de
Lauuerdiere guidon de Monsieur de la Suze. All these had charge under them. Le
Sieur de Broeil-baudet.
And there are a great many Gentlemen wanting, and as yet not known.

FINIS.
Discourse, sommaire de la Miraculeuse victoire, obtenue par le Roy de Navarre,
contre ceux de la Ligue, le vingtiesme d' Octobre. 1587.
LE Roy de Navarre prenoit son chemin verse son armee estrangere par l'abord des
Provinces qui luy sont fauorables, and pour cest effect auoit a passer les
riuieres de Drougne, and de l'Isle.

Monsier de Ioyeuse auoit charge de luy empescher ce passage a quelque peril
que ce feust, pensant que luy des-faict par vne raisonnable consequence,
l'armee estrangere ne pourroit subsister.

Le dict Sieur Roy, assiste de Messeigneurs le Prince de Conde, Comte de
Soysson, se resoult de passer. Ledit Sieur de Ioyeuse de l'empescher, renforse
de plusieurs compagnies de gens-darmes, que le Roy luy auoit enuoyees.

Le dict Sieur de Ioyeuse prend son logis a Barbezieux de puis a Chalays. Le
Roy de Navarre a Archiac. Et puis a Monlieu, and lieux prochains, resoluz tous
deux de gaigner le passage de la Drougne, and sur tout le logis de Coutras ou
elle se pouuoit plus commodement passer.

Il se passa des occasions de combat sur le chemin. Aussi le Roy par sa
diligence accoustumee gaigna le logis de Coutras sur Drougne, vne heure premier
que ledit Seigneur de Ioyense y peust arriuer. Qui auoit des ja enuoye quelque
cheuaux legers pour le prendre, qui le quitterent a larriuee dudict Sieur Roy.
Cestoit le Lundy au soir dix-nieufiesme Octobre.

Le Mardy ensuiuant de grand matin Monsieur de Ioyeuses se rend enter la Roche
Chalays and Coutras, auec son armee. Et prend sa place de Battle a demyelieue
de Coutras, au lieu le plus aduantageux qu'il peust.

Le Roy de Navarre de son cost part de Coutras, and luy va au deuant, met son
armee en bataille. Faict passer la riuiere son canon, qui le soir pardeuant ne
lauoit peu passer. Et le faict mener a sa test. Resoult tous les siens a ce
combat, qu'il trouua pleins dardeur and devotion. Faict fair la priere a Dieu
de troop en troop.

Dispose au rest son armee en tell sort, que toutes les pieces seruirent,
and pouuoyent fair leur effort, sans incommoder ni les vns, ni les autres des
siens.

Comme de faict son artillery joua fort a propos, l'arquebouserie de mesme,
and ny heut party de son armee qui n'eust notable part de la victoire. Bien
que certes sa Majeste (au jugement de tous) heust la principalle.

Tanty a que sur les huict heures l'artillerie commenca a iouer, and auant neuf
heures on vint aux mains. Fut la bataille si tossed decidee, (Chose estrange en
legalite de toutes forces,) qu'a dix heures il ny auoit homme de l'enne mi qui
rendist combat, mesme qui feust en veue, Sans toutes-fois qu'il se soyt perdu
en vne si notable des-faicte (qui paroisse encore) vingt hommes soyt de pied,
soyt de Cheual du cost dudict Sieur Roy de Navarre, ny mesme pas un de marque,
ou homme de commandment.

Le Roy de Navarre est venu aux main^ jusques a Colleter. Monsieur le Prince,
son Cheual tue. Monsieur le Prince de Soyssons y a faict des prisonniers de sa
main, Monsieur d^ Turene son cheual tue.

Dieu qui a ordonne l'issue des Batailles, a done la victoire au prince, en
laquelle Monsieur de Ioyeuse a este tue. Tous les chefz ou mortz ou prins,
reserve le Sieur de Lauer^ din, qu'on ne scait encores qu'il est deuenu* Les
inseignes and cornettes prises, mesmes la generalle. L'infanterie toute
des-faicte, L^ canon prins, Le Bagage perdu. La victoir^ suyuie trois heures ou
plus. Laction de grace faicte a Dieu au retour au champ de la Bataille. Les
mortz enterrez. Les logis de l'ennemi bruslez. Et tout ce en sum qui peu^
appartenir aux circonstances d'vne signale^ victoire, Que Dieu luy doint
poursuyure au bien and estat de ce Royaume.

Le Roy de Navarre les a voulu vaincr^ encores en courtoysie, ayant tellement
tracte les prinsonniers, and les blessez qu'ils ont tous dequoy cognoistre,
q'uil aim la France and les Francoys, and les scayt bien discerner dauec ceulx
de la Ligue ennemis de l'estat, comme (...) feroit s'il pouuoit dans le sort
des arms.

MORTS.
Monsieur de Ioyeuse. Monsieur de Saint Sauueur son friar. Monsieur de la
Roche du Maine le Ieune. Monsieur le Comte de la Suze. Monsieur de Fumel.
Monsieur de Roussay puisne de Piennes guidon de Monsieur de Ioyeuse. Monsieur
de Nenfuy de perigort laisne. Monsieur le Comte de Gouallo. Monsieur le Comte
Daubijou. Le Sieur de Coullons friar du Comte de la Suze. Le Sieur de Brize qui
portoit la Cornette blanch. Le fills du Sieur de Rochefort Croyzette. Le Sieur
de Guzacq. Cornette de Maumont. Le Sieur du Bourdet de zaintonge enseigne de
Saint Luc. Le Sieur de Vaux Lieutenant de la compagnie de Monsleur de
Belle-garde. Len seigne du Sieur de Montigni. Tarcelin Maistre de Camp. Le
Chesnel son premier Captain. La Vallade l'vn de ses Capitaines. Le Cappitaine
Boculaud. Le Ieune Campelz qui portoit un drapeau. Le Sieur de Pleuiault. Le
Sieur de Saint Fort guidon de Saint Luc. Le Baron de Theunes. La Brangere.
Tous ayans charge en l'armee.

Prisonniers and Blessez.
Monsieur de Belle-garde pris and bless. Monsieur de Saint Luc. Monsieur de
Sansac. Monsieur de Cypierre. Monsieur le Marquis de Piennes. Monsieur de
Gautrel. Monsieur de Montigny Captain de la Port Monsieur de Ville-comblin
Lieutenant de Monsieur de Souuray. Monsieur de Chasteaurenard guidon du Sieu de
Sansac. Monsieur de Mouuent Captain de cheuau legers. Monsieur le Comte de
Monsoreau pris and bless. Monsieur de la Patriere guidon de Monsieur Lauerdin.
Monsieur de Chasteau-meux. Monsieur de Chastelu. Monsieur de Lauuerdiere guidon
de Mo^sieu^ de la Suze, tous ayans charge. Le Sieur de Broeil-baudet.
Et plusieurs autre gentils-hommes non encore recognus.

The true copy of a Letter written and sent by the most excellent King of
Navarre, to his Secretary of estate, Monsieur de la Marcilliare after the
battle lately had at Cowtrace.
MArcilliare
I dispatch Pomenia unto you, to let the masters of Rochel to understand of
the happy and absolute victory which God has given me, in the which battle
the general of the enemies army is slain, and with him almost all the
Cheestains and Capteins are likewise either slain or taken. The great
Ordinance, Artillery, Cornets and Ensigns, both of horsemen and footmen are
taken, with a general dissipation of the whole Army, for the which it is
duetifull that in public and private sort, we render thanks to almighty
God. I pray you further the present supply: for we must go to mete our
Roytors, who for their part have given an overthrow to some part of the Duke of
Gwyse his army, which now dares not scarsely to show himself any more before
them, but keeps him self aloof in the back of the forces, to give the
looking on. You shall also have an eye to the performance of my orders and
commandments, and to that which may concern my affairs. And so I pray God to
keep you in his safegarde.

From Countrace this xxi. of October. 1587. Your most loving M. Henry.


