THE Fair Ethiopian. DEDICATED TO THE KING AND QVEENE. By their Majesty's
most humble Subject and Servant, WILLIAM LISLE.

Horat. de Art. Poet. Verum ubi plura nitent in Carmine non ego paucis Offendar
maculis. LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND, at the Authors charge. 1631.

Ad Regem.
Prospera conservent Carolum tibi Fata Minorem;
Tu Britonum Carolus denique Magnus eris.
A la Reine.
Tant des perfections Ie Chanteray sans cesse;
Ou le Roy est Patron, la Reine est Patroness.
Rose Fleur-de-lys

Dum rotat astra polus, dum fixa est terra, Britannis
Gallica florescant Lilia juncta Rosis.
W. L.
THE Fair Ethiopian.
ABout the Tongues when diverse with me wrangle,
And count our English but a mingle mangle,
I tell them, all are such; and in conclusion
Will grow so more by curse of first Confusion.
The Latin, Greek, and Hebrew are not free;
Though what their borrowed words are know not we;
Because their neighbor tongues we never knew;
Nor what they keep of old; nor what have new:
But count that language good, which can express
The more of sense, in doubtful speech the less;
How ever now disguised with novelty,
Yet, framing all to prop'r Analogy;
For Prose and Poetry has words to spare,
And all that man can think on can declare;
Will license ask no more than others take,
And line as strong, and verse as nimble make.
Nor might we glory more in sword than tongue,
But that we Trewants are, and stand not long
To file our Phrase: O all you Critic blood;
Rude work, and verse that was not blur'd a good,
Nor often has been with cunning singer scand,
Reprove and mark with peremptory brand.
Yet judge me not, as if I thought that I
Could mend the fault; but, what I can, to try,
I Will sing the Faire-One borne of Parents swart,
And her true Love, and his that won her heart;
How each for other manifoldly crossed
In war and peace, at Sea and Land were lost;
Before they could in safety set them down,
Enjoy their right, and wear the Abissen Crown:
And how Hydaspes, Queen Candaces son,
From Persian King Phile and Siene won.
Yet sometime tell I less, and often more,
Then read is in Greek Prose of Heliodore:
That Poetry may shorten Oratorie,
And with a Muses vain improve the Story.
O Branch of flowring Gold the best that grows
On face of Earth, consorted now with Rose
Both white and red; Since Helicon is thine,
Me grant a sip of liquor Castaline;
That I in verse this Romant so endight,
As may thee and thy dainty Buds delight:
Thy rare endowments ever will I sing;
For Queen is Patroness where Patron King.
Blacke-winged night flew to the Antipodes
At sight of Morning Star, and the Eastern seas
Withheld the rising Beam, until it guilt
The top of trees, and turrets highest built.
Then armed Band of such as live by spoil,
(A trade more old than just) by seu'n-head Nile,
Began to proule; and clambring up the steepes
Of Canopaean Outlet viewed the deepes.
But seeing naught there might give hope of pray,
To nearest Strond look back; and thus it lay:
A ship unmann'd full-fraught as seemed to view,
(For up to th'vpper guyrt it water drew)
With Cable gross is anchored fast to shore,
And ground there all about embrew'd with gore;
Yea strewn with bodies wounded, some full dead,
Some moving still, or leg, or hand, or head;
An argument of but-late-ended fight;
Yet warlike weapon lay there none in sight.
But lukewarm relics of some dismal feast,
That had such end. The tables richly dressed
Remain yet standing some; and some are found
In dead men's hands, and ouerturn'd aground;
As used for weapons at vnthought-on field;
And some the men thereunder seem to shield.
The boules of gold from hand of some that drunk,
And some that meant to throw them, downward sunk.
For sudden broyle, neglecting proper parts,
Their boords their bucklers made, their pots their darts.
Here tumbleth one with ship-axe wounded sore;
Another brained with beach-stone found at shore;
A third his bones has broke with wooden Mawle,
And some with blocks halfe-burnt are made to sprawle.
And others otherwise: the most were shot,
But knew not whence, with arrows erring not.
So fight with feasting, sacrifice with slaughter,
And wine with blood was mixed, and groans with laughter.
Th'Aegyptian the eues beheld this from the Mount;
But knew not how it came: they see and count
A number slain; who slew them they see none;
A conquest plain; and yet no Victor known,
Nor spoil yet gathered: though vnmann'd the ship,
Yet fraught with ware, and no man began it strip.
As safe it seemed there wauing all alone,
As if it were maintained with garrison.
Though case as yet they know not, down they run,
For spoil and gain, as they the day had won.
But coming near the ship, and men so lying,
Much more aghast they were, a Maiden spying
Of wondrous beauty, set upon a rock,
And Goddesse-like; bewailing yet the shocke
There late befallen; but with so brave a sprite,
As nothing could her Princely mind affright.
With laurel crowned she was, and at her back
Rich quiver hung, her left arm falling slack
With bow in hand, her right, with elbow bent,
And hand upholding face, on knee she lent:
Her head not moving, downward glance her eyes
Upon a Gallant that among them lies
Extremely wounded; yet as from a deep
Began looke-up, as from a deadly sleep;
Of manly beauty still, and purer white
Do seem his cheeks, for blood on them allight.
His eyes oppressed with pain to her drew she;
Nor see he would, but only her to see.
Revived a little, straight he began her greet,
And thus with feeble voice said; O my Sweet,
And art thou safe indeed, or made a part
Of this days slaught'r, and wilt not from me start?
Is this thy self alive, or but thy ghost
Me still attends in this disaster'd coast?
In thee (quoth she) is all my love of life;
Behold, (and showed him on her knee a knife)
This had I used, if thou had deadly slept,
And saying so from off the rock she leapt:
They daunted then with fear and admiration,
As struck with lightning, sundry in sundry fashion
Them hide in shrubs; for more she seemed divine
Upright now standing; so her garments shine
With glittering gould reflecting the early Sun,
So clasht her arrows like a sudden gun.
Her hair from under garland played untied
With pleasant wind; yet all her back did hide:
What now they saw done terrified them more
(The cause unknown) than all was done before.
Some say it is Isis, Goddess of the place;
But some, observing well her beauteous face,
Swear it is Diana; some will wager ods
A Virgin Priestesse of their Heathen Gods;
Who, for revenge of some unlawful trade,
(Not thinking on their own) this slaughter made,
With holy rage inspired. But she forth stepped
Unto that wounded Gallant, wail'd and wept,
In diverse postures on the goarie ground;
Him kissed, and cheered, and wiped his every wound.
And, for his life, with much ado repreeues it;
But, though she holds him fast, she scarce believes it:
Unfeigned love so reigns her heart th'rowout,
That of her joy possessed she stands in doubt.
The thieves observing all, one the other sed;
Is this a Goddess part to kiss the dead
With such compassion? courage we, and go
(What'ere it be) the certain truth to know.
So getting heart, they forward went, and found
The Virgin busy about his sorest wound.
Yet all behind her back amazed stay,
And gazing on her nothing do they fay:
But at their armours sound and shadows sight
She raised her self, looked back, and naught affright,
Or at their ugly shape, or theeuish plight,
Bows down again to cure her wounded Knight,
All other good, or bad so Love despises,
And only that it loves, to keep devises.
The Robbers passing by before her stand,
Attempting somewhat: she leant on her hand,
And seeing faces black and ghastly, said;
What would you have that look thus ill apaid?
If ye the ghosts been of the men here lain,
You do us wrong; for you your selves have slain
Each others all: or, in case any we,
'Twas in defense of sacred chastity.
But, if you live, a theeuish life you lead,
And come in time to send us to the dead,
Then make an end of all our miseries;
Lamenting so, down by her Love she lies.
They knew not what she spoke, and nothing speak;
But, seeing both so safe, because so weak,
Them leave a while, and haste the ship to rifle,
And (all ware else accounting but a trifle,
Though much there was) with silk and precious stone,
And gold, and silver, load them every chone.
So much they had, they could desire no more,
And all they lay in several packs a shore;
Not shared out by worth of things, but way'd
For equal portage; as for Youth and Maid,
They after think take order: but, behold,
Another troop of thieves, more strong and bold,
With Leaders two on horse, came on, and then
The former fled; for why? they were but ten,
And thirty these: nor take the gold or gem,
For giving the other cause to follow them.
So twice is taken, yet not captive she,
At least in mind, now well revived is he.
These thieves, though bent to spoil, a while forbear,
In part to know the cause, in part for fear:
And all that slaughter think was done by those
That ran away: When they the Maid disclose,
In glistring habit strange, and not dismayed
With that befell; nor at their sight afraid;
But wholly bent the wounded Knight to cure,
And seeming all his grief her self to endure;
Her mind and beauty move them wondrously,
And his long body there that lay her by.
At length comes he that chief was of the Crew,
Lays hand on her, and bids her come; she drew
(Though knowing not, but ghessing what he said)
The Knight with her, and he fast held the Maid;
To show themselves unwilling both to part;
And, more to sign, she set knife at her heart:
Whereby th'Aegyptian saw the Maid was loath
To live without her love; so took them both;
Withal, considering what good use he may
have of so brave a Youth another day;
Alights himself, and makes his Squire alight
And sets up first the Lady, and then the Knight.
Commands the rest to take and bring the pray;
Says only these should be his charge to day.
So runs them by on foot, and all the way
Does him with left and her with right hand stay,
Lest either chance to fall: how these distressed
Yet rode in pomp! the Conqueror is pressed
To serve the Captive; beauty and noble state
Is able saluage heart of thief to mate.
Now in this equipage a mile and more
They traveled along the Mid-sea shore,
T'a hill-foot turn; at right hand leave the Maine,
And ore the Mountain pass t'a watrie plain
On the other side; a grassie fen in style
Of Egypt called; where th'ouer-flouds of Nile
Fall int' a Dale vnmeatly midward deep,
Though nigh the banks to muddy fen it creep.
This Stouer breeds, which some for pasture take,
And as the Marsh to Sea, is Fen to Lake.
Here all th'Aegyptian Robbers make their Fort,
And bastard Commonwealth hold aft'r a sort.
Some ever fishing seldom come off hatches,
Some walk the pasture six foot high on skatches.
If Islet any above the water peep,
Some build a Lodge there; some in boat on Deep
Both carried are and dwell, and only there
Their women serve them, and their children bear.
The newborn babe with mothers milk at first,
Then with Sun-rosted fish and foul is nursed:
And when he stronger grows, is tide by th'heele
With rope to ship, that out he cannot reele,
Nor stagger far: what men else ever tried
So new device, with bonds the feet to guide?
Though Kings of Egypt would this Fen have drained,
These would not suffert't, thinking better gained,
With ease, some fish, or foul, or flag, or reed,
Than with due care the grazing herds to feed.
Where now a Pike, well might they feed an Ox;
Yea meat, drink, cloth, have from their bleating stocks.
Yet some they graze, and Herdmen are they called,
Though from all hand of Justice water-wall'd.
A theeuish Fort, and thither still recoyle
The lawless Crew, and such as live by spoil.
Their wondrous store of Cane, that on the marge
Of this their Lake shoots-out both long and large,
For Bulwark serves them; having cut some ways
To them, not others known, with crooked bays;
That from assaults and sudden ouertures,
As Labyrinth, their dewlling place secures.
And more than lake-fish hungry maw to soul,
Fruit, herb, and root they have, and store of foul.
The Swan both swimming there, and flying freely,
The lofty Sternet crying t'Ely, t'Ely,
Th'Ibis, Halcyon, Crane with tufted rump,
Storke, Shov'ler, Herneshaw, Bittour sounding Bumpe,
Coot, Red-shanke, Sea-mew, Teale, Di-dapping-Chucke,
Goose, Sea-pie, Moore-hen, Osprey, Widgen, Ducke:
I had almost forgot that most of all
Remarkabl'is, the bird that here we call
The Cormorant, Emblem of Penal Law,
With long, sharp, hooked bill, edged like a saw,
To hold an Eele, but great one seldom takes,
These are the foul that haunt the fenny Lakes.
Now, as the Sun declining lower goes,
To the eye of man he great'r and greater shows;
And farther makes to shoot forth on the ground
The shade of things, till all in dark be drowned.
But ere the Set came Captain thief to Lake,
Where his prey-loden men him overtake.
The Knight and Lady some of them dismount;
Some bear aboard the spoil; but see the account
They of their Captain made! the most him meet
That went not with him, and as King him greet.
And when they laid to heart the goodly pray,
And her divine aspect, they thought that day
Their Accomplices, who care not what they lurch,
Had got the spoil of some well-furnisht Church,
And brought away Shee-Priest, or Goddess self,
In whose compare they count the rest but pelse.
So they the Master-theefe congratulate,
And to his home attend him all in state.
His home an Islet was, of all the best,
For him and his divided from the rest:
He thither brought, with thanks commends their care,
And bids them come to morrow for their share.
They so dismissed, short supper, but no feasts,
For him prepared is, and his two young guests:
Whom after supper (for they could not speak
His language yet) he gave in charget'a Greek,
That late was taken prisoner, fair and young,
And had by this time learned th'Aegyptian tongue:
So might interpret for them; bids him cure
The wounded Knight, and keep the Lady sure;
So, weary and careful, went to sleep: but she,
Now of the Greek they also lodged be,
In bed full hard by straight command alone,
When all were hushed time finding fit to moan,
With many a deepe-fet sigh, and shower of tears,
Thus unto Heaven her piteous plaint arreares.
Appollo whom so carefully we serve,
Thou us afflictest more than we deserve:
Is It not enough that we are diu'n from home,
Bereft of friends all ore the sea to rome;
By tempest tossed, with roaring billows shaken,
And, fearing worse than death, by pirates taken;
But now at land (which most of all me greeues)
Are made a prey to first and second thieves?
What yet remains? if death; so void of shame,
Content I am, and thereto will me frame;
Ere any get that of me, which I keep
For one deserves it: he, not yet asleep,
Her heard, and (Sweet) thou may bemoane thee said;
But not accuse the Gods: they must be prayed.
You warn me well, quoth she; but (pray) what rest?
The more (quoth he) since this young man me dressed.
And more you shall have, trust me, (quoth the Greek)
To morrow morning such an herb I seek,
Where heretofore I often have it found,
That after dressing thrice shall close your wound:
And marvel not that I should thus comply;
Your case is mine: you Greeks are, so am I.
A Greek? (quoth they) and thereat much rejoice.
A Greek, quoth he, both by my birth and voice.
Think, after sorrow, hope there is of game.
Then, quoth Theagenes, but what is your name?
(He Cnemon said) Of whence? and how came here?
O ask no more, quoth he; too long it were
To tell, and matter sad; the night is deep,
And after travel you have need of sleep.
They instant are, and think it somewhat smothers
Their own mis-haps, to hear the like of others.
Then he began; My father Aristippe
Athenian was, and, both by land and ship,
Of good estate; and when my mother did,
Thought much, for one sons sake, in world so wide
And full of change, to lead a widow life;
But sets his mind to marry a second wife.
So did, a handsome, but a cunning Dame
As ever lived; Demenet was her name.
She wrought my father soon to what she list,
And in his presence me full often kissed.
I thought and took it as a token kind
Of one that loved me with own mothers mind:
But worse it was; and, when right well I konn'd it,
I hated it, and turned away, and shunned it.
Herewith enraged she turns her love to hate;
And one day, when my father came home late,
She faines her sick a bed, and he bewailes her
(Good man) and asks her often times what ailes her.
Your goodly son (quoth she) whom (I protest)
I loved more than your self has thus me dressed.
For when some tokens were to him revealed,
That I was quick with child, which I concealed
From you, till all were sure; he watched his time
Of your out-lying, and, besides the crime
I blush to tell, so sore has punched me,
As makes me lie in this poor case you see.
This hearing spoke he not a word; but all
Thought true she said; and when we met in hall,
He fiercely cufs me twice or thrice, and then
With rods me naked whips held by his men.
I knew not why; although by humane laws
Should all, that are corrected, know the cause.
But, when his heat was over; Sir (quoth I)
That thus you beat me pray now tell me why.
But more enraged, O hypocrite quoth he,
That would his foul deed now have told by me!
So turned his face away, and in a fret
Made all the haste he could to Demenet.
She, not suffis'd, inuents this other slight;
Makes feign her maid to love me, Thisbe hight;
Whom I before had wooed, and could not win,
Now woo's she me, and I t'aduise begin:
She seeks, I fly; she flies, I seek her still;
Will she? I will not: will she not? I will.
At length she tells how Demenet abused me,
And was the cause why so my Father used me;
Yet false to him; says, if I would, I might
Her with the Adulter take in bed this night.
Prouokes me to revenge my self; and I
Believing all, as not unlike, apply
My self thereto: she came at night, and said;
The time is come; believe your faithful Maid.
Your father's forth, th'Adulter new gone in;
Now, if you be a man, revenge the sin.
With weap'n in hand I force the chamber door,
And find my self deceived by that whore;
My father there, with Demenet alone;
I Thisbe looke-for; but the queen was gone.
As thunder-strucke, then all amas'd I stand;
Then falls my sword out of my quaking hand,
Which she tooke-vp, that had contrived the plot;
And said (O husband) you believed me not,
When I you told that now so plain appears,
I pray devise to rid us of our fears.
No word he gave, but me in prison cast;
And, when I thought to tell how all had past,
He would not hear me; but next day betimes
Accuses me of these so heinous crimes
Before the people: when I would have spoke,
With question short thus does a Clerk me choke:
Did you your fath'r assault with sword? I said,
I did, but hear you how; then all so brayed
I was not heard, nor worthy thought to plead
Ought for my self. Some judge I should be flead;
Some, cast int' Orcus-pit; and some with stones
To death would have me battered flesh and bones.
As winter weather, be some friends of mine,
That wont to freeze in shade, and thaw in shine.
In all this hurly-burly still I cry
O, for my step-dame, thus unheard I die.
They heard my words, and somewhat began suspect;
Yet, so their hearing prejudice had checked,
I might not speak: their voices when they count,
T'a thousand and seven hundred full amount
The numb'r of those who me condemn to dye,
But diffring how; the rest vndiffringly,
In numb'r a thousand grant me banishment,
And they prevail as most of one consent.
Thus was I cast from home; and Demenet
Not long enjoyed it: Heaven aright will set
That men do wry. But long it is to tell,
And you have need of sleep that are not well.
The night is spent; betake you to your rest.
So (quoth Theagenes) you more molest,
To leave her wicked plot so practiced,
And show not how the wretch was punished.
Then Cnemon, hear then, since it is your mind.
Soon after sentence there a ship I find
For Aegin bound, where well I might abide
Among some kindred by my mothers side:
I went aboard, and safely there arrived,
Full merrily my time I spent vnwiu'd.
Let clear and rainy days of all the year
Compared be, and more shall be the clear;
But he that lives a whole year with a shrow,
More foul than fair days shall be sure to know.
Er long, at hau'n-side walking on a day,
As was my wont, I saw come-in a Cray;
Which while I mark well, what it brought and whom,
Er plancke lay fast, I saw leap out a groom,
Who came to embrace me kindly, Charias hight,
And said, O Cnemon, now pluck up thy sprite;
Good news I bring thee; Demenet is dead,
And so, as well deserved her deu'lish head.
Thy father began repent it, aft'r a while,
To Have been the cause of thine unjust exile;
And in his Countrey-village desolate
Selfe-fretting spent his time: but she began hate
Herself and Thisbe, for her loves depart
(So thee she calls) and takes it so to heart,
That mad by fits she often threats her maid;
Who feared the worst, and thus preventing said;
They say (forsooth) that Cnemon since his doom
Has left the land; but he has found a room
To lurk in here, enquiring for your sake
This have I learned; Arsinoe (I take
You know the Queen) she closely keeps him hid:
For this I tell you let me not be chid.
O happy she, quoth Demenet; but what
Is this to me? O mistress, very pat,
Replied the Maid; mine old acquaint is she,
And one whom I have used in that degree.
I Will say, I Cnemon love, and pray, and pay,
That in her room this night she will me lay.
And, if she grant, the turn shall not be mine,
But yours; and I Will him bring well soakt in wine.
The plot is liked, and hasted all they can;
But with Arsinoe turned cat in pan:
For unto her the subtle Thisbe says
She loves one Teledemus, and her pray'th;
Sweet, lodge us both to night; he comes before;
And I when Dame a bed has shut the door.
Agreed she goes in haste to Aristippe,
And says (Sir) I deserve more than the whip.
That you have lost your son, not principal,
But instrument I was; your wives at call:
Whom when I knew abuse your bed, I durst
Not tell to you, but unto Cnemon first,
Her fault at night; he thought I said that night,
And start-vp suddenly with all his might;
Took sword in hand, and casting on his coat
Unto your chamber went: the rest you wot.
But now forgive m', and I will you light,
How to revenge your son and you this night;
And take your wife in breach of Nuptials,
Nor yet at home, nor yet within the walls.
Do not (quoth he) from this thy proffer swerue,
But well performe't, thou shall no longer serve;
I Will set thee free: it shall prolong my life.
To be revenged of such a wicked wife.
T her suspected by some marks aloof;
But thought it best be silent, wanting proof.
You know (qu^th she) the tomb of th'Epicures;
And garden where it stands; this parts is yours;
Expect me there at Even; so went her way
To Demenet, and thus vnt'her began say:
Come, make you fine; for that I promised
Is ready for you: he will straight to bed.
So led her forth, and coming nigh the place,
She wills her Mistres stay, and went a space
Before, and prayed Arsinoe withdraw
T'anothter house; for Teledem but raw,
And yet a Nouice unto Cupids Queen,
Would blush at first of strangers to be seen.
Arsinoe departs, then Thisbe fet,
And laid in bed, her Mistres Demenet;
Put out the candl', and said, lest you should know her,
(Who then at Aegin were) and shut the door:
Then for her Master went, and wished him hold
Th'Adulter fast. He comes in Iealous-bold,
And cries, O have I caught thee wicked wretch!
Then Thisbe, as though some man thence made a breach,
Cries-out, th'adulter's gone, an^ clasht the door.
No matter (wench, quoth he) since here is the whore;
And fast her holding brought her thence; but she
Bethinking what a shame it would her be,
What punishment to her offense was due,
And, by the Law, without all help t'ensue;
And mad, that by her maid she was so mocked;
While people wondering all about her flockt,
(You know the deep pit where our Leaders won*
Do solemn Rites) when they came near upon it,
With (struggling much she broke his hold at last,
And thereinto her self down headlong cast.
So broke her neck (full often conjoined be
Bad life, bad death) so my revenge, quoth he,
Preuents the Law; and forthwith to the States
Her life and death, and all thy case relates;
Gets hardly pardon for himself, the while
His friends entreat to call thee from exile:
But done, or not, as yet I know no whether,
Fair wind and sudden business called me hither:
That all the people give consent, no doubt;
And soon thy father will go seek thee out.
This Charias told me; but what else befell,
And here how came I, more time asks to tell.
Then he, and they for company, began weep;
And eased with tears together fell asleep.
But Thyamis (th'arch Outlawes name was so)
Had rested well, till household Cock began crow,
As all by kind (some say because they feel
The Sun returning with his midnight wheel,
And would salute him; some, for natures heat
So quicke-digesting, and desire of meat,
They call to work the men with whom they dwell)
Then dreampt, and had a vision, thus befell;
He seemed at Memphis entering Isis Fane,
That all th'rowout with firebrarnds it shane,
That th'Altars were with sacrifice besprent,
That in the porch and all about the^e went
Men all in tumult raising hideous cries,
As having took the Temple by surprise;
That, coming near the shrine, the Goddess met him
With his fair prise in hand, and thus she great him;
This Maid (O Thyam) I command thee save her
From hurt; but know, thou having shall not have her.
Thou shall a guest kill, though against my Law,
But she shall live: this when he heard and saw,
His mind was troubled how to conster it;
And thus he made all for his purpose fit.
Have and not have, a wife, no more a maid:
But how then kill? O Hymen stab he said:
For many a virgin her virginity
May wounded have, and of the wound not die.
When Sun began t'enamell th'Easterne sand,
He calls him-to the chief of his command,
And bids the Spoil (so by more noble name
He termed the Prey, to keep untainted Fame)
Be laid before him; Cnemon eke he wills
Bring forth the prisners: O (quoth they) what ills
Yet more betide us? and him weeping prayed,
And he them promised, if he could, some aid;
And cheered them up, and told them how their Chief
Ne bore the mind of rude and savage thief;
But noble and gentle was to just complaint,
And would not live thus but upon constraint.
When all were come, and Thyam set on high
To speak them-to, as wont he commonly,
He Cnemon bids, unto that Youth and Maid,
Report, in Greek, this he in Gypsy said.
My Fellow soldiers, being, as you wist,
The firstborn son of Memphis highest Priest,
And from my right kept by my younger brother,
I fled to you; and me before all other
You chose for Chief: and't has been since my care,
Of all we got, to take no more than share.
The captive men of strength I gave to you,
The weaker sold; and this y'all know is true,
The freeborn women ransomed, or set free
For pity sake, the servile sort had ye:
This one whose habit shows, and goodly port,
Her some Deuore, and therefore meet Consort
For Bishops son, though of my self I might
Her choose, and take by only Captains right
(As well you know) yet her of you I crave,
To be my wife; you all the rest shall have.
They all consent, he thanks, and further says;
Then speak you Faire-one, do me plight your faith;
To live with me in lawful marriage;
And tell your Country, and your parentage.
She cast her modest eyes upon the ground,
And staid a while, as 'twere in thought profound
What should she say; then him with blushing eyed,
And thus, as Cnemon did relate, replied.
My brother better speak here may, than I,
A Maid before so manly company;
But since you give me leave, and chiefly me
Concerns the meeting, know (I pray) that he
Apollo's Priest is, and Diana's I,
Of noble parentage in Ionie.
Our Office ending ('it was but for a year,
And not hereditarie like yours here)
With solemn pomp (as holy custom pressed)
For Delos sailed we, there us to diuest.
When ran at sea was half our course and more,
Began a storm, that cast us here a shore:
And, at a feast made for our late escape,
The Mariners our goods thought all to rape.
On either side there slain were all but we,
In woeful case left, as you chanced to see:
Yet happy in this, we your hands-into fell,
Who grant both life and love; which I like well;
This one thing craving, to remain a Maid
Till solemn diuesture, mean time with aid
You Memphis may recover; where is best
(If you so please) both marry, and diuest.
They all approve; and staid is his desire
By her Sirenish song (though more afire)
And by his dream; wherein he thought was noted
He should at Memphis marry this Devoted:
So breaks the moot, and they with hand and heart
Him promise aid; and leave the richest part
Of spoil for him; and he them bids prepare
The tenth day after to the war to fare.
And, for his guests, that nothing might offend them,
Full well prouides; and Cnemon wills attend them,
Not now as Keeper, but Interpreter;
Himself forbearing once to look on her,
For fear of being tempted. Cnemon, when
They brought were in, went forth beyond the Fen
Among the bushes, where he knew was best
To seek that herb he promised his guest.
Meanwhile Theagenes, to her no words,
But unto Heaven complains; and she him boords,
Is this for old, or for some late event?
Forgetting me (quoth he) sh'is now content
To marry another. God forbid, quoth she;
My promise ever will I keep with thee.
O do not then so much increase my grief!
Before Theagenes I choose a thief?
I spoke but to delay the danger nigh,
You sooner will (I fear) be false, than I.
Indeed (quoth he) I liked well that invent
Of broth'r and sist'r, and how from home we went:
But O, when you, when you so plainly granted,
Appointing place and time, how was I danted!
She then embraced and kissed him, shedding tears,
And said, O how delight me these your fears!
They prove you costant notwithstanding all
The miseries that daily on us fall.
But sure, we had not thus conferred to day,
If i had much opposed, and not given way.
A Lover rude will never be calm without
Some hope, and that may still him, never so stour.
So thought and did I, thus far for the best;
Our loves protector Phoebus work the rest!
And wisely must we handle this our plot,
That Cnemon, though our friend, perceive it not:
Or, if he chance by circumstance suspect,
We must deny't, and let him but coniect.
Th'vntruth that speaker helps, and naught at all
The hearer hurts, may well be borne withal.
Thus had she said, and Cnemon from the field
Came running in, and looked as almost wild;
And said; Theagenes, lo here is found
That herb, which once laid-on will heal your wound.
I cannot stay, but come ye both with me;
And, what the cause is, you shall quickly see.
But haste we must; that wasting time in words
We be not overtaken here with swords:
So led them fast away to Thyamis;
And found him fellow-like, with many of his,
His armor scowring; Sir, then said, it is well
You Are so providing; for ill news I tell.
There comes upon you troops of armed men;
I think they are by this time near the Fen;
Or not far off; from yonder hill I spide them,
And, as I came, have wished your men provide them.
The Captain then began himself advance,
And armed Capapee, with sword and lance,
Before he stepped a foot forth on his way,
Took present order for Chariclia.
A Cave there was, hand-wrought by Gypsie-wit,
To hide their spoil; it opened well and shut
With narrow door of stone, that threshold was
T'an upper room; within, a Maze it has
Of sundry ways entangled (like the roots
Of thicke-set trees, amids and all abouts)
That meet in plain; with scales of Crocodile
The roof is pau'd, brought thither from the Nile,
On pillars short vpheld; to help the sight,
From top thereof descends a beam of light:
He Cnemon wills her take (but in his ear,
That what he said none other man might hear)
And lead, and safely place her in this Cave,
Where all his treasure lay, and bids him have
A special care the mouth thereof to close,
As wont it be. With heavy heart she goes,
Still looking back at her Theagenes
With Thyam left; and Cnemon, her to please,
Upon the Cave before he laid the door,
Her promised, to bring him safe unto her;
And not to suff'r a yet-raw-wounded Knight,
To vent'r his life in such untimely fight.
She answered not a word; but of her love,
(As soul) bereft, did little breathe or move:
Nor without tears departed he, to think
How fair a creature there he left at brinke
As 'twere of death; nay buried had alive
That shining beauty might the world revive.
To Thyam then he ran; with whom he found
Theagen armed royally; and round
About them flock the rest; first low, then tall,
For better sight and hearing. Fellows all,
Then said the Chief, your life is all a war;
Your trust and courage tried; the foe not far:
T'encourage you nor need I, nor have leisure:
Is 't for our goodly cities, for our treasure;
Is 't for our children, for our wealth or wives,
They set upon us? no it is for our lives.
For such as live by spoil, as they and we,
We fight not who shall reign; but who shall be.
Then never yield we to this enemy;
But fight it out, and conquer him or dye.
Then called he for Thermuti^, could not get him;
Which made him angry, and for his absence threat him.
So ran to Ferrie; for he saw the fight
Was now began, and his some put to flight,
And others slain. Th'inuaders as they got
The mastrie of any, straightway burnt his boat:
This cast a flame on all the cane and reed
Th'row-out the Fen; that Vulcan, set on speed,
Their ears with crackling, eyes with flashing smote;
And smoakie cinders all about them flote.
Then death with ugly face upon them gapes,
Devouring diverse men in diverse shapes.
By fire, by water, by the sword, by smoke,
They burn, they drown, they shed life-bloud, they choke.
So woeful case was never seen, they say;
But at the siege of Troy, and Solyma.
Where bastard Commonwealth of Robbers stood,
Is nothing now but cinder, smoke, and mud.
For work by Heaven accursed, be it never so great,
Shall fall as wave that seems the sky to threat;
And down his some regardlesse quickly sinkes
Amid the basest water 'twixt the brinks.
This Thyam seeing, thought upon his dream,
And of the meaning makes another theme;
Have, and not have; she should be from him taken
By force of Arms; and yet by him be slain
With sword indeed, not as he thought before.
Against his Isis then he began to rore,
As him deceiving; thought it high disgrace,
That other should his dearest Love embrace.
Thus on the Maid, the foe, the boat the weather,
His nimble thoughts disparteth heth'r and theth'r.
Now this, now that, right fast imagining;
Yet for that one neglects each other thing.
Then his exhorts again to fight, not yield;
But, as they had done, still maintain the field;
Till he Thermutis sought (that was pretent)
But all in haste unto the Cave he went.
A barbarous man the affection cannot tame
That once he set, nor from design reclaim;
Self out of hope will take quite out of way
That most he loves, from being others prey:
And Thyam therefore all in-hand forgets;
Though compast round about with fearful nets,
Enraged with anger, love, and jealousy,
To Cave he went and rusht in suddenly;
Then cried aloud in Gypsy till he met
One answered Greek: then left hand on her set,
And thrust her the row with right; that there she lay,
And with her blood her life flew quite away.
These are, quoth he, thy spousalls at my hand,
O worthy best! now none shall thee command.
So said, and coming forth he sighed and wept,
And shut the door, and earth upon it heapt.
When to the boats he came, this was the plight;
His, some, prepare to run away at sight
Of first-come enemy: Thermutis would
Do sacrifice; whom Thyamis contrould;
And said, himself had offered with his blade
The fairest sacrifice that could be made:
He meant that in the Cave: so went aboard
Thermutis, he, and, them to row, a third.
The boat, as all the rest, was but a trunk
Of hollow tree; if more had come, had sunk:
In like went Cnemon and Theagenes;
And two by two, thus on fresh water seas,
A mighty number: but they made away
At first encounter. This made Cnemon say
Unto his friend, What? shall we stay to fight,
When all the rest have took them to their flight,
Save Thyamis himself? so they withdrew.
But Thyamis when th'aduersaries knew,
They cried let all men set on him alone;
O had we him, though all the rest were gone!
Would any know the reason? these were they
That at the Canop-Outlet fled away,
And left so rich a spoil for Thyamis;
And therefore hate they deadly him and his.
That him their mind was here to take alive
(Though many slain are thereto while they strive)
The cause was this: his brother Petosire,
Of heartenflamed with ambitious fire,
Withheld the Priesthood from him, most unkind,
Against his birthright, and his fathers mind.
Then of the Robbers was he chosen Chief,
And he that should have been Archpriest, Arch-theefe.
This put the younger brother much in fear,
Lest aft'r a while he should some tumult rear,
To get his right: beside, thought tract of time
Would manifest at length his further crime.
This likely mischief thinking to prevent,
Vnt'all th'Aegyptian Outlawes word he sent,
With sums of money, and promises of other
(Pretending, for 'twas thought he slew his brother)
For any man that should him bring alive.
With much ado at last they him deprive
Of (strong Thermutis help; who bravely fought;
Yet ouer-boord was thrown, and drowned thought:
But seeing Masters case so desperate,
With other matt'r in mind, away he gate,
And swimming came to land: for the enemy
His taking Thyam counted victory;
Yea reck'ned him of all the war compend,
None other minding; him away they send
With half their force to guard; and all the rest
His Islet ransackt: long they were in quest
Of that was left, and when they little found
(For all the treasure hid was underground)
The night approaching, staid they not; for fear
Of such as sled, and might surprise them there;
But, setting first the cottages afire,
Unto their fellows well in time retire.
Finis Libri primi.
THE Fair Ethiopian.
THe great light damps the less; and so, so long
As Phoebus shone, was Vulcan scarce among
The cinders seen: But, now is come the night,
Theagenes and Cnemon see the light
Of all that Isle on fire; and then began
The Lover true to cry, O wretched man,
(And tore his hair) I live no more to day;
My danger, fear, hope, love and care, away:
Now she is dead why should I longer breathe,
Not in my breast this bloody weapon sheathe?
O thrice unhappy! in vain then did they see
Me fly the fight, to keep my self for thee
So sudden lost, and by so fearful death,
And where thou would not, giving up thy breath!
And what a grief is this, that so by fire,
As of thy beauty, perfect and entire,
No spark is left. I gave no last embrace,
Nor kissed thy dying lips, nor saw thy face.
O cruel Heaven! are these my nuptial brands?
So took his sword; but Cnemon staid his hands,
And said, What mean you? much deceived you be*
Chariclia lives: You me deceive, quoth he,
You have undone me, you no life have left me,
That of so sweet a death have thus bereft me.
Then Cnemon swore, and told all of the Cave,
And what commandment Thyamis him gave.
This cheered Theagenes, and now they post
Themselves both rowing (having sculler lost
At first encounter) to th'encinder'd Isle;
Yet up and down they carried are a while
By gusts against them, and because they knew not
The Scullers Art, and just together rue not.
Yet (want of skill supplied with earnest mind)
They get to shore, and then, as swift as wind,
To cave they run, and by the door it find;
But (that which Cnemon maruells-at) vntin'd.
He takes (as there he found) some fired reed
To give them light, and leads the way in speed;
Yet (lo) full soon on sudden starts he back,
And cries, O Gods, what hap is this! Alack
W' are quite undone; Chariclia here is slain;
And down the candle cast, and wept amain.
Theagenes, as smit down by some force,
Fell, and embraced the bloud-embrued corse,
And long so lay; that Cnemon lest he should
Himself do hurt, came softly; and was so bold
As draw his sword that hung down by his side,
And went for light. Then lamentably cried
The Knight, and said, O grief insufferable!
Malignant Star, or Fury insatiable!
Was It not enough to banish me from home,
All up and down the world to make me rome:
To cast me where no comfort man releeues,
At sea to Pirates, and at land to thieves;
Yea more than once; and take my joys away?
Of all but one was left; and that to day
Is also lost, my dear Chariclia,
Slain in defense of virtue (dare I say)
To keep her self for me. These eyes of thine
That all men cheered, as with a light divine,
Be dark and nothing see; nor he them saw
Who thee assailed, or hand had staid for awe.
But this of mine shall join us, and this Cave
Our bodies both shall keep in hidden grave.
Then felt he where he thought his sword had hung,
And said (O Cnemon) this is double wrong
Both unto her and me. As thus he said,
A slender voice, as 'twere of boy or maid,
Was heard to call Theagenes, and he
Full well it heard, and answered, Call'st thou me?
Sweet soul I come: then Cnemon came with light.
And plainly heard the voice of such a sprite,
As called Theagenes: O God, quoth he,
Chariclia lives, that was her voice; it is she.
O Cnemon (quoth Theagenes) O leave,
And do me not thus often times deceive.
I both deceive (quoth he) and am deceived,
If this dead-one be she, and therewith heau'd
The head from ground, and to them turned the face:
Whereat amazed, he started back a space,
And cried (O wonder!) this the countenance
Of This be should be; what concealed chance
Should bring her hither? then Theagenes
Came to himfelfe, and feels at heart some ease;
And comforts Cnemon, almost out of wind,
That with his help he might the sooner find
His dear Chariclia; this now Cnemon knew
For Thisbe, chiefly by a ribban blue,
Which with a scroule from off her neck he took,
And, as he would upon the writing look,
Theagenes him bids forbear as then,
And seek Chariclia further in the den.
So he is content: but I had nigh forgot
The sword of Thyamis that in the plot
Was also found, well hatched and richly guilt,
Which Cnemon said he knew well by that hilt.
Who sits in dark, sees such as come with light,
And knows them sooner than is known; this might
Excuse Chariclia, that came first to embrace,
And kiss Theagenes with modest grace:
The fairest thing is Justice; Health, the best;
And most delightful, that we love, possessed:
And have I got th'againe, quoth she? And lives
My Dear, quoth he? thus each vnt'other gives
The kind salute; and count'r embracing fell
For sudden joy aswound: there was a well,
And Cnemon sprinkled wat'r upon their faces,
Which brought again their rosie-blushing graces.
For now ashamed they were, and chiefly she,
That Cnemon did, what past between them, see:
Though all but well: yet, as they had offended,
They pardon crave for that which he commended.
But you Theagenes, he said, for that
You did before, I cannot praise; for, what?
Embrace a stranger having no relation
To you at all, and in so foul a fashion?
While I stood by, and told you plain that she,
Your best Beloved, lived yet? quoth he,
O charge me not before Chariclia;
I took that course for her. But can you say
Ought for your self, who first the same mistook,
And wail'd my case, and started back, and shook
For fear of woman dead, an armed man?
O Soldier stout! O brave Athenian!
Hereat they smiled a little, but with tears,
As more to sorrow bent amid their fears.
And yet Chariclia scratching at her ear,
As if sh'had then concein'd some jealous fear
By thinking on it, broke out thus; Happy she,
Whom he so wail'd and kissed, what ere she be!
And, but you both will think of jealousy
I ask thereof, feign would I know if thee,
Sweet heart, what one it was, that so for me
Was kissed unknown? You marvel will, quoth he:
For Cnemon says 'twas Thisbe that Athenian,
The Minstrellesse that wrought so with a wenian
Against him and Demenet. Chariclia, scared
With news thereof, asked Cnemon how it fared
That Thisbe's brought from Greece into this den,
And neither he nor she perceived her, when
They thither came. That, who can tell? quoth he;
But that of her I know, is this; when she
Had circumuented Demenet (the plot
Against me known) at first my father got
Himself a pardon, and my home-recall;
And me to seek prepared a ship; and all
This while the queen had leisure t'exercise her
In minstralsie; Arsinoe enuies her;
Chiefly because the Merchant Nausicles
Became her love, before Arsinoes;
She unto friends of Demenet relates
The plot of Thisbe, they unto the States;
And cause to plead procure with great expense
The men of greatest wit and eloquence.
They cry that Demenet was cast away
Vniudged, vnconuict, and further say,
This crime of wed-breach was devised for shame
And way to death; where is he? what is his name,
That should commit this foul adultery?
Him bring alive or dead; or else, to try
The cause aright that Thisbe let be rackt.
My father promised; but she closely packt
Herself away; what like to fall upon her
Foreseeing well: and then with much dishonor
My father (cleared of murder by the laws,
As one that had related right the cause)
Yet lost his goods, and was himself exiled,
For overthrowing so his guiltless child,
And helping Thisbes plot against his wife;
That better had he led still widow life.
The man that buries wife, and weds again,
Does after shipwreck lanch into the Maine.
But this same Thisbe, here that has her due
Now in my sight, from Athens came I knew
By Anticles at Aegin; therefore twice
With him int' Egypt sailed I with advice
To find her there: that by her means I might
Relieve my father; State enforming right.
But how to Lake, or how into this Den
She was conuey'd, I cannot tell, nor when.
But, if you please, let us see what is in the writ
I found about her; thus begins it:
Unto my master Cnemon. Know you (Sir)
My mistres death, and I procured it her,
For your revenge; but how, because (forsooth)
'Twere long to write, I Will tell by word of mouth.
If you be pleased your handmaid to receive,
And, while I tell the manner give me leave.
Ten days I have been here captived t'a thief,
Who vaunts himself Shield-bearer to the Chief.
So close he keeps me that I cannot move
Vnt'any door, and says it is for love;
I rather think, and liker it is, for fear
Lest any take me from him; yet (mine Here)
Some power divine me did the grace to show me
Your face in passing-by, and I besh^ew me,
That out I ran not humbly to salute you;
The fault unto my hard restraint impute you:
With much ado yet pen and ink I got,
And wrote, and sent you this by that old Trot
Was set to keep me; save me (Sir) I pray you,
And I in all things humbly will obey you.
'Twas by constraint against you that I wrought;
But, you to right, of own accord I sought.
And if your anger nothing can appease,
It use against me (Sir) even as your please.
For by your order rather had I die,
And buried be with Grecian obsequie,
That Attick am, than suffer, Worse than hate,
Of barbarous thief the love disordinate.
Thus had she wrote, and Cnemon thereto said;
Unhappy Tib, (I cannot call thee maid)
That after death (yet so I count it well)
Thus to my self thou do thy story tell.
Behold Revenge about the world thee cast,
Nor staid her whip, till unto me at last,
Whom thou had wronged, she brought thee; that with eye,
I might be witness of thy misery.
But what a mischief had thou now in hand,
To work by lett'r against me? for I stand
In doubt, that all is yet but some invent
Of thine, to be so far int' Egypt sent,
To work my woe. Theagenes burst out,
Still fear you shadows? are ye still so stout?
You see she is slain; but who has blessed you so,
How, when, and why it is done, feign would I know.
By Thyamis (quoth he) the deed was done,
I know his sword, and The Eagle grau'n thereon:
But cannot guess, or how, or why, or when.
This is no such as was Trophony's den,
Whererein whos'euer entered, prophesi'd,
O Pythia then, O Delphi they two cried;
And both at once; not knowing what they meant,
He stood amazed thereat; and thus they spent
Some time in commoning. Now must you know,
That when Thermutis had received a blow,
And wounded swam to land, he came in haste
Unto the Cave where he had Thisbe placed;
What time his Master sent him to devise
(And long he staid) for solemn sacrifice.
And hard within the door, as come but new,
Her Thyam finding, for Cariclia slew.
Now as the commoned Thermutis came
And called Thisbe, greeking but in name;
But when he found her dead, upon her gazed,
And, word not vtt'ring long time stood amazed.
At last them hearing to them went, and thought
They had her slain; and would revenge have wrought,
But naked was, even as to land he swam,
And had no sword; O, then in what a stam
Was theeuish, barbarous, loue-sicke, angry mind,
That how to wreak his wrath could no way find;
But must comply! and so he did; but yet
Meant, if he got a sword, upon them set.
His look declared his mind was not at ease,
And so came fawning to Theagenes:
Amazed they were before they heared him speak,
And suddenly Chariclia gave a squeake,
And into the inner mazie cabin ran,
For fear, or shame, to see a naked man.
Theagenes opposed point of blade
Against the sly assault Thermutis made;
And bids keepe-off: when he the danger sees,
With humble show he fell down on his knees,
By fortune more than nature made so tame,
And him to plead-for Cnemon called by name;
And said, I late your fellow was, and craved
That both would think him worthy to be saved.
It moved Cnemon take him up, and where
Sir Thyam was, and how he sped, to spear.
He told of Thyams taking, hardly more
The manner how, than I have said before;
And said himself came now to seek a slut,
Whom he in cave before the battle shut.
Her name was Thisbe, what is she to you?
Quoth they. Then he them told the manner how
He took her from the Merchants, loved her, left her;
And now he knows not who had him bereft her.
Then Cnemon, them of all suspect to quit,
That Thyam killed her, said, this proves it,
And showed the sword, that well Thermutis knew,
And saw it bloody yet of slaughter new.
From barbarous breast a deep sigh then he drew,
And said, O Thisbe, my dear heart, adieu.
And Thisbe, Thisbe, rudely still he brai'd,
And on her breast his head all bloody laid:
He kissed her dying lips, and kissing wept,
Till charmie sleep upon his senses crept.
Than the other three had time (it seemed) to think
On their affairs, yet all begin to wink,
Oppressed with former toils, and Cnemon led
The way to sleep; Theagenes his head
Leant on a stone, and she upon his breast,
And all together sweetly took their rest.
Commanding Nature will enjoy her season,
And make our senses overcome our reason.
From this the careful mind is not exempt;
And, while Chariclia rested, thus she dreampt.
A shag-hair'd fellow (dreaming thus she quaked)
She thought pulled out her eye, wherewith she waked,
And not remembering their now-present plight,
She gave a sudden shreeke, that waked her Knight;
What ailes my love, quoth he? She told the case,
And with her fingers felt about her face:
Then it is a dream, quoth she, I have mine eyes;
But what this means can I not devise.
And sore I fear, lest you that are mine eye
Be taken from me; Cnemon with her cry,
Awaked, and heard, and answered by and by:
Good Lady think not so; not so think I;
But, if your parents lived late, shall one
Of them depart; for, this full well is known,
They made you see and seen: and therefore right
It is, to count them authors of your light;
And so your eyes. I thank you (Sir) for this,
Quoth she, and pray, you hit the mark, I miss.
We do but dream then quoth Theagenes
Thus weighing dreams: 'twere better for our ease
We weigh our dangers, casting them decline;
And since you given are by some Power Divine,
T'assist us Cnemon, understanding well
Both tongue and ways, which we do not; pray tell
Your best advice, while yonder Gypsy sleeps:
For fast away neglected season creepes.
Then he, In the Isle provision is there none;
But hidden treasure much, to diverse known:
Consider then, if here we longer stay,
We starve forth with, or make our selves a pray
To some late on our side that all do know,
And come for spoil, or to returning foe.
Then haste we must away; but first devise
To rid us of Thermutis; otherwise
Who knows how long we shall be forced endure
A man unconstant, barbarous, impure,
And something still suspecting us for her
He loved so? if time he find to stir.
But how us rid? by sending him t'enquire
Of Thyamis: and hereto they conspire.
And raise and tell him; he is content; but so
As Cnemon went with him; alone to go
Unwilling was, in case so dangerous:
And Cnemon thought it much more perilous,
To Have such a mate: this saw Theagenes,
Who spoke him-to aside: the words were these.
Sir Cnemon, well you counsel can, but want
Performing courage. Courage man: how cannot
Be dangerous for you to go with one
So naked man; you having sword, he none?
And he will suspect our flight if you refuse:
But go togeth'r at first, and after use
Your skill to leave him; pointing us to meet
At nearest civil place; and in the street
Of Chemmis was the appointed place, a Town
Both populous and rich, upon a Down,
Or side of hill, erected for defense
Against the spoiling Herdmens insolence,
At bank of Nilus, not far from the mouth,
Beyond this poole some twelve mile off, at South.
This is too far for her to walk at ease,
Not wont to foot it, quoth Theagenes:
But go we will in beggars poor array,
T'auoid suspect, and get meat by the way.
A good device, quoth Cnemon, verily;
Deformed both, and she has lost an eye:
But sure I think you look for better fees,
Than can be got by begging bread and cheese.
Whereat they smile, and swear fidelity,
Not one to fail another willingly.
And on the morning Cnemon and Thermute
Their journey take, and fall to some dispute,
Ere half a mile they past, at break aday,
Concerning wheth'r of them should lead the way:
Which Cnemon will not, ignorance pretending,
But 'twas indeed to cast for his defending;
And take same offered opportunity,
To rid him of such hateful company.
They went not far, but light upon a slocke,
Whose Shepherds, having heard the fearful shocke
Late at the poole, were gone, and all amid
The thickest neighbor woods themselves had hid.
This hungry pair then caught a sheep and flead,
And broyl'd it there upon the Shepherds glead.
But (not to stay, for hunger, or for fear)
With hasty chaps the scorched meat they tear.
And bleeding send it down the narrow gulf,
As Indian Tiger wont, and Irish Woolfe.
Thus having fed, and drunk of milk their fill,
Now toward night they come unto a hill,
At whose far-side was set, Thermutis said,
A town where Thyam (as he thought) was staid.
But Cnemon feined cause to lag behind,
As pained sore in guts with flux and wind,
And upward casting his disordered maw,
For drinking milk, and eating meat so raw;
The Gypsy staying for him on that hill
In little time benighted was, and fill
Asleep, where he had laid him on a stone,
And stung with Aspe ere morning di'd alone.
That Cnemon knew not, who ran still in fear
Of this so fell, now no more biting, Bear:
He looked behind him still and ran amain;
And ran, and looked, and ran, and looked again.
O how this sight would fair Chariclia please,
To laugh at him that mocked Theagenes.
A living Greek from dead Egyptian ran,
And long time that, which could not hurt him, shan.
As Coward armed with helmet, shield, and spear,
Looked in a glass, and ran away for fear.
At night he wraps himself in heap of leaves;
And yet for fear he neither turns nor heaues,
Nor takes a nap, but dreaming of his case,
Still thinks him running from Thermutis face.
When day began, which he thought longest when,
His hair that, for the custom of those men
With whom he lived, he let grow very long,
(For thought it is elsewhere, and these among,
That shaggie locks will make a young man show
Both mild to friend, and terrible to foe)
He now cut short: and this was reason chief;
Because he would not still be took for thief.
Then hasted he to Chemmis, by th'accord
Between them made; and near to Nilus board
Where over he was to pass, he saw at hand
An old man walking up and down the strand;
(White hair he wore, in holy fashion long,
His beard alike down vnt'his girdle hung,
More narrow toward point; in Greekish cloak,
And other garmenrs made of finest look)
So full of thought, that with fair By-your-leaues,
Thrice passed-by, he no man yet perceiues:
Then coming face to face, him bids all-haile:
Of that (quoth he) my fortune will me fail.
Then Cnemon wondered, and was far to seek,
And said, I pray (Sir) are y'a stranger Greek?
Nor Greek, nor stranger, then replied the old Sire:
Why then (quoth Cnemon) wear you Greek attire?
That this I wear, though this more gallant be,
Quoth he, the cause is my calamitee.
But the other wondered why a man should wear
For sorrow gallant clothes, and feign would hear.
A tale (quoth he) too long and lamentable
For me to tell, for you insufferable.
But (young man) whither go you? what to seek?
And how in Egypt (tell me) speak you Greek?
I asked you first, quoth he, and you refuse:
Of mine affairs then will you know the news?
I take it not ill (quoth the old man) for you seem
A Greek well taught, and one of some esteem;
And changed, as my self, for some design;
But (O) I wish you better case than mine:
Which, if I should not tell, my heart would burst,
And therefore well am pleased to tell you first.
But let us pass the Nile here running wide,
And go to yonder town on the other side.
I have no house mine own there, but a friend
That me receives, and all that I commend:
We shall be kindly used, there full well
Our strange adventures may both hear and tell.
Gow' then (says Cnemon) let us pass the Sound,
And to the town: for thither was I bound,
To meet some friends. Then timely take they boat,
(For many there upon the river float,
Expecting hire) and to the town they bend,
And that man's house, which was this old man's friend.
The man abroad, his daughter marriageable,
And other maids attend them, set the table,
And furnish it with diverse dainty meats,
And make their bed, and lay them aired sheets,
And washed their feet: then Cnemon, we may call
This house the house of Iupin Hospital:
Not so, but one that knows the God so hight,
Replied the old man, and one that favors right:
And in a word, to pass by all the rest,
He knowing well distress will help distressed.
So did he me, and brought me to this place
With travel weari'd, and in woeful case:
And still in what I need affords aid.
Why travel you, quoth Cnemon? The Old man said,
Of children robbed I was by theeuish might,
And, though I know them, dare I not me right.
But here I mourn; nor can I take my rest
Or day, or night: as bird that has her nest
Devoured by Dragon all before her eyes;
Yet nigh she dare not come, no^ far she flies.
Wilt please you then (quoth Cnemon, Sir) to show.
How this befell you, and how long ago.
Hereafter Sir, quoth he; now time requires
To think upon our stomack^ just desires.
But first do service to the Gods, as use
Th'Aegyptian Wisemen: nothing shall excuse
Me from this duty; then upon the ground
Fair water pouring, said, this am I bound,
And do, in honor of the Powers Divine
That hold this place, and such as well incline
To Greece, Apollo Delphicke, Cynthia,
Theagenes, and his Chariclia;
Whom I among the Gods will ever count:
So did, and said, and wept as from a fount.
This Cnemon hearing, on him wistly gazed,
And well observing him replied amazed;
If for my boldness (Sir) I be not blamed,
What are to you the two that last you named?
They are my children (quoth he) not by wife,
But given me from above; the grief and strife,
Which I have had for them, me them assure
As much as if they were my geniture.
As childen love I them, they me as Sire:
But (Sir) it makes me greatly now t'admire
How you them know. I know (quoth he) and tell
This for your comfort, they are safe and well.
O Phoebus! O, where are they? tell m'I pray.
What will you give to know, quoth he? why say
What will you ask (quoth the old man?) Here no more
Than thanks well can I give; and that for store
Of wealth do good men take, and hoord in heart,
As treasure great: nor will they from it part
For any thing: but if I come well home
(And Isis promises so shall I come)
And safe receive my dear boy and my guirle,
I will reward you both with gold and pearl.
Uncertain this is and to come, quoth he;
You may in present better pleasure me.
Ask what you will, quoth old man: Promise now
(Quoth he) to tell me whence they are, and how
They were disseuer'd from you, and their birth;
For next your self none more them loves on earth.
A treasure great is this; but, since you crave it,
I promise, after supper you shall have it.
When they had eat their nuts, and figs, and dates,
And plums, and pears, and other such a chates,
As the old man wont (for that which once had life,
He never would eat-of; nor it touch with knife)
And he had water drunk, and Cnemon wine:
The Greek began, and said; O grave Divine,
Bid one, I pray, come take away the board;
For now is time that you perform your word.
I will (quoth he) and would good Nausicles
Were here to hear the tale, but Mitranes
Has drawn him out on hunting; often he prayed
Me tell the same, and still I him delayed.
The Greek had heard, and startled-at the name
Of Nausicles, and asked what was the game
They went to chase: of beasts (quoth he) the worst,
That called are men, of all good men accursed.
They live by spoil, we hardly can them take;
For, for their den they keep a noisome Lake.
What have they done? quoth he: surprised a guirle,
Which he esteemed above or gold or pearl,
An Attick-borne, which, well could play and sing;
He meant present her to the Abissen King;
His Queen to wait-on, hoping (in regard
She was a Greek, so taught) for great reward,
As wont be given there: Thisbe was her name.
O Gods! quoth he; and closely past the quame,
To hear the rest: and unperceived said,
What force of Arms has Nausicles, what aid
For such emprize? He told him Mitranes,
A Leader under Lord Orondates,
The Kings Lieutenant there, with horse and foot
For some good sums of money's hired to do it.
And I so counsail'd; for my mind me gave,
I might some news thence of my children have.
O Sir (quoth Cnemon) I had nigh forgot,
Thus led along by your entising plot,
To put y'in mind of promise; what is this
To that, I pray? and the old man said, it is
To that you asked me last; and now to that
You most desire I come: but first somewhat,
To make the matter clear, I must premise,
And of my self, on whom that story lies.
In Memphis borne of father Calasire,
Whose name and office (he that shall enquire,
May find) I had, and Isis minister
Was long therein, though now a wanderer.
Wife had by Citi's, lost by Natures hest:
When fne from body went t'another rest,
My life I led awhile without anoyes,
My self delighting with two pleasing boys
I had by her: at length it thus befell;
Here came from Thrace (to me may seem from hell)
A wanton Piece, nor over young nor old,
Of woman kind, so tising and so bold;
That she to Temple came, and at her heels,
A train of seeming Maids as smug as Eeles.
Thus once she told me, from Philosophee
I can your scholars draw; you none fro me
And I replied, it is easier to spill,
Than make the man: your draught is down the hill,
A broad and easy way to vice; but I
Them upward drive to virtue lodged on high.
Yet, after this, I blush to tell, but will;
Though long resisting that entising ill,
I faint at length, and lest I place profane,
(Twice marry may not Metropolitan)
I rather chose observing holy Laws
My self t'absent, pretending other cause;
To see my Thyamis, mine eldest son,
Which with his Grandmother at Thebes won.
That name again made Cnemon muse, but let
The Old man say-on, to hear what issue set.
Besides (quoth he) the Goddess whom I serve
Me told my fate, from which I could not swerue:
My sons, by some disaster waxen lewd,
Should fall at odds, and into deadly fewd.
The sight whereof t'auoid, I further went,
And punished my self with banishment.
The mid-time of my travel will I balke,
As not concerning this whereof we talk.
When I at Thebes heard how great a fame
There ran of Delphos, and Apollo's name,
I long to see'^, and landing at the Cirrhe
In Crissie Gulf, ere I the Town came near,
Of voice divine me thought I heard the sound,
And worshipped, and kissed that holy ground:
The place is such indeed, quoth Cnemon then;
For right the same my father told me, when
He had been Legate there from Athens sent,
To meet in grave Heptarchie-Parlament.
And are you then Athenian, quoth he;
What name, I pray Sir? Cnemon call they me;
And of my state I tell you shall anon;
Now (pray) with that you have begun, go on.
Then he; devoutly to the Templ' I come,
And ask, and answer get, thus much in sum:
From fruitful bank of Nile why do thou fly,
T'auoyd the strong design of Destiny?
Endure; int'Aegypt shortly will I send thee,
And there, in all that is to come, befrend thee.
And they that heard it, standing near in place,
Said, since Lycurgus, no man had the grace
To be so welcomed: and forthwith they all
Well entertain me; still their friend me call,
And friend to that their God; so well provide me
Of common purse, that nothing is denied me.
In temple-close I lodged was nigh the griest,
And grew acquaint with Charicles the Priest:
Who told me many things, and asked me some;
As whence those ouer-floods of Nilus come;
Who made th'enormous great Pyramides;
Of Crocodiles, Ichneumons, Ostridges;
And of the two-legg'd-winged Dragon, seen
To swim and fly the river banks between,
From out of Arabie; which he thought was
The right, not that which wings and fourefeet has.
And much the like: then I, Sir, how come you
To know our parts so well? to tell you true
(Quoth he) I trauell'd the row them many a mile
To Catadupe, and Cataracts of Nile:
And as in City walking on a season,
I bought that was with us in Greece most geason,
Against return, a man of comely port,
Though black, and speaking Greek, as aft'r a sort,
Me met, saluted courteously, and prayed
A word with me, and in the Temple said;
I saw you (Sir) buy many drugs to day,
Some Abissine, and some of India;
What I shall show you, be it with your good leave,
And buy of me; I will you not deceive.
I will, let us see, quoth I: Nor do you grutch
(Quothe he) to give: Quoth I, nor ask you much.
And so from vnder's arm a casket drew,
With many precious stones, green, red, and blue;
And oyly-shining pearl, as big as pease,
All perfect round, of South-East Indies seas;
When I beheld them dazzled were mine eyes,
And (Sir) I said in vain should I them prize;
Go seek a fitter chapman, if you please,
For all I have will not buy one of these.
If you ne buy them can (quoth he) yet take them;
That can ye do; and I your own will make them.
I cannot set (quoth I) so great a rest,
Nor take this gift: but why so do you jest?
I do not jest, believe me (Sir) quoth he;
But am in earnest: hereby shall you see:
These all I give you, so be that you please
Take one thing more, more worth than are all these.
I laughed, he asked me why; at jest you make
To promise more (quoth I) if all I take.
I swear the gift (quoth he) but swear ye to
To use it well: and for such hope, I do.
Then with his right hand by the left he takes me,
And leads me home to his house, and welcome makes me:
And shows m'a fair one, putting off her masket,
More worth than all the Jewels in his casket.
He said she was no more than seven year old,
But I no less than twice seven guess her could,
And fit for husband: beauty rare (I deem)
Makes little Ladies often taller seem.
I stood amazed, as well at that was done,
As what I saw. He thus again begun.
This dainty guirle, her mother, for some drift
You shall hereafter know, her left to shift
With fickle Fortune, wrapped in cradle-bands;
I chance to find and take her in my hands,
And save her life; for our Gymnosophists,
When soul of man has entered fleshie lists,
Hold that it ought in no wise be neglected,
But as the life of man, by man protected;
Besides I saw, as 'twere, a beam divine,
When she beheld me, shoot forth of her eyne:
About her lay this heap of precious stones,
And silk with letters wrought, which for the nones
(I think) were done to prove another day
Whose The Infant was, and hidden truth bewray.
When I them read, I saw well whose she was,
Yet unto Shepherds nursing let her pass;
And kept the rest, for fear that for the pray
The child might afterward be made away.
And while she was but very small, I count
Her hidden safe: but flours of beauty mount,
And such as this apace; that under ground
(I think) though hid, would break forth and befound.
Thus though a while I had it well concealed,
I fear it would by self light be revealed;
So hurt it self and me. Then suit I make
To be int'Aegypt sent, and her I take
Along with me; and now in this Embassage
I hope to find for her some better passage;
And even by you, Sir, whom this many a day
I well observe: and take her you, I pray,
With all her dowry, swearing first to me,
You will her keep, and marry well, as free.
But now no more, my business calls me hence,
This King to day appoints me audience.
In Isis Fane to morrow will I tell you
The rest of her, and so with her farewell you.
I take her home, and on the morrow went,
To know the rest; but he away was sent
With threats for haste; because he came to claim
A mine of Emrauds for the Melchusaim,
Hydaspes King of either Blackmoreland;
Then I, (because I could not understand
Who, whence she was, and of what parents borne,
That had thereafter listened so beforne)
With discontent retire: I cannot blame
Him (then quoth Cnemon) for I feel the same:
But what he further said, quoth Calasire,
Now shall I tell, and make you much admire.
When I came in (thus said my Charicles)
At sight of her my heart had present ease:
In Catadup no longer dare I stay;
But homeward down the Nile make haste away.
And here she now is with me, counted mine,
And bears my name: and does in all incline
To Obey me like her father (so she takes me).
But of a husband will not hear (that makes me
Full, full of care) and yet in beauty exceeds
All maids of Greece, which emulation breeds:
For strangers here as well as Greeks admire her;
And many Suitors, men of worth, desire her.
She says she will Diana follow she,
And hunting with her still a Maiden be:
With bow and shaft full well can hit the mark;
But unto Cupids bow would never hark.
I thought bestow her on my sisters son,
A proper man; but nothing can be done;
In vain is all my care and labor spent;
So strongly she maintains her said intent,
And most with reasons sometime heard of me,
In commendation of Virginitee:
Now I beseech you (Sir) help what you may:
To talk with her she will not you say nay,
Nor any worthy man: she courteous is,
And opportunity you cannot miss:
In Temple-close, as 'twere in house the same,
Now living both: me help maintain my name;
For husband worthy long she shall not tarry;
Pray, you persuade her what you can to marry;
Lest, wanting whom to leaue-to mine estate,
I lead my latter days disconsolate.
So said he ( Cnemon) shedding tears, and I
Him promise help, and weep for company.
While thus we talk, a solemn Embasie
Of Achillaeans came to him; and I,
When he had told me what they were, desire
To see the principal; (he came t'enquire
Of Charicles the Priest for furtherance,
And what so might their Sacrifice advance)
Let call him in (quoth he) and then came in
The goodli'st youth among them e're had bin:
Achilles-like in portlinesse and face,
And show of courage with more lovely grace.
Us he saluted, we him resalute:
And Sir (quoth he to Charicles) impute
No fault to me; for haste I must the Rite,
That all the pomp may well come in ere night.
Go then, quoth Charicles, and to me said,
If not before, now shall you see the Maid.
For she, Diana's servant, must attend
This Sacrifice, from time it gin to the end.
Now (Cnemon) I had seen the Maid before,
And with her ministered; and of the lore
Sh'hath asked me many points; now held my peace
To see the sequel: here our talk we cease,
And go to Templ'; as all things were before
Made ready, when the Chief came in at door.
We come to The Altar, and with Priest his leave,
Begins the young man orison conceive.
By secret slight some cunning Priests will make
Diana's Image, and Apollo's shake:
And call it pious fraud: but thus think I,
Truth has no need helpt-out to be with lie.
For when came forth Diana's gallant Maid
With virgin train, thus Pythia plainly said:
The youngest he and she, that here attends
In Priestly Rite, shall have their wished ends:
By sea and land, by war and tempest tossed,
Shall come at length to hot Sun-parched coast,
For virtues due reward; and there allight,
Their tanned temples crown with Turban white.
This Oracle not one of that Repair
Could understand, and least of all the fair,
That had no tanned temples, could be thought
Designed thereby. But when the thing is wrought,
Then prophecies and dreams are understood;
Then shows the face, before kept under hood.
Finis Libri secundi.
THE Fair Ethiopian.
ALL other pomp to tell (quoth Calasire)
I ouerpasse, and for you most desire,
To know how bore themselves that solemn day
Theagenes and his Chariclia;
Though yet not his; when he came forth, what ere
Was seen before, is thought not worth a pear.
The gallant mounted on a Dapple-gray,
In shining rich attire revived the day,
As Sun broke out of cloud; his abron hair
Wau'd up and down with Aeols gentlest air.
Of purple velvet was his cloak, and wrought
With gold, how Lapiths with the Centaurs fought.
The Buckle-brooch thereof in fine Obryze
Had Pallas wrought with fair sky-colour'd eyes
Of Saphyr bright: her breast is covered
With stone-to-turning shield of Gorgons head.
Then in his hand the steely-pointed lance
So well became him; when he began to prance,
(Helm had he none, his cheerely face to cloud)
I thought the horse was of the rider proud;
So wantonly to right, to lest he flings,
And neighing, snorting, yerking, trots the rings:
Foot after foot then on the grass he stamps,
And golden bit with teeth all-foamy champs:
Now this, now that way, fore and backward flies,
With prick-eare, tost-vp head and rolling eyes;
With many a short curuet, and lofty bound,
So dainty trampling, as he scorned the ground;
At length on tip-hoofe striking for a space,
His fierceness moderates with pleasant pace:
So horse to man, and man to horse complies,
Not two, but one, they seem to fall and rise.
Amazed were all at him, and women kind,
That could not hide the affections of their mind,
Cast many favors at him moving mirth,
And all him thought the goodliest thing on earth.
But when, like rosie-finger'd morning-shine,
Came fair Chariclia from Diana's shrine;
Theagenes, how ever they commend him,
Himself and they confess she goes beyend him.
And yet (well dare I say) no further sure,
Then does a woman's beauty more allure.
In purple silk to foot, orecast with lawne,
She rode in Coach with two white oxen drawn,
As there the state is; gold and precious stone,
From thicker garment the row the thinner shone.
Two Serpents made of gold, enameled blew,
With tails entangled from her shoulders drew
Each the other side, close under either arm,
And re-entangled, as it were by charm,
Some place they seek, wherein to take their rest,
And met, and hung their heads below her breast:
And this her girdle was; they seem full deep
Enchanted by the virgin pap to sleep.
Her amber hair nor all bound-vp, nor yet
All hanging loose, above with Coronet
Of Laurel tide is (lest the wind it raise)
And underneath upon her shoulder plays.
Below the right a perled quiver hung
With silver shafts, nor over short nor long;
Her left hand held a gilden bow, her right
A golden cansticke with wax taper light.
And every man her then beholding cries,
How brighter than the taper been her eyes!
Then Cnemon suddenly burst-out; O these
Are true Chariclia, true Theagenes.
And Calasiris said, I pray now where?
As thinking Cnemon had espied them there.
Your speech, quoth he, so brought them me to mind,
As if I saw them. You shall never find
The like, quoth Calasire, I speak it bold,
Sun never since did such a pair behold.
The man and wife like him and her that be,
May think to have gotten immortalitee.
But come to point; when all the beasts were slain
For sacrifice, some of the leaders train,
Appointed thereunto, forthwith desire
Apollo's Priest begin, and tind the fire
Upon his Altar; Charicles then said,
The Leader self must from Diana's Maid
The burning taper take, and fire the wood;
Mine office was to pour the wine and blood:
And so he did. Then came Theagenes
To fetch the taper: now (Sir, if you please)
By way observe the souls diuinitee
In passage following, as seems to me:
For, when each other first they began behold,
They paused a while, as if they thought they should
Each other know. So mind and mind alike,
Though not acquainted, soon together strike:
As two quicksilver drops each other nigh
Can hardly stand, but soon together fly.
With more assured countenance yet she
That holy candle gave, than took it he.
A little smile they both, and blush the while,
As if they were ashamed be seen to smile;
And after pale, now all the face, now part,
Declareth' affection had possessed their heart.
And still their countenance altered, and their eyes,
In such a sort as troubled mind implies.
Which none so marked as I, who nothing there
Had else to do, and, what was said whilere
By th'Oracle, now thought-on: so remained,
When he the taper taking was constrained
To leave the Virgin, nothing else to do
But complement, and fire the wood, and go
To banquet with his Achillaean Peers;
And she to chamber presently reteeres;
Puts-off her robes, and puts-on oth'r attire*
Not dwelling now with her supposed Sire,
For only fear of his importunance
To work in her from purpose variance.
Now grew I curious marking what had past,
And Charicles to meet of purpose cast;
And have you seen (quoth he) my joy to day,
Yea Delphos joy and mine, Chariclia?
Give father leave to dote on daughters face:
Pray, how do you like her? did she somewhat grace
The solemn show? You ask as much, quoth I,
As if the Moon do somewhat grace the sky.
I Am going to her, quoth he; go with me,
And how she does, now all is past, let us see:
Lest any hurt she took amid the crowd,
Or by the peoples roaring out so loud.
I gladly yielded, making yet a show
Of other things neglect, with him to go.
When there we come, we find her sick a bed*
She says she cannot sleep for pain in head.
But well did I observe, at this suprise,
Her broken speeches, and her loue-sicke eyes;
Her father did not: He gives straight command
They make no noise about her, then by the hand
He leads m'abroad, and says, What think you (friend)
Of her so sudden change at one hours end?
In such a prease (quoth I) or in, or out,
Some glance of eye bewitched her has, no doubt.
You then belike, in jesting wise quoth he,
And smiled therewith, believe that such there be.
I do, quoth I, and, as I thought to prove
The like by reason, both in hate and love;
Comes one in haste (he seemed well soaked in wine)
And says, My masters mean you not to dine?
You seem as slow, as if to battle pressed
You rather were, than bid to such a feast.
And this the ba-ba-braue Theagenes
In honor makes of Neoptolemes.
This man (quoth Charicles) does so inuit us,
As if to dinner he would drive and smite us:
W'had best be gone. You do but jest (quoth I)
But let us go indeed, intending why.
And when we came, he Charicles does place
The next him-to, and for his sake me grace.
To pass the rest, this youth behau'd himself,
As well-became Ambassador to Delph.
Nor spoke, nor looked, as loue-sicke one, but strivve
Vnt'all his guests good entertain to give
With cheerly countenance: but I could see
How aft'r a sigh he fained a merry glee,
Was fad sometime, yet would himself recall,
And into sundry changes easly fall.
For Bacchus-like is Cupid, some men think;
And Drinkers soon will love; and Lovers drink,
This Charicles perceived, and softly twitcht
Me by the sleeue, and said, Has eye bewitched:
This gallant too? Quoth I, we may't infer;
For who excelled but he, next after her?
He drunk a health vnt'all, at length to me;
I thankt, but pledged him not, and thereat he
Seemed discontent; me Charicles excused,
And said, drink wine th'Aegyptian Priest not used.
He now perceiving what I was, and whence,
Me more esteemed, and set aside offense.
And, glad as one that had a treasure found
Upon a sudden, hidden in the ground,
To me again he drunk in water clear,
And said (Grave father) let our meeting here,
And this carouse in that you fancy best,
Confirm our love, and setl'it fast in breast.
Content, most noble Prince (quoth I) for so
Was my desire: therewith we rise and go.
When home I came, I so began to think
On these affairs, I covld not sleep a wink:
But studied still what meant the latter part
Of th'Oracle, and found it past mine Art.
Now near on midnight (wheth'r I wakt, or slept,
I cannot tell; but sure I am I wept,
Because I found not out the mystery)
This vision had I from our Deitee:
Apollo with Diana came; and he
Theagenes me brought, Chariclia she;
And told me time was now I should retire
To native soil: and said, O Calasire,
Now time is come, and Destiny commands:
Then take these two (and put them to my hands)
Int'Aegypt with you, never trust deceive;
But keep and guide them as the Gods give leave.
Glad was I (Cnemon) so much more to know,
That homeward now I with these two should go:
But how my Charicles should be deprived,
And our departure handsomely contrived,
I could not see; When Gods will have thing done
They tender means; This while I thought upon,
At breake-aday one at my portall knocked,
And when my servant had the door unlocked;
Who should it be, but self Theagenes!
My troubled mind me thought then felt some ease;
I thought (and likely 'twas) that when he knew
I was a Gypsy, not of common crew,
But Priest of Memphis; that he thought I might
In love so faithful help to do him right;
And therefore came: we kindly consalute,
And on my bed he sat a while as mute.
What makes my Lord (quoth I) thus early rise?
And why to me? he wiped his loue-sicke eyes,
And said, O father, never stood I more
I need of help. When I him asked, wherefore?
He blushed and held his peace: I saw my time
To play the Gypsy, and thus began to try him.
What you conceal (quoth I) and tell me doubt,
I shall by cunning Gypsie-skill find out:
And smiling raised myself, and counters took
Betwixt my fingers, naught to numb'r, and look
As one possessed, and wistly them remove
From place to place, and say, my son's in love.
He start thereat; but when I further said,
In love (I say) and with Diana's Maid;
He thought indeed I spoke with Power Divine,
And me to worship began himself incline:
Which I forbad him; but some tears he shed,
And softly stroakt my beard, and kissed my head;
At length burst-out in these; yet am I glad,
And thank the Gods, that (look) what hope I had,
It fails me not; and prayed me save his life,
And help to make this goodly Nymph his wife:
And said he was a dead man else, and swore
He never woman knew, or loved before.
And wept as 'twere for grief it should be said,
So stout a man was conquered by a Maid.
I comfort him, and fear not, say, my boy;
We Will overcome her, be she never so coy;
So you be ruled; he said, the row sword and fire
He would obey his father Calasire:
And promised me reward, his whole estate.
As thus we talk, one raps hard at my gate,
And prays me come with speed to Charicles,
Now in the Temple gone about to appease
Apollo's wrath, for some unpleasing sight,
And fearful dream that he has had to night.
So more in hope departs Theagenes,
And glad I sent-for was by Charicles.
I sad and sighing find him, ask him why:
O dearest friend (quoth he) this night had I
Most strange and fearful dreams, and my Charic
(The rest a sob cut off) continues sick.
Now shortly run our youth in arms, and she,
Diana's Nymph should their torch-holder be.
To keep our custom, help and use your skill,
In this I know you can do what you will.
Vncharme that eye that so bewitched my guirle,
And we will reward you both in gold and pearl.
I must confess 'twas yet forgot (quoth I)
And time you must afford me, both t'apply
And make the medicine; yea, the Maid you must
Persuade well of me, that she may me trust.
I will (quoth he) and come now let us go to her.
No sooner entered at her chamber door;
But I her sickness read could in her face:
Her colour's gone, her all-delighting grace
With pearly shower allayed; yet when she saw
Us two, of whom she stood so much in awe,
Sat up, composed her self, began t'aduance,
And call again her former countenance.
Then Charicles her often embracing kissed,
And said, What ailes mine only child? what is it
Has wrought this change in you? and why conceal you*
This hurt from me, who may devise to heal you?
Have cheer my guirle, and be no whit dismayed,
This reu'rend Father promises his aid:
To cure your sickness hold him the only man;
For, if he will do what he can, he can.
She nothing said; but made us well conceive,
By sign, she yielded: so we took our leave.
And Charicles me prayed along the way
To think upon it, and make no more delay*
Especially to work in her a mind,
To love a man, as ought all woman-kinde.
I made him answer, such as well him pleased,
It Is nothing hard to cure one so diseased.
Finis Libri tertii.
THE Fair Ethiopian.
THe Pythian games are past, and now begun
The day wherein the Gallants armed run.
And Cupid President of all the sport,
Will show, by these two, greatest his effort.
All Greece lookt-on, with City-Iudges seven;
A Heralds voice, that seemed to rend the Heaven,
Was heard: Come forth, O ye that mean to pace
So swift in arms. At farre-end of the race
Appeared Chariclia like a morning Star;
As loath her absence should the custom bar,
Or (as I think) because, more for her ease,
She thought she might there see Theagenes.
A torch in left, a Palm she held in right,
And her-vpon straight all men cast their sight:
But first Theagenes; for, Love entire
Is quick to spy that is his most desire;
And he had time to mark, that heard whilere
What should be done; then whispered me i'th'eare
(Of purpose next me set) it is she, it is she:
I bid him peace; then coming forth we see
A Gallant armed point-deuis, that high
Of spirit seemed, and no man would him try;
So known he was, and had so great a name,
For winning always, when he ran, the game.
The Judges send him back; nor might they give
The garland him, that had not for it strivve.
He then obtained it might proclaimed be,
And it is, come who so will: He calls me,
Then says Theagenes. How now, quoth I,
Will you adventure such a ieopardie?
It shall be so (quoth he) nor will I stand
To see another from Chariclia's hand
For running swift reward of conquest bear.
But loss (quoth I) and shame I wish you fear.
You say full well, quoth he; but this believe;
Who naught will undertake, shall naught achieue.
And, were this Challenger as swift as Lark,
He could not me outrun at such a mark.
With many men in this kind had I strife,
But never was out-ran in all my life;
And love has wings: so said, and down he leapt,
And forward on the Plain full nimbly stepped;
His name and country told, and took his place.
Was armed, and stood all ready for the race.
The people shout at th'vnexpected part,
And wish him well; So moves every heart
The comely person: but the Ladies most.
I marked Chariclia how she cleared the coast
With Sun-bright eye, the Crier hearing name
What were the men that entered for the game:
To wit, the stout Ormene of Arcady,
And brave Theagenes of Thessaly:
Nor could she keep her looks with all her Art,
So moved she was: at trumpet sound they start,
And cheek by cheek on sudden passing-by
So swiftly ran, they seem not run, but fly.
How did her panting heart then shake her seet!
How did she stir by fits her hands and feet!
As if her spirit with his body ran
To help him run. And now did every man,
And most my self, with care expect the event;
With him as with a son my wishes went.
No marvel ( Cnemon said) if so't affect
The lookers-on; for I with care expect
That do but hear't; and quickly tell m'I pray,
If our Theagenes there got the day.
The day (quoth I) yes, and deserved the night:
For passing Ormen-by, as 'twere a flight,
And, faining at some stone his foot to clap,
Of purpose fell, but fell just in her lap.
And when he took the Palm, I could perceive
He closely kissed her hand, and with her leave.
But she went home now sicker than before;
This second enterview enflamed her more;
As fuel twice at fire: and I that night
Could take no rest, for thinking on our flight.
I saw 'tas meant by sea (by sea and land,
Said th'Oracle) but whither, t'vnderstand,
I must go learn of that embroydred silk,
Left with her when she left her mothers milk;
Which had, but understood not, Charicles:
To him I go; but find him litl'at ease,
How fare you man, quoth I; he wept amain,
And said (alas) my daught'r is more in pain.
Both you and all the rest (quoth I) depart;
And leave m'alone with her, to prove mine Art.
A three-foot stool me set, and bays withal,
Perfume, and fire; and come not till I call.
It Is done, and I, now having time to play
My Gypsy part, perfume and wave the Bay
Now here, now there, and over her face and feet:
She wagg'd her head at me, and smiled to see it;
And said (good father) do not so deceive
Your self in me: then (Lady) by your leave,
(Quoth I, and left my tricks, and sat her near)
I know it full well; but be you of good cheer;
A rise disease it is, and easly cured,
Some eye bewitching has your heart allured,
And put you to some pain two days before;
But, since you saw the race, a great deal more.
I guess the man, and saw him cast that eye,
The swift Theagenes of Thessaly.
Whe'r he me hurt, or not, I wish him good,
Quoth she, what is he? Of Achilles blood
They say, quoth I; and so may well be thought,
By face, and stature; beauty, and spirit haught.
But only that he seems more gentl' and mild,
As if a friend might rule him like a child.
And has (I warrant) took more hurt than done,
By glance at you; and, if he were my son,
So could I wish: Alack (quoth she) and why?
He hurt me not at all, good Sir; but my
Disease has other cause: Yet thank I you
(Good father) for so suffering with me now.
If other cause (quoth I) my guirle, reveal it;
And from your father never long conceal it.
Disease like new-set plant is; quickly taken,
With ease plucke-vp; but rooted, hardly shaken.
A fathers love I bear you, and your father
Has put m'in trust; O therefore then the rather,
What ere it be impart, I vow and swear
To keep your cousaile, and effect what ere.
Hereat she paused a while, and in her face
Had many changes, all with pretty grace
Declaring doubtful mind: then said, I pray,
(I cannot yet resolve) forbear to day:
And after, what it is (if by your spell
You know it not before) I shall you tell.
I rose, and yielded (as ought yielded be)
A time to bashful Maidens modestee.
Yet take my leave as men of women use;
Soon after meet with Charicles: what news?
Quoth he; all well, quoth I; and even to morrow
She shall be rid of all her grief and sorrow.
Nay more I tell you; she intends a deed
Will give you great content, and that with speed.
And ne'rthelesse I wish you counsel take
Of some Physician, safer all to make.
If further cause be, call me to my task,
So part to the end he then no more should ask.
And walking homeward meet Theagenes
In Temple-close: it did his heart some ease
To see but where she dwelt; I pass beside,
As not perceiving him, then oh he cri'de,
Good Calasire! the very man I sought.
I sudden turned, as somewhat else I thought,
And said, O brave Theagenes! how brave,
Quoth he, that can of her no favor have?
Ah will you still (quoth I) mistrust mine Art,
Which have so well already played my part;
Which have her overcome, and made her love ye?
As, if you stand in doubt still, I shall prove ye.
You Are the only man whom she desir's to see.
Then he, what, what? why longer tarry we?
And going was apace, till by the cloak
I pulled him back, and thus unto him spoke.
Nay stay a while, good youth; though as a Son
Of great Achilles, very swift you run;
The time in counsel spent is never waste;
And this no work is to be done in haste.
Her father chief man is of all the Delph:
Why, then (quoth he) let us go unto himself,
And for his daughter pray him give consent;
I trust it shall be no disparagement.
But he (quoth I) her promised long ago
To His sisters son. It shall be for his woe,
His woe, quoth he, and little for his ease,
Who gets Chariclia from Theagenes.
Nor blunt my sword is, nor my hand so weak.
Good Sir, quoth I, what need you thus to speak?
It Is better done another way: be wise,
And counsel keeping, do as I advise.
Be little seen with me; our enteruiew
May breed suspect; so forced he bids m'adiew.
Then Charicles came, thankt, embraced, and said.
O the only man to turn devoted Maid!
This is your Art, and your great wisdom able:
My guirle is conquered, erst unconquerable:
She Is now in love. Then I look big, and strut;
And say, though little I gave, I knew 'twold do it.
But how appears it? you (quoth he) us bid
Physicians counsel ask; and so we did.
When they came in, she turning to the wall,
As if she minded not, or scorned them all,
That verse of Homer sung with dewie cheeks,
O great Achilles, chiefest of the Greeks.
The wise Acestin (sure you know the man)
Her caught by the hand, the malady to scan,
And by the pulse her troubled heart bewrayed;
Then unto me (good Charicles) he said,
In vain you call us; this is no disease,
Whereof our physic can the fits appease.
O Gods, quoth I; and must I lose my dear
And only guirle! Peace you (quoth he) and hear:
So called m'aside, and softly told me thus,
The body, not the mind, is cure for us:
She Is sick in mind; she loves, and only he,
That made her sick, will best Physician be.
So went his way: and I straight hither ran
To you my best Director for the man:
I would it were Alcamenes my lad,
Whom for her husband I appointed had.
'Twere good (quoth I) to try, and let him go
To visit her: he said it should be so,
And thankt me for th'aduice: and yet e're noone
The next day met m'and cried, I am undone:
My daughter's mad; I sent as you advised
Alcamenes, and him she so despised,
And turned away-from shreeking, as the sight
Of Gorgons head had put her in affright:
Nay, threat with cord to make her self away,
Except we left her suddenly that day.
'Twas time to go: but now, good Calasire,
Proceed t'accomplish that which I require,
And make her lean to love. I doubt (quoth I)
Lest some malignant counter-sorcerie
Be wrought upon the silken scarffe you said
Was with her Jewels by that Infant laid.
Forthwith he ran and fetch it me, and so
I looked thereon, and told him, this to know
Requires some time; then to my hand he sped it,
And I went home and all at leisure readde it.
In letters Aethiopick (not the same
Of common sort, but that the Kings they name,
And very like the sacred Characters,
That Priests of Egypt use) thus it refers.
Persina, woeful Queen of Blackmoreland,
This wrote her self in haste with trembling hand.
I know not how, except by pictures white,
Wherewith my King would have his chamber dight.
I brought him forth this white-one: but afraid
Of that high crime would to my charge be laid,
Ne durst be known thereof, but said she di'de,
And by a trusty Groom her sent aside,
To save both her and me from death and shame,
That hate th'Adultresse and the Bastards name.
And now, sweet Babe, in vain so fair that art,
Whereby thy self and I were like to smart*
These jewels and this swath-band I thee give,
To make thee known, if be thy hap to live.
Which O! and then think on thy Pedigree,
And like a Princess guard thy chastitee:
Of all thy jewels this Pantarbe stone
Have care to keep; it is worth all them alone.
And more there was in lamentable fashion
Set down to express a tender mothers passion,
Which here I skip; but (Cnemon) when I saw
The name Persina, struck I was with awe:
And in my mind were grief and joy at strife;
The grief, to note this fair young Ladies life,
And what she was indeed, and what supposed:
The joy, to see the Prophecy disclosed.
That now I thought was meet fit season watch,
And what I did intend with speed dispatch.
To her I go, and find her all alone,
Nigh overcome with languishing and moan;
Yet some what cheered to see me. Then I said,
I now expect the promise of a Maid;
Which was to tell me what is you grief: I pray
Make, if you will have ease, no more delay.
You know my trust, and that I can it know
Though you conceal: But why should you do so?
She took and kissed my hand, and said, O father,
Then by your wisdom understand it rather.
Well then (quoth I) you are not the only she;
But many brave and virtuous Ladies be
That love a man: and he that has you heart
(If any worthy be) has all desert.
This, if you mark, may set your mind at ease;
For what is wanting in Theagenes?
But Sir, quoth she, you speak as if 'twere sure
My father would consent, and the other endure
To woo a Maid. Quoth I, to tell you true,
The man is deeper struck in love than you.
Then, as for your supposed father, he
Wife vnt' Alcamenes would have you be.
Alcamenes (quoth she)? first let me die:
For, but Theagenes will no man I.
But why my father call you so, supposed?
Then I that written on the silk disclosed;
And showed it her, and asked her if she knew't.
She said such-one she had; but he with-drew't,
To lay-vp safe, lest it be worn or stained:
Yet never knew before what it contained.
Then up she looked with courage void of pride;
With countenance well assured, and steadfast e'yd;
And asked, what is to be done? I tell her how
I was my self in Blackmoreland ere now,
To learn the tongue, and join Gymnosophie
With Gypsy skill, and Greek Philosophy.
And that her fathers Court, without obstacle,
Of learned men was chiefest Receptacle.
That there so grew I known to Queen Persine,
And was esteemed as an Arch-Diuine.
She, when she heard that home return I meant,
Sent form', and told me why she for me sent;
To wit (she durst but vnt'a stranger tell)
A child she had, which fare it ill or well,
Dead, living, where, feign would she know, and prayed,
That with my skill therein I would her aid.
And told your case, and said she could not find
That any such now lived in land of Inde;
But made me first, to keep her counsel, swear.
I learn of Isis that you live, and where.
Your mother then me prays in any wise,
I cast would how to find you, and denise
To bring you home: and if you come in heal,
To King Hydaspes she will all reveal.
Now time has well approved her loyalty;
And, for succession of his royalty,
Glad will he be to find unhoped heir,
And doubt not you are his, although so fair.
This all I knew, though nothing said, before
I got the silk, that might confirm it more.
Then ere against your will Alcamenes
Begin to work, or father Charicles,
With us your Parents, and your country seek,
And there be married to this noble Greek;
Remembering what, of him and of your self,
Was prophesi'd by th'Oracles of Delph.
Then since (quoth she) that we this shall acheiue,
The Gods declare, you say, and I believe;
Show how I pray. I say, make you a show
To like Alcamenes. Alas you know
It Is hard, quoth she, to seem love that I hate,
Or, but Theagenes, like any Mate.
Yet, since I yield me to the Gods and you,
(Suppose I could so counterfeit) say how
I may come-out of danger, once got in.
To that I answered, care not you a pin:
That leave me. Something, ere woman knows,
She boldly does; but knowing it forestowes.
Comply with Charicles, and be not nice:
He will do nothing without my aduice^
She wept, I left her, met wit Charicles,
So sad, as if his heart had no whit ease;
How now! quoth I; you cause have to be glad;
Your daught'rs well, and why are you so sad?
I dreampt (quoth he) that from Apollo's hand
An Eagle came and snatched my guirle t'a land
I know not how far hence; where shadows were
Me thought in stead of men. When this I hear,
I knew the meaning; but him tell it thus;
(T'auoid suspect of that was meant by us)
Apollo's Eagle signifies that ho,
The God, whose Priest you are, will mindful be
To send her that you wish; and, in few words,
A man excelling men, as Eagle birds.
Now married once, she must your bosom leave,
And, till she give up ghost, vnt' husband cleave.
For that is meant I know by shadow of men,
Whereto she goes at length. To blame you then,
To blame you are, yet are you not the first,
That of the Gods good meaning make the worst.
Wherefore apply we to the better sense,
And make her willing with our conference.
My part is done, and now must you do yours.
How, how, I pray? (quoth he) for yet she loures
(As much as can that face, quoth I) to hear
Alcamenes is her intended Feere:
If they (quoth I) be faln-out, what attones
A woman more than pearl and precious stones?
Such tokens carry you her in his name;
And if it please her not, be mine the blame.
He did as I advised, and brought her est
The jewels all that Queen Persina left
Laid-out with her, and said Alcamenes
In token of his love had sent her these.
She played her part well, and when this I knew,
'Twas time to give Theagenes his Q.
So did, and while I went to sacrifice;
Thus me preventing Phoebus did advise:
Away now strangers call. And some I saw,
But knew not, there according to their Law,
When some what they had offered, merry making,
Carouses filling, emptying, giving, taking.
And these enuite me. There I sat a while,
And ate, and drank: then said I with a smile,
Since your enuitement does me thus embolden,
Pray let me know to whom I am beholden.
We Tyrians are, says one, for Carthage bound,
With wares of Blackmore, and of Indy ground:
To morrow mean we plow the bracky Maine,
If wind thus hold, and all together sayen
To that effect. Then I, yet if you may,
And are content to tarry but a day,
(No more I crave to settle things at Dolph,
And for the way) I Will be your Fare my self.
We will, say they; for with so grave Divine,
We more securely shall pass ore the Brine.
I left them set then all on merry pin,
And each with other dancing Matakin;
(Of some called Anticke, as it well may be,
It so presents old inciuilitee,
With rudely making faces, body wrying;
Now up, now down, on this and that side prying)
And bid my younglings ready make to go
Next day at even. This night it fell out so,
That, ere the second Cock was heard to crow,
A band of Thessall youths, whereof now know
Theagenes was chief, began so to rore,
That all the City waked out of the snore
Of soundest sleep: yet no man durst arise,
Affrighted were they so with hideous cries,
And clattring armor, such as shook the ground;
And made Pernassus hill return the sound
With doubled echo: but amid the noise,
There comes a troop of these unruly boys,
Breakes-ope Chariclia's door with many a stroke,
(Of purpose left so, that it might be broke)
And takes the Lady, little saying nay,
And with her packet carries her away.
The rest the country fly; but he and she,
The loving pair, come hand in hand to me,
Where was appointed: Sane us father cry;
And on her cheeks ran sudden blushing die,
As for a fault. I comfort them, and will
They keep them there, unseen of others, till
I come again, and going was; but she
Fast held my cloak, and said, what! leave you me
With him to keep? O father, do not so;
It Is treason-like: I will not let you go
Before you make him solemnly to swear,
That now and evermore he will forbear
To touch me wantonly, till we be wedde,
And may enjoy a lawful marriage bed:
Agreed and done. Then I to Charicles;
His house in tumult find without appease,
For daughters loss. And what should now be done
They cannot tell, though all unto him run.
For all the beauteous virgin held so dear,
They would revenge the fact, but know not where.
My masters then (quoth I) this sudden fit,
(What?) has it quite bereft you of your wit?
Before the rape of Hellen, or Europe,
A beauteous Lady was of war the scope.
Take arms, and follow this unruly Crew
Of Thessall youths; it is they have wronged you:
And specially that one (friend Charicles)
With whom you made m'acquaint, Theagenes.
So made them bend their force another way,
While we to ship, and on the surges play,
From Delphi safe-conuey'd by this complot:
But what was after done there know I not.
Finis Libri quarti.
THE Fair Ethiopian.
NOw let us rest a while, though (Cnemon) you
Can hold-out well I see. Quoth he, nor now
Should I desire you stay; but that I hear
A noise below; or me deceiues mine ear.
I cannot hear so quick (quoth Calasire)
Or for mine age, or for my set desire
To tell this story. But, me thinks, I see
Our Landlord Nausicles come up; it is he.
What have ye done, Sir? Nausicles repli'de,
Far better than we thought: but looked aside,
And, seeing Cnemon, asked what was the man,
A Greek, quoth Calasire; He Is welcome than,
Quoth Nausicles; and then said Calasire,
But needs we must of your success enquire.
Know now but this, quoth he; that I have found
A better Thisbe than I did propound.
It Is time to rest: and so he went to bed.
But Cnemon lay all night with troubled head,
For name of Thisbe; thought in Gypsiland
The dead revive so soon; and, t'vnderstand
The truth, arose, and groping in the dark,
At length t'a woman's woeful cry does hark.
And thus she said; O wretched I, tha^, out
Of Spoylers hands escaped, now had no doubt
T'attaine my liberty, and death acquit
With presence of my love; yet fail of it,
A slave become again. But O that he
May live, and keep himself from bondage free,
And sometime on his Thisbe think! for so
Now must he call me whe'r he will or no.
These words struck Cnemon in so ghastly fear,
That all in haste he gate to bed, and there
With chattring teeth and quaking legs he lay,
Till Calasiris asked what did him fray.
That wicked Tib (quoth he) whom with mine eyes
I saw lie slain, yet lives, and yonder cries.
But he poor wretch deceived was, and afraid
Of that which known will hold him best apaid;
Or make him laugh until he fret a rib;
For this Chariclia was, and not the Tib.
It thus befell: when in the mazie Den
Thermute and Cnemon left the Lovers; then
They chastely clip and kiss, forgetting day,
Till at the length the man began to say,
Sweet heart, I know it is our most content
To live together still; but since the event
Of men's affairs uncertain is; and we
By some misfortune may disseuer'd be,
(Which Gods forbid) let each a watchword have,
And privy sign to use, as need shall crave.
She liked the motion well, and both agree,
That he should Pythius write, and Pythia she,
On every crosse-way-stone and monument,
Or famous Image, by the way they went,
To right, to left, to what town, where, and when;
That so the sooner they may meet again.
And for some signs, in case by cross or quame
They could nor write, nor speak, he bear a paume,
And she a taper: yet a fearre had he
Received by tuske of wild Bore on his knee*
And she of Jewels ever bore this one:
Her fathers ring with rich Pautarhe stone.
And this of all the confirmation is,
They kiss and cry, and kiss and cry, and kiss:
Among the riches left by thief in Cave,
Although the choice of many there they have;
(Behold consent of either Princely mind)
Th'ill-gotten treasure all they leave behind,
And take but of their own a part, and go,
She with her pack, he with her sheafe and bow.
When to the Lake they came, and were about
To take a boat, they see an armed rout,
With many boats, come rowing toward th'Isle;
And daunted much thereat stood still a while,
Till she for fear began to run aside,
And praid in Cave they might again them hide:
Yet as they went were met withal by some,
Before unseen that ore the Lake were come,
But lo, a fair and beautiful aspect
Will many times a barbarous mind affect.
A cruel hand began to strike, and staid
Amazed at sight of such a beauteous Maid,
Or Goddess so disguised, as then was thought;
And therefore to the Leader be they brought,
As all they found; his name was Mitranes,
Lieutenant unto Lord Orondates;
That had all Egypt in his governing.
Under the mighty Babylonish King.
And he against the Robbers of that Lake,
By Nausicles was hired for Thisbes sake.
And though the subtle Merchant saw full well
This was not she, but did her far excel;
To put a trick upon the Don, he said,
O this is she my Thisbe, my fair Maid;
Embraced and kissed, and whispring told her how,
To save her self, she must be Thisbe now.
He spoke in Greek which she well understood,
And hoping well it might be for her good,
When Muranes her asked what is her name,
Him answered Thisbe: yea the very same,
Said Nausicles, and kissed the Captains hand,
And called him man of fortunate command.
The Soldier puffed with praise, and gulled with name,
Although he wished himself so fair a Dame;
Yet, for reward that he before had took,
To Merchant gave her with repenting look.
Then on Theagenes his eyes he bent,
And said to Babylon he should be sent:
For, for his pers'nage and well featuring,
Well might he wait upon the mighty King.
Then him with conuoy, and with letters sent
TO Orondates, and this was their content.
This Grecian youth is of so comely grace,
That I him thought deserve a better place,
Than under me. I think, like him, not one
This day attends the King of Babylon.
Wherefore (my Lord) him please you thither send,
And both our duties to that God commend.
Now broke the day, and longing Calasire,
With fearful Cnemon, began themselves attire:
Yet half unready go to Nausicles,
And for some further news will hi^ disease;
Who told them all that I know said before;
And how he got a virgin for a whore:
Yea, passing her as much for beautiful,
As does a Goddess pass a common Trull.
Then they began how matter stood conceive,
And prayed they might but see her with his leave.
He calls her in, she muffled does appear,
And looking down; he bids her have good cheer:
She shows her face; at once is seen and sees,
Is known and knows; at Calasiris knees
Falls down and cries, O father! he likewise,
O daughter! Cnemon, O Chariclia! cries:
That Nausicles the while upon them gazed,
And at so strange encounter stood amazed;
Whom Calasiris spoke-to thus; O friend,
Though I not able, God shall thank y'i'th'end.
You save my daughter, you me give the sight,
Wherein of all the world I most delight.
But, O Chariclia, what has thee bereft
Of thy Theagenes, where have him left?
O how this question dampt the royal guirle*
She could not speak, till drops of liquid pearl,
Fell from her Diamond eyes t'asswage her heart;
And then told how their fortune was to part,
As said before. Then they from Nausicles
Desire to hear more of Theagenes.
I can but tell (quoth he) and you but hear;
For you are poor, and it will cost you dear
Him to redeem; the Babylonian
Is covetous, yea more than any man.
Chariclia whispered Calasire i'th'eare,
And said, we have enough about us here;
Him promise what you will. Then Calasire
Said, Wise men have as much as they desire
On just occasion (fearing to detect
Chariclia's offer, lest it breed suspect)
Then tell us what is he that has our friend;
With help of Gods we shall him please, who send
What ere we need: so, when you list (he said)
You can be rich; and thereat smiling staid,
And said again; them will I you believe,
When for your daughter you me ransom give:
You know your Merchants money seek and scan
As much as any Babylonian.
I do, quoth I; but it is no Merchant feat
To grant so soon: you should me make entreat,
For this my daughter. Sir (quoth he) be bold;
Your happiness I would not long withold.
Moreover, now mine offering will I make,
Come you and yours, and pray for me, and take
What ere the Gods do send: O, do not jest,
Quoth Calasire: but on their Godheads rest.
So, when you will, begin, and we shall join;
And you i'th'end shall see we want no coin.
Chariclia t'offring never had been brought
With Merchants daughter, but because she thought*
for her fit time it was the Gods to please,
And pray unto them for Theagenes.
Then go they to the Templ' of Mercury,
The most of-Merchants-honour'd Deity.
When Calasiris th'entrals had beheld,
And saw good fortune bad-with entermeld,
As did his look declare; he thrust his hand,
And took, as'twere from vnd'r a firebrand,
A Jewel rich, and said, O Nausicles,
See what the Gods have given; will this you please,
For this my daughters ransom? 'twas a ring
That sometime wore Hydaspes, Blackmore King.
The circle was fine gold, and silver mist;
The Pale and Aethiopick Amethyst;
As big as Maidens eye, and of a vain
Beyond the best of Britanie or Spain;
And turned about, it sheds a golden stream
On each thing nigh, and from a deeper beam.
And thus engrau'n it had; a shepherds boy,
On hillocke set, there seems to play and toy,
(Such leisure have they) while his sheep, him by,
Some share the tender grass, some basking lie;
As 'twere in Sunshine of that flaming stone,
And some in companies, and some alone.
The wanton Lambs there some start up and leap,
Some all together run upon a heap,
As dansing to the boy, that seems to play
Upon his pipe, and harkning to the lay.
They seem all golden-fleeced by the gleame
All ore them cast from th'Amethysticke beam.
Thus was the ring: Which Nausicles admiring,
Said (Calasiris) 'twas not my desiring
To make you pay so for your guirle, I meant
Her freely give: but since this ring is sent
From Power Divine, and it is not good you say
We such refuse, I take it for to day,
As sent by Mercury my greatest friend
Of all the Gods, whom I serve most auend.
Then took a glass of watercleere, and said,
This (Calasire) vnt'eu'rie Nymph and Maid
That is so clear; and this to them I drink,
Because your daughter such one is, I think.
For lo, no music, nor no dansing she
Among the rest delights-in, but on knee
For her Beloved praying is; that he
May soon and safely meet her; yet have we
Now leisure good to hear, that often had I
Desire to know, your wandering history.
Put-off no longer: Cnemon prayed the same.
Then Calasire, To sacrifice we came
Not telling tales. But since you both desire
To know my roming, to the ship of Tire
I must return; wherein we sailed from Delph,
Theagenes, my daughter, and my self;
Of Tyrian Merchant-venturers a troop;
And merrily we ran, with wind in poope,
That day and night; and all in safety and ease,
With iron share broke up the fallow feas:
The Straight of Calidon we pass ere night,
And of the sharp-point Islands lose the sight.
Next day betime, with wind now turned aslant,
Cast ank'r, and land before the town of Zant;
To winter there: But, for the rude resort
Of Sailors running to and fro the Port,
I thought the ship not safe; nor yet the town,
Left our escape might happily there be known:
And, other harbor seeking, light upon
An aged Fisherman, that on a Stone
Sat mending broken nets: I said, God speed,
Good father; can you tell a man, if need,
Of some good Inn here by? They all to rags
Were broke (quoth he) against some hidden crags.
What Is that to me (quoth I)? you shall do well,
Or me receive yourselfe, or else one tell,
Where else I may be l^dg'd; 'twas not my fault,
Quoth he; Tyrrhenus is not so assault
With blind and doting age; they were my wags,
Who cast in place unknown among the ^^ags.
I then perceive the man was deaf, and cry
In's ear aloud; God speed you (Sir) said I*
And can you help us some good lodging find?
God speed you too (quoth he) and, if your mind
You serve thereto, come soiourne here with me;
Except you many and over ^^tious be.
But three (quoth I) my self and children twain.
No more, but one (quoth he) with me remain:
Mine elder children married with my purse
Are gone: two boys are lest me, with their Nurse:
The mother dead: you shall be welcome to us;
And seem a man that may some pleasure do us.
We come and there full well are entertained;
By day we all together still remained.
At night we laid Chariclia with the nurse;
And glad was she her lodging was no worse.
Alone Theagenes, alone lay I;
And old Tyrrhenus with his youngest fry:
Sit all at board the same, and well we fare,
With fish he got at sea, and with our share
Laid-out on such achates, as marketby
Did every week afford; and pleasantly
So lived we there a while as heart could wish*
And went sometime to foul, sometime to fish.
For the old man was prepared for either sport:
But pleasant times (alas) are over short.
Who long can lie at ease in Fortunes lap?
Mis-hap have once, and (...) mis-hap.
Chariclia's beauty makes tumultua^ie
This very place so mean and solitary.
For he of Tire, that won the ^ythian game,
Now haughty grown by that renowned name,
And more, because we sailed with him in ship,
Her loves, and will not this occasion slip.
With tedious suit he daily beats mine ears;
And that the goods and ship (...) his he swears*
And says his all shall hers be during life,
If I my daughter let him take to wife.
I poverty pretend* yet say that she
Shall for no wealth so far be sent from me.
He says he will her person more account
Than any dowry, though it should amou^t
To many talents; and his kin forsake,
And whither so we will his voyage make,
To dwell with us* I saw his fervent heat
On flat denial might some mischief threat,
And promise that in Egypt once arrived,
It should be done, if well the journey thriu'd*
He thus put-off, a while some rest we have;
But in the neck of this another wave
Begins t'arise: Tyrrhenus near the shore
Me took to walk, and much protesting swore,
For love to me and mine he will reveal
That much concerned us, neither could conceal.
A Pyrat ship (quoth he) beyond the Cape
There lies in wait, your Tyrian hulke to rape.
Look to your self and yours: I thank, and pray
Him tell me how he knew't* But yesterday*
(Quoth he) the Master-Pyrat asked me when
Your ship puts-off; Trachinus was the man.
I say, I know not; but (Sir) why I pray
Demand you this? if be so bold I may.
(They love me, Calasire, I dare you tell;
I bring them victails; for they pay me well;
And poor is house that has not much to spare
For poor, for thief, for waste, and want of care)
I love the Maid (quoth he) your Soiourner,
And mean to set upon them all for her.
To know his whole design then thus I said,
What need you fight with Tyriant for the Maid
That is with me? before she goes abord*
There may you take her never drawing sword.
It Is for your sake (quoth he) that I fores^ow^
For Pirates love their friends: yet further know,
I two things aim at, wife and wealth to win:
I lose at sea, if I at land begin.
Considered well, quoth I; but, for the thing,
I think they will not go until the spring.
So part we: now this villane us intent,
I hope your care and wisdom will prevent.
What did I then? It was my chance to meet
The Tyrian Merchant walking in the street.
He gave occasion, asking my good will,
As heretofore; I tell, not all that ill,
But what I thought was meet* how earnestly
A great man of this country did apply
Himself to get my daughter for his wife:
But I had rather, so you lead your life
With us in Egypt, as you promised;
And for your wealth, that you (my Lord) her wed.
And therefore wish, before our mind be crossed
By force or otherwise, we leave the Coast.
He liked the motion well, and, though too soon
He said it was, yet having light of Moon,
Resolved that night be gone in any sort,
Although he got but int'another Port.
I tell my children, not Tyrrhene a word;
And after twy-light get us all aboard.
Yet by the way our Host it began perceive,
And each of other kindly took our leave.
The Moon kept counsel, blabbed not our flight,
Yet gave us leave to see our way by night.
With armed beak we cut the fomy brees,
Behind the land, beside us fly the trees.
The brother began to quench the sisters light;
And day appearing drove away the night:
The wind that filled our sail now began to stoop,
And Pirates ship descri'd is from the poope
To follow us, and this and that way twine
As if our hulke had towed her with a line.
A man of Zant, that wistly began it mark,
Cryes-out Trachine it is, I know the Bark;
Prepare to fight or yield; he comes apace,
And all this day has had our ship in chuce.
We though becalmed, yet seem with tempest shook,
So stand w'amas'd, and one at other look;
Run up and down, before, behind, beside;
Some put on arms, some under deck them hide;
Some leave the ship, and get into the boat
To make away: Theagenes, full hot
Set on to fight, beseech we both to stay,
And hardly keeps him back Charislia;
Desiring each might either live or dye
In others arms; but on a point think I
That might us help (now knowing 'twas Trachine;
That would not rashly kill or me, or mine)
And took effect. For when the Pyrate gave
Vnt'all men leave, that would their person save,
In single clothes to leave the ship, and go
Aboard the boat: we with the rest do so.
He then Chariclia taking by the hand,
Says, unto you (sweet Lady) this command
No whit belongs, but all is for your sake,
That I this war and voyage undertake.
Then fear you not; but be of hearty cheer;
For all is yours and mine that you see here.
Then she (as wisdom was, observing case)
Of sorrow-damped look recals the grace;
And tisie-smiling said; now Heaven be thankt,
That I among these others am not rankt;
But shall I think indeed you loving be?
Grant this my first request, and keep with me
This same my brother, that my father dear;
For them-without I cannot be of cheer:
So wept, entreated, fell upon her knees
Embracing his; which when the Rouer sees
Therewith delighted, purposely delay'th
The grant a while, and then her raising, says;
Your broth'r I give you, likely man to stead us
In feats of arms; and the old man too may lead us,
Sometime by counsel, which way best to take;
Yet both I grant for your own only sake.
By this the Sun had ran his days careere,
And eu'ning signs of rising wind appear:
That raised a sudden storm; when they in fine,
To spoil our ship, had left their brigandine;
And thus surprised knew not what to do;
For, want of skill is worse storm of the two.
Though little pinnace, whose each rope they knew,
Well could they rule how ere the Brothers blew;
To guide our ship, yet all with trembling hearts,
Are feign to play these unacquainted parts.
Some to the poup, and some run to the prow;
And steer they know not what, they know not how:
Some awkly draw the cords, and some them loose;
And some untie, where they should make a noofe;
Some beat their breasts, and tear their hairie scalps,
To see the sea like Pireneis and Alps.
The wallowing hills now up to Heaven us mount,
Now cast us headlong to the waters fount.
And on the sides of that our floting grot,
Thump, thump, as loud as charge of Engine-shot.
The Pirates bark, with salt seawater drunk,
Her cable frat, and thrice turned round and sunk.
And we no more, than head less Commonweal,
Where all men may with all things entermefle,
And no man will obey, but all command,
In time of greatest danger, like to stand.
Yet shift the Pirates made as long as light
From Heaven appeared, though like to drown at night:
At night as dark as pitch, save enterflashes
Of lighting mixed with fearful thunder-crashes.
Thus then, and next day troubled were the seas,
And they therewith: which gave me time and ease,
To think on our affairs: But aft'r a while,
The tempest over, we safe embock the Nile.
The rest are glad, but we lament the more;
That rather wished be drowned, than come at shore,
In danger still of Pirates proud command,
Who showed his foul intent new come to land.
For making show with sacrifice to please,
And for their safety thank the God of Seas;
To country sends he men with store of coin
For much provision; lands the Tyrian wine;
With goodly Tissue Carpets spreds the tables,
Some on the ground, and some on roules of cables.
And sets on siluer-bowles, and cups of gold:
All for his marriage feast, as he me told.
When (Sir) quoth I, may't please you celebrate
The same with all such complements and state,
As place and time affords; your ship may be
Bride-chamber then, and none there come but she
The Bride her self, to dress and make her fit;
And for the time all others thence a acqiut,
When I have there been first, and taken care
She nothing want that might her well prepare.
He likt th'aduice, and gaue-out straight command
It should be so: Theagenes by the hand
I take, and both unto Chariclia go,
And find her almost overcome with woe.
Then children, said I, this is not the way
T'auoid our present danger; what I say
Mark well and follow. So I both advise,
And ending went to play another prize
With him that was the second of the Crew,
Pelorus called; and said (my son) for you
Good news I have, my daughter loves you well;
If how t'auoid Trachinus you can tell,
And like of her, she will be your wedded wife:
Than marry him sh'had rather lose her life:
But time is short: the cheer he does pretend
For sacrifice, is for that other end.
Well, fear you not, quoth he; I was of mind
To Have moved the same; and could no season find.
But now I know we thus agree in heart,
Trachinus never shall her from me part.
I have a reason will our fellows charm;
A sword as good as his, as strong an arm.
Thus having done, in haste, t'auoid suspect,
I turn to them, and further them direct.
Soon after sit we down, and when I saw
The Pirates well in wine, Pelore I claw
By sleeue, of purpose sitting next his side,
And ask him, have you seen the gallant Bride?
He told me no. Then closely make a flip
(For'tis forbid, quoth I) into the ship:
There shall you see (yet haste, and do but seek;
Lest otherwise take hurt both you and she)
My daughter so attired in gold and pearl,
As might become the Bride of Prince or Earl.
He goes and sees her clad in Delphick pall;
(For that for triumph, or for funeral,
Was then put on) returning more on fire,
Now both with emulation and desire.
And set at board, quoth he, why have not I
That me belongs by Law of Pyracie,
For entering first this hulke? then said Trachine,
The parts yet are not made, nor yours, nor mine,
Nor anies here; nor yet us told have you,
What thing you claim: quoth he, then will I now.
The captive Maid I claim. Trachine repli'de,
I her except, take what you will beside.
Then break y'our Law, quoth he; quoth the other, no.
But on the ground of other Law I go,
Which gives the Captain choice; and for I mean
My wife to make her: this cuts you off clean;
And rest content, or this (and up he rose
With massy pot in hand) shall cross your nose.
Thus I (my fellows, quoth Pelorus than)
Thus shall you be rewarded every man.
And after this (believe me Nausicles)
These men were like the sudden tossed seas:
So all on tumult run they foolish blind,
When wine and anger stirr'd-vp had their mind.
And some with the one, as equal share to make;
And some, for government, with the other take.
But as Trachinus at Pelorus stung,
Pelorus him at heart with dagger stung.
Though he were dead, in his or the others right
Partaking still, the rest continue fight;
Are struck, and strike like mad and drunken fools,
With stones, with clubs, with tables, pots and stools,
I closely stole away, and on a hill,
My self in safety, look on others ill.
Theagenes and his Chariclia
Fought also both, as I them told the way.
With sword in hand at first he took a part,
But help the weaker still, that equal Mart
Might all consume: and she made many groan
With arrows shot from ship at all but one.
And now was left but he and that Pelore
At single combat: she had spent her store;
Or if a shaft remained, what might it boot?
For fear of hitting wrong she durst not shoot;
So near their bodies were, and moving still
At combat close: Theagenes she will,
But cannot help with hand; yet at her charm
Of Courage man, he smote-off Pelors arm.
The blood so sprang out after g^isly stripe,
As water from a broken Condit-pipe.
This made him put the sturdie thief to flight,
And chase him far: what more was done that night,
But that Theagenes returned again,
Of me unseen, and lay among the slain,
I cannot tell; For I continued still,
And durst not stir in dark from off that hill;
Chariclia knows; for on the morn him by
I saw her sit, and him as like to dye.
A troop of thieves them carried both away,
With goods from out the ship. I thought to stay
For fitter time to help them, having scope,
(Whereof, as then, I clean was out of hope)
And now with your good help, good Nausicles,
(The Gods reward you) freed is one of these.
So said, and wept; but Nausicles repli'de,
And said, they shall not the other from you hide:
To morrow will we know of Mitranes,
If he be sent yet vnt' Orondates,
As was designed. Done is this offring-feast,
And Nausicles his daughter with the rest
From out the Temple going are away;
But Calasiris mist Chariclia;
And sought with Cnemon, and at length her found.
Where she to Apollo kneeled on the ground,
His Image feet embracing fast asleep;
And when they waked her she began to weep:
And said she drempt that her Theagenes
Had far to go, and more by land than seas.
They comfort her, and tell her their intent;
And all with Nausicles to lodging went.
Finis Libri quinti.
THE Fair Ethiopian.
THe Princess lay with daught'r of Nausicles,
A fair young maid, yet little took her ease;
And Cnemon thought it long with Calasire,
Before they went Theagenes t'enquire.
They raise their Host ther^ore by break of day,
And him to Mitranes conduct them pray.
Content is he; feign would Chariclia
Then with them go; but they persuade her stay,
Her promising, before they far remove,
To come again, and bring her lookt-for Love.
So left her doubtful, whether to be sad
For their depart, or, for their promise glad.
Now when they near approached the banks of Nile,
There rusht them by a monstrous Crocodile.
A Serpent strongly scaled, head, back, and leg,
And twelve yards long, yet bred but of an egg.
Note when he gapes, his lower chap stands fast,
And th'vpper moves, some five foot long and past.
And this deuourer having fed his fill,
Will suffer Trochilos with slender bill
To pick his teeth, a bird no bigger, then
The little Titmouse, or the Iynny Wren:
Will follow such as run away, and run
From such as follow, both in shade and Sun.
Now these Egyptians used to such a sight,
Were nothing moved; but Cnemon much affright,
Start back, and ready was to run away:
Whereat the Merchant laughed; and Priest began say,
I thought (Sir Cnemon) nothing could you fear
But in the dark, as the other nights Bug-beare.
What Is that (quoth Nausicles)? then Calasire,
To pass the time, and satisfy desire,
Him told how Cnemon took Chariclia
For Thisbe, when at Chemu^is first she lay.
Then Nausicles could laugh no more, but thought
Why name of Thisbe so on Cnemon wrought;
And asked the cause whereof he was to seek,
And so to laughter now prouokt the Greek:
Who said, behold how strange a name is this,
To move my mind so first, and now so (...)
I thought our noble Host had been more stout,
Than now be dampt, who late could others flout.
Ha'done, ha'done (quoth Nausicles) you have
Revenged your self enough: but let me crave;
By all that may to you most pleasing be,
And by the Gods of Hospitalitee;
This name of Thisbe whence it is, and why
You turn't upon me now so meerily.
Then Calasiris, Cnemon, time you see
Requires you satisfy both him and me.
Then let us hear your story from the sourse:
For well is travel eased with discourse.
He yields, and tells them what not many weeks
He told before unto his fellow Greeks.
And how with them acquaint he grew, and friend,
Among the thieves; and of that Thisbes end.
And left out naught that was not, as their own,
To Nausicles and Calasiris known.
It moved the Merchant so, that he full well
Could find in heart the rest of her to tell,
And of himself; confessed and said, it is I
That was that Merchant then of Naucratie;
And brought her out of Greece. Here one they meet
With Nausicles acquaint of Chemmis-street;
Who told them news; that where as Mitranes
Had sent a young man vnt' Orondates,
To serve the great King; he by Thyamis
Now Chief of Bessans intercepted is;
And Mitranes with all his force is gone,
In just revenge their Town to set upon:
So past them by in have. Then Nausicles
Persuades return; and for Theagenes,
Because the journey longer was, to go
Provided better: they determine so,
And coming home, at door Chariclia found
Them looking-for: for, Love is like a hound
That for his master waits. But, when she saw
They brought him not, she began her hair to claw,
And tore asunder Natures finest thread,
And wept, and cried, alas my Love is dead!
What all alone, and, as you went, return?
O tell me quickly, lest I longer mourn
With grief suspended. It Is a courtesy
Not to delay report of misery.
Why do you (then quoth Cnemon) so foretell
The worst, and false? Theagenes is well;
And told her how, and where. O blame her not,
Quoth Calasiris; felt you but a jot
Of love so true, you would her soon excuse:
For such are never content with hearsay-newes:
But think they cannot each from oth'r absent
Without some sad and fearful accident.
When such as you (Sir Cnemon) well I know
So speak of Love as never bent his bow.
Ask Saints how fair in Heaven, for they can tell;
And ask ye Fiends how foul it is in hell.
Then like a father led her in by the hand,
And there not long they either sit or stand;
But Nausicles, to put them out of dump,
And having some thing else therewith to iump,
Prepared a feast that night with cheer and wine,
And made his daughter more than wonted fine.
And toward banquets end them spoke-to thus;
As heretofore so shall be still with us;
My welcome guests (that so you are I call
The Gods to witness, and continue shall,
If please you stay) what I at sea or land
Have any where, it is all at your command;
Not now as guests; but as my dearest friends.
But know my trade on Merchandise depends;
My ship my plow is, and the Southern winds
Me call to Greece: then let me know your minds;
That whether here I leave, or with me lead you,
I may my voyage frame some way to stead you.
The Priest of Memphis, after pause repli'de,
Good Nausicles, have happy wind and tide!
Let all the Gods of Merchandise attend you,
And home with gain full-fraught in safety send you!!
That, stay or go we, do so perfectly
The laws observe of hospitality.
Unwilling we to part from such a friend,
Yet must be gone, you know, and for what end.
Thus much for me, and for Chariclia;
What Cnemon means to do I cannot say.
The Greek, about to speak, with sob is staid;
At last with sighs and bitter weeping said;
O this uncertain state of humane life!
How full of doubt, and variable strife!
Deprived of fathers house, of Country and Town
So dear to me, still rome I up and down?
Not long it is, a plural scarce of weeks,
Since hope I had, with such two noble Greeks,
(Though hard put-to, as I) to find some ease;
And shall I now bereave my self of these?
What shall I do? or which way shall I bend?
Tell (O) that can! I am at my wits-end.
To leave Chariclia, can it but displease,
Before she finde-out her Theagenes?
Or if I seek with her, O who can tell
How, where to find him; when all will be well?
So shall I wander still: what if I crave
Of you, sweet Lady (shall I pardon have?)
To take the occasion given by Nausicles,
And home return, now call us wind and seas?
Though help I little, I willing shall me show;
True servants love will creep wher't cannot go.
She had perceived (and quickly, by your leave,
A Lover can a Lovers mind perceive)
That Cnemon loved the daught'r of Nausicles;
And that it did the father greatly please:
Wherefore she said; I bear you thankful heart,
Sir Cnemon, for your thus far friendly part;
And gladly shall requite it: for the rest,
I see no reason you be further pressed
To follow mine affairs; but mind your own,
And take the occasion now so fitly shown.
My fath'r and I to the end shall hold-out still;
Though no man else assist, the Gods yet will.
This hearing, Nausicles began to pray,
All good success attend Chariclia,
So wise, so gracious! and (Cnemon) now
Vnt' Athens going, never grieve it you,
That Tib you bring not, since you bring the man,
Who took her thence: and if you like it can
As well as I, now well I know your strain,
You shall both house, and land, and wife attain
With dowry great, this same mine only child;
He gave a quick consent thereto, and smil'de;
And took her straight, of purpose ready dressed,
And turned the supper to a marriage feast.
While all the rest attending were the Bride,
The Princess vnt'her chamber slipped aside;
And shut the door, and (as she were distract)
Her raiment tore, and hair about her shakt.
Then wept, lamented, howled, beat her breast,
And said, this danse becomes my marriage feast.
My bedfellow Nausiclia from me taken?
And I now left alone, of all forsaken?
Is Cnemon married now at full hearts ease?
And still in bondage my Theagenes?
At their success (O Gods) I not repine;
Though grieve you make no better his and mine.
But O Theagenes my sweet delight,
And only care, to thee I give this night;
I consecrate these locks, then hair she tore,
And laid them on her bed, and wept them-o're.
So fell asleep with grief and passion tired,
And slept so long as next day was admired.
For Calasiris missing her, before
That wont rise early, knocked hard at her door;
And waked her suddenly with such a din,
That, as she was, she rose and let him in.
But when he saw her hair and vesture rent,
And looks unsettled, ghessing what they meant;
He looked aside, she slipped half into bed;
Then thus he chid her, while she dressed her head.
What mean you (Lady) so your self to vex?
I thought you had in courage past your Sex:
And now me thinks, but only for the name,
(So changed you are) you should not be the same.
Why will you kill your self, and not expect
Your better hopes? O do not so neglect
Theagenes and me! a while she staid,
A blushing while, and modestly then said;
Good father pardon! it is no strange desire,
Nor common cause that sets me thus afire.
You know the love I bear Theagenes,
And his to me; my heart cannot have ease,
For his long absence, most because I fear,
And, wheth'r he live, or dead be, cannot hear.
Fear not, quoth he; for that of him and you
Foretold by th'Oracle must needs be true.
Nor doubt y'of that was told us yesterday,
How he by Thyam carried was away:
But think him safe as with acquainted friend;
And unto Bessa let us go or send,
As both have cause; you for Theagenes,
And I my sons intended war to appease;
But rather go: she paused, and said, your son?
If that be Thyamis, I am undone.
How so? quoth he. You know (quoth she) and where
Theagenes and I his prisoners were.
My seeming beauty, mischievous to me,
So there enflamed your son (if this be he)
That I, to save our liberty and life,
Delaying promise made to be his wife.
My son is not so far run out of way,
Quoth Calasire, but I shall make him stay.
Or if you doubt, invent some how, I pray,
(For cunning you are I see to make delay)
Some how we may enquire, and not be known.
She smiled, and said; Sir, my way or your own,
In jest or earnest, little skilth it now,
Theagenes and I had such a how:
But were prevented e're we could prepare;
And 'twas, in form of beggars clad, to fare.
This (if you please) now (...) put in ure;
For poverty makes all men walk secure,
Be pitti'd, not enui'd; and victailes get,
Which unto travelers are dearest set:
And world so false in now (that by your leave)
Who will not be deceived, must deceive.
But think we not so long what must be wrought,
That we forget to practice that is thought.
He could not choose but at her reason smile.
And all in haste prepares them for that wile
Then there in Chemmis; after parted fair
With Nausicles and his new married pair.
Now on the way, in place convenient,
They change their clothes, and as a begging went,
She Doxy-like, and he, as Patrikoe,
With hundred-patched cloak lent on her bow,
And halted when he met or man or page,
And crookt his shoulders more than had his age;
Or as a blind man poring on the land,
Sometime Chariclia led him by the hand.
He bore her quiver bound-vp at his back,
Like some thing else; and she in slubber'd pack
Her best attire, and jewels; then besmut
Her face, and hardly counterfeits a slut.
When fouler faces use a Painters knacke,
To make them fair, she needs be painted black.
O all that look in glass, and find you fair,
Do nothing that the credit might impair
Of those sored and white, and comely graces;
If beauty fail, with virtue mend your faces.
A show may soon deceive the vulgar eye;
But he that looked on her iudicially,
Might well perceive in black-well-featur'd face,
Of nose, of lip, of cheek, eye, brow, the grace:
As when a cloud is over Diana drawn,
Or Venus looking the row black cobweb lawne.
Was never seen a Maiden comlier,
Nor under duskie cloud so bright a sterre.
Yet Sir (quoth she) you seem one of the Bench;
O, good your Worship, pity a poor young wench:
Good Dame, quoth he; my right hand is me rest,
And no true finger least is on my left.
And she again; once poor, and ever poor;
For wealth is given to none, but had before.
Then he again; yet wind in driving snow,
From higher places often fills up the low.
Thus when between themselves they had protested,
As beggars do, and each at other iested;
To Bessa-ward they trudge; and by Sunset
Had seen the Town; but see what was their let!
Dead bodies many find they laid aground
On heaps, and all of some yet bleeding wound.
And while they viewed the carcasses they meet
An aged woman creeping hands and feet,
And much lamenting over a young man slain;
And t'aske of her they thought it not in vain,
As Calasiris did in Gypsy tongue,
What mischief had so many laid along.
And what was he whom she lamented so.
She said, my son, late forced to battle go
With Thyamis our Chief, against the power
Of Mitranes and all his Persian flower;
He came to sack our Town for one man's sake,
Whom he had sent to Memphis from the Lake:
This man by Thyamis pretending right
Was entercepted; cause of all this fight:
And willb' of more: for slain is Mitranes,
And all his men by ours; Orondates
Will seek revenge; which our men to prevent,
And unawares to take the Foe, have sent
A puissant army Memphis to beleaguer;
And Chief, and all, are thereon set more eager,
To get his right of Priesthood, by none other
Withheld, but even his own, and younger brother,
But you are strangers here full well I see;
And whither go ye? to the town, quoth he.
You cannot safely lodge (quoth she) in town,
So late in time of war, and both vknowne.
Yet if you please (quoth he) us entertain,
We may (I trust) to night well there remain.
The Old woman answered, I have now in hand
An earnest night-worke; if you further stand
Till all be done (and best you keep aloof)
To morrow will I do for your behoof.
Then what she said, he told the Lady in Greek,
And they repose them in a bushie creek.
He slept a while with quiver vnd'r his head,
Chariclia made her packet serve for bed;
But only sat, and slept not on it, for fear;
And unto Philomela's song gave ear:
Till Cynthia rose, and showed (as tales imply)
Her man and bush, or (as Philosophy)
Her spoongie part; though we now understand
It Is nothing else, but face of sea and land,
As 'twere in glass; for in the Torrid Zone,
Betwixt the Moon and the earth thick cloud is none:
She clearly shining, three days days past the full,
Made seen how this old witch heau'd up the skull
Of her dead son, and with her negromancie,
(A vice that Gypsy women greatly fancy)
Him forced to speak yet once more vnt'his mother,
And tell her if her second son, his brother,
Should safe return from war; he told her no,
And that her self should soon receive a blow
For just reward; and specially because
She made the living know the dead-man laws:
For here is a Priest (quoth he) and here is a Maid
That see your pranks: by him may be allaid
The war betwixt his sons, so be it he haste:
And she shall get her Love, and reign. at last.
Chariclia wakt the old man at first, to see
And hear this all, and all interprets he.
And hearing this, the witch, all in a rage,
So plays her Scene upon this deadly stage,
With sword in hand, that had she stranger found,
Sh'had laid them soon among the dead aground.
But as by Moonlight flourishing she lope,
Now here, now there, to hit uncertain scope;
At unawares, upon the sharpest part
Of broken spear, she ran herself to the heart.
So punished was th'abominabl' offense:
So works of darkness have their recompense.
Finis Libri sexti.
THE Fair Ethiopian.
NO sooner began appear the dawning day,
But Calasiris and Chariclia;
With danger past affright, and fearing worse
By loss of time, as prophesied the Corse;
Depart, and trudge to Memphis-ward, and found,
When they came there, a Camp pight on the ground
Before the walls: for in the Town the States
Had fortified themselves and shut their gates,
And let Portcullice down, advertised
Of enemies approach, by some that fled
(As always escape in battle more or less)
From Host of Mitranes overthrown at Besse.
Now therefore Thyamis, to siege addressed,
Thought meet his weary companies to rest;
And wills, for doing good, and shunning harm,
They nigh the wall, and not too nigh disarme.
The Citizens, afeard of them before,
Now began to scorn them, for they were no more:
And would with Archers lest in garrison,
And certain troops of horse, them set upon;
But that a Nobleman, that was full wise,
With age authorized, began thus advise:
Why (Contrymen) although our Gouerner
Be gone far hence about the Negroes werre,
We should, before we weaken any Fort,
Acquaint the great Kings sister, his Consort:
And better will the Soldier make defense
In war begun with her intelligence.
They like th'aduice, and to the Palace run,
And ask Arsace what she please to have done.
She was a Faire-one of Diana's size,
And chaste as Venus, and as Pallas wise,
And minded-high as Juno, for her birth;
That such another was not found on earth.
And true it was, though not in common vent,
Sh'had been the cause of Thyams banishment.
For, when the old Priest of Memphis secretly
Had left his Country for the Prophecy,
Came Thyamis his elder son to place;
That was a tall young man of comely grace:
She likt, and showed him such a fauour-token,
As of a Princess ought not to be spoken:
But he, both young and virtuously disposed,
Not saw, or would not see it: And this disclosed
His brother Petosire to Orondates;
That ( Thyam gone) he might the Priesthood seize:
For thus much of his own he puts thereto,
That Thyamis was bent her will to do.
The Governor, that knew her humor well,
Did soon beleeue't; and yet (the truth to tell)
He durst not vie it; were for want of card,
Or for that awe and reverend regard
He bore the imperial blood; yet took to heart
So, that he made young Thyamis to smart;
And ever threatte him death, until he went,
For fear of worse, to willing banishment.
This heretofore; but now the City comes,
And all defire her leave to beat-vp Drums.
First let me know, quoth she, these enemies
How many, and what they be, and why they rise.
I Will offer parley to them from the wall;
And when I have well marked and gathered all
That may be therein safety done aloof,
Then will I cast the best for our behoof.
They praise her wisdom: yet as turbulents
Run all on heaps upon the battlements:
For out of hand there show her self she would,
And did in throne of purple silk and gould;
Attended on with guilden armed Guard,
And clad as might with Empress be compared:
In Crown of gold, and precious stone, and pearls,
She stately sits her down; and eye she whitles
On every side, and over the Bessan Camp,
And having viewed it well she gave a stamp,
And showed her Herald, sign of parl; he calls
The Leaders forth to hear him from the walls^
Theagenes and Thyamis appear
All armed but head, and this full soon they hear.
A^sace wife of Prince Orondates,
And sist'r of Babels great King Artabes,
Demands what are you? wherefore come you? whence?
Before she sends out force to drive you hence.
Then Thyam answers, telling them his name;
And how his right to get again he came;
Which if he might obtain, he would suppress
his companies, The Inhabitants of Besse:
But if Orondates and Petosire,
Who both him wrong, deny that they require,
He will by these, and others far and wide
Stirred up to war, the Controuers decide.
And Lady Arsace, if she call to mind,
What Petosire has done, no cause shall find
Him to defend against his elder brother;
For he 'twas, only he 'twas, and none other,
That made Orondates suspect her grace,
And thereupon put Thyam out of place.
The Memphits all are moved, and him they knew,
And what he said of the others think is true;
And the elder brothers exile all deplore;
The cause whereof they never heard before.
Arsace self now troubled most of all,
Does sometime anger, sometime love recall.
Her love to Thyamis rekindles fire;
And anger, to revenge on Petosire.
And one thing else distracts her more than these;
Her sight and new love of Theagenes.
The very standers-by may well perceive,
How diverse passions in her shoue and heave.
But when was over this fit of Apoplex,
Thus stout and wisely spoke she past her sex.
You (yet my friends) and all that with you take;
Me thinks not well advised are, here to make
Unequal war: the mighty King my brother,
Although my Lord be gone, has many an other,
To lead his forces here, that may be tri'de,
Enough to compass you on every side:
And pity it is, that you so comely and young,
And (as I guess) of lineage noble sprung,
Should put your selves in danger for these thieues.
And for the common people me it grieves,
To shed their blood: but since on private laws
The matter leanes, and is no public cause;
The same me thinks the Combat should decide:
Then let the brothers only danger bide,
And try their right. The Memphits all assent,
To save their persons from a wars event.
But (see) the Bessans love their Captain so,
They will not hazard him; and all say no:
Until himself entreated and them told,
His brother could not long against him hold;
A man vnexercis'd against a man,
That could in arms as much as any can.
And this she thought-on that the Combat moved,
To plague her hated man, by man she loved;
And void suspect. No sooner it is agreed;
But all for combat ready make with speed,
Save Petosire, that, after great dilates,
At length is hardly thrust out at the gates.
For oth'r his arms than Thyamis does ask;
Theagenes him puts-on gilden caske,
With goodly-shaking crest, and, though no need,
Encourages and wishes him good speed.
I trust (quoth he) to win, but have no will,
Nor never had, my brothers blood to spill,
For all the wrong me done: Yet chance of fight
Uncertain is; and therefore if it light
I overcome, to you my dearest friend,
Of all my happiness I part intend.
And here with me at pleasure live you may,
For I in town shall bear the greatest sway:
But, if it fall (as oftentimes we see
Th'vnlikely come to pass) that slain I be;
Then of the Bessan forces take you charge,
And them commanding may you live at large,
Till better fortune fall. They thus agreed
Do kindly part; and Thyam went with speed
T'encounter Petosire; Theagenes
Sat there beholding, and beheld at ease.
The Ladies eyes are on him still, and his
Upon his friend well-wished Thyamis:
Whose coming Petosiris could not bide;
But back to gate he runs, and Open cri'de.
And then both from the gate, and from the wall,
Keepe-out, receive him not, they cry out all.
He casts his armor off to make him light,
And round about the City takes his flight.
Then Thyam follows, then Theagenes,
To see what issue; both he could with ease
Outrun; but would not, lest be thought it might,
That for his friend he ran, and meant to fight:
Though shield and spear he left, when first he raze;
On which, for him, does still Arsace gaze.
They run the walls about once and again,
And all this while is Petosire not taine;
For anger cannot swifter be than fear;
And Thyam armed ran; yet now with spear
Is like to prick him, charging him to stay,
Except he would be slain upon the way.
Then Calasiris, knowing both his sons,
By that foretold him was, them after runs,
And faster then might well endure his years,
And cries, O Thyamis! O Petosir's!
My sons, what mean you? what now? are you mad?
Respect your father, though as beggar clad.
They know him not, until the cause he spi'de
And cast his staff and beggars cloak aside;
And gravely stood before them face to face;
With long white hair, and old Archbishops grace:
And said behold your father Calasire;
It Is I (my sons) O put away your ire!
They fall down at his knees, and wistly view him
From head to foot, and so full quickly knew him.
And glad they were of his unhoped life;
But sorry that he found them so at strife.
At this the companies upon the wall,
The less they knew, the more they wondered all.
And chiefly for they saw Chariclin,
When Calasiris ran from her away,
Him after fast to run; and when she spi'de
Theagenes a far (for love quick-ey'd
To see the loved had him soon descri'd
By very gesture) now the more her hied;
Him ouertooke, and hung about his neck
In case she was, until he gave her check
And cast her off, not knowing her; but she
Comes-on again, as loath to lose her fee;
And for her boldness got a box oth' ear,
He little thinking who she was, I swear.
Then said she softly; Pythius has forgot;
And showed her taper; then defers he not;
But, struck with beauty shining the row a cloud,
Her took in arms, and often kissed aloud.
Arsace swells thereat, and all admire,
To see the strange event; that Calasire
Who ten years had been absent, came so pat
To stay the Duel 'twixt his sons; and that
Two Lovers should thus unexpected meet.
They pass in order the row the Temple-street,
The Old Priest between his sons led, and the Maid
By her Theagenes: the people staid
Them gazing-on, and all themselves delight,
The younger men to view the gallant Knight,
The Maids the Maid, old men the Priest, and child,
That brothers had, the brothers reconcil'de.
And Thyamis to those of Bessa sent,
With many thanks and noble complement,
An hundred oxen and a thousand sheep,
And Crowns a piece before he went to sleep.
T'encrease the pomp Arsace went in pride
With all her train, and still that young man eyed;
For whose sake only so far came she forth,
And to Isis offered things of greatest worth.
But when she saw him lead Chariclia
With one hand, and with other make her way;
Forth with she leaues-off all solemnity,
And goes to Palace sick of jealousy.
To both his sons now Calasire commends
The Affairs of those his two young Grecian friends:
And when the old man had done his whole devotion,
Unto the people near he makes a motion,
And says h'is old, and well foresees his death,
And to his son that first received breath,
A man not wanting parts for work divine
Of body or mind, the Priesthood does resign.
Then set the Mitr' upon Sir Thyamis head;
And in the morning found was fairly dead.
His time was come. Which him did more oppress,
I cannot tell, or joy or weariness.
Arsace knows it not: for when she came
To Court, her mind was all put out of frame.
To chamber went she, and on her bed she cast her*
For love was wholly now become her master.
She turned from side to side, and deeply sighed;
And now along she lay, then sat upright:
Then down again half naked tumbled she,
And wished Theagenes were there to see.
As wanting something then she calls her Maid,
And sends her back again with nothing said.
And likely was it, that, were she long alone
In such distraction, all her wits had gone.
But Cybel came, her ancient household Bawd,
And thus in word her loue-sicke Lady clawed.
What aile you Madam? Who has hurt my dear
And fairest Nursling? have good heart and cheer.
He lives not that your favor shall refuse,
If please my Sweet-one so my service use,
As oft-to-fore: then tell me, what is the man,
But I by suttl' enticing conquer can?
So said this Hag, and pidling kissed her feet,
And swore as silver white, as Amber sweet.
The praised Peacocke spreds abroad his train,
That else would hide it: now is hit the vain,
And gusheth-out. Good mother then, quoth she;
The peace that made was yesterday, to me
Began a war: wherein, not from a part,
But over all I wounded was to the heart:
The fair young stranger when I first espi'de,
That in the Duel ran by Thyams side;
You cannot choose but note the man, that are
Herein so skilled; he past them all so far.
I did forsooth (quoth she) and, be it spoken
Unto your Ladyship, by certain token;
That impudently fast about him clung
A ragged Trull, though somewhat fair and young.
Tush, fair? replied Arsace then, she paints:
But can a man abide so bold constraines?
More happy she, than I am, at this hour,
That has her got so brave a Paramour.
The Bawd then smoyling said, Ah Dearling mine,
I Will make him cast-off her, I Will make him thine.
Sweet mother Cybling, quoth the Lady then,
And will you do it indeed? (I pray) but when?
Leave that to me, quoth she; and take your rest:
So took the candl' away, and to her nest.
By peep-aday she rose, and well aray'd,
A Groom before her, and behind a Maid,
Vnt' Isis Temple went: and there she spoke
(As often Deuotion's made of sin a cloak)
With one that kept the door, as if she meant
Come offer something that Arsace sent:
Who (as she said) was troubled sore last night
With very fearful dream and grisly sight.
He said, as yet he could not serve her turn;
Now all that keep within the Temple mourn
For Calasiris death, and none let in,
Till after this another week begin.
What shall your strangers then the while (quoth she)?
Our new Archbishop Thyamis (quoth he)
Has order given, and well content they are,
T'another house, without the Close, to fare.
This Hag lays hold on th'opportunitie,
As on the chiefest point of Faulconrie,
And said, good master Sextain well you know
My Lady loves to talk with such as the;
And many noble Greeks has entertained;
Her hospitality was never stained;
Then well of both you may deserve, as thus,
To say that Thyamis them sends vnt' us.
The Sextain little knew the Bawds intent,
But as for good unto the strangers went:
And found them both (as full great cause they had)
For loss of Calasiris weeping-sad.
He cheeres them up, and tells them Thyamis,
As was his fath'r, of them right careful is,
And has prepared them lodgings fairly dight,
Which this good Lady (pointing at the spright)
Will bring them to: and bids no longer stay her,
But, as a mother to them both, obey her.
Well was his meaning, though it ill befell;
As, ill that meant is, often falls-out well.
They condescend; O never had been so gulled
This loving pair, but that they had been dulled
The day before with joy; that night with grief.
And so them stole this man-and-woman-thiefe.
No sooner came they to the Palace gate,
And saw the sumptuous buildings and the state;
Where workmanship excelled manifold
The matter self, though Porphyrite and gold;
But maruell'd much, and troubled were in mind;
For they had thought some private Host to find,
And not belodg'd in Court: too late they thought
To start back now; and further still are brought;
Until they came to Cybels lodging; where
She made them sit, and came and sat them near;
And said, My children well I do perceive,
It Is forth'Arch-Bishops death that you so greiue,
Your reverend friend; it seems he loved you well,
And you him also: but I pray me tell,
Of whence and who you be: of Greece I know,
And well descended, by the grace you show
In lineaments and looks: but of what town
Of Greece you be, and how thus up and down
You come to wander, let me know, I pray?
That to my Lady better may I say
For your behoof: she loves a Greek full well;
And in that language few can her excel
That are not Greeks: and is to strangers all,
Of worthy parts, most noble and hospital.
The royal wife of Prince Orondates,
And sister to the great King Artabes.
You shall not speak it but t'a faithful friend,
And one that will continue yours to the end;
For Greek I am, and Lesbis they me name,
Of that brave Isle and City whence I came.
From place to place a captive did I rome;
But settled here far better than at home
I manage all my Ladies great affairs;
And every stranger first to me repaires.
And I them bring acquainted with her Grace,
Then let me somewhat understand your case.
He then this hearing, unto mind does call
Arsaces wanton glances from the wall;
And thought no good was like to come thereon,
But rather mischief now he fears begone.
And as he began to speak, Chariclia
Him rounds i'th'eare, and says, in that you say
Your sister think-on. Mother (then quoth he)
We Grecian borne, and broth'r and sister be.
Our Parents were by Rouerstak'n away,
And we them seeking worse have fared than they:
Till now of late with holy Calasire
We fell acquaint; and at his kind desire
Resolved to live with him; this is our case;
Now, if you love us, do us but the grace,
To let us lodge in place more solitary;
For from the Court our habits greatly vary.
Then of your Ladies favor make pause,
And trouble not her Highness for our cause.
Glad was the Grammar when she heard they were
A broth'r and sister: that she might not fear
Chariclia would be some impediment
For her to effect Arsaces main intent:
And said, good son, you never would so say,
If you my Lady known had but a day:
So kind to strangers, so compassionate
Vnt' all that suffer cross in there estate:
Though Persian borne she loves the Grecian guise,
And of the two our Nation counts more wise.
Then fear not: you shall best preferment get
That fits a man; your sister shall be set
At board with her, to keep her company,
Both near each other living merrily.
But now your names? Theagenes (quoth he)
My self am called, and Chariclia she.
Then bids she them her straight return expect,
And vnt' her Lady Arsace runs direct.
And told what service sh'had already done,
To bring those young ones, hardly to be won,
Into the Court; where now, without offense,
May enterview be had, and conference.
She gave command'ment first t'another Hag,
That kept her door, no bolt thereof to wag,
For anies coming in, or going out.
What if your son (quoth she)? Keep back the Lout,
Cyb-hag replied. And she no sooner gone,
But comes, and knocks hard at the door, her son.
Then O Theagen, O Chariclia,
Say the one to the other: she does us betray.
And, keeping Lovers chaste and faithful grace,
Embrace, and weep, and kiss* kiss, weep, embrace.
They then the loss of Calasire lament;
And chiefly she, that most time with him spent.
And said; O sweetest name of father quite
Bereft me now! for him that was my right
I never knew, and him that fostered me,
Whose name I bear, how can I hope to see,
That left him so, no better than betrayed?
And this that was my best and surest aid
Lies flat aground embalmed for the beer;
And cruel custom lets me not come near.
Then would she tear her locks, and on them weep,
And said, thy funeral yet thus I keep.
But he held both her hands; then she the more
Fell thus again her Patron to deplore.
My guide in foreign lands, and as I rome
My staff to lean-on; who shall bring me home?
Who shall me lead? Who shall my Parents find?
Put-by my dangers, comfort me so kind,
Now thou art gone? O were my head a fount,
To weep my fill, and yield thee just account!
Mean time Theagenes did inly grieve,
But hid his own, her passion to relieve.
Achamenes, without door all this while,
Against the Porteresse began to moyle.
Yet when he knew his mothers charge, I think,
He said no more; but peept in at a chincke,
And saw them both, and thought, how brave a Swain
Were that, and this a wench, in merry vain;
Who so become their grief! Again he peekes,
And bett'r observes the countenance of these Greeks;
For such he learned they were, and by his mother
Late thither brought; and viewes both one and other;
Till at the last is struck, by th'Archer blind,
In love with her, and began him call to mind;
And thought, is this not he, whom the other day
The Malcontents of Bessa took away
From me and my Conuoy; by Mitranes
Sent, to present him vnt' Orondates?
And should he not (I have it under ring)
From hence be sent to serve the mighty King?
But, not a word, until I know the rest;
And how my Lady likes of this her guest.
Now Cybel came again, and chid her son,
For prying so into that she had done.
As oftentimes the curious are shent,
For searching things to them not pertinent.
He mutt'ring went his way; but thought, this youth
Was kept of-purpose for Arsaces tooth.
As for that wench, it shall go hard, and if
By mothers help I get her not to wife.
The Bawd discerned as soon as she came in,
Though now composed, in what case they had bin.
Why mourn my children so (quoth she) that reason
Have more to laugh, for their good hap this season.
My Lady wills me that you nothing want,
(And here assure you no good cheer is scant)
To morrow must I you to her present:
Then do not still so babishly lament:
But unto cheerfulness now change your face,
And set your selves to please her noble grace.
Good mother pardon, quoth Theagenes;
Since death of friend we cannot find that ease.
These are but toys, quoth she; a man thus old
As Calasiris, ripe was for the mould.
Now by this one thing all things may y'attain;
(Wealth, honor, pleasure) please my Ladies vain.
And I shall show you fittest time, and how
That she commands must be performed by you.
An haughty sprite has she, as come of Kings;
And hereto somewhat youth and beauty brings:
To be neglected highly will she scorn.
This more him struck than all was said beforne,
As filthy stuff implying. Now there came
Some gallant Eunuchs from this haughty Dame,
With best reuersions of her Princely table
Served all in massy gold incomparable.
Which she, they said, these strangers t'honour, sent;
And set before them, and away so went.
The Lovers eat thereof, but more for fashion,
Than of their own desire or inclination;
Who rather wished for meaner cheer to pay:
This had at supper, this had every day.
At last these waiters come to call away
Theagenes unto their Lady, and say;
Thrice happy you, our Lady for you sends;
Enjoy the bliss that few men else attends.
He paused a while, and rose, and asked the Groom;
Must I alone, or with my sister come?
Alone, quoth he: for now she does converse,
In stately wise among the Lords of Perse.
Another time your sister shall be called
Among the Ladies: he thereat appalled,
Lent down and softly said unto his Love,
I like not this: but wish it well may prove.
She answered softly, keeping well the close,
It Is best you do not flatly at first oppose:
And so he went. They taught him by the way,
Who need no teaching, what to do and say:
And when he came her Stateliness before,
They willed him, yet he would not her adore;
But bolt-vpright salutes her with this verse;
All-haile ARSACE, royal blood of Perse.
The Persian Courtiers murmured at the Greek,
Who durst so boldly to their Lady speak
Without adoring her; she did but smile,
And said my Lords, when he has seen a while
The state of Persian Court, he will do more,
Than with an outward complement adore:
So saying moved her Coronet upon it,
As Persian Queens in giving thanks are wont.
And further said, you are welcome gentle guest;
But ask, and have, if ought you be distressed:
So sent him back with favorable sign
To th'Eunuchs made; whereto they all incline,
And lead him down with stately pomp of Guard.
Achaemenes him met, and on him star'd,
To view him better now in open light;
And knew him better now at second sight:
Suspects the cause, and was therewith offended;
But mum, quoth he; few words are soon amended.
That night the Lady sent not only joints
Of dainty meat, but goodly counter-points,
And suits of hangings wrought in Lyde and Tire,
With purle and twist of gold and silver wyre,
To sundrie-colour'd silk, Gem-stone and pearl;
A boy for him, and for his sist'r a guerle:
Then by themselves, to put-off irksome thought,
A while they look what every piece had wrought.
I pass the rest; at one Chariclia gazed
Remarkably, and stood thereat amazed:
How now (quoth he) whereat so looks my Dear?
With that she deeply sighed, and said, lo here,
Lo even among my fathers enemies
Is better known his daughters miseries
Than to himself; behold a crowned pair
Of Black-ones here set high on royal chair;
The Queen is great, as cunning hand and head
Has well set-out, and yonder laid abed
With child her-by; as far unlike them both,
As snow to Ieat: behold and yonder go'th
With child in arm the wise Sisimithres,
As Calasiris heard of Charicles,
And told it me: alas, alas the loss
Of such a guide is now our greatest cross:
Yet even in Egypt (howsoever we speed)
Is seen by this that virtue has her meed.
Then Cyb came-in; and yet she durst not push
At what was meant: but goes about the bush.
She magnifies her Ladies great good will
To him and her; and much commends her still,
For beauty excelling any Persian Queen,
Yea beauty and parts as well unseen as seen;
To gallant youths most amiable and kind;
And so she tries him, how to lust inclin'de.
The virtuous Knight though seeing would not see
Whereat she shot; yet many thanks gave he
TO Arsace for her kindness showed the Greeks:
But Cybel knew she thought her hours weeks,
And promise would expect: and now no more
Can be put-off, as had been heretofore,
With idle excuse; as that the youth's afraid;
Or some mishap their forward purpose staid:
A sennight's past, and almost every day
Is called, and made-of much, Chariclia
For brothers sake; that now the Bawd is feign,
Against her will, thus speak the matter plain;
My Lady loves you (Sir) I know you see it:
When will you leave this sour, and taste the sweet?
No danger is there* for her husband's gone;
And none shall know it but I: Wife have you none,
Nor other love; though many not far hence
I know, that would with such a bond dispense
In case the like, and scruple never make
Both wealth and honor with delight to take.
A meaner woman, when she loves a man,
And is not loved, by all the means she can
Will seek revenge: can royal blood of Perse
Endure it, think you? call to mind your verse.
Behold how many men at arms attend her,
To guard her friends, and punish those offend her.
But you, but one, a stranger, friendlesse, weak.
At last she praid Chariclia for her speak;
And said, sweet heart, it will be good for you*
My Lady will you favor more than now,
Enrich, advance, and set you at her board,
And highly marry to some Persian Lord.
Chariclia looked askew at her, and said;
I wish the nobl' Arsace bett'r apaid;
And, if not otherwise, 'twere good that he
Her gave content, so safely might it be:
And, lest it hurti'th'end both him and her,
From knowledge kept of th'absent Gouerner,
Who sees far-off. Hereat the Gammer skips,
Embraces her, and lays her on the lips;
And says (Good daught'r) I thank you for this grace:
Becomes a woman tend'r a woman's case,
And sister brothers: but the coast is clear
All round about, and nothing need you fear.
Forbear, and let us think upon it, quoth he;
So forth went Cybel, and Chariclia she
Said, O (Theagenes) it is hard success,
This happiness in show, in deed distress!
But wisdom bids make use of what we find
To save the maine: and so if be your mind,
Content am I. But if you think it gross,
As out of doubt; yet set not all on loss;
Delude her with fair promises a while;
For time may help; to the end she bring no vile
Disgrace on us: and yet I pray take heed,
Lest often promising you do it indeed.
He smiled, and said, for no adversity
Will women leave their fault of jealousy.
Thing ill to do should not be said: and know,
Of such a mind I cannot make a show.
But, us to rid of further suit, the scope
And way is, quite to put her out of hope.
Then present mischief must upon us fall,
Prepare you for it, quoth she; and therewithal
Comes Cybel in, late having comforted
The loue-sicke Lady, left yet on her bed.
This Gammar Bawd, this all-enticing spright,
Yet lets Theagenes alone to night;
And labors what she can Chariclia
To help her suit, as they together lay.
But in the morning sets on him again,
And prays him put her Mistress out of pain,
If yet he be resolved: he flat denies her;
And she again unto Arsace hies her,
With sad report. The Lady gave her check
In such a sort, as near had broke her neck
Thrown down the stairs: her self, both heart and head
Now like to burst with grief, rowles on her bed;
And all to tears her cloths, her hair, her breast;
Nor all that day could take a minutes rest.
The Bawd no sooner left the Nurserie,
But meets her son, who saw her sadly cry;
And asked the cause thus of her sudden damp;
What ailes Arsace? What news from the camp?
Has Lord Orondates received a blow,
Or lost the field? good mother let me know!
And instant is to learn the reason why;
Nor will her leave, though she would put him by.
Then him she conjured, and by hand him took
And led him forth aside t'a secret nooke:
And said, My son; this unto none I would,
But unto thee, mine only child, have told;
Our Lady loves the Grecian here; and thence
Come all her favors and benevolence.
The vain and foolish youth will not comply,
Do what we can, her mind to satisfy.
Which her distracteth in so high degree,
I think 'twill make her kill her self and me.
Then help us son, if thou know wherewithal,
Or else prepare for mothers funeral.
What shall the man have (quoth he) that procures
To be fulfilled my Ladies mind and yours?
Ask what thou will, quoth she; Cup Bearer late
I made thee, and daily can increase thy state.
Then he; I thought at first it would be so;
But held my peace to see how game would go.
I Will work my Ladies will, or lose my life,
If I may have that Greek wench to my wife;
And ask no more: for (mother) I so love her,
That live I cannot long, except I prove her.
Away with honor, and away with pelf;
And let Arsace judge me by her self.
Why son (quoth she) of this make you no doubt;
I think my self can well nigh bring't about;
Bed-fellowes are we: by some trick or gin,
Not now to seek, I quickly shall her win.
But how can you so bring about this gear?
A word not I (quoth he) until she swear.
And mother deal not you, in Greek, nor French,
Nor any language, with my dainty wench;
Lest hurt you do: for I already find
She looks aloft, and bears a haughty mind.
But let my Lady assure her self I will,
On that condition, all her mind fulfill.
With this Dame Cybel vnt' Arsace runs,
And tells her this fair promise of her sons:
Let call him in, quoth she; except you feign,
And, as before, will me delude again.
Achaemenes comes-in, and him t'assure,
The Lady sweates, if he her love procure,
He shall Theagens sister take to wife:
Then here (quoth he) shall ended be the strife.
The man your slave is, and he must obey:
How so (quoth she)? I had him the other day
In charge, quoth he, as sent from Mitranes
Unto your husband Lord Orondates.
And took he was from me by strong impresse
Of Thyamis and Malcontents of Besse.
Whom if you ask, he can it not deny:
And yet a much more pregnant proof have I;
My Captains letters firm and under seal,
Which (here behold) will all the case reveal;
And how he should to Babylon be sent.
This rude relation gave her great content.
She makes no more ado, but straight bids call
Her learned Council to the Judgment hall;
And there on lofty Throne she stately bore her;
And willed Theagenes be brought before her:
He comes, and ( Achaemen him standing by)
Know you that man (quoth he)? she answered, I.
And were you captive left unto his charge?
Confessed it too: Then how (quoth she) at large?
By Thyamis, quoth he. Then she, my slave
You are, and please me, or no mercy crave.
And of your sister thus I do dispose;
She shall be wife to him that did disclose
This first to me; my servant Achamen,
So well deserving every where and when.
As for solemnities and marriage-day,
When things be fit, no longer shall we stay.
It struck Theagenes to the heart: yet he
Made answer thus; Although our fortune be
To serve, freeborn, and of no parent base,
Yet herein may we bett'r account our case;
And frownig fortunes bad intent convince;
To serve so brave and gracious a Prince,
That will be pleased do justice; which we crave:
My sister yet nor captive is nor slave.
Well (quoth Arsace) let him be brought up
Among the slaves that wait upon our Cup;
And Achaemen him teach in cu'rie thing,
That may him fit to serve the mighty King.
So forth they went; Theagenes distressed
In mind, and thinking what to do were best;
Achaemenes, to have him at his beck,
Insultingly, and thus began him check:
Ah ha, Sir youth, you thought your self so free,
As no man else; now must you wait on me.
I Will make you bend, that bear your head so high,
Or knock y'about the sconce. Authority
In base men's hands is never well employed.
Arsace then commands the rest avoid;
And thus to Cybel says; now all excuse
Is taken away: this proud boy, for the abuse
Me done to-fore, shall well and surely pay
(You tell him so) except he soon obey;
Which if he do, then will I set him free,
And honor add, and wealth to libertee.
She tells Theagenes the Ladies mind,
And of her own some reasons more does find
Him to persuade, he craves to pause that day,
And talks alone first with Chariclia*
Then says (my Dear) now are we clean undone:
I must obey before the morrow Sun
Has ran his course; or suffer servitude,
Yea both of us, among this people rude:
With all disgrace that on the kept-in strict
May scorn invent, or barbarism inflict.
This could I bear; but that, far worse than this,
I never shall; though past her promise is;
That Achaemen (forsooth) should marry thee:
While I have life and sword, it shall not be.
Necessities are subtle Councellers:
I have a trick. Then thus with Cyb conferr's.
I am resolved: go tell her now you Krone,
Alone-I wish to talk with her-alone.
She, glad he was so bold with her, as sign
Of yielding mind, her Lady told; in fine,
That night he sent-for was, and softly led
In dark by Cyb, when all were gone to bed,
But Lady her self and these: and when they came
Within the chamber door, the little flame,
That there was left, she takes, and would away.
Nay (Madame, quoth he) let kind Cybel stay;
For she is no blab. Then Lady took by the hand.
And said, thus long fore-slow'd I your command,
(Dear Lady and Mistress) that I might obey
With more security both night and day.
And, now good fortune me declares your slave,
More willing am I you command and have.
But (O!) this one thing grant me first I pray,
Renounce your promise of Chariclia
Vnt' Achamen (you shall her much disparage
(Such is her birth) by making such a marriage)
Or else, I swear (befall what can befall)
At your command I will do naught at all.
For ere I live to see her suffer force,
You shall me see a selfe-dead-wounded corse.
Arsace then; Why think not (Sir) that I,
Who give my self, can ought to you deny:
But I have sworn before, and by my life,
Your sister shall be Achaemen his wife.
Well it is no worse, replied Theagenes;
Him give my sister (Lady) when you please:
For sister none have I; and, on my life
This is my spouse, and even as good as wife.
For further proof, appoint the day, and we
Shall gladly with your favor married be;
Which broth'r and sister cannot. This to hear
The loue-sicke Lady touched was very near:
Yet said, we grant. Then I Will do your command
When that is undone, quoth he; so took in hand
Her hand to kiss: but she it backward slips,
And bows her down, and lays him lips to lips.
Not kissing he, but kissed forthwith arose,
And with her leave for that time, out he goes;
And tells Chariclia what was done: but she
Scarce heard the last without some jealousy.
This one thing done (quoth he) prevents the fall
Of many mischiefs on our heads; and shall
Achaemenes provoke his case deplore,
And set this house forthwith in great uproar.
For Cyb will tell her son; and for that cause,
When forth she would of chamb'r, I made her pause:
And to the intent she might a witness be
Of what there past, and of my love to thee.
For though it well suffice the guiltless breast,
To know his own integrity and rest
Upon the Gods: yet unto men we ought,
With whom we live, by deed declare our thought.
And said again, be sure Achaemenes
Is like to lay some plot, that will disease
Arsace self; a mischief minding knave,
Her discontent and disappointed slave;
Who knows her life, and leaving false invent,
May work revenge on matters evident.
Exhorts her therefore courage have, and hope
That something will befall to fit their scope.
The next day comes Achaemenes to call
Him forth to wait upon the Lady in hall;
And brings a Persian suit which she him sent,
Laid all with gold, and pearly Passement;
This he, with greater state her cups to fill,
Must now put-on, though much against his will.
And when the Clown would teach the Gentleman
Give wine, he said, it needed not, and ran
Before his mast'r; and neatly did it skinke,
And with a comely grace her gave to drink.
She drank more love than wine, beholding still
Her waiters face, and had not yet her fill;
But left a little, through her wanton skill,
For him to drink; though he had to it no will.
When feast was done, he prays the Lady straight
He might not wear that robe, but if he wait.
She grants, he shifts him; and, for then, they part.
Achaemenes yet, sorely pricked at heart
With envy, twits him for his bold attempt,
And says, all were your Nouesie exempt
From check at first, yet if you keep that guise,
You shall offend: I friendly you advise;
As one that shall, if Ladies hold their saw,
Ere long become your loving broth'r in law.
Theagenes held down his head, and said
No word thereto: but the other ill-apaid
Complains his mother-to, that this new Lad
Of Lady Arsace greater favors had
Than he himself; and, that which grieves him most,
With bold presumption has her cup engrost;
To me no duty yields, no thank to me,
Who taught him all this skill; and yet if she
Had favored him without my plain disgrace,
It would not grieve me so to leave the place;
Who furthered have her purpose, and concealed
That long ere this had better been revealed:
But time will come. Now (moth'r) on bed or bench,
Where lies, how does my dainty Grecian wench?
My love, my spouse; feign would I see her snout:
(Think this a phrase that fits a clownish lout)
The sight of her perhaps will ease the pang
Of wound received from Angers rustie fang.
Why son (quoth she) while you at shadows rap,
You lose the maine: It must not not be your hap
To marry her you mean. Why so (quoth he)?
My fellow-seruant? you are deceived, quoth she.
Son, in the Sun the man that walks shall burn:
This, this, have we for serving still her turn;
Preferring still her lust before our lives.
A new-come slave, that should be kept in gyues,
But once beheld, has made her break her oath,
And unto him thy promised betroath:
He says no sister sh'is, but his true love,
And that by marriage ready is to prove.
And has Arsace promised it (quoth he)?
I present was and heard her so, quoth she;
And very few days hence will celebrate
Their marriage feast, with great resort and state:
But promises she will for thee provide
Another wife as good, what ere betide.
Betide what will, quoth he; (and clapped his paws)
If any right there be, or care of Laws,
Or men can women rule: good mother keep
It off a while, and I shall make them weep
All ere the marriage-day. If any ask
For me, them tell that I have got a laske;
And keep within doors at your Country Farm;
Then thus he mumbled as it were a charm.
TO Arsace rude before, now finely bows;
His sister late, must now be called his spouse.
Who sees not this devised to put me by?
What if he kiss her, if with her he lie?
(And the one I Am well assured-of; he kissed her)
Are these enough to prove her not his sister?
Go to (ye fool) quoth she; be it false or true,
Against my Ladies purpose stir not you.
Or wise, or fool, quoth he; What wise has known
Another case, as does a fool his own?
Do what they can, I will not so be gulled:
Nor will the Gods an oath be disanull'd.
Thus Anger, Love, with Jealousy and Fail,
(Which might against the wisest man prevail)
Him sets a-rage; and, what he first bethought,
Without consideration will have wrought.
He takes th'Armenian Courser kept at ease,
For the only pleasure of Orondates,
And on him flies over Aegypts fruitful glebes,
To tell his Lord at hundred-gated Thebes;
There now r'enforcing for the war began
Against the white-tooth'd Ethiopian.
Finis Libri septimi.
THE Fair Ethiopian.
WHen claim is justly made in quiet passage,
And no just answer given to nobl' Embassage;
It matters not, if Kings obtain their right
Against an Enemy, by force of slight.
So when Hydaspes by a warlike wile,
Pretending treaty, got his Mine of Phile;
A Town whereon th'Outlawes of Egypt pressed,
That was before by th'Aethiop possessed;
And stood at th'vpper Cataracts of Nile,
From Elpentine and Sien thirteen mile;
The Persian, driu'n in haste to muster men,
Was full of care, and busy about it, when
Achaemenes came in; yet said, What wind
Has set you thus unlooked for here? the Hind,
I Will tell my Lord in private; and, when all
The rest were gone, declares the criminal:
What Grecian youth was sent by Mitranes,
To serve the King, if so his Lordship please;
And how by Thyam intercept, and how
In love with him was fallen Arsace now;
Had brought him to the Palace, entertained him,
And though he thought, sh'had not as yet constrained him;
(Because the modest youth resists her still,
And will not condescend unto her will)
Yet lest more hurt be done, as may full well
In tract of time, he came his Lord to tell,
And do the duty longing to his trust.
This moved his anger; the other moved his lust,
When Grecian wench he praised, and said she past
The fairest now on earth, from first to last.
Of her so spoke, as hoping, when his Lord
Had done, he might her get to bed and board;
For just reward of servant diligent,
In this revealing ere it further went.
The twice-enflamed Lord, to lose no time,
An Eunuch sends forthwith, of all the prime,
With fifty horse to Memphis-ward that day,
To fetch the Grecian Captives both away;
And letters by him; vnt' Arsace these:
This straightly thee commands Orondates;
The Grecian broth'r and sister send m'away;
By name Theagen and Chariclia;
To send the King: for captive his they be,
And fit to serve The Imperial Maiestee.
If you them send not willingly, they must
Be taken by force: thus Achaemen I trust.
And these, to th'Eunuch chief at Memphis Court,
Euphrates called; I hear of you report,
Which you shall answ'r another time; to day
Send us Theagen and Chariclia,
By Bagoas, and, whether will or no
Arsace, send them: or we let you know,
We give command you self with all disgrace,
Be brought in bonds, deprived of your place.
These under seal he gave, to bring them down
With more assurance by th'assisting Town.
To Memphis th'Eunuch, and Orondates
To war, and takes with him Achaemenes;
On whom he sets a priute watch beside,
To keep him safe until the truth be trt'de:
For, wanting proof, he wisely thought not good
Believe a tale defaming Royal Blood.
Meane-while at Memphis see what fallen is out:
When Thyamis with all the Priests devout,
Had ended Calasiris funeral,
And of the Priesthood had his full install;
That well he might, now after week of pause,
Converse with strangers, by their Cloyster-lawes:
The two young Greeks he quickly calls to mind,
And earnestly them casts-about to find.
At length he learnes they in the Palace kept,
And for their sake straight vnt' Arsace stepped:
And asked her for them, as his friends, and such
As, to provide for, does him nearly touch,
By fathers will; and thankt her for the grace
Sh'imparted them this mourning enterspace,
That barred him hitherto; and now it is over,
Praid that he might their company recover.
But she replies, I marvel (Thyamis)
Since our estate so well provided is,
And since out entertainment you commend;
You seem to doubt it will not hold to the end,
Not so, quoth he; for well I know, that here
Your Ladyship maintains more dainty cheer
Than is with us; and better may they live;
Such royal entertainment wont you give:
But they well-borne, now ending pilgrimage,
Are homeward bound to see their parentage.
My self some reason have, and, for my father,
Provide them would of all things much the rather.
It Is well (quoth she) that, anger laid aside,
You will the point of equity abide;
Which more is always on Commanders side,
Than his that has but barely to provide.
Have you command, quoth he? Quoth she, I have;
By Law of Arms that makes a Captive slave.
He saw she meant th'exploit of Mitranes,
Who took them both, set-on by Nausicles
At th'outlaw Fen, and therefore meekly said,
No war (good Lady) now; but all is a paid
With peace on either side. Peace sets free,
All that in time of war captiued be.
This is the royal Law of Arms; and all
That this oppose are thought tyrannical.
Besides (Arsace) let me tell you true,
It Is no ways honourabl' or good for you,
Such youth, so strange, with so perverse a will,
To say and mean you must imprison still.
This madded her (as wantons of that age,
Concealed blush; but manifested rage)
And, thinking Thyamis conceived the truth
Of her enclining to the Grecian youth,
She said, I care not for your Priesthood I;
Perhaps your self full dear yet shall abuy
The death of Mitranes: and, as forthese,
I will reserve them for Orondates.
In spite of Rhet'ricke and your lawful bands,
It shall be done that Majesty commands.
The King shall have them; for his slaves they be;
And, as for you, be gone. So parted he,
Imploring help divine: and thought to raise
The City upon her, making known her ways.
But she to chamber straight, and must advise
With Gammer Cyb: In these perplexities,
What shall I do (quoth she)? I cannot slake
This siame of love, nor him more yielding make:
But rather worse he seems; that heretofore
With some hope fed me, promising still more;
He flatly now denies, as something heard,
Of Achaemen, that I am much afeard.
But let him be believed, or not believed,
If vnt' Orondates I show me grieved,
And flattring weep; all were he never so rough,
It makes him mild; I shall do well enough.
But here is the mischief, that before I see
My mind fulfilled, prevented shall I be,
With tale him could, perhaps be made to die
Before he hear me speak, or see me cry.
Wherefore use all your skill; and cast about
With what device you can to help me out.
Or, if my self to kill I do not care,
Assure thy self I will not others spare:
And thou art like be first for this good deed
Of Achaemen thy son (ill mote he speed!)
And thou were privy to it, or I mistake.
Good Madam (quoth she) better reckoning make
Of both your servants; and take heart unto you;
Or else this care will utterly undo you.
Too mild you are, and flatter, not command
Theagenes your slave: at former hand
'Twas not amiss, reputing him a boy;
But now he stands a tip-toe, proudly coy
Against his loving Lady, let him know
He shall be forced with many a stripe, and blow,
And other torments to perform your will;
Then do not flatter so and please him still.
It Is right (quoth she) you say: but how can I,
That love him thus, endure his misery?
O Madam, you are too pitiful, quoth she;
And cannot speed while thus affect you be,
Not weighing well, how, aft'r a little pain,
Both he and you shall have a merry vain.
Nor need you see it: but let Euphrates lay
Some small correction on him every day,
Till he relent; she likes her suttletee.
To hear a thing, so moves not, as to see.
And love, when once it grows so desperate,
Can be content, that loved was to hate,
And venge repulse. Commandment then she gave;
Euphrates should torment him like a slave,
As for some fault in waiting. Eunuchs all
Are given to jealousy; and he the more
Theagenes afflicts; for that before
He well observed, and all the signs had seen
Of love him-to that showed the wanton Queen:
With knottie whips he tears his tender skin,
While manacles and shackles hold him in:
With hung'r and thirst him pinches, and no light
By day him shows; nor lets him rest at night.
Not so Arsace meant, yet worse than so
Did Gammer Cyb pretend her mind to know:
For none but she came there; though with pretense
To bring him meat, 'twas for intelligence.
And when she saw him so maintain the field
Against her plot, and by no means would yield;
The more his body is beaten down, the more
His mind was raised with chaster love to soar:
And thought, if this Chariclia did but know,
It took away the pain of every blow;
And cried in torment either night or day,
My love, my light, my life Chariclia:
When this the Gammer heard and saw, she thought
This Virgin living all their plot was naught:
And now she fears, if by Achaemenes
(As like it was) be told Orondates,
Lest she be soundly paid for all; and left
Arsace kill her self; wherefore the beast
Is all on killing set now, to remove
What ever hindered her sick Ladies love;
To bar intelligence, to save her hide;
And one day to her Lady thus she cri'de;
Madam, we work in vain as long as she,
On whom builds all his hope this stubborn he
Is suffered still to live: but, were she gone,
We should do well enough with him alone,
The louesicke Lady on this laid present hold,
In ang'r and jealousy for that was told;
You tell me true, quoth she, and I ere night
Will order take she stand not in my light.
But how (quoth Cybel)? By the Persian Laws
You may not kill, but show and prove the cause;
Which asks time to plot: but I Will to day,
If you think good, her rid quite out of way,
By draught of poys'n: it likes Arsace well;
About-it goes this Chamberlain of Hell.
She found Chariclia weeping bitterly,
And, more than so, devising how to dye:
For now she began suspect the cruel case
Theagenes was in; that all space
Came not at her: though Cybel feigned excuse,
And said he was restrained for some abuse,
Or little fault in service: but by my
Most earnest suit was dealt with graciously,
And shall be still, and out of doubt ere night
At liberty: therefore plucke-vp your sprite,
And do not thus with mourning pine away;
My Lady makes her marriage feast to day.
Refresh your self; that when your Lover comes,
You may with joy receive him and the Grooms.
Behold some dainties have I brought you here;
Come, let us fall-to, it is of my Ladies cheer.
You use (quoth she) so much me to deceive,
That, what you say, I hardly can believe.
Th'equiuocating witch devoutly swears
She should to day be rid of all her cares.
So down they sit and eat, and less in fear
Chariclia now, for that she heard her swear,
And hope of that she promised. What we wish
We soon believe. Then ate they flesh and fish,
And other dainties; Aura gives the cup,
Made ready for Chariclia to sup,
To Cybel-selfe; she drinks it off mistook,
And felt it straight, and cast a cruel look
Upon her Maid. I wish there might vnt' all,
That go about such wickedness, befall
The like mistake! the poison was so strong
Prepared for youth; that soon it laid along
That aged witch. Yet she amids her maine
Convulsing, swelling, staring, twitching pain,
While belly bursts, and sinews crack, and shrink,
Declares a mind more poisonous than the drink.
For sign she made, to some then standing-by,
As if Chariclia made her so to dye;
Poor innocent, amas'd at such a stound,
And often attempting her to raise from ground.
But help of man or woman littl'auailes,
When poison strong the vital part assailes.
Her skin was black, and out start both her eyes,
And with her mouth awry there dead she lies.
The guiltless Virgin, never used to bands,
But silk, vnti'de and ti'de with softest hands,
In case she was is rapt from off the ground,
And with rough cord to Arsace carried bound.
The jealous Lady threatens with excess
Of pain to force her, but she would confess
Her poys'ning Cybel. (Mark what innocence
Can make one do, and guiltless conscience!)
She came not drooping; but with cheerful grace
Of Princely courage (Fear attends the base)
And, glad to see, that, where through grief she thought
To kill her self, it should by them be wrought,
Said, goodly Princess, if Theagenes
Be yet alive, then (set your heart at ease)
I did it not: but, if by your design
He Is made away, the deed was only mine:
I flue your Nurse, that has so well you taught,
And in these honorable ways vp-brought,
Come take revenge, you cannot better please
Your refractorie man Theagenes.
O noble he, that could so well withstand
So wicked purpose and so cruel hand!
With this enraged, the lust-sicke Lady spent
Some blows on her, and presently her sent
Bound as she was t'her chief Eunuch Euphrate;
There to behold her lovers like estate;
And safe be kept, until the morning come,
When hear she should the Judges deadly doom.
And as she is led away that Aura came,
Dame Cybels Maid, and lowdly began exclame;
Alas poor innocent! the standers-by
Constrain her plainly speak; she said, 'twas I
The poisoned cup mistook, and gave the same,
Which unto this I should, unto my Dame.
TO Arsace carried, there she says the like:
The raging Lady was about to strike,
Yet held, and said, this also had conspired
My Nurses death, thereto by the other hired:
Away with her, away with her, and let her
Be safely kept in manacle and fetter
To Abide the doom. Then for the Judges sent,
And next day showed the cause of their convent.
She cried my Nurse, alas my Nurse is gone;
Yea poisoned, poisoned, by this wretched one,
Whom I received with all humanity;
(My Lords, you know) and yet this thank have I.
And sobbing, sighing, weeping, wringing hand,
(Such women have their tears at their command)
She said what could be said in such a mood;
And yet Chariclia made her saying good.
Nay more, confessed she would Arsace self,
That wicked wretch, that lust-sicke wanton Else
Have made away; but that she was prevented:
And that she mist her purpose much lamented.
Although, in truth, she never had such a thought,
But, misery t'auoid, her death so sought,
As was in their conceit most like to speed;
And so in prison were they both agreed:
When hardest heart constrain it would to rue,
The lamentable sight of their adieu.
Her Jewels all the Cradle-band wrapt-in,
Were ti'd about her twixt her smock and skin:
That at her death pretended criminal,
They might supply the want of funeral.
But now the Judges hearing her confess
The crime at large, and rather more than less;
According false Arsaces hearts desire,
Condemn the guiltless to be burnt with fire.
The crime proclaimed nor better was nor worse,
Then for the poys'ning Lady Arsaces Nurse.
Tormentors lead her forth without the walls;
And such a sight the people much appalls.
Arsace, for success of her inuents,
Comes forth her self upon the battlements:
And for she would not lose her pleasant sight,
Of lovers torment standing in her light*
But when the fire was ready and slam'd aloft,
Chariclia them that led her prayed go soft,
And give her leave to speak; and loud she cri'de,
O Sun and Heaven! can any from you hide
This cruel fact? I suffer willingly,
But innocent, to put-off misery.
For this I pardon crave: but as for her,
This woman monster, femall Gouerner,
That cares not what she does in lusts-excesse,
To take my husband, filthy Adulteress;
O pay her home! these words with resolution,
Made some prepare to stay that execution.
But she preuents them, mounting as to game,
And straight way sat as in a throne of flame:
For by degrees the pile about her stood
Of straw, of sedge, of reed and solid wood.
What need I names of sundry trees compute?
Of every kind there was that bore no fruit.
The bearing tree is priuiledg'd from fire,
Which unto the other pays deserved hire.
And now her beauty, by resplendent shine
Of flashing light, appears the more divine;
Yet burnt she not; although to speed her death,
And rid her of this vndelightsome breath,
Feign would she burn; and though from sted to sted
She followed still the fire, the fire her fled.
Whereat she wonders much and all that saw't:
Arsace sees it from the murall vault,
And threatens her tormentors; they fling-on
More straw, sedge, reed and wood; fire all anon
And more deuoures; and yet no whit the more
Came nigh the Maid; nor heat unto her bore.
The peopl' are moved, and twice or thrice they said;
The Maid is guiltless, guiltless is the Maid;
And drove the Tortors off, by Thyamis
Stirr'd-vp thereto, that com'n was there by this.
And, though they could themselves approach do nier,
They stood aloof, and called her from the fire.
Which when she heard and saw; the Gods she thought
To show her innocence that wonder wrought.
And, lest she should unthankful seem, she came
Forth all unhurt amid the yielding flame.
The Town for joy and wonder gave a shout,
Which made Arsace as mad come running out,
With all her Guard, and Noblemen of Perse;
And on Chariclia she, then looking fierce,
Laid hand her self, and said with rage enflamed;
What mean this peopl'? and are you not ashamed
To hinder justice on this wicked wretch?
Whom more condemns that you to wonder stretch.
For poys'ners all, and witches are the same;
And by her witchcraft has she escaped the flame.
Come all to morrow to the Judgment Hall,
And there you shall be satisfied all:
Then her by shoulder griping led away,
As cruel Faulcon seiseth on her pray.
Such as live wicked, woman be it or man,
The noting escape not; do they what they can,
They shall be cursed alive, and trod-on dead,
By all them knew: whereas the blameless head,
Th'vntainted life, such honors fame attaines,
As flies all ore the land-and-water Maines.
No sooner came they to the Palace gate,
But sent again the Virgin is to Euphrate,
And harder bound; not so to keep her in,
As purposely to fret her tender skin.
Yet all in good she took, and more at ease,
As fellow-pris'ner with Theagenes.
Although Arsace willed it so for spite,
That one might grieve the more at others sight;
For Lovers more at pain of their Beloved.
Than at their own, are lamentably moved;
But they to comfort turn it, while they strive
To show their love in bearing well the guiue.
And now each oth'r exhorts they stoutly stand
To Endure the worst Arsace could command,
Before they fail in faith so firmly plighted;
And so they talke-on till they were benighted.
Nor slept they then; because they deemed, either,
This was the last that they should talk together.
At length they mind the miracl' at the fire
And what might be the cause thereof enquire.
He said it was the grace of Power Divine,
That caused the fire an Innocent decline.
Why then (quoth she) abide we more and more,
Th'vniust commands of this usurping whore?
But now I call to mind a dream I had;
Thus Calasire me thought in verse it radde.
Pantarbe wearing fear thou not the flame;
With such a virtue Nature did it frame.
Therewith Theagenes, as much as guyues
Would suffer him, leaps, and his heart reuiues,
Remembering what he likewise dreampt last night:
That such a verse him Calasiris dight.
To Blackmorland the Maid with thee shall come;
And escape to morrow fell Arsaces doom.
I see (quoth he) whereto these verses tend;
To Blackmorland, that is unto mine end,
The land of shadows, and Proserpina
The Maid is whom I must attend to day.
And escape Arsaces doom, that is, be free
From bodies bond, in Souls simplicitee.
And for your verse (sweet heart) what does it say,
But may be turned or this, or the other way?
Pantarbe signifies of all thing Fear.
Yet Fear not fire (it says) ye that it wear.
Then she, my heart, my dear Theagenes,
O be not led with such conceits as these!
Whom Fortune much afflicts he cannot choose
But fear the worst, and still on ruin muse.
Ye men will say that women pass for tongue;
And I have lived so much the Greeks among,
That well I know this Tarbos often is read,
As well for great amazement, as for dread:
And, for a stone so much to oppose the fire,
It may amaze and make men all admire.
Then hear me rather, this your Maid is I,
Whom you shall bring home vnt'Aethiopie,
(For is not that the proper Blackmans room?)
And so escape this fell Arsaces doom;
But how 'twill be I know not* though I know
The Power for showing can effect the show.
And who would think that I should hitherto
Ha escaped death? and yet you see I do.
And when I bore my help about me, (lo!)
That then I knew not, now I plainly know:
Among my mothers jewels there is one,
That binds in gold a rare Pantarbe stone:
I had them all about me when I went
Condemned to fire: for if I escaped, I meant
They should maintain me; if I di'd withal;
Me stand in stead of solemn funeral.
And now I think that this so wondrous thing
Is only wrought by that Pantarbe-ring,
As pleased the Gods; And often Calasire
Me told it was an Antidote to fire;
Though then I thought not on it, nor ever since;
Till now the trial did the truth euince.
Well have you said (quoth he) for that is past;
But what Pantarbe shall us save at last;
Or from to morrowes doom? Good hope, quoth she,
And trust in that to come, as that we see
Faln-out, according to the Pythian verse;
You know it so well, I need it not rehearse.
Our fatal rest we seek through much anoy,
Whereon to think hereafter shall us joy.
Thus were they talking till the night grew deep,
And never minded any rest or sleep:
Till Bagoas his troop with quick dispatch
To Memphis brought, and softly raised the watch,
Well known at first* let-in, he cast a list
About the Palace, lest the Court resist;
And, by a secret way he knew, forthright,
TO Euphrates came, the Moon affording light.
In bed asleep he was, and thus awaked,
Began to rave, till Bagoas him slak'd,
And said, it is I, and called t'a boy for light;
And when it came Euphrates said; by night
Thus unexpected (Bago's)? what is the cause?
He said no more, but bid him read the clause
Of both those letters, marking seal and hand,
How 'twas Orondates did this command,
That must be done: he readd, and said, I dare not
Show this to Arsace; left her self she spare not,
Nor any about her: leave them with her will
I know she cannot; rather kill, kill, kill
The first she meets, and all that her oppose;
For now unjust and tyrannous she grows;
To say no more. And you in time are come,
To save these strangers from a deadly doom.
Then do them good; for they have suffered much;
Not with my will: but her command was such.
They are (no doubt) some Imps of noble blood;
So virtuously disposed, so mild, so good,
I find their nature: then the row prison led
His fellow Gelding to the manacled;
And hard it is to tell with what compassion,
The new-come Eunuch heard their lamentation;
Who sighed to see, for beauties excellence,
Of either sex, the afflicted innocence.
But when they saw him come in so by night,
A man unknown, at first they were affright:
But soon again with lively and cheerful grace
Lift-vp their heads, and said; Thus thinks Arsace
To hide her wicked deeds, and deadly spite?
No, no; the Gods shall bring them all to light:
But do as you are enioyn'd, with sword us strike,
Or burn, or drown, so both togeth'r alike.
To hear these words, it made those Eunuchs weep;
But forth they lead them while the Court's asleep.
Euphrates stays, and Bagoas proceeds;
Who mounts the prisoners on two goodly steeds;
And, but for safety, not to hurt them, bound;
Then, (ring of horsemen cast about them round)
With foure-foot hoof they thund'r upon the glebes,
And haste away for hundred-gated Thebes.
So rid they till the Sun was three hours high,
And never litte; then, wexing hot and dry,
And nodding some on horse for want of sleep;
But chiefly that they might refresh, and keep
In health the Maid, they turn aside and stay,
Where Nilus winding made a grassie Bay;
Almost an Island (that I may not feign)
With narrow land-necke joined to the maine:
The place by nature was so fortifi'de,
That there they might all out of danger bide.
And there in shade of sweet and fruitful plants,
In stead of tent, thought good supply their wants:
Even under th'Arbours bearing sweetest gums,
Dates, berries, grapes, nuts, apples, pears and plums.
The Beam there burns at quarter part of race;
So them to rest inuites both time and place:
For trees not only of every kind there grew;
But Meddow-starres, white, yellow, red and blew.
The dainty Florist (said be it under pardon)
Has not so fair, so diverse in her garden.
For there together dwell Pomone and Flore:
Betwixt the trees sprung sleepie Mandragore,
The Marigold, the Buls-eye, th'Aemonine,
The duoble King-cup, Daisie, Sops-in-wine;
Cloue-Gilliuer, and Gilliuer of stock,
Pinke, Vi'let, Cowslip, Primrose, Ladies-smocke;
And past them all for color, sent, and juice,
The crimson Rose, and golden Flow'r-de-luce.
So many dainties never was their borne
by wanton Nymph in Achelous horn.
And there the sweet and dainty plants among,
The winged Quiristers record their song.
There th'Eunuch broke his fast, and offered meat
To those young Greeks; they said 'twas needless t'eat,
For such as were so soon to die; but he
Persuaded them, and said; that should not be:
But strangers cheer yourselues, and take some ease;
To death you go not, but to Orondates.
The Sun had left to shine right on their crest,
And side-ward shot his darts from out the west.
Then th'Eunuch thought it time to reset-on
And was preparing; but there comes anon
A running, panting, sweating messenger,
Who straight admitted rounded him i'th'eare.
He stood a while as in a muse; at length
Said, Courage you my guests, and gather strength:
Your enemy Arsace lives no more;
Sh'hath paid her debt so much ran on your score.
For when she heard that you were gone with me,
She hung her self, preventing Headmans fee.
This news Euphrates sent; then do not fear,
Now she is gone, by whom you wronged were,
That did no wrong. Thus (with some words to seek)
He patcht them up a speech in broken Greek.
And glad himself t'escape the Tyranness,
Yet this he spoke to make them grieve the less;
And for he knew, his safe presenting these,
Would well be taken of Orondates:
Her, now Arsace's gone, to be his wife;
And him to wait, for neu'r in all his life
Had seen the like. And could the loving pair
But joy thereat? Now pleasant eu'ning air
(While western winds the Suns hot horses cool,
At point to drink of Amphurites poole)
Inuites to travel, th'Eunuch forward went,
And all that night and morn in journey spent;
To find his Lord among the Gypsy States,
Before they left that Town of hundred gates.
But was deceived: the King of Blackmorland,
Of late at Phile had got so great a hand;
That forced Orondates Siene-ward,
With all his power, that other Town to guard.
Th'intelligence had Bagoas that day;
So leaving Thebes, took Siene-way.
But coming near the Town, himself has lost
Among fore-riders of the Blackmor Host;
And with his prisoners, prisoner is to those,
Who friends to them were, and his mortal foes.
Oh, this the dream was, then began to say
Theagenes to his Chariclia;
And these be they, by whom we must be led,
Though captive, to that Land with shadows spread.
As fair to Sunshine, black is like to shade,
And dark they seem whose lively colors fade.
Uncertain luck it is better seek with these,
Than certain danger with Orondates:
To these then let us yield. Chariclia knew
Now well enough what was thereon t'ensue;
Or, by instinct that Nature often sends,
The black men thought not enemies but friends.
Yet told him not her thought; but was content
To yield with him, and to the black men went:
So forced was Bagoas; that with a fall
Had wrench'd his leg. The Moors then take them all;
And, wondering bid the two unarmed and bound,
In Gypsy or Persie what they were expound.
(For Spies are eu'r accompanied with some
Who know the peoples languages, with whom
They have to deal.) Theagenes discerned
What was their mind, and, having Gypsy learned,
This answer made; Our Chief then (by your leave)
An Eunuch is (and that they did perceive
Soon by his face) attendant principal
TO Orondates th'Aegyptian Coronall
For Persian King: but as for her and me,
We Grecians are, and subject (as you see)
To Persian bonds: and now much better hopes
Conceive, to fall among you Aethiopes.
They take them, mount them, compass them with ring;
And mean present them to their Blackmore King:
That now their case (to speak alludingly)
Was like the Prologue of a Comedy:
Two strangers young, that late before their eyes
Had naught but death, are here in captive wise
Not led, but sent* and with a conuoy strong,
Of such as shall their subjects be ere long.
Finis Libri octaui.
THE Fair Ethiopian.
ORondates, when th'Aethiopian Host
He saw, past Cataracts, begin to coast
Siene-ward, he wisely them preuents,
By coming first, repairing battlements,
Renforcing Garrisons on Tower and wall,
Preparing engines the enemy to gaul,
And barricading gates. Hydaspes thought
Be there before; and now his Army brought,
And planted round about the walls; at least,
Some threescore hundred thousand, man and beast;
As Hunter plants his toil on every side
The thicket, where the Stag himself does hide;
So Blackmore King the Town environed,
To take the Prince that Persian Army led.
And there, without assault or skirmish lay
As quietly, as sitting at a play.
And when the spies their prisoners him present,
He looks upon the Greeks with great content;
And as his children, knowing not their race,
Yet, for good liking, gave them kind embrace,
And for good luck; for lo the Gods, he said,
Before us bound our enemies have laid;
And these, because the first, as is our guise,
We will be kept for humane sacrifice:
So gave commandment they should take their rest,
Be neatly kept, and fare still of the best;
And leaving th'iron guiues be locked in gold.
The man then smiled, and said; sweet heart, behold
A brave exchange! we go the row diverse hands,
And captive still; yet richest now in bands.
O flattering Fortune! O deceitful show!
Chariclia smiled to; but soon made him know
Her better hopes: and what has been foretold*
Of their far travel to the land of gold;
Her native soil, as she is borne in hand;
And gold for iron goes in Blackmorland.
Ere long the King in pers'n assaults the Town;
And thought their courage would at first come down:
But they defend themselves most valiantly,
With deed and word provoking the enemy.
At length, to make them soundly pay the price
Of that presumption, seeks he new device;
That shall full soon their heat of courage quench,
He sets his Host to cast a bank and trench
About the walls: there were so many men.
That soon it is done, by ten pole every ten.
Orondates, and Sienaeans all
Were well content to see another wall
About their Town, and let them work their fill,
And them derided all the while, until
They saw at Circles ends a fearful sign:
For why? they met not: either, straight as line,
An hundred foot asunder ran a file,
Unto the nearest bank of raging Nile,
And always somewhat vp-hill: so the Town,
Below the river, fit was made to drown.
In rivers hither side they made a vent;
Then broader wat'r in narrow channel pent;
Ran down amain, and with so wrackfull stream,
As if it would have ouerflow'd the Realm.
With hideous noise at Goole, at new-out throat,
And all the way it set the Town afloat:
Which when the Townes-men heard, and saw, and waigh'd,
Their fearful case; they labor all for aid.
And first with mucke and straw they stop the chinkes
Of every gate, that new-come water drinks.
Then make they butrases and prop she wall
In many places, so prevent the fall.
Lest by the waters vndersoaking, straight
The spongie ground refuse to bear the wait.
Some wood, some stone, some clay, some lime and sand;
And some bring thither what came first to hand.
Not one sat idle, but in case of life
Will all take pains, old, young, man, maid, and wife;
They bend to work their Sunburned hands and necks;
Not one desires excuse of state or sex.
The stronger men, and such as might bear arms,
With littl' offense to put-off greater harms,
Within and under wall are set to mine,
By light of torch, by leauell and by line,
A ten-foot deep and broad trench that may reach
Their foes new bank, and therein make a breach
With inlet waters. But (alas) before
It half was done, the flood came with a roar
So down the new-cut channel from the goole;
That all within the bank was made a poole.
And so Siene quickly, that ere while
A mid-land City was, is made an Isle.
The wall endured, at first and for a day,
The waters force; and then began to sway
By weight oppressed of flood now round about;
That soaking the row the yawning chaps of drought,
Foundation wets, and makes new springs arise
All over the Town in lamentable wise.
And part of wall betwixt two Towers that night
Above the water broke, t'encrease th'affright.
For though the waters yet no breach do win,
It made them see what danger they were in.
Whereat they raised so lamentabl'a cry,
As heard was to the Camp of The Enemy.
And cry to Heaven to have the water staid:
For out of hope they were of humane aid.
And yet to try, with much ado, i'th'end
They ou'r-entreat Orondates to send
A yielding message to the Blackmore King:
And wanting boat were feign to use a sling;
Whereout they sent a letter ti'd t'a stone;
But short it fell; then strive they eu'richone,
That had the skill, with engine, bow, and string,
Now it is for life; and yet they cannot bring
The Intent to pass, they cannot reach the road,
Or foot-way land; the waters are so broad.
Then make they signs, at first with held-vp hands,
As supplicating: then (intending bands)
Behind them put: Hydaspes sees they crave
But only life, and means they shall it have,
Nor was it other like: For grace t'impart,
The yielding foe commands the gracious heart
Of such a King: yet wisely thus he tries
The faithful meaning of his enemies.
When first he cut the goole came many a boat
From maine of Nilus down his trench afloat;
That landed all at th'inbent of the bank;
And ten of these with Archers all in rank
To Town he sent, instructed what to say:
Now strange it was to see, in plow-mans way
An armed galley rowed; with men on land
A ship to fight: but this can war command.
The Sienaans seeing them draw near
Their broken wall; as All thing puts in fear
Distressed men; it thought for towns behoof
To shoot at them, and make them keep aloof.
But shot or short, or up, or down the wind;
As not to hurt, but make them know their mind.
For this declares of man's desire the prime,
Despairing life would gain some little time.
The black men shoot again with surer aim,
And many Townes-men kill, and many maime.
Great had the slaughter been, but that a wise
And ancient man the Town did thus advise:
What mean you Sirs? Has this calamity
So dulled your sense, that these you will put-by,
Who come to save us at our humble suit?
If ill they means us, it is without dispute,
They cannot hurt us here, although they land:
Yet if we slay them, can we get by the hand,
When cloud so back has round about beset us*
At land and water? O then rather let us
Them entertain with speeches fair and kind;
And give attentive ears unto their mind.
The Governor himself and all the rest
Commend his words: and standing there abrest
On either side the breach, lay down their arms,
To hear the Black man's oratorie charms;
From ship, as 'twere at hau'n, who thus began:
Of Perse or Sien know you every man,
Both young and old, From meanest state to best;
Hydaspes King of Indies East and West,
Yours also now, can tame his proudest foes,
And yet is gracious evermore to those
That yield and mercy crave: on you therefore,
Whose life is in his hands, he lays no more,
Now after your so pitiful petitions,
Then turn to him and make your own conditions
No Tyrant is he governing by lust;
But toward all his people kingly just.
To this the Sienaans answer gave;
That they, their wives and children, all they have*
Were at his service; use them as he please:
As for the Governor Orondates,
He promises to leave the Smaragd-Mines,
With Town of Phile, and all the next confines,
Which caused the war; and only craves the grace,
That to his person naught be tendered base:
And that they would two Persian Soldiers take,
And bear, and let go safe beyond the Lake
Vnt' Elpentine, pretending thither sent,
To know if that Town also were content,
To yield as does Siene: they the two
Take to their King, and message quickly do.
He smiles to see the Persian captiuate,
Now past all help of man, capitulate:
Yet, loath to stroy a multitude for one,
Forbeares him, yea and lets his spies alone;
As light-regarding, what they could in fine
Against his drift consult at Elpentine:
But sets his own a work with pin and planke
Of wood that grew on either side the bank;
And some whole trees, to make as tanke, and take
The goole of Nile, before they draine the Lake:
Then steele-shod piles are driu'n the row channel-rocks.
With iron-bound commanders downright knocks.
And, for the draine, of trench they cut the band;
That inlet stopped, and outlet made, the land
About the Town might sooner dry and bear
An Armies weight: and, as they labor there
(Though night her darkness did upon them send,
Ere either could their purpose bring t'an end)
So in the City nothing is forgot
To save their lives; and now their mining plot
Is followed hard; from wall to bank the scope
Above with eye, below they meat with rope.
By torch their wall, by torch they view their cell,
And finding all, as for the time, but well;
Had thought to rest: yet were they sore affright,
By sudden fearful sound they heard that night.
Themselves and enemies it thought a fall,
And of no less than their whole Citie-wall;
But was not so: part of that circle-bay
Relapsed, the water made it self a way.
The morning light them put all out of doubt;
And showed the drained Lake all round about.
Above the mud are crawling seen by millions,
Ichneumonets, Lagartos, Crocodillions
New out of shell, and on the sandy sholts,
Sirenets, Sea-calues, Hippopotam-colts.
For the elder monsters wont in channel deep,
With seuen-head Nilus, or with Neptune keep.
So wont the Powers Divine (as well they can)
In saving life prevent the work of man,
Though first by diligence the goole was caught:
The Gods will help such as for help have wrought.
Though water's gone; yet neither the other come,
Nor can, the ground o're-spred with muddy scum,
So soft as yet, will bear nor horse, nor man:
Thus two or three days pass they, and for than
In sign of peace the Blackemoore disarmates,
And they of Sien open wide their gates;
Nay celebrate a feast, that fell the while,
In honor of their mighty river Nile,
Whom they as God adore, and him to pray,
When Summer and Sunsted makes the longest day.
But, after feasting, when the night grew deep,
And all the Sienaeans fast asleep
Lay buried in their wines, Orondates
Occasion took to cross those muddy seas;
Commanding every Soldier bear a planke,
And one at others heels succeed in rank;
So made a sudden bridge, at hay now hay,
To live or die; and closely stole away
With all his forces, leaving horse behind,
For fear of noise and waking those of Jude:
They soundly slept that night, and set no watch,
But such as were to finish and dispatch
That work begun at Nilus broken flank;
With stone and clay to ram the boorded stanke:
And earnest these, and busy about their charge
Perceive them not: nor came they near the marge
Of Nilus stream. And by this slight so fine,
The Persian brought his men int' Elpentine:
A Town (he knew) that soon receive them meant,
Prepared thereto by those two men he sent.
The Sienaeans knew not they were fled,
Till such, as had the Soldiers billetted,
Them mist in house; and from the wall to bank,
At morning saw the ioyntlesse bridge of planke.
For this the Town perplexed was the more,
Their second faults revenge now fearing sore;
That, after mercy showed them, traitorously
May seem gave way for Persian force to fly.
To clear themselves, and get a second grace,
Both old and young they come forth of their place;
And over the planke-bridge toward th'Aethiopes,
In humble sort go to renew their hopes.
And all afar-off kneeling on their knees
Made lowly sign of suite. Hydaspes sees,
And sends to know the cause, why came they then
Without the Persian Leader and his men.
Their Priests that went before declare the case,
And how the Persians, to their foul disgrace,
Unknown to Sien, stole away by night,
When all the Town was doing Nilus right.
What further meant was could they not define,
But thought, to gather force at Elpentine:
And prayed Hydaspes ent'r and take the Town,
And evermore command it as his own.
He thought not meet himself to go, but sent,
To sound yet furrher the enemies intent,
And keep the Town, a Garrison of strong
And well appointed men; and sent along
The Sienaeans with them, promising
Both life and freedom like a gracious King.
Then led his Army forth in good array,
To give or take encounter by the way.
And forth with word was brought him by his Spies,
That fast were comming-on his enemies.
And now began the Persian pride appear;
Orondates, and many in armor clear
All double-guilt, against the rising Lamp
Reflects a lightning on the Blackmore Camp.
His right wing holds the Persian and the Mede*
Of them the strongest-armed still precede:
And under these, more safe to shoot and fight,
Their Archers follow nimbl' and armed light.
Upon his left wing care was had to range,
Th'Aegyptians, Afers, and all people strange:
And after them came other Bows, and Slings,
To fight a flank, and counterguard the wings.
Himself between them rode in charr'ot bright,
With sharp-edg'd hooks all round about bedight.
His strong Phalanges march on either side;
And troops of Cataphracts before him ride:
With whom he counts himself most safe and sure:
And this the guise is of that Armature.
Some choice well-timber'd man of courage stout
An helmet close puts-on, which round about
His head defends, and from the Crown to neck;
His left hand holds the reine his horse to check,
His right a lance whereof butte-end is set
In horses armed flank that will not let
It backward slide, but guided with a span
Combines in thrust the strength of horse and man;
Which armed both in steel wrought smooth by file,
And ioynted close like scales of Crocodile,
When horse has reine on neck, and spur at flanks,
As iron Statue breaks the foremost ranks;
And piercing th'armour first, then flesh and bones,
Some two, or three, sometime thrusts the row at once.
Now Persian Satrap, with such men and horses,
And as before had ordered all his forces;
He forward sets. And so the Blackmore King;
Who sets against the Mede-and-Persian wing,
His Meroans, not men of armor light,
But well appointed for a standing fight.
On the other side his Troglodytes and those
Who dwell where all the best Amomy grows;
All armed light, and very swift of foot,
And cunning all to hit whereat they shoot.
And when he saw in middle battle most
Consist the strength of all the Persian Host;
Himself in person leads against the same
His towred Elephants, with Sere and Blame;
A people strong, who, fighting though on foot,
Such armor wore as none could thorow-shoot.
And these, although at first they meet at large,
Had, after battle joined, a special charge;
To creep aground, accustomed to such acts,
And gore th'vnarmed paunch of Cataphracts.
With trump the Persian, th'Aethiope with drum,
Both strike Alarm when they to th'Onset come.
The Persian came-on with a full careere
Of armed horsemen, thunder-like to hear:
Hydaspes softly, that the Persian horse,
Before the encounter, might abate his force:
And lest he should, by speeding-on th'Auants,
Unguarded leave his slow-paced Elephants:
But when ^hey met, these hardy men of Blame
Creep vnd'r unarmed horses, hoh them lame,
And wound th'vnarmed paunch with th^^st and cuts,
So make the gored beast run-out his guts,
And cast the riders: who, for armours weight,
Now cannot stir, and are dispatched straight,
By first-come enemy: me thinks to fight
Were bett'r on foot, both for pursuit and flight.
A whizzing cloud of arrows dimd the Sun,
And blows are struck as loud as modern gun
To cut off armed limbs; the field is spread
With legs, arms, heads, and bodies but halfe-dead:
At right wing and at left, areare, avaunt.
The neighing Horse, and roaring Elephant,
With fall of beast and man, some over, some under,
Made such a noise they could not hear it thunder.
And now begin the nimble men of Sere,
Retire to guard their Elephants areare.
The Persian horse, as many as escaped the gore,
At Seres run: yet backward start, and snore
At sight of th'Elephant, that hill of beast;
That with his snout can take of grain the least;
And yet enroule an armed man and send him
Aloft int' air, and by the downfall rend him,
As then were many served: each Elephant
Had two men on each side, and two avaunt,
In foure-square armed tower; there was no fail,
But only that way which was next the tail.
And fed the beasts were, more to make them fight,
With grapes and mulberries, their chief delight.
The Seres were so skilled in Archeries,
They made their arrows stick in Persian eyes;
That on their brows they seemed have growing horns,
Or in mid-forhead like our Unicorns:
Yea, some in mouth received a hidden stripe,
And 'twixt their lips hung th'arrow like a pipe.
So Persian Leaders, troubled in their face,
Fly back themselves, and draw the rest apace.
Orondates on swiftest horse of Nyze,
His chariot leaving, with the foremost flies.
And this the wise and valiant King of Black,
From turret, set on tallest Elpen back,
Beholds, triumphing in his victory;
And loath to shed much blood of enemy,
Sends-out command to spare their lives, and bring
The Persian Duke alive unto the King.
And so they did, while he the manner viewed.
The Persian noting first the multitude
Of Blackemors Army, kept the Nile behind him;
For fear they should all round about enwinde him:
So barred himself the flight, and now forsaken
Of all his men, on bank alive is taken;
Though Achaemen repenting what he told,
And fearing the end in flying was so bold
To stab his Lord: it was no deadly blow;
And yet revenged with Ethiopian bow,
That surer struck the Traitor; so with ease
Was into presence brought Orondates.
To whom the King; I hold it most renown
By weapon standing, and by favor down,
To vanquish foe: and you do freely give
(Though ever false to me) this leave to live.
The Satrap answered; False I was to you;
But thereby more unto my Master true.
The King replied; Say truth and do not swerue,
You Are overcome; what do you now deserve?
The same (quoth he) that would my King require
Of one of yours, that were to you entire.
But, O my friend, then quoth the King again,
Although you trusty were, it was in vain,
And part unwise for you to set upon
My forces here, that are ten to your one.
I knew it well, quoth he; but ever find,
How much my King mislikes a fearful mind.
And seeing plain you meant to set on me,
Thought best begin. For often a ieoperdee
May fall out well; and many a chance in war
May bring th'vnlikely luck, the likely bar.
So might befall me well; and often in doubt
Some friendly Fortune favors courage stout;
But if it fell out so, I did but live;
I might the bett'r account my Sovereign give.
The King his answer liked, and straight him sent
To Sien Town, and after softly went:
And, leaving th'armies Lieutenants charge,
In royal state upon his Elpen large
Enters the gate; that strange it was to see,
On monster black so black a King as he.
Then forth to meet him all the City went
Man, woman, child, of high and low descent;
And cast him garlands, coronets, and posies
Of all the fairest lil^ies, pinks, and roses,
That grew on bank of Nile, congratulating
His victories, and him-to them prostrating.
He first of all unto the Temple goes,
Pesents the Gods with sundry solemn shows
For victory: then looks upon the Well,
That wont with Nilus flood to sink and swell:
The polisht stone within it having lines,
To count how much it rises or declines:
And Dials saw (though they no news to him,
Because they had the like at Meroim
Both City and Isle) with Gnomons bolt-vpright,
That gave no shade at noone, but round had light:
There also puits, that nere so deep were sunk,
Had Sun at noone that of their water drunk:
For North and South on each side equal lay,
And Nadir midnight, Zenith made midday:
For either Pole respective seen was there,
At landskop-end, South Cross and Northern Bear.
Then such as came from North-side of the Line,
To Southward of Siene and Elpentine,
With much amazement saw, where now they stood,
To left hand run the shadows of the wood.
Of Unicorns some to the King relate,
And show them richly wrought on cloth of state;
Like cloue-foot horse (if wrought it were not wrong)
With horn in forhead straight some seven foot long.
There also painted show they him the Rucke,
So huge a bird, as strong enough to tucke,
Or trusse (as Faulk'ners speak) an Elpen fierce,
With ell-long tallons) toughest hide to pierce:
Yea foure-foot winged Dragons wrought he saw,
And Gryffins also, contratie to Law,
That Nature keeps in other creatures all,
Affording them but four limbs principal;
Not mingling kinds; as this to ramp and fly-on*
Before an Eagl' is, and behind a Lion;
As here set-out by cunning workmans hand:
But, that there were such living in that land,
On furth'r inquiry made the truth to touch,
An old man called Hearsay did avouch.
Then set they forth the praises of their Nile,
And in their praising give him such a style,
As if the Sun and Moon were less than he
The causes of their Lands fertilitee,
With yearly slime there filling every creek;
Whereof that stream first got that name in Greek.
They further say their River was the Year,
And with some reasons make it thus appear:
What other flood has flowers like the Nile
To show the Spring? and there the Crocodile
In winter-quarter breeds; by waters heap
The Summer's known; and Autumn time by Neape.
Besides, the letters of that name amount
To sum of days in the year by just account.
For N his fifty, and E his five commands,
And I for ten, and L for thirty stands,
And O for seventy, for two hundred S,
To tell in Greek; and these all make no less,
(By rule of Adding if you them contriue)
Than days in the year three hundred sixty five.
Then said the King, since you this way have trod,
And since you worship Nilus for a God;
And him we send you down from Blackmorland;
For this, me thinks, we should your love command,
You shall, replied the Priests; and much the more
For such a gracious King; whom we adore
For saving us more like a God than King,
And this his victory still shall we sing.
With moderance (quoth he) your praises scan,
And still remeb'r, a King is but a man.
So part of day he spent in talk, the rest
With Negroes and Sienians in feast.
Then sent his Army Goats, Sheep, Oxen, Swine,
Whole Herds at once, and many Butts of wine.
The next day seated on a lofty throne,
His well-deseruing men calls eu'rychone:
And with the spoil, before he thence depart,
Will see them all rewarded by desert.
To him that took Orondates, he said;
Ask what thou will: he says, I Am well appaid
With that I have, if please your Maiestee,
With your most royal, word confirm it me:
And showed the poniard of that Persian Earl,
Most richly set with precious stone and pearl,
That many a million cost: the standers-by,
Too much for private man, began to cry,
More fit to make a treasure for a King.
Hydaspes smiling said; is any thing
More Kingly, than to cast-off couetise,
And that, which common men admire, despise?
Besides now, be it a thing of worth or trifle,
The man that takes a prisoner, may him rifle
By Law of Arms; we grant him then his right,
Which he might well have kept out of our sight.
And, after this man, call'd-for next are they
Who took Theagen and Chariclia,
And say (O King) nor gold, nor precious stone,
But fairest two we bring of flesh and bone:
To serve your Highness and your gracious Queen.
Well put in mind (quoth he) I have them seen,
But did not mark them well; now then again
Them bring before me: then one ran amain
To Camp, and willed the keepers quickly bring
That fair young man and maid before the King.
They asking whither now, and why they went,
Are told Hydaspes King has for them sent.
O Gods, quoth they, at King Hydaspes name,
Till then not knowing still had reigned the same.
Then he to her, sweet heart (in whisper-vaine)
Tell you our case; Hydaspes still does reign,
Your fath'r, as often you told me. Whereto she,
Have patience a while (sweet heart) and see
Yet more; A matt'r of such a consequence
Must-not be dealt-in rashly, for offense.
And things, that have beginnings intricate,
Are brought t'an end with some more solemn state.
Besides, my mother (though we hear she lives)
Of our estate most pregnant witness gives;
And is not here. Theagenes replies;
But, if we offered be for sacrifice,
Or given to some as Captives in reward;
Too late we make you known, I am afeard.
O fear it not, quoth she; we must be seen
At Meroe, and there shall meet the Queen
Ere sacrifice. Our ouer-hastie joy
In matt'r unripe may breed us much anoy.
To show our case in absence of our proof,
I think can no ways make for our behoof;
But rath'r offend the King, when such as we,
In servile state, his heirs shall claim to be.
But you have evidence (quoth he) and show it:
It Is evidence (quoth she) to them that know it,
And know the passage; otherwise, althow
The King himself some of these jewels know,
In such a case as this, he may deny them,
Or else suspect we came not truly by them.
Who knows the Queen this writing e're compil'de,
Or as a mother left it with her child?
It may be said that some confederate
This wrought, to raise a tumult in the state.
Instinct of Nature is a wondrous sign,
That at the first encounter will incline
The mother to the child. Then is it not best
This sign to loose that makes good all the rest.
The Fable says, one had a bird did lay
Him eggs of gold; who, thinking long to stay
Till lay-day came (because he kept no measure)
Did kill his bird, for in-her-hidden treasure:
But true that saying is (think on it my Dear)
He hastes well that wisely can forbear.
And now they two, with Eunuch Bagoas,
The Row all the Blackmore Guard have way to pass,
And come before the King: he eyed them well;
But how affected hard it is to tell:
He rose a littl' and said; me Heaven excuse!
And sat him down again as in a muse.
The Peers about him asked him what he meant.
He said, I drempt the Gods this night had sent
Me such a daught'r, and suddenly so grown;
I little thought thereon, nor would it own;
Till now is come before my waking sight
The very same (me thinks) I saw by night.
They told him, dreams sometime will let one see
A thing beforehand that will shortly be.
Then setting light thereby, he asked them, what
And whence they were? Theagenes to that
Replied, we broth'r and sister be, and come
Late out of Greece. But is that Maiden dombe
(Replied the King)? Chariclia said, we hear,
We must to The Altar; and my Parents there
Will soon be known. But hear (O King) the troth;
That one is here, and there they will be both.
To that Hydaspes said, and saying smil'de,
Me thinks now dreameth this my dreame-borne child;
Imagining her Parents, swift as thought,
Shall out of Greece to Meroe be brought:
Well, take and use these two with all the grace
They had before: but what is that Eunuchs face?
The same, say they. The King then, let him pass
Along with them, to keep vntaint the Less:
For Eunuch is a kind of jealous Elfe,
Envying others that he lacks himself.
Thus having said, all other Captives there
He called, and viewed them well; and all that were,
As borne to serve, of fath'r and mother slave,
Among his well-deseruing Soldiers gave.
The rest, that seemed of better birth to be,
Without imposed ransom let go free,
And whither so they lift; save only ten
The fairest younger maids, and younger men,
T'encrease the Sacrifice: then Justice found
All such as did their cases there propound.
And some there were who though they fought not hard,
For good intelligence obtained reward;
And some for counsel, some for Engin-Art;
For victory depends not all on Mart.
At last Orondates he calls him nigh,
And bids him hold his former Satrapie.
Thus further saying; When you come before
My broth'r of Babel, tell him I full sore
Against my will to bloody war am forced,
Albee't as any King well manned and horsed.
And yet, in bloodshed though I not delight,
Must take up arms and will to keep my right;
Which now I have recouer'd, strike no drum
T'enlarge my Territory, as would do some:
But am content with share on Nature grounded,
Which Egypt has from Aethiopie bounded
By Cataracts: so, if he will, let cease
This war betwixt us for a friendly peace.
As for the Sienaeans, I release them
A ten years tribute; do not you oppress them.
But wish your Master grant that libertee,
I know he will, commended so by me.
No wicked man I praise, although my friend;
Nor good man enemy will discommend.
The Persian hearing this, with hands before
His breast athwart, bowed down his head to adore;
And prayed the Gods his royal days increase,
That Perse and Indies ever keep in peace.
Then all gave thanks, devoutly promising
Their loyalty to such a gracious King.
Finis Libri Noni.
THE Fair Ethiopian.
THe King then sent his Army part before,
And follows with the rest along the shore
Of flowrie Nile, until he came beyond
The Cataracts, he there forsook the strond,
And drew to Midland-ward as far as Phile,
From Sien (as I said) some thirteen mile.
And thence he sent another multitude,
Led well as need was (for they were but rude)
Of common Soldiers marching merrily
Before the King, who staid to fortify.
When that was done, he sent two horsemen post,
To signify, the King with all his Host
Is coming home, and means to gratify
The Gods with Sacrifice for victory:
As by his letters more at large is seen,
Both vnt' his sacred Council and the Queen:
To Council thus; These are to let you know
My conquest of the Persian forces; though
I vaunt not of it: Fortune is unstable;
And all her turnings hold I venerable:
But you, that always heretofore and now
Foretold me truth, I cannot but allow
This testimony for your Priesthoods sake;
And pray, and charge you further pains to take;
And come in person, answering our hopes,
At full Assembly of our Aethiopes,
To grace the business with your gravity,
While we do sacrifice for victory:
And thus to Queen; We have quite ouerthrown
Our enemies, and herewithall be known
(That most concerns you) in health we are:
A solemn sacrifice therefore prepare,
And call our Wisemen to the sacred field,
And meet us there your self, due thanks to yield
Unto the Gods, protectors of our Land,
The Sun and Moon, and all that for us stand,
I have my dream, quoth she; last night me thought,
A goodly daught'r into the world I brought,
Of marriageable state. The War my throws,
And Victory my goodly daughter shows.
Then to the City messengers she sent:
That Loto-garlands had for ornament;
A flower (not much unlike the flower of Franks)
With growing gold that crowns Nilus banks;
And shaking Palms in hand on horse they road
Th'rowout the City and Suburbs all abroad.
The people know the sign without the voice
Of Victory, and greatly began rejoice:
Yet more for safety of that their gracious King,
Than for the Persian Army conquering.
They thick and threefold to the Temples crowd;
And offer sacrifice, and sing alowd
In City, Parish, Ward, and Family;
They him so love, for right and clemency;
For ruling them with tender piety,
And never showing point of tyranny.
The Queen then sent into the sacred fields,
All manner beasts and foul the Country yields;
Enough to sacrifice with foul and beast,
And furnish-out a solemn public feast.
Then goes she to the wise Gym^^osophers,
Acquaints them with the Kings desire and hers,
But stays a while till they their Gods demand,
What should be done; and lo in turn of hand
Sisimithres comes forth, their chief Anoint,
And says they come; for so the Gods appoint;
But some great tumult, by their prophesies,
It seems there will be made at sacrifice;
Yet well shall end: as though part of your ground,
Or of your self, were lost, and shall be found.
I do not fear (quoth she) those fearful signs,
In presence of such reverend Divines:
But when I hear the King is come I shall
You certify. That need you not at all,
Sisimithres reparted, I know it well;
And ere't be long a letter shall you tell.
And as they spoke came letters from the King
Unto the Queen faire-sealed with his ring.
Then straight an Herald sent is to proclaim
The Effect thereof; in Queen and Councels name;
Commanding there should be no woman seen,
But she, that was Diana's Priest, the Queen,
And such as must be sacrificed there,
As was the custom, then from eu'rywhere
The men come flocking; and, a day before
The time appointed, some cross Astabore,
Some Arsasoba, some the broader Nile
In Reeden boats; for Meroe was an Isle
With these three rivers compassed for strength;
An hundred broad, three hundred mile in length:
A fair and fruitful soil; it bore a reed
That made a boat, would carry three with speed,
All were but slit, at leauell line and point,
No more than Nature gave twixt joint and joint.
It bore some wheat so high, would hide a pack,
Or man that sat on tallest horses back:
And for the seed (so mellow was the mold)
It paid the husbandman three hundredfold:
Nor only rich in these and other plants,
But yearly brought the hugest Elephants;
Whose ell-long tuskes (believe ye them that saw)
Grow not in the under, but in th'vpper jaw;
Nor were the lower jaw bone deep and strong
Enough, to bear a tooth so large and long.
And there Rhinocerots, ^ight Unicorns,
With all beasts else that have, or have not horns,
This Island bred, of greatest height and size,
Whereof they brought for solemn Sacrifice,
And for the feast, a wondrous multitude
To satisfy both civil men and rude.
Some meet the King a great way off for joy,
Some near, and all cry-out Vive le Roy.
The grave Gymnosophists maintain their state,
And meet the King not much beyond the gate
Of sacred field; and there they kiss his hands.
The Queen within the porch of Temple stands;
Receives him there with men of noble ranks,
And all for victory the Gods give thanks.
Then out of Cloister to the place they went
Of Sacrifice, and set them in their Tent:
Foure-square it was, and (pillarets in steed)
At every corner born-vp with a reed
As big as trunk of Oak; in Canopee
Met close above with boughs of Phoenix tree.
Another Tent there was two stories high;
Wherein, above, the pictures set are by
Of Memnon, Perseus, and Andromeda:
Of whom the Blackmore Kings (I cannot say
How true it is, but as it is pretended)
From time to time are lineally descended.
Hereunder sit the grave Gymnosophists,
Round about the Soldiers keep the lists;
That force of people break not upon those,
Who should do Sacrifice amid the close.
The King them told, what for the Commonwealth
Was lately done, and all pray for his health:
He then commands, according t'ancient guise,
Whom-to it longed, proceed to Sacrifice;
For now the time of day grew toward Noone.
Three Altars were there, two for Sun and Moon
Together set, the third for Bacchus was
By It self alone; and this for offering has
All sorts of creatures: to the God of wine
Th'vncleane and clean, th'impure and pure incline.
But the other two, for either heavenly light
That all the world about do shine so bright,
The Sun white horses had, for swiftest flight;
The Moon, for helping tillage, oxen white.
And, while men busy be preparing those,
Confused cries among the peopl' arose
For humane Sacrifice of strangers taken,
That, after custom, first should there be slain.
The King them all appeased with beck'ning hand,
And for the strangers bringing gave command.
They brought are loose; the rest all heavy and sad;
The Greeks undaunted; rather seeming glad;
And cheerfully Chariclia cast her eyes
Upon Persina, which the Queen espies;
And marking was affected much, and said
With deep-set sigh, O husband what a Maid
Have you pickt-out to kill? so sweet a face
I never saw. With what a cheerful grace,
And haughty courage comes she to her death?
The daught'r I brought you, had she drawn her breath
Till now, I think should bear the selfsame age.
What pity it is, that on this bloody stage
The flower of Maids is brought! I should delight
In such a waiter, if I save her might
A Greek I think, the more I pity her case;
For, if you mark it, sh'hath no Gypsy face.
A Greek indeed, quoth he, and though she said
Here parents will be here, it cannot aid.
I pity her my self; but cannot stead,
Except it prove sh'hath lost her Maidenhead;
Which must be tried by fire. And, if it be so,
For you to take her, were it fit or no?
No matter, quoth the Queen, or maid, or wife,
Or otherwise; so I but save her life.
Captivity, and war, and banishment,
Though fault committed were, excuse intent.
So said sh'and hardly could her swelling eye
Conceal the affection from the standers-by.
Then called the King for th'artificiall fire,
That wont discern the broken from th'entire:
For, though it were with burning gold made hot,
Yet man or woman virgin burnt it not.
That gold by fire, and woman's tried by gold,
And men by women, cannot be controlled:
Though Maid to try, by scaping thus enfir'd,
It cannot be but from above inspired.
Theagenes is called, and all admire
So young, so goodly a man, to endure the fire.
To see him tried so, was Chariclia glad,
Though no suspicion of his love she had.
And grieved again (when trial was so done)
He should be sacrifis'd unto the Sun,
As said the King. To her Theagenes
Then softly said; among such peopl' as these
Is Sacrifice reward of chastity?
And death of honest life? Sweet heart, but why
Reveal you not your self, to save our life?
You see me near the Sacrificers knife.
Or will you stay until you see me dead?
Or till your mothers sword strike-off your head?
I prithee save me! yet I care not, I,
So thou be sure to live, although I die.
The time's at hand, quoth she; what shall I say?
Our fortunes now are all at Hay now hay:
Then op't her fardell, quickly dressed her self
In sacred mantle that she brought from Delph,
Dispred her golden hair about her shoulders,
And, to th'amazement there of all beholders,
On fire she leapt in fury as 'twere divine;
That made her beauty more and more to shine,
And hurt her not. All wonder, many weep,
That she her maidenhead so well should keep,
To make her die; Persina most of all
Affected is, and (rising from her stall)
Entreats the King. In vain you speak, quoth he,
And troubl' us all, for that which cannot be.
The Gods (you see) do choose her, since she leapt
Upon the fire, and therefore have her kept
Untainted hitherto: but, O ye Wise,
Wherefore begin you not the Sacrifice?
Sisimithres replies then out of hand,
In Greek, that all there might not understand;
Far be it, O King! with Sacrifices such
Polluted are w'already too too much.
But we will aside into the Temple draw,
And not assist man-sacrifising Law;
Wherewith the Gods offended are we know;
Yet, since the people needs will have it so,
It Is meet the King do stay and see it done;
For fear the vulgar to disorder run.
And after shall your Majesty have need
Be cleansed, for assisting such a deed.
And yet not so, for done it shall not be;
A beam about the strangers heads I see.
Which plainly tells me that some Power Divine,
In tok'n of aid has cast on them this shine.
So saying rose, and all his company
So parting were Chariclia presently
From fire down running fell before his way,
And said, O reu'rend Sire, beseek you stay:
I have to plead against his royal grace;
And you are only judge in such a case;
As I am told: then hear and quickly know
That such a death I ought not undergo.
The stranger then (quoth he) O King, appeals:
Now do her right, as father of Commonweals.
Hydaspes smiled, and said, how can it be,
Or what has such an one to do with me?
That shall you know (quoth he) if she declare.
But (Sir) replied the King) you must beware
You give not way for judgment or Appeal,
To wrong a King and Fath'r of Commonweal
(As you me term) and do me this disgrace,
Against a Captive so to plead my case.
Sisimithres reparted: Equity
Respects not high Degrees, or Majesty;
But he that right with reason best maintains
At Justice bar, is only man that reigns.
But with mine own (replied the King) and not
With strangers ought I thus to try my lot.
O Sir, a thing to subject equitable
(Replied the Judge) to stranger's honorable.
Then says the King, it is plain sh'hath naught to say,
But only seeks to trifie time away,
As loath to die: but let her speak, because
Sisimithres so forward that-way draws.
Chariclia courage had enough before
And hope of safety; that name gave her more.
For she had heard that one Sisimithres
Was he that gave her first to Charicles;
And then but seven years old, ten years ago;
No marvel now that him she did not know;
Nor yet her he; who, then Gymnosophist
But one of common sort, now led the list,
And Primate was of all. That made her raise
Her hands and voice to Heaven; and thus she prays;
O Sun, the Founder of my Pedigree,
And Gods, and Demigods, mine Ancestree!
Me hear and help! To witness call I you,
That nothing shall I here allege, but true.
And thus begin; O King, are they your own
That thus mun die, or strangers and unknown?
And strangers only said the King: Then she;
Then must you seek some other here for me.
For I shall easly prove and make it known,
That I no stranger am; but even your own.
He maruell'd much, and called her Counterfetter:
Small things are these (quoth he) now hear you greater:
For I shall prove me not borne only here,
But of Blood royal, to your self full near.
The King it scorned, and her, for words so vain
And new devised; she reparts again,
With sober countenance and behavior mild;
Most royal father scorn not so your child!
The King was wroth, and said, Sisimithres,
And you the rest, how long thus will it please
Your sacred Wisdom, that I this endure?
Away with her: I have no child I Am sure:
Though once I had a guirle that quickly di'de,
As all you know; and I had none beside;
Away with her. Not till the Judge so say,
Quoth she; you judge not, but are judged to day.
Your Law perhaps you suffers stranger kill;
That child you slay, nor Law, nor Nature will:
And that your child I am, though you say no,
The Gods themselves this day will plainly show.
Two kinds of Arguments, as I am told,
Are chiefly used in proof: the first enroul'd
By writing are, the second firmly stand
On witness vnexcept on either hand.
I bring them both; and offered to be seen
Her cradle-band displaid before the Queen:
She looked thereon amazed at case so strange,
And at her guerle, with many a counter-change.
Now it, now her she viewed, then her, then it;
And fell a sweating with a shaking fit,
For joy, and fear, and doubt what might befall;
And what the King would think, and what they all,
That she with honor could a daughter bring
So much unlike her self, unlike the King.
The King perceived her passion, and, what ill,
(Sweet heart, quoth he) has done thee that same Bill?
What ailes my Love? she not a word, but O
King, Lord, and Husband, read it you and know:
Then sad and silent gave it him; and he
The Wisemen called, with him to read and see.
They look well on it all, and, as they look,
With much amaze Sisimithres was struck;
And now the writing, then the Princess eyed:
And when the King was partly satisfied
About the Babe, and putting forth, and cause
That moved the Queen thereto; with little pause
He said, I know a guerle I had; but told
Was by Persina dead and laid in mold;
Put-out now first I hear: but where is the man
That took, brought-vp, and kept her? show who can.
How came sh'int'Aegypt? wherefore was not he,
That brought her thither, taken as well as she?
How are we sure that this is she, and not
One foysted-in by politic complot
Of such as may true babe extinguished,
Or got these tokens after she was dead,
Abusing them and my well-known desire
Of child, me to succeed in this Empire?
To that Sisimithres; Your Majesty
Well knows I may not, nor have cause to lie.
What since became of her I little ween,
But I am he that took her from the Queen,
And seven years kept her close, till you in fine
Me sent int'Aegypt for the Smaragd-mine.
Then thith'r I take her with me; there I seek
To place her safe, and with an honest Greek.
And this no doubt is her own swadling-band,
A th'inside writ with Queen Persina's hand.
But hear (young Lady) said he more, and smil'de*
I other things then left him with the child.
Lo here, quoth she, and jewels showed, whereon
The Queen well looking, stood as still as stone.
How now (then quoth the King) what find you more?
Something (quoth she) that I Will not speak before
So many men, but I shall be your debtor
To tell you all, albeit in private better.
Chariclia saw the King yet full of doubt,
And smilingly these words-into burst-out.
Sir, these my mothers tokens are, but (see)
This one is yours, and showed the Pantarbee.
The King it knew full fell, and said at sight,
This was mine own indeed; how came you by it?
For why? your color, here so peregrine,
Does plainly show you can be none of mine.
Then said Sisimithres, the child was white
That I so took; and time accords right
With age of this young Damsel; yea me thinks
Her face the same, both when she looks and wink:
And such a beauty never have I seen
Before, nor since, and this had of the Queen.
More like a Patron than a Judge you say,
Replied the King: but yet take heed, I pray,
Lest one doubt clearing, you a greater bring,
And move suspect betwixt the Queen and King:
For how can we, that are a Blackmore pair,
Beget a child so beautiful and fair?
The Wiseman looked on King with twiring eyes,
And said, a Judge must justice patronize.
Yet still (my Liege) I think I speak for you,
As well as her, and help you to your due.
And what if I for her, now grown, do strive,
For whom, a child, I strove, to keep alive?
That of your body you might leave an heir;
And will you cast her off, because so fair?
For that, the roll, of Queen Persina's hand,
Will satisfy you, if it well be scand.
To clear the case yet further, call I pray
(At hand it is) for your Andromeda:
The picture's brought and set hard by the Maid,
And all that looked on them admiring said;
O father know your child, mistrust not mother,
For, but by life, we know not the one from the other.
Hydaspes doubts no more, but of his dream
Then spoke again, to ratify the theme:
So did the Queen, and both the Parents gaze*
On daughters face, and on Andromeda's.
Yet said Sisimithres; Royal Descent,
And Crown, and Scept'r is weighty consequent:
And truth most weighty of all: another sign
I know, may best The Imperial cause define.
Your left arm (Lady) show; it is no disgrace
To show a naked arm in such a case.
If you be that same royal child I knew,
Above your elbow a mark there is of blue.
She showed, and so it was; like azure ring
On pollisht Iu'rie; this when saw the King,
He was persuaded; and Persina then,
Forgetting state among so many men;
Ran from her Throne as if sh'had been half wild,
Embras'd, and kissed, and hugged so fast her child;
That, through so sudden joys extremity
With mourning mixed, she fell int' ecstasy.
Hydaspes pitied her, yet like affect
He felt in mind with manly courage checked.
But, when he saw them both together fall,
He raised them up, and kissed them both withal.
And on his daughter wept, to make amends
For hard belief: Yet thus said; You my friends,
And loyal people see this strange event,
And will (I think) if I desire, consent
To save the life of this unhoped Heir
Apparent to my Crown, although so fair:
But for your sake and safety, for the Law,
I may not spare her; so began to draw
Her toward The Altar; All cry-out on high,
The Gods have well declared she should not die
This cruel death; O save the Royal Blood!
And stepped betwixt, and crowding stiffly stood
To stay his passage; and yet further cry,
You fath'r of people fath'r a family!
I thank you for your love, quoth he, and staid,
And turned about, and to the Princess said;
That you, so fair one, yet my daughter are,
Howeuer called, the Gods and these declare.
But what is he, that was with you surprised,
And stands at The Altar to be sacrifiz'd?
How hapt you called him brother heretofore?
For, but your self, I children had no more.
Chariclia bent her eyes down to the ground,
And blushing said; it was that fearful stound
Constrained me so; but what he is indeed
(Please you him ask) himself can best arreed.
I cry you mercy (smiling quoth he than)
That blush I made you, speaking of the man.
But stay and keep your mother company,
And of your fortunes tell her th'historie;
So may you bring her now more joy and mirth,
Than at the day of your admired birth.
Of solemn Sacrifice I must have care,
And in your stead another Maid prepare
To die with him. The Princess at that word
Was like to skreame, yet held, and said; my Lord
And royal father, since the peoples mind
Is, for my sake, to spare the femall kind;
They look not for another, or if need
Require a pair must on your Altar bleed;
'Twere good you had another man; for he
Cannot be sacrificed, but with me.
The Gods forbid, quoth he; why say you so?
Because with him (quoth she) I stay, or go;
I live, or die, as Destin has defined.
I like (quoth he) your charitable mind
To save your fellow-pris'ner; but in truth
It cannot be: to The Altar must this Youth:
And that the people were content to spare
Mine only thee, was heavenly Powers care.
O King (quoth she) the Gods that had the care
This body of mine, so little worth, to spare;
Will spare my soul; and what that is they know,
That have ordained (before) it should be so.
If otherwise, and that this man must dye;
This one thing grant m'I pray, that none but I
Him sacrifise, to show these all about
Your daughters heart, like true bloud-royall stout.
The King was vexed, and said; of this your mind,
So contrary, no reason can I find.
At first this stranger sought you to defend,
And now, as if he never were your friend,
But utter foe, you would your self him kill:
I see no good can thence arise, but ill:
Nor can it with our reputation stand,
For you to take that office now in hand.
For none weilds here the sacrificing knife,
But Priest of Sun and Moon, the man and wife.
That hinders not, quoth she at mothers ear;
For I have one that may that title bear.
You shall, replied the Queen in softly voice,
When for your good and ours we make the choice.
There need no choosing one already had,
Quoth she. Alas (quoth he) my daughter's mad;
Or, ouerjoy'd with sudden change, in chat,
As in a dream, she speaks she knows not what;
Him brother calls, that is not; save him would
At first, and kill him now: She thinks she could
Be maid and wife at once: Dear wife her take
Into your Tent, and see what you can make
Of these her words; or labor to recall
Her wits again before she lose them all;
I must send-out to seek some other Maid,
For her to die; and mean time shall be staid
To give Ambassadors their audience,
That late are come (I know not yet from whence)
I think our conquest to congratulate:
Soon after set himself in chair of State,
And orderly them called Harmonias;
That for the time thereto appointed was.
Meroebus first, the Kings own brothers son,
Comes-in, and with his present thus begun;
My Sovereign Lord and Father, (for entailed
The Crown was on him, if Kings Issue failed)
For safe return of your high Majesty,
And for our gladness of your victory,
We all bring presents; and my self this man,
That often has played his prize, and ever wan;
At running, wrestling, cudgelling, and cuffes,
Can none come near him. Then the fellow-puffes,
And makes a present challenge; Come who dare;
And naked began there round about him stare.
The King makes proclamation; Come who would:
But not a man in all his Camp so bold.
So great his bulk was, post-like his vpholders,
And taller he than all by head and shoulders.
I thank you son Meroebu^, quoth the King;
And I will give him such another thing.
So did; and Elephant so grown with years,
That all the rest about him seemed but Steares.
The beast was brought, and like the man did stare;
And all the people laughed at that compare.
Now next to these came in the men of Sere,
Who brought the King two silken robes to wear,
Of dainty sleaue drawn from their wormie trees;
And ask a boon upon their naked knees.
And, what it was, is vtter'd be their Prime;
A pard'n of all their prisoners for the time.
The King it grants: then came-in th'Embassie
Of such as dwelt in Happy Arabie.
Unhappy since, for bringing forth the sword
Of Prophet false, that fights against the Word.
They brought a present did such odours yield,
As sweetly soon perfumed all the field,
With Aloes, Amomum, Cassia,
Canella, Stacte, Nardus Pistica,
Mirrh, Ambergris, Mahaca, Labdanum,
Keranna, Stor, and every precious gum;
Worth many tallents. Then brought they that have
None other house, but every man his Cave;
The Troglodytes, of Country no where cold,
A yoke of Gryphons chained with that fine gold,
Which Emmots nigh as big as Norfolk sheep,
At sand-hill-side are said to gath'r and keep.
Then came that wore, for Turban, straw in net
With arrows round about the brim beset,
Point upward, feathers down; a radiant show
They made, and stuck still ready for the bow:
And bow, with shafts of hurtful Dragons bone,
These men of Blemmy brought, and thus says one;
In all our Country (high and mighty King)
We have no better present now to bring,
Than these; but hope your Majesty will say
They did good service on the battaile-day.
They did indeed (replied the King) and were
The chiefest cause of other presents here:
Then ask what will you. They be seek his Grace
T'abate their tribute. He for ten years space
Remits it all. At last come the Axumates,
No Tributaries, but Associates;
And they rejoicing at this his victory,
Present him with a Camelpardalie:
So strange a beast, as never there was seen;
With Beuer-colour'd hair all dappled green.
As Camel high before, but low behind,
Does every way his small head nimbly wind;
With neck upright, and long and slender throat,
And great and rolling eyes, that stare and glote,
As if he cruel were; yet is, to keep,
As debonaire and tame as ox or sheep.
But since his legs behind both equall-short,
Both equall-long before, could not consort
With ambl' or trot, in pace his feet he sets
Just as an horse does when he well curuets;
Has higher bounds and turnings up and down;
And but a cord, made fast unto his Crown,
To guide him by. When this strange beast appeer'd,
And with his eyes so goggle-gloting leer'd
At Horse and Bull, that ti'd were fast to th'Altars,
They, scared therewith, broke suddenly their halters;
And snorting Horse, and roaring Bull amain
Ran up and down that Army-closed plain.
The people gave a shout thereat; and some
For fear of harm, the beasts so nigh them come:
And some cry-out and laugh, for game and sport;
Not so to see their trod-downe fellows hurt;
As more to think in accident so rare
Of others harm, how safe themselves yet are.
The noise so great, prouokt the Queen to draw
Her curtain, so she and her daughter saw.
Theagenes at Altar kneeled, expecting
The stroke of sword; yet herewithall erecting
Himself to see, and, seeing keepe^^ gone,
That other horse, which lest was, leapt upon;
With faggot-sticke in hand from Altartane,
And for a bridle holding fast the mane,
And kicking hard, him se^ to run so fast,
That Bull they chase, and overtake at last.
At first attempt the standers by surmise
The prisoner sled to escape the sacrifice:
But when they see him touch the beast behind,
And course him round, they sudden change their mind;
Yea take delight, to see the Bull in drift,
And held by tail, and yet the man him shift
So nimble at every turn; and tame him so,
That close together side by side they go,
As well acquainted now. And all admire
The man that made so Horse and Bull conspire;
And, that which many there admiring spoke,
As 'twere to draw, had joined them without yoke.
But other thoughts had then the royal Maid;
She of his hurt, or fall, was sore afraid:
And that perceived the Queen, and said; my child,
You seem t'affect the stranger now so wild:
My self do wish, him escaped these jeoperdies,
To keep him sound and fit for sacrifice.
Good mother wish the man more graciously,
(Quoth she) than that he escape this death to dye;
Since of your favor this small sign you gave him,
Do somewhat more for my sake now, and save him.
Persina thought it sauour'd of some love,
But knew not all; and said, what should you move
T'affect him so? for sure you make me muse;
Then tell me plain: a mother can excuse
Her daughters weakness, and well with it bear*
Chariclia then, down dropping many a tear,
And sighing said; I speak before the wise*
Yet am not understood, and then she cries,
And speaks again; I cannot so abuse
My self, to tell that shall my self accuse*
And as she thought to have vtter'd somewhat more,
They interrupted were with great up rore,
And shout the people made: For at the last
Theagenes that horse let go, and cast
Himself upon the Bull; and laid his head
Betwixt the roarers horns, and roundly sored
His arms about them, clasping fast his hands
Before the front; and neither sits nor stands,
But on the beasts right shoulder hangs down right,
And tires him so: at length by dainty slight,
When he had run him thrice about the ring,
And came to place now just before the King,
In course him tript, and on his back with bound
He laid him flat, and pight his horns aground;
They stuck so fast, he could not wag his head;
But kicking lay with all four quarters spread.
The man with left hand held him down (his right
Held up to Heaven) and made a cheerful sight
To King and people: so much eke the more
For that, as trump, the Bull began to rore
And sound the praise of him that overcame;
The roaring multitude then did the same;
And cried, now let him try his skill at full,
Th'old-Elpen-man, with him that cast the Bull:
Meroebus man they mean, and for him call;
That this young Greek and he may try a fall.
Then at their instance was the King content;
And for the Champion a Waiter sent.
Full soon came in the giant Aethiops,
On tip-toe strutting without coat or ^^ops,
And every way began to goggl and start,
To see the man that with him wrestle dare.
To the other then in Greek thus said the King;
You stranger, it is the will of all this ring,
To see a combat 'twixt this man and you.
I am content, quoth he; what shall we do?
No more then wrestle, quoth the King. Nay, nay,
Lets fight at sharp (quoth he) that I to day
May do some famous deed, or with my death
Content Chariclia, that still holds her breath,
And all this while our cases would not tell;
Or has already bid me quite farewell.
I know not what you mean^ by that same word,
Chariclia (quoth the King) but fight with sword
You may not: it is against the Law and guise,
That blood she shed before the Sacrifice.
Theagenes, perceiving King afraid
He should be slain before his offering, said,
It Is well you keep me for the Gods, and they
I trust will think upon my right to day.
But let him come: then strid, and strongly pight
H^s feet on chosen ground, with arms outright,
Back, neck, and shoulders bent; as I suppose,
To take the best advantage at the close.
The Giant comes, as 'twere at (...) where can,
But plays at first the Boobie more than man:
For catch he meant not, though he made a show;
But gave Theagenes a weighty blow
With arm on neck, and laughing started back,
And came again to set his limbs in ^acke:
Then both together grappling, tugging, springing,
Advancing, crouching, heauing, shouing, swinging,
Retiring, spurning, locking, loosing, make
Both air above, and earth beneath them shake.
Theagenes, that from a child had been
Instructed well by cunning wrestle-men,
Not only in Greece among the Mercurites,
But in Great Britain with the Cornwallites,
Got-vp this heavy Slouch at last on hip;
And all-asudden gave him such a trip*
(His own wait helping) by a Cornish knacke;
That fetched him over, and laid him flat on's back.
And as he fell, was ecchoed equal sound,
To lump of flesh so thrasht against the ground.
As dead he lay at first, stretched out at full,
Then facing Heaven shook heels as did the Bull.
Where at Meroebus angered gave a stamp;
Though greatly pleased therewith was all the Camp.
Chariclia's color went and came the while;
But at the fall she laughed beyong a smile.
This Queen of Di'monds, fairest of the pack,
Was she that help the red suit win the black.
But soon was dampt her victory; for lo,
The King arising from his Throne, said O
What pity it is that such a man should die
Untimely death! but help it cannot I.
Come young man now remains that you be crowned
For Sacrifice; and yet this deed renowned
Deserves no less: then set a golden stem
Upon his head, beset with pearl and Gem:
And weeping said, triumph; though, by our Lay,
The joy thereof will have an end to day.
But, since I cannot free you, though I strivve,
Ask what I may do for you, whilst you live,
And I shall grant it. Then Theagenes,
If sacrificed I must be, let it please
Your Majesty, that your so newfound heir
May use the sword upon me, and I Will obey her.
The King was struck, remembering how that clause
Agreed with hers: yet would not search the cause;
But said, I promised what I might, but this
I may not do; against the Law it is;
That says the Sacrifice still out be laid
By one that is a wife; not by a Maid.
She has an husband, quoth the Knight. To that
Replied the King; you speak you know not what,
And like a man to die: the fire has clean
Refuted that conceit; except you mean
Meroebus here, whom I intend t'aduance
By marrying her, as you have heard perchance.
You never shall effect it, quoth the Knight*
If I conceive Chariclia's mind a right*
And you may trust me as a Sacrifice*
That of the truth divinely prophesies.
To that Meroebus, Sacrifices slain
Do prophecy; not while they live remain.
And (father) well you said, and hit himpat;
At point of death he speaks he knows not what.
'Twere good you sent him unto th'Alt'r again,
And at your leisure put him out of pain.
So sent he was. The Princess that before
Had some small joy received, with hope of more,
For game at wrestling won; now began to droope,
When unto death again she saw him stoop.
Her mother comforts her, and says; full well
He might be saved, if she would further tell
What was betwixt them. When she saw no way,
But plainly must a Maidens love bewray,
And since it was but to the Queen that bore her,
She pluckt-vp heart, and laid the case before her.
Meanewhile the King, Ambassadors if more
Yet were to come, a Sergeant sent to know.
The same brings word again that from Sieen
Are letters come with gifts to King and Queen.
A grave old man comes in, as one elect
To bring the letters, and to this effect:
TO Hydaspes King of Indies West and East,
Orondates, of all his Train the least.
By Deeds of Arms your valor all men see,
And bounteousnesse by favor showed to me.
And, since your all-admired Majesty,
Me gave so soon th'Aegyptian Satrapie,
It makes me think, this little suit that I
Have now to make, you will me not deny.
A certain Maid to me from Memphis sent
(As I am told by some that with her went
And are escapt) is by your high command,
With others captive brought to Meroland.
I pray, me send her; this I undertake,
Both for her own and for her fathers sake,
Who seeking her was took by some of mine
Before the peace, and left at Elpentine.
Now prayest' appear before your Majesty,
In hope to taste herein your clemency.
O King, return him not with heavy thought;
But glad to find the grace we both have sought.
When this was read, the King said, where is he
That seeks a daughter captive? let me see.
The Old man, who brought the letters said, it is I.
Then said the King, I will you not deny
A fathers suit; and well it shall me please,
To grant this first request to Orondates.
There are but ten, and one has Parents known;
Go view the rest, and finding take your own.
The man for very joy began to greet,
And fell before the King, and kissed his feet;
Then viewed them all, but his there could not find,
And told the King; you se (quoth he) my mind;
The Old man hung down his head and sorely wept,
Yet looking up again, to The Altar stepped,
And as in sudden fury fast he goes,
And on Theagenes, as'twere a noose,
His twisted tippet casts. The Knight gave way
And let the old man alone to do or say
What ere he list: for, though by such a swing,
Content he was to come before the King,
And look again upon Chariclia,
Dejected since he last was sent away.
The Dotard pulls, and cries, I have, I have
That false Aeacide, maiden-stealing Slave;
And draws him, willing to be drawn, before
The King and State, and thus begins to rore.
O King behold! this is that wicked wight
Who stole my daught'r, and now, like hypocrite,
At Altar kneeles: they could not well arreed,
What 'twas he meant; but wondered at the deed.
And some it pitied, some it moved to laughter,
To hear him cry; My daughter, O my daughter!
My daughter thus far have I sought in vain?
O Templ' at Delph! O Phoebus! O Diane!
The King commands him tell his case more plain;
'Twas Charicles, who thus began again,
The maine truth hiding; Sire, I had a child,
A guirle, although I say it, both fair and mild,
As any could be seen of flesh and blood;
Who served Diana vowing maiden-hood,
In famous Templ' at Delph: this Thessalite,
Himself pretending Achillaean Knight,
From Phoebus Templ', and from within the gate,
Her stole a way, and left me desolate;
Wrong is it to you, that place if one profane;
Your Sun is Phoebus, and your Moon Diane.
When I had sought all over Thessalie,
Pelasgiot, Estaetin, Phthiotie,
And found them not, I had intelligence,
The Priest of Memphis had them guided thence:
And him then seek I, but I found him dead;
A son of his then priesting in his stead;
Who told me all; how that my guirle was sent
TO Orondates: then to Siene I went,
And taken was, and staid at Elpentine;
Until the Satrap hither sent m'in fine;
And here I find, yet her I cannot say,
But this the man that took her first a way.
So held his peace, and many brackish tears
Fell down his cheeks upon his silver hairs.
Then King to Knight, to this (Sir) what say you?
Theagenes replied; Sir, all is true.
Me thief and rauisher confess I must,
As unto him; but unto you am just.
Restore him then the Damsel, quoth the King.
Not he that stole, but he that has the thing
(Replied the Knight) restore it ought; your self
The Damsel have the Priestesse was at Delph:
It Is even your daughter fair Chariclia;
And, if he see her, so the man will say.
They all are moved; and then Sisimithres,
Who knew it true, embraced Charicles,
And said, your nursling whom I once you gave,
Is well, and her now her right parents have.
With that Chariclia, this old man to meet,
Ran from the Queen, and fell down at his feet,
And said, O father, dear to me as they
Who me begot; because I went away
So rudely leaving you and holy Delph,
Take what revenge you will, I yield my self.
With that Persina kissed the King, and said,
Believe, my Lord, of this our daughter maid
This all is true; and no man else but he,
That noble Grecian, must her husband be.
And now by many signs all understood
The Gods would have no more of humane blood*
The King agreed, and glad was of such heirs,
To bear with him the burd'n of Kings affairs.
Then on their head he set in full renown,
The white silk Turban with the Blackmore Crown:
And two by two to M^roe they ride;
Persina with her new-come daughter Bride;
Hydaspes with his son Theagenes;
And Priest of Delphos with Sisimithres:
There many days together and many nights
They celebrate with joy the nuptial rites.
And as they sat at board with royal cheer,
What ere was dainty, were it never so dear,
A curle-head blacke-boy (taught by Zanzibar,
Who, Thou Art to learn, had traveled as far
As th'Isle of Britain) sung to th'Irish harp
How Sun and Moon about the Center warp,
And, passing thr'ow the signs of heavenly Ring,
Make Summer first, then Autumn, Winter Spring;
How Greek Achilles Trojan Hector slew,
And thrice about the City wall him drew;
How mighty Memnon, fair Aurora's son,
Before he fell, had many a battle won;
How Perseus came int' Aethiopia,
And from Sea Monster freed Andromeda;
Whose picture fair, in black Kings chamber seen,
That Faire-one made be borne of Blackmore Queen.
This have I wrought with day-and-nightly swinke,
To file our tongue so rough: let no man think
It was for wealth, or any vain desire
(As of a mind that aims at nothing higher)
T'enable me to till, or let more land;
To Have men and women-seruants at command;
To stretch my self on costly bed of state,
In faire-hung chamber furnished with plate;
Or in Caroch to whirle the Town about,
With humble suitors followed home and out;
To quaffe in crystal glass the dearest grapes,
And make my guests therewith as merry as Apes;
To wear the linen fine and white as milk,
And purpl' engrain'd of softest wool and silk;
With mule in street to see my foot-cloth fould;
In field on horse to stamp the grassie mould
At wilde-goose chase; or after hawke, or hound;
Or run for silver bell, and hundred pound:
For none of these: what rhen? that abl' I be
Without debt, or restraint of libertee,
At land and sea, peace and war, book and sword,
With more effect to serve my Sovereign Lord;
To write, road, give, keep hospitalitee,
As heretofore have done mine Ancestree:
That after-c^mmers know, when I am dead
I some goo^ (...) life endeavored (...)
I cannot mu^^ (...) to (...) use* (...)
Make causey, drai^^, bridge, ^^^mon (...)
Poor boys bind Prentice, marry (...),
When Commonwealth requires such kind of aids:
Nor purchase and restore unto the Church
Th'improued Tithes that Avarice did lurch:
Nor yet build wall, fort, hospital, or school,
To keep my name vndrown'd in Lethe poole:
Yet will I labor what I can with pen
To profit my succeeding Contrymen:
In vain (may seem) is wealth or learning lent
To man that leaves thereof no monument.
FINIS.

