Yet a course at the Romyshe fox.

A dysclosynge or opening of the Manne of sin, Contained in the late
Declaratyon of the Popes old faith made by Edmonde Boner bysshopp of London.
whereby wyllyam Tolwyn was than newlye professed at paul's cross openly into
Antichrists Romyshe relygyon again by a new solemn oath of obedyence,
notwythsta^dynge the oath made to his prince before to the contrary.

An alphabetycall dyrectorye or Table also in the end thereof, to the spedye
finding out of the pryncypall matters therein contained. Compyled by Johan
Harryson.

2. These. 2. Before the lords coming schall the manne of sin be opened.
Esa. 11. with the breathe of his mouth schall the lord slay that wicked one.
A preface to the Christen Reader.
SEns the worlds beginning (dear frynde in the lord) has inyquyte had his
froward course, and schall so have still to the latter end thereof. In Job. 4.
2. Pet. 2. Iudae. 1. Genes. 6.
the very angels or spretes of heaven ded god find an untoward stubbernesse
and an obstynate crokednesse. what he has had in the ungodly children of
me^ne sens the days of Cain till this present age, it were much to write. Of
that was sumtyme the church of Christ, has yt made the Synagoge of satan
ever sens that aduersarye was set at large after Apoc. 2. Job. 2. Apoc. 20.
Iudae 1. Math. 7. 2. Pet. 2.
the thousand years, and sumwhat before whose malygnaunt members under title of
a spirytualte are always filthy who remongers, murderers, thieves, raueners,
Idolatours, liars, dogs, swyne, wolves, abhomynable workers, adversaries to
god, and very deuyls incarnate.

Of whose cursed cruel no^bre one, is Apoc. 9. Math. 7. Prove. 26 Psalm. 143.
Edmonde Boner now bysshopp of London, a very fearce furyouse angel of the
botto^lesse pytt, as his daily fruits declares him. Specially this declaration
of his here following, who^ he malycyouslye enforced wyllyam Tolwyn the person
of saint antonynes openly to proclaim before the audience at paul's cross the
year before this to the terror of there tymerouse conscyences and confusyon of
Sap. 17. 1. These. 5. 1. Joan. 4. Apoca. 9.
there sowles. Mark the doctrine therein contained, and prove the sprete and
vein thereof by the scripturs, and ye schall fyn de it no less than the
filthy fomynge smoke of the insacyable chaos or pytt without bottom. Neither
is god therein sought, nor yet any godliness. For in God is not herin named
ones, but to condemp nation.
the whole process is not he ones named but to condempnacion. I think sens
cristes ascencyon was not soche a monstruouse thing seane as yt is, thus
offered to the people for a necessary doctrine of faith. No, not under the most
wicked tyrauntes. antichrist is not all out of en glande.


In the most pestyle^t time of papystrye was not soche a perverse professyon
made unto Antichrists ragged rewles, as this is here, if yt be thoroughly
wayed. I have read diverse recantacyons made in Johan wycleues time of phylyp
repyngdon, Thomas waldenus i fasciculo heresium.
Ioha^ puruaye, Richard with Nycolas herforde, harrye crompe, wyllyam
swynderbye, Robert rigge, walter dashe, Johan hu^teman, Thomas britwell and
other, but no^ soche as this is, neither so folyshe nor yet so deuylyshe. Gala.
1. 1. Cor. 16. Acto. 15.
Saint Paul holds him accursed of god, that techeth any other doct^^ne tha^
the gospel, or the sacred scripturs of the Bible, though he were an angel
from heaven. Much more must he be accursed tha^ which mynystreth nothing but
wickedness. Math. 15. Gala. 4. Esa. 1. Dani. 14. Amos. 5.


Nothing is here taught but the doctrynes of men, the beggerlye tradycyons
and dyrtye dregs of the pope, as holy water making, processyon going,
sensynge of Images, and latyne wawlynge in the temple, with other like filthy
fantasyes, which are soche vain worshyppynges as God does abhor. No sin
ponishe the papystes with soche extremyte.
And with tyranny are they here extorted, by open rebukes and shames of the
world. Of so many traitors as the bysshoppes and prestes have known, of the
ues, manquellers, Idolatours, whoremo^ gers, swearers, and sodomytes, never
brought they one yet to Paul's cross there to do open penance. But for sekyn
ge to have the verite syncerelye preached Enemies to the glory of god
according to the wholesome commandment of Christ and the king, was this
poor ma^ne po^nisshed before all the cite and enforced for the same to
proclaim him self an heretyque. sabellicus Platina et Joan nauclerus.


Eue^ soche an other part has my lord of London played here with Tolwin, as
Dioclecianus played with Marcellinus the bysshopp. For like as he compelled him
openly to renounce Christ, and to do sacrifyce to the Idols after the heythe^
manner. So does my lord here constrayne Tolwyn to forsake his verite and swe
are to the observation of papistrye, which Act. 4. Marc. 8. Joan. 1. Luce. 12.
Math. 10. Apoc. 3. 1. Tim. 5.
is of the same stynkynge leven. To deny Christ (which is all one with his
word) before men, has he most cruel lie enforced this poor innocent manne
so puttinge him in danger of his denial again before his eternal father,
which is everlasting da^pnacio^, be he not the more merciful unto him. For If
he believes that denye^ge the verite with mouth on lie, he is out of that
parell of soul so lo^ ge as he still retayneth yt in his heart, he Eusebius
cesariensis et Epiphanius.
is sore deceived as were the helchesaytes Against whom wrote both origene and
Epiphanius the bysshopp of salamyne in cypres, confutinge that opinion often hers
as a most detestable heresye.

There covenant with God (says saint Augustinus super psalm. 118.
Austyn) do not they observe, but be comes therein unfaithful, which for auoy
dynge persecution goes back from his true testymonyes. Much after this sort
Antonius auerarius sermo. 34
recanted Theodocyon the ephesiane, con fessynge with the hebyonites and Jews
christ alone to be ma^ne, after that he had* godly interpreted the scripturs.
And in thus doing he thought himself also discharged in conscience, for that
he ded it of fear, and because he therein named not god. Many are now in
england which walk under these subtle shadows, Like conneyaunce nowin
england.
but if they think so to avoid the danger of gods indygnacio^, they sore
deceive themselves. Sebastianus the holy martyr perseuinge Marcellus and Marcus
two brethren at that parelouse point of Antonius auerarius sermo. 42
there sowles destruction, offered himself unto the death to hold them still
stead fast in the true christen believe, least they schuld so have peryshed for
ever.

Wha^ James the less was settvp at hieru Ide^ in lib. de virtutibus sermo ne.
18.
salem in the common preaching place by the Pharysees and scribes to revoke
again that doctrine of salvation which he had taught, he ded not only afferme
yt a fresh, but also with a much larger circumstau^ce more yt, without fear
of death. And therefore has yt been an honor Eusebius cesariensis
unto him ever sens, besides his everlasting reward with God. where as it is
to them that renounce yt, perpetual shame and confusion. In the primative
church Canones co^cil^ niceni and platina.
were they putt to penance among the vnbaptysed beleuers, that had in
persecution forsaken the truth, and were not received again unto the christen
communion, but after great repentance and prayer. Nolesse plage limyteth the
scripture unto the^ that so cowardlye reca^teth Apoc. 3. Luce. 12. Mat. 10.
Marc. 8. Luce. 9. Mat. 25. Joan. 12.
tha^ the racinge of there names out of the book of life. He that is ashamed of
me (says Christ) and of my word in this aduouterouse generation before me^ne,
of him will I be ashamed before the mageste seat of my eternal father, what
schuld ye fear them that slay the body, wha^ they ca^ do no harm to the
soul?

Woe be to you shrynkynge children Esa. 30. Os^e. 7. Abdye. 1.
(says the lord) which seeks help at the power of Pharao, and confort in
the shaddowe of the Egypcyanes. Both schal Pharaos help be yowr confusyon, and
the shadow of Egypt yowr utter shame Hieremie was a strong wall of stele, yet
was he stoned unto death. Johan Baptyst Here. 1. Luce. 1. Marc. 6. Math. 14.
Joan. 8. Joan. 15.
was great before the lord, and full of the holyeghost from his mothers wo^
be, yet was he beheded of Herod. Christ gave his own life for the truth of
his word, and promised his dyscyples no^ other reward of the world but
death for the same. An honor is yt to suffer for ryghtousnesse, and a glory
of immortalite. Eccle. 4. Sap. 3. 2. Tim. 2.
Non schall be crowned (says saint Paul) but he that lawfullye stryueth. The
nature is (says saint Hierome) of these wretched tyrauntes, to constrayne
Hierom. in quada^ homelia.
the poor innocent sowles to deny Christ's veryte before men, that they
might lose that crown and be dampened.

Never manne hard any of them yet 1. Cor. 15. Gala. 1. Joan. 8. Ephe. 4.
recante with Paul, though there generacyon has for the more part been
murderers, so has the lord given them up into most deep errors of the
sprete. When judgment in causes of relygion is committed to soche monstruouse
mahou^des what godliness can follow? What a Ceremonies are the cause and
ground of superstycio^s
mendement of euyls can be looked for? They say there ceremonies may stand,
the superstitions taken away. And yet have those there ceremonies been the only
ground and cause of the superstitions. For had there been no ceremonies, never
had there been any superstitions. But full Never is the devil with out his
crafts
false are they and subtyle in there generacyon. They know yt will be easy
enough to bring in them again, if the other remain. Master person podypoke
and ser sau^der slye his parryshe pressed schal have a commandment at the seane
to do They do but dally and mock with the king
there feats in that behalf under the title of devotion or else of commendable
rytes of holy church, and the king schall never know of yt. Let him
command* what he list, yet schall yt be as they will have yt, spyght of his
hait. And I trow they schall find justices a broad fytt for there hands, in
case the heretyques speak any thing against them.

I trow master Wharton of bongaye Wharton a greatvp holder of trayterose
prestes
in soth folk will not be behind with his part now, no more than he has been
a fore time, with his colege of calkers that calked so long for Cromwell, and
for other more if the world had not changed to there minds. The holy ghost
thus deluded and the princes godly commandment 1. These. 4. Mat. 3. Hiere.
50. 3. Reg. 18.
set all at naught, the lord will not fail to raise out from among the
trodden stones in the street or conte^ned multitude some ernest Helias or
faithful child of Abraham to touch there abomynacyons. I am (I know well)
most simple and weak learned of a great sort. Yet will in the quarrel of this
poor Israelyte, Hebr. 11. Apoc. 19. Exodus 2. Ephc. 6. Hebr. 4. Apoca. 1.
this natural cuntre manne of mine, and fellawe servant of Jesus Christ, with
Moses invade this proud stranger and cruel Egypcyane. Non other weapon will
I take here, but the sword of the sprete (which is the word of the eternal
living God) with the most auctorysed hystoryes and chronicles, and with the^
will I stryke him to the groun de, so leaving him there in the sand.

An whole year have I tarryed and more, Much confession, but no true
ame^deme^t of life.
to se if any amendment would come for this outragyouse blasphemy age ynst
God, he going so often to confession, and I perseyue yt will not be. For sens
has he been much worse than a fore. I se well now, that do bysshoppes neuerso
many myscheues, in there Benedicite rekenynges No repentance in there
Benedicite rekenynges
they have no place to repentance. Never have they conscience of there most
wicked doings, and therefore must the world know them to there utter shame.
Most deuylyshe will his pontifical actrs apere, come they ones to the true
touch 1. Joan. 4. Math. 7. Jude. 1. Apoc. 18.
stone, which is Christ's doctrine. I doubt not but to please Christ in doing
this office, and intouchynge this adversary of God with his whoryshe holy
church or blasphemouse spouse of the devil

I have for that purpose given myself Suffer must he that will live in Christ.
Psalm. 115. Credidi, propter quam locutus sum etc^.
over unto pouerte, and unto a peynefull exyle with my wife and children, and
schall not (I trust) refuse the death also, if yt come that way. For so
necessary is yt now to suffer for Christ's doctrine as in the aposteles time.
For why, alone veryte is yt that was than persecuted and now. Many has
alredye in the steadfast believe of David, spoken lyberallye and has been
greuouslie troubled for yt. With stomach have they rebuked the world, and
showed men of there filthy errors. They have remembered God for his benefytes
and have been heavy to se them abused. Vvherfor they have received the cup of
salvation, calling Calice^ sa lutaris et c^. Preciosa in conspectu.
upon the name of the lord. Performed have they there promise unto God, in the
presence of his people. Precyouse in the sight of the lord was the death of
those his holy witnesses, which they suffered there for his sake.

And I trust there be yet many more 3. Reg. 19. 2. The. 2. Daniel. 11 Apoc. 13.
behind of the same godly zele and stomach, that never will cease till that
wicked one be vttred, which still exalts herself in the conscyences of men
above all that is called God. Many now a days which has been touched
sumwhat with the sprete af Christ, has bego^ne The Popes church is the deuyls
Iakes.
to smell out the fylthie sauer of that iakes of the devil, but they have not
yet brought the very thing to light. No, some there be abroad in the world,
walking under the pretense of the gospel, which do all they ca^ to hyde the
filthy Nahu^. 3. Esa. 47. Apoc. 17. Ezech. 16
parts of that monstrouse madame, that rose colored whore of Babylon, where
as God has decreed to putt her to shame and co^fusyo^. The books which has
been putt forth by men of learning Adversaries to Gods heaue^lye purpose.
to discover her myscheues, do they now gelde, myngle, hacke, cut, take fro
and putt to. Some to get lucre in the sale of them, some to auaunce there own
names, and some to please the bysshoppes therwyth.

How shamefullye are the bybles handled, which now has neither annotacyons
Soche enemies fyndeth the verite always.
nor table? How the godly confession of the germans, the common places of
Sarcerius, and now of late certain notable treatyses else compyled by sundry
learned men, with diverse other works more. To se how dyuerslye men do seek
them selves now, yt is a wondre, not carynge what wickedness they mynystre
Them selves does me^ne seek and not Jesus christ.
Easy it is to perseyue, what has brought these me^ne to the gospel, and
what fruits they seek thereof. Nothing do they else in soche presumptuouse
entripryses, but withstand the pleasure of God for there own fylthie lucre and
da^pnable deuyly she pleasure. The time is now come, wherein God will dysclose
the strong delusyo^ of antichrist, though all they say nay to yt,

Some men does look that the self the worldly judge mente off diverse men.
said antichrist or body of satan, with all his supersticiouse kinds of
Idolatrye schuld be destroyed by the power of princes, and therefore would they
have men to tarrye there doings. But those men shote at a very wrong mark.
Full barelye have they serched the scripturs thereof, that look for yt that
way. Cursed Daniel 8. Hiere. 17. Psalm. 145. 2. These. 2. Esa. 11. Esa. 27.
Psalm. 1.
is he (says the Prophet) which trusts in ma^ne, and appoynteh his strength
unto flesh. Only schall the lord with the breathe of his mouth, or sprete
of (...) destroy that mighty leuia than, as he by his aposteles and prophets
has specyfyed a fore. Like dust in the wind schall he scattre from the earth
that deceytfull generacyon of hypocrites

I deny yt not, but those godly gouuernours Apoc. 21. Psalm. 71. Esa. 61.
Hiere. 50 Psalm. 117. Apoc. 6. 2. Joan. 5.
of the earth which schall in these days bring there glory and honor
ryghtlye to the new cite of God (as some has done all ready) shall show
themselves faithful mynysters, and seek his glory in that behalf. But they
schall not perform this. For yt may be non act of man by his promise. Only
is that wonderful conquest over the enemies of God reserved to his word, and
so ougth yt only thereat to be looked for. The lord commanded Johan his elect
apostle Apoc. 11. Gal. 4.
in measurynge the temple, to seclude from yt as no porcyon thereof, the chaste
cell of charmers. Vvych is by the judgment Lucae. 3. Apoc. 11. Apoc. 22. Ephe.
5. 1. Cor. 6.
of his word, to separate from his true congregacyon, those spiritual
sorcerers of Sodom and Egypt. Vvythout (says he) are dogs and inchaunters,
filthy wurkers and manquellers, Idolatours and liars. Than was this in mystery
spoken, now schall yt be actuallye fulfilled, as I have in more ample wise upon
the Apocalypse declared yt, whom I have called the Image of both churches.

For non other cause have I named this The man of sin.
book here of Boner, The ma^ne of sin, and the gloss there upon made, his
dysclosynge or opening, but for that yt contains nothing else but a
spiritual wickedness, Ephe. 6. 2. These. 2. Dani. 12.
and is therefore so called also of saint Paul, and for that the other by many
clear manyfestatyons declares the same. In many places of the scripture is
manne a name of contumelye and reprofe, of vanyte Psalm. 115. Psalm. 61. Eccle.
12. Psalm. 38 1. Cor. 3.
and falshede. All men (says David) are liars. The children of men are
deceytfull. All is but vanyte (says Solomon) all is but a fyckle vanyte. A
universal vanyte is every living manne. Are ye not carnal (says Paul) are
ye not Psalm. 13. Joan. 1. Gal. 4.
beastlye, walking after ma^nys ways? Nothing was ma^ne but a myserye, till
the lord looked mercyfullye down upon him from heaven, and made him his child
Psalm. 3. Joan. 1. Gala. 4.
of adopcyon through faith. A fore was he nothing but a fleshlye generacyon,
all of the filthy earth.

By cause that I therefore tryenge this book The cause why this book is thus
intyteled.
by the scripturs, have found therein no^ other fruits tha^ has risen of the
corrupt fantasyes of me^ne. I have here with Paul intytled yt the man of
sin, as a thing offering not else of it self but sin* who se abhomynacyo^s
I have here partlye opened to the intent that people should be ware All schall to
hell that is not of Gods word. what church christ looks to receive.
of the^. And that they which have received the^ in faith, schuld vomete the^
out again, least in the lords coming they peryshe with them. Non other
fashyoned church looks Christ to receive ageine of the world for his
eternal spouse, than that he left here in persecucyon for his word. No thank
are they like to have of him, which has brought into his clear building,
stubble, hay, or timber, Mat. 16. 1. Cor. 3.
or yet any other corruptible things.

These myters, typpetes, furred amyses, Not off christ but of antichrist are
these.
and shaven crowns. These crosses, copes sensers, and candel styckes. These
mattenses, masses, ceremonies, and sorceryes, schall not he know for his. For
he commanded no soche things to be done. He told them he would require
mercy Esa. 1. Math. 9. Marci. 12. Osee. 6. zach. 7.
at there hands and no sacrifice, and thereof have they now nothing at all. I
much rather desire mercy (says the lord) tha^ offering, the knowledge of
God than burnt sacrifyce. This text of Oseas and Matthew was very far of from
my lord Boner, when he set up a commandment in Paul's a geynst Bible
readinge, for the time of there Romyshe rablementes. Mark the last reckoning of
the indge Herem. 2. Math. 25. Esa. 58. Ezech. 18. 1. Cor. 11.
in the. 25, of Matthew, and ye schall se no soche things demanded, as they
look to have observed. Herin is not Christ's instytucyon denied in any case,
but the popes filthy tradycyons and customs. So far is his holy ordinance
above God and the devil are not like.
the popes rustye rewles, as is the pure gold above the vile dyrt of the
dongehyll, or the imperial heaven above earth.

I know certenlye I schall for this be called a thousand times heretic, but
I way it nothing at all, for it is the old The old name of true christianes.
name of true christianes. I think some of owr feeble faint brethren, which
are now neither whote nor cold, will dyuerslye say there minds, and have
sentences much like themselves. I know I schal be The old reward of Gods
true servant.
burned if I may be caught, but I care no thing for it. For I doubt not my
porcio^ to be with Christ, which will not suffer one hear to peryshe, but will
restore it me again at the latter day. Yea, if I lose for him here, I know I
schall be a Luce. 21. Mat. 16. Joan. 12. Actu. 5. Math. 10.
winner again there. Rather I had to die many deaths, tha^ to obey soche
myscheues to my sowles condempnatio^. Never schall the life of my synnefull
carkas be so dear unto me (I hope) as is the glory of my eternal father and
redemer Jesus Christ.

What is the religion of yowr church The church of england holds fast the
popes leauynges
in england at this day, but the popes dyrtye leauynges, the filthy dregs
of his rotten vessels, and the cancred rust of his old worn pytchers. Surely
he that schall compare yowr church to the church that Christ left schall
find them so unlike as chafe to wheat, and claye to silver. As in a myrrour
is that to be seane in this most deuylyshe declaration of Boner, to the
wonderynge of all christen Judge what that church is by this spu^ all fruit.
dome. Is not england (think you) most dolorouslye to be lamented, this
being an open spectacle of there christen learning, profession, and faith? and
the wyndynge up of there new gospel after there churches reformation? I trow
me^ne may what me^ may report of there new reformacyon.
say abroad, they have frutefullye sytten upon the causes of christen relygion
so many years, bringinge it to soche a good end. If it be thus in London the
head cite of the realm and so nygh the kings presence, it must needs be much
worse farther of.

Oh most unshamefast boldness of a Esa. 56. Daniel. 8. 3. Joan. 1.
very shameless Antichrist. Ryghtlye has Daniel descrybed the great master
of his, geuynge him an unshamefast face. This is a matter not done in silence,
but openly at Paul's cross, the more men does wo^dre of it, and think that
not christ have they sought but themselves.
an other thing has been sought there by the gospel preaching, tha^
Christ's kingdom. Well, I ca^ not tell, the lord amend all, but I know
this is abominable. If it schuld cost me a score of lives (had I so many) I
would not spare to utter it to his dishonor, seeing the lord thus blasphemed,
and his redeemed heritage They ^atche home agyeyn there pope.
so abused. In this pestylent professy on, is the great Idol of Rome admytted
again unto his old seat. By all crastie means seeks Boner here and other
more of his fellawes, to have him regne a fresh in the waueringe cso^cye^ces
of me^ne. By layser will they also find the means They seek to restore hi^
again
to purchase him his old prymacye again, and to have him the head of there
church.

For what other is it to be sworn to his pilde laws, but to acknowledge him
All one is the devil with his deuylyshnesse.
inwardlye for there master and lord? Non ca^ne ryghtlye allow his wares,
unless they allow him also. He and his creaturs must needs go together, as
the work manne with his work toles. If holiness be supposed to be in his vnc
cyons and blessings, orders and ceremonies, much more in his gloriouse
person which is the creator of them. Fill Of soche Idell vanitees co^eth very
Idel fruits.
the heart ones with Idle vanytees, and yegett of yt but Idle fruits. Examples
need not far of to be sought, if all things be well considered. Vvarnynges
have we had if we would receive them, that al shrewes are not a sleep. Be
learned ones Psalm. 1. Sapi. 6. Roma. 13. 3. reg. 10. 2. Pet. 3. Hiere. 22. Apoc.
20. 1. Cor. 3. Iudic. 16. Psalm. 143.
ye rewlers in the laws of the lord, and decerne according to the^. Vvynke
not always ye noble kings of the earth, to whom God has committed the
governance of his people. Play not the wantons till death stele upon ye,
least ye be to seek in your accountes making. Co^sydre that yowr charge is
great, and that euerve ma^ne schall have rewards according to his deeds, be
they in faith or out of faith. Ye be otherwise cumpassed by these ^latterynge
phylystynes tha^ ye beware of and that may ye by this act perseyue. God has
given you wonderful vyctories se now that ye be not unthankful.

Not withstanding, yet is it to be considered Eccle. 47. 1. Para. 22 3. Reg.
6. 3. reg. 22. 2. Para. 18
that though David slew great Golye, and ded many other notable things, yet
ded he not build the temple, for that was reserved to Solomon. Considre the
time of Iosaphat king of Judah, which reigned immediatlye after thethre
thousand years from the creacyon of A da^ after the hebrews co^putacion. And
confer it with owr age now, which has after a like manner ouershote the three
half thousands from christ's natiuyte, the king he^rye the. 8. compared unto
Iosaphat.
world decresynge, and ye schal se them wonderfullye agree. A clause a fore
hand is this, parauenture not all to be neglected. Praise be unto the eternal
lord, for that he has wrought alredye by your most victoriouse Iosaphat. I
doubt 3. reg. 19. 4. reg. 10. Eccl. 49. 4. reg. 23. 2. Par. 34. Eccle. 49. 2.
cor. 13.
not but here after he will send soche a Iehu as schal take away all the
Idolaters. Soche a full Josias schall ye have if ye be thankful, as will
perfyghtlye restore the laws as yet corrupted, and break down the buggerye
places that are yet in the house of the lord. The grace of owr lord Jesus
Christ, and of his heavenly sprete, be with the (good gentle Reader) and with
all the^ which love the veryte of God unfeignedly. Amen.

Thus ends the preface.
Mark this rewle following.
Certain fygurs have I here added both to the text and gloss, appoyntynge
therbye the Manne of sin unto his just opening, (figure compared to figure)
that he may the better apere unto the dylygent reader in his right colors

* A dysclosynge or opening of the Manne of sin, Co^taynynge a just reproach
of the deuylyshe declaration of Boner, or the new professyon of Tolwyn to the
antichrist of Rome. And this is thereof the first fytte.
The dysclosynge.
HAd this bysshopp been sent unto us in massage from God the everlasting Joan.
1. Lucae. 3. Math. 28. Marci. 6. Roma. 1.
father as was Ioha^ Baptist, we had had of him the preachi^ge of repentance
for sin. Had he been dyrected from his eternal son Jesus christ as were
the meke spreted apostoles, we schuld have received af him the Joyful tidings
of salvation in his blessed death and passion. Had he been a true mynystre of
that undefiled church which is alone governed 1. Pet. 4. Prouer. 9. ^. Cor. 2.
Apoc. 9. Math. 12. 2. These. 2. 2. These. 2.
by Christ's only word, he had brought to Paul's cross the wholesome doctrine
of faith according to that Christen office. But as one shaken out of
antichristesnest, he has mynystred here fruits like himself. Even like the
very manne of sin, or like him which has no manner of godly sprete, neither
of wisdom, understanding, counsel, stre^gthe, knowledge, pity, nor yet of the
true Esa. 11. Gala. 5. Apoc. 13. Marci. 3. Joan. 19.
fear of God, as Esaye does rehearse the^. I think verylye he is that two
horned beast which Christ showed unto Johan boanerges his dearlye beloved
Apostle in mysterye, that schuld rise out of the earth. For here he speaks
perverse things and blasphemies as it is said that beast schuld do. He has ij
horns like the la^bes at a blushe, as that beast schuld have A right descripcy
on of Boner out of the apoc.
for they are also cou^terfett. The.ij. prycketes of his myter (his chaplaynes
says) betokens the.ij. testamentes, which manyfestlye proves him to be the
same. He compels here the worldly multitude to worship the first beast,
like as that The works of a right antichrist.
beast schuld do. He seems to fatche fire from heaven in me^nys sight, he
seduceth the dwellers upon earth, he incorageth aseheades that of late years
were dumme dodypols, as are Standyshe, huntyngto^, dyrt dawbers of ^roke^
Babylon.
and soche other more, and he sleeth them that will not do homage to the first
beasts Image as that beast schuld do, and there for he seems to be the same.
Though he be not that whole beast (for that it universally extends to all
the spu^all promoters of Idolatrye in the popes kyngedome) The promoters of
Idolatry.
yet has he a great porcyon therein. The massage that he here brings and the
lyerninge that he here utters might come from the devil well enough, for any
Boners declaracyon is a massage from Satan.
goodness is in it. And therefore let hi stand forth here hardelye, and tell
his own tale. I think by that time ye have throughlye hard it having
always recourse to the scripturs, ye will say in this matter as I do.

The manne of sin.
1 Here begins the declaracyo^ made. 2. the forth sond^ye in aduent 3. the
year of owr lord God a thou sand / five houdreth and.xli. 4. by master
Vvyllyam Tolwyn person of saint Antonynes. 5. in the cite of London.


His dysclosynge.
NOn other is this declaration (good Christen Reader) if thu dyligentlye mark
it and way it a right, A new professyo^ to Antichrist.
but a new professyon to the Antichrist of Rome and his old rustye rewles*
his only name suppressed. Necessary it is for the Christian traueler which
walks here betwixt fire and water, light and Eccle. 15. Herem. 2. 1. Joan. 4.
1. These. 5. Joan. 5.
darkness, good and ill, life and death to try all spretes, and to prove
all beleues by the rewles of faith, whether they be godly or nay. And to
that end were the holy scripturs first given us of owr eternal God, and are
made now open unto us by the sprete of his only son Jesus Christ, which are
herin and in all soche deuylyshe dottages needful to be Pro. 30. Esa. 52.
Osee. 10. Math. 7.
followed if we couete with the^ salvation. For with the false Prophets schall
the seduced multitude perish as the children with there mother and the fruit
with there tree if they take not the lords aduertysementes. 2. We will not
greatly strive with my lord Boner here of London Iewyshe rytes not yet
abolyshed.
for the name of the day* whereupon the said new profession was made by
co^pulsio^, though it be sumwhat Iewyshe. For neither is it in owr power to
change it in other, nor yet to command it not so to be observed, though we in
owr own conscience according to the doctrine of Colo. 2. Lucae. 17. Gala.. 4.
saint Paul, observe neither days nor months, times nor years in bondage,
least we turnyng again to beggarly tradicyons and lowsye customs schuld have
of christ no profyght. This we speak for my lords forth sunday of aduent or
coming of Christ. Vvherin we look not now for his coming again with The
papystes look for christ with the jews and hipocrites
the jews, nor yet think to receive him in outward shadows with the
hypocrytes more upon one day than upon an other. But we believe to have him
within us at all times. And as the true worshyppers, by him to worshypp the
father in sprete and in verite. For why, 1. Cor. 6. Joan. ^. Joan. 15.
without him we can do nothing. So perfyght must owr faith betherfor that he
may dwell presentlye with us, and not now be thought coming toward us, if
we be of God. For we schuld 1. Cor. 3. Hebr. 5.
now be no babes in Christ having his godly, doctrine of salvation so long
time among us. 3. This declaratyon schuld be made by this present evidence, in
the year of owr lord God a thousand, five hondreth, and.xli. which year
antichrist looks still to regne i the conscience.
seems in this act and soche other like, to be rather of the pestyle^t regne
and perverse dominacyon of my lord of london under his most holy father of
Rome the great god of the earth, patriarch of purgatory, and porter of hell,
tha^ of the eternal living God, he so cruellye exacting^ soche a shameful
profession and abhomynable All this is still to ma ynteyne there vain glory
oath as this is here. For in this process is not his glory sought, but there
vain glory, pride, and glotonouse co^etousnese. 4. Of the poor simple man
ne, called here in scorn master Vvyllya^ Tolwyn, person of sait Antonines was
this open promise to the deuyls obedience most tyrannouslye coacted by the very
satellyte of Satan. 5. In the famous The captyuyte of co^sci^ce passes all
other.
cite of London at Paul's cross, to the great dishonor and seruytute of so
noble a cite to have soche a shameless anti christ for there bysshopp as gives
no better fruits. Now follows in course the said declaration.

The manne of sin*
^ Good people / so yt ie / that I will lya^ Tolwin. 2 master af art and 3
person of saint Antonynes within this. 4. cite and dyocese of London. 5 have
been lawfully donounced / detected / and peesented to my lord bysshopp of
London / that I have been and ama manne vehementlye suspected / noted / and
infamed of herety / call. 6. and sedicyouse opynyons age ynst. 7. the catholyke
faith of owr holy mothethe church.
His dysclosynge.
A^ Craftye custom has the wylye fox of wanton play and dallyaunce, when he
myndeth to obtain a pray, which my lord Boner of london uses here as one
very subtyle in Ezech. 13. Lucae. 16. Sopho. 3. Prove. 11. Psalm. 37.
his woluyshe generation. With glosinge words and flatteringe speech he faw
neth upon the people by this poor simple soul, calling them good, as the
false pharyseded Christ for a wicked purpose. But necessary it is after the
godly Math. 19. Lucae. 18. Colo. 2.
counsel of Solomon, not to give a rydie ear unto flatterers, but rather with
Esaye to think they mind deceyt toward us which calls us good. If the
people Prouer. 1. Esa. 3. Sap 13.
be good (as I am certain and sure they are so many as has thankefullye
received Gods word) great pity it is there goodness schuld be distayned with
Eccle. 29. Romans 8. 1. Tim. 4.
so vnwholsom council of deuilyshenesse in hypocresye as herin is contained.
2. He that was set forth to declare this doctrine, is a master of art here
noted. A tyttle it is mete for soche lowsye lernige as this is. To subtilte and
craft are they compelled Pro. 16. 2. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 2.
to ro^ne, which has not gods word upon there side. For no disprayse of
learning nor yet of the poor ma^ne be this sooken, whom my lord of London
thus cruellye enforces to stand forth in these colors. 3. He is also here
noted to be person of saint Antonynes within the Subjects are me^nebeco^e
unto Idols.
cite and diocese of London, to make the matter more gloryouse. Sure we are
that the saint Antonyne which there dwells is a profane beastlye, Idol, and
so are all they that stand up in tabernacles within his temple. To be the
vycegere^t, or to represent the person of soche an Idol, is non other (I
suppose) tha^ to be an Dani. 14, Zacha. 11. Ezech. 34
Idol in deed. For, an Idol does zacharye call that sheparde, which doing
Idol service, omytteth to feed his flock with the true laws of god.
Vvherfor I wyshe the said poor man no longar to be under soche tyttles and
offices, as can Osee. 11. Sopho. 1.
ne not be used without danger of soul. 4. To be a cytezen of London is no
more harm before God than it is to be a dweller in any other quarter of the
world. But to be of the diocese is to be a member Math. 23. Apoc. 13.
of antichrists kyngedome which is much worse in deed. 5. Non other has
denounced him of errors, detected him of heresye, and presented him to my
lord bishop of London for a sedicious 1. Cor. 6. Ephe. 5. Apo. 21.
person, but there own filthy frye, the cursed generacyon of Idolatours,
whore mongars, extorcioners, and epycures. Of renon other for the trewthes sake
has he been vehementlye suspected, noted, and infamed, to be a favorer,
furderer, and receyuer of heretykes as they call them, than was Christ and his
Apostles, with Lucae. 23. Joan. 7. Act. 24.
all soche like abiectes of this world. 6. Sedicious must he be noted that
has opinyons against the false faith of there whorishe mother the church of
a^tichrist the strompe^t of babylon, the rose colored Here. 3. Apo. 17.
harlot^ with the cup of all filthy abhominacyons, daily dronken with the
blood of the witnesses of Jesus. He schuld not else be the servant, massenger,
Math. 10. Joan. 15. Marci. 13.
nor yet a just follower of his master. Neither schuld the word of God else be
found true, no more than is the tale or fable of a sinner. By non other token
is the true church of Christ known from the false and cownterfett synagoge,
but by persecucyon for ryghtousnesse Mathr 5. Joan. 13. Lucae. 6.
sake. For his church is evermore as he was, hated, blasphemed, vexed,
trobled, scorned, dysdayned, accused, lied upon, and cruellye afflicted unto
death, else is it not of his mark. Not wurthy is 1. Cor. 6. Joan. 15. Math. 5.
he to be a member of Christ's body, but to be cut from it, that will not
suffer with him. Blessings of the gospel (wherbye the church is made holy)
are neither promised to myter nor rochett, shaven crown nor typpett, whode nor
side gown, stole nor cope, cup nor can delstyck, a^oyntinge nor prestode,
mass nor mattens, sensynge nor ceremony, consistorye nor sessyon sitting.
But to Lucae. 6. Esa. 61. 1. Pet. 3.
them that be meke, merciful, faithful, pyttefull, ge^^ill, peaceable, poor
in sprete, and that pacye^tlye suffer all manner of shame and rebuke for the
trewthes sake. No puffed up Prelates, glorious bysshoppes, dysgysed prestes,
sophysticall masters, nor painted hypocrytes does he know for his, but simple
preachers, godly beleuers, and me^ne persecuted for Luce. 13. Math. 19. Gal. 6.
his word. For they are those are those which car rye his lyuerye. 7.
Catholyck they call the faith of there church (which term the scripture has
not) and it may well be. For catholyck is as much to say, as Calepin* 9
Perottus et ^re^to nus.
universal, or admyttynge all. For in deed they allow all manner of faythes,
that faith only excepted which they owght to allow most of all. No Iewyshe
ceremonye refuse they, nor yet heythen super stycyon. So long as the gospel
is not trewlye preached, there faith is good ynowgh. For it is catholyck.
Universally All super stycyouse beleues ad mytt the papystes.
all false beleues and wicked worshyppynges contrary to Gods prescripcyon it
allows, no kind of Idolatrye and supersticyon rejected. Neither have this
generation sens the beginning reproved pylgrymages nor pardons, rellyckes nor
false reuerences, sensynges nor ca^del sacrifices, la^^yn bussynge nor lyppe
service, dead shadows nor Idel obseruacyons, Never repent they the^ myschefes.
with soche like pylde pedlarye and romyshe ware. For it is there own proper
good. And that will plentuouslie apere here after in this present declaratyon,
wherein this poor man is more depelye compelled to accuse himself.

The manne of sin.
1 And also that I have been a great favorer / defender / mai^tener / and
receptour / of heretyques. 2. acustomed also to have in my custodye. 3. books
of heresye / and other unlaw full works. 4. forbydde^ by the kings magestees
proclamacyon and ordinances. 5. and also contrary to the decre and inhybycyon
of mine ordynarye.
His dysclosynge.
FOr fauourynge, mainteyninge, and defending Christ's godly verite, was
steven as a blasphemer stoned unto death at Jerusalem. Antipas the Act. 7.
Apoc. 2.
faithful witness of the lord was slain at pergamos. And Christ's Apostles
were dyuerselye afflycted the world over, Math. 23. 1. These. 2. Romans 16. Act.
17.
by this viperous generacyon. Jason for receyuynge Paul and Sylas with other
dysciples and teachers of the gospel, was brought before the cownsell at
thessalonica, and accused for a sedycious traitor against Caesar. No maruele
therefore thowgh this pore man be vexed of the same Joan. 16. Act. 9. Phil. 2.
sort; mainteininge the same doctrine, and fauorynge the teachers thereof. Is
there any other reward following the true servants of God now then has
been before? No surely, unless christ has now of late changed his former
promise, and is now become a speaker against himself, which is so impossible as
he not to be God. If they have persecuted him, Lucae. 21. Joan. 15. 1. Cor. 6.
Math. 10. Lucae. 21.
needs must they persecute his members. If they have called the master of the
house beelzebub, so will they do his how should ye schall be hated of al me^ne
(says Christ) for my names sake. It is no new thing to se poor men thus
handled, blasphemed, and openly schamed, without reasonable cause.

2 For heretykes must they be taken, which follow not there tradycyons, nor
regard there sacred sorcerye. Thus may christ was no good church manne.
they call christ an heretyke also, for he never allowed there ceremonies. He
never went processyon with cope, cross, and candelstyck. He never sensed image
nor sange lat^yn service. He never gave orders nor sat in confession. He never
preached of purgatory nor pardons. He never honored saints nor prayed for
the dead. He never said mass, mattens, nor Christ taught no popyshe ceremonies*
euensonge. He never fasted frydaye nor vygyll, lent nor aduent. He never
hallowed church nor chalyce, ashes nor palms, ca^dels nor belles. He never
made holy water nor holy bread, with soche like. But soche domme ceremonies
not having the express commandment of God, he called the leven of the
Pharysees Math. 16. Lucae. 12. Deuteronomy. 4. Apoc. 22. Psalm. 68. Gal. 4.
and dampnable hypocresie, admonyshinge his dyscyples to be ware of them. He
curses all the^ that adds unto his word soche beggerlye shadows, wypynge
there names clean out of the book of life. Saint paul testyfyeth them to have
no porcyon in Christ, which wrappe themselves again with soche yokes of
bondage.

3 Books of heresy must all those works be, which rebukes any of there
abusvons, be they never so godly. That caused them so long time to lock up
2. Pet. 3. 1. Cor. 14. Joan. 3. Ephc. 5.
the scripturs in a strange language and under an unknown speech, least the
people by readinge of them schuld perseyue there works to be nowght, and so
rebuke them. Yea, they have not been ashamed of late years, to call the
prophecyes of the old law, the.iiij. gospels, paul's epystles, and the holy
apocalypse, with other treatyses of the sacred Bible, most The holy scriptures
co^de^pned for heresye.
detestable books of heresye, and to burn many good godly and innocent
creaturs for having the^ in there howses, and for reading of them unto other,
and all under the tyttle and auctoryte of princes laws. In the mean season
also have they boasted themselves for the peculyar people of God, for the holy
church, the consecrate The brag ges of antichrists shorlynges.
nombre, the spirytuall sort, the catholyck doctors, the chosen persons, the
godly company, the relygious brether head, the wyuelesse vyrgyns, the good
gostlye fathers, and that they have done nothing but in the zealous quarrel of
the lord. But no more are they of his kyngedome than was phassur and semeias
Hiere. 20. 2. Tim. 3.
which persecuted Hieremye, Iannes and Iambres which resysted Moses, Cayphas
and Annas which putt Christ unto Joan. 18. Actu. 4.
death and vexed his apostles, with soche like bludthurstye prelates and
malycyous mourtherers. For his church or kyngedome is a congregation of
simple, Math. 19. Joan. 18. 1. Cor. 6. Gala. 5.
meke spreted, lowlye, pytefull, and gentle teachers, and not of proud
glotto^s, glorious lechours, cruel byteshepes, and rauenouse robbers, as they
are. Never schall ye se them trewlye ground there doings upon Gods holy
word, but either upon there own filthy tradycyons or upon the crooked customs
of the Marci. 7. 4. reg. 17. Esa. 34. Psalm. 145.
cuntre brought in first of all by there cursed counsel, or upon the
auncyentnesse of there fathers, or holiness of there doctors or else most
chefelye upon the mighty auctoryte of princes.

4 Mark how the byssoppe of London layeeh forth here the kings proclamacyons
and ordynaunces against this poor ma^nne, for having in his custodye A
marriage betwixt beliall and christ God and the devil
books against the bishop of Rome, and how he does couple them with his own
Antichristiane decre and inhybycyon. Yea, consider how blasphemouslye and
trayterouslye he does here abuse them, to the abhorrynge of all Christian ^ares,
and the great dolor of all faithful hearts. Here is not the true preaching
of the gospel called upon by the kings proclamacyons, to the glory of God.
Neither is here sowght the adolishment of the bishop of romes usurped pour,
Nothing for christ but all for the pope.
nor yet the laye^ge aside of deuylyshe supersticyons, (which are all
effectuallye required in his godly ordinances) For they are not the things
that mi lord seeks to uphold. But here is sore co^playned of, the slacknesse
in going of processio^ My lord here vnd' propeth babylon for falling.
at eue^songe, in the saying of romy she hours, in the making of holy water
and holy bread. And what make these to the Christen erudycyon, or to any other
godly purpose? What are these ^oyes either to the mayntenaunce of faith, or of
any common welthe? Must so many idle Bysshoppes and prestes be masted up so
fat to the great hyndraunce of the public welthe, for the vpholdynge under
prices auctoritees work they there feats
of things of so small profyght? Alac that ever the prices auctorite schuld
thus be used to the blasphemye of God, and to his great dishonor. This makes
fore^ people to report much shame which is not here to be spoken, to the great
heaviness of true faithful hearts.

5 If the decrees and inhybycyons of There sinodes are all against God and his
christ ^
my lord ordynarye of London, and of other soche holy ordynaryes of england
(as they be here named) were dilygentlye sowght out, and well wayed, I fear me
they schuld apere very scant honest men, well, the lord sees all, and schall
surely judge it at a day.

The manne of sin.
1 And more over that I have not accustomed to observe and keep the. 2.
laudable ceremonies / rytes / and customs / of this catholyck church of
england co^monlye observed and kept by other / that is to say. 3. neither in
going procession upon satudaye^ at euensonge. 4. nor in the usage and manner of
making of holy water and holy bread 5. nor in making my confession. 6. or
saying of mass. 7. mattens / or euensonge / as I schuld or ought to have.
His dysclosynge.
GIR euous burdens and intolerable yokes lay they still upon the shoulders of
men, sitting in Moses Math. 23. Luce. 11. Math. 15^
chair. Nothing esteem they the co^mau^dements of God in comparyson of there
own tradi^yons. No fawte is the brekynge Fruits of the popes holy spyrytualte.
of them here noted. Idolatrye, sy monye, sacrilege, whoredom, hatred, se
dycyon, gluttony, covetousness, cruelte, rape, and mourther is neither here
blamed nor yet spoken ill of. Only is Gods verite here conde^pned under the
Christ is persecuted in his poor me^ bers. Lucae. 21. Apo. 9.
black tyttle of heresye, the poor member of Christ made a lawghige stock to
all the world for yt, blasphemed, dysdayned, and abhorred. Soch is yet the ab
homynacyon of this sixth age of the church. When satan tempted Christ in the
desert, in his first.ij. suggestions he named the son of God. But in this
declaracyon Math. 4. Lucae. 4.
(yea, rather temptacyon of his people) schalt thu not find one syllabe
me^cyoned, neither of him nor yet of his he auenlye father. Read yt over
hardelye god is not ones named in all this doctrine.
with judgment, and mark yt with we pynge eyes, lame^tynge that the dear
flock of the lord is thus myserablye led. For there is no plage under
heaven to it. If this be not the defec^yon from Christ, mencyoned by Paul to
the Thessalonianes, 2. These. 2. Daniel. 9. Math. 4. 1. Joan. 2.
I think there is non. I fear yt that my lord of london has taken up the
third suggestyon of satan with his couetours and ambycyous kyngedome, and as a
fearful tempter, seduceth the people to there dampnacyon. For what a doctrine
is thys^ wherein neither God nor his son is mencyoned. Vvele may it be called
error in hypocresye and doctrine of 1. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 3. 2. Cor. 11. Gene. 3.
deuyls, yea, and worse if worse may be. Se how the devil resembles here the
angel of light. Sens Christ's ascencio^ has not soche a declaracyon been
after this sort spredde among the people, by Christyane nor Antichristiane,
Jew nor pagane, angel nor devil, a poor manne compelled so openly to
profess the same No devil of hell so blasphemose as are Papystes.
and no mencyon made of god nor of christ. If this be not a mystery of
iniquire, and a workynge of Satan under a de ceytfull power, never was there
any.

2 A grett matter is made here of a thing of nowght, and it must be proclaimed
at Paul's cross. Tolwin must stand forth there for an heretyke. And why? For
he A very sore offense.
has not observed the laudable ceremonies, rytes, and custo^es of this
catholyck church of england. Vvherin I pray you?

3 He has not gone processyon upon saturdayes at euensonge. A very heinous
offense, and worthy to be judged no less tha^n high treason against yowr
holy father agapitus popett of Rome, Petrus de natalibus wernerus ^arthusianus.
which first dreamed it out, and enacted it for a lawdable ceremonye of yowr
whoryshe church, for christ knows it not. But I maruele sore that ye observe
yt upon saturdayes at night at euensonge, he co^maundynge yt to be observed
upon the sondayes in the morning betwixt holy water making and high mass.
Paraue^ture ye will say, ye do both, and so doble yt (as we perseyue ye do in
deed) least the holy obseruacyon of your father Ranulph. cestrensis Joan. stel.
schuld drop away, and you be found neglygent in your obedience. For soth
ye show yourself a very natural child to your holy mother, in so holdinge
her up for falling now in her latter age, and wurthye ye are to have her
blessing. If ye would wytsaue to put^ One wyekednesse auau^^eth an other.
the. 7. stacio^s of Rome unto it in the worship of the* vii. deadlye sins
after the old wont, your ceremonye might ape ^e more solemn. Much is
Sa^urnus beholden unto you (which is one of the old gods) to garnyshe the
going out Saturdaie is dedicate to saturn, of old usage.
of his day with so holy an obseruacyon. Joy yt is of your life, so to
remember your old fryndes. Doubtless yt is a fine myrye pagent, and you
worthy to be called a Saturnyane for yt. Vvher of this and other proper
page^tes of yours be called lawdable, we can not tell, for we can neither find
word nor commandment of god for them and therefore we refer it unto you.

4 An other lawdable ceremonye of A sore matter in the popes books.
yowrs Tolw in has not well handled, nor as a workema^ne of that occupacyon
schuld do. He has not made his holy water and his holy bread after the old
usage and manner, nor as it is customablye yet used of other conynge artyfycers
of your lyuerie and mark. Though he has made the^ and well seasoned the^ with
salt Platina ^ vitis po^ti. Sigebert. ge^blacensis.
after the rue les of pope alexander, yet has he left out the holy exorcysmes
and co^iuracyo^s, supposing the good creaturs of Gods creacyon to have no
deuyls within the^, reme^bringe also his princes pleasure, which has wylled
all supersty cyousnesse to be taken away from the ceremonies. Notwithsta^dinge
you se an other thing in it. The lawdable institucyon of your holy fathers
popes of rome schuld perish if it were not so used. Yea A ceremonye borrowed of
sorcerers.
we, schuld have nothi^ge to drive away spretes with, nor yet to take away
ve^ge able sins. For neither has christ nor yet a Christen mannys faith the
power that holy water has. Therefore set hand to it hard lie, and regard
neither god nor Open penance for holy water making.
yowr king, but let the heretyke knave do open penance in spite of the^
both to putt other in fear, least the feate of holy water making be
forgotten among the^.

5 Confession is also a laudable ceremonye of yowrs, and was first admitted by
pope innocent in the most pestyle^t counsel of laterane for a mayntenaunce
platina in vita pape ^epherini
of yowr markett. Se now that it decay not for want of lokynge to. Consider
first of all that for yowr commodite it has deposed and dysherited more the
ij. hondreth lawful kings, and shorn them into monasteryes of monkerye some
of there eyes putt out. It made fredericus barbarossa the Popes footstool at
sigebertus Ioa^naucle rus ge. 40
venys, and subdewed many other noble emprowrs. For soche a treasure it is as
ever helps when yowr matters are in danger. By the virtue of confession was
the plesaunt kingdom of Italye destroyed, Eginhard Matheus. Palmerius
and became saint peter's patrimonye, the king thereof called desyderius with
his wife and children exyled into lions, and ending his life in greatt
myserye. Throwgh the same was the empire of constantynople translated from the
greeks to the frenchemenne your old Volateranus et wernerus Ranulph.
cestrensis.
fryndes, because they would not for your profyght to have images worshypped.
King Johan of england a man of no small valeauntnesse and virtue, through
the hydden mysteryes of the same was brought into hate of his nobyly ^^ and
commons and compelled to give up his crown and tyttle for him and ^ys heirs
to the apostolyck seat. Raymundus also the last earl of tholose and Nicolaus
bertra^dus in hysto. tholosana
most valeaunt warryour of all christendom, abowght the same time only
by^ause he would not burn the albigesyanes within his dominyon (who^ your holy
^athers judged for heretykes for that they ^esysted there said ear confession,
there prymacye, Guido perpinianus in lib. de heresibus.
there purgatory, there praynge to ^ead saints, with other soche pylde ped
^arye, which they had establyshed in the ^fore said counsel of laterane for
new artycles of the Christen faith, and as matters necessary unto saluacyo^
he was ^ruellye compelled to stand forth naked Guilhel. de podio Meyerus and
kyrian der.
in his shyrt in the face of the world, bare^oted and bareheaded, and to axe
mer^ye upon his knees before the legate cardynall of sayn^ angel, his natural
people standing about him, waylynge, weeping, and cryenge out for very pity.
For he was not only enforced there by penance (as they call it) to give to
Nicolaus bertra^dus in histo. tholosa.
there clergy. 27. thousand mark, but also to dysheryte his whole stock for
ever, and to war upon the turks without power, the sonnar to bring him to
his end with other most cruel ininuccyons, as are to be seane more at large
in the hystorye of tholose compyled by Nicolas Bertrande doctor of both laws.
Beware ye tell no ^ales out of scole.
It schall stand tolwyn in hand therefore from henceforth to take better head,
and not to dallye with your confession as he has done, seeing yt is so
dangerous a matter

6 No maruele is yt thowgh ye call Iacobus Bergome^ sis. Sigebert. and Platina
^^ere conseque^tlye upon your latyne mass saying, for that far passes a
lawdable ceremony, being the instytucyon of so many holy popes, being also
a sacrifice necessary for the quycke and the dead, and so profitable also to
the vpholdynge of yowr glorious glytterynge kyngedome. That has made your
purses wayghtye and your kychynes war me, your chekes fat and your flesh ple
sa u^t. Therefore Judge the speaki^ge against hold fast this Jewel or all will
away. The relygyon of the popes church.
yt, no less than heresye and treason, make cruel laws of death, provide
fagottes yuowgh and borne the losels apace. For if that ones fall, your
precious robes, myters, crosers, fine rochettes, scarlett frockes, sandals, and
typettes, with the monstruouse mark of madyan will follow sone after. And than
farwell the Romyshe relygyon. Adewe than all spiritual vayneglory. Consider what
years yt cost e^e yt cowde be fynyshed, and how many holy popes were about yt
Vvernerus in fas. temporu^.
ere yt cowde be browgt to pass. It was more than vi. hondreth and lxx. years
after Christ's incarnacyon ere the first latyne mass was said. For as
witnesses platina in the lives of romyshe bysshoppes, Platina. Antonin.
Nauclerus
Johan bishop of portuense was the first that ever said mass openly, pope
Agatho^ approuynge yt than in the.vi. general synod at Constantinople in the
year of ower lord. 677 where as marryage was first forbidden to prestes and
whordome Achilles Gassarus and Vvernerus.
admytted by this rewle. Si non cast tamen caute. Remember also that yt was
the work of more than. 20. holy fathers of Rome, every one of the^ clowtynge
in a patche unto yt, And let not the labor of so ma^ye peryshe among these
Luthe ranes for a little lokynge to. Ye have more auctoryte than ever had
Cayphas and Annas. For ye may call sessyons where Cayphas could never both
accuse and judge.
and when ye will. Ye may sit upon life and death, and be both accuser and
judge. If the warmode quest will not co^de^pne your accused, bring out a false
of your own, of Rome ro^ners, pardoners, parrysh clerks, and bellryngers, as
ye ded now of late for Richard mekyns, a poor simple ladde of. 17. years of
age. And give him a bylle of wrong articles Richard Mekyns brent of my lord.
in his hand to read wha^ he comes to the fire to shaddowe with your
myscheff.

7 Though Christ calls yowr latyne hours Idelnesse, hypocresye, much
babbling, and lyppe labor, yea, and Math. 6. Esa. 29. 1. Cor. 14. Roma. 1.
though saint Paul does esteem it a po^t of vain folishnes and much more
madness to utter a process in an unknown language among the people, yet set
your romyshe wisdom against them both, and stand fast in your old popyshe
opinion, making Gods co^maundeme^ts of non effect for your own dyrtye
tradycyo^s. Where as christ has comanded Math. 15. Marci. 16. Joan. 10. ^.
Joan. 2.
you syncerelye to preach his gospel, do as thowgh ye owght him no service,
nor were non of his. Obey it not, but say that ye know a much better way
Ye have a master (whose lyuerye and mark ye wear) which gives better wages
for the darkenynge of the gospel The Popes reward for darkenyge the gospel.
tha^ christ gives for the preachi^ge of yt. The pope gives forth glorious
tytles, fat bysshopryckes greatt benefices, princely howses, delycyous meats
and drynkes, with other mennys wives to lie bye wha^ they be young and fair,
where as Christ is all to the contrary. And there for ye will rather follow him
tha^ Christ This makes you so straytlye to look Very sharp balyes in the
popes behalf.
upon yt, that matte^s, pryme, hours, mass, even song, and complyne, be done
as they owght to be. That is to say, according to the holy instytucyon of
pope Pelagius, which first ordained them to blemyshe the gospel preaching and
to fill the time with Idell vanytees. Yea, ye wuld putt men to death rather
than Joan. 16. Miche. 7. Math. 23.
fail, for not obserui^ge them, if they ded not thus with pore Tolwyn
shamefullye recante. So good, faithful, obedient, and loving are ye to your
holy fathers of Rome, though your wylye pretense be an other.

The manne of sin.
1 Which denuncyacyon / deteccion / and presentacyon / 2 has been partlye by
mine own confession 3 and partlye by suffycyent witness and record in that
behalff 4 sufficyentlye proved.
His dysclosynge.
1 This is an old practyse of owr holy prelates, evermore to leave one
craftye clause or other as a startynge hole to Rone to, if danger happen An
old practyse of bysshopes.
to them of there deeds here after. Think you that my lord of London will be
found fawtye in this act, in case yt be proved in process of time,
blasphemouse, trayterouse, cruel, and deuylyshe, by the sacred scripturs and
by the kings statutes Mat. 23. Prou. 16. Lucae. 3. Math. 27.
and laws? Nay, I warande you. He is of a more craftye generacyon than so. I
trow my lord will wash his hands here with Pylate. Not one spotte shall
apere in his rochett of all that is done in this matter.

2 Rather schall Tolwyn confess himself here to be his own accuser to my
Full workemanlye conuayed of my lord.
lord, not all unlike to him that ha^geth himself or drowneth himself. So
workmanlye will this matter be handled. Partlye has Tolwyn by his own
confession denounced him self for a sedycyouse doer, detected himself for an
heretyque, and presented himself for a greuouse offender for not observing the
popes But satan can not thus hyde his myschefe.
holy tradycyons. And this is enough to clear my lord, if any lykelyhode of
old fryndeshypp toward his holy fatherhede do here after apere. But who
extorted this confession more semynge a devil than a man, with thret
tenynges of fagottes and fire? That will be easy to know to him that marketh
the terms. Never could tolwyn throughlye Unto ane we scole is Tolwi^ brought.
know what these rhetoryckes meant, as are denuncyacyon, deteccyon, and
presentacyon, so long as he was in cambryge, neither by his art stodye, nor
yet by his scole dyuynyte, till he came to my lord of Londons house. There was
he sone made perfyght in them, by some well stodyed manne of the popes law.
For from thens they came first in deed. Never is a man to old to be taught,
and be brought in farther practyse.

3 The witnesses also received the same why the witnesses are called
suffycye^t.
doctrine, to the same self end and purpose. And here they are called
suffycyent. Whether yt be for that they were many in nombre which than
accused him, or be cause they are accounted honest men for there goods
falselye gotten or in that yt pleased his Good lord shypp so to accept them
for there old faythes sake, let the dylygent reader judge. Soche allowaunce of
catholyck witnesses and records against heretyques, for Christ was also thus
served.
the vpholdynge of holy church, is no new thing, if ye search the scripturs
and hystoryes. For they that accused Christ for a malefactor, a supporter of
sinners, a deuyly she person, a subuerter of the people, Joan. 18. Lucae. 23.
Marc. 3 Math. 26. Joan. 7.
a blasphemouse heretyque, a breaker of there Sabbath, a defyler of there laws,
a sower of sedycyon, and destroyer of holy church, a traitor against caesar,
and soche like, were accepted and abeled of Annas and Cayphas for honest,
credible, wise, and suffycient men, though all the world knows them for
false periures Act. 3. Marci. 14. Joan. 16. Act. 4
and knaves. So sone as the Apostles began ones to preach after Christ's
ascencyon, by soche ghostlye children of holy church were they accused and
co^ pelled to make answer in the spu^al court of the Jews. And sens that time
has the bysshopps been seldom without soche prodygyouse pykethankes and
glaueringe Bishops are never without there Iudases and Jews.
glosers, to bring men coram nobis. Which think they do God great good
scruyce, when they bring one of his pore lambs unto death, as they do in
deed, though there service be nothing to there own sowles profyght, as it will
apere in the last reckoning. Well, these suffycyent witnesses and records of
my lord, or true vpholders of the popes old Vpholders of the popes holy
church.
faith, has suffycyentlye proved Tol wyn an heretyque in that behalf,
besides his own confession. That is to say, in that he has not gone
processyon upon saturdayes at euensonge, nor workman lie made his holy water
and holy bread, nor confessed himself as the use of Smell here what yowr
holy prelates are.
Rome is, and so forth. And upon these suffycyent accusacyo^s would my lord
have conde^pned him to the fire without mercy, had he not recanted at Paul's
cross. Sone may ye know where of yowr holy prelates smells, if ye way this
matter a right. Now resort we ageine to the text.

The manne of sin.
1 And al be it for my offense in so doing. 2. I knowledge to have de served
no small po^nyshment. 3. yet I have found soche charitable good nesse and
mercy in my lord bisshopp of London. 4. upon my submyssyon and suit unto him.
His dysclosynge.
1 Preposterous always are the judgments of this vyperouse generacyon.
Evermore esteem they that is Math. 12 Esa. 5. Prouer. 3.
evil to be good, and that is good to be evil, as witnesses Esaye. Ambycyon,
pride, and vain glory take they for spi rituall holiness, clerelye reiectynge
the Ephe. 6. Math. ^5. Iudae. 1.
ryghtousnesse of God for there own beastlye tradycyons whom his heart
abhors. Thus putt they darkness for light and light for darkness. Mennys
wisdom Esa. 1. Joan. 3. Romans 12 Ephesians. 4. Iaco. 3. 1. Cor. 1.
(which is but error, dottage, and blyndenesse of the sprete) prefer they to
the eternal wisdom of God. Very folysnnesse, heresye, and madness do they
judge the gospel, which is the strong power of the lord unto salvation to
all them that believes yt. That make they sower which ^s more sweet than honye,
and that vile which is most precyouse, as to putt in the lord owr whole
confydence Psalm. ^^ Esa. 13. Colos. 1. Psalm. 11^. 1. Tim. 4. Hiere. 23. Miche.
3. Roma. 1. Ephe. 4. 2. shes. 2. Exodus 7. Apoc. 11.
and trust, like as his holy word leads us. For his undefiled laws, my
nystre they the doctrine of deuyls, with lies in hypocresye. Thus does the
children of this world pervert all godliness. As the very antychrystes turn
they the tree rotes upward. Into a wicked mind therefore has the lord given
them over, strongelye to delude the unbelievers for there vnbeleues sake. S^ how
this subtyle charmer, this coniurer of Egypt, this vnbonere bysshopp Boner, a
very blodye bocher of Babylon does hand le this poor innocent Chrystyane.

2 So has he bywytched him with his craftye legerdemayne. So has he feared
him for chynges of no wayght. Yea so has he compassed him with threttenynges
of terryble death, that needs he must grant sin where no sin is, and
antichrist can make sin ver tu, and ver tu sin.
ope^lye confess a greuouse offense where as no^ is at al. He must acknowledge
to the people to have deserved no small ponnysh me^t at my lords hand, though
his conscience stands clear to the contrary. What haynouse treason have thu
done good simple manne, that thu stand thus forth for a wonder of the
world? What is thy Prestes ar never thus ponnished for Idolatrye and whor dom.
offense, that yt requires soche open shame? Is yt these or murder, whoredom
or Idolatrye, superstycyon or sacrylege? Than were yt more mete that my lord
stood there than thu. For of these fruits and soche other, he has much more
store than thyselfe has, as yt is easy to perseyue by this process. If yt be
for not observing the commendable rytes, ceremonies, and customs of holy
church, as is said before. Than ought my lord also to suffer the same self
ponnyshment, Ancient rytes and lawdable ceremonies of holy church.
for not going abought with saint Nycolas clerks, for not hallowynge
pelgrimes to Jerusalem a^nd Rome, for not sensinge the plowghes upon plowgh
mondaye, for not rostynge eggs in the palm ashes fire, and for not singing
Gaudeamus in the worshypp of holy Thomas Becket, with soche other like, which
were sumtyme more lawdable ceremonies, than either saturdaye processyon or yet
holy water making upon the sunday. But my lord does here much Esa. 10.
Math. 23. Lucae. 11. Oseae. 11.
after the practyse of his old predecessors, which heaped upon mennys
sholders intolerable burdens of tradycyons. They laid upon the^ heavy yokes
enough therselues not ones mouynge there fingars thereunto for soylynge.

3 He that does couete to know the natural compassyon, gentylnesse, and
sauoure, which regneth in a bysshopp of antichrists kyngedome, let him here
as in a glass behold it. For Tolwyn has found my lord very favorable and
good unto hi, as he here protests. What though he has stand forth at
Paul's cross The favorable goodness of my lord of London
to his rudyculouse reproach, for not observing the lowsye laws and Idele
ceremonies of the pope, yet is my lord very charitable unto him. What though
this uncomely prospect has made of his fryndes his utter enemies, and brought
him out of al honest estymacyo^ of men, yet has my lord showed great
goodness unto him. What though this recantacyon declares him of a frynde an
enemy to gods truth, preparynge Learn here to know the mercy of a bishop
him to the fire in case he here after fall in relapse and turn again to
Christ, yet is my lord very plentuouse and large in mercy toward him.
Think you that the wolf (which is naturallye given to rauyne) shows not
great gentylnesse The chorlyshe nature of a wolf is not to spare.
when he suffers his pray to pass from his gredye mouth, and so leaves him
vndeuowred, what though he has before spoiled him both of his wolle and skin?
Yes surely does he, and far otherwise than he has of his chorlyshe nature.
Than commend my lord bonner of London for thus charytablye handelynge Tolwyn,
considering that the serpentyne nature of a bysshopp of that kind would
otherwise. But truly if this be my lords charity, goodness, and Do as ye
would be done to dwells not with my lord
mercy, his dyspleasure, hate, and malice is the devil and all.

4 But how comes yt to pass that my lord has showed himself here so mercy
full upon my humble submyssyon and penytent suit unto him, says Tolwyn. Yea
marrye, now I here the. I would else have thought yt much more than a miracle,
Low crepeth the sheep to the l^o^ to have his poor life
the wolf so to have left the sheep, the fox the capon, and the marleon the
poor bird. I warrant the good poor creature thy submission was not small to
temper the furye of soche a woluyshe tyrant. Thy suit was not little with
promise and oath to maynteyne all Romish poperye, to save thy syllye carkas
from the fire. Oh, my serable calamyte of soul. Oh, most ungodly handelynge
of Christen people. Awake ones ye Christen governors out of your slothful
dreams, Sap. 6. Psalm. 2. Math. 13 3. Reg. 10 Psalm. 98. Apoc. 11. Prou. 29.
and attend to your right office. For whyls you are a sleep, the enemy sows
tares among the good sede. Suffer not the people of God to peryshe among these
proud gloryouse glottons of So dome and Egypt, for want of lokynge to. Leave
them not to the hands of soche unmercifully tyrau^tes, unless ye care not for
them. If any blasphemouse spectacle may move you to show your selves gods
true mynysters, let this be one hardelye. For all the world wondreth of yr,
as they may full well, you sufferynge Romans 13
the holy ghost to be in soche contempt, his graces not regarded. Heb. 6.


The manne of sin.
1 That upon only this decleracyon 2 here made of mine offense un to you 3
with promise that I will in deuer my self to the best of my power to tyue
as a 4 catholic manne ought 5 and schuld do here after
His dysclosynge.
F^Or not straynynge out a gnatt (as Christ calls the fryu^louse obseruacyon
Math. 23. Lucae. 11. Zach. 11.
of the Idell ceremonies) is all this terryble tragedye, this outward
penance, this open shame of the world, called here the charitable goodness
and fatherlye mercy of my lord of London. Much easyer had yt been for Tolwyn
to Gods commandments no thing regarded.
have broken all the commandments that ever God gave, great and small,
precepts and counseles as they call the, than one beggerlye tradycyon of the
popes whoryshnesse, so ferce are his horned warryours in his holy cause,
though they speak yt not. For a ma^ne (they say) may love his house well,
though he sit not upon the top thereof. Had he committed an hondreth kinds of
Idolatrye superstycyon, hypocresye, treason, forcerye, theft, rape,
fornycacyon, fylthynesse, Co^fessyo^ dyschargeth al these myschefes.
sodometrye, and the devil and all else, (as there smered shauelynges does
dalye) Benedicite under a stool had been able to dyscharge him. If he had
betrayed his king.vii. times* murdered a score of innocents, and defiled an
hondreth vyrgyns (as many of that generacyon has done) Ego absoluote had been
able to Hier. 7. Tush we are absolved quyte say they.
clear him against all men. But an here sye committed against holy church
(which is the very execrable whore of Babylon, having nothing ryghtlye of
Christ) is no power able to remytt. That must in the sight of all men with
most extremyte be ponnyshed.

2 An open declaracyon must be made thereof to the people, to make yt to apere
Open po^nyschme^t to drive other from the truth
unto there blind eyes an offense much more greuouse than either whoredom or
murder, fellanye or treason, being no sin at all but godliness. No^ other
is yt but an office dewlye belonging to a Christen heart to abhor such
bestelvnesse as obscureth the glory of God

3 Yea, a solemn promise must be A professyon to beco^ a traitor to all
godliness.
made also upon this declaracyon, of studyouse indeuoraunce with all dylygence
and power possible, to Remain from hence forth a false perjured Chrystiane, a
double sworn papyst, a new professed traytoure against God and all godliness

4 Whom my lord calls a catholycke man. Which is as much to say, as a
ma^ne living still after the same rewles and the same self customs that were
used in this realm before the popes putting What yt is to become a catholyk
papyst.
down. And what is this else, but layserlye by a little and little to set him
up again and to restore him to his old seat, or else to raise up soche an
other antichryst for him though yt may not so be spoken? When old practyses
will no longer help, tha^ must new be sought Baptista Mantuan, lib. 3. Fast
out, to the vpholdi^ge of owr gaye glytterynge Gabaon. This may ye se that yt
is much less danger to offend a godly minded woman, than a proud painted
whore, a meke spreted lady, than a malycyouse modye qweane. For pacye^tlye
will she remytt all iniuryes done, Psalm. 38. Hier. 26. Ephesians. 5. Math. 18. Apoc.
2.
where the other will spyghtfullye revenge them. The gentle spouse of Christ
(which is his church without spotte) is evermore redye to forgive, though the
offense be done seue^tye seven times. The cruel synagoge of satan (which is
the sodomytycall swarm of smered sorcerers) provoke evermore her horned
whoremongers to fight in her quarrel, All diverse is the popes church from
christ's.
and to persecute her offenders unto death by many unjust laws and decrees.

5 Far unlike schall ye find these ij. churches, if ye confer them
together, bring them to the touch stone, prove there spretes, and try them by
the scripturs The office of a Christen bishop were r^ther to preach than to
ponnyshe, rather 2. Tim. 4. Ioann. 21. Math. 28. Coll. 1. Apoc. 9. Hiere. 23.
Ezech. 34* Zacha. 11.
to feed than to famyshe, rather gentyllye to allure than curryshely to rebuke
before the world, were he after the order of Christ and his apostoles. But my
lord is of an other smokye broad, whose nature us to rauyshe and destroy, to
devour the flock and feed them selves with the fat, executynge upon them
all tyra^nye possible. Lord pity thy poor people, and wytsaue ones to open the
in ward eyes of worldly rewlers, that they may in thy fear behold these
myschefes with Iosaphat; hiehu, Ezechias, and 3. Reg. 22. 2. Par. 34*
godly Josias, for as yet we are far from godliness for all owr new
reformacyon.

The manne of sin.
1 And that I do not here after preach or teach any 2 heresies / errors /
or noughtye opynyons 3 contrary and against the catholic faith of ovvr holy
mother the church / 4 but as much as can lie in my power to maynteyne /
defend / 5 and auaunce the said catholycke faith.
His dysclosynge.
SIE if there be in the world any myschefe, abhomynacyo^, or deuylyshnesse
like unto there is. In every point do they Luc. 16. Math. 12. Gene. 3.
show them selves the very adversaries of God, and the rebellynge sede of the
serpent. Christ at his departure from this world, commanded only preaching
Mat. 28. Marci. 16.
and baptyme to his apostles, and neither singing nor sensynge, holy watte
ring nor massynge. This do they with all threttenynges inhybytt, as is here
specyfyed. The papystes ponnyshe with death when Christ is obeyed.
For Tolwyn is here commanded from hence forth neither to preach nor to
teach, upon soche peynes and penaltees as are due to heretyques, which is no
less tha^ burning in smythfeld, or hanging in the lollars tower at mydnyght
when men be a sleep. Vvo is unto me (says saint Paul) or dampnacyon 1. Cor.
9. Act. 9. 1. Cor. 1
to my soul, if I preach not the gospel. Christ has not sent me to baptyse,
but to publyshe the glad tidings of health, much less than to go processyon
or to say a popysshe mass. This necessary They forbid and condemn that
christhath commastded.
mynystracyon in the word, which Christ has ordained, do they like
antichrists condemn. The wholesome office of preaching that he has
commanded, do they most streyghtlye inhybitt. Ryghtlye therefore ded Christ
declare the^ contempners of his fathers heavenly ordynaunces for there own
filthy tradycyons and customs, which are most abhomynable blasphemies.

2 But here parauenture my lord will allege for himself, that his present inhy
Heresye call they the gospel.
bycyon concerns the only preaching of heresies and errors, which he will
in no wise have taught in his dyoces. If my lord had so well assertayned us
what an heresye is, as he has here set out Tolwyn for an heretyque, we schuld
much What he resye is, they tell not.
better have understand him. But surely if heresye be a contrary doctrine to
the wholesome doctrine of Christ, my lord is here the most ra^ke herety qne and
wit less antychryst that cuer I hard of. And as for Christ, here is no manner
of mencyon of him. He is not so much as ones named Not ones is Christ here
named.
in all this frantyke declaracyon. He re is not one thing that the scripture
of God can iustlye maynteyne, so Babylonyshe, heythr^ysse, and hellyshe is yt.
And therefore yt is no doctrine of his, but all against him. My lord thinks
that there Heresies after my lords me anynge.
are no^ other heresies but those which rebuke the superstycyons of his popyshe
church. Non other errors, but that speaks against there ambycyouse pride and
vain glory. Non other noughtye opynyo^s but soche as towcheth there couetouse
cloynynge and insacyable auaryce. The^ Heretyques after the popes doctors.
thinks he only heretyques with Thomas, Bonauenture, Dons, Bachonthorpe, and
other sentencyoners, which dysobeyeth the Rome churhe. He remembers not that
according to Christ's promise, the holy ghost at his coming schuld reprove
the world of sin, ryghtousnesse Joan. 16. Luc. 12. 1. Tim. 4.
and judgment, which betokens infydelyte, hypocryse and mannys wisdom. For
he fyndeth yt not in his portifolium, nor yet in owr ladies mattens. And
therefore when soche strange voices sou^deth in his ear for lack of a through
acquayntau^ce with them, he takes the^ for Esa. 5. Hier. 2. Ezech. 38 Lucae.
3. Math. 15. Ephesians. 4.
heresies, errors, and noughtye opynyo^s Thus may he also judge Esaie,
Hieremie, Ezechiel, and Daniel with the other prophets, Christ, Johan Baptyst,
Paul, and Peter with the other apostles to be heretyques, for all there
prophecyes and wrytynges are full of soche heresies.

3 Every where are they contrary to the catholyke faith of your church,
which is the worshyppynge of Idols, the calling upon men that are departed,
and the gasynge upon gods that are seane with the eye. Every where are The
catholyk faith of papystes in dead Idols
they against that holy mother of yours, in opinion, faythey and doctrine. No
Christen believe fatcheth there dyscyples, and scolers from your lay me^nys
cale^der your dead book of Images, nor yet from iour latyne service who^ they
understand not, but from the living word of the lord. The faith of true
Chrystianes in the living God.
There faith is a substance of things vnseane, and not of gaudes and fables
aperynge to the eye. In sprete and verite do they worship there eternal father
and not in outward shadows and toys. Unholy do they judge that mother
which brings forth daily so many proud porkelynges, so many couetouse
Phil. 3. 2. Tim. 3. 2. Pet. 2. Psalm. 105.
charmers, so many Idell hypocrytes, oyled Idyotes, shorn bellye gods,
wedlock breakers, defylers of mayde^he de, open persecuters of the truth,
sleers of innocents, sodomytes, and beasts, of ferynge themselves up for
astynkige sacryfyce unto belphegor in the filthy fire Daniel. 13 Ephesians. 4. 1.
Tim. 4.
of concupyscence, burning heates of there lusts, and insatiable desires of
there lueshe with a desperate conscience, contempnynge the just ordinance of
God to observe there papystycall vow.

4 The catholyke faith of this malygnaunt madame, the church of anti(...)st,
the mother of myschefe (which is abhomynable whoryshnesse) has Tolwyn promised
to his simple power to Errors lies a^dthe doctrine of deuyls in hypocrysye.
maynteyne with holy water making to defend with errors and lies in hypo
crysye, and to auaunce with the holy docrysye, of deuyls, according to his
new made oath and professyon in my lords preuye closett, for the scripturs
will not thereto serve him. They knowledge no^ other church of christ, but the
kings daughter which is from within, as David does largelye descrybe her in
his Psalm. 44. Luc. 17. Math. 12.
44, psalm and is therefore called the kyn gedome of heaven, which neither has
myter nor cope, mattens nor mass, shaven crown nor anoyntynge.

5 To this new professyon and solemn oath of Tolwyn, that he schall during
his life, maynteyne, defend, and auaunce the popes old relygyon or
a^tychristes whether ye will (for yt is no^ of christ's) the worshypfull cite
of London, London must hear this pro sessyo^, to obey yt.
my lord mayer, the shryues, and the whole commynnalte must bear record,
that they may also obey the same, though they have both gods laws and there
kings acts to the contrary. Is not this think you a bold enterpry fe and a
wonderful spectacle unto men, soche a thing to be done in the face of the
people, the pope so latelye putt down, antichrist has here an unshamefast face.
the gospel so clerelye dyuulgate, and the king making soche constytucyons
for the scrypturs mayntenaunce. Are not the people of this realm wonderfullye
abused by soche masterye workers as my lord is? What you think of yt in En
glande I can not tell, but I wot all christendom besides wondereth of yt, the
The king does one, and the bishops an other.
king thus doing one thing and the bysshoppes an other. If they dare be so
bold openly and under the kings nose, I doubt not butt hey are bold ynow a
broad and farther of, and there prestes lacks no good counsel there unto in
there conuocacyons and seanes. In deed this far passes the calkynge of doctor
Cro^ke horn with his secret reuelacyons, and Doctor Cronckhorne and doctor
Bockyng
also the pratye practyses of doctor Bockynge and the holy maid of kente, if
all things be considered. Now follows the text in his course.

The manne of sin.
1 And Utterly to detest / abhor / 2 and avoid all / 3 and all manner of
heresies / errors / and nough tie opynyons / 4 With the favorers /
mainteyners / defenders / or any of them during my life.
His dysclosynge.
O^ F a far other sort was Christ in taking of sinners to repentance, than
is my good lord of London, for he compelled non of them to do soche Christ was
more easy to seek unto than my lord.
open penance, nor yet shamefullye to slander them selves a fore the
multitude. Magdalene, Zacheus, the aduowteroose woman, and the thief on his
right hand, had favorable words of him, with many sweet commendacyons,
blesssynges, and promyses. The spyghtfull Luc. 7. Luc. 19. Joan. 8. Luc. 23.
Eze. 18. Math. 26 Marci. 14. Joan. 18. Matthew. 11.
traitor which betrayed his body unto death, refused not he to kiss. The
dyscyples which forsook both him and his doctrine to the great slander thereof,
ded not he co^strayne to recant openly. Learn of me (says he) for I am
gentle and meke hearted. My yoke is easy and my burden light. But perchance
my lord will say here in his own behalf (as he is a man of great learning
and less godly wit) that he has done in this as ded Peter wha^ he struck
of Malchus right ear. Tha^ My lord smytethof Malchus ear with Peter.
must my lord co^sydre what thank Peter had of his master for so doing, and
how little pleasure that enterprise ded him. He was by and by commanded like a
braynelesse fool to put up his weapon again, with soche an ernest check,
that he never durst draw yt sens. We must Math. 26 Lncae. 22. Joan. 18 2.
Cor. 6.
remember also that Malchus was a bishops servant, which dyschargeth my lord
of Peter's felyshypp. For non agreement can Christ have with Belial, nor yet
light with darkness. A true christian ought by his Christen professyon, in
the sprete of lenyte and gentylnesse to examyne Joan. 5. 1. Joan. 4. Iacobi. 4.
1. Pet. 1
all doctrines, and to prove all spretes whether they be of God or nay, and not
rashelye to condemn his poor Christen brother whom Christ has so derelye
redeemed.

2 But this new professyon of my lord in Tolwyn, is of an other vein, and af
a far diverse sort from that. For yt must utterly detest, abhor, and
avoid all. But what all I can not tell you, unless All godliness and veryte
condemned by professyo^
yt be all godliness and veryte, or all that England has done against the
pope, for yt is not here expressed. It is soche an all, as stands here in
mysterye, co^prehendynge my lords whole mind in holy churches behalf with
out vtteraunce.

3 Seeing therefore that this all, being My lord looks for a time of more
myschefe.
under a secret trope or figure may not be dysclosed till my lord sees a
better time, we will let him alone, and pass forth to the all that follows,
which car ryeth his contents with him. That is to say, all manner of heresies,
errors, and noughtye opynyons unnamed, least they schuld show my lord in his
right colors. Not unlike is my lords honorable lordshypp here in this
condempnacy on to the great bellyed braggers or sorbonycall masters in Paris,
which coming with read faces from the cherefull bankett of Bacchus, called
prandium theologicum Martyn Luther condemned in sorbon at Paris.
condemned Martyne Luther in the rear of owr lord. M. D. and XXIIII his
artycles not examyned. It must needs be an heresye, an error, and a noughtye
opynyo^ if my lord so judges yt though yt be Christ's own word. It is
enough for my lord but to speak yt, for a Christen My lord is a great pyllar
of the popes church.
man nys believe. For his reverend lordeshypp is a great pyllar of the popes
holy church, which may condemn the gospel by quodcunque ligaueris.

4 Yea, he that schall profess this new rewle of old papystrye, must
utterly deteste and abhor all these (I wot not what) with the favorers of
them, the maynteyners, defe^ders, or obiecters what so ever they be, king or
counsel, for both they have depelye entered soche matters.

5 For why yt follows in the text This doctrine tea This doctrine tech eth to
ab horrekyn ge and con^sell.
here, or any of them. Which is an anagogycall trope or high speaking of my
lord above his compass, I had almost have said, beyond his wit. And this
must be for ever and ever during his life. For so has Tolwyn promised, for
example. This vow of relygyon may never be broken, though gods
commandments and Christ's aduertysementes Take heed of. xxi years in this
vnad uysed vo we.
schuld go all to the devil of hell. For the breaking thereof might bring in
both fagottes and fire. And all this must be do ne for the auauncement of holy
church, as is a fore spoken. Butt tell me this. What godly wise manne can
think that church holy or good, which sees Holy church knows not a tray
tour from a saint.
not in so many years a traytoure from a saint, but auaunceth him with so
many false miracles, as there church has done beckett, and still does more of
the same generacyon. She schall be of a much better sight, and of a more
godly judgment ere I crust either her, or yet her anointed children as
spiritual as they be. Vvele I wot that the church, which is the immaculate
Apoc. 19. Ephesians. 5. Cant. 4. Joan. 12.
spouse of the lamb Jesus christ, had never soche a spotte in her garment. The
eternal father be ones merciful to his people, and deliver them from this
dampnable plage of darkness, if yt be his pleasure.

The manne of sin.
1 His fordeshypp is content to respyte the rest of my penance / 3 and upon my
good deseruynge 4 and doing according to my said promise / 5 to forgive all
together.
His dysclosynge.
I 1 Vvyst yt would at the last apere from Tyra^nye springs out ofther
lordshyp
whens all this Pharaonycall tyranny spryngeth, this cruel persecutynge, this
murtherynge of innocents. It comes from a lordshypp, by there own confession.
For his honorable lordshypp is contented here upon couenauntes made betwixt
them, to respyte the resydue of Tol wyns penance. But from whens aryseth Apoc.
20 Zach. 9. Joan. 18. Luc. 22.
this spyrituall lordshyp, or worldye monarchye rather. Not from Christ's
doctrine, for they taught evermore the contrary. My kyngedome (says he) is
not of this world. The rewlers of nacyons have the universal domynyon, and
are called gra cyouse lords, but you schall not so. Peter, Ioha^, lames, and
Paul, with the other apostles and dyscyples were only preachers Marc. 26 1.
Cor. 4. Act. 4.
of the gospel, mynysters, dysposers, and geuers Forth of the secrets of god.

They never became any lords, but perse cuted abiectes, as many are uow
adays. This gloriouse lordshypp came in wham phocas the false emproure made
Rome the Phocas the Emprour. Apoc. 20
head church of the world for money. And yt was spread abroad after a thousan
de years from Christ's natyuyte, when Sa than was losed out of his preson, and
per mytted to go at large to deceive the ungodly multitude for there vnbeleues
sake. So that this lordshypp is non other, but the power, auctoryte, and seat
of the Daniel. 9 Apoc. 13. Ezech. 22
dragon given unto the great antichrist, which is the beastlye body of Satan,
of whom my good lord here is a member, and so are all they that work like
feats in the same generacyon.

2 What my lord schuld mean here The rest of Tolwyns penance is burninge
byr espytynge of the rest of Tolwyns penance, I can not well tell, unless he
tarryeth a time or wayeht a layser to have him in relapse, and so to burn him
up for an heretyque all together, like as his holy predecessors has done
ever sens Johan wycleues time and sumwhat a fore. Ioha^ wyc leaves bat tail
against an ^y christ.
As I purpose shortly (the lord le^dyn ge me life) to declare in a far more
larger treatise. Yet plucketh my lord back this respyte again full like a
merciful father of holy church, to apere charytable if yt may be.

3 Tolwyn upon his good deseruynge What a good deseruynge is.
may chance to have a full for geuenesle of my lord. But what call ye a good
deseruynge I pray you? Mark that follows here after, and ye schall se how
honorablye my lord has dyffyned yt he re unto Tolwyn, with a lump of good
learning.

4 It is to do according to his said My lords own dyffynycyon there rof.
promise. That is to say, to become from hence forth a good processyon goer
upon saturdayes at eue^songe, a good holy water maker, a good mattenser,
masser, and so forth, but no true gospel preacher. More over yt is to become a
catholyke manne, What is a catholyck man ne of holy church.
otherwise called a popyshe rebellion but say never a word I cha ge you. Yt
is also to auaunce the popes holy church, and to detest and abhor the
noughtye heretyques, otherwise called good faithful Christen me^ne. Loo ser,
all this is called here a good deseruynge.

5 If Tolwyn perform all this according to his said promise, my lord is
contented to forgive all together like a good gentle virtuous prelate. If
not, the Be a false periureor else bew a re the fire
lord of heaven have mercy upon him, for he goth surely to the fire. For
that is the old reward of bysshoppes, when men will not be rewled and obey
the good laws of holy church. That holy mother of there is can not abide an
enemy to blow ones upon her, but she consumes Holy churcheys beco^ all
fyerye.
them with burning cooles, not all unlike to Proserpina and the old god
Vulcanus, so full of sober pacyence is she. Her nature is now, not to overcome
the world with faith as she was wont to do, but with flame, so fervent is she
waxen sens she became a gloryouse madame of the earth. Fire can she make to
come down Apoc. 13. Joan. 16. Miche. 7. Romans 8.
from heaven in the sight of me^, causynge them to believe that yt is gods will
to have the heretyques consumed. Thus provoke she that good creature of God
vnwyllyngly (as saint Paul speaks yt) to serve her vanyte, clean contrary
unto his gracious ordinance. As where yt ought to be mannys comfort to work
his The new miracles of antichryst.
confusyon, and where yt ought to serve his need, vnsemynglye to devour him
and swallowe him clean up. Soche wonders can they do in the face of the world
and yet be an holy consecrate order still I doubt not but the lord will ones
make there inyquyte full known to all men, when they schall say with
horrible fear and anguyshe. These are they whom Nahum. 3 2. These. 2.
we sumtyme had in derysyon. We thought there lives very madness, and there
^de without honor. But loo how Sap. 5.
they are counted among the children of God, and there porcyon is among the
saints. Therefore have we erred from the The desperate co^playnt of antichrystes
slaughter men.
way of truth, the son of ryghtousnesse has not shyned unto us, nor the
clerenesse of understanding over spredde us, with his bright beams. We have
tired owr selves in the rewles of wickedness and destruccyon. Tedyouse ways
have we gone, but the just way of the lord have we not known. what good has
owr pride done unto us? Or what profit Eccle. 12. 1. Joan. 2.
has the po^pe of richesse brought us. All those things are passed a way
like a sheaddowe, and so forth as yt follows still in the fifth chapter of
sapyence.

The manne of sin.
1 Besechynge therefore you that be my fryndes / 2 to give him most hartye
thanks for the same / 3 and to take example by me 4 to avoid the like
danger. Amen.
His dysclosynge. The serpe^tyne nature of antichrists members.

O^H what a co^pas of deceyt is this to avoid the suspycyon of tyranny before
the blind world? This poor manne is shamed openly. He has lost his good
name for ever. Of a dear child of Christ he is made a sworn child of the
devil by this new professyon, wherein neither Christ is named nor yet his Am
Impe of him which of freth his fete to be kyssed.
eternal father. Yet must his fryndes come with cappe a^dknee, to give hartye
thanks to this terryble termagaunt, this Ne^roth, this Pharao, this Hieroboam,
this Olopherne, this antyochus, this Herod, yea, this mytred mahounde, and
very devil incarnate. I have in my time seane letters No soche blasphemye in
saracen nor turk.
and wrytynges diverse, which has comen from the great Turk and Souldane. But
never saw I any of them with out the name of god as this lordlye declaracyon
is. Vvo is that realm that has many soche ghostlye gydes. It had been great
pity except yt had been declared at Paul's cross, and that Tolwyns fryndes
sehuld give hartye thanks for yt, there is in yt so much goodness.

2 But unto what purpose schuld these Thanks for playnge the tyrant.
thanks be given? That my lord may be judged a prelate most charytable, and
that he has done all this but of ge^tylnesse and fauer, where as he myghthaue
burned the heretyque by the popes holy laws, of whom he is a commensed
canonyst. Why? call ye that an act of charity, to Vvo to them that calls
sower sweet. Esa. 5. Marci. 8. Math. 16. Joan. 8. Apoc. 13.
show soche vyolence for matters of so small wayght? Yea, for thiges which are
rather deuylyshe than godly, whose fulfyllynge is sylthye abhomynacyon and
blasphemye? For non other cause was Peter called Satan of Christ, but for
fauorynge things that were not of God but of men. Let him give him thanks
there for that has set him a work, to kill as many as will not do there
homages to the beastlye body of the old serpent of hell. And let not honest
godly men now worshypp that Image, which is latelye raised of the beasts
wounded head, of whom I have written a large volume The Image of both churches.
called the Image of both churches comprehe^dynge an whole commentarye upon the
reuelacyon of Johan, which I trust ye schall shortly have with other things
else. For a doctrine of salvation is that Apocalypse, and so necessary to be
understand and known, as yt is to be a member of Christ's church,
considering yt is non other but a manyfestacyon of the estate thereof for all
ages unto the worlds Necessary doctrine of saluacyo^.
end. Now to owr purpose again. My lord would feign by these far fett
colors hyde a wolf, but yt will not be. Falshede will apere falshede, and axe
him no leave. Great peynes he takes to weue the spyders web, and to hatche
the coccatryce Job. 8. Esa. 59 Ezech. 13. Apoc. 14. 16. and ^^. Oseae. 8.
eggs, but all will not help.

He under proppeth Babylon with vntempred claye for falling, but his building
will not fashyo^. Her irrecuperable fall is at hand. The calfe of Samaria must
be take away. Yet will they do myschefe as long as they may, so deuyllyshe is
there nature.

3 Which is here included in this latter Take warning by Tolwyn or else ye
burn.
admonycyon of Tolwyn. Vvherin he desires his fryndes to take an example of
warning by him, and therbye to avoid like claunger. And me thinks this
counsel is fryndlye, if yt be his. For indede they schuld not find yt easy
to come in soche tyrannouse ha^delynge. But I think verelye, that this latter
end is no less my lord of Londons, than is all that went a fore. Not for
any good love or benyuolence that the wolf bears the Ezech. 22 Joan. 10.
Lucae. 11. Heb. 13.
flock of Christ's lambs. But in purpose to scattre them, and to fraye them
away from the sweet pasture and fat fedynge of the gospel which is his
eternal testament. A contynuall practyse has this been among owr spiritual
Mahometes ever sens there beginning. And I think A prac^tyse borrowed of the
Romans
they learned yt first of the romans, as they have done all other deuylyshnesse
else. Whose custom was, when so ever the flood of Tiber raged, to throw in a
man ne or a woman, therewith to pacyfye his furye. And in deed waters in diverse
places Psalm. 76. Apoc. 17 Act. 6. and 21. Lucae 2.
of the scripture, betokens the people. Those hastye voices against there
proud kyngedome, they use often to apeyse with soche a fraye bugge as was Tolwyn
at Paul's cross, whom my lord set up the re for a sign of contradyccyon. If
Johan Porter that ge^tyll and godly young man ne and true dyscyple of Christ
(whom my Ioha^ porter famyshed i^ new gate for Christ.
lord latelye quelled in preson for reading the bible) had submytted himself
to this simple office and professyon of papystrye, forswerynge Christ and his
veryte, he had been ma^ne alive, (and so had other more) where as now he is
dead and gone. But be thu certain and sure of yt (thu terryble and cruel
Cerberus) that Precyouse is the death of the faithful before God.
God has not lost him. Full dear is he unto his merciful redemer though thu
have wretchedly cast him away. Yea, full precyouse in his sight is his death,
though he dyed in the stynkynge do^gyon of new gate with the wydowes alms of
no small wayght upon him, besides the most sharp ho^ger and greuouse famyshme^t
which dried up his bowels. Or strangelynge up in the night as your common
feate is, The commen charity of mytred prelates.
for ye have yowr hired slaughter men in soche hydden corners for soche busye
bible readers. Remember what ye said, when he came before you, that ye were
glad he was come to your hands. Ye thought than to dyspatche him for any more
reading in Paul's, as ye have now done in deed, though he were a man of
right strong nature and stomach. But blessed be our lord God, though ye Psalm.
113. Math. 10. Lucae. 9. Joan. 12. Marci. 8. Math. 25.
have slain his body, ye can do no harm to his soul. He that loses his
life for Christ, schall find yt ageyn to advantage. The corn that dies in
the ground, brings forth much fruit. He that loses his soul here, schall
find yt in the life everlasting, when tyrauntes schall have reward with the
devil and his angels.

4 Tolwyn has not done all amys therefore in admonyshynge his fryndes before
hand to take example by him, for the auoydaunce The blood of these and other
axeth vengeance.
of like danger or else worse. For if they list not to beware by him. they may
take warning by that has be done unto Richard mekyns, Robert ward, and now
last of all Johan porter, whose blood axeth daily vengeance over this cruel
tyrant, as ded the innocent blood of Abel over that spyghtfull murderer Cain.
By this and soche other, as by most enydent tokens, may christen An euyde^t
sign of Christ's doctrine. Idols and the stews never persecuted.
me^ne se that yt is christ's doctrine which has been taught now of late, by
gods appointment and the kings permyssyon. For if yt were of the world, the
flesh, or the devil, yt schuld have the clergy to frynde, like as has
Idolatrye, whoredom and all other fylthynesse, with the stynkynge stews whom
they never persecute. Our eternal God and merciful father deliver ones his
people from these cruel enemies, whom he has redeemed with the precyouse blood
of his son Jesus Christ

Amen.
THE SECOND FYTT OR BOOK of my lord of Londons declaracyo^ concerning the
popes old faith, with the dysclosynge of the same.
The manne of sin.
1 Here after follows the names of 2 the books 3 which the said person of
saint Antonynes 4 vva^ detected / and presented with.
His dysclosynge.
1 IN case like was Tolwy^ wha^ my lord of London examyned him, as wa^ Christ
when he came before Mark the examynacyon of Annas. Joan. 18.
Annas the high pre^ of the Jews, as yt is here manifest. O^ his dyscyples and
doctrine ded Annas e^amyne him, so ded my good lord of L^^don poor Tolwyn for
the order of hy^ cure, and what learning he taught them* For the first was the
before said declarac^on, and for the other is this process (...) Dyuersyte of
matters herin specyfyed
following of the names of serten boke^ perteynynge also to the same. Diverse
are there tytles partlye for the dyuersyte of the matters, and partlye for the
more sole^pne setting forth of this notable work to the vpholdynge of holy
church against heretyques. The first matters respects The first co^cerueth
his paryshe or people.
his dyscyples or parryshners under the tyttle of declaracyon, whom he has not
fed with the pharysees leven, nor yet pampred up with the popes swylle and
dregs according to his first professyo^, but now of late with the pure word
of god as he could conuenyentlye procure yt. This present process concerns
his doctrine under the tyttle of the names This is all of the doctrine which he
taught.
of books, where with he was both detected and presented of them that neither
understood them nor knew them, the co^^entes thereof not declared at all.

2 What haynouse heresies and daungerouse doctrine the said books contains,
will here after apere as there names come to hand in there course. But I maruele
The bag schuld be co^de^pned with the books
much that the bag is not so well expressed in this title as are the books,
considering they came to Paul's cross together. So well is he worthy to be
condemned of heresye by the popes law as (...)y, for his covering, carryenge,
and conueyenge of them, as he ded. And as Nothing is here seane but names.
many heresies has he when he is emptye as they have, for ought wese here yet
saving o^lye the names. What we schall se here after I can not tell.

3 Would Tolwyn have been a good Idol mayntener with holy water and
sensynge, latyne Iabberynge and wawlynge, according to the office of saint The
office of saint antonynes personage.
Antonynes personage, he had not been thus brought forth for a^ heretyque.
Would he have showed himself the popes good swyneherde, and have fed his
porkelynges apace with sosse and syllybubbes, coddes and swaddes with other
like purueaunce, the great swyne had not so gredelye devoured him.

4 Neither had they detected him for Luc. 5. Matthew. 7. Esa. 66.
a loller, nor yet presented him for an heretyque. In no wise can they away
with the clenlye prouysyon of Christ, nor yet broke the service of his
apostles. The sweet bread of the gospel has in there mouths no sauer, nor yet
the dulcett gust of the other scripturs. The wholesome delycates Math. 15. Act.
17. Joan. 8.
that the holy ghost has prepared, ca^ they not away with. Give them the
dra^fe they were wont to have, with the swyllynges of the popes old vessels,
for they are soche worn bottels as will rather Marci. 2. Luc. 5.
burst than hold new wine. Better is a filthy puddell unto them to wallowe
in, than a fair clear river to make them 2. Pet. 2.
clean. Ye can have a swyne no better tha^ he is of his own ungentle nature.
Therefore Iete swyne be filthy swyne, and vile gootes be gootes still. As the
meke lambs Apoc. 22. Joan. 10. 1. Pet. 2.
of Christ, follow you his voice, which is the high shepeherde of yowr sowles,
and late swyne be swyne still. Now follows the second process of this
declaracyon.

The manne of sin
1 Good people / 2 these books contained here in this baggez or sachell are 4
erronrouse / heretycall / and noughtye books / and were remaining and found
in my house and custodye / 5 what time I was denounced and detected 6 to my
lord bysshopp of London.
His dysclosynge.
1 When the wylye fox fawneth, Ezech. 13. Prou. 11. Psalm. 36.
beware your chyckens, as the common adage admonysheth you. For naught is yt
not, that he calls you here good people, ye may be sure of yt. Vvych he, I
pray you? Even my lord bonner of London. For though the voice be Tolwyns, the
words of the voice are my lords. The words of Tolwis voice are my lords.
Full heuye was he in his heart good soul, to give him the vtteraunce of the^,
if he might otherwise have chosen. But he must needs forth (they say) that the
devil dryueth, be he never so vnwyllynge. My lord has rhetorycallye begone
his proposycy on to win his audytorye, and to make them attentyue and
dylyge^t, in calling them good people.

2 But whatys his narracyon or processes His pontyfycall rhetoryck co^ceruynge
a sachell.
Ofserten small books contained in a bag or sachell, which Tolwyn shoke forth
at Paul's cross, with a feeble countenance and a more feeble stomach. And what
meant my lord in this matter? That the people schuld judge Tolwyn an horrible
heretyque, and that they schuld therbye be ware of soche noughtye heresies
against holy church. But what were the Heresies not known but to the bag
heresies? Nay, that we can not tell. For they were fast shutt up in a bag,
and might in no wise be seane. The fathers in the prymatyue church confounded
always there heretyques with the open testymonye of the most euydent scripturs,
and not with the shaking of books in a bag. Yea, than was tha^, and now is
now. Tha^ were they called herety ques that spoke against God. But now is there
non heretyques Difference of heretyques now and than.
except they speak agei^st holy church. Than were serten philosophers
reasons blasphemouse, but now they are good dyuynyte, and the very scripturs
are fou^e heresies. Therefore my lord is now much wyser than so. For if the
books were seane and the artycles throughlye My lord plays here 3. parts.
known, his self might perchance be judged both an herety que and a
traitor, and also a cruel persecuter of Christ in his faithful members,
which were a great blemyshe to his lordhypp. And that causes him so secretlye
to work. It is Enough for my lord to say, there be errors The kings true
subjects abused.
in the bag, though he never bring them forth. And yt schall become all the
kings true subjects to believe yt, under the pain of hanging or else
burning. For why my lords quarrel in this, is the kings quarrel. There is
now non heresye but is also treason (as yt was in Thomas walde^ in prologo
primi li* co^tra wic leuistas.
king harrye the fiftes time) that they may be both partyners in one plage of
the lords vengeance, if innocent blood be shed. So naturallye good and
louyn ge is he to his prince.

3 But what means my lord to say here, this bag or sachell? Me thinks
the tone of the^ had been suffycye^t enough in so light a matter. No ser, not
so. Ye know Equiuocacyon of this mystycall* term, bag.
this word bag is a^ equyuocall term, and has many diverse
sygnyfycacyons. Sumtyme yt betokens a safron bag, sumtyme an alame bag.
Sumtyme a money bag, and sumtyme an old nail bag. Yea, sumtyme a
wallett, and sumtyme the end of a worn sack, with soche otherlyke. My lord
has therefore declared rhetorycallye by a cyrcu^locucyon A toke^ of remembrance
against an other time.
what manner of bag yt is, even a very sachel, that men might throughlye
know yt against an other time. That if Tolwyn schuld chance here after to be
burned upon relapse, they might yet testyfye that his heresies were schewed at
Paul's cross in soche a bag as is called a sachel and that therefore be was
well worthy to dye.

4 But what means my lord to call these books erronyouse, heretycall and The
bag knows more tha^ we
noughtye books* That can the bag tell which co^tayneth them, for we are not
so far taught as yet. This large circu^staunce of speaking (I suppose)
comes of the angrye zele that my lord has in holy churches quarrel, wherein
he would all her ill wyllers were clerelye consumed.

5 The resydue of this text is easy to The fervent zele of my lord for holy
church. In custodye and out of custodye. The popes sworn benefactours.
understand, as where these heretyque books remained, where they where found,
and what time they were found, as is here set forth for a necessary doctrine
of this new Christen faith. They were remaining in Tolwyns house, and they
were found in his custodye, soche time as he was in my lords custodye, and
would feign have been farther of.

6 And soche time also as he was denounced of the popes sworn fryndes for not
going processyon, and detected of his pr^uye spies for not werkema^lye making
his holy water,

7 Unto the reverend lord late risen out of the donge hill and now consecrate
bishop of London to uphold the regne of antichryst, till the lord turn yt
over with the breathe of his mouth. No less London as fortunate as rome
fortunate is London than is Rome yt self, to have soche a gracious gyde and
spiritual pastor as mynystreth soche godly doctrine as here is, to the
edyfycacyon of soul. But who yt was that sought A mystesterye left here
vndysoussed
out these books to the clerer setting out of this wortlye pagent, that schall
remain still as a secret mysterye vndyscussed (whether they were his accusers
or my lords own servants, or else both together) because yt is not here
expressed.

The manne of sin.
1 And the names of the said books are these. 2 A book of frythes ^3 A book
called Thorpe 4 and old castle. 5 The old God and the nevve. 6 Rydleyes
comme^taryes upon saint Paul to the Ephesyanes.
His dysclosynge.
1 SVmwhat we are like to have out of this sachell, to prove Tolwyn an Names of
books but nothing else.
heretyque by. We schall have the names of the books therein contained, though
we have nothi^ge else. And that is Enough to make foles believe the moon is made
of a grene chese. If my lord schuld say that saint Paul's epystles in
English we The old faith and believe of holy church.
re heresye, as his predecessors has done they must give credence to yt. For
why they must needs believe as holy church does teach them, though they
schuld go to the devil for yt, as they are like to do, yea, both that holy
church and her children, unless they repent in time. For when the blind does
lead the blind, Gal. 4. Lucae. 13. Math. 15. Joan. 8.
they must both fall into the dytche. The only light of salvation is Christ,
and alone the way to eternal life. He that walks not in that light, schall
never atteyne unto that life, have he never so many Joan. 14. Joan. 1. Esa. 55.
counterfe^t lyghtes of my lords holy church of antichrists foundacyon.
Names of books has my lord here promised us, which schuld declare Tolwyn an
heretyque.

2 But he halteth very sore at the first, My lord halteth at the first.
geuyng us a book of frythes without a na me. Of a lykelyhode his lordshypp
never opened that book, or else he lyked not there of the tyttle, judging
frythes name, Enough to co^dempne yt without any farther sight of yt. Yet has
he broken covenant (no derogacyo^ be yt to his honor) My lord breaks
covenant
in that he has promised here not the names of the me^ne which made the books,
but the names of the self books. Sure I am that Johan fryth made no book
without a name. Either yt had the tyttle of a dyspu^acyon against purgatory,
or of an answer The books that Ioha^ frith co^pyled.
unto mores epistle, or of the examynacyon of his artycles, or of an
exhortacyo^ to the folowers of Christ's gospel, or of a myrrour to know owr
selves by, or of a bulwark against rastell, or else concerning the sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ, yfyt were his. And as touching the
reuelacyo^ of antichrist, The reuelacyon of antichryst translated by Johan
Frith.
though he ded translate yt out of a foren tongue into English, with an
antithesis annexed unto yt, yet was yt not of his making. But truly if I
might utter my co^ceyt, I would say that this book of frythes were his
disputacyon of purgatory, by cause yt is here unnamed. In deed by the going
down thereof, my lords kychyn is not the warmer, nor yet his purse the
wayghtyer, and therefore yt must needs be heresye.

3 Thorpe and oldecastell are the names of.ij. diverse men, and not of one
several The examynacyo^ of master Vvyllya^ Thorpe.
book, and therefore though my lord has perused the bag, yet has he not
dyscretelye perused the books. For a monstruouse thing yt were.ij. men to
beo^e book, unless he could bring yt in by some strange figure of the canon
law which now adays works many new miracles. The book of master Vvyllyam
thorpes examynacyon comprehends The chief artycles theryn co^prehe^ded
only these artycles. That Images schuld in no case be worshyped. That me^
schuld not go to them on pilgrimage. That prestes have no just title to tithes
by the gospel. That yt is not law full to swe are by any creature. And that
the sacrament of Christ's body is no accydent without a materyall substance
as fryre Thomas has fantasyed.

4. The other small treatise called the examynacyon of ser Ioha^ oldecastell
the lord Ser Johan oldecastel the lord cobham.
Cobha^ and worthy warryour of Jesus Christ contains only these artycles.
That bysshopes has made laws for there covetousness, whom no Christen men
ought to follow. That no pressed ought by gods law to sytt upon any mannys
death. That sens venym was shed into the church they never followed Christ.
That the pope in his laws and living is unto Christ an aduersarye. That the
Artycles contained cheflye in his examynacyo^
church of Rome is the nest of antichrist, whose tail are monks and fryres.
That the sacrament of the altar is Christ's body and bread after Christ's and
Paul's doctrine. That ma^nys salvation, came in by Christ and not by the cross
he dyed on nor yet by any other dead thing. That God often times curses where
as bysshoppes Sore matters to be condemned
does bless. And that an ignorant pressed living wyckedly ought to hear no
ma^nys confession. In the condempnacyon of these artycles, ye also condemn
many godly things that owr gracious prince has done by the auctoryte of
gods word so forgetful are ye of yourselfe in your My lord co^de^neth the
king.
dronken generacyon. Nothing is like to be allowed at your hands (I se well)
that makes ageist your glytteri^ge regne of blasphemye. Still are ye of the
same Like is my lord to the old brutes of Babylon.
self burning zele and stomach, that Tho mas Beckett, Vvyllyam Cortenaye, Tho
mas Arundell, Harrye Spenser, and soche other terryble termagauntes of yowr spy
rytualte were in the quarrel os yowr holy church. A wonderful thing is yt,
that ye never repent yowr myschefes, nor yet recant yowr errors,
superstycyons, and blasphemies. But evermore persecute Evermore persecute our
bishops with Cai phas.
and murder for the vpholdynge of the^ playenge still the same parts that
other cayphases has done before you. Not on lie are ye contented to behold
the cruel acts of yowr popyshe predecessors, but also ye must conferme them
a fresh by a new conclempnacy on of the popes enemies to the great slander
of yowr prince, least ye schuld lose yowr part in the An easy part has my
lord played he re.
vengeance promised for the shedynge of innocents blood. Let men dylyge^t
lie search those. ^. treatyses, and they schall easelye perseyue what a
faithful part ye have played here, in condempnynge in a manner all things that
he has made lawful by the scripturs.

5 The book of the old God and the The old God and the new
new was compyled (so far as I can re membre) by one Hermannus a germane
more than, xx. years a go. And only yt touches the pride, covetousness, and
tyranny of the bysshopp of Rome, the Idotrye of his church, and the
hypocrysye of his sects. Much do I maruele wheri that God is he re named
only to his condempnacyon.
book schuld offend you, but that I know your heart by your fruits. This is
the first time that god is named in this seco^ de process of my lords
declaracyon, and yt is in the tyttle of this heresye book, else had yt gone by
at this time, and therefore thank the book for yt and not him.

6 The commentarye which the virtue ouse learned manne master Lancelot Rydleye
made upon saint Paul's epistle to Rydleyes commentaryes upon Paul to the
Ephesyanes.
the Ephesyanes for the true erudycyon of his Christen brethren, has my lord
he re also condemned for heresye. But what the cause is I can not tell.
Unless yt be for auauncynge the gospel, as the thing whereby we are made
ryghtouse without either decre or ceremonye. Or else for admony shynge us to be
ware of mennys tradycyons and doctrines, least we schuld by Tradycyons may not
be touched.
them trust in any other thing than in Christ, and least we schuld for there
glytterynge gawdes refuse the spyrituall armou re against the devil and his
members, whom Paul has there prescrybed unto us. So charytable is my lord to
Christ's Nothing comes from my lord but condemp nacyon.
congregacyon, that nothing comes from him to there edysyege neither ^
preachyn ges nor yet in wrytynges, but all in condempnacyons of both to there
destruccyo^. Here is this latter book called rydlyes co^ mentaryes, as though
they were many upon this one epistle being but one, by cause he will be true
in nothing.

The manne of sin.
1 Denatorius upon Timothe / 2 and v vyna^iu^ of Gods prouydence 3 The
cathecysme of Melanchton / 4 The cathecysme of Dr^anus / 5 The cathecisme of
pacimontanus / 6 The cathecysme of Sarce^us.
His dysclosynge.
Much a do have we still with these books. Not yet is my lords mind More
books spott'd with heresye. Thomas Venatorius i Pau lum ad Ti motheum
satysfyed with them, but more of there names must be blown abroad to prove
Tolwyn a rank heretyque. Now comes forth Thomas venatorius, which with great
grace, learning, and eloquence has written an excellent work upon the.ii.
epystles of saint Paul to Timothe. This book may not come a broad to be tried
by the scrypturs and most auctentyue doctors, but yt must in a bag be
condemned at Paul's cross for heresye, non artycles named. And what is the
cause think you? For yt shows the right office of a Christen bysshopp, how
he schuld teathe and govern, which my lord ca^ not The principal con tents
of that godly work.
away with. It commands to resyst false preachers, whom my lord does
daily maiteyne. It describes soche wicked pre lates as teaches the doctrine
of deuyls with lies ^ hypocresye forbyddynge mar ryage and meats, of whose
nombre his lordshypp is one. It exhorts all spiritual gydes of the people to
be virtuous and The right office of a christe^bys hoppe
charytable, to cleave to Christ's gospel, and to shurne superfluouse
arguments, and not to deceive the world with hypo cresye, sufferynge all
abhomynacyons un der the shaddowe of outward holiness to have there fre
course, but my lord will non of that.

2 The compendyouse treatise of Gods prouyde^ce, which that most notable clar
ke Huldricus Zuinglius wrote at the instan^t Huldricus Zuinglius de prouidentia
Dei.
request of the right worshypfull lor de Phylypp the La^dgraue of Hesse, only
comprehends the matters here folowyn ge. That God necessarylye dysposeth all
creaturs according to his inscrutable wisdom. That the prouydence of God The
conte^tes of that famous and excol lent work.
is his perpetual and unchangeable admynystracyo^ of all thiges. That the
right consider acyon of the creaturs byneth yt a plain way to deduce us into
knowle^ge thereof. That manne is not only a terrestryall but a celestyall
creatur also. What the law of God is, and unto what end yt was given unto
manne. That the eternal wisdom of God knowing mannys Mark what my lordehath
here condemned.
diverse fall before hand, could in no case err, ouershote her compass, nor
yet be deceived, neither in creatynge nor yet in geuynge the law. That Gods
eleccyon or predestynacyon (as the doctors does call yt) takes ground of his
goodness and wisdom, and is immutable. And that his eternal decrees or set
purposes are always as he is, unchangeable, strong, and sure, with soche
other like. And All condemns he with outrespect
all these has my lord of his pontyfycall dyscressyon condemned here for
heresye, with all that was spoken of before. Vvherin I stand i much doubt
whether he has condemned his prince for an heretyque or no. I will not say
that my lord is an assehead without true knowledge, nor yet The report of
diverse learned me^n ^
a beast without godly judgment, yet here I diverse learned men so daily
report him, for condempnynge this book, and soche other, One thing I would
desire the dylygent reader to mark here, which I have often rehearsed a fore. In
the first of my lords declaracyon was neither God nor Christ ones named,
neither God found among heretyques is co^de^pned.
yet in this latter fytt till we come to the rehersall of heretyques books, and
that does ^he all of spyght. But blessed be that lord that he will be found
there yet. I thought so much all this time, that came we ones among them, we
could not be long with out him. In the very tyttles of there books does he
apere, much more in the process God bears no rewle among bishops.
within. Where as in the whole matter of an holy spiritual, gloryouse,
glytterynge prelate he can not ones be seane. True is that lord of his word
and just of his promise, that he will be with the pore contemned dyscyples to
the end of the world.

3 Next follows. 4. diverse books of Psalm. 118. Mat. 28. 4. cathechysmes of
faith.
one tyttle, called all catechysmes, or instytucyons of the true Christen
relygyon. Whom my lords holy fatherhode in the zele of a contrary or
popyshe relygy on, conde^pneth here for heresye. The first is the catechysme of
Phylypp Melanchto^, Philippus Melanchton compyled the first.
whose manyfolde erudycyon the best learned of chrystendome greatly commends.
This treatise of his, is an only christen instytucyo^ for the bringing up of
you the, teaching the^ the commandments of God, the artycles of the
Christen faith, the lords prayer, and the right use of the sacraments. I
wonder what my lord me aneth to condemn these for heresies.

4 The second is the catechysme of Vrbanus Regius made the second.
Vrbanus Regius, a man also Chrystenlye learned and of a sincere living? This
work contains the necessary pryncyples of the christen relygyon before
rehearsed, whose knowledge is life, and whose ignorance is dampnacyon. This
could not my lord reprehe^de had he not an eye given to wickedness.

5 Of Balthazar Hiebmeir Pacimontanus Balthazar Pacimontanus made the iij.
is the third catechysme, whom in deed I know not but by name, as I have
read yt in other mennys writings. But I co^ceyue here the better o pynyon of
him, for that my lord has condemned him among these men, whose doctrine I
know to be pure and perfyght.

6 Erasmus Sarcerius Anemontanus Erasmus Sarcerins co^pyled the forth.
(whose name is also notable and his learning famous) made the fort
catechysme, whom he elegantlye dyffyneth to be an in stytncyon or teaching by
mouth, comprehendynge the necessary points of the Christen faith and
relygyon. Nothing is more bewtyfull in a Christen manne, than purelye to
worshypp God, and right Rebukes gives the bishops for godliness.
lie to exercise the wurkes of faith, which these books throughlye teaches.
Rather were soch men worthy thanks than rebukes, for so regarding the
Christen common welthe, if bysshoppes not doing soche things were as they
schuld be, regarding the peples health. But soche are evermore the unworthy
ways of this world, malygnelye to blame men ne for there well doing, and
flatterynglye to hold the other sort up in all kinds of wyckydnesse. As my
lord does here full Hier. 10. Math. 23
fatherlye, which will neither enter into the kyngedome of God his self nor
yet suffer any other that would gladlye do yt

The manne of sin.
1 D vestmore upon the concylyacyon of fathers. 2 The book of the counterfayt
bysshopp / 3 The confession in English with the Apologye. Postylles upon the
epystles and gospels.
His dysclosynge.
Still is my lord busye with this bag or sachell, declarynge the contents
thereof to the great confusyon of Tolwyn, The wolf chaseth the poor la^be (...)
still.
I had almost said of himself but that I stopped yt in time. For bysshoppes
can ta(...) no scathe here, bnt what is toward the^ in the next world, that
is in the ryghtfull judges hands. More of these erronyouse books must be
conde^pned yet, no remedy. Specyallye one westmore upon the concylyacyon of
fathers. My lord by Bartholomeus west hemerus a learned ma^ne.
all lykelyhode was here i some great agonye or whote passion of prelacye,
forgetting the right tyttle of this book. In deed he that made yt is called
Bartholomeus Vvesthemerus, which is yet a ma^ne of great lytterature and
judgment. The tyttle Conciliatio sacrae scripturae.
of his book is, The co^cylyacyon of the holy scrypturs and most au^cyent
fathers, And not westmore upon the concylyacyon of fathers. He compyled the
self treaty se, and not wrote upon yt as me^ne do that gloss a text. My lord
therefore being Ignorant Christ is condemned of my lord.
of the true tyttle, schuld seem to be ignorant also in the contents of that
book, and so to condemn he woteth not what. But by his absolute power he may
do soche acts, and condemn Christ to if he come in his way, in so hastye an
over sight. In this book as in a clear myrrour, may me^ne behold wheri^ the
holy What is to be seane in that godly volume.
doctors, counsels, canons, Rome bishops, constytucyons, customs, and
chronicles dyffereth as concerning Christen relygyon, from the sacred scripturs
of both testamentes. And this is a matter necessary to be known of all men
that coueteth to walk ryghtlye, rather than to be conde^pned without lokynge
on, if we have either conscience, wytt, or grace. But all Joan. 5. Esa. 50.
Math. 15. Luc. 6.
my lords labor is to make his ghostlye children to grope still in the dark,
till they drop into the dytche for all.

2 I much blame not my lord for being offended with the book of the
counterfett bysshopp, partlye for that yt was made by Martyn Luther the
capytall enemy Martyn Lutherma de the cou^terfett bishop.
of antichrists bysshoppes, and partlye for that my lord is therein so lyuelye
set out in his pontyfycall colors. Yet wondre I again that he schuld
condemn that pycture which he bears out so lyuelye in the sight of the
world. Parauenture he is well contented to play the proud pagent, but he
would not have the scripturs to busye to tell him thereof. Nothing takes this
treatise from a right 1. Tim. 3. Esa. 1. Apoc. 18.
christen bysshopp, though yt touches the tyrauntes of Sodom, and the
gloryouse, glottons of Babylon. Therefore let the^ wexe furyouse, fra^tyk, and
mad at there spirytuall pleasure, full little cares Martyn for that
thonderynge or earthquake of there is.

3 The godly confession of faith, which the noble princes of germanye mekelye
The co^fessyo^ of the Germans
offered to the emproure for the churches reformacyon (whom my lord calls
here the confession in English full wyselye) with the learned Apologye of
Phylypp Mela^chton, has he also blotted with the black tyttle of heresye.
Ryghtlye Math. 7. Esaye. 50. Phil. 3. Math. 33.
compares Christ soche shamelesle hypocrytes to rauenynge dogs and swyne
cruellye tearing his truth and treading under there filthy fete the
precyouse pearl thereof. Full little knows this blind bysye busharde what he
does condemn in these godly books here rehearsed. He da^pneth diverse
verytees of God All godliness condempneth Bonner.
as our iustyfycacyo^ i Christ, the putting down of the pope, the confutynge
of the anabaptystes, the true obedyence to princes, the abolyshynge of
superstycyo^s, with many godly things that our king has done against the
false kyngedome of antychrist. What godly wise manne ca^ With all that ower
king has done
judge otherwise of him, when he conde^pneth all that is in them contained with
out respect. Certain I a^ that these are the pryncypall points therein decysed.

4 What the postylles are upon the epysteles and gospels, (which follows
co^sequentlye under the same condempnacyo^) The postilles of Richard taverner.
I can not tell, unless they be Rychard tauerners. Whom he compyled together
of a good godly mind, that yowr asseheaded prestes which can do no soche
things) schuld not be all Idell, but show some godly instruccyons to the
people. By this furyouse act therefore may all me^ne Nothing seck the bishops
but destruccyon of soul.
se, that ye mind no manner of godliness to the dear flock of Christ, but all
destruccyon and myschefe. In the chamber of this poor manne (whom ye thus
proclaim for an heretyque) found ye diverse books of papystrye and treason to
your price were they so narrowlye looked upon as these are. But them left ye
there behind untouched, as matters necessary to the vpholdynge Books of
pystryea^(...) treason no(...) co^de^pned(...)
of your holy church. Let Tol wyn have so many of them as he will, and he
schall never be blamed, but be your own whyght son. Ye pass not a whytt how
much treason be a broad, for by that always has your ruffelynge relygyon had
mayntenaunce. Only is yt heresye Treaso(...) is non h(...) resye, bu(...)
only th(...) scripturs
(as ye call yt) that moves your spretes. For by that is decayed yowr vain
glory. Ye force not though a hundred thousand of those books were abroad that
might teach men to be dysobedyent to God in the matters of faith, and unto
your prince in the causes of there true allegeaunce. The enchyridion of Eckius
that Johan Eckius with his Enchirydion.
impudent proctour of antichrist offends you nothing at all. Yet co^tayneth
yt all doctrine of deuylyshnesse, as the popes auctoryte, power and prymacye,
his counsels co^stytucyons and customs, his confirmacyons orders and vnccyons,
his worshyppynge of Images rodes and rellyques, The ghostlye treasure there in
contained.
his excommunycacyons interdyccyons and cursings, his purgatory pardons and
pylgrimages, his immunytees pluralitees and tot quo^^es with the devil and all
of soche fylthynesse. Every where is this book sought and inquired for i^
cite, markett, and feyer. Every ser Johan must have To learn therewith to make
trayters a pace.
yt that can read, to make him therewith a Christen curate, a good ghostlye
father, and a catholyck member of holy church Very few popyshe prestes with
in my lords dyocese are at thyssame hour with out yt, either in there
chambers, sleues, or bosoms. For yt is a most precyouse treasure to him that
will hear confessyons Necessary doctrine for holy church.
and keep a cure well to antychristes behoue. That embrase the gentle men of
the popes lyuerye and mark, that culle they, that kiss they, that draw they
to them as a work of most holy wholesome catholyck doctrine. No less might
harrye pep well in Paul's church yearde, have out of harry pep well
stokyslayes prouider.
Michael Hillenius house, in Anwerpe at one time than a^ whole complete prynte
at the holy request of stokyslaye. In a short space were they dyspached and a
new prynte in hand, soche time as he also commanded Barlowes dyaloges to be
preached of the curates through out all his dyocese. The auctor suspended for
prechynge the gospel.
I know yt the better for that he at the same time suspended me from
preaching in estsexe because I would not leave the gospel and be sworn to the
obseruacyon of his iniunccyons. I have known in my time more than vi. diverse
pryntes of this erronyouse and deuylyshe book which is a manifest token that
the vtteraunce thereof has not been small. Diverse Other books else of the said
papyst Eckius.
of them has besides this, his dronken dysputacyons against heretyques, his
apostolyck creed, his crysopassus of dyuyne predestynacyon, his aurycular
confessyo^, his book offer will, his primacye of Peter to pope Leo the tent,
and his postylles of papystrye. Many other dyrtye dyuynes have they else of the
same pharyseycall leven, to maynteyne the same self doctrine. As Thomas of
Aquyne, Bonauenture, More lousye doctors of the same leven.
Walden, Prierias, Catharinns, Clychtoueus, Radinus, Empser, Cocleus,
Lathomus, Scatzger, Herbron, Hochstrate, Natalis Beda. Tregarius, Pelargus,
Hofmester, Alphonsus de Castro, Johan Fysher, and Thomas More, with canonystes
and Romystes the devil and all. But at these can my lord wynke, in hope of, I
say no At these canthe bishops wike.
more. Whether these ways be right or nay, let men of godly and ripe
dyscressyon judge.

The manne of sin.
1 A book of prayer made by Luther / 2 The door of holy scripture / 3 The
postylles of Coruinus / 4 Two old written books / the one for scolers / 5
and the other taken out of frythes books.
His dysclosynge.
NOt yet have we done with these books, A book of prayer made by Martin luther.
but still are they a foul blott in my lords eyes. Now comes a book of
prayer made by Martyn Luther, yet nothing is seane but the bag. Anon my
lord will say that heretyques despise good works, and write against fasting
Bonner will prove himself a foul liar.
and prayer. But let him be ware least this book prove him a loud liar in the
face of all the world. In that small treatise (if yt be his) is nothing else
contained but the lords prayer, the commandments, and creed. It is much
maruele to me, if they are now become heresye, and legenda aurea, with sancta
Maria ora pro nobis out Legenda aurea, * with ora pro nobis.
of your ordynarye pie and portas becomes again so wholesome learning. But
parauenture yt is for Luthers names sake. If the whole doctrine of the trynyte
came in that name, yt schuld sure into the sachell without lokynge on, and be
condemned for heresye. Ye, if God came hymfelfe under his tyttle, he schuld
surely stand forth God and all his commandments condemned here
for an heretyque in my lords great mode He has alredye condemned his
commandments, his prayer, and the artycles of his faith, for Martyns sake
o^lye. And no maruele. For he is the father heretyque and enemy of all holy
church. If God would God might have thanks to take luther away. The door of
holy scriptur is Christ. Joan. 10.
ones take him out of the way, doubtless he schuld hane great thanks of my
lord and of the rank rabble of Romyshe ruffelers.

2 Next comes forewarde in course the door of holy scripture. Whether this
be Christ or no, I am in much doubt. For in deed he says unto his dyscyples
in the x. chapter of Johan. I am the door into the sheep fold. He that enters
in by me schal go in and out, and find good fedynge. But I fere me that my
lord is one of those Joan. 10. Treno. 3. Col. 3. 2. Tim. 3. Exodus 7. Psalm. 2.
Act. 4. Hier. 26. Math. 26.
thieves and robbers that Christ speaks of there, for stoppynge up of this
door. For he in so doing depryueth the people of that life which is in him, and
so sleeth there souls, holding them still captyue in sin. Always has my
lords generacyon been thus rebellyouse against the lord and his word. As we
have for example i^ the old law, the false prestes which compassed Hieremye
the prophet, and in the new law the spiritual prelates that sought Christ's
death. If this door of holy scripture be a treatise, than had yt been more
wisdom for my lord to have christenlye reproved the errors thereof (in case A
tyttle offering much godliness conde^pned.
there be any) and not to condemn soche a clear perfyght tyttle as offreth
nothing but godliness. I think either his wits are not his own or else he
is drunk with excess of the Babylonyshe cup of his holy mother.

3 The compendyouse postyls of Antonius Postille Antonij* Coruini, vtiles and
necessary
Coruinus upon the sondayes and saints, are judged of men that be syncerelye
learned, to be faithful and godly. And so much the more necessary to a
preacher that is but meanelye learned, that within a small compass they
contain much christen erudycyon. But my lord admits nothige that
perteieth to that office. He cares No right preaching but sensynge of Images.
the new manner of preaching now a days. The auncye^t works of holy church
for nothing but for holy water and sensynge processyo^ and massynge. He
thinks that.iiij. times in the year or ones in a quarter is enough for
preaching, and therein only to declare the kings acts concerning ceremonies
and tithes instead of the popes sentence of cursings which now is worn out.
If they Iyst to preach any other thing else, they have yet there old
festyuall, mammotractus, Gesta roma norum, Sermones discipuli, Sermones dormi
secure, Rationale diuinorum, Manipulus curatorum, postilla guilhermi, and
diverse other more, which are ancient works allowed of holy church. They
have also a famous new work called Ioh Ecka^ius postyll, which battelleth
for the new postyl of Ioha^. Eckius.
the holy fathers primacye hard. These and soche other are books of catholyk
learning, and schall never be condemned, for they make all together for holy
church.

4. In the bottom of the bag lies.ij. old written books, and they have no
names Two old written books without name.
here to fulfill my lords promise with, But thus much has my lord gathered
of them, that the one of them is for scolers, and the other is taken out of Io.
frythes books. But wonder yt is to me what that book schuld offend which is
only for scolers, and has non other tyttle. Will Virtuous educacion is
become heresye.
my lord still destroy all godliness without excepcyon? Non other is yt to
condemn a book for scolers, (having non other addycyon) but to condemn for
heretyques doctrine there virtuous bringing up in good letters and manners, In
this does my lord declare himself an enemy unto nature, which delyteth
Arist. 2. de aia. and 1. coeli.
in necessaryes, besides that he has done unto faith.

That the other treatise taken out of Johan frythes books schuld be an old
book, yt is a foul lie, though yt be newlye The age of Johan fryth.
practysed of my lord. For he was not. 27 years old in the 8. year before
this declaracyon, when my lords generacyon Stokyslaye, Gardyner, and soche
other, (who^ Esaye calls the tyrauntes of Sodoma) Esa. 1. Genesis 9. Johan. 10.
putt him to most cruel death in the year of owr lord God. M. D.xxxiij. for
Christ's congregacyon sleeth no man for his faith. And therefore it ca^ not
now be old, and collected of his books. Not all unlike is my lord here, unto
the old 4. reg. 23. Hiere. 36 1. math. 1.
tyrauntes in the condempnacyon of these books. Ioachim the king of Judah tare
Hie remyes prophecye and consumed yt in the fire for vtterynge the truth.
Antiochus commanded the books of the scripturs to be brent also, and the
readers of them to be putt unto death. Herodes the Ascalonyte or Idumyte
destroyed the monymentes of Joan bachonis.3. sente^ did. 20.
the Jews, and cruellye slew there notaryes. Besides that has be done by the
consecrate prelates of Constantynople and Rome, which also destroyed many
works of Chrysostom and Gregorye, as the chronicles mencyoneth. And To^stall
in owr time (which is now bishop of Durha^) Tonstall burned the testamentes
in. english.
when the testamentes came first into English, bought up a greatt nombre of
them and brent them in Paul's church yearde, for the great devotion he had
unto them, and because he would show his kind. But what became of the asore
named tyrauntes, for workynge soche wickedness? Truly Ioachim was led
captyue Hiere. 22. 4. reg. 24 3. para. 36 Math. 1. 1. math. 6 petrus co^mestor
li. 19. cap. 16
into Egypt, and at the last dyed there myserablye, his name secluded from
Christ's genealogye. Antiochus departed in a strange land, overwhelmed with
dyspayre, and innumerable sorrows else. Herod was vexed with many sore
disseases, as ytche, scall, mange, gowte, fevers, collyke, and at the last
consumed of worms, most wretchydlye ended his life. what schall become here
after of my lord bonner and Tohstall for doing like feats I Boner and
Tonstall under the lords ve^geaunce.
will not nor can not dyffyne, for yt is in the hands of God. But sure I am
that yt will be remembered when blasphemers schall receive rewards according
to there deeds. My lord parauenture thinks the men be ill, and therefore he
may iustlye condemn there works. My lord must consydre again, that though
Balaam, Saul, Number. 24* 1. reg. 26. Joan. 11. Lucae. 6. 1. cor. 12.
and Cayphas were wicked persons, yet does not the scripturs condemn there
true prophecyes. What these me^ne are there fruits schall declare. For no man
can say that Jesus is the lord (which my lord has not yet vttred in all his
process) but in the holy ghost. And as for my lords thinking, we remember
in Esaye that Esaias. 5 and 55.
they which hold darkness light and light darkness, have thoughts and
judgments full unlike to the thoughts and judgments of God. They say they
do well (says Micheas the prophet) when they labor to shede blood and hunte
there Mich. 7. Zach. 11. Joan. 16.
brethren to death. They slay the sheep (says Zacharye) and yet they take yt
for no sin. No, they suppose they do God good service in so doing. But let
them take heed of yt and they list, for Esaye gives Esa. 5. Psalm. 54.
them warning that hell gapeth full wide and opens her mouth at large to
reward that good service of there is.

The manne of sin.
1 In which books are contained many sundry errors 2 and blasphe mouse /
detestable / and abho^ynable he resyes / 3 not only against the blessed
sacrament of the altar 4 with other sacraments of Christ's church / 5 but
also against the sre will of ma^ne 6 making God the auctor of sin.
His dysclosynge.
NOw face out your matter with a card of ten. Sumwhat must be said here to
make foles believe, ye have done A blind re^naunt must still hold up Babylon
Psalm. 52. Ezech. 10 Esa. 44. Hiere. 18.
a good act though it turn all to allye. A blind re^naunt of people must ye
always deceive to uphold ye still in your mischefes. And they be those dustye
dreamers that Esaye speaks of, which can have no fre conscience to reason
with themselves, or ones to think in there mides. May not I err? Soche
dawyshe dodypolles were the parents of him that was borneblide, which would
not confess Christ to have Joan. 12. Math. 10. Joan. 12. Joan. 16.
healed there son, for fear of dyspleasynge the prestes, and least the
bysshoppes schuld them excommunycate, or curse them out of church. In these
books (ye say) are contained many sondrye errors and heresies. It may well
be your saying, for we se neither them nor the books as yet. Ye have buried
the^ both in a bag. If ye schuld Not one of the doctors are without errors.
reiee^tet all books that has errors, ye schuld retain very few works of
saint Augustine, saint Hierom, Orygene, Tartu lyane, Basile, Chrysostom,
Cyrill, Damascene, Isodre, Bid, haymo, or any of your other doctors. If
errors offend you, I maruele ye suffer Thomas of Aquyne to Thomas of aquine
with his affinite.
remain, whose dyrtye dyuynite has made the pope Christ's vycar in earth,
and all Christen kings his sworn subjects all your scole doctors,
canonystes, senten cyonystes, and summystes agreynge to the same.

2 Books ye have and that many, which Ada^ cardinalis in dialogo regis and
episcopi.
deryueth all princes powers out of the popes auctoryte, as branches out of
the vine, and small ronnynge ryuers out of the head spring, secundum esse and
exercitium (soche are your Ynkehorne terms) only to execute in polytyque
ordynau^ces at his holy mind and pleasure, but them bring Thomas waldenus
co^tra wic leuistas.l. 2.
ye not forth. In them find ye neither blasphemouse lies, detestable errors,
nor yet abhomynable heresies (as ye call them here) though they expreslye say,
that there is no lawful Christen king, unless he receive his vnccyon, other,
promise, faith, iurysdyccyon, auctorite, seat, power, sword, scepter, and
crown of hi^ or Ide^ waldenuscontra wicle uistas lib. 2. cap. 78
of his deputes. Yea, and to make this good ye compare your prestes unto the
sun, the soul, and unto fine gold, and the kings with there people unto the moon, the wret ched body, and course lead, As though your princes were a
far more unworthy people tha^ you by reason of your gresynge and shauynge,
for few other virtues have ye. If yowr canon law (whereof The cano^ law and
ceremonies tried by the scripturs.
ye are a commensed doctor) and all the ceremonies which ye have of the pope
were brought to the trial of gods word they schuld not only apere sondrye
errors, but also blasphemouse beggerye, detestable learning, and abhomynable
wytcherye, the pharysees leven, lies of hypocrites, Math. 16. Esa. 59. Hiere.
23. Sopho. 1. Ezech. 4. 1. Tim. 4. Matt. 24.
adders eggs, spyders webbes, bryres, tares, cockle, chafe, menstrue, rust,
dust dregs, dreams, dottage, dronke^nesse, dogs dyrt, swylle, swynes
draffe, fylthynesse, stubble, snares of enemies, execrable doctrine of deuyls,
Gods curse, and abhomynacyon sitting in the holy place.

3 These books (ye say) are against the blessed sacrament of the aultre, and
against other sacraments of christ's church. And A pretense of godliness to
color there myschefe.
all this is not else but to color your cautels of myschefe under some pretense
of godliness. Under this color name ye christ, and yt is the first time of
axynge, though it be not greatly to his honor* who are more against that
godly myny stracyon than you? which has in every They contrary christ's
instytucio^
point corrected, yea, rather contraryed christ's clear instytution? Ye give it
a new liver ye besides the gospel* you call it the sacrament of an altar,
which is as much to say, as the holy sign of an heap of bryckes. They call
yt the holy The papystes blaspheme the sacrament.
supper of the lord, or a mutual pertycy pacyon of christ's body and blood,
according to his godly instytucio^. Therefore you blaspheme yt and not they,
you err and are the heretyques, and not they. Much better yt was with us wha^
christ Hebr. 13. Psalm. 50. Romans 12. Deuteronomy. 12. Esa. 65. Apoc. 18. Collo. 2.
Osee. 4. Osee. 10. Esa. 2.
was owr only altar, and we the living sacrifyce offered thereupon in a
sincere faith unto god the father, than now having yowr brycke aulters among
dead mennys graves (as Esaye tells your tale) and you to stand up there as
new redemers and sauers for money, with touch me not for I am holyar than
thu. Oseas the prophet says, that ye eat up the sins of the people, and
courage them in your wickedness. And therefore upon your Apoc. 6. Math. 26. 1.
Cor. 11.
aulters schall grow both thystles and thorns when you schall hyde your
heads. The mutual supper of the lord, who^ he made common to all his true
beleuers, have you turned into a brekefast of your own deuysynge, because ye
are much wyser ^stes preche unto walls and wyndowes.
tha^ he. wherein ye turn yowr arses to the people, ye tell a long process to
the walls, wyndowes, altar clothes, and Y dols in a fore^ language which the
more part of you understands not. And when ye have eat and dronke up all, ye
bless all your neybers with the emptye cups bottom and god bewith them,
never p^achynge the lords death till he come. If ye crucyfye 1. Cor. 11 Hebr.
6. Math. 20. Luc. 18.
christ a fresh (as you say ye offer a sacrifyce for the quycke and the dead)
ye must ageyn betraye hi^, accuse him, scorn him, scorge him, judge him, nail
hi^ to the cross and perce him to the hartwyth a spear. For all these were
necessary offices in the first sacrifyce. One oblacyon made Hebr. 7. 9. and
13. 1. Pet. 3. Ephesians. 5
he ones for all to sanctyfye us unto god, and that can not ryghtly be renewed
again, unless all these parts be played. And that ye leave undone in this
point, ye perform full manerlye in the members of his mystycall body, who^
ye never cease to pursue unto death.

4 With your other sacraments we The other sacraments. Apoc. 2. Joan. 10.
Hiere. 13.
will not here meddle, because ye do not express them. But of this we assure
you, that church is not Christ's which follows your voice and not his. Not
his flock are they that goes a whore hontynge to many strange Gods, after
your rradicyons and customs.

5 Ye say consequentlye that the before The article of ma^nys fre will.
named books are a gaynst the fre will of man, and in so doing they make God
the auctor of sin. What you make of God I can not tell. But well I wot,
this doctrine of yours is strange. Sumwhat ye would feign have to auaunce your
own ryghtousnesse, and depresse the ryghtousnesse they seek to depresse the
ryghtousnesse of god.
of God, and that must up for a new article of ower faith. For no^ other
purpose would ye have a fre will, but to prove therbye that your whole
iustyfycacyon comes not by Jesus Christ, but much by your good merytes and
works. Augustinus de ver bis apostoli. Augustinus in soliloquijs Cap. 15.
what fredome can we have of that which has brought us into all bondage of
death, sin, hell, and the devil? we are of ower selves nothing (says
saint Austyn) but all together vanyte, a shaddowe of death, a dark
bottomless pyt and a void barren ground, nothing bringing forth but
confusyon, sin, and death. Truth yt is that before the fall of Adam, mannys
will was fre. Sens has yt not been Fre only in bodily things.
fre but in bodylye things, as to eat, drink, and sleep, or to do all manner
of wickedness. Now are we not able of that will ones to think a good thought.
All is now sin in us that is not of faith. 2. cor. 3. Romans 14. Joan. 1. 1.
Cor. 4.
Neither of the will of the flesh nor yet of mannys will, become we now Gods
children, but of an only believe in his name, and that is his gift also.
Stoyckes and epycures may that fre will make us, but no true children of God.
It fares Here. 10. Romans 7. Prou. 25. Phil. 2.
by the braggers of this fre will as by him which boasts that sumtyme he had
a fair house, where as now is neither rose nor wall. A tyttle yt has that
soche a thing there was, but yt is nothing less in effect. Feign would yowr
scole doctors with there unsavory sophystrye make sum The papystes boro of the
pelagyanes and Manychees.
what of yt, if they coudebrynge yt so to pass. Sometime with the pelagyanes ye
garnyshe yt with the excellent gifts of nature. And when that will not serve,
with the subtyle manychees ye prevent yt with a grace, least the first
entrance of sin schuld be imputed unto yt, besides that ye borowe of the
Iouynyanystes, Iacobytanes, All one are they in opinion with the anabaptists.
priscyllyanystes, predestynates and other heretyques more. Fynallye with the
anabaptystes ye grant it in owr power to fulfill the commandments of god.
Thus are ye all one in opinion with heretyques old and new, and yet ye
pretend to be co^dempners of the^. If God be the worker of all good things,
as he reports himself Esaias. 44 Ephc. 1. Jacob. 2. Math. 10. Joan. 14. Romans 9.
in Esaye. If he works all in all, according to his own pleasure. If all
goodness comes from the father of light. If we can not speak a right, but in
his sprete. If non can come to the father but by christ. If we be saved only
by the eleccyon of his grace, what can owr fre will do? Can we merit grace
with sin? or deserve to be ryghtoused by folly? O blind beasts Hypocrytes
give al to themselves,
block heads, and hypocrites, learn ones to be wise and godly, and to refer
more unto god and less to your selves.

6 Ye say if we allow not this fredome in mannys will, we make god the
auctour of sin. Yowr argument is as An old argument of pelagius.
you are, unlearned, fantastycall, and doltyshe. This wise reason of yowrs came
first from Pelagius the first fynder out and mayntener of your fre will, as
witnesses saint Austin i hypognostico. Loo (says Augustinusi hypo gnostioc
versus finem.
he to the pelagyanes) because your best be love or fre will, who^ ye have so
much commended, has conceived lewdenesse, engendered sin, and brought forth
death ye constytute god the author of sin. Ye call both him and his apostle
a te^pter of God is not the causer of sin. Iaco. ^.
ill men, because (after your opynion) he has created the things that
provoke them to evil, and so causes them to peryshe. But saint James
clears this, saying. That manne is tempted, drawn, and allured of his own
concupiscence, which is now ha^defast to your fre will. The gentyles (says
chrysostom) vndyscretelye notes Chrisostomus Hom. 4. super Ioannem.
christ a destroyer of the people, for that he called them with so much
gentylnesse and not brought them in by compulsyon. What are these else, but the
fruits of mennys wisdom and blasphemouse fantasyes? The scriptur says that
God commanded Semei to curse David. He reserueth 2. reg. 16. Prou. 16. Esa.
54. 3, reg. 22. Romans 1. Eccl. 11. Amos. 3.
the wicked unto an evil day. He makes the waster to destroy. He promises
to be a lyenge sprete in the mouth of all false prophets. He has given men
up to there hearts desire to work vncomlye things. Good and ill, life and
death comes all of the lord. Is there any plage (says Amos) or my shappe
in a cite, that is not of the lordesdoynge? with soche other more. And schall
we say for these, that he is the author of sin? No, God Nune. 23. 2. para. 19
is not in case as is manne, that he can lie, or do any other wickedness.
That is sin ne in manne, is eternal ryghtousnesse in Michaell bononien in. 2.
sent.
him, as witnesses, all the sentencyoners in amaner. I maruele therefore what my
lord will stand to, wha^ neither the scripturs nor yet his own doctors can
serve him. Let never the pott earth in the hands of the potter reason what
vessel he will Hie. 18. Romans 9. Prou. 15. Eccl. 3. Esa. 38.
make him, least he be broken in his anger for searching so high things. He
that mekeneth himself schall find grace. Sure we are that non can peryshe,
which faith fullye obeys his calling. For he is of infinite mercy. If any
be lost for not obey enge it, the fault is there is and not his.

The manne of sin.
1 And more over against good works / 2 specyallye 3 fasti^ge / prayer alms
deed 4 against auriculer co^fessyon / 5 against the vow of chastyte / 6 and
for the marriage ofprestes.
His dysclosynge.
DEd not I tell ye before, we schuld not My lord bonerproueth himself a foul
liar.
need to seek far to prove you a liar, for your own confessyo^ would do it?
ye say these books are against good works, and ye declare here what good
works ye mean. Specially fasting (ye say) prayer, and alms deed. I maruele
ye are not ashamed, to be so double of your words. A fore ye said, there was
in the Always has antichrist a shameless face. Daniel. 8
sachell a book of prayer made by Luther and here now ye say, they are against
prayer. Of prayer and against prayer is not all one, by any godly mannys
judgment. But first let us go to good works. If it be a good work to
abhor unfaithfulness, to detest Idols, to All these are good works and
requiaed in those books.
shurne hypocresye to repent wickedness, to resort to christ, to seek his
glory alone, to obey christen rewlers of lone, to live after Gods
commandments, to pray without supersticion, to bring up you the in virtue,
with soche other like, tha^ are you a most wicked blasphemer. For all There
monye sacricesare not in the^ commended.
they are in these books most ernestlye desired. Marrye in deed the good works
that might make to the fyllynge of your spiritual purses, are not there
greatly cared for and that is the cause of yowr great anger.

2 As much care you for true fasting Eccle. 34. Za. h. 7. Esayc. 58 Luce. 6.
Baruch. 2
(which is to cease from sin, and to do the works of mercy) as does the
devil of hell. When deliver you the oppressed? When dysolue you vngolye
promises? when hunger you for the right ousnesse of God? Abstyne^ce from meats
makes us not Gods servants. For than were the devil most holy, which never
eats nor drynketh. The fasting that ye Math. 6. 1. Tim. 4. Eusebius in
histor. Eccl. 11. 5. ca. 16. 17. ^. 18.
call upon does Christ name hypocresye, and saint paul the doctrine of deuyls.
Mo^tanus a perverse heretyque was the first that made the laws of compulsyon
in fasting, whom you still occupye to this present day. Against whom at the
same time wrote Melciades, Appolonius, and Serapion with other notable fathers,
and therefore, ye had need to conde^pne there books also, The cause now why ye
take soche peynes in this matter, is to hold up (if it may be) your le^t made
by pope The Blondus and platina in vitis pontificu^ Roma.
olespherus, your e^brynge days ordained of pope Calixtusthe first, your
friday fast co^fermed by pope leo the fort, as witnesses master Eckius, your
satturdaye vygyle co^stytute by pope Innocent the first and pope Gregorye the
seventh, with yowr rogacyons and saints vygyls. Se you to yt that soche ware
fall not to the ground for breaking, A wonderful thing is it that you
(whose god ysyour bellye) Phil. 3. Baptista man^^^nus aeglo ga. 1.
does call so much upon abstynence. No men does less occupye yt than you,
which daily stuff your panches to the very vomete. No man can make us
believe, ye would ever take soch peynes, were there not more profyght to be had
upon the calling on than upon the obseruacyon thereof. Saint Paul says, that
Romans 14. 1. Cor. 8. Hebr. 13. Act. 11.
the kyngedome of god is not meare and drink, but peace and Joy in the holy
ghost. Good is it (says he) not to stablyshe the heart with meats, but with
grace.

3 And as concerning prayer, who is more against it tha^ you? which has
clerelye changed the right use of yt into a brawling in the temple and a
bletynge in the streets, in a foren speech and in the 3. reg. 18. Esa. 29. Mat.
6. Act. 10.
sight of men, where as Christ has required yt to be secretlye done and from
the heart with out much babbling, These many clogges also have ye laid upon
yt to confou^de yt altogether, your canonical hours, mattens, mass,
processyon, sensynge, The hypocrites burdens and yokes confoundynge prayer
saints honorynge, holidays, euensonge, complyne, letanyes, inuocacyons,
knelynge to Images, dyryges for the dead owr ladies psalters, with baptized
belles bedes, organes, song, wax, light, pycturs, rellyques, banners,
crosses, aultres. holy water, and the devil and all of soche Idolatro use
beggerye. Ye bind it fynallye More superstycyouse than mahomete.
to the cyrcumstau^ce of place and time more superstycyouslye than ever ded
Mahomete with all hysfalse prophets, enforcing the poor co^scyences of the
simple to the co^fyde^ce of creaturs. Ye have (says the prophet Amos) set up
tabernacles to Amos. 5. Leuit. 20
yowr God Moloch (which is all that ye worshypp besides God, after rabi Moses)
and the fygurs of yowr Idols, to have them worshhpped. All these do the lord
Esa. 1. Hier. 6. zach. 7. Doctors
tell you by his prophets that he does abhor, and yet ye believe yt not.
Against you also in these points, are saint Johan chrysostom, Cipryane,
Cyrill, Austyn, Hierome, Ambrose, Clement, fulgencius and other, I maruele
therefore ye condemn them not.

4 No men may with less honest The article of alms.
complain of them which are against alms than you. For no^ has been so great
enemies unto yt as you, which hathcuer sens your beginning consumed the
patrimony of the poor. Remember what The clergy has robbed the poor
emprours, kings, dukes, and other men of power has lest in yowr hands to
the behoue of the sick, nedye, impotent, halt, lame, and blind, and what they
have Hiere. 23. luce. 6. zach. 11. Daniel. 14.
now of it at your hands, and hardelye leave seeking of motes in other mennys
eyes, judging yowr selves very ill stewardes. Co^sydre also your daily
pollage in offerynges, confessyons, deuocyo^s tithes, courts of bawdrye, and
soch other, wherein with out just tyttle of Christ's gospel, ye suck up the
sweat, and eat up the labor of the poor ma^ne that ysmore vertuose than
you, devouring a Eccl. 34. Ezech. 16 Math. 23.
great camel for strayninge out a g^at, or doing a thing of naught. What
your alms is to the poor, specyallye if they be of god, ye have largelye
instruct us by Johan porter whom ye latelye famyshed Bonners alms upon Ioha^
porter.
or else strangled up in newgate, and by other more that has selt your
benyuole^t charity. Soche a benefactour are ye to fasting, prayer, and alms
deeds, that ye ca^do soche miracles yet. Ye can murder the living saints,
and make ye advocates of them that are dead, though there ends Ambrosi us in
epis tolam ad Roma. 1.
were doubtful. Ye can da^pne them for heretyques, and set up the other for
saints. Ye can burn the bodies of the living, and deck the graves of the
dead for advantage. For soth great is your charity I dare say so much for
you, that there was no martyr this five hondreth year, sens satan was
throughlye at large, that has not been putt to death by your holy Bysshoppes
alms is to makemartirs
generacyo^, so Good alms men are ye, Let other men judge therefore whether
ye be against yt or nay. Never are Good works spoken against but when yowr
abhomynacyons are touched. Soche mystes ye have still, to blind the eye sight
of the world with.

5 Now come ye in with confessyo^ in The article of confession.
the ear, that these heretyque books schuld be against that also. But ye
speak nothing of confession to god and owr neyber when we offend them,
(which only Psalm. 32. Apoc. 18. Hirem. 6
are allowed in the scirpturs for they bring in no sweet profyghtes with the^.
Some of the fruits of this your ear confession, have I told you before.
Notwithstanding when new occasyo^s be offered new matters comes often to
remembrance. Gracianus monachus the first sower Gracianus did. 1. de
penite^cia et Glossator.
together of your popyshe laws, in the first dystynccyon of penance, leaves
it all in doubt whether a man be bound to confess himself to a pressed or
no, being only but an ordinance of man. The greeks (he says) were never
bound because they received not the same constytucyon. Begone yt was in deed
at constantynople zozomenus in historia tripert li. 9. ca. 35.
by Nectarius the bysshopp, and by him again putt down upon this occasyon. A
gentle woman confessed there to a pressed, and enjoined to fast and pray in the
church, was in the time of her penance constuprate by an holy deakon, which
took great peynes there in the saint warye, to observe the vow of chastyte.
And therefore upon the peples Ciprianus Episto. 11.
exclamacyon, yt was utterly there dyssolued again. Chrysostom says ypon
the. 12. chapter to the hebrews. I say not unto chrisostomus hom 31. in
epistolam ad hebr. Ambrosius super lucam.
the that thu schuldest bewraye thyselfe abroad neither yet accuse thyselfe
before other. But I will that thu obey the prophet which says, Show unto
the lord thy way. Peter mourned and wept (says saint ambrose) because he
erred as a man, but I find not what he said. I know that he wept, and I
read of his tears, but I read not of his satisfaccyon. What have I to do
with men (says saint Austyn) Augustinus li. 10 confessio. number ca. 3.
that they schuld hear my conscience, as though they could heal all my
dyseases? here is a curyouse and a bysye kind of men, to know an other
mannys life, and a slow sort to amend there own. Vvherfor seek they to hear
of me what a man I am, which will not hear of the (o lord) what there selves
be? Soche The old doctors are agei^st ear confession.
sentences are there innumerable among the old doctors both greeks and
latynes, I maruele therefore that my lord does not bag them up and condemn
them at paul's cross. All this yet denies not owr coming to the pressed for
counsel, in case he be a sober wise ma^ne and learned in the scripturs. For the
lord says, we schal 1. Esdre. 7 Aggei. 2. Osee. 5. Malach. 2 Hier. 23. Mat.
7. Act. 20. Ezech. 13.
seek the law at the mouth of the pressed, but not nombre our sins in a
bondage* we schall require to be taught, but not coacted to accuse owr selves.
But if he be a blasphemouse and unlearned papyst (as the most of them are) we
ought to shurne him as the most noyful poison. For in the^ has confession been
a sure hold of conspyrycye and treason this five hondreth years and more, as
all the chronicles witnesses. Captain cobbler and master Ask.
That made captain cobbler and master ask full notable captains, and raised
them up a valeaunt army in there late pilgrimage of grace.

6 More over, these books (says my lord) are against the vow of chastyte.
yea, so is my lord also with his whole Math. 12. 2. Cor. 11 Jude. 1. 2. Pet. 3.
generacyon, if we speak of that chastyte that saint Paul commends in the
coryntheanes, besides there fornycacyon, whoredom, sodometrye, sacrylege, and
all other fylthynesse else. I would feign Ezech. 16 Apoc. 17. and. 19. Prou. 6.
Psalm. 17. Hebr. 12. Eccl. 13.
but know how they could be chaste, having an execrable whore to there mother,
and they brought up in whory shnesse all the days of there life. Can his
clothes be vnbrent that has fire in his bosom? Is yt possible that he has
whole fete which evermore goes upon hot cooles? Nay, who so touches pytche,
with the same schall be defiled. what have you else to keep your chastyte with
but Idle vanitees? All the world knows, ye abhor Papystes abhor holy
scripturs.
the scrypturs, and all godly verytees else, which schulde make ye chaste. If
men want probacyons of this, let them come hither and prove this doctrine of
yours and they schall find yt so true as is possible. Few examples have we of
your honest living, but innumerable of your fylthynesse. linthprandus
ticine^sis li. 2. ca. 13.
Johan the. 10. pope of that name was begote in aduouterye by pope Sergius of
an whore called Marozia in the time of his holy papacye. Pope Johan the. 13.
by Ioha^ the. 12. also, after soche an other contyne^t sort. Betwixt an holy
no^ne and Ioannes textor, and
a pressed were borne at one time Petrus lo^bardus the master of yowr sentences
or scole dyuynyte, Petrus commestor the master henricus agrippa de anne
monogamia.
of your hystoryes, and Gratianus monachus the compyler of yowr canon Jaws.
And with the doctrine of these. 3. fruits of one fornycacyon, has both the
church and the scripturs been corrupted these. 4. hondreth years, yet are they
not brought to yowr satchel. Phylypp the holy volateranus, and loannes textor,
in officinis.
abbott of vallisolett and archebysshopp of hispalis in spain, kept his own
brother Alphonsus wife called Christyane the king of denmarkes dowter, he
being a live. Petrus mendosa the cardynall of valence in the same regyon
occupied Germanus quidam.
helysabeth the wife of king Ferdinandns, and had by her. 2. bastardes he
being also alive, besides other wonders which are not to be named. Ower last
cardynall Thomas wolsaye was not all behind The cardynall of england wolsaye
Pope Julius.
with his part, as apereth by master winter, and other more abroad. what
business popeIulius made with the cardynall of Na^tes to have had the
occupye^ge of. 2. young laddes which the french queen Anne had committed unto
him to be brought up in virtue, yt would abhor any ma^ne to hear, and
therefore I write yt not. Soche noble stews ded pope Sixtus Henricus agrippa, de
incerti tudine sci enciarum.
build at Rome in his time, as yet brings in yearlye more than. 20.
thousand duckates to the augmentacyon of saint peter's patrimonye. Ioha^
stokyslaye yowr predecessor, a mighty mayntener of that vow, dyed not
without issue, as his fruits declares not far out of london. Neither yet
wyllyam warham The chaste examples of owr time in the bishops.
the old archebysshopp of caunterburye, whose increase is well known in ke^t,
besides his dallyaunce with the holy maid there. Many prodygyouse wonders
are yet told in sothfolke by serten worshypfull gentylwomen of Rychard nyxe
the blind bysshopp of norwych (which putt master bylneye the true martyr of
god to most cruel death by the counsel Thomas bylneye the very martyr of god.
of P^lles and Godsalue) besides his contynuall occupyenge with the balyes wife
of hoxton. Diverse fine tryckes of good relygyouse bawdrye wrought by bysshopp
Brygett, kyte, and vnderwode, all three holy p^lates, are not yet all forgote
among the people. Not many years Spiritual prouysyo^ for the holy vow of
chastyte
ago a bysshopp removed a nonne from ycklyngton in cambryge shere, unto dat
forth in kent which has had in her time a good honest increase, I could name
them both if I list. wylye wynchester also has not wrought so warelyein the
wanton works of venus sens his 21. years, but he has been smelled out of some
parties, besides the store that he The stews of london. Deuteronomy. 23. Apoc. 2.
is steward of for the common welthe of the cite. The people of Israel were
long without whores, like as God had commanded them. But owr Nycolaytanes
condempnynge the scripturs and all godly order, will have no common welthe
without them, hycause they will have before Baruch. 6 Psalm. 49.
God there portion with thieves and aduouterers. There is yet alive an other
bishop in England which schall be namelesse at this time, that kept a mannys
wife and my cosyne. 20. years ago, before he was bysshopp, whom I chaunsed to
Aduowtery of. 20 years hurts no spiritual vow. Many wonderful examples
are in the chronicles.
find sitting at his table within these.iiij. years. If I schuld recyte all
the wholesome fruits of your chaste vow, which I have read in chronicles and
hystoryes, and known by your examples besides forth, many men would maruele
that ye synke not to hell with yowr prodygiouse chastyte. For innumerable
knaueries has your holy abbottes, priors, doctors, prestes, persons, curates,
and relygiouse (as ye call the^) done. Some one ghostlye father of yowrs has
for his life time corrupted an hondreth nonnes and maids, some. 2. hondreth
that we read of, some more some Joan boccacius and, Pogius.
less, and yet have they been chaste geldynges and good wyuellesse virgyns. So
long as they have not married, all has been well. For some of there doctors
Henricus Agrippa aduersus louanienses. Spiritual rentes. Hericus a grippa de
incertitudine scien ciarum.
has not been ashamed to write yt, that monks and prestes has not utterly
for sworn whoredom, but marriage only. It is no small so^e of money that
some of you in the world and yowr notaries takes of prestes for whore
kepinge, and al is (I know well) for the abateme^t of that vow, which ye call
your second baptym. Henricus agrippa does testyfye that a serte^ bysshopp
boasted at his table, that he had in his dyocese a.xi. thousand prestes, which
paeyd yearlye a french crown a piece for whore keeping, besides the cap. 64.
price of occupyenge with other mennys wives. And therefore it is no maruele
though it still be maynteyned, and matri monye put back, for the profyghtes
there of are sweet,

7 Now comes in the sorest matter Marryage of Bishops detested most of all.
of all, and that does most ernestlye move you. And that is the marryage of
prestes. Before were these books against frewyll, fasting, prayer, and so
forth, which in the kind ye use them, are your own propre wares. Now are they
with marriage, which is no^ of yours. Ye utterly for 1. Tim. 4.
sake it as a thing hurtful to your holy orders, which whoredo^ and buggerye
cannot defyle. Though God the father has instytute yt, God the son
consecrate it, Gene. 2. Joan. 2. Prou. 8.
and God the holy ghost much commended it in the scripturs, yet is it not
wholso^ for you. Though it were in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, i Moses, Aaron,
and Samuel, in Gedeo^, Job, and Tobias, a way of rightousnesse in the lords
sight. Though Gala. 3. Luce. 1. Math. 1. Luce. 2. 1. cor. 9.
it were in Zacharye the pressed and Helysabeth his wife a walking before him
without rebuke. Yea, though Jesus christ were borne under it, and his blessed
mother lived long in it, and the apostles embraced it, yet is it no honest
state of living for you, for your office (ye say) is above all there is. Though
saint Paul does say that wedlock is honorable among Hebr. 13. 1. these. 4.
Ephe. 5. 1. tim. 4.
all people, and the chamber thereof undefiled. Though he says also that God
will condemn aduouterers and whore kepers, and that the forbyddynge thereof is
the very doctrine of deuyls, all that can not move you. Though the primatyue
Eusebius. Platina. Nauclerus Apo. 20.
church had it in great price, and so still ded use it till Syluester the 2.
ded fatche the devil fron hell by his nicromancye (where as he was a fore tied
up for a thousand years) to seal the obligacyon of his papacye. yet do you
take it for carnal be astlinesse, because master Eckius does so Joan. Eckius.
report it, which never the less had. 3. bastardes the same self year that
he disputed that matter at lipsia. Oh, very sede of Genesis. 3. Esaias. 1. Math.
12. Marci. 8.
the serpent, and cytezens of sodom. Not without cause was it that Christ
called you a false and an aduouterouse generacio^. Full well knew he what we
schuld have of you, the heavenly father be merciful unto us. With all
abhominacions Still ymagyne they fylthynesse.
have you filled the world, and yet to this day Imagyne ye non other thing.
Is your doctrine in this any other than the dyrt of the pope, and the filthy
shytynges of old heretyques? The Tacyanes taught that matrymonye was in no
case Justinius. Hirencus. Eusebius. Epiphan.
lawful. The Marcianistes would admytt no^ to baptim, unless they renou^ced
wed lock. The Eustachyanes held opinion that non could be saved in marryage.
Mo^tanus with his sect, leadynge women abought, with him, noted yt a light
thing, Alpho^sus de castro.
and said it might be broke well enough. The priscyllyanystes separated the
men from there wives, and the women from there husbands against there wills.
The Abelynes allowed marriage, but guido per pinianus ^ lib. de hesibus.
no carnal copulacyon therein. The Adamytes improued it as an unclean thing
for that Adam knew not his wife before he sinned. The Nicolaytaynes were of
this opinion, that wives ought to be common. Cleme^s alexa^drinus 3. lib.
stromatum. Bernardus lutzenburgus. The pope agreth with all heretyques a against
marriage.
The Cataphrygeanes, Catharystes, and Tartulyanystes, condemned for aduoutrye
the marryage of widows. The Esseanes, Nouacyanes, Carpocracianes,
Apostolyckes, Iouynyanistes, and other more, has opinion of matrimonye in
diverse other respects. Last of all comes your holy father of Rome with his
rabble of rutters, myters, hattes, hoodes, cappes, crowns, conyes skynnes,
cattes tails, in all manner of colors and proporcyons, and he has an ore with
them all, as an vpholder of al heretics against this holy estate. Yea, holy I
say ageyn, though it be irreverently used of many. For it There vows makes
innumerable sodomites
makes neither whore keeper not sodomyte as yowr chastyte does daily
innumerable. Vyhan now in this latter age, this buyldinge of yowrs through the
gospel preaching suffered a great earthquake, and was like to fall to the
ground without recover, comes forth master Ioa^ Ecki.
Eckius a very conning artifycer in the se works of yours, and he
vnderproppeth it with an old broken sparre. Marryage De celiba tu clericorum
decre tu^ Calixti.
may be granted to no pressed (says he) by no manner of dispensacion, for the
vow that is a^nexed to there chastity. And for the establyshment of this
doctrine, he brings in the inhibicion made by pope Calixtus, because no
scripturs will serve him. But where as he says with no Henricus Agrippa.
small cyrcumstau^ce, to make his matter good, that the pope never yet
dispensed with that vow, He lies of his holy father. Raphael volateranus
says that a serten Voleteranus and Sabellicus. Lambertus shafna burgensis
monachus
monk called Nicolas married Anne the duke of venys dowter by the popes
consent. Burghardus the provost of tryere or utters in Germanye had to wife
the prince of the ruzeanes sister by the dispe^sacyon of pope Gregorye the. 7.
otherwise called hyldebrande, the same self year he inhybited the marriage of
prestr^es. Pope pelagius ded create a bisshopp at syracusa Did. 28. canonu^.
in the land of sycill, and he had both wife and children. Henricus agrippa
makes mention of a Cardinal in Rome, whom the Pope permytted to take a wife
in marriage, and at his pleasure to return ageyn to his cardinalshypp after
Agrippa aduersuslouanienses Achilles and paulus phrigio.
he had children, without any manner of irregularyte. Colomannus the bysshopp
of uaradyne, left that spiritual office and was made king of hungarye by the
Popes dyspensacyon of purpose to have issue, about the year of owr lord. M.
lxxvi. and reigned there.xix. years. Daniel a Gaguinus and paulus Phrigio.
pressed was like wise constytute king of france by a like dyspensacion, and
was called after ward Chylpericus, gouernynge that regyon the space of.iij.
years. Petrus Elsacius a pressed and elect Bishop Iacobus meyer in Cronicis
flandrie.
of Cameryk, was dubbed a knight and married leonor the countess of nyuerne,
which had been called Sybyll. Reme lius a monk being aged, was taken out of
his monastery by the popes lyce^s, Robertus abbas mo^tensis.
and made king of Aragone after the disseace of his father Sanccius about the
year of owr lord, a thousand a C. and lx. and had by his wife Mawde a dowter
which was afterward married to Raymondus the earl of Barchinona. Pope Ce
Platina and nauclerus
lestyne the third lycensed Henrye the. 6 emprour, to have to wife Co^staunce
king Rogers dowter of sycyll for a yearlye pensyon, which was a professed
nonne at panorme. Fredericus dongianus was releaced In vita diui alber ti
drepanensis.
of his vow to the Carmelytes order, and constytute king of Sycyll* Sardo
nigh, and Calabre, for the syngular co^modyte of those lands. Matthew the earl
of bulleyne married Marye king Steuens dowter of england, and had her out of
Flores historiarum anglie. Iacobus guisianus in a^nalibus ha^nonie.
ramsaye abbeye where as than she was ab basse, and had. 2. dowters by her
called Ida and Matilda. Bochardus aueniensis a man ne of great birth and
learning forsook his presthode and benefyces (which than he had many) and
Joined himself in we diock to Margarete, the emprour Baldewyne of
constantynoples dowter, and had many fair chydren by her, pope Gre gorye the.
9. after much suit and expe^ses judging yt godly. Johan the bastard
Polydorus in cro nicis a^glo rum li. 10
son of Fardynandus being a cysteane monk was constytute king of
portyngale, Johan of gaunte tha^ being duke of lancaster and king of castele
geuynge him his dowter Phylypp to marrye after that he had in the year of owr
lord. 1388. optayned a dyspensacyon of pope vrbanus the. 6. James the last
king of cypres being bysshopp of Nycose not long before Achilles et paulus
phrigio.
was permytted of pope paul the second to have a Venecyane to wife, to that
intent that his land schuld become the Venecyanes, as yt now is in deed. In
like case Canutus, which had been a professed Albertus crantz.
monk. 6. years at clunyake, was dyspensed with for money to have a wife.
Sowas a serte^ abbott of Redynge here in England. So was vrsynus a pressed of
nursia Ioannes rauisius textor. vo lateranus et nauclerus.
and a great nombre else, as we find in diverse chronicles and wrytynges. Why
schuld soche a furyouse beast than so shamefullye lie, to establyshe an error
of de uyllyshenesse? But that he is ignorant in the hystoryes, and also that
soche dyrtye doctrine stands only by lies. Ioannes Ioannes tex tor and
pogius Damasus platina and nauclerus Ranulphus cestrensis in policroni co.li.
7. Ca. 2.
andreas (whom they call the fountain of there canon law) was a prestes son,
so was Franciscus phylelphus that famous orator and poet, so was my lord
Boner of london by report of his next neybers, with diverse other more. I read
of more than. 13. popes that had prestes to there fathers. I much maruele where
there vow of chastyte dwelte in those days. Soche time as contencyon was
betwyn Lanfrancus and Thomas norman the arche bysshopp of york for the
prehemynence of Caunterburye, he proved him a prestes son before pope
Alexandre the second. Eckius would feign have sum ^ynchester helps Eckius
with his xxi. years.
what to prove a thing of naught, but yt comes scant wyselye to pass. Than
works wynchester on the other side with his one and twentye years, to hold
up this broken byldynge of vnadduysed vows and as vnaduysedlye made. If these
2. stoles hold not, we are like to fall to the ground with owr unchaste vow,
for these are the last stays 1. Reg. 25. Marci. 14. Math. 14. Act. 23.
in that matter. Therefore stand fast now or else never. When David made a solemn
pne vow to destroy Nabal and all that Belonged unto him, Peter to stand by
his master to the death, Herod to grant what so ever Herodias dowter axed,
And the xl. men at Jerusalem neither to eat nor drink till they had slain
Herod only performed his vow.
Paul, were above.xxi. years of age. Yet was there non of them that performed
his vow but Herod, when yt had been better for him to have broken yt, for all
the standing of a kings word. wynchester also was beyond that age when he
made his sole^pne vow in Ca^bryge to be the popes true servant, yet has he
sens made a vow to the contrary, and broken that also in maynteynynge a
fresh the same dyrtye doctrine of his. If ye will needs have soche vows
wynchester has broken hysvow^ on both sides.
observed, set up your monasteryes and cloisters again. Let them have again
the howses ye took from them, if ye will have the same relygyon kept. Give them
not abroad more occasyons to fall, and than ponnyshe them worse than before. Oh
tyranny tyranny, God gave ye to know the abhomynable fruits of that
unmercifully tyranny destroynge body and soul.
stynkynge vow in the general vysytacyon of abbeyes and pryoryes, yet will ye
still yoke the poor wretches with yt. So unmercifully are ye to that people,
whom ye ought to gyde and not to devour, to norryshe and not thus shamefullye
to destroy. Would ye consydre yowr own lives in that behalf, ye zach. 11.
Ezech. 13. 1. Petri. 5. Jude. 1. Luce. 11. 2. Tim. 4. Romans 14. Joan. 8.
schuld find them bad enough. Ye snare there conscyences with that ye ought to
take from them (which is sin) were ye as ye schuld be. All that is besides
the will of the sprete and the sacred scripturs. (as is that popyshe vowynge)
is plain Idolarrie and wickedness. Paraue^ture ye will now lashe at me with
Eckius first argument upon, Vouete et reddite, Psalm. 75. Deuteronomy. 23.
saying with david. Vow and perform, promise and pay. But than ye must take
with you the clause that follows, Ione. 2.
which is. Onnes qui in circuitu eius affertis munera. All you round about
that bring offerynges with you. Here are no monkyshe vows mencyoned, for
there No monkyshe vow but obedyence unto God.
were no soch shorn sodomytes in those days. Here is no chastyte called upon,
for yt was spoken to them that had wives Not withstanding marryage is a
chastyte, or a gift of God to avoid fornycacyon. But herin was than required a
faithful obedyence unto god in the fulfyllynge of his commandments, and no
so 8. reg. 15. 1. pet. 2. Nume. 25 Eccl. 5. Baruch. 6
domytycall sacrifice to Belphegor as ye would have yt yet still. In folyshe
vows (says the wise manne) has the lord no pleasure. I could tell ye
wonders of children that has been buried in the lakes, for saving the honor
of that vow, Miracles done for that holy vow.
with other maruels else, but I let yt alone for this time. The vtteraunce of
yowr virtuous examples in that holy obseruacyo^, might teach more myschefe
tha^ goodness. To confute this obieccyon of yours Saint Paul said he had no
commandment 1. Cor. 7. 1. Tim. 3. Gal. 3.
for vyrgynyte. Much less than for a popyshe promise, or a snare of the devil
If we schuld (says he) observe the vows tha^ used, we schuld have no manner of
porcyon with Christ. Soche vyllenouse contempt of matrimonye, spryngynge now of
late out of Eckius old dyuynyte and wynchesters new canon law, has brought
Eckius and wynchester. 1. reg. 17. Deuteronomy. 28. 2. reg. 12. 2. reg. 16.
upon David for all his wonderful vyctorye over the lion, bear, and
phylystyne, the plage promised of the lord for soche ungodliness, the sun
lokynge broad upon yt in the myd day to no small dishonor. I can not
iustlye tell whether you perseyue yt or no, but well I wot all the whole
world else beholds yt. And that may chance herafter to apere, Dyshonoure
follows of ungodliness evermore. Thus are they plaged that foloweyll counsel.
when me^ne schall be occasyoned to seek examples in soche purpose. I write
this with heuyneste as a premonyshment before, lamenting the thing and
fearing worse to follow if repentance come not in time. Where as other me^ne
may chance after this with Moses and Samuel to describe yt at large, to the
warning of other in that behalf, and to owr perpetual reproach. With soche
holy prophets and cou^sellers (as you are) now a days were Ioram, Achab,
Ochosias, Ioachim, Sedechias, and other kings more of Israel and Judah
deceived, and brought into the great indygnacyon of God. Ioannes nauclerus genesis
36. and Benno cardinalis
This tyrannouse coaccyon to fylthynesse came in first of all by pope
Hyldebra^de a superstycyouse monk, a nycromanser, a murderer and a cruel
suppresser of Christen princes, in the year from Christ's in carnacyon.
M.lxxiiij. as all the chronicles mencyoneth. Which Hyldebrande never the less
that pharaonycall constytucyon, Lambertus shafna burgensis mona chus in
cronicis.
kept Mawde the duchess of lotharye both by the life days of her husband
Gozilon, and also after his death, leadynge her abought with him, and she
maynteynynge him again in myschefe with the great possessions that she had
there and in Italye. He took like wise Agnes the Sigebertus and Benno
cardinalis.
emprours mother clerelye from him, not without a black report also upon her
side. At the same self time began the bysshoppes and great benefised prestes
to build nonncryes for remedy of that sore dyssease. He that schall read the
hystorye Hermannus schedel and wernerus carthusianus.
of V do the archebysshop of magdeburgh and prymate of almayne, how he ordered
his no^nes in his holy vysytacyo^s, schall find yt no badde matter. What
co^mocyons, scysmes, lyghtenynges, te^pestes, earth quakes, and other terryble
moui^ges apered at that time, yt were a wondre to reherce. Ioannes nauclerus
genera. 36 Ex Ioanne capgraue anglo.
Among all other a Comete was seane at that season, of whom Elmerus a monk of
malmesburye in England gave thyssente^ce. Art thu come (says he) art thu
come? Unto many mothers have thu brought woe and sorrow. I saw the long
before, but now in deed I behold the more terryble, Even the very destruccyon
of thyslande. Soche an other warning brought the law Iacobus mayer in
cronicis flandrie.
master of Turnay in massage unto Coleyne to the emprour at the same very
time, of a woman prophecyenge that antichrist was tha^ in his full course.
Which woman so vanyshed away and was never more seane. Yet could not this
cruel enforceme^t be received in England, till Ranulphus ce strensis and
Robertus fabianus in suis cronicis.
Anselmus a french monk also, and arche bysshopp of Canturburye brought yt in
by a synod holden at london, in the year after christ's natyuyte, M. C.ix.
which Anselme bad long contended before with king wyllya^ rufus and king
Henrye the first for the commodytees of antichrystes gloryouse kyngedome, and
had than got the vyctorye of them in deed. Yet Ranulphus in polycronica li. 7.
Ca. 13. Guilhelmus malmesbury^
wash at that time so accombred with so domytes, that he was every sunday
compelled openly to excommunycate them. After this kept the prestes concubynes
otherwise called whores (for that was more holy than marryage) the space of
more than.xv. years, till loannes de Cremona an holy legate from the popes
right side, came in a great heat from Rome, and took that from them also hy an
other counsel holden at Paul's, his self taken with an whore the night
following to begin the relygyon with. Se how busye flores historiarum and
henritus huntyngdon.li. 7.
they are yet with all deuylyshe deuyses possible to hold up this wickedness
still, which was begone with soche myschefes, and has continued with
fylthynesse unspeakable. The multitude of prestes (says Oseas the prophet) is
like The daily stodye of bysshoppes.
an heap of thieves, murderers, bloudthurstye rauenours, for they have wrought
ab homynacyon. In the desire of vnclenlye lusts (says Heremye) they are
become altogyther like rank stoned horse neyenge Osee. 6. Marci. 11. Apoc. 18.
hiere. 5.
every where after there neybers wife. They go about (says the lord) with
there own inu^^^yo^s, but I se the^ well enough. They make the king and
princes to have delyght in there wickedness and lies. Osee. 7. Michee. 3 Hiere.
20 prove. 29
All these burn in aduouterye as yt were an oven that the baker heateth, when
he has left knedynge. I will vysyte all those (says the lord also by
Sophonias the prophet) which wears strange clothing, Sopho. 1. Math. 23.
zacha. 12. Osee. 10. Gal. 6. Apoc. 18. Hiere. 5.
and treads over the thresholde so proudelye, which fyllther lords house
with roborye and falshede. But now they have plowed wickedness they schall
surely reap sin, and eat the fruit of lies wherein the mother schall
peryshe with her children and the branches with there stock, because they are
not the lords.

The manne of sin.
1 Against the rytes and ceremonies of the church 2 comparinge the manner of
vveddynge 3 and maryenge of vyrgyns unto the beastlye fashyon of a savvte
bytche 4 Against mennys laws 5 and tradycyons.
His dysclosynge.
Still is my lord reparynge his broken Hiere. 2. Iosue. 13. Esaie. 12. Cant.
4. Joan. 4.
pyttes, to hold in the filthy waters if it may be. In no wise can he away
with the wholesome watter, that refreshes to life everlasting. All his neybers
would he have of the same diet that he is of, so charytable is he, making this
good prouysyon for the^. He thinks Bysshoppes seek only the sowles
destruccyo^.
god to lack wit and his son dyscressyon, and therefore he will non of there
rewles. There is an other way which pleases him much better, and that he
will have observed in his dyocese, so long as he is lord ordynarye of london.
1. Cor. 1 Deuteronomy. 12. Esaie. 5.
The law dable rytes and ceremonies of his mother the holy church of Rome
which brought him up of a whelpe and gave him the sweet suck from her pappes,
It will not away that is bredde by the bone. The bragges of ser Johan. Things
of no profyht.
schall not drop away, so long as he may uphold them. A sort of noughtye
heretyques has written against the^ now of late, but yt makes no matter
(says owr ser Ioha^) for my lord has conde^pned all there books in a sachell.
I maruele what my lord means by all this ruffelynge abought matters of no
wayght nor yet godliness. In all the new testament is no mencyon made of
these.ij. words Ceremonies and Rytes in the latyne, neither i the Gospels nor
yet in the Epystles, neither in the Acts nor yet i the Apocalypse. I would
feign know tha^ what we have to do with them? like wise in the No me^cy on of
the^ in all the scripturs.
Psalms and Prophets we read not of the^ by those.ij. terms, saving ones in
Ezechiel, and that is but a rehersall of things done in figure. In Moses.v.
books and in other hystoryall treatyses are they often spoken of in deed, and
there are they to Eze. 44. Exodus 18. 3. Reg. 2. Hebre. 9.
us but shadows of good things to come, which we are at a point with,
having Christ p^se^t. yet rytes are there more reprehended than praised, as
the very superstycyouse customs of the paganes. 2. Para. 28 3. reg. 18 Math.
10.
But what does my lord mean, if he schuld go to the best of them? will he
make us Jews again? will he make us bond servants, and christ has Gal. 3.
4. and. 5. Romans 6. Amos. 5.
made us fre children? Saint paul says. If we clogge owr selves again with
that yoke, we fall from grace, we go quyte from christ, and his death schall
profyght us nothing. Therefore there ye offer Zach. 7. bebr. 7. Thomas aquinas
prinia. 2.
us wrong. Your own laws and doctrynes besides the scpiture, grau^teth
abrogacyon of the laws ceremonyall. If ye bring us in any rytes therefore
taken of the heythen customs, as are your saints holidays, your processyons,
your letanyes, your dyryges, your sensynge of aulters, Heithe^ customs are
become christian ceremonies
your knelynge to Images, your calling upon dead men, your kissing of
relics, your conjuring of spretes your consecracyons, vows, and sacrifyces
for sin, with soche other, ye do us great iniurye also. Non that sets
hand to the plough (says christ) and looks ageyn back, ysfytt for the
kingedome of Luce. 9. Gene. 19. Luce. 17. Joan. 4.
god. ye know, lothes wife for doing soche a feate, was turned into a salt
stone, Christ has said also in Ioha^, that the true worshyppers schuld
worshypp god only in sprete and in veryte. Than are they the false woshyppers
which worshypp The false worshyppers.
in outward things, specyallye the outward thing self. As for baptym and
the supper of the lord are christ's holy Baptim and the supper
instytucyons, and non of your popyshe ceremonies. Happy yt is that ye ca^ not
accuse these beretyque books for speaking against the right use of them.
Because of the trust that the Jews had in the commanded Ceremonies detested
of the lord.
ceremonies, god detested them. Here. 7. Esa. 1. psalm. 50. Amos. 5. zach. 7.
and Mychee. 6. much more the wa^to^ rytes of your p^scripcyon. The Ceremonies
of criste^ me^ (if ye will have the^ so called) are now spu^all offerynges of
the heart. 1. The church is now all in sprete.
cor. 10. Ephesians. 5. Col. 3. for the true christian church is all from within. ps.
44. The outward are all for the benyuolence, aid, confort, and other needs
concerning owr neyber. Tobi. 4. Malach. 2. Romans 13. Ephesians. 4. Eccle* ^. Esa. 28.
Math. 7. 1. Ioa^. 3. And No ceremonye may bid the conscience.
though we grant unto those that be honest and semelye for an outward
comeliness in things necessary, yet ought they not to bind owr conscience
or be any part of owr iustyfycacyo^. Neither may they be superstycyouse, or
in any point against christ's doctrine. But so The criste^ rytes most
supstycyouse of all other.
is owr christen relygyon (as you call yt, and as I would yt were) clogged with
your heythnysh rytes, that neither Jew nor Saracene, Arabyane nor Turk
wylcome unto owr faith, thinking there own rytes much better, as they may
well enough. To whom'ye will hame us refer the clause that here follows, that
is A comparyso^ falselye gathered of Bo^ner.
to say, Comparynge the manner of wedding to the beastlye fashyon of a sawte
bytche, we ca^ not well tell, ye have putt yt here so dyffuselye. As well may
yt extend to yowr ceremonies as to the books, standing in place here as yt
does. Well, we will take yt that ye mean the A doubt vndyscussed of my lord
books. But than there is a doubt again, whether ye mean all the books or
part of the^, because ye have not here declared yt. If ye mean all, than have
ye marred your markett in proving your self a liar, for in deed the most of
them speaks little A liar is his lord shypp proved both ways.
or nothing of marryage. If ye mean some one pertycular book, yet are ye a
liar also for falselye reportynge yt, and so schall ye be a liar both ways.
Para ue^ture yt says (as yt may fullwell) that your neglyge^t prestes or
ignorant hob lurches does Join the^ together, with who The popyshe maner^
marryages.
schall have this woman and a few other bablynges more, geuynge them no manner
of godly istruccyo^s how they schuld in the fear of god behave themselves the
one to the other in that comelye estate of 1. These. 4. Hebr. 13. Gene. 2.
living. Neither do they tell them what marryage is, nor yet to what end yt
was instystute of god. They declare 1. Cor. 7. 1. These. 4. Tobie. 3.
not unto them that yt is an only remedy against fornycacyon, and ought to be
used with much honest, clennesse, and soberness, after the Godly example of
Tobias and Sara. But turn them forth together with tyrlerye tregobett, neither
barell better hearing. Hoppe whore, and run thief. I am as good as My lord
has here a sawte bytche of his own
thu, and I besure we thy whoresons heart, till they fall to the trial of the
matter for the best game to catch the^ an heat. And what is this else, but
dog and bytche? Is yt so haynouse a matter to tell you of this? The examples
thereof are to euyde^t a broad. Who so ever be rebuked for there Heresye is yt
to rebuke the anointed charmers.
vycyouse living, your anointed mustre may not be ones touched. Your ser
Nycolas nydypolles may not ones be blown upon, but straytwayes yt must be
proclaimed heresye. O father of heaven, when will ye be ashamed of yowr
lewdenesse? Neither speak ye here of the There own honor here sought, and not
Gods.
thing self, but of the manner of usage of the Ceremonye thereof calling yt
wedding and marryage, as though yt were ij. diverse things. I thought this
blast was for some matter of yowrs. I would have marueled, if ye had sought so
much honor to marryage. But I wondre It is latelye fallen from a Sacrament to
a Ceremonye.
sore how yt now becomes but only a ceremonye, and was sumtyme one of your
sacraments? Surely ye have conceived some dyspleasure against yt now of late.
And I think yt is for that ye have known prestes gone so fast unto yt within
few years, contrary to your holy decrees and canons, to the destruccyon of
your Sodom and Gomor, which ye Sodom and Gomor destroyed by marryage.
have gloryouslye maynteyned ever sens the days of Anselme.iiij. hondreth
years and more.

3 But where as ye write that ye marrye vyrgyns, yt is not true, specyallye in
soche marryages as you promote. I have hard of, and known diverse of your An
other sawte bytche of my lords own fedynge.
generacyon that has marred virgyns before they have married them, yea,
sumtyme in the self morning before, whyls the pyes were in bakynge, so
spu^allye have they used that godly ordinance. I think thvs be yet worse
than dog and bytche. Neither is yt true in other marryages Prestre^ rather
mar tha^ make in marryage
where as you are no medlers, if ye make a dyfference betwyne wives and
vyrgyns. For wives they are before they come there, else are they made nou by
you. The lord has knytt them together before in one mutual knotte of love,
Which you have no more power to knytt again than ye have to dyssolue yt. As
for grace and the holy ghost whom Prestes will give that they have least store
of.
ye pretend therein to dyspense, little need have you to give them from you,
having so small store at home. Never saw I men so full of those gifts and
so rydye to give them, having so few of the^ in there own living. He that
made the band a fore has plentye of them with Math. Gene. 2. Eccl. 18. Psalm.
83 Prou. 12. Eccle. 3.
out you. At his hand must they needs be had, and not at yowrs. The couplynge
of the^ in the face of the congregacyon despise we not, but greatly allow
upon many consyderacyons necessary, were yt godly done, as there is nothing
clean in your hands. Notwithstanding all this, in marryage and out of
marryage we would call them a chaste virgyne, as 2. Cor. 11. Esa. 57. Ezech. 23
Paul does the corryntheanes, were they clear from the aduoutrye of your
Romyshe laws and customs. But that will not be in your days.

4 For here ye hold your self also grieved with these books (ye say) for
being against mennys laws and tradycyons. If The article of me^nys laws.
ye could so well have said, against gods laws, we had had yt of you ere this.
But blessed be owr lord ye can not so speak yt wout a great lie. The laws of
men ^^e to be allowed, so long as they ag^ello the laws of God. For else are
they no laws, but vyolence and tyranny. Princes Laws of men ought to agree
with Gods law. Act. 5. 1. Mac. 2. Leuit. 10. 2. Reg. 17*
and magystrates being the mynysters of god, ought to make no laws for there
private co^modite, but for the publyque welthe of there commo^s. Neither ought
they to decre any thing against Gods honor. If they do, than this rewle of
the lord must be observed. Necessary yt is rather to obey God than manne.
And so ye ought to tell the^. But whoo child there. Rather set ye them a
work tha^ stay them, when soche things are in doing like old temptynge
serpents. Mathathias 1. Mac. 2. Exodus 1. Iosue. 2. Math. 1. 2. Mac. 6. Act. 4.
would in no case obey the cruel decrees of Antiochus. No More would the
mydwyues of egypt the ungodly commandment of Pharao. For dysobeyenge a
wicked precept, was Rahab blessed of God, so was Eleazarus with the.vij.
machabees and there mother. The apostles preached not whithstandynge the
inhybycyo^ of Annas, Cayphas, Ioannes, and Alexander with other of the high
counsel of August. de libero arbitrio. Isidorus did. 4. and li. 2. ethimol.
the Jews. That constytucyon (says saint Austyn) is no law at all, which is
not ryghtose. A law (says Isidorus) ought to be just, honest, easy to be
borne, commodyouse to the co^tre, respectynge time and place, necessary,
profitable plain without cautels, for no pryuate welthe only, but for the
common profyght of the whole multitude made.

5 But as touching yowr lowsye tradycyons, Tradycyons of papvstes. Hiere. 2.
Ezech. 4. Esa. 64. Amos. 6. 1. Tim. 4. Hiere. 25. Apoc. 1^. Marci. 7.
wherewith ye look to be lords over the says and conscience of men, the
scripture says they can mynystre to us no goodness. For they are but chafe,
swylle, mennys dyrte, menstrue, dreams, drunkenness, Gall, wormwode, venomed
darts, filthy waters, whoredom, abhomynacyons, errors, lies, deuylyshnesse,
the curse and cup of the lords indygnacyon, as I have told you before. Ye
can no^ otherwise say, but these your tradycyo^s are me^nys commandments,
unless ye will be holden all together for Gods. And Christ tells you
plain, that Math. 15. Marci. 7. Math. 23. ^. Tim. 4. Act. 20. 2. Joan. 1. 2.
Petri. 2. Jude. 1.
all they worshypp him in vain which worshypp him after them. Yea, he says
more to you, that they make men double the children of hell. Saint Paul
says also they are lies i^ hypocresye, and the very doctrine of deuyls. Than
what would ye have us to make of them, when they make so little of them? Would
ye that we schuld believe you and not them? Would ye have us count them false
liars, and you true spiritual men? Be that far from us. Though Christ sent
ye forth at Marc. 16. Luce. 21. Joan. 15. Jacob. 4. Math. 15.
the first to preach his gospel (whom ye now persecute) he bad ye make no
new laws, for he had made laws suffycyent. Saint James says, there is but
one law geuer that ca^ save and destroy. But you put his laws a part, to
have yowr own observed for advantage. And nothing do ye else after Sophonias,
but fill the lords Soph. 1. Osee. 12. Mat. 23. Osee. 11. Esa. 1.
house with roborye and falshede. Evermore are ye increasynge lies to
destruccyon. All hypocrites yokes bring ye upon the people, to clogge them
down to hell, for nothing make they toward heaven. Paul the first pope of
that name made your le^t service, Vitellianus yowr singing with organes,
Gregorye the first yowr ceremonies, Theodorus yowr Martinus carsulanus Hugo
floriacensis.
paschall, Honorius yowr letanye, Fabianus yowr oil and creme, Felix yowr
dedycacyons and aulters, Agapitus yowr processyons, Caius your holy orders,
Calixtus yowr embrynge days, Bonifacius.iiij. all hallowne day, Felix.iiij.
yowr Ptolomaeus luce^sis. Godfridus viter biensis.
extreme vnccyons, Euticianus the blessing of benes upon the altar, Alexander
yowr holy water, Paschalis yowr relly ques, Gregorius.iij. yowr worshyppynge
of Images, Stephanus.iij. yowr sensynge of them, Virgilius candelmasse day,
Anicetus yowr shauynge, Sergius yowr shrynes, Zepherinus yowr chalyces, Le^
Antoninus flore^ tinus. Ioa^ nes rufus dominicanus.
ij. yowr paxe at mass, Vrbanus.ij. yowr lady mattens, loa^nes.xix. all soul
day Syluester yowr confirmacyons of children, Sauinianus yowr bell ryngynge,
Hyldebrandus yowr vow of chastyte, Bonifacius.v. yowr saint waryes for thieves,
Mamertus the bysshopp of vyenne Gui Ihelmus dura^ di in racionali diuinoru^
(which was no pope) yowr rogacyon daves, and the devil and all else. With all
these and with many more besides over charge ye the people. In all these kinds
of Idelnesse do ye bring the^ up, there christen duty commanded clerelye
laid a part. That will the judge only demand Marci. 7. Math. 25. Jude. 1.
1. Joan. 4. I. These. 5.
at the latter day, when all these schall go with you to the devil. If I
schuld co^ferre them with the sincere scripturs of the prophets and apostles,
they would apere the very fruits of hell. Consydre what the lord says by his
prophet Esaye. Why offer you (says he) so many Esa. 1. Zacha. 7. Hiere. 6.
Amos. 5. Osee. 3. Amos. 8. Osec. 2. Math. 6.
sacrifyces unto me? I have no pleasure in them. Who has required soche
things at yowr hands? Offer me no more oblacyons, for yt is but lost labor. I
abhor yowr incense. I may not away with yowr solemn feasts. Yowr
assemblyes are all in vain. I hate yowr fastings and new holy days, even
at my very heart. They make me werye, I can not abide the Though ye hold out
yowr hands, yet turn I mine eyes from you. And though ye make many prayers,
yet hear I nothing at all. For yowr hands are full of blood Holy church
stands by that the scripturs conde^pneth. Esa. 29. Luce. 6.
Full are all the prophecyes of soche terryble chrettenynges against soche
wretched beg gerye and beastlynesse. Yet this do you make the peples God. To
this hold they up there hands. To this run they by heaps. And upon this
wondre they, as though there were non other heaven. Thus you blind asses lead
the^ blind with you into the dytche of dampnacyon.

The manne of sin.
1 Against communyon 2 and hovvselynge at easter / 3 and under one kind / 4
against inuocacyon of saints / 5 against mass / 6 mattens and euensonge.
His dysclosynge.
This follower of Balaam seeks yet Number. 23* 2. Joan. 1. Heb. 2. 2. Pet. 2.
more colors of deceyt, to obtain the reward of inyquyte. The dry fou^tayne
is he without water, and the cloud carried forth, of a tempest, to whom is
reserved the mist of darkness for ever. He utters proud words to Jude. 1.
Psalm. 16 Joan. 8. 2. Pet. 2. Luce. 11. Prou. 26. Eccle. 34. Act. 13.
entyce unto wantonness against god. His labor is to bring me^ne into
bondage of sin, and to make the last error worse than the first. He
enforces the dog to turn again to his vomete, and the sow that was washed
to wallowe her a geyne in the mire. Se what a cu^passe this subtyle charmer
fatcheth, to call the people back, least they schuld clearly fall from there
old errors. But set yowr heart at rest ye Zach. 3. Math. 7. Joan. 10. Cant.
5. Math. 17. Hiere. 23. Esa. 55. Ezech. 7. Eccle. 51. Osee. 11. Luce. 11.
crastye Satan, for non will follow you but dogs and swyne, soch as never
regards the graces of the lord. The lambs knows there shepeherd. His voice
will they hear, as there heavenly father has commanded. They will no more be
acquaynted with the voices of strangers. Esaye has sent ye word, they will
give no more money for the thing that fedeth not. They will spend no more
labor about that satysfyeth not. Ye lay yokes very fast upon me^ne (says
oseas) but ye ease the^ not of there burden. These books (says my lord) are
against the communyon and howselynge at easter, and specyallye 1. Pet. 4. Act.
2. Joan. 13.
under one kind. What the co^munyo^ is we are throughlye assertayned by the
scripturs.

^ But of your easter howsell we can not skyll. And therefore ye have done well
here to make them diverse. Surely yt is the most learned point we se in you
yet, for they are diverse in deed. So diverse, Luce. 11 Math. 12. 2. Joan. 1.
2. Cor. 6. Luce. 22. Math. 26 Marci. 14* Col. 2.
that the one is with Christ, the other is against him. The one allureth unto
him, the other scatters from him. And no maruele, seeing the one is of
Christ, the other of Anticrist. Christ said unto his dyscyples, Take yt and
deuyde yt among yowr selves, And so co^stytuted therein a mutual perticipacyo^
of his body and blood. You will suffer no^ to touch yt, be they never so
clean that day, because they 1. Cor. 11.
have not yowr oils. But ye give every manne his brekefast alone, because yt
schuld be no communyon. After this sort Joan. 13.
received Judas a soppe alone, as non of that communyon. Ye think ye have done
well in changynge Christ's ordinance. Ioannes cuspinianus de saracenis.
Alas wretched creaturs, ye have done most wyckedly. No saracene nor Turk dare
change one Jot of Mahometes law (which is but a wretched thing) and you
spare not to alter the set purpose of the eternal god. And where as yewyll
suffer no lay me^ne to takeyt in there hands Colo. 2. Treno. 3*
yt is but a superstycyose nycenesse of ye. For christ's dyscyples were never
smered with yowr popyshe grease and yet they laid hands upon yt. Yea, Eusebius
cesariensis and Dyonisius Alexandrinus also Histo, tri pertit. Lib. 9 ca. 30.
writes that a young ladde ded mynystre yt unto one Serapion at Alexandria, as
he lay a dyenge, and yt was than well allowed. Theodosius the emprour had yt
given him into his own hands by the assygnacio^ of saint Ambrose the bysshopp
Iacobus de voragine.
of millayne. Hypolitus a lay manne ded mynystre yt unto his how should
servants, and is yet to this day commended of many ancient writers for so
doing. The communyon is a mutual socyete Ephesians. 4. Romans 12 1. cor. 10 Gala. 2.
of men in one Christen faith, knytt together in one brotherlye love, as
members in one body to there head, in the true partycypacyon of that heaue^lye
mysterye Unto this communyon was Paulus and Barnabas received, when Peter,
Iohanand Acto. 6 Joan. 2. Apo. 18
James gave them there right hands of felyshypp.

2 Vvherof your how sell ryseth, or where upon yt has cawte that name, we ca^
not well tell. Unless yt be upon this Ex. 6. synodo. quest. Ca Nullus episco.
How sell ye? that is to say, those wares for there is nothing else but
merchandyce in yt. The one sells his master with Judas, and the other byeth
the holyeghost with Simon magus. And to maynteyne this rewle, must tithes and
offerynges with other deuocyo^s and dewtyes be paid, the whole acco^ptes
thereof than made in confession. I could write many Esa. 3. Hie. 23. Dani. 14.
things concerning there craftye cloyninge and pyllage of the poor labourynge
men and womenne, servants and prenteses, to be catchynge yet of su^what,
but for this time I let yt pass. This your Easter how sell was first
instytute by pope platina in vitis po^t. Innocencius. 3. de pen. and re
Zepherinus and after confermed by a popyshe decretall called, Omnis vtriusque
sexus. The communyon of Christ is fre to his people, and bound to no day, but
all days at there pleasure bound unto yt, for they are now no servants to
the day, but the day unto them. For the lord created not manne to serve the
day, but the Marci. 2. Math. 12. Luce. 6. Gala. 4. Col. 2.
day to serve manne. How happens yt (says saint Paul) that ye turn ageyn to
the weak and beggerlye tradycyons, de syerynge a fresh to be in bondage? Ye
observe days and months, times and years I am in fear of you, least my
labors be in vain among you. The article of the Eucharystye in both kinds.


3 In the end of this article, ye condemn these books for admyttynge both
kinds i^ the Eucharystye unto the lay people (as you name them) though they be
unto Christ more holy tha^ you which has the popes vnccyons. Whether you be
the heretyques or they that made the books, let Christ be judge. He ernestlye
commanded Mat. 26. Marc. 14. Luce. 22.
his dyscyples to drink of yt all. And they drank of yt all, says Mark. You
say, hand of in pain of burning or else hanging, because Eckius dronke^
dyuynyte has so taught you. Paraue^ture ye will say with him, that the An
argument out of Eckius dyuynyte 1. Cor. 11. Ambrosius et Hieronimus.
body is not without the blood? Christ knew that also so well as you. Yet
mynystred he the chalyce, as ye call yt. Saint Paul in like case writynge a
law of christen living unto the Corintheanes (which were lay men and no
prestes) commended both kinds unto them, like as he had of the lord received,
and you make laws of death for yt. In the wicked counsel of Constaunce was
yt Baptista panecius sermon 56. atque alij.
first inhybytt in the.xiij. sitting, by pope Johan the.xxiij. which was there
deposed for poysenynge his predecessor Alexander, by the false workynge of Mar
silius de parma a phesycyane. Where as the holy men of God Ioannes huss and
Hieronimus de praga for withstanding Panormitanus. Acta consilij Basiliensis.
yt, were done to most cruel death, in the year of ower lord. M.cccc. xv.
yet was yt.xxiij. years after granted again unto the Bohemes in the general
counsel of Basyll after many great dysputacyons. And therefore yt is a sore
matter to putt men to death for, but that ye must follow the steps of yowr
fathers Genes. 4. Math. 23. Joan. 10. Zach. 11.
to be partyners with them in that plage. Both must ye be thieves and murderers
depryuynge the people as well of health as of life.

4 And where as ye seek to maynteyne the inuocacyon of saints, condempnynge
these books for speaking against yt. Ye she we yowr self a more folyshe
heretyque, Bo^ner folyshe. Eckius obstynate.
Idolatour, and papyst than any that I can hear of else. Though master Eckius
be a very obstynate aduersarye to Christ and his word, and an unshamefast
captain of antichrists wars, yet is he not so folyshe a^ Idolatour, as to
allow what Eckius allows, the saints.
inuocacyon to the saints, though he allow them both veneracyon and prayer.
Therefore ye are like in this to stand fool alone without the help of his
doctrine or yet of any other, unless ye seek to the old queresters of Baal,
or the chapleynes 3. Reg. 18. Dani. 14. Hiere. 51. Osee. 4.
of Bell the old God of Babylon that ded eat up all the sacryfyces as yower
generacyon does still. What I schuld write of this I can not tell, yt is so
folyshe. Saving that I remember.viij. years ago I was before Edward lee the
archebysshopp of york. Whereas I The author examyned upon saints
worshyppynge. An old dottynge doctor dodypoll The answer of my lord
archebysshopp of york.
was examyned upon the article of honourynge and prayenge to saints, divided
into.xvij. artycles. In the time of that examynacyon was there an old doctor
which greatly lamented (as my lord does here) that he might no longar make
inuocacyon to saints, and thought him self half lost for yt, good doctor
Downs standing by and smiling at his folyshnesse. Unto whom the archebysshop
said these words. Speak not (says he) of inuocacyon concerning saints. For
that respects a peculyar worshypp only due unto God. And with that the man
was pacyfyed, and argued no farther. So that I can se non agree with my lord
here in this opinion, unless they be blind dastardes and asseheades, as this
old dottynge fool was. This is yet su^what worse What the popes has granted
unto saints.
than is the popes doctrine. For though pope Sergius gave them shrynes,
Theodatus churches, Felix holy days, Gregorye veneracyon, Honorius prayenge
to, Leo hympnes and psalmodye, Johan.vij. pycturs, Constantyne Images and
tabernacles Iacobus bergome^sis, Platina, et nauclerus.
putting them in the mass. Theodorus wax, Stephanus sensynge, and Alexander
holy water, yet wa there non of them all that ever gave them honor under the
tyttle of invocacyon. That is the only new years gift of my lord of london
here, borrowed altogyther of the old Idolatours. And as much worshyppys
Perottus and herma^nus torre^tinus i^ elucidari^o.
he worthy to have for yt as had Herostratus, which burned the great temple of
Diana at Ephesus only be spoken of. Neither grants the scriptur saints
honorynge, nor yet there prayenge to. Neither are they allowed there for
intercessours, medyatours, nor advocates. In the primatyne The saints are no
medyatours.
church were they had in memory, only for imytacyon of there godly works,
but yet of non other than Christ had commanded. For saint Paul his self
would non otherwise be followed of other, than he had followed Christ before. 1.
cor. 4. Phil. 3.


5 Yet is not the ragynge furye of my lord pacyfyed for these books, but needs
they must be condemned for having Mass, mattens euenso^ge offices of
anticrist.
matter against mass, mattens, and euenso^ge, though they be only offices of
antichrists relygyon, yea, rather superstycyo^ What yowr mass is we have
partlye declared before as occasyon has been offered us. If every pope schuld
have home again the fedder he has putt unto yt, yt A creature of the popes
creacyon.
schuld be a very naked monstre, not all unlike unto Isopes choughe, whom we
commonly call Jack dawe. Yet must yt be a sacrifyce satisfactorye for the
quycke and the dead, to the great derogacyon and blasphemye of that only
sacrifice of ow^ Hebre. 10 1. Pet. 1. Phil. 3.
redemption, which Christ ones made for all. These beastlye bellygoddes has
not been ashamed in there scolastycall learning or deuylishe diuynite', to say
that the mass of the work self delyuereth from The dirty dyuinite of
papystes for there mass.
actual sin, optayneth remyssion, grants deserui^ge, gives merit,
minystreth grace, and discharges both the gyltynesse and pain due thereunto,
where as Christ's death is no more but a dyscharge for oryginall sin only,
Yea, it is not long a go sens Stokyslaye and other besides, mynistred the same
for a Christen doctrine Stokyslaye and Standyshe, both blasphemers.
at paul's cross. Standyshe that blasphe mouse Idyote, maynteyninge the same
self lowsye lewd learning, was not abashed to compare the precyouse blood of
Christ to the filthy blood of a swyne in his deuylyshe preachinge. Which I
have touched more at large in an other book against his slaunderose reproach of
Barnes, Never are soche matters condemned The author against standyshe for
Barnes.
nor yet recanted. No, they are to sweet to there purses, panches, and pratye
pygeons of paul's, to be thrown away so sone. It were better a hondreth
thousand sowles went to the devil, than they schuld lose an ynche of those
wanton pleasurs. Oh, wretchedness, of men. If there were in No compassyon
nor pity in papystesbut destruccyo^.
you but one spark of godliness, it would abhor you thus to delude, slay,
da^pne, and destroy your poor simple brethren with this wicked mass of
yowrs Of whom ye boast christ and his apostles to be the authors, not being
able throughlye to bring one godly ma^ne for the Not crist but antichrist
founded the Mass. Filthy drynkes of sin. Apoc. 17 Prou. 15. Polydorus de
rerum inue^toribus. Lib. 6.
author thereof as yt is now. I speak only of yowr patched mass, and not of
cristes words in the right kind.

6 And as touching your matte^s and euensonge, they are also filthy drynkes
of the same whores cup of Babylon, very execrable and noyfull to them that
schall receive them in faith without understanding, as a fulfyllynge of there
duty to god. Only are they instytucyons of popes, As of Damasus, Gelasius,
Pelagius, Gregorius, Vitelianus, Vrbanus. And soche like. And of monks
agreynge to the same, As of Ioannes cassianus, Paulus Diaconus, Isuardus,
Alcuinus, Rabanus, Osmiidus, and soche other more, taken out Ioa^nes tritemius,
and Cestre^sis. Math. 6. Esa. 29. Lucae. 11. 3. Reg. 18.
first of the supsticiose use of the gentiles and the hypocritishe customs of
the pharysees. When ye pray (says Christ) speak not much as does the
heythen, nor stand not up in the synagoges as does the hypocrytes. For the one
thinks to be hard by much babbling, and the other seeks to be seane of
men. They both are Marc. 16. Joan. 20. Math. 28.
without reward of God. When Christ went from the world, he sent forth non
other but preachers only to instruct the multitude to live after the rewles
which he had before taught by his gospel. Now The popes dylcyples are
matte^sers and massers.
comes the pope which is of a contrary relygion from him, and he sends
forth mattens mongers, mass momblers, holy water swyngers, and euensonge
clatterers with other hypocrites else, to fulfill the time with there Idell
supersticyons, and clerelye to exyle the gospel. And this is the religyo^ that
my lord laboreth here with tothe and nail to maynteyne. But God Hiere. 15.
Psalm. 1.
(I doubt it not) will shortly deliver his, and the ways of the wvcked schall
come to naught.

The manne of sin.
1 Against the gyuynge of an oath 2 before a judge 3 and fynassye to have all
things commen amongst the people. 4 Ita est / 5 Vvilhelmus Tol vvyn manu
propria.
His dysclosynge.
RYghtlye has the apostle Jude, otherwise called Thadeus described Math. 10.
Joan. 14. Jude. 1. Act. 20. Psalm. 13. 2. Tim. 3. 2. Petri. 3. Luce. 18.
this false generacyon in his epistle, calling them blasphemers, mockers,
murmurers, quarellers, and proud speakers, walking in ungodliness according
to there own lusts. These are they which separate them selves from the
multitude, and are not as other me^ne be. Beast lie are they in there doctrine
and living, having neither sprete nor grace. Mark Bo^ner is here by his
fruits a very a^tichrist.
well the fruits of my lord in this process, and ye schal say they are the
same. Still co^playneth he of these poor books without either wytt or
learning, and will in no wise be pacyfyed. Next is he in hand here with that
he observes least, which An oath before a judge.
is to swear to be true and perform yt. These books (says he) are against
the geuynge of an oath before a judge. I wot he means here the unjust
examynacyo^s of the very martyrs of God, ser Ioha^ oldecastell Vvaldenus in
fasciculo heresum, and co^tra wic leuistas.
the lord cobham, and of master wyllyam thorpe pressed, which utterly refused
to be sworn to antichrists abhomynacyons before that uerye mynystre of satan
Thomas arundell tha^ archebysshopp of caunterberye and chancellor of England.
I schall first infourme the (good christen reader) of the cruelte of this
tyrant, ^ I find in diverse chronicles, and Polydorus, Joan. mayor, Fabianus
and Caxtonus
tha^ co^sydre thu the new practyses of my lord here. As Thomas arundell
perseyued the veryte of God to spring and floryshe by the contynuall lecturs,
determynacyons, and preachynges of master Ioha^ wycleff and his clyentes (which
was in those days of most wonderful life and learning) and that king Edward
the Vuolpha^gus Kiriander in persecutionibus ecclesiae.
third in his latter age sumwhat favored the same, and also that king
Richard the second succedynge him, would not persecute yt to his mind. He
first conspyred against the said king Richard with the earl of Darbye which
was also duke of harforde. Than procured he the Iryshe Polydorus and Ioannes
mayor, i^ chronicis.
men to rise, his own commons to rebel, his lords to depose him of his
regne, and fynallye to settvp in his rome the said earl of Darbye, famysshynge
him unto death at the last in the castle of pomfrett. Than caused he the
gospel reading Vvaldenus co^tra Vvicleuistas, and Fabianus:
to become both heresye and treason, and procured for yt both hanging and
burning, where as before yt was but exylynge only, or else headynge at the
most. So that there were in one day at his procurement both hanged and brent
in saint Robertus fabianus i^ chronicis
Gyles feldo.xxxvi. besides ser Roger acton knight, master Johan brown
esquyre, and ser Johan beuerlaye pressed, in the year of owr lord. M.cccc.
xiij. And all was for that they would not obey the popes relygyon. Greuouslye
is my lord Anticrist would yet be obeyed in his myschefes.
of london offended here with these books because this great prelate was not
obeyed there in these wholesome works of holy church. Truly this is the oath
he co^playneth of here, that is there denied before a judge. It will not away
they say, that is bredde by the bone. In deed yt so apereth, if ye way this
gere well.

2 Who has co^stytute bysshoppes for Sapi. 12. Joan. 18. Luce. 22. Prou. 8.
Apoc. 13. Danie. 7.
judges in life and death over me^ne? Not the eternal God which only gave
that authoryte to kings, but the infernal serpent that has given power to
the beast to make battle with the saints and to over come the^. Were ye of
Christ's institucyo^ as ye are of anticristes, your office were Of preachers
are prestes be comemur therers. Saint fra^ces first brethren Christ's false
brethren.
to preach like poor dyscyples, and not to sytt in judgment of them whose
believe is now much better than yowrs. But yt fares by you as by the first
brethren of saint Fra^ces (as the tale goes among the people) he left them
penytentes, and found them thieves at his return. So christ left you
preachers, and now fyndeth you murderers up of his people. Ye ought rather to
counsel from swearynge (being in yt so great parell as there is) than to
enforce men cruellye unto yt. A dampnable Hiere. 5. Math. 5. Deuteronomy. 6.
use have ye brought into the world among many other, to swcare upon a book
which is but a creature, where as mennys oaths ought to be upon God only. For
this abhomynable custom of pleyne Idolatry, are ye sore rebuked of saint
Johan Chrysostom in his.xliiij. homelye upon Chrisost. hom. 44. super Matheum.
Matthew, as ye schall find yt more at large declared in the christen
exhortacyon unto customable swearers. How bosshop peshath bestowed there oaths
to there princes sens the conquest and sumwhat before, Guilhelmus malmesburie^
sis, lib. 2. Cestre^sis, lib. 6. ca. 29. Robertus fabianus. Cestre^sis,
Caxtonus flores and alij.
they that are expert in the chronicles knows full well. Robert the arche
bysshopp of caunterburye within a while after his oath of allegeaunce to king
Herolde, brought into this realm duke wyllyam of norma^dye a bastard, with a
ba^ner from pope Alexander the second, and clean remyssyon of sin to subdue
both him and yt. What prankes has been played sens by Egelwinus, Odo,
Anselme, Randolf of durham, Rafe of chychester, Alexander of lyncolne,
Nigellius of helye, Roger of salesburye, Thomas becket, Steven la^gton, Edmonde
of pountnaye, Thomas of herforde, Rychard scrope, He^rye spenser, Thomas
arundell, Thomas the late cardynall Thomas wolseye cardynall.
of England, and a great nombre of the^ more, yt would axe great time to
declare: And therefore yt is no maruele thou my lord looks here so strayghtlye
upon the matter, yt is so faythfullye observed Bonner has been sworn thryse
to antichrist
among the^. It were mete for him to recke^ with him self how he has
bestowed his own. He has been thryse sworn to the Pope at the least before a
judge for his spiritual degrees, and yet has he of late years been against
all those promyses out wardlye. Sens has he sworn to his prince, A periure
becomes he now to his prince.
and now becomes he a periure to the same, so depelye maynteynynge the
kyngedome of Anticrist as he does here.

3 In the end of this matter to prove him self altogyther a liar, he accuses
these books of a very perverse and sedycyouse opynyo^, which in deed they have
not, A sedycyouse opinion of the anabaptystes, and of monks. Authors
confutynge this opinion
but are utterly against yt. As to have all things common amongst the people.
Only is this opinion holden and maynteyned of the Anabaptystes, which had yt
first of there mo^kyshe sects, whose custom was sumtyme for themselves to have
all in common, but for no man else. In this vncristen article has Martyn
luther, Melanchton, Zuinglius, Venatorius, Vrbanus regius, Vvestmerus,
Sarcerius, Coruinus, and diverse other confuted the said Anabaptystes, not
only with invyncybl^ arguments but also with books written, as all the world
knows. Where as Henricus Agrippa contral* ouanienses and alibi.
my lords oyled generacyon was not able to do yt, or at the least would take
no soche labors upon them. And therefore my lord schall in this point be a liar
by day light. But in deed in this he uses the practyse of his old
scolemasters the holy pharysees and scrybes, which laid Luce. 23. Act. 24.
Joan. 16. 1. Petri. 2. Esa. 28.
first unto Christ, than unto Paul, and consequentlye unto the other
dyscyples, that they were sturrers up of sedycyon, when they se non other
thing would help them out of the way. And this has continued ever sens in
Antichrists church as a necessary polycye against heretyques. To say they
are subuerters Genes. 16. Act. 6. Galat. 4.
of the people, and destroyers of good laws, when they play the parts there
selves. Though my lords spiritualte are not of this opinion toward other
monne, yet are they of yt toward themselves, seeking The prestes works yt
in effect.
to make all mennys goods commen unto them by tyttle of tithes, offerynges,
deuocyons, pylgrimages, absolucyons, indulgences, bequestes, mortuaryes,
monthesmyndes, yearmyndes, and the devil and all besides, devouring Math. 23.
Esa. 10. Psalm. 13.
up poor wydowes howses with the patrimonye of the desolate and fatherless

4 Now last of all when this matter of my lords is fynyshed, comes poor
Tolwyn as a man half hartlesse with Tolwyn subscrybeth to this doctrine.
pen and ynke in his hand, and subscribeth unto yt for fear of burning.
Ita est (says he good simple soul) yt is even as my honorable good lord of
london has said here. These books are all heresye, and I have been an
heretyque for retaynynge of them. But now from hence He promyseth obedyence to
the same.
forth I will become (I trust) an obedyent child to the popes holy church.
And than he played Jack a napes, swearynge by his te^ne bones, with Vvilhelmus
Tolwyn, manu propria.

5 I Vvyllyam Tolwyn make my new professyon to my lords grace here in A new
professyo^ unto Romyshe papystrye.
the Popes stead, and promise to observe these in iunccyo^s of mine ordinarye
with out the grace of god and my kings true obedience, unto my lives end.
Mine own hand writing to witness least any thing be laid to my lords
charge for yt a^ other day. I dare say yfhys good lord A very prodygy ouse
kind o^tyrannye is this here.
of london schuld have said unto him at that hour that Crist was a these and
his father an hangemanne, he would have subscribed unto yt for the sauegarde of
his life. And with as good a conscience might he have done that as this, the
ver^tees considered which are herin condemned. Thus draw they poor
innocents to Acto. 20. 2. Joan. 1. Math. 23. 2. Tim. 3. Apoc. 13.
the devil by compulsion. Ye hypocrites (says christ) ye compass see and
land to make a preselyte, or a nouice as monks call the^, and so to bring
him into yowr believe. And wha^ he is ones brought ^ ye make him two fold more
the child of hell tha^ ye your selves are.

The manne of sin.
1 Imprynted at london in 2 saint Sepulchers paryshe in 3 the old bay lye^ 4
by Richard lant. 5 Ad imprimendum solum.
His dysclosynge.
SO notable is this new work of my lord here that yt may want no
cyrco^stau^ce They are not ashamed of there deuilyshnesse.
to promote yt for ward, and to brige yt to a worshypfull sale. The great
works of saint Austyn and Chrysostom has not a more sole^pne sealynge up,
tha^ has this pylde patche of papystrye, nor yet Christ's holy testament
neither. It is here The blasphemose fruits are Boners.
said to be imprynted at London, though it be not greatly to the honor of so
worshypfull a cite, to send forth soche blasphemouse fruits. Not with
sta^dynge there is no fawte in the cite in that, for why the fruits be not
there is but there bysshoppes A plage to be under Antichrist.
A sorrowful plage is yt surely unto the^ to be in captyuyte of conscience
under so che a^ apostle of Antichrist as mynystreth no better learning. Great
confort would yt be unto them, if yt would please the lord te se^de them soche
a pastoure as Polycrates Polycrates. Polycarpus. And Meliton.
was unto Ephesus, Polycarpus unto Smyrna, and Meliton unto Sardis, delyuerynge
them from this tyrant. He first set up Bybles in Paul's not purposynge any
christen erudicyon to the people, but as snares to catch them by. For in His
bybles are snares to know and to catch.
mediatlye after he set up a commandment that God should give place to the
Pope, and Christ unto Antichrist. There shall be no reading (says he) for the
time of gods service. As though there wayne, Idell, and blasphemouse
supersticyons were only gods service and the bible reading no God must give
place to there vanytees.
part thereof, but a very profane thing Upon this polycie ded he set them
up there, to know which were the busy bible men of London, that he might
speak with the^ at layser. For he had hysspyes evermore and his Iudases there
at hand. Co^sydre the cruel.
Some has al redye proved yt and also paid the hard price thereof. So that
they which at there first coming held up handelynge of ^o^a^* porter
there hands unto god for there good bysshopp, does now hold down there heads
and can say, that Satan has showed himself for all his angelyk face.

2 In saint Sepulchers paryshe was this What saint Sepulcher is and where he
was borne.
famous work imprinted in the old bailye. But what manner of saint is this
same saint Sepulcre? where was he borne, or where is he shryned? Is he Martyr
or a Confessor, a Virgin or a Matrone? I would feign know the certen^e. He
is non of all those ser. It is the grave that Christ's body was laid in after
yt was Bartholomeus a saligniaco. Brocardus Iudolphus Nicolaus Huen.
taken from the cross. Nay, that is a false tale. for that was beaten out of
the hard rock, and could never be removed from the place yt is in, as all the
writers and Luke also does wytuesse. And what if yt were the same? Yet could yt
be made no saint. The pope uses to canonyse no soche things for saints,
though he Only is saint Sepulcre the shaddowe of an Idol.
suffers them to be worshypped. But now I perseyue yt is made by some caruer,
and garnyshed with colors by some paynter. And than is yt sum what worse* than
an Idol, for yt is but his s^addowe or simylitude, and paraue^ture nothing
like yt. The scripture says, Psalm. 96. Sap. 13. Ose. 11. Gala. 3.
that unhappy are they, which have a* vain stone to there patron^. And they
that sense Images are gone quyte from god. But be there never so much
abhominacion in soche things, never schall ye se them at Paul's cross
condemned by the bysshopp. Many testamentes of crist has Testame^tes bre^t at
paul's but no Idols.
there been brent, but never Idols openly rebuked, saving the gapynge rode
of Boxlaye and the duckes blood of Hayles. My lord can suffer both saint
Sepulcher and saint Antonyne, and allow them here ^ his book for saints,
notwithstanding Non re^a^teth for Idolatre nor yet for there buggerye
all the myschefe they have done in castinge away so main thousa^de sowles
through Idolatrye, and yet never ce^pell the^ to recant at Paul's, nor yet his
self for the sufferaunce of them. No, this is non heresye this. It is even the
holy father of Romes relligyon, and therefore yt may not be hyndred. Oh most
abhomynable workers, when will ye forsake yowr Never ashamed of sin.
ungodliness? wha^ will ye be ashamed of sin? No where ca^ne there dwell any
people, but they make them captyue slaves unto soche Idols. Either must they be
under the tittle of saint Thomas of acres, sait All are captyun to Idols.
Do^stone, saint Botolp^e, saint Bryde, saint Magnus, saint Foster, saint
Gyles, sait Benett, saint Crowche, saint Sprite, or of soche other like. And
all they are made but of paynters ^^d caruers. More godliness were in it to
set up there makers than the^ Rather worship the caruer than the^.
for they are yet the creaturs of god. A godly act was yt to seclude the
bysshopp of Rome, But a much more godly act were yt, to putt a side his
fylthinesse. For that remains yet still under the tyttle of lawdable rytes
and ceremonies, and ^ewe The popes fylthynesse remains.
men are grieved therewith. A far other way went Asa, Iosaphat. Iehu, and
Josias the godly kings of Judah and Israel to work in destroynge the
wickedness 2. Pa. 14. 4. reg. 10. 2. Pa. 34. 4. Reg. 18 Nume. 21 Eccle. 48
of Idolatrye, Specially good Ezechi as which brake the brazen serpent in
pieces that Moses had made at the lords commandment, when he se yt ones
become^ an abhominacyo^. He would in no case at the counsel of false prestes,
suffer the thing to remain the only supersticyons taken away. But he took
away the occasion Much worse is the occasion than the superstycion.
with the supersticyo^s, least they schuld rise ageine. Never come things
ryghtlye to pass, be owr pretenses never so godly so long as we myngle with
the eternal wisdom of god ower own carnal wysdom.

3 What is meant here by the old baylye, The old baylye, what yt means.
I can not well tell, unless yt be a street, where as they su^tyme dwelt which
saw the best rewle observed. If a new or dre were taken in this matter, God
would be much better pleased. Richard laut promoteth this. work.


4 Now co^sequentlye comes Richard Lant, and he also sets his name to this
notable work, not as the maker but as the putter forth of yt by his prynt. He
is well contented to be under that venge Apoc. 18. Sap. 15. Math. 15.
au^ce which hangs over Babylon, to get a little money. My lord is his
diocesane, ordinarye, and bysshopp, and therefore he dare be the bolder to set
his foot where A thief to god and his verite
my lord sets his, though yt be in a fylthie soil. A saying there is that
as ill is the thief as he which sets him a work. If Rychard lant had been a
true tenant Saint sepulchers tenant against God.
of the eternal lyuige god as he is to saint Sepulcher, his fore sight would
have been much better. If he had dwelt in the new baylie as he dwells in
the old, he would have done no soche thing. But if both the hand and the
tole of bym that Prove. 8. Sap. 14. Exodus 20 Deuteronomy. 27.
makes an Image be accursed (as the lord says they are) I think Richard
Lant is not far from the same.

5 And where as he has Ioyued his princes auctoryte unto yt, Ad imprimendum Ad
iprime^du^ solum, not golye used here.
solum, to bring him also under the same curse of God (for I know God is true
of his word) he has played no honest ma^nys part, no more than has some other
more of his ^ellawes* Besides that he has done here against the glory of god,
he God, king, and cu^tre is herin dishonored.
has dishonored his king and dyshonested his cuntre, in offering unto the
people under his tyttle of preuylege to drink ageine there own fylthie vomete
of abominable papistrye to the utter destruccyon of there sowles more tha^
before. Let men of godly knowledge judge but according to co^scye^ce what
learning this Nehe^. 1. 1. Joan. 5. Hiere. 7. Hebre. 10
is, and lament with heaviness the seduccyon of Christ's dear heritage. Herin
are they compelled by cruel e^forceme^tes, to sine the sin unto death to
the blasphemye of Gods name for who^ remains neither sacrifyce nor yet
prayer, but a fearful expectacyon of judgment without mercy The eternal
father with his son Jesus 2. These. 3. ^. Joan. 5.
Christ and the holy ghost, three persons in one everlasting godhede redress
ones this matter with soche other more* to his own glory and the peples
health. Ame^

The conclusion or Epyloge.
AL this have I done (Good Christian reader) brotherly to admonish the Marc.
12. Philip. 3. Joan. 1. 2. These. 2.
to be ware of this cruel enemy and soche other, which seeks by there dailye
crafts to rob the of that life which thu have in Christ Jesus. Parauenture
thu wilt be moved, not because the ma^ne of sin is thus set forth in his
right colors, but for that yt is done here with soch extremyte Consydre for
that the ernest vein in the 1. Joan. 3. Esaie. 1. 2. Pet. 2 Jude. 1.
scripturs against this wicked generacyo^ from the beginning. Both ded the
holy prophets and Apostles evermore fercely reprehe^de the blasphemy of the
lords name and veryte. Full are all there prophecyes and writings of terryble
rebukes and thret tenynges. Yea, Christ owr most ge^tyll and pacye^t redemer,
spared not to call the^ strangers, Joan. 10. Matt. 23. Luce. 16. Apoc. 17
hyrelynges, thieves, wolves, murderers, dogs, swyne, adders, liars, deuyls,
hypocrytes, serpe^tes, oppressers, destroyers, tirau^tes, abhominacio^, a^
whores broad, and many other names of great indignacio^. Much better is yt to
the Christian beleuer that Satan apere Satan, and the devil be known for the
devil, tha^ still to Apoc. 2. 2. cor. 11. Act. 26. Prove. 14 Math. 24
lurk under a fair similitude of the a^gell of light, For wha^ he is ones
known, he may sone be avoided, where as under a glitterynge covert he may
lead to destruccio^, yea, the very elect vessels, were not the lord to the^
more merciful. Thou Jesus Christ mekelie suffered the adversary to remain
unrebuked i^ his own cause, yet with fercenesse ded he reuyle hi^ i^ the
^^rell of his everlasting father, and badde Math. 4. Marci. 1. Luce. 4. Apoc.
9.
him with no small dyspleasure, avoid Satan. All that this Boner does here,
and other like lecherouse locustes of Egypt, y^ to obscure the glory of God*
and to demynyshe that people which daily seeks yt to there power. But there
cruel enterprise Eccl. 34. Exodus 1. Sap. 18. Deuteronomy. 10. Act. 7.
is now all in vain. The more Pharao commands the mydwyues to flee the
men children of the hebrews, the more they increase and multyplye. The more
the people of the lord are oppressed, the more they prospere and floryshe. The
more the Luce. 18. Marci. 10. Math. 13.
poor blind ma^ne by the way side from Hierico is forbidden to speak, the
more he cries upon Jesus the son of David for mercy. The small grain of
mustarde sede which is cast into the garden, will grow into a great tree,
though all the deuyls of hell say nay to yt. The lord which commanded Johan
in the beginning Nota. Apoc. 1. Apoc. 10. Apoc. 22.
of his reuelacyon to write that he saw, and in the mids thereof to seal up
the voices of the.vii. thonderynges, charged him again in the end to suffer
them to pass at large. In the prymatyue church was the gospel gredylye
received of the Marc. 16. Apoc. 20 1. Tim. 4. Act. 20.
universal world. In the mids thereof when Satan was at lyberte, was yt in
a manner contempned of all men, and hypocresye taken up in the stead thereof.
Now in the latter end are men again very desyerouse of yt, and doubtless
yt schall be received both of the Jews and paganes, Roma. 11. Esa. 59. Math.
2^* Iohel. 2.
withstand yt the adversaries never so sore. If the Jews tare there outward
vesturs when they hard there God blasphemed, much more ought we owr inward
hearts, and to suffer owr flesh to be torn of those terryble termagauntes of
Babylon. Rather ought we to dye, than to Tobie. 3. Sapien. 5. Psalm. 118. Esa.
11. 2. These. 2.
leave those Antichrists unto wched, that so depelye blasphemeth his wholesome
ways and withstandeth his godly testymonyes. Not by the power of princes nor
yet by the workynge of me^ne, but by the only breathe of his mouth (which is
his word by Christ alredye taught) has he ernestlye promised to overthrow in
this latter age that filthy and false generacyon. Sonner schall heaven and
Apoc. 18. Luce. 21. Genes. 15. Amos. 2.
earth pass, than that promise pass by vnfulfylled, trust upon yt surely.
The inyqytees of the Amorreanes are almost fulfilled, there utter destruccyon at
hand. In non other mind am I concerning the reproach of this enemy, than
was Helias when he brought Baals prestes to the broke of Cyson, saving 3. Reg.
18. Deuteronomy. 32. Ezech. 9. Roma. 12.
only that I would not cut of there heade^, nor yet any other bodylye harm
unto them, the lord is my judge, but as his pleasure is. But in deed I would
as many men more would, rather Gods honor to regne, than there filthy
Idolatrye. His glory rather than there spyrytuall vain glory. Only couete I
Leuit. 19. Judith. 8. Osee. 11. Luce. 11.
in this there amendment if yt might be* referrynge all vengeance unto God. I
would they ded ones cease from ouerloadynge the peples conscyences with there
wretched beggerye. For doubtless as yet they have done nothing in all there
spiritual syttynges, but renewed again the Psalm. 2. 2. These. 2. Zach. 11.
decayed mysterye of inyquyte. Look if this written work of this holy bishop
shows any other here. The learned men of Germanye demands many times of
there merchau^tes as they be returned home again from England, the fruits The
fruits of there newlye broched christyanyte.
of there new christyanyte or newlye preached gospel there. And they deliver
unto them with no small laughter the folyshe treatise of Johan Standyshe
against Barnes, the fra^tyk Genealogye of heresye made by Johan Hontyngton, and
the. ij* draffyshe Declaracyo^s of my lord Boner, The dyrtye dryselynges of
there old
with soche other dyrtye dryselynges of Antichrist. By that means came I by
the^ first of all. For few other have they elsthe re no^ under the kings
preuylege, A^ imprimendu^ solu^, but soche filthy dregs Antichirst. Abac. 3.
Deuteronomy. 23* Esa. 28. Hie. 11.
of the devil, the eternal father be mercy full to that people, and hold from
them the promised plage for soche unthankfulness. For never was the word of
the lord yet sent to any nation. and so blasphemouslie ordered, but wonderful
destruccyo^s has solowed thereupon. Consydre Ione. 3. Nahu^. 1. Mich. 10. Math.
23.
for an example the great cite of Niniue preached unto by Jonas, Nahu^, and
other holy prophets. Jerusalem also who^ owr sauer Jesus Christ in his own
person called unto repentance, And ye schall find there afflyccions most
terryble and fearful. If soche warnynges had be given to Tyrus Luce. 10. Math.
11. Ezec. 26.
and Sido^, or to Sodom and Gomor as has of late days been given unto
England, they had received the^ to the ame^deme^t of life and not been so
destroyed. Pray there for unto God ferue^tlye, that yt will ones please him to
putt yowr prince in mind (as the heart of a king is in the hands of Prove. 21
Eccle. 11. Apoc. 9.
God) to take from you these dyrtie donge Hills which never will give other
sauer than yssueth from the bottomless pytte. Alredye has he taken from you
by the auctoryte of Gods word, Monks, Chanons There deuylishne^ still re
mayneth.
No^nes, and Fryres, but still yet remains all there doctrine of deuylishnesse
i^ a^ other blospher^^use use broad, Babylon is there yet an habita(...)on of
deuyls, and a lodging of unclean spretes. Yet still contynueth Apoc. 18.
there a filthy cage of hateful and vene mouse birds, with all superstycyo^s
lurkynge, and waiting there time to hoppe They look toregnea geyn
again at large, would the world ones apply to there minds. Do but mark the
craftye cloynynge of wynchester when he either preaches or dysputeth, how he
clowteth the old broken hooles with patches wynchester clowteth old holes wit
new subtyltees.
of old papystrye, sowynge them to gyther with new subtiltees and wyles. His
chatterynge charmers a broad does follow the same self trade also, saving
that they want much of his craftye conueyau^ce, as all me^ne may behold in
the aforeseyd book of Standyshe a wise learned chaplain of his. Hontyngto^ an
other Hontyngton can find no heretyke a monge papystes.
of his retynewe, can not among all his heretyques find one Pope of Rome, nor
one false Bysshopp, nor one scysmatyk Pressed, fryre, monk, nor chano^, of so
many as be in the chronicles. He can not find out one traitor nor one sturdye
Papyst, as many as has been of them and are His sight serves him but upon
the one side
yet to this day. Though he beheld Barnes that was brent in Smythfelde for
being the popes enemy, yet could he se neither Powell, Abel, nor Fetherston
which were Gods enemies and the kings, though they were at the next door by.
No his eye sight would not serve him upon that side, for his holy fathers
sake. But I He is proved a promoter of moloch.
think his popyshe poesyes and scripturs most deuylyshlye perverted, are
metelye well tried where as yt is, to the manyfestacyon of soche a shameless
Antichrist and presumptuose Idyote. The lord gyde all faithful hearts in the
love of his he 2. These. 3. Dani. 2.
auenlye word and pacye^ce of Jesus Christ among those deceytfull workemenne,
and shortly remove the clouds of darkness with the clear light of his
coming. Amen.

Thus ends the Manne of sin with his Dysclosynge, collected by Ioha^
harryso^ in the year from Christ's incarnacyo^. M. D.xlij. and imprented at
Zurik by Olyuer Iacobson Anno Domini. 1543. the.x. day of Dece^bre
Fawtes through negligence of the Prynter.
Read fo. 3. page 2. lin. 21. of there is. fo. 4. in marg. conueyaunce. fo. 5.
page 2. lin. 2. heart. fo. 6. page 1. Join Credidi propter to the. 29. lin. fo.
7. page 1. lin. ^2. enterpryses. page 2. in marg. 1. Ioa^. 5. fo. 10. page 1.
lin. 27. consciences. fo. 13. page 2. in marg. Hierem. fo. 15. page 1. in marg.
Psalm. 36. fo. 17. page 2. lin. 29. thing then to se. fo. 29. page 1. lin. 25.
merciful? Upon. fo. 30. page 1. lin. 8. there Idell. lin. 27. daily. fo. 31.
page 1. lin. 11. Thus. fo. 33. in mar. Ezech. 34. fo. 37. page 1.li. 21. for he
taught Item in marg. Marci. 16. fo. 41. page 2. in marg. Psalm. 115. fo. 52.
page 1. in marg. Hier. 50. fo. 53. page 2. in marg. Esa. 56. Math. 13. fo. 57.
page 1. lin. 19. Johan Eckius. Ite^ page 1. in marg. Gene. 19. 1. Match. 1. fo.
59. page 1. in marg. Ezech. 13. Hiere. 10. Joan. 9. fo. 60. page 1. lin. 4.
oath. fo. 67. page 2. lin. 17 if we. fo. 74. page 2. in marg. Galat. 5. fo. 76.
page 2. in marg. Zach. 1. fo. 80. page 2. lin. 19. without. lin. 30. are to be
allowed, so long as they agree to. Item in marg. Math. 19. fo. 84. pagi. 2. in
margi. Act. 8. Synodo. 1. And other more.

An olphabety^all dyrectorye or Table to the spedye finding, out of the
pryncypall matters and hystoryes herin contained.
A
ABbot of redynge had a wife. 73. ^ Abelynes heretyques against marryage. 71. a
Abhomynable whoredom of papystes. 68. 2. 69. 70. 71. Abhor the king and
counsel. 36. a Abrogacyon of ceremonyall laws. 78. a Accusacyons against
Christ. 26. b Accusers of Tolwyn. 15. b. 26. a. 4. 6. a Adamytes herety.
against marryage. 71. a Ad imprimendum solum, abused for money. 95. a. 97. b
Aduent what yt is. 14. a Age of Johan fryth when he dyed. 57. b Agnes the
e^prours mother suspecte. 75. a Alby gesyanes brent for the faith. 23. b All
against Christ is this doctrine. 32. b All, comprehendynge a mysterye. 35. b
All things in common would papystes have. 91. a Alms hyndred by the
spiritualite. 65. b Alms of the wydowe in new gate. 41. a Alms of bysshoppes,
what yt is. 66. a Amendment looked for and not had. 6. a Anabaptystes for fre
will. 62. b Anabaptystes would all in common. 91. a Anagogycall trope of Boner.
36. b Annas and Cayphas for witnesses. 26. b Anselmus puts prestes from there
wives. 76. a. 80. a. 90. b Anselmus acco^bred with sodomytes. 76. a Antiochus
burns the scripturs. 58. a Antipas slain for the veryte. 17. b Antichrist
must be uttered. 6. b. 97. a. Antichrist restored again. 12. a. 31. a. 95. a
Antichrist in full course. 76. a Antichrist would yet be obeyed. 90. a
Antichrist is the body of Satan. 37. b Antonius coruinus a learned manne. 56.
b Apocalypse, what yt is. 40. a Apologye of Mclanchton. 53. b Apostles dysobeyed
the prelates. 81. a Apostles were preachers only. 37. a Apostolykes
heretyques, against marryage. 71. a Argument of Eckius answered. 74. b. 85. b
Artycles of Vvyllyam thorpe. 47. b Artycles of ser Johan old castle. 48. a
Artycles of Gods prouydence. 50. a Article of good works. 63. b Auctoryte of
kings abused. 18 b. 19. a. 34. b. 95. a Auctoryte of Antichrists bysshoppes.
24. a. 37. b. 45. a Aulters, what schall become of them. 61. a Ancient rytes
of holy church. 28. a. 81. b. 82. a. 88. a Author inhybytt to preach. 55. a.
86. b Author examyned at york. 86. b
B
BAconthorpe doctor with other more 33. a. 58. a Babylon is yet an habytacyon
of deuyls. 98. a Bag with books descrybed. 45. b Bag worthy condempnacyon.
43. a Balthazar pacimontanus. 51. b Banquet of Bacchus at Paris. 36. a Baptym
and the lords supper. 78. b Barlowes dyaloges preached. 55. a Barnes the popes
enemy brent. 98. b Bartholomaeus Vvesthemerus a learned manne. 52. b Believe of
holy church. 46. b Benedicite under a stool. 6. a. 30. a Bible reading is
death. 41. b Bybles, why they were seett up in Paul's. 93. a Byenge and
selling of Christ. 84. b Bysshoppes never recant there errors. 5. a 4. 8. b.
94. a Bysshoppes dyuerslye sent. 12. a Bysshoppes have always there Iudases.
26. b. 93. a Bysshoppes fauer and gentylnesse. 28. b 37. b. 39. b. 66. a. 74. a
Bysshoppes of England. 48. b. 90. b Bysshoppes call much upon fasting. 64. b
Bysshoppes observing the vow of chastyte. 68. a. 69. a Bysshoppes occupye
mennys wives. 69. a Bisshopp co^ueled a no^ne to datsorth. 69. a Bisshoppes
take re^t for whoredom. 70 a Bysshoppes betraye there kiges. 22. b. 89. b
Bysshoppes builded no^neryes. 75. b Bysshoppes and prestes married. 71. b 73. a
Bysshoppes become judges upon death. 90. a Bysshoppes make al men captyue to
ydols. 94. a Blassphemye of Gods word is plaged. 75. a 98. a Blessings, to
whom promised. 16. a Bochardus avenie^sis, a pressed married. 72. b Books
ungodly de formed. 7. a Books of heresy are the scripture 18 b 43 a Books
erronyouse, and why. 44. b Books made by Ioha^ fryth. 47. a Books of papystrye
and treason. 54. a 55. 57. a 59. b Books of Ioha^ eckius a papyst. 55. a Book
of prayer, called heresye. 55. b Book for scolers, called heresye. 57. a Books
slau^dered of Boner. 79. a 91. ^ Books brent by tyrauntes. 57. b Books
condemned in a bag. 44. b 85. a 87. a Boldness of papystes to be marked.
10. a 34. b Boner a^ a^gell of the botto^lesse pi^^. 2^ 12. b Boner plaieth the
^^ra^^t. 3. a 28. a 39. b 93 a Boner has a^ unshamefast face. 10. a 14. b 33.
a Boner plucketh hyder the pope again. 10. a Boner is the two horned beast in
the apocalypse. 12. b Boner is a Bocher of Babylon. 27. b Boner is proved a^
heretyque. 32. b 86. a Boner ought to do open penance. 2^. a Boner plays
Malchus. 35. a Boner would hyde a wolf. 40. a Boners rhetorycall proposycyon.
44. b Boner plays.iij. parts. 45. a 86. a Boner co^de^pneth the kige. 48. a
50. b 53 b Boner co^de^pneth all godliness. 53. b 57 b Boner is proved a liar.
55. b 57. b 63. b 79. a 91. a Boner seeks the sowles destruccyo^. 77. a 83. b
88. a Boner had a popyshe priest to his father. 73. a Boner stands fool
alone^i Idolatrye. ^6. a Boner would have a^tichrist still obeyed. 90. a Boner
is a periure every way. 91. a Boner is a plage to london. 93. a Boner
laboreth to obscure the glory of God. 96. b Both kinds in the sacrament. 85.
b Braggers offer will. 62. a Brent, testame^tes at paul's. 58. a 94. a Brent, a
great nombre in saint gyles field. 89. b Burghardus, a provost married. 71. b
C
CAyphas and Annas for wytnes. 26. b Cardynall permytted to marrye. 72. a
Cardynall taken with a^ whore. 76. a Cardynall of valence in spain. 68. a
Canutus a monk married. 73. a Captain cobbler and master Ask. 67. b
Cataphrygeanes heretyques, against marryage. 71. b Carpocracyanes heretyques,
against matrymonye. 71. b Catarystes heretyques, co^demnynge marryage. 71. b
Catechysmes, or institucio^s of faith. 51. a Catholyk faith, what yt is. 16.
b. 33. b Catholyk witnesses against heretics. 15. b 26. a Catholyk ma^ne,
what yt is. 30. b. 38. a Catholyk member of holy church. 54. b. Catholyk
doctrine of holy church. 57. a Ceremonies of the popes church. 18. a 77. a
21. b Ceremonies lawdable of late years. 21. a 28. a 77. a Ceremonies besides
the scripture. 78. a Ceremonies what they are. 77. b Ceremonies to what e^de
ordained. 77. b Ceremonies made by popes. 82. a Ceremonies never without
superstycyo^. 94. b Charity and compassyon of bysshppes. 28. b 37. b 39. b 66.
a 74. a Chastity of the clergy or spu^alte. 66. b 68. a Chilpericus a pressed
married. 72. a Christ allows no popyshe tradycyons. 18. a 32. a Christ not
ones here named. 2. b 20. b 32. b 39. b 51. a Christ accused of many thiges.
26. b 91. b Christ taking synnres to repe^tau^ce. 35. a Christ owr alter, and
we the sacrifice. 60. b Christ sharp i^ rebuki^ge the spu^alte. 96. a Church
that christ lokethfor. 8. b 16. a 33. b 61. b Church of antic. how known. 16.
a 61. a Church of Christ is from within. 34. a Church holds that scripture
condemp neth* ^3. ^ Cite of london must obey the pope. 34. a Cytezen of london,
what yt is. 15. b Colomannus a bysshopp married. 72. a Comete or blasynge
star. 75. b Comme^dacion of marryage. 70. a Co^mentarye of lancelot rydleye.
49. a Communyon, what yt is. 83. b. 84. b Communyon fre for all days. 85. a
Concubynes kept the prestes in Enlande. 76. a Confession bettereth no
bysshoppes. 6. a Co^fessyo^ anrycular. 22. b 27. a 30. a 66. b Confession whom
yt dyschargeth, and whom not. 30. a Confessyo^ of faith of the germans. 53. b
Confession an occasyon of lechere. 66. b Confessyo^ described of the doctors.
67. a Confessyo^ an hold of co^spirycye. 67. b Confirmacyon of old errors.
48. b Co^cylyacyo^ of scripturs and fathers. 52. b Co^stancia a nonne married.
72. b Co^te^pt of marryage iustlye plaged. 75. a Corintheanes, received both
kinds. 85. b Counsel general of constau^ce. 85. b Counsel general of
laterane. 22. b Counsel of Basyll grant both kinds. 86. a Cou^terfett
Bzsshopp, a book. 53. a Credidi, propter quod locutus sum. 6. b Cro^wel was
calked for of the prestes. 5. b
D
Days of superstycyon. 13. b Daniel a pressed married. 72. a David broke his
vow. 73. b Deaken brake his vow of chastyte. 66 b Death necessary to a
Christian. 4. b 9. b 97. a Death for Christ is precyouse. 6. b 41. a Death
for observing Christ's iustytucyons. 85. b Declaracyon, what yt is. 13. a. 32.
b Declaracyons of bishop Boner. 97. b Description of Boner by the. *. honored
beast. 12. b Description of a bag with books. 45. b Desiderius the last king
of Italye. 22. b Desperate co^playntes of Antichrists. 39. a Destruccyon but
no compassyon in papystes. 87. b Dyocese of london described. 15. b. 32. b 77.
a Dyfference of churches. 16. a. 31. a Dyoclecianus plays Boner. 3. a
Dyfference of a bag and sachell. 45. a Dyscyples of the pope contrary to
Christ's. 88. b Dysclosynge, what yt means. 8. a Dyuersyte of matters. 42. b
Dyspleasure against marryage. 80. a Dyuynyte of Johan Eckius. 75. a. 85. b
Dog and bytche, what yt is. 79. b. 80. a Doctors of the popes scole. 33. a.
55. a. 68. a. 69. b. 87. b. 88. a Doctor cronkehorne and bockynge. 34. b
Doctors has all erred. 59. b Doctors of the christen scole. 3. b. 64. b 65. b.
67. a. 81. b. 85. b. 91. a Doctors against ear confession. 67. a Doctor
downs, a man learned. 86. b Doctrine of deuyls suffered. 21. a. 68. a. 70. b.
87. b Doctrine of Christ persecuted. 42. a Doctrine of holy church. 54. b
Door of holy scripture. 56. a Draffe only fytt for swyne. 43. b
E
EAster howsell what, and by whom instytute. 84. b Edmonde boner bysshopp of
London. 2. a Edward the third, king of England. 89. b Edward lee
archbysshop of york. 86. a Eckius postyll of papystrye. 57. a Eckius opinion
for marryage. 71. b Eckius argument soluted. 74. b. 85. b Eckius dyuynyte with
wynchesters cano^ law. 75. a Eckius, an aduersarye to Christ. 86. a Eleazarus
dysobeyed a wicked law. 81. a Elmerus a monk of malmesburye. 75. b Emprours
subdued of papystes. 22. b Empire of constantynople. 22. b Enchiridio^ of
Eckius with the co^te^tes 54. b Enemies unto marryage. 71. a England to be
lamented. 9. b England has had warnynges to amend. 98. a Epycures and
stoyckes makes fre will. 62. a Equyuocacyon of a bag. 45. b Erasmus
sarcerius a learned manne. 51. b Errors among the doctors. 59. b Esseanes a
sect against marryage. 71. a Eucharystye abused of papystes. 23. b 84. a 85. b
Eu^^songe and mattens. 23. b 24. b 88. a Eustachyanes, against marryage. 71. a
Examynacyon of Annas. 42. b Examynacyons of thorpe and oldcastell, 48. a 89. a
Example of warning in Tolwyn. 41. b Examples of spu^all chastyte. 66. b 68. a
Exili^ge and headynge for the gospel. 89. b Exhortacyon to princes. 10. b 29.
b Exhortacyon against swearynge. 90. b Extremyte herin, excused. 96. a Ezechias
broke the brazen serpent. 94. b
F
Fasting, what yt is both ways. 64. a Favorable and kind are bysshoppes. 28.
^ Faith of the christen church. 33. b Fedynge of parryshners. 43. b Feats
wrought for superstycyons. 5. a. Ferce are the scripturs against sin. 96. a
Fygurate speakynges of Boner. 35. b 36. b Fire to come down from heaven. 12.
b. 38. b Flatterers are to be taken head of. 10. b. 15. a 44. a Flood of tyber
ragynge. 41. a Folyshe people deceived. 59. a Fortye men brake there vow. 73.
b Form of new professyon. 92. a Four books of one tyttle. 51. a Fra^ciscus
philelphus a prestes son. 73. b Frances first brethren. 90. a Fredericus
barbarossa the popes fotestole. 22. b Fredericus do^gianus a fryre married. 72.
b Fre will of man, what yt is. 61. b Fruits of chaste vows. 67. b 73. a
Fruits of hell are the ceremonies. 82. b Fruits of new cristianyte demand.
97. b
G
GEntyl womam through confession constuprate. 66. b Gentle women of sothfolke.
68. b God not ones named in this work. 2. b 20. b 32. b 39. b God named only
to conde^pnacyo^. 49. a God co^de^pned for a^ heretyque. 51. a. 56. a God
found among heretyques. 51. a God served when they murder. 58. b God is not
the anthor of sin. 63. a Gods word is heresye and treason. 45. a Gods word
blasphemed has plages. 75. a 98. a Gods prouydence of Zuinglius. 50. a
Ghostyle gydes for the devil. 39. b 44. b 50. b 68 b. Ghostyle fathers chaste
vowers. 69. b Good deseruynge, what yt is. 38. a Good works allowed of
heretyques. 64. a Good works of the papystes. 65. a Godsalue and Pelles for
Bylneye. 69. a Gospel preaching condemned. 24. b 32. a 89. b Gospel judged
heresye. 27. b 45. a 89. b Grace of the holy ghost given. 80. b Gospel
dyuerslye received. 96. b Gracianus monachus doubts of confession. 66. b
Gracianus monachus begote of a no^ne. 68. a Greeks never bound to confession.
66. b
H
HAre of there prince in cruelte. 45. a Helchesytes, with there opynyo^. 3. b
Heythen customs beco^mynge christian ceremonies. 78. a. 88. a Henrye the fifth,
king of England. 45. a He^rye pepwell stokyslais prouyder. 55. a He^ricus
agrippa a learned ma^ne. 69. b. 72. a Heresies are the scripturs here called.
18. b 20. b 27. b 32. b. 89 Heresies after my lords meaning. 32. b Heresies
in a bag, not uttered. 44. b Heresye may not confession dyscharge. 30. a
Heresve becomes treason also. 45. a 89. b Heresye to brige up youth i virtue.
57 b Heresye to rebuke a pressed. 79. b Heretyques have God among the^ 51. a
Heretyques sor fre will with papystes. 62. a Heretyques are the papystes. 60.
a. 85. b Heretyques for marryage with papystes. 71. a Heretyques are
Christyanes called. 9. b 18. b 45. a Heretyque is Boner in deed. 32. b
Herrnannus a Germane, learned. 48. b Herod brent diverse books. 58. a Herod
only kept his vow. 73. b Herostratus brent dyanaes temple. 87. a Hieremyes
prophecye brent. 57. b Hieronimus de praga and Ioa^nes huss. 85 b Hyldebrande a
pope. 72. a 75. a 82. b Hyldebrande inhybyted prestes marriage. 75. a
Hyldebrande kept the duchess of lotharye. 75. b Hyldebrande suspect with the
emprours mother. 75. b Hypolitus mynystred the sacrament. 84. b Holy water
making. 22. a. 27. a Holy church with her children. 33. b. 36. b Holy
church sees no trayters. 36. b Honor of inuocacyon given only of Boner. 86.
a Honors given to saints by popes. 86. b Hontyngton and standyshe.ij.
papystes. 12. b 98. b Hontyngton is answered at large. 99. a Hontyngton can
find no papystes among heretykes. 98. b Hours canonycall in latyne. 24. b
Howsell at easter, what yt is. 84. b Howsell, by whom instytute. 85. a
Huldricns zuinglius a learned ma^ne. 50. a
I
IAcobytanes heretyques for fre will. 62. a James the lessewolde i no case
rec^it. 4. a James the bishop of nycose married. 73. a Iannes and Iambres
sorcerers. 18. b Jason, was accused of sedycyon. 17. b Jesus christ borne under
marryage. 70. a Ignorant p^stes mynistrige marryage. 79. a Image of both
churches. 8. a 40. a Inhybycyon of marryage. ^ Inyquyte always regneth. 2. a
3^ Inyquyte is become spu^all. 9^ Instytucyon of Christ for the sacrame^ 9. a
60. b Instytucyons of diverse popes. 21. a 2^ 64. b 82. a Inuocacyon of saints
newlye. 8^ Ioachim king of luda. 57 Ioannes andreas a prestes son. 7^
Ioannes de cremona inhybyted concu^ nes. 76 Ioa^nes huss and hieronimus de
praga. 8^ Ioa^nes Eckius with his books. 54. b 5^ 57. a 64. b Ioannes Eckius a
papyst. 70. b 71. b 73 85. b 86. a Ioa^nes Eckius had.iij. bastardes. 70 Johan
measures the temple. 7^ Johan describes the.ij. horned beast. 12 Johan
writteth, seals, and opens. 9^ Johan puruaye recanted. ^ Ioha^ wicleue a
ma^ne of god. 2 b 37 b ^ Johan king of England. 2^ Johan bysshopp of
portuense. 2^ Ioha^ oldecastel, lord of cobha^. 48. a 8^ Johan frith with hvs
books. 47. a 5^ Johan porter famyshed in new gate. 4^ 66. a Johan porter would
not recant. 4^ Johan stoky slaye a tyrannouse papyst. 57. b 87. b Ioha^
stokysle with his chaste vow. 68. b Johan the.x. pope begote^ of an whore. 68.
a Johan the.xij. and the.xiij. popes. 68. a Johan a cysteane monk married. 72.
b Johan of gaunt duke of lancastre. 72. b Johan.xxiij. pope deposed for
poysenynge. 85. b Johan Chrysostom against swearers. 90. b. Johan brown
esquyre brent. 89. b Johan beuerlaye pressed brent. 90. a Johan standyshe a
blasphemouse Idyote. 12. b 87. b 98. b Johan hontyngto^ an vpholder of
papystrye. 12. b 98. b Iouynyanystes, for fre will and marryage. 62. a 71. a
Judas received a soppe only. 84. a Iudgeda a charytable prelate. 39. b Judges
are bysshoppes become. 90. a Julius a pope with his chastyte. 68. b Justices to
there minds. 5. b
K
Kings schall not onerthrowe antichrist. 7. b 97. a kings ought to be godly
and learned. 10. b 29. b. 94. b kings auctoryte abused of papists. 19. a 34. b
95. a 98. a kings.ij. ho^dreth shorn i^to mo^kerye. 22. b kings command
one, bysshoppes a^ other 5. a 34. b kings compared to.iij. light things. 60.
a kings that were p^stes, married. 72. a 73. a kings always deceived by
hypocrites. 75. a kings destroyenge Idolatrye. 94. b king He^rye compared to
Iosaphat. 11. a king Johan of England. 22. b king Edward the third. 89. b
king Richard the second. 89. b king He^rye the fifth of England. 45. a
king condemned of Boner for heresye 48. a 50. b 53. b kyngedome of Italye,
the popes. 22. b kyngedome of god, what yt is. 65. a kyte, brygett, and
vnderwode. 69. a knowledge of godliness increases. 96. b
L
LAdde mynistrynge the sacrament. 84. b lady and whore much dyfferi^ge. 31 a
Labors to uphold Babylon. 40. b Lay me^ne touches the sacrament. 84. b
lambs will follow there shepeherde. 44. a 61. b 83. b Lancelot rydleye, a
learned manne. 49. a Laterane^se co^siliu^, with his acts 23. a Latyne mass,
when yt first began. 24. ^ Latyne hours and service. 24. b.* 88. b Lawdable
the ceremonies are called. 21. a 28. a. 77. a Law master of turnaye. 76. a
Laws of the lord restored. 11. a Laws of men, when allowed. 80. b Laws
spiritual suffycyentlye made of Christ. 82. a Letters from the Turk or
Soldane. 39. b Leuiathan schall be destroyed. 7. b London abused of
Antichrists membre. 10. a. 15. b. 34. a. 46. a. 92. b. Lordeshyp, from whe^s
yt ryseth. 37. a. 46. a Lord spiritual, what yt is. 37. b
M
MAgystrates, what laws they schuld make. 81. a Mahomete more easy tha^
papystes. 65. a Malchus a bysshoppes servant. 35. b Mamertus bysshopp of
vyenne. 82. b Ma^ne of sin, what yt means. 8. a. 12. b Marcya^ystes
heretyques against marryage. 71. a Marcellinus renounceth Christ. 3. a
Manychees allowynge fre will. 62. a Marye, a nonne of Ra^saye married. 72. b
Marozia the popes whore. 68. a Marryage forbidden of the spiritualte. 24. a.
75. a. Marryage of prestes decyded. 70. ^ Marryage dyuerslye commended. 70. a
Marryage is a chastyte. 74. b Marryage mynystred of ignorant prestes. 79. a
Marryage, how yt ought to be^sed. 79. b Marsilius de parma poysened a pope. 85.
b Martyne Luther condemned of papystes. 36. a. 53. a. 56. a. 91. a Massage
from the devil by Boner. 13. a Mass first said in Latyne. 24. Mass made
of.xx. diverse popes. 23. b 87. a Mass, what it is of it self 23. b 84. a 87
a Mass, a^ office of anticristes relygio^. 87. a Master of art, what yt is.
15. a Mathathias dysobeyed Antiochus. 81. a Matrymonye, what a godly estate yt
is. 70. a. Matrymonyes co^te^pt iustlye plaged. 75. a Mattens and eue^songe
descrybed. 25. a. 88. a Mawde duches of Lotharye the popes harlott. 75. b
Meliton bysshopp of Sardis. 93. a Me^ne seeking themselves in these days. 7. a
Mercy in bysshoppes, what yt is. 28. b 38. a. 39. b. 66. a. 74. a Merit we
can not of owrselues. 62. a Merchandyce in the temple. 84. b Mydwyues dysobeyed
Pharao. 81. a. 96. b Miracles of Antichrist. *12. b. 38. b. 66. a 74. b
Miracles for saving there vow. 74. b Mystery vndyscussed of Boner. 35. b. 46.
a Mystery dysclosed of the apocalypse. 96. b Mysterye of inyquyte renewed. 97.
b Moloch, what yt means* 65. b Monks and popes made latyne service. 88. a
Montanus made laws for fasting. 64. b Montanus opinion for marryage. 71. a
Mother holy church what yt is. 33. b 36. b. 38. b. 68. a. 77. b
N
NAmed is God to conde^pnacyo^. 49. a Named ones is not Christ here. 2. b 20.
b. 32. b. 39. b Names usurped of the clargye. 18. b Names given ryghtlye to
Boner. 50. b. 83. a. 86. a Names of diverse books. 46. b Names of popish
tradycio^s. 60 a 65. a. 81. b. 82. a Names of diverse popes. 21. a. 64. b. 68.
a 82. a. 86. b. 88. a Names of sondrye heretyques. 62. a. 71. a Names of monks
that made Latyne service. 88. a Names of rebellyouse bysshoppes. 90. b Names of
learned men. 91. a Names of papystycall doctors. 55. a Names of serten Idols
in London. 94. a Names given of the scripture to prelates. 96. a Necessary
doctrine of new Christen fayihe. 46. a. 54. b. 57. a Necessary to dye for
Christ's doctrine. 6. a. 9. b. 97. a Nectarius put down confession. 66. b New
practyses when old will not serve. 25. b. 31. a New Christen relygyon of
England. 9. b. 92. a New years gift of Boner to saints. 87. a New
professyon to Antichrist. 92. a Necessary in these days to suffer. 6. a
Necessary offices in the sacryfyce. 61. a Nycolas bertrande of Tholose. 23. b
Nycolas a monk married. 71. b Nycolaytanes of England. 69. a. 71. a Nonne had
iij. children at ones. 68. a Nonne conveyed by a bysshopp to datforde. 69. a
Nonneryes builded of bysshoppes and prestes. 75. b Notaryes for prestes whores.
69. b Nothing comes from Boner to edyfycacyon. 49. b Nouacyanes against
matrimonye. 71. a
O
OBedyence to the romyshe pope. 24. b. 34. a. 92. a Obedyence of mennys laws:
81. ^ Oblacyon to belphegor in vows. 74. b Obseruacyons of papystrye. 15. b.
19. b Offenses who remytteth and who not. 31. a Offices of sin, which be
they. 15. b 40. a Office of a right bysshopp. 31. b. 50. a Office of a true
Christyane. 35. b Offices dew in the sacryfyce. 61. a Of dyscyples and
doctrine. 42. b Old bottels will hold no new wyue. 43. b Old God and the
new. 48. b Old books twain in the sachell. 57. a Old doctor dodypoll at
york. 86. b Old auncye^t rytes of holy church. 28. a Old baylye, what yt
means. 94. b One spiritual law maker. 82. a Opening of the manne of sin.
8. a Opinion of the helchesytes. 3. b Opynyons of the papystes for there mass.
87. b Orders not hyndred by whoredom. 70. a Ordynarye of London, to what end.
19. b. 77. a Ornaments of the popes church. 23. b Oath, or swearynge before a
judge. 89. a Oaths, how they ought to be. 90. b Oaths of bysshoppessens the
conquest. 90. b Oath newlye made to Antichrist. 92. a
P
Pay no more for thiges of naught. 83. b Papystescu^passynge there princes. 10.
b Papystes can away with no godliness. 43. b Papystes has clerlye lost God.
51. a Papystes are proved heretyques. 60. b Papystes abuse the lords supper.
61. a Papystes agree with heretyques for fre will. 62. a Papystes against there
own doctors. 63. b Papystes change Christ's instytucyon. 84. a Papystes agree
with all heretykes against marryage. 71. a Papystes can se no trayters. 36. b.
98. b 99. a Papystes would have all in commen. 91. b Papystes never confute but
burn. 91. b Papystrye solempnelye maynteyned. 59. b. 77. a. 95. a Paul would
be followed, how. 87. a Pelagyanes heretyques for fre will. 62. a People abused
of the Antichrystes. 34. b 4. 5. a. 95. b People increases in Godly knowledge.
96. b Peter stryketh of Malchus care. 35. a Peter is called Satan of Christ.
40. a Peter brake his solemn vow. 73. b Peter's patrymonye, what yt is. 22.
b. 68. b Petrus lo^bardus begote of a^ whore. 68. a Petrus mendosa, a
cardynall. 68. a Petrus elsacius a pressed married. 72. a Petrus co^mestor begote
of a^ whore. 68. a Phassur and semeias false prestes. 18. b Philippus
melanchton a learned manne. 51. a. 53. b. 91. a Philippus archbysshopp of
hyspalis. 68. a Phocas made rome the head church. 37. b Pyllar of the popes
church. 36. a Pyllage of the pore by the papystes. 65. b Plage to be under
Antichrist. 93. a (84. b Plages for unthankfulness. 98. a Pope coming
again to England. 10. a Pope, father of all heretyques. 71. a Pope
hildebra^de kept gozilo^s wife. 75. b Pope hyldebra^de suspected with the
empress. 75. b Pope sends Dyscyples contrary to Christ. 88. b Popes
instytucyo^s diverse. 21. a. 64. b 82. a Popes.xiij. had prestes to there
fathers. 73. a Popes which made ceremonies. 82. a Popes, what they grant to
saints. 86. b Popes fylthynesse still remains. 94. b 97. b Polycarpus
bysshopp of Smyrna. 93. a Polyeye of papystes against Christynes. 89. b
Polycrates bysshopp of Ephesus. 93. a Porkelynges fed with the popes swylle.
43. b Postyls upon the epystles and gospels. 53. b Postyls of Antonius
coruinus. 56. b Postyll of Johan eckius. 57. a Powell, Abell, and Fetherston.
98. a Practyses of bysshoppes diverse. 25. b. 31. a. 40. b. 89. b. 91. b Prayer
becomes heresye. 56. a Prayer abused of papystes. 65. a. 88. a Prandium
Theologicum at Paris. 36. a Preaching and baptym only commanded. 32. a. 82a.
88. b. 90. a Preaching of papystes, what yt is. 57. a Predestynates heretyques
in fre will. 62. a Prelates of holy church. 48. b Prelates descrybed
dyuerslye. 16. b. 19. a 31. a. 32. a. 48. b. 53. b Prestes practysynge
deuylyshnesse. 54. b 76. b Prestes always rebellyouse to the word. 56. b. 76.
b. 77. a Prestes of both sorts. 67. a Prestes and Prelates married. 71. b.
72. a 73. a Prestes builded nonneryes. 75. b Prestes of England kept
co^cubynes. 76. a Prestes, what they are by the scripturs. 7^ b. 82. a Prestes
mar before they marrye. 80. a Prestes geuynge the holy ghost and grace. 80.
b Prince, what he schall herafter do. 11. a Prices, what laws they schuld
make. 81. a Princes power deryued out of the pope. 59. b Priscylly anystes fot
fre will and marryage. 62a. 71. a Processyon upon saturdayes. 21. a. 27. a
Proclamacyons abused of papystes. 19. a Professyon made newlye to Antichrist.
2. b. 12. a. 13. b. 30. b. 34. a. 35. b. 92. a Prouyssyons for the vow of
chastyte. 69. a. 75. b
Q
QVarell taken for Tolwyn ryghtouslye. 5. b Quarrel of bysshoppes become the
kings. 45. a Quarrel of God fercelye defended of Christ 96. a Queresters of
Baal are the papystes. 86. a Quodcunque ligaueris, condempneth the gospel. 36.
a
R
RAhab dysobeyed a wicked commandment. 81. a Raymundus the earl of Tholose.
23. a Reasons against the pellagyanes and gentyles. 62. a Recantacyons in
wycleues time. 2. b Recantynge, what parell is therein. 3. b Reca^tynge of
wyllya^ Tolwyn. 25. a. 29. b Relygyo^ of the e^glyshe church. 9. b. 34. a Rent
of the stews at Rome. 68. b Re^tes spiritual for whore keeping. 69. b
Remelius a monk married. 72. a Report of learned men concerning Boner. 50. b
Resydue of the text here. 45. b Respytynge of Tolwyns penance. 37. b
Reuelacyon of Antichrist translated. 47. a Reward of holy church is fire.
38. b Rewards for the gospel preachige. 17. b Rewle of scolastycall
theologye. 63. b Rhetorykes of the popes law. 26. a Richard the.ij. king of
England. 89. b Richard nixe with his chastvowe. 68. b Richard mekyns a ladde
bre^t. 24. a. 41. b Richard Tauerners postyls. 54. a Richard lant impre^ted
this work. 95. a Rytes of the church, what they are* 77. b Rytes taken of the
heythe^ customs. 78. a Robert archebysshop of can^terburye. 90. b Robert ward
empresoned to death for Christ. 41. b Roger acton a knight brent. 89. b
S
SAchell with books condemned. 43. a. 44. b Sacrament of the altar. 60. b
Saint antonynes psonage. 15. b. 43. a. 94. ^ Saint sepulchers parryshe. 93. b
Saints inuocacyon, what yt is. 86. b Saints, what they have granted of
popes. 86. b Satan losed after a thousand years. 37. b Satan shows hiselfe
in Boner. 93. b. 96. a Saturnus the old God. 21. b Sacryfyce of the mass. 87.
b Sawte bitche of my lord Boner 79 b 80 a Scrypturs must try all things. 13.
b Scrypturs destroyed of tyrauntes. 57. b Scripture allows good saynges of
ill men. 58. b Scrypturs apparent that God causes sin. 63. a Scrypturs
allows no saites honorynge. 87. a Sebastianus forbode recantynge. 4. a
Sedycyouse are godly me^ne noted. 16. a Sedycyon laid to Christ and his
apostles 26. b. 91. b Sentences of god against ceremonies. 82. b Serapion
received the sacrament of a ladde. 84. b Service in Latyne made of monks. 88.
a Seven machabees and there mother. 81. a Shameless Antichrist is Boner. 10. a.
14. b. 34. a. Sin make they where no sin is. 28. a Sin against the holy
ghost. 95. b Syluester the second pope. 70. b Sixtus a pope builded stews.
68. b Smoke alredye felt of many. 40. b Sodom and Gomor vpholden of prestes.
80. a Sodomytes followed inhybycyon of marryage. 76. a Sorbonycall masters of
paris. 36. a Srandyshe and hontyngton papystes. 12. b 87. b. 98. b Steven
stoned for the veryte. 17. b Stews of London never persecuted. 42. a 69. a
Stews builded of an holy pope. 68. b Submyssyon and humble sure. 29. a
Sufficient witnesses, what they are 15 b 26 a Superstycyo^s brought in again.
5. a. 34. a Supper of the lord abused. 60. b Swearynge before a judge. 89. a
Swearynge upon a book, what yt is. 90. b Swyneherde to the pope, what yt is. 43
b Swyne ad beasts are the papystes. 44. a 83. b
T
TAcyanes heretyques against marryage. 71. a Tartulyanystesagelst marryage. 71.
a Terryble mocyons and tokens. 75. b Testamentes brent at Paul's. 58. a. 94. a
Thanks with cappe and knee. 39. b Theodocyon the Ephesyane recanted. 3. b
Theodosius took the sacra. ^ his hand. 84. b Thomas venatorius a learned ma^ne.
49. b Thomas aru^dell a tyrau^t. 48. b 89. a Thomas beket a trayterouse
bishop. 28 b 48. b 90. b Thomas of aquyne a popysshe doctor. 55. a 59. b
Thomas Norman a prestes son. 73. a Thomas bil^^ie the matter of christ. 69. a
Thomas wolseye a cardynall. 86. b. 20. b Thorpe and oldecastell examyned. 47. b
48. a 89. a Thousand years from Christ. 37. b. 70. b Three fruits of one
aduouterye. 68. a Three parts playeih Boner. 45. a 86. a Tyranny of bysshoppes
for tradycyons. 3. a 57. b 74. a Tyra^nye of Boner for papystrye. 3. a 24. a
27. b 31. a 39. b 41. a 57. b Tyra^nye, from whe^s yt sprigeth. 37. a 56. b
Tyrau^tes plaged for destroyenge the scripturs. 58. a Tithes, deuocyo^s, and
offeringes. 85. a 91. b Tokens of the true church. 16. a Tolwyn constrained to
deuye christ. 3. b Tolwi declared a^ heretik. 21 a 44. b 46 b Tolwyn set
neuwlye to scole. 26. b Tolwyn set up for a sign of co^tradyccyon. 41. b
Tolwyn examyned as was christ. 42. b Tolwi deuowred of gredye swyne. 43. b
Tolwin shoke forth a sachell at paul's. 44. b Tolwyn subscribeth for fear of
burning. 92. a Tonstall brent testamentes of christ. 58. a Tradycyons made by
diverse popes. 82. a 88. a Tradycyons not allowed of christ. 18. a 65. b 81. b
88. a Traditions may not be towched 49 79 b Tradycyons, what they are. 60. a
81. b Trayterye professed newlye. 30. b 54. b Trayterye maynteyned preuylye.
54. a Trayters make they saints. 36. b Treason becomes the gospel. 45. a 89.
b Treason not regarded of papists 29. b 30. a 54 a Treaty ses made of the
author. 8. a 37. b 40. a 87. b 90. b 99. a Two old books i the bags botto^.
57 a
V
VDo archebysshopp of magdeburge. 75. b. Vengeance axeth the blood of
innocents. 41. b Virtues of the holy spu^alte. 20. b 27. a 23 a Vices has the
clergy to frynde. 42. b Vyrgynes not married of prestes. 80. a Voice of Tolwi,
words of boner. 44. b Vows papystycall with the filthy fruits. 33. b. 36. b.
66. b. Vow of chastyre broken. 66. b. 68. a. 69 a Vows with there chaste
fruits. 67. b 68. a 70. b. Vows besides the scrip. wicked. 74. b Vows broken
of many. 73. b Vows in the old law, what they were. 74. b Vouete and
reddite, answered. 74. a. Vpholders of the popes church. 26. a Vrbanus regius
a learned ma^ne. 51. b Vrsinus a pressed married. 73. a Wages of the pope better
tha^ christ. 24. b Vvalkers under shaddowe of the gospel 6. b Vvares of
antichrists synagoge. 8. b Vveddynge clerkelye compared of Boner. 79. a
Wharton of bongaye, a false justice, 5. b Whoredom not forsworn, but
marriage. 69. b Whore and lady, with there difference 31 a Whores abhorred of
the Israelytes. 69. a Whores for a common welthe. 69. a Vvydowes alms in
newgate. 41. a Vvylye practyses of bysshoppes. 24. a. 30 b. 31. a 40. b
Vvycleue, a ma^ne of much godliness. 2. b. 37. b 89. b Vvyllyam Tolwyn
cruellye handeled. 3 a. 39. b 44. b Vvyllyam thorpes vninst examinacyon. 47. b.
89. a Vvyllyam warha^ with his chastyte 68 b Vvynchester a tyrannouse papyst.
57. b 69. a 73. b Winchester keeps his chaste vow. 69 a Vvynchester with
his.xxi. years. 36. b. in marg. a 69. a 73. b Vvynchestre has broken his vow.
73. a 74. a Vvynchestre clowteth broken holes 98. b. Vynchestres cano^ law
Vith eckius dyuynyte. 75. a Vvytnesses, or false accusers. 15. b 26. a Vvomam
prophecyenge of anti. 76. a Vvorshyp, how yt ought to be used. 14. a
Vvorshyppers true and false. 78. a 81. b
Y
Year of regnynge under anti. 14. a Years.xxi. of wynchestre. 36. b in marg.
69. a 73. b Ydell ceremonies of the pope. 18. a 21. a 30. a 82. a 93. ^ Ydell
stoclye of popyshe p^stes. 54. b 82. b ydolatrie never rebuked of bisshops 94.
a Ydoll worshyppynge maynteyned. 43. b 94. a Ydols are become captains over
all 94. a Image worshyppinge commanded of bysshoppes. 15. b Image of both
churches, a book. 8. a 40 a Image of the beast, worshipped. 12. b 40 a Yokes
laid upon prayer. 65. a 88. a Yokes intolerable of the a^tichristes. 74 a
Yokes of popyshe ceremonies. 78. a 81. b 82. a 97. b
Z
Zele of the author ageist papists 5. b 9. a 97 a Zuinglins wrote of gods
prouydence. 50. a
Finis.

