A.j.

A Letter Written by the King of Navarre unto the French King concerning his
innocence, against the sclaunders of his adversaries. Truly translated out of
French. Anno 1585.



1585.

A Letter written by the King of NAVARRE unto the French King, concerning his
innocence, against the slanders of his adversaries. Truly translated out of
French. 1585.
MY Lord,
so soon as the auctors of these new troubles had made some show of the
purposed effects of their bad minds toward your Highness, it pleased your
Majesty in writing to impart unto me that opinion which justly your self had
conceived of their entents, which was, that notwithstanding whatsoever their
pretenses, your self were not ignorant how they practiced against your person
and Crown, also that they sought to grow mighty by your decay and detriment,
as men that purposed the total ruin and utter subuertion of your estate.
These my Lord, were the very effect of the words of your Letters wherewith
your Majesty vouchsafed to honor me, as acknowledging the vnio^ of my hap with
yours, expressly adding, that they endeavored my overthrow together with
yours. Mine, I say, my Lord, the which, depending upon you as it does, they
can hardly compass without yours. In respect hereof it pleased your Majesty
also to command your Governors, general Liutenants, Baylifes, Stewardes, and
all other your Officers to withstand them as Rebels and perturbers of the
Common quiet. Your Majesty's declarations also were hereupon sent unto all your
Courts of Parliament, and in the same ratefied, whereby they were pronounced
Traitors, whereof have ensued sundry solemn decrees, and upon the said
decrees diverse executions of great importance in many parts of this Realm,
which remain as presidents as well of their rebellion and conspiracy against
your estate, as also of that judgment which your Majesty, your Counsel, and
your Courts of Parliament had assessed of their purposes.

All this notwithstanding, it pleased your Majesty according to your natural
clemency, to think good by gentle means to reduce them to their duties, and
thereupon vouchsafing to honor me with your Letters, you therein commanded me
with patience to suffer all, whereby your self might have the better leisure
to enter into consideration of them and their purposes, to the end to give to
your Subjects to understand how far the very causes of their devises did
differ from their published pretenses: alleging that although your self were
not ignorant thereof, yet that it was requisite to open the same to your
people, whom under the feigned show of Religion, they sought to withdraw from
their duties. Your Majesty my Lord, are to call to mind with what patience at
your commandment I have hitherto borne and obeyed: notwithstanding, according
to your wisdom and equity you are not ignorant by how just occasions I have
always been provoked and my patience moved, especially seeing my self
challenged as party by your Majesty's enemies, who openly have declared that
they sought only my overthrow, so that although I plainly found my self to be
the scope of their attempts and enterprises, yet in respect of that reverence
which evermore I have endeavored to show to your commandments I durst not
once stir against them, no notwithstanding I daily beheld them marching
before my face, yea almost within my reach, in Arms against your Majesty, in
stomach against my self, evermore atte^pting against either some Towns
within my government, either some of my houses, or else against my own person,
and yet occasion so fitly serving I might neither do your Majesty any service
requisite, or my self be revenged according as reason and nature did require.
Your only will my Lord, have I accepted for reason, and your commandment for
law: My nature and duty have I strained and forced, yea almost my reputation
and credit under your precepts, and that the rather my Lord in respect that
your Majesty still honoring me with your Letters, did in the same promise to
be as mindful of my interest as of your own: as also that you would not
grant or co^discend unto any thing that might be prejudicial to your Edict
of peace, which you purposed to be irreuocable, yea and that in and according
to the same you would protect and defend all your Subjects indifferently: all
which promises your Majesty have from time to time reiterated in all your
Letters, which being of your own handwriting I do reserve, as also you have
promised the same to the Lords of Cleruant and Chassincourt, with other my
agents resiant about your person, as also have the Queen your Mother as well
by word of mouth as by Letters.

When therefore my Lord I heard it reported that your Majesty had on the
suddeine concluded peace with those that have rebelled against your service,
upon condition: that your edict be broken: your loyal subjects banished: the
conspirators armed: yea armed with your forces and authority against your most
obedient and faithful subjects: even against my self, who have that honor
to be of your Majesty's blood, and allied unto you, who ever since I supposed
my self to have any place in your good favor and liking, could never be
found to have departed therefro, except by too much patience, sufferance, and
duetifull obedience: when this I say came to my knowledge, I leave it to your
Majesty's consideration to think in what perplexity I might remain, either
wherein I might repose any further hope, except in despair.

In that declaration which on my behalf was exhibited unto your Majesty, I
have motioned the most equal and reasonable conditions that might be devised
for the furtherance of common and general quiet, for your security, and for
the relief of al your subjects* Viz. If their quarrel be for Religion,
(howbeit, notwithstanding whatsoever Buckler they make of the same, yet it is
the farthest from their thoughts) I have referred my self to a free Counsel:
If for assurances (which certainly they have no reason to demand) I have
offered to resign my government, together with what soever my Fortresses or
houldes, upon condition that them selves will do the like, and that to the end
no way to prolong the stay of quietness throughout this Realm: If it be my
self that they shoot at, either if under pretense and color of me they
pretend to trouble the whole land, to the end your Majesty may no longer be
troubled thereabout, I have craved that this quarrel might be decided between
them and me, yea for the cutting off of common calamities even between their
persons and mine. To be brief, I have beyond all show of reason, and contrary
to all natural sense, yielding to whatsoever your Majesty's commaundeme^ts
proceeded farther then duty could bind, and, notwithstanding the inequality
of our degrees and callings, have stooped and become equal with my inferiors,
to the end with my blood to redeem so many mischifes. Yea I have abased my
self to those parsons whom your Majesty have pronounced Rebels.

If therefore my mishappe be such (which I will not yet believe) that your
Majesty have proceeded so far, as notwithstanding all these my conclusions
and submissions, to conclude such a treaty, and thereby to infringe your
Edictes, and to arm your Rebels against your estate, against your blood, yea
and against your parson, I can not but heartily lament and bewail your
Majesty's condition, especially seeing your highness through contempt of my
faithful service, forced to utter subversion of your estate, together with the
consideration of the calamities of your realm, the end whereof we are in vain
to look or hope for, except in the total ruin of the same: For that all the
world does know by twenty years proof and more, that their pretense is a
vain attempt, and their building a manifest subversion.

In the mean time I will comfort my self in my innocence, integrity and
affection to your Majesty and your estate: also in that it has not been long
of me, that with my own peril I have not prevented this shipwarcke: but above
all, I will ground my consolation upon the Lord God, the protector of my
sincerity and loyalty, who in this necessity will not forsake me, but
rather will increase my courage and multiply my means against all my ennemies,
who are yours.

And my Lord, I beseech him to enspire you with good counsel, and in all your
affairs to assist you with his strength. Also that he will vouchsafe me his
grace during life, to yield unto you my bounden service as I desire: also to
preserve your Majesty.

At Bergerac. Julij. 21. 1585.

