AN EPISTLE OF THE MOST mighty and redouted Prince Henry the.viii. by the
grace of God King of England and of France, lord of Irelande, defender of the
Faith, and supreme heed of the church of England, next under Christ, written
to the Emperors majesty, to all Christen Princes, and to all those that
trewly and syncerely profess Christ's religion.

IN THIS EPISTLE BOTH the causes are plainly declared, why the Kings
hyghenes owght neither to send nor go to the Council indicted at Vincence,
and also how perylouse a thing it is for all such as profess the true
doctrine of Christ, to come thither.

HEREUNTO ALSO IS ANnexed the Protestation made the last year by the Kings
hyghenes, his holle Counsel and clergy, as touching the Councille inde^tted
at Mantua etc.

Read both o Christen Reader, truth is coming home, long before being in
captyuytye, step forth and meet her by the way: if thou see her presence,
embrace her, and show thy self glad of her return.

HENRY THE, VIII, BY THE grace of God king of England and of France etc.
saluteth the Emperor, Christen princes, and all true Christen men, desyringe
peace and Concord among them.
WVHERE as not long since a book came forth in our and all our counsels
names, which both contained many causes, why we refused the Councylle, than
by the bishop of Romes usurped power first indycted at Mantua, to be kept
the.xxiii. day of May, after proroged to Nouembre, no place appointed where
it should be kept. And where as the same book does sufficiently prove, that
our cause could take no hurt, neither with any thing done or decreed in
such a company of addicte men to one sect, nor in any other council called
by his usurped power, we think it nothing necessary, so often to make new
protestations, as the bishop of Rome and his courts by subtlety and craft,
do invent ways to mock the world by new pretensed general councilles. Yet not
withstanding because that some things have now occured, either upon occasion
given us, by change of the place, or else through other considerations, which
now being known to the world, may do much good, we thought we should do,
but even as that love enforseth us, which we owe unto Christis faith and
relygion, to add this epistell: And yet we protest, that we neither put forth
that book, neither yet we would this epistle to be set before it, that thereby we
should seem less to desire a general Councille, thanne any other prince or
potentate, but rather more desirous of it, so it were free for all parts, and
universal. And further we desire all good princis, potentatis, and people, to
esteem and think that no prince would more willyngly be present at such a
council than we, such a one, we mean, as we speak of in our protestation,
made concerning the council of Mantua. Truly as our forefathers invented
nothing more holyer than generalle Councilles, used as they ought to be, so
there is almost noothing, that way do more hurt to the Chrystian common
welthe, to the faith, to our religion, than general councils, if they be abused
to lukes, to gaynes, to the establyshement of errors. They be called general,
and even by their name do admonysshe us, that all Christen men, which do
descent in any opinion, may in them openly, frankly, and without fear of
punyshement or displeasure, say their mind. For seeing such things as are
decreed in general councils, touch egally all men that give assent thereunto,
it is mete that every man, may boldly say there, that he thinks. And
verylye we suppose, that it ought not to be called a general councylle, where
alonly those men are hard, which are determined for ever, in all points, to
defend the popysshe part, and to arm them self to fight in the bishop of
Romes quarelle, though it were against god and his scriptures. It is no
general Council, neither it ought to be called general, where the same
men be only advocates and adversaries, the same accused and iuges. No it is
against the law of nature, either that we should condescende to so unreasonable
a law against our selfs, either that we should suffer our selfs to be left
without all defense, and being oppressed with greattest injuries, to have no
refuge to succor ourselfes at. The bishop of Rome and his, be our great
enmies, as we and all the world may well perceive by his doings. He
desires nothing more than our hurt, and the destruction of our realm: do
not we than violate the judgment of nature, if we give him power and
authority to be our judge? His pretended honor first gotten by superstition,
after increased by violence, and other ways, as euylle as that: his power
set up by pretense of religion, in deed, both against religion, and also
contrary to the word of god: his primacye, borne by the ignorancie of the
world, nouryshed by the ambition of bishops of Rome, defended by places of
Scripture, falsely understand. These.iii. things we say, which are fallen
with us, and are like to fall in other realms shortly, shall they not be
establyshed agein, if he may decyde our cause as him lysteth? If he may at
his pleasure oppress a cause most rightuouse, and set up his, most again
truth? Certaynely he is very blind, that sees not, what end we may look for
of our controversies, if such our enemy may give the sentence. We desire, if
it were in any wise possible, a council, where some hope may be, that those
things, shall be restored, which now being deprauate, are like, if they be
not amended, to be the utter ruin of christen religion. And as we do desire
such a councyll, and think it mete, that all men in all their prayers, should
crave and desire it of god: even so we think it perteyneth unto our office, to
provide both that these popish subtilties hurt none of our subjects, and
also to admonyshe other Christen princis, that the bishop of Rome may not by
their consent abuse the authority of kings, either to the extinguyshing of
the true preaching of scripture (that now begins to spring, to grow, and
spread abroad, either to the troublyng of princis liberties, to the dimynishinge
of kings auctorities, and to the great blemysshe of their princely majesty.
We dout nothing but a reder not parciall, will soon approve such things, as
we write in the treatise following, not so much for our excuse, as that the
world may perceive both the sondrye deceytes, crafts, and subtilties of the
papists, and also, how much we desire, that controversies in relygion may
ones be taken away. All that we said there of Mantua, may here well be spoken
of Vincence. They do almost agree in all points. Neither it is like, that
there woll be any more at this Concille at Vincence, than were the last year at
Mantua. Trewelye he is worthy to be deceived, that being twyse mocked, woll
not beware the third time. If any this last year made forth toward Mantua,
and being half on their way, thanne perceived, that they had taken upon
them that journey in vain, we do not think them so foolyshe, that they woll
hereafter ride far out of town to be mocked. The time also, and the state
of things is such, that matters of Religyon may rather now be brought
farther in trouble, as other things are, than be commodiousely entreated of,
and decyded. For where as in manner the hole world is after such sort troubled
with wars, so incombred with the greatte preparacyons that the Turk makes,
can there be any manne so against the setlynge of relygyon, that he wolle
think this time mete for a general Council? undoubtedly it is mete that such
controversies, as we have with the bishop of Rome, be taken as they are, that
is much greatter, than that they may either be discussed in this so
troublesome a time, or else be committed unto proctours, without our great
ieoperdie, all be it the time were never so quiet. What other princes will do,
we can not tell, but we will neither leave our realm at this time, neither we
will trust any proctour with our cause, wherein the holle stay and welthe of our
realm stands, but rather we will be at the handlynge thereof our self. For
except both an other judge be agreed upon for those matters, and also a place
more commodiouse be provided, for the debating of our causes, all be it all
other things were as we would have them, yet may we laufully refuse to come
or send any to this pretended Councyl. We wol in no case make him our
arbyter, which not many years paste, our cause not hard, gave sentence
against us. We woll that such doctrine, as we, followyng the scripture, do
profess, ritely to be examinid, discussid, and to be brought to scripture, as
to the only touch stoone of true learning. We will not suffer them to be
abolysshed, ere ever they be dyscussed, ne to be oppressid, before they be
known: much less we will suffer them to be trodden down being so clearly
true. No, as there is no jot in scripture, but we wolle defend it, though
it were with ieoperdie of our life, and peril of this our Realm: so is
there no thing, that does oppress this doctrine, or obscure it, but we woll
be at continualle war therewith. As we have abrogated all old popish
traditions in this our realm, which either did help his tyranny, or
increase his pride: so if the grace of God forsake us not, we will well foresee,
that no new naughty traditions be made with our consent, to bind us or our
realm. If men will not be wyllyngly blind, they shall easily see even by a
due and evident proof in reason, though grace does not yet by the word of
Christ enter into them, how small thauctoritie of the bishop of Rome is, by
the laufull denial of the Duke of Mantua for the place. For if the bishop
of Rome did ernestly intend to keep a councyll at Mantua, and has power by
the law of God, to call princis to what place him lyketh: why has he not
also authority, to chose what place him lysteth? The Bishop chose Mantua, the
Duke kept him out of it. If Paul the bishop of Romes authority be so
great, as he pretends, why could not he compel Federicus, Duke of Mantua,
that the Councylle might be kept there? The duke would not suffer it. No, he
forbadde him his town. How chances it, that here excommunicacyons fly not
not abroode? Why does he not punysshe this Duke? Why is his power, that was
wont to be more than fulle, here empty? wont to be more than all, here
nothing? Does he not call men in vain to a Councylle, if they that comme at
his calling, be excluded the place, to the which he callethe them? May not
Kings justly refuse to come at his call, when the Duke of Mantua may deny
him the place, that he choseth? If other princes order him as the Duke of
Mantua has done, what place shall be left him, where he may keep his
general Council? Again. If Princes have given him this authority, to call a
Councille, is hit not necessary, that they give him also, all those things,
without the which he can not exercise that his power? Shall he call men,
and woll ye let him find no place to call them unto? Truly he is not wont
to appoynte one of his own Cities, a place to keep the council in. No, the
good man is so faythefull and frendely toward other, that seldom he desires
princes to be his gestis. And admit he should call us to one of his cities,
should we safely walk within the walls of such our enmies town? were if mete
for us there to dyscusse controuersyes of Relygyon, or to keep us out of our
enemies trappes? meet to study for the defense of such doctrine as we
profess, or rather how we might in such a thronge of perils be in
sauegarde of our life? Well, in this one act the bishop of Rome has
declared, that he has none auctorytye upon places in other men's domynyons,
and therefore if he promise a Councille in any of those, he promyseth that that
is in other man to perform, and so may he deceive us again. Now if he call
us to one of his own towns, we be afraid to be at such an hosts table. we
say, better to rise a hungered, then to goo thense with our bellyes fulle. But
they say, the place is found, we need no more seek where the Council shall
be kept. As who says, that, that chanced at Mantua, may not also chance
at Vyncence. And as though it were very like, that the Venecians, men of
such wisdom, should not both foresee, and fear also that, that the wise
Duke of Mantua seemed to fear. Certes, when we think upon the state, that
the Venecians be in now, hit seems no very lykely thing, that they woll
either leave Vincence, their City, to so many nations, without some great
garrison of souldyers, or else that they being else where, so sore charged
allredy, will now norysshe an army there. And if they would, does not Paulus
him self grant, that it should be an evil presydent, and an evil exaumple,
to have an armed Councille? How so ever it shall be, we most heartily desire
you, that ye woll vouchesafe, to read those things, that we wrote this last
year touching the Mantuan Councille. For we nothing doubt, but you, of your
equytye, will stand on our side against their subtyltye and frauds, and
judge (except we be deceived) that we in this business, neither gave so much
to our affectyons, neither without great and most just causes, refused
their Councilles, their Censures, and Decrees. Whyther these our wrytynges
please all men, or no, we think, we ought not to pass much. No, if that,
that indifferentely is written of us, may please indifferente reders, our
defyre is accomplysshed. The false and mystakyng of things, by men parcyall,
shall move us nothing, orelles very little. If we have said aughte against
the deceytes of the Bishop of Rome, that may seem spoken to sharply, We
pray you, impute it to the hatredde we bare unto vices, and not to any evil
will that we bare him. No, that he, and all his, may perceive, that we are
rather at strife with his vices, than with him, and his: our prayer is, both
that it may please god, at the last to open their eyes, to make soft their
hard hearts, and that they ones may with us (their own glory set aparte)
study to set forth the everlasting glory, of the everlasting God.

Thus mighty Emperor Fare ye most heartily well, and ye Christen Princes,
the pylors and stay of Christendom, Fare ye heartily well. Also all ye, what
people so ever ye are, which do desire, that the Gospel and glory of Christ
may florysshe, Fare ye heartily well.

Given at London out of our Palace at Westmynster, the eyghte of Apryll, the
nine and twentye year of our reygne.
LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI REGH IMPRESSORIS. EXCVS. ANNO.
M.D.XXXVIII.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


