AN EDICT OR STATVTE lately set forth by the French King, concerning the
prohibition and punishment of single and private Combats.

Published there in the Parliament, June 27. 1609.

And first printed at Poictiers by John of Marneff the Kings Printer, 1609.
with his Majesty's Privilege or License.

Newly translated out of French.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by William Hall for Richard Boil, and are to be sold at his
shop in the Blackfriars. 1609.

HENRY by the grace of God King of FRANCE and NAVARRE:
To all his Subjects greeting.
The Kings our predecessors, and We, have made diverse Ordinances and Statutes
for the restraining and abolishing of the too common and familiar use of duels
and single combats in this our kingdom. Moved, as most Christian Kings, with
our duty, and the discharge of our consciences toward God: and as loving and
gentle Fathers, with the general safety and welfare of all our Subjects: as
likewise with the care We have of the preservation of our Soraigne authority,
greatly offended and endammaged by the disordered and too much unbridled
license of those aforesaid combats. To this end have We, by our Edict, dated in
April the year of our Lord 1602. and made by the consent and advice of all the
Princes of our blood, the Officers of our Crown, and others of our Counsel
which were then about Us, declared all such, as under a pretense of drawing
satisfaction from any man for a pretended wrong, shall either challenge, or
cause him to be challenged, guilty of high treason, and withal ordained they
shall be punished accordingly: as likewise such as shall answer any such
challenge, or assist and second such as do. With express prohibitions to all
our Officers, of what place and quality soever, not to dispense with such as
are guilty of the pain prescribed by the laws of our kingdom against the
Criminals of interessed Majesty, or high treason, nor to moderate the same
upon any consideration. Hoping that the grieuousnesse and terror of the said
pain will be a means to repress the liberty and detestable custom of those
aforesaid combats. But so far are We from obtaining what We so laudably
desire, that, to our great grief, and the no less contempt of Gods
Commandments and our own, these single duels or combats have since been
far more frequent then before. Which we have observed principally to proceed
from a false, erroneous and long conceived opinion, too deeply rooted in the
hearts of our Nobility, who have always had their honor in greater
estimation then their lives, That they ought not to dema^d or seek for any
satisfaction of received wrongs, but only by arms, without disparaging their
reputation, and incurring some note of cowardly baseness, but specially in
those cases, which they imagine cannot be sufficiently repaired but by arms.
Notwithstanding that We, to free them from this scruple and pretext, have by
our foresaid Edict been willing to charge our selves with whatsoever might be
objected in this regard against those that should submit and range themselves
to the obedience and observance thereof. Moreover, many as malicious as rash,
not well informed of what heavy censure and judgment We do esteem such
actions worthy, do often times on set purpose engage and precipitate
themselves thereinto, to the no less endangering of their souls, then of
their bodies, thinking to increase hereby their reputation, and to get the
start and advantage of others. Howbeit, in effect they be directly contrary
to true and solid honor, no way beseeming a true Christian, and altogether
displeasing unto Us. So that from Us they are to hope hereby for so little
favor, that We detest the use of the^, as We do those that practice them, as a
more then brutish madness. Being willing therefore now lastly to make clear
and manifest the false conceit of those that build such opinions upon so
dangerous and deceitful foundations; and by the same means provide (as much as
in Us lies) for the disastrous inconveniences which are daily bred of the
boundless ouerflow of this above said liberty: as experience teaches Us,
that sometimes it is necessary, for the better welfare of the Commonwealth,
to alter and change the laws, and to accommodate them to such accidents as
newly happen, to make them the more profitable: We likewise have thought it
requisite, by the advice of the said Princes of our blood, Officers of our
Crown, and other great and honorable persons near unto us, who by our
express command have often assembled themselves together about this subject,
to add to those preceding Statutes and Decrees made by our Predecessors, and
by Us, against the said combats (without reuoking or disanulling them in any
thing) this present Ordinance. Which We will and command to be kept, and
inuiolably observed of all sorts of persons, of what estate or condition soever
they be. Giving them all express prohibitions to this end: As likewise to the
Queen our dear and best beloved Associate, and to all the said Princes of our
blood, other Princes, and to our principal and special Officers and Servants,
not to make any petition, request, or supplication unto us contrary heereunto,
upon pain of our displeasure. Protesting and swearing by the living God, never
to grant any grace or pardon, that may derogate from this present Ordinance,
nor ever to dispense with any man from the pains and punishments thereby
prescribed, in favor or consideration of any whosoever, nor for any cause,
pretenses, or respects, that may be taken, propounded, and alleged, whatsoever.

IFirst of all, We enioine all our foresaid Subjects, of what estate or
condition soever they be, to live hereafter in peace, unity, and concord,
without offending, wronging, contemning, or provoking one another to hatred and
enmity, upon pain of incurring our indignation, and suffering withal some
exemplary punishment.

IIWee command that they honor and respect such persons as by birth, and by
reason of those offices and dignities wherewith our self have furnished them,
deserve to be distinguished from other, as We understand they are: and that
such as shall fail in this their duty and respect, be punished according to
the quality of the person whom they have offended.

IIIThe said persons of quality shall likewise abstain from offending others,
whereby to compel them to loose the respect which is due unto them. And where
they shall so do, shall be bound to satisfy as shall be appointed.

IVAll differences that shall happen amongst our subjects, and whereof the
examination and decision may and ought to be performed by justice, shall be
ended and voided by the ordinary courses of law established in our kingdom.
And We forbid the parties to frame any quarrel thereon, upon pain to him that
shall attempt it, of the utter loss of the thing in question, which now from
this present we will adiudge to his adverse party.

VAnd forasmuch as through the indiscretion and malice of some, others
sometimes endure such grievous outrages, that they think it impossible to draw
any amends from them which may satisfy them in their honor, but by way of
arms; which being interdicted and forbidden by our said Edicts, they either
seek it themselves, or practice it by their friends, and exercise it daily,
to the great contempt of our Laws and our Authority, from whence those
disorders, and so frequent murders, which at this present we will repress,
do arise; We have judged it necessary, for the preventing of more perilous
accidents, to permit, as by these presents We permit all and every person, that
shall think himself offended by another in his honor and reputation, to
complain to Us, or to our dear and best beloved cosins, the Constable and
Marshals of France, and to demand either of Us, or them, the Combat; which
shall be granted them by Us, according as We shall think it expedient for
their honor.

VISuch as are in our Provinces, may address themselves to the Governors of
them, and in their absence, to our Lieutenants General; and in default of
them, to the Governors or Lieutenants General of the Provinces next
adioining, to show their grieuances to them, and to demand of them the said
Combat. Which Governors or Lieutenants General shall decide the said
differences, if it may be done. And if they be of that nature, that they
cannot be ended but by Combat, they shall give us notice of it, that they may
receive and cause to be put in execution our commandment thereupon.

VIIThe party offending shall be bound to appear before Us, or the said
Constable and Marshals of France, as before the said Governors or Lieutenants
General in form above said, when he shall be called either by Us or them,
when our command or theirs shall have been signified either to himself in
person, or at his house two several times, with the complaint of the party
grieved: And the request of the combat which he shall have made; whereto if
he be wanting, it shall be then reiourned for three days. And not appearing,
he shall be suspended for his disobedience from his honor, be made incapable of
bearing any arms, and turned over to the Judges of our Courts of Parliament,
every one according to his abode, to be punished as refractarie to our
ordinances and decrees. Which Courts We enioine to do their duty herein.

VIIIIf one of the said parties have just occasion to refuse the foresaid
Judges, to whom they are appointed to present their complaints, he shall have
recourse to Us, and We will see to it. But if the causes of such refusal be
found light and frivolous, and unworthy in some sort to be accepted, he shall
be turned over with blame to the said Judges, who shall dispose of it as they
think best.

IXHee that shall ask the combat, and be judged not receiueable, as having
taken offense too lightly, and upon small occasion, shall be sent back with
shame.

XThe Attemptor that shall have offered wrong unto another, so as to prejudice
his honor, shall be deprived for the space of six years, of all such Charges,
Honors, Titles, Offices, Dignities, and Pensions, as he is possessed with, and
not be reestablished in them during the said time, nor after, unless he shall
have asked pardon of Us, and satisfied the party in such manner as shall have
been determined, and withal received from Us new orders, and declaration of
our will for his reentring into the said Charges.

XIHe that shall have no Office, Charge, Dignity, or Pension, shall lose the
third part of the annual revenue of all such goods as he enioieth. Which
thirds shall be levied by way of preference to all charges, debts, and
obligations whatsoever, and employed to such use as We shall afterward
declare. And he whose said thirds shall amount to less then two hundred
pounds, or that shall have none at all, shall be kept in prison the space of
two whole years, wheresoever We shall appoint.

XIIWhosoeuer shall challenge any man the field in the behalf of another, or
certify the challenge, or be the bearer of any dishonorable speech, shall
for ever be degraded from his gentry, deprived of arms, be kept in
perpetual prison, or be punished with some infamous death, according as shall
by Us or by the foresaid Judges be ordained. Besides, he shall forfet for ever
the half of his goods, as well mooueable as immooueable.

XIIIHe that esteeming himself offended, shall challenge the combat for
himself, not having formerly demanded leave, as is here enioined him, shall
be deprived from ever being able to make his party good by arms with any man,
as likewise from obtaining any satisfaction or amends for whatsoever injury he
shall pretend to have received. And if he that shall have been challenged by
him, shall give Us, or our foresaid Cosins, the Constable and Marshals of
France, or at least the said Governors and our Lieutenants General, notice
thereof as We appoint the^ to do, the Charge, Office, or Pension, which the said
challenger enioieth, shall be given, as from henceforth We ordain, to the
party challenged, if he be a man of quality, and fit to hold the said
Charges: but if he that is challenged, repair to the place appointed, or does
any thing tending to this end, without giving notice as aforesaid, he shall
undergo the same punishments with the party challenging, and We will then
dispose of the Charges, Offices, and Pensions of either party as shall seem
best unto Us.

XIVIf contrary to the prohibitions expressed in this our present
Proclamation, it falls out, that any fight, and kill another, he that shall
have killed, shall undergo the pain of death, declared by all our Ordinances.
And till such time as he be apprehended, he shall be deprived of those Charges,
Dignities, and Pensions, which are in his possession. Moreover, the half of
the revenue of all his goods shall for ten years space be employed to such
ends and purposes as We shall ordain hereafter, without any satisfaction
notwithstanding to the heirs of the party that is slain, because he
disobeied this our present Edict. And if both the parties die in the said
combat, their bodies shall be deprived of burial, and the thirds of their
goods in fee simple be employed to that same end as shall be said. And if
they have no goods, their children shall be declared ignobles, and taxable for
ten years. And in case they were before taxable, shall be proclaimed to be
unworthy of ever being noble, or holding any Charge, Dignity, or Office Royal.

XVSuch as shall have assisted the said Combattants, if once they have had
weapons in hand, shall lose both life and goods, according to our former
Edicts. And if they have been but only lookers on, yet went thither to that
end and purpose, they shall be degraded from arms, and for ever be deprived
of those Charges, Dignities, and Pensions, which they enjoy. And if it happened
by chance that they were there, and nevertheless did not endeavor to part the
said Combattants, and to hinder them from the deed, they shall be suspended
from the performance and possession of the said Charges, Offices, and Pensions
for six years, and shall not after the said term of time be restored unto
them, till such time as they have asked pardon of Us, and procured new decrees
and orders from Us.

XVIThose that of themselves shall fight in single combat, shall incur the
pain of death, or perpetual imprisonment, with the loss of half their
goods: and till such time as they be apprehended, shall be degraded from their
Gentry, and deprived, during their life, of all their goods.

XVIIIf the offenses be committed in places of respect, besides the pains and
penalties here above mentioned, from which We protest never to exempt any man;
such as shall commit them, shall be subject to the sharpest and seuerest
punishment contained in the laws and ordinances, as well ancient as modern,
of our kingdom.

XVIIIAll Laws, how good and holy soever, are nevertheless defective, and
more hurtful often times then profitable to the Commonwealth, as likewise not
very honorable to the Lawmakers, unless they be observed and executed in
every point as they ought to be. Hence is it that We expressly inioine and
command our said cosins the Constable and Marshals of France, to whom the
knowledge and decision of these contentions, quarrels, and differences that
concern the honor and reputation of our said Subjects, appertain, that they
diligently see to the observation of our present Edict, without using any
moderation, or suffering it in any sort to be counterchecked by any favor or
conniuence: Notwithstanding all Letters private and patent, and all other
Commands that may be received from Us, which We forbid them to respect, as
they desire to be pleasing and obedient heerin unto Us.

XIXWe give the like Commandment to all other Officers of our Crown, even in
regard of those that are under their charge; and to the Governors or
Lieutenants General of our said Provinces, for our Subjects that inhabit in
them, who shall repair unto them, as is permitted and ordained them by this
our present Proclamation: Reserving to our selves the liberty of adding
heereunto by way of augmenting and enlarging the penalties, that which time,
the practice and experience of such orders as in it are expressed, shall teach
Us to be necessary, That We may cause the liberty and confusion abouesaid of
these duels and single combats, utterly to cease in this our kingdom, as
things too rashly undertaken, and with presumption on our authority; and by
this means free our said Subjects from the inevitable perils of their souls,
as of their bodies and goods, into which they run headlong continually by
such means: Which We have declared, and by these Presents do declare, to be
altogether infamous and shameful, as repugnant to true honor, as those, to
which a passage by these Presents is made them, shall from henceforth be both
honorable and profitable to them.

XXAnd to the intent it may please God to bless our present intention, and to
direct and prosper it to his glory, and the safety of our said Subjects, We
have vowed, allotted, and appointed all such money as shall arise from the
pecuniary penalties, seisures, perception, and enjoying of the profits and
revenues of such as shall infringe this our said Edict, to be employed as well
for the nourishing of the poor, and for the erecting of an Hospital Royal,
which We have determined to build expressly to this end and purpose, as also
for the repairing of decayed Churches in this our kingdom, not suffering the
said sums of money to be diuerted from these uses upon pain of grievous
punishment.

In the mean time We will and command, that the said sums of money be
received by the Receiver of Gods Hospital in our good City of Paris, who shall
diligently keep it till such time as We shall otherwise dispose of it. We
also give commandment to all our trusty friends, the Judges of our Courts of
Parliament, Shiriffes, Bailiffes, and other our Justices and Officers, to whom
it appertains, That they cause the contents of these Presents to be read,
published, and enregistred, kept, and observed, and that themselves keep and
observe the same inuiolably, and without infringement: For such is our
pleasure. And to the end it may remain for ever firm and stable, We have
signed these Presents with our own hand, and caused our Seal to be put
thereto, without prejudice either to our own right, or that of other in any
thing.

Given at Fountaine-Bleau, in June, the year of grace one thousand six hundred
and nine; and of our reign the twentieth. Signed, HENRY.
And a little lower, BRVLLART.
And on the side, VISA.
And sealed with green wax, on labels of red and green silk. Read,
published, and registered, at the request of the Kings Attorney General,
without prejudice to any rights, or obligations of pretended Creditors. And
ordained that Copies compared with the original shall be sent to the
Bayli-wickes, and Counties of that Province to be read, published, and
registered. Enioynd the Substitutes of the Kings Attorney General to proceed in
the publishing, and to certify the Court of their diligence within the month.

At PARIS in Parliament, 26 June. 1609. Signed DV-TILLET.



THis required the Kings Attorney General, ordained that his Majesty's Edict
now read, should be registered in the Court Rolls, that recourse might be had
thereto when need required, and to be published with sound of trumpet through
all the streets and corners of this City, where Proclamations are accustomed to
be made, and sent with all diligence, at the charges of the Notarie, to every
particular Court, there to be likewise read, published, and registered; whereof
the Officers shall certify the Kings Attorney. It is enioined, and We enioine,
all persons of what estate and condition soever they be, to obey it, upon
pain as aforesaid.

Made this 11. of July, 1609.
THis present Proclamation has been read and published the Court being
assembled, and besides through all the streets of this Town of Poictiers, by me
Stenon Renier Sergeant Royal, having with me Peter Pareau Crier, and
Trumpetter ordinary of this City.

Made this 11. of July, 1609. Signed Renier and Pareau.



