(...) of those (...) league (...) risen up (...) arms in thi^ Realm of
France.



With Privilege.

Truly translated into English according to the French copy.

Printed at London, by John Charlewood, dwelling in Barbican at the sign of
the half Eagle and the Key, 1585.

LOo Rey and Prince Soubiran de Bearn a permetut, and permet a Loys Rabier
Imprimador de son Vniuersitat d'Ortes de imprimar, been, and exposar La
declaration que sa Maiestat a enbiada au Rey de Francia, contre las calumnias
d'cus de la Ligua, ensems la lettraque sadicta Mastat escriu audict Segnor Rey
de Fra^cia, com plus plaaes contengut en las letras de pribilegi ottrogeadas
audict Loys Rabier per sadicta Maiestat dadas a Bargerac, loo xi. de Iuin 1585.
Sageradas deu grand saged deudict Seignor Rey and Prince Soubiran, signadas de
sa maa, and co^tresignadas de Mazelieres, Raportadas au Conseil deudict Seignor
Rey per Mr. Me. Joan du Breuil Conseiller audict Conseil loo xiiij. deudictmes
de Iuin. 1585. A Pau.

The Abridgement in English of the Kings Privilege, before rehearsed in the
Bearnois tongue.
THe King and sovereign Prince of Bearne, has permitted and does permit,
Lewys Rabier, Printer of his University of Ortes, to imprint and set forth,
The declaration sent by his Majesty, to the King of France, against the
slanders of those of the League, and also the letter written by his Highness
to the said Lord the King of France, as more is contained in the Letters of
privilege, granted by his Maiestic to the said Lewis Rabier, dated at
Bergerac the xi. of June 1585. Sealed with the great Seal of the said Lord the
king and sovereign Prince: Signed with his band, and cou^tresigned, De
Mazelieres, exhibited to the Counsel of the said Lord the King, by Master Du
Breuill, Consellour in the same Counsel, the xiiij of the said Month of June.
1585. At Pau.

To the right worshipful, Sir Phillip Sidney, KNIGHT.
SIR, for as much as this Noble and most godly Christian King, by this
declaration, desires that all Christian Princes should understand what great
injury is offered to his honor, by th'enimies of the holy Church of God: I
have thought good to translate this good Prince his protestation into
the english tongue, and to present the same to your worships view: knowing that
both you and all the worthy English Knights touched with like godly zeal as
your worship is, will, with the balance of a ripe and sound judgment,
consider and favor th'equity of the cause, as it shall please the almighty to
put into your noble and generous hearts: whom I beseech so to bless and more
and more enrich and augment those gifts of grace, which he has so liberally
bestowed on you, that it may redound to his honor and glory, and to
th'euerlasting fame of your worship

Your worships most humble to command, Claudius Hollyband.

To the King.
MY sovereign Lord, your Majesty shall well perceive, how they that lately,
rose up in this Realm, have bent themselves against me in their protestations.
And in the same have gone about by all manner of slanders, to bring me in
suspicion with your Majesty, into hatred with all orders and estates, and into
the great misliking of all Princes and nations of Christendom.

Therefore, my good Lord, I thought it good to send unto your Majesty, the
declaration, written and signed with mine own hand, which shall be presented
unto you by Mounsier Cleruaut, and De Cassincourt. The which I most humbly
beseech your Ma. vouchsafe the reading from point to point, and there to set
before your eyes mine actions and demenoures passed, wherein I hold my self
assured that the upright and indifferent eye of your Majesty, shall perceive
nothing but faithfulness and integrity. The which (my sovereign Lord) has not
been either in causes or effects, more deeply or cleerelier seen by any
other, then only your Majesty. And therefore, although my principal desire
above all thing, be to yield satisfaction to your Majesty's judgment, which
I doubt not but shall be a very easy matter for me to perform: yet nevertheless
(my Lord) for that the poison of these slanders is spread throughout all the
veins of this Realm, and of all Christendom (as much as in them lies)
wherein my honor and reputation do suffer incredible damage: I am most humbly to
beseech your Majesty to show me so much fauo ur, as to think well of my
sending this present declaration, to all your Courts of Parliament, and other
the notable incorporat towns of this Realm, with whom most cheefely my
adversaries seek to stayne and diffame me. And also that it would please your
majesty to vouchsafe me this honor, to command your Ambassadors to exhibit
it to all Christian Princes your friends and allies, with those letters which
(with your Majesty's license) I purpose to write unto them. And I am certainly
persuaded, your Majesty cannot but think it a thing most strange (being so
near allied unto you as I am, and with the mind that I bear) that I pass in
silence the great blames and slanderous reproves wherewith they charge mine
honor: which I dare say cannot be spotted without some damage to your Majesty.

Wherefore in all humblenes and dutiful affection. I beseech your Majesty to
grant these my requests: And so referring the rest of my mind to the
discharge of the said Mounsier de Cleruaut, and de Cassincourt, I most humbly
beseech your Majesty to give credit unto them.

Your most humble and most obedient subject and servant. Henry.

The declaration of the king of Navarre, touching the slanders published
against him, in the protestations of them of the League, which are risen up in
this Realm.
THE King of Navarre, upon the view and consideration of the protestations, and
Declarations of those that this day trouble the estate of this Kingdom, under
the name of the holy League, wherein they would cover their wicked intent,
partly with zeal of Religion, and partly with affection and good will toward
the common wealth: But particularly take his Majesty for the party against
whom they are bent, as though be were an Heretic, a Relaps, a Persecutor of
the Church, a disturber of the estate, and a sworn enemy against the estate,
etc. has thought it, as appertaining to his duty, to give clear evidence and
manifest declaration, to all Kings, Princes, and Nations of Christendom,
against these slanders: but specially to the King his soueraigue Lord, and to
all manner of people, of what state or degree soever they be, within this
Realm, the rather, for that under his shadow, they make no conscience to
attempt against the Crown of their Prince, and bring a miserable confusion
upon his whole estate.

First therefore, touching the matter of Religion, the said Lord the king of
Navarre, protests before God (who sees the bottom of his heart, before the
King his soneraine Lord, unto whom his principal desire is to approve his
actions, before all the abouesayde Princes and Nations, to whose testimony and
judgment he willingly yeldeth himself) that he hops not for any salvation,
otherwise then in the Christian faith and Religion, which he embraces with
all hearty affection, and for an infallible rule thereof, he receaueth the
word contained in the old and new Testament, which it has pleased GOD to
preserve in this darkness, for the light and direction of his Church: that he
believes one Catholic and Apostelike Church, for the preferuation and
continual endewing whereof with all manner of graces, be daily prays unto to
God, and would think himself most happy to shed his blood in the defense
thereof against the Infidelles: That he believes the Creedes or abridgements
of the Christian faith, which have been set down by the same Catholic and
Apostlike Church, to serve as marks or cognisances, whereby the Christians and
Rightbeleeuers may be discerned from such as think amiss of the faith, and
from heretics: And also be embraces the most ancient, famous, and lawful
Counsels, that have been holden against them. He rejects and detesteth with
all his heart, all doctrines by them condemned, and for the reverence he bears
to the Church, yea, and will be always ready to yield to her judgment, and stand
to her decree, when she shall be orderly assembled in a lawful and holy
counsel.

As touching the matter in controversy, whereof in these days there is
question in the church: The said Lord the King of Navarre desires, that
consideration may be had, that he is not the only man; nor the first, that
has complained of the abuses brought into the church, and desired reformation
of the same: And therefore it should be too hard, that this most true
Christian desire, to see the Church reformed, should be imputed unto him as
heresy, or enimitie against the same: In that for the space of five hundred
years and above, it has been a common complaint of all Princes, of all
learned men, and of all holy personnages, that the Church through all this
long tract of time, has lost much of her first purity and sincerity, for
she being thus compounded of men, who without doubt, ever with themselves
added and brought some what of their own inventions unto her. So that it has
been the voice of all Councelles (without exception of any) which have been
holden within the compass of the time aforesaid that the Church had great
need of reformation, which in every age has been long desired, yea, and
vehemently sighed for, by all the best sort of men, out of whose mouths this
sentence would never else have proceeded: to wit, that whosoever should
affirm the Church to have need of purging, ought to be taken for an heretic,
and enemy of the same, That the most Christian Kings well perceauing the same,
have often for the like effect thought it to appertain to their office, and
toward the discharge of their consciences, to exhort the Pope and Christian
Princes to a general Council, which in the Popes default, and in case he
winked at the matter, they could very well take upon them to call together by
their own authority, from whence have proceeded under their own names, most
laudable ordynaunces, for the reformation of the french Church. So that, in the
end after long complaint of many ages, when they, to whom the matter seemed
to appertain, would not take in hand, but rather (as all men know) employed
themselves in the affairs of the world, it came to pass, that many Princes,
Peoples, and estates, with great care weying and considering the reasons
alleged unto them, and seeing the defense and maintenance of the same, by the
great constancy of infinite Parsons of all degrees, in most grievous torments,
even unto th'extremitie of death: did remit the said reformation to a lawful
Council, and upon refusal of the same, did protest against the abuses, which
they pretented to be in the Church: and thereunto did lay their own helping
hand to redress the same: from whence sprang the Schism, which the said
Lord the King of Navarre does now bewail to see in the Christian Church, and
against the which it was not impossible in so long time to find remedy, if the
honor of God, and the salvation of men had touched us as near, as our own
glory or particular profit.

The said King of Navarre, in regard of him self, says, that he was not only
borne during this unhappy Schism, that thus has happened in the Christian
Church, (the continuance whereof, he judges, ought to be imputed to such, as
sought not means to reunite the Church as they ought to have done) but also
that he was brought up in France, while th'exercise of both the Religions was
permitted by the King, in the general estates of his Realm, and after
confirmed by many of his Majesty's Edictes: besides, he was nourished and
instructed in his tender years in this belief, that there were great abuses in
the doctrine of the Romish Church, which (...) great need of reformation: And
after that he was confirmed in the same, all ^ell by the conference of many
lenthed me; as all so by reading the holy Scriptures. So that he believes in
his hart^ ^^eely cof^^eth with his mouth, that he is verily per^^aded that the
truth is on his side: Which has been an occasion of his falling, into very
many dangers and losses, rather then to (...) the same. By which occasion also
(to his great grief) he never hand the mean to do such services, neither to
be partalier of the good grace and favor of his sovereign Lord and Prince,
as otherwise without doubt, he might have done, if he could (with a safe
conscience) have framed himself so that profession, which his Ma^essle
follows. Yet (notwithstanding) to give knowledge to all men, that whatsoever
he has done in that respect, was not of obstinacy, but of constancy,
neither by ambition, but for the only desire of his salvation: he most humbly
bes^cheth his Majesty, to cause a free and lawful council to be helden,
according to the promises always made by his edicts. The said King of Navarre,
being always ready to receive instruction from the same, and to rule his
belief according to that which there shall be discided, concerning the
controversies in religion.

As for the counsel of Trent, it is not to be obeyed. For although the
continuance thereof was prosecuted by the late king Charles, and in the end
obtained at the hands of Pope Paulus the third, and after the proclayming
thereof, Ambassadores were sent from his majesty to the same counsel with
Christian and Catholic instructions, agreeable to the holy decres of the
romish church, and approved by the College, of Sorbonne, and the Doctors of the
same, sent to the said counsel with the said Ambassadors: Yet not withstanding
all their diligence used toward the Cardinales, Legates, and presidentes in the
said Counsel, by the space of eighteen Months and above, it was not
possible to obtain any thing conformable to the said instructions, nor to
reform the ecclesiastical order according to the same. When his majesty was
advertised thereof, and well perceiving the harms that might grow thereby: he
gave commandment to his Ambassadores, to protest against the said Counsel,
and after their protestation made, to come home from thence, and so they did
accordingly. And albeit great suite and entreaty was made unto them, by the
Pope and the said Cardinales, and the deceased Cardinal of Loraine, to return
to the said counsel, and stay there till the end of the same: yet they would
never yield so to do. So that the same counsel was continued, ended, and
concluded without them, and without their signet, according to the custom of
all times. Whereby also it came to pass, that for any instant pursuit that was
made, for the receiving and publishyng of the same counsel, in the Court of
Parliament at Paris, the said Court, the Chambers being assembled, has always
withstoode it, and that in the year threescore and twelve, after
Bartholmeweday, when the same seemed greatly to favor their suite.

Therefore the said King of Navarre thinks, that men of upright judgment,
cannot account him either an heretic or an obstinate person, considering the
matter is yet vndiscided and in respect he submits him self to the trial
of a counsel, neither can they judge him contentious or vmust, that will
yield to the decree of a Parliament, whatsoever the advocate or counselor ^vn
the one party can cavil to the contrary, ne yet deem him for a schismatique
or stubbourne offender, seeing he yields this obedience and reverence to the
assembly of the estates, to be ready to make his appearaunce there both to
yield a reason of his oppinion there, and likewise to learn there, yea and to
change to better, when better shall be taught him. On the contrary side he
complayneth, that hitherto for the space of many years, he has seen these
zealous persons assembled to destroy him, but not to instruct him. He
complayneth of a process: beginning with execution, of a teaching, begun
with excommunication, without any kind of formalitie that either is requisite,
or may be allowed to proceed. Protesting before al Princes and estates, and
above all others, before the King his Sovereign Lord, to whom he makes his
recourse for justice, and before the estate of this kingdom, unto whom he
intends to represent his actions, against the aucthors and fauters of this
league, of so manifest violence, precipitation, and injustice.

The said King of Navarre also affirms, that the name and blame of a relaps
or a backslider, cannot rightly be applied unto him, by virtue whereof, (though
by a counsel he should yield to change his opinion) their pretense is to
deprive him from the succession of the Crown, whereon God grant they think
as little as he. And thereby he refers the cause to all men's upright
consideration, to think with what charity his adversaries proceed herein.
And whereunto their devise may tend, to cut from him (as much as lies in their
power) the desire to procure his instruction in a counfell, without entering
into the depth that might overthrow it, both by Cannons, and examples. In
their language, they call them Relapses or backsliders, that have been
heretics and abiured there heresies, and yet nevertheless after wards fall
into the same again. Therefore forasmuch as the King of Navarre (as here above
appears) has not by the Cannons been an heretic: it is most clear that he
cannot be a relaps. He further affirms, that though he had been, or should
be an heretic, yet could he not be a relaps, considering he was never
converted from the pretended heresy, and considering also, that no one ever
thought to take any pain, or seek means how to persuade or convert him, but
these zealous fellows have shot at no other mark, with all their driftes and
endeavors, then to overthrow and destroy him.

They allege here, that the said Lord the King of Navarre, after Bartholmewe
day, sent to the Pope, and yielded to go to mass, Setting age asid, every man
knows what kind of conversion this was, and whether he had just cause of
scare or not, longer refutation would be frivolous. The truth is, if, by all
laws, our actions are accounted of no force, when they proceed through fear
or force: it is most certain, that never had action less will, neither ever
had any action more force. The truth is also, that he had not so soon
recovered his will, but he caused she same to appear by public profession,
what it was, and that in the midst of the Catholics which were in his
cempanie, and seemed to possess him at that time: without either dissimulation
or subtillie, whereby his error might appear to be altogether far from
hippocrfle.

The said Lord the King of Navarre most humbly beseeches the King his Lord,
that it would please him to take in good part, his modest answer also, to
that blame which they lay to his charge, that he is a persecuter of the
Catholic Church. And touching this point, he cites the consciences of his
greatest enemies to answer before God, whether this title in any respect can
appertain unto him. Let every man here consider, that the civil wars sell in
the tender years of the said King of Navarre, and whether there be any
likelihood, that he enterprised war with a joyful heart persecute the
Catholics, every man knowing their number, authority, and force in this
kingdom, to be wholly without and free from persecution: Who under the kings
only name were in safety, in regard of the said King of Navarre, and of all
that depends on him, from all attemptes, enterprises and injuries whatsoever.
Verily there have been rigours and persecutions heard, and spoken of in France,
within the space of certain years passed: But no man at any time interpreted
them other wise then passiuelie, in regard of them of the religion, and aniuely
in regard of others. And to use any word to the contrary, would be so vnantly
spoken, that no man would understand it.

It pleased King Charles, to cause the said King of Navarre repair to his
Coart, and to honor him with Marriage of his sister. He came thither in the
religion wherein he was brought up: ^ut that which followed may better be
shaddowed with silence, then to be now again fresh repeated. When he departed
from thence, he went back into his own Countries. When peace was made with my
Lord that is deceased, the said King of Navarre used not so much as one word
by way of request, for any thing concerning him self, neither is there any one
article to be read therein that touches him. And yet without doubt he had
greater occasion then any other, either to bear some stomach for matters
passed, or to be as it were recompensed for the losses he suffered. How^eit the
said King of Navarre would not, for his own particular occasion, hinder the
peace and tranquillity of this Realm, and the succor and comfort of the
people, so much as the space of one only day. Yet it is well known, that if
he had been so minded; it lay in his hands at that time, to have served his
own turn with the army, of the Rutters, who every hour were ready (for
default of their pay at the Kings hands, according to the articles of the
peace) to enter into a mutiny, and turn their heads toward Paris.

Contrariwise, then was the time wherein the heads and masters of this league
(abusing his clemency and goodness) devised this pretended holy league, against
the kings edict then newly proclaimed, whereby in express words, they
swoore the utter destruction of them of the religion, without any exception or
acception of persons, and without respect or regard of alliance, affinity,
consanguinitie, kindred, or brotherhood. Such as entered thereinto, without
looking into the depth of the matter, drew themselves out as soon as they
knew it. And a^ concerning the said King of Navarre, then wore the
instructions discovered, which as this day are put in execution, concluding his
death and also the death of my Lord the prince his Cousin, and all their blood,
Note of David the advocate.
for the preparing of a more easy way to the adversaries, (as is expressly
set down) to the invasion of this kingdom. Here let all men indge, who at
that time was the agent, or pacient, the persecuter, or the persecuted.

Thence issued the civil wars of the year one M. flue hundred and seaue^ty
seanen, when they had induced the asse^blie of Bloys, to the execution of their
devise: it had been altogether against nature, if the said King of Navarre,
or they that are of his profession, had not made resistaunce against the same.
For thereby a snare was laid for his person and life: his conscience and honor
were laid for by the same, and the kingdom or royal estate, (as now
manifestly appears) was in danger. The great inconvenience and perrill,
which the king perceived not, did then but begin to bud forth, insomuch, that
his majesty could not imagine any such thing toward them, who held all their
prosperity of him. But the King of Navarre well foresawe it: yea contrariwise,
the defaulte of resisting the same, would have been the betraying of
himself, the destruction of this estate, and the submission of himself to
their desires, in steed of setting himself against the same.

In the mean space, though the cruel clauses of the conspiracy were very
suffcient, immediately to turn his patience into fury, and the natural mildnes
and mercy of them that issue of his house, into revenge: although also he saw
the professors of his religion, to run to him from all parts, being
rigorously persecuted, or put to their choice to depart the Realm, or recant
their religion. Yet nevertheless, the said Lord the King of Navarre, in the
Towns under his power, would not use the like manner of dealing toward the
Catholics, nor against the Monks and Clergiemen, which indeed might be
suspected, and disfauoure the execution of his affairs. On the contrary side,
they of Again well know (which example he alleges, for that there was the
place of his resident, having a byshopricke in it, and being a town of some
fame) that the Catholics there suffered no hard dealing in their persons or
goods, nor discontinuaunce in the matter of their religion. That the Clergy
applied their accustomed services. That the Monks preached freely in the
greatest heat of the said troubles. That be was content the professors of his
religion should make their sermons in private and borrowed houses, to the end,
the professors of the Romish religion shoulds not in any wise be troubled. That
for the furnishing of necessaries for his defense, he took not above the
tenthes which the King was wont to levy upon the clergy. At what time all his
patrimony was seasd and taken out of his hands in all places: whereof my Lord
the Duke of Montpencido may be witness, a prince most affectioned to the Romish
religion, as all men very well know. And also Mounsier the Marshall of Biron,
my L. the Archbishop of Vienna, Mounsir de Villeroy, secretary of estate to his
Majesty, and many others, that were beholders of it upon the places, can give
testimony of the same.

As soon as liberty of conscience was granted, albeit with very great
restraint in comparison of the former edict, he vnarmde him self without
delay, though (as his Majesty best of all others knows) he could have
continued the wars with greater power and means, by reason of the notable
aid which he had procured from the Princes of his religion, being so far
forward, that a strong Army of strangers was at the point of entering into
this kingdom: thinking himself happy to have dispatched the same away, in
sort, that ye poor people by occasion thereof might suffer no farther
inconvenience: choosing rather by succouring them, to impair his own
condition, then to better it with their hinderaunce. Wherefore the said Lord
ye King of Navarre, prays all men freely to speak their minds, whether he
has in any respect by his demencures, descrued the name of a persecutor, which
his enemies attribute unto him, that would not take this resolution, to suffer
them go forward with the execution of their barbarous persecutions and
bloody devises, against him at the first show, but consequently against ye
Kings Majesty and his royal estate.

In those Countries where the said King of Navarre, by the grace of God, has
soucraigne power and authority, he thinks also to have as little deserved
this blame in the judgment of them yt have well known the nature of matters,
and the order of his proceedinges: And in all that remains to him of the
kingdom of Navarre, where at his coming to his dignity, he found the
exercise of the Catholic Romish religion, it is most certain, that he has
neither altered nor innouated any thing therein, in so much that the service of
the same is there still used at this day, without any exercise of the reformed
religion, saving in two places only.

And as touching his country of Bearne, which is no great land, the Queen his
mother in a general assembly of the estates, did there establish the said
religion, whereof her self made profession, and no complaynt of the chaung of
religion followed thereuppon to the said estates, in the space of many years
after it had continued in the same estate, as he has alredie freely declared,
having always been of this opinion, that a discreet and well counseiled
Prince, without great necessity or evident profit, ought not to bring any
change into his estate. And though commodity or necessity should require
the same, yet it were expedient that it should be accomplished by the like
way, whereby the constitution was before made.

Now he had well perceived, that after Bartholmew day, when him self, by
force and violence, had yielded in the cause of religion, and sent Monsir de
Mieussent for governor and Liuetenant general, into his said Country of
Bearne (whom all men know to be a Catholic) with express commission there
to set up again, the Catholic Romish religion: Yet notwithstanding the
great despair that then was of the affairs of religion in France,
notwithstanding the contrary profession of him self, which might serve for an
example to his subjects, and notwithstanding the authority of a governor by
him expressly sent, they did all resolve to persevere in their religion, and
maintain the form of their estate, without receiving the said alteration in
religion.

Wherefore the said King of Navarre, thought and let al men indge whether
without good reason or not) that it was a firm and well grounded resolution of
his estats, forasmuch as necessity, yea and that such necessity, as gives law
to al laws, was not in any wise able to remove them from it. Also it is most
true, that in the assemblies of the estaes which are from year too year
holden in his said country of Bearne, there never appeared any man that
required this change of religion, though, (as it is well known, there is such
liberty used in those assemblies, that the least grief pretended to have been
rereiued from the Prince, may be propounded with request of reformation and
recompense, whereby it appears to be before any practice, of the enufers of
the tranquillity of his subjects, and not an in ward desire of them. And yet
for all that, the said Lord the king of Navarre has not ceased, to make
continual payment of the pentions of the Prelates, and other Ecclesiastical
persons of his said country, (for proof whereof, he will bring forth no other
witnesses but them selves) and that most often with his own proper money, as
the bishops of Acques and Oleron, and others well know. And that more is, of
his own m^ere motion, for the contentation of such^ of his subjects, as might
continue in the Catholic Romish religion, he moderated touching the cause of
Religion, the ordenaunces of the Queen his mother ^^ceased, which were but
very small amercen^entes in money. So far of was it ever in those parties from
such proceeding against the Catholics, by banishment, corporal ^^nishment,
death, burnings, torments, searching and sifting, as they that in these bays
call themselves the protectors of the Catholic Romish religion; have
counseled, practiced, and brought in, against the professors of the contrary
religion. And hereof the Catholics of Bearne are witnesses, who there live,
in all peace and tranquillity. Of whom, many do exercise notable offices,
either in the same Country, or near about the person of the said King of
Navarre, and and has the cheifest charge in his gards, and be Captains of
his best houses, which it is not likely that he would ever allow, or consent
unto, if he had used any evil dealing toward them, or if he kept any grudge in
his heart, to be executed against them hereafter.

By the premises, it is sufficiently answered to their affirmation, whereby
they pretend him to be the sworn enemy of the Catholics. Yet nevertheless,
the said Lord the King of Navarre, desirous to open his heart to all the world,
will not stick, to lay open unto them, his affections, and actions. Wherefore
the said King of Navarre declares, that he^ acknowledges and believes, and
has always believed and acknowleged, that in case the foundation of a good
conscience be laid thereon, the diversity of religion, is no empechement to a
good Prince, to draw very good service indifferently from his subjects, nor
any hinderaunce to the subjects, to yield their allegiance and bounden duties
in all manner of respects, as well to their superiors as to their Princes,
forasmuch as it is evident, that both the religions, equally according to the
word of God, do recommend the duty of the subject toward his Prince, and
of the inferior toward his superior. And therefore the said Lord the King of
Navarre, has always noted this, that he has been as faithfully served by
the one, as the other: As for example, in the destribution of the offices of
his house, all men know well enough, he has indifferently furnished them with
both sorts of men. Also the said Lord, the King of Navarre, knows himself
to be well beloved, and faithfully served by Catholic Gentlemen, and other
persons of all degrees, wheme he has accepted into his service, as on their
behalfes, they will all volutarily acknowledge themselves to be loved by him.
without acception of religion, and that according to the proportion of his
ability, he has bestowed goods and honors upon them, as largely, and more
abundantly, yea in the very time of wars, then he did to the professors of
his own religion. And further, it is not unknown to the Lords, Gentlemen, and
all other Catholics, that during the time of the troubles, he spared them as
much as he could in their goods and houses, never suffering any rigor of
war to be used to them, no not so much as against his own Vassalles that
rose in Arms against him, and were present at the destroying of his proper
houses, who notwithstanding, after the wars were ended, making their repair
unto him, were all welcome to his presence, and never received for their
disloyal doings so much as an evil word, or angry countenance at his hands.
So far of has he been from practicing against the^ directly, or indirectly,
according to the sundry means, which the Lord has over his Vassal, any kind
of stomach or reuengement. Thus much also dare the King of Navarre promise of
his actions, that so many of ye Catholics as vouchsafed to approach to him,
departed again with good contentation, without observing any thing in him,
whereby they could presnnre other wise, then that he bare a natural
affection, to embrace all the Kings subjects and servants, of what soever
religion they be: promising in like sort on their behalf, the like good will
that they have always showed toward his.

The sayve King of Navarre thinks that the effects above specified, which he
has hither to continued, are of sufficient weight to confute the allegations
proclaimed against him by his enemies. Yet nevertheless, have they affirmed,
that the said Lord, the King of Navarre has sent into England and Germany, to
conclude a league, to the destruction and confusion of the Catholics, for
that (as they allevge) he foresawe the Kings death, and meant whenever the
same should happen, to be in a readiness to change religion etc. to invade
the possessions of the Clergy, and confiscate them of the Novititie, which
would not join themselves as adherents to his in^ention. Upon the which
matter, they have dispersed in all places, yea and caused to be read in
Sermons in the open Pulpitte, a certain concord or agreement of the year a
thousand, syue hundred and eighty four, pretending the same to bear date the
fourteenth of December: as resulting of an assembly holden (as they allege) at
ye instance of the said king of Navarre at Magdebourgh, and that like wise, at
an assembly holden at Montanban, he had promised and sworn (whenever ye
kings death should chance) to abolish the Catholic Romish religion, stripping
her of all her goods (...) possessions, and to deprive the professors thereof
from all estates and dignities.

Here shall evidently appear, how easily every slander, naturally shall open
and confute her self.

First therefore the said king of Navarre, protests in his conscience before
God, that with all his heart, he desires and wishes prosperous and long life,
to the King his sovereign Lord, and never entered into any conceit or opinion,
to build any devise or purpose either upon his death or after. Which be
thinks were not only offenses of high treason, that could not otherwise
proceed, then from a dis^oyall and miserable des^re of the death of his
Prince, which would be pursued with all speedy effect, if power served
thereto. But also an offense, (in all respects,) against nature and common
sense, for as much as his majesty, thanks be to God, is in ye chief strength
and time of his age, and full of health, and further, so small difference
between both their ages, that it were a ridiculous matter, in respect of the
difference of two years or there aboutes, to take such advantage one over
the other. So far has the said king of Navarre always been from conceyuing
any imagination (as the heads of the league have done) to condemn the king as
ready to die, by foreseeing the consequentes of his death, or forty years (as
the said king of Navarre hops) before any need require, and that under
color of providing for the affairs of the Realm, although in the mean
space they cast the same into most lamentable confusion.

So far also has he ever been from making open declarations, touching the
pronouncing and foreiudging of the (...) and Queen his wife, to be barraine in
the flower and best strength of their age, (as the said confederates have done)
being a thing never practiced before in the estates of christiendome, and a
thing also which the estates of England, would not require of the Queen of
Englands yet vmnaryed, reposing them selves upon her wisdom, that she having
governed them in peace during her life, will leave the same for an inheritance
to their posterity. To be breef, ye said king of Navarre never did se much as
once require his soue reign Lord and King, to declare him to be that which
naturally and lawfully he is, or to give any sign or token thereof, either by
preferring and advancing him, or otherwise, although the confederates of the
said pretended holy league, have enterprised the like, who have armed against
him, my Lord the Cardmall of Bourbon, a Prince of the age of threescooe and
sire years, who is also a Prince without all hope both of maringe and
posterity to be his heir: as though the Kings Ma. their sovereign Lord had
not above a year or 2. to live to have children, and as though we should rather
expect issue from an old man, having always lived in single life, then from
the kings majesty's flourishing marriage, in the most chief and principal age
of himself, and his Queen and wife. And as though, for all that, the said
Lord the King of Navarre, could not perceive the subtle devises which ye same
persons have a long time been in devising against him, and also the practices
which they made a against him in ye towns, together with ye conspiracies yt
craftily they entered into Italy and Spain to bar him, when the K. death
should happen, from the right of succession to this kingdom: for ye which, his
hope is, that God will grant him such grace, giving long life to the Kings
Majesty, as that he shall not have any matter of controuersre, assuring
himself, that whatsoever it be that L^^^ or nature will give unto him, his
onimies shall never with all their leagues and practices be able to empeach and
hinder him from the obteyning of the same.

The said Lord the king of Navarre, frankely confesses, that by a long space
he has perceined the indirect devises of these confederates, against the King
and his royal estate, And makes most humble petition to his majesty, to call
to remembrance the aduertismenter, that the said him of Navarre, gave unto his
royal majesty in that behalf, in the year of our Lord. M.v.c.lx. and
(...). At what time he purposely sent to his grace a gentelman with certain
remembrances, concorning the very same matters, from point to point, that this
day are taken in hand to be executed. When also these confederates began to
lay their foundation, under color of the name of bretherhood and holy league.
That soon aster thepease concluded, in the year. M. v.c.lx. and xvii, he
perceived the frame and building there of exected by the stur^^^ then madoamong
the estates, stir^od up by the^ diverse provinces against the service of his
Majesty, so far, that they would have enticed the very professors of the
reformed religion to the same, and had entered into treaty with the most noble
Prince Cazimire, County Palatine of Rhyne. Who (as he will always confess)
seeing into the depth of their devises pretended against the estate, for the
honor and amity, which his auncesters had always borne to the house of
France, would not harken any further to that matter. That afterward as the
affairs of the enemies proceeded from step to step, the king of Navarre
also made discovery of their treaties in Italy, and Spain, of the money that
was received, of the matters by them propounded in those parts, and what
answers they receyned touching the same. Whereunto the King his majesty, who
in his mind could not conceive so great ingratitud to lurk in their hearts
toward him, made it a hard matter to be believed, nevertheless the said King
of Navarre vid expect some suddayne clappe of this mischief from day to day,
(as a ruin thoroughly perceived by him before.) That he reme^red the taking and
execution of Salcedo, who had confessed a great part of those things which are
well perceived; at this day, which then were endeavored to be obscured by
craft and cunning sleightes, But yet the certenty thereof, stayed in the hearts
of the kings true subjects. That Mounsire (who is deceased) had not without
good ground given aduertisme^t thereof to the King, that unless Salcedo had
been gyltie of more then ordinary crimes, the King would never have taken so
much pains, as to send two of the chiefest of his counsel of estate into the
low countries, to fetch him to his presence. Neither would have been present
at his examinations and repetition of his depositions etc. Whereupon it
followed, that by the diff^itiue sentence of the Court of Parliament at Paris,
he was pulled in pieces with four horses, as a high traitor to the king, and
all the estate of France. That by their memorialls, proceedinges, and their
assotiations, newely made in the most part of the good towns of this Realm,
there was sufficient evidence given, that their color and pretense was, to
root out that religion which the King of Navarre professes, and most
specially so bestroy him if it lay in their power, in sort that the first
stroke of their thunderbolt (...) have lighted first upon his head. If his
majesty in the meanespa^e saw not into the end of their practices. By
occasion whereof, the said king of Navarre perceiving the king his Sovereign
Lord, had given no order therein, and foreseeing their pretense, tended to
destroy the protestants, was justly moved to have regard to his affairs. And
therefore about the ye^re. M.v.r.lxxx. and three, he dispatched Mounsir de
Segur Pardillian, superintendent of his house, to the Queen of England, the
King of Denmark, the princes ^lectors of Almanie, the Lantgraue of Hesse, and
other Princes and estates. First, to exhort them, to seek means to agree the
^outrouersies in religion, which remained (...) the reformed churches, and were
abused to their common destruction. Secondly, to renew and assure a perfect
amis^^e with them: without desiring or employing them any farther. Thirdlye, to
furnishe in Almanye a good some of money, therewith to prou^d (when need
should require) a conueni^t succor against his mortal enemies. At the which
Kings, Princes and estates, are straighly allied to ye Crown of France, with
whom the King his Sovereign Lord has Ambassadores, with which Ambassadores,
the said Mounsier de Segur had express charge to confer, and so did at
certain times, whom he took for witnesses of his sayings and doings, of his
propositions, negotiations and conclusions. And after his return, the said
King of Navarre most humbly besought his ma^estie to give commandment, yt
with a^ diligence, information might be taken and brought to his Majesty of a^
his legatio^, being fully assured, that therein they may most plainly behold,
his french heart, sincere affection, and true loyalty toward his majesty's
person and Royal estate.

Wherefore ye said King of Navarre, requires all the aforesaid most noble kings
and princes, to give testimonye to the King under their own signetts, and to
his kingdom and al christendom, whether at any time, there have been on his
behalf any letters or instructions delivered, (...) communication had, either
against the Kings dignitye, or against the wealth and felicity of his estate,
or in any respect, contrary to the duty (...) a most humble and most devout
servant and subject: whether ever he moved them to make war upon the King,
to renew the troubles, or destroy the Catholics: whether ever any ouerture
has been directly or indirectly made unto them, touching the Kings death, or
any matter to follow upon the same. Also the said Lord the King of Navarre
most humbly beseech^th his Majesty, that he may be tolerated, to send this
his declaration to the said Princes, against the aforementioned flaunders: and
to cause the same to be presented by his Majesty's own Ambassadors, to wit,
by every of them in the place where he is resident, to all Christian Princes,
friends, and confederates of this kingdom. To this end, that if he have
treated of any like matter, then they now seeing him protest the contrary, may
esteem him for a counterfeyte Prince, of small faith and troth, and in all
respects unworthy of their amity and freendshyppe, which his abouesayd
enemies go about to make suspected. And which for his own parts he frankly
declares, that his desire is, with all carefulnes to entertayne, as he
thinks, he has most reasonably sought the same.

As touching the concord or agreement, the adversaries allege it to bear date,
the fourteenth day of December, in the year 1580. and there make the sayds
Mounsier de Segur present, as Ambassador from the King of Navarre: who had
departed out of Almany, repassed into the Low Countries, and from thence into
England, where he soiourned two months and above: and yet notwithstanding,
the employment of all that time, was embarked to return into France, before
the fourteenth day of December. In which concord they bring in the
Ambassadors of the Elector Palatine, and of the Prince of Orange, the one dead
above a year before, leaving his heir under years, during whose mynority,
Duke Cazimir governs the electorship: the other murbered four monethe^
before by a Je^uite, suborne^ by such as are like to the confederates of this
pretended holy league. And yet nenerthelesse, both the said pr^^es (as the
adversaries allege) are bound to be present this month of May in the town of
Basil, concerning the concluding of some agreement in the controu^rsies of
religion. The adversaries add with all, that the King of Navarre, on the
xviii. day of April then next, promised to enter into arms, at which time
forsooth they them selves were resolved to enter into them, and now go about
to derive the hatred thereof upon this Prince, who being on every side
compassed about with their conspiracies, yet sturreth not at al. They date the
said contract at Maidenbourgh, a town apperteyning to the son of my Lord the
elector of Brandenbourgh, and yet in the concord they remember neither father
nor the son. And in truth it is no other but an imagniary assembly: For
neither in that place nor any other, can there any assembly be found to
have been holden. Further, the tytles, ^ ^ ^ (...) so many other (...) to much
(...), to (...) with so (...) ^ncte, to (...) ^ (...) for a (...) pedlers
(...), (...) Presthers (...), to (...) the (...) of (...) people inste^ius
(...) they^ (...) with bery (...) (...): for what can they (...) war^e (...)?

The (...) of Mon^anban, reser(...) more bl^^e, for any thing (...) thereof,
nor more (...) any thing published by the^ of (...), (...) the (...). The true
(...) wheir the king h^^de conclud^d prace in the year (...) five (...) and
(...) seaue^, withful inte^tion (...) (...) should (...) (...), his Muiesty
lest in the (...) of the King of Nau^r^^ and the (...) (...), for the (...) of
^ ^ ^ this god (...) of the (...), very many de^^^ous of nothing more then to
^^nus the troubles, (who after fette themselves in Ar^^^ with ye Authors of
this league) by all means possible, crossed the execution of the said evict
of peace, and at all hours by sundry new enterprises gaus occasion of
distrust, in sort, that ye wounds which they ought to have cured, wered forer:
and the edict of peace, which in time past was to take effects, flydde
backwards ^^^ppe by step, and was clean cut away from the Protestants, point
after point. By the continuance of which practices, it come to pass, that
during the (...) years, ye peace was diversely interrupted, by surprysings, and
attempts, yea and by open war, that continued the space of a whole year (...)
whence issued ye conferences of N^ rac and Flex, so yt the (...) years which
were pre^^^ed for ye rendering up of the places, ^^^^ised not to work the effect
whereunto they were limited: and that by reason of the impediment which came by
means of these interruptions of the execution of the edict, and of the
paci^^ing of old grudges which were promised to be brought to pass within ye
tyms. In ye mean while, the (...) the (...) persons, (...) to be yielded up,
for that the (...), on ye (...), the (...) of the refo^ed (...) the causes
still to continue, to wit, the ^ons of ^strust, and old (...) re^ued by the
troubles, made some (...) thereat, most humbly (...) his M^, not so much to
regard the time per^ed, as the harm and inconvenience happened in the mean
space, and rather to have consideration of the effect that was promised during
the fire years, and at the exp^tion of the same, to wit, during the years,
the execution and continuance of peace, and withal, the burying of distruste
and grudges: and consequentlye at the end^ of the six years, the yielding up
of the places, which for ye matter stood then in such hard case as is before
specified, was not agreeable to that grace and equity of his Majesty, from
whence the grant of the places first proceeded, forasmuch as the condition by
him expected, take no such effect as within that time (...) hoped for. His
Majesty therefore, not so much (...) of the observation of the (...), as to
heal the fore, and reunite (...), thought it expedient, not (...) them of the
religion with (...) the king of Navarre had (...) unto his Majesty, that his
said subjects of the religion, had great (...) to be exhibited to his grace,
concerning the execution of the edictes, which if they were heard and
satissyed, then (...) the yielding up of the said (...) the more easily
attained unto.

The said Lord the King, by the mouth of Mounsit de Belieure, one of the
cheifest of his counsel of estate, at the request of the said Lord the king
of Navarre, consented unto the assembly of Montanban: consisting of the
Princes, Lords, Gentlement, and men of good calling, of the said religion.
And during all the time of the continuance of that assembly, the said Mounsir
de Belioure, was present in the Kings name in the ^^wne of Montanban, whom the
said Lord the King of Navarre requires to ^eare witness of his actions, and
desires to be herds and ^ited in all that be knows concerning the says
assembly. So then this assembly of Montanban was not like unto theyr^ of the
league, (...), without the knowledge and (...) of the King, but by the consent
and (...) ^^ment of his Majesty, which assembly of (...) after ryper
deliverati^^^ had upon the same, he (...) to be pro(...) for the (...) and
tranquillity of his estate. In this assembly, there was made a (...) of all the
breaches and executions of the (...) of pears, which was presented to the King
at S. German in Lay, by Mounfie the County of Laual, and other Mep^ties,
with (...) humble requests, for remedy of the (...) of his said (...) of the
religion Therein also, all^e^^ promised for any particular attempt (...) against
the, (...) to seek their re^urpence by like injurious attempts, least the
temerity of some particular persons might cast this ^ealme in to trouble, as
sometime, before was supposed to (...) been (...) but to make their (...) to
the King of Navarre, who would cause (...) to be^ gyu^n thereof to the King, who
according to his ^ation suffyciently percey^^^, (...) the tranquillity of his
subjects, knew best how to apply convenient remidyes to the (...). And
likewise the Kying of Navarre promised to embrace their cause toward his
Maiestys, and carefullye to present the same unto him when need should
require, as he had always done in times paste, to the (...), that they
(...) him take their cause in (...) the (...), might the better be retained,
within the (...) of reason, (...) imagyning any such extraordynarye mea^s, as
they had^ attempted in former time, for lack of recourse (...) supporte else
where. Here is all that (...) be found to have (...) in the (...) assembly
of Montanban, and no mods then this. The fy^ purpose, (...) is most evident,
to be for the staying of pryuate attemptes from r^ to a public mischief and
hurts, that might trouble the peer of this Realm, like to the conference of
Nerac, ^lden with the Queen Mother of the King, where there was an express
Article in that behalf. And whatsoever the ^ies disperse more then is here
expressed, is no truer then their allegatio^s touching the pretended concord
of Magden bourgh, where the Jesuits had forgot (...) that they had caused I
(...) to (...), months (...) (...) they cause to (...) forth (...) the (...).

(...), the King who (...) (...), of all that (...) (...) fourth shair (...)
(...), that of his (...) (...) them (...) ^ (...) his (...) was not so well
(...) (...) thought (...) (...) of the (...) the (...) of the (...) (...) the
King (...) (...) the Kings (...) ^.

(...) the King of Navarre (...) eth, that (...) will call to (...) what has
(...) within (...) with the (...) (...), will (...) think (...) that (...) the
(...) (...) of (...) (...) that request (...) (...), when the (...) (...), the
(...) then (...) (...) the (...) not (...), that these securities might have
further continuance for a certain time (...) because (...) danger was (...)
taken from (...) Protestants, and for that the ed^^t of peace, whereon their
life and tranquillity pe^^(...) was not th^^ s^^ne to be in (...) estate,
Nevertheless the (...) of Navarre, (...) most freely confess, th^^ the
principal, (...) wherefore, (...) (...) necessity of the professors of the
ref^rmed relig^on, he had a particular desire to make (...) petition to his
(...) to leave the said to (...) still for (...) the cons^^^^^te of these
confederates, the effect, whereof (...) ^tinually (...), the which the (...)
resounded religion, whose deaths were co^spired by the said confederates had
great (...) of places of refuge, till God should grant them such ^^^e, as that
the King, might have perfect intelligence of their intentions; and verily the
grante^^, (...) of them which during the peace, attempted upon the said towns
of sureties, (whom the King always dissauowed) (...) at this pay sufficiently
open unto (...), by whose (...) and allowance, then durst (...) to trouble the
peace, and enterprise vpp^n the s^^^s places and others of the religion: For
(...), they had taken arms in the service of the (...). Now the said King of
Navarre, most humbly beseeches the King to call to his remembrance, the
aduerti^(...) which he gave to his M^^estie, by the (...) of a month before
the say^^ (...) of Montanban, which were very sufficient (...) cause his
Majesty at that (...) to have regard to his affairs: and in default thereof,
earnestly to admonish him, to s^^ke or retain out some place of surety for his
person, against whom they manifestly pretended some mischiefs.

If the enemies shall now allege, that they have taken Arms, and seized his
Maiesti^^. Towns, to the intent to have towns (...) security also, according
to the example of them of the Contrary rel^ on, as some of them have affirmed.
The^ the king of Navarre p^th them altogether, to make declaration to al
Fraun^^ what distrust has mooned them thert^^ For of truth, it is hard to
guess, what causes they have to distrust the King to mistrust the Catholics,
to complay^^ of the hatred injuries, (...) quarrels of the professors of the
reformed religion. Certainly it is to well known, that the King has committed
into their hands his forces and kingdom: If his majesty (...) meant any ^arme
toward them, they could not now have had so great mean to do har^is as they
have. It is well known also, that they have as it were, de^ided this kingdom
amongst their brethren, and between them of their own house, by means of the
great offices, and ample gouernementes which they have in their hands, yea
some of them, to the damage of the prineth of the kings blood: That they have
comm^ed over the armies: assualted Towns, given battay^, ^owed (...), and for
a full reckoning have for the space of certain years, (...) the kings favor
as they lysted. That vutill his ^ay, whilst they ma^e a show to obey the
kings comma^s, they have been honored by the (...), and the good towns, they
have borne (...) in the same. They have there assured whom soever it pleased
(...). So far have they been from standing in need them selves to be either
(...) warranted by others, as against any other. Further it is well known,
(...) they have (...) their (...), by the (...) (...) their (...) at the ^ them
selves assured, w^ at (...) raunces (...) it (...) their (...) of (...), if
they (...) (...) they (...) King^^ clenu^^cy and (...) (...) have (...) a^
self. And (...) that they (...) not put them selves in (...) seturity, (...)
gaynst his man is, except it be by (...) selse, (...) they attempt against
(...) person, and inuace his (...). But if (...) alledg, that they (...) the
pro^rs of the religion in Fra^ (...) know well ^ough, that for eight (...)
which the Protestan^^ retain th^se consedrentes have as^ wh^^^ g^^^rnments
within this kingdom: Who so (...) that (...) stand this inequiditie (as there
is (...) so (...) will (...) (...) that they of ye (...) for (...) places of
(...) (...), neither (...) that the (...) in any (...) to be assisted by them,
that hitherto (...) cient (...) to defend them seluen, (...) (...) hurt their
(...), except t^^y, (...) by the King, (...) with his (...) (...) with his
power.

To the (...) therefore, (...) men (...) of the said Lords the King of Navarre,
(...) ^risie of hi^ (...) that vnde^ shadows (...) to him, (...) they shall not
(...) any necessity to dema^d the like ^ainst him and ^umely they which wars;
always in the Kings (...) lay do no hann^e, but through the (...) that has
been reposed in them, and the too great (...) has heen dy^ unto them; The
said King of Navarre, offers for the common benefit and wealth of (...),
(notwithstanding the (...) in all respects, between his decree and theirs)
that he is read^ to (...) into the Kings majesty's hands; the Towns a^
smertie which he has in (...), and power, without (...) for the (...) of the
two years pr^larged, wh^ffit pleased his (...) to (...). Upon condition, that
they of ye league unarm th^selues, and yield by into the kings han^s th^se
(...) they have sease^, (...) (...) may dispose of the same (...) his pleasure
Moreover he (...), (notwithstanding the said (...)) as well on hi^ (...) Lord
the Prince of Conde his (...), for the removing of all struples from the (...)
saries ((...) have ^ay) and to for (...) (...): To (...) into the (...), the
goue (...) which it (...) pleased his Majesty to grannt unto the in this
(...), to be disposed (...) to hi^ Majesty's will and pleasure: So that the
^^der saries, will (...) up into his Majesty's ha^^ek, those gouerne^ which
they hold. Thus far are they (from the assurance which al (...) know to be
rather new unto them) from being importunate upon the king for new securities
and new gouernementes, as their neuersaries which are not (...) to ^apitulate
in their articles, that the gouernementes of Normandy, Picar^y, Lionn^is,
Salusse, Metz, Thou, and Verd^ur, etc. Would be distributed (...) them of their
house. To wit, to (...) rightly, (considering what they have ^re^) the greater
part of this kingdom.

By the preni^s, the King of Navarre thinks it clearly appears, whether
his ^duerferies or he, do most (...), the common w^ith of the poor people,
the contentation of the Kings majesty, and the rest and tranquillity of this
estate, verily it is too (...), that ye ser^^t of the house would be credited
to his more yeal^us of the (...) of the same, then the (...) child of the
family, That these stanngers words make us bel^ne they (...) or cater care of
the prefernation of this estate, then those in wh^^ that care is naturally
borne with the (...). These stra^^^^s (I say) whose greatness cannot be (...)
without hi^uine and dissipation, who have (...) no conscience to publish him
for an ene^ue of this estate.

Hereupon, the said Lord the ^inge of Navarre, prays all orders and (...) of
this Realms, to make a comparison in this plare (although in truethe they be
matters incomparable. Of the deme^nours of his predecessors in this kingdom,
who from the father to the same, have kept this name, that they were never
authors of any appression to the people, nor of injury to the nobiti^ it is;
with the (...) of the predecass^r^ of the beads of this league, who wi^be
found to have erected since they set soote in France, the sale of offices, of
justice, new subsidies upon the poor people, whose juice and substance they
drew out under King Henry and King Fraunces the second: And also consusion in
offices and dignities, which they first of all transferred at their pleasures,
and sold from one hand to another? To conclude, it will be found that they have
increased Simony in the Church, and brought in the sale of the temporalties
for their own profit, to be reuanged upon their memies, under color of
beresse.

As touching his own person, he also, prays all the estates of this Realm^,
to remember, or make inquiry, what charges soever he had to bear and
maintaine^ Whether ever be were the cause, of any surcharge of the people:
Contrariwise, how he governs that small number of subjects which God has
given unto him, who will be f^unde not to have been purcharged with any imposts,
tares, nor sub(...), notwithstanding, the great affairs has had a long time:
whether he ever ^mitted any outrage, in word, or deed, in ^oods, or person,
to any gentelman whatsoever (though he has been strangly ^ded by many) for any
manner of occasion, either in his house, or in his countries. Whether for any
rigor that he received at ye hands of the professors of the Romish religion,
he never did wrong to any Prelate, Curate, Monk, or any other of the Clergy,
Contrariwise, whether they have not always been welcome to him, and
courteously received at his hands, (...) he more ready to forget those
offenses which they had committed against him, then others by whom he had been
offended, were to cease from renewing their evil demeanor toward him. Whether
he have not always yielded honor and respect to the Sovereign Courts, and
the officers of the same, and also to all others that bear the mark of
Justice. And whether he did ever either forcibly commit any violence to
justice, for else deny ed necessary strength to justice, if it were in his power
to aybe her. And as touching all other parties of this estate, he that to every
of them has not showed any thing, saving honor, friendship, and good will,
neither ever displeasured or desired otherwise then to pleasure them, cannot
easily be believed, nor judged for an enemy of this estate.

Concerning the estate ingenerall, he will not deny, but that the Civil
wars have brought into this kingdom, great confusion in all things,
poverty to the people, decay to the nobility, Ruin to the Clergy,
Contempt to justice, men addicted to war, and above all the rest, civil
war which he be waileth in his heart, and would remedy if possibly he could,
yea with his own proper blood.

But God is witness, his conscience witnesses, France her self witnesses,
having bright eyes, and very fresh memory, by reason she saws and well
remembers all the course of that time, whether he entered into arms, except it
were through the counsel of extreme necessity, though long aforehande he
might have foreseen and prevented her by reason. The assembly of Bloys is
witness, stirred up by this present league, where he was declared to be
banished out of this realms with all the professors of his religion, except
they changed their religion very quickly. Which to him paraduenture were no
hard change, if he had as little religion in him as the adversaries have,
whether also he ever delayed ye receiving of peace, for any particular occasion
whatsoever, (albeit his degree is such, as that which to him is particular,
might rightly be judged for public) when his conscience might be satisfied,
and could see that the professors of the same religion which he professes,
might serve God according to their faith, in tranquillity and quietness: Whether
he ever demanded any thing gaynefull to him self, increase of authority,
increase of pencions, or increase of offices: Whether contrariwise, he has not
rather chosen, to see him self as he is, without authority in his
government which by the peace ought to be al yielded into his hands, then to
prolong the war never so little, then by the space of so much as an hour, to
delay the comfort and succor of the people, by the peace, or to trouble the
peace after it was made, for default of enjoying that which was promised in his
regard. The articles of the last peace may be for witnesses, and the
conference of Flex, wherein he might fitly have served his own turn to
enlarge his conditions, by reason of the great desire which Mounsir that is
deceassed, had to pass into the Low Countries, whether he was called by a
general Embassage of the estates of ye country, who most instantly required
and solicited him to come thither. Yet the King of Navarre, at that time
rather yielded away his own intrrest to the advancement of this kingdom,
then he would never so little, differ or stand to make merchandise of a
benefit as might thereby come to his party. Therefore he made peace, and
accepted it with such conditions as pleased his majesty to grant, to the
intent too further the conquest of those countries, and to transport him self
thither in person, if it might so stand with his majesty's fanour and good
liking. These good Frenchmen the heads of the league, to empeach the joining
of Flaunders to France, when the Ambassadoures of the Low Countries offered it
to the King, with such conditions as that they were ready to receive law from
his Majesty, and admytte into their towns, such Garrisons, and governors as
pleased him: To the intent to let and hinder his majesty there from, does vex
and trouble his kingdom, cause his people to rise into mutinies, and in time
of full peace begin to make wars.

What patience the King of Navarre, has used in all that time, notwithstanding
the coffeehouse that he might conceive by the dealing which at the
suggestion, of such as be like to the adversaries, used toward him, I leave it
to the consideration of all the world, being separated from the King, without
authority in his government, not paid of that which was due unto him, and
much less respected in his affairs, then the least Captain of the kingdom.
Be it spoken without reproach.

And to utter the plain truth of his demeanours. If he had been no more
touched with the feelyng and consideration of the grief and detryment of the
people, and of all France, then they of the league be at this day, being
that party which he is: both people and Country might have fallen into utter
destruction. But he is a Frenchman, and a French Prince, a number of France,
and feels her greeses and wounds.

Diminishing of authority, want of favor, particular interest, had never the
power to make him rage and spite agayust himself, whyth is a thing proper to
the Leaguers, who are but lightly grasted in France, and are like to wodden
legs, and timber Arms, that feel nothing when the body is burned. To which
kind of men, may be easily given the outward part, but not the inward
affection, neither the moving or feeling of a true and natural Frenchman.

Touching these broils and commotions, which they declare and protest to be
directly against him, bending themselves agayust his person, his lyse, his
honor, his conscience, seeing them armed, and and taking Towns in the myddest
of his Government, being on every side compassed and encombred by them, his
patience incessantly styrred and moved: ^f he had not respected the King more
then his own pryuate danger, if he had not earnestly desired the welfare of
this Realm, with hope of a public peace (if he may have any peace at these
men's hands) yea and that more then his own preservation, is there any
likelyhoode, or was there any reason, he should hold him self content as he
has done: But all is well, so the people be at quiet, he lyketh all well, so
the estate remain in peace, the King obeyed, the King honored as he ought to
be, yea though it were to his own evident peril with his loss unrecoverable.

Here is the whole sum of al things, whereby the King of Navarre can be
blamed with these fair tyrles of heretic, Relaps, persecutor of the Church,
enemy of the Catholics, and disturber of this estate. As touching the
conclusion which they draw from thence, whereby they declare him incapable to
succeed in the kingdom, and have caused my Lord the Cardinal of Bourbon his
Uncle, to take upon him the name of the first Prince of the blood and Heir
apparent.

This certainly is the point yt most of all others sticks in their hearts,
whereupon the said King of Navarre, has hitherto thought least, and now last
of all it is presented to him. Touching this: point, the said Lord the King of
Navarre, contenteth himself, in hope that God will long preserve life to the
Kings Majesty, for the benefit and common wealth of this Realm, and grant
him issue in due time; to the great grief of all his enemies. His confidence
also is, that he has to do with Frenchmen, notwythstanding, all the care and
diligence that has been used to corrupt them, who know the rights, are not
ignorant of the discentos, and will maintain him in the place and degree
which he ought to hold. He comfort himself in God, the defender of all
right, the revenger of all violence, who ^eth both parties, whose most
righteous judgment is not like to to corporal men's, whose most diffinitiue
sentence is certain, and the execution thereof inuariable, in sort, that
nothing is of power to resist the same.

For conclusion, and as concerning religion, the said Lord the King of Navarre
declares to the King his sovereign Lord, to all orders and estates of this
Realm, and to all Princes and estates of this Realm, and to all Princes and
estates of Christendom, as well temporal, as ecclesiastical, that he is, and
ever will be most ready, to submit himself to the determination of a lawful,
General or natural counsel, as is expressed in his Majesty's edict of
pacification. And as concerning this estate and the administration of the same,
that he most wyllingly does and will embrace and repose himself upon,
whatsoever in that behalf shall be ordained in a lawful assembly of the estates
of this Realm, when it shall please his Majesty to call the same together. In
the mean space, the only request and petition of the said King of Navarre is
nothing else, but that be may live quietly under the benefit of the edicts.
Being ready to employ his life, his means, lands and goods, and all his
friends, for the defense of the King, of his Majesty's estate, and all the good
subjects of this Realm.

And forasmuch as they of ye said league have taken the said King of Navarre,
for the matter and pretense of their rising in Arms, I would have all men
think, that their quarrel is only against him, and no man else, sowing diverse
slanders abroad against him, in their said protestations, wherein by express
name, they publishe him to he desirous of ye kings death, a disturber of the
estate, and sworn enemy of ye Catholics, etc. Duer and above all the
premises, which he thinks sufficient to satisfy every man, the K. of Navarre
with all reverence, most humbly beseeches the K. his sovereign L. (to whose
ears he doubts not but these sla^ders are come) not to take in evil part
(saving always the honor and respect due to his M.) that he affirm and
pronounce in this place, in that manner and sort which presently he he does: to
wit, that all they which have sown abroad and published the said flaunders,
contained in ye said protestations against, him have falsely and slanderously
lied, excepting the said Lord Cardinal his Uncle.

And further, to give their slanders the lie, by his acttons, the said Lord
the R. of Navarre, most humbly beseeches the King his sovereign L. to
vouchsafe the good liking of his most humble fidelity and devotion, in this
offer which he has thought good here to make to his Maicstie, to wit, that
for the quietness and ease of his Majesty and people, it would please him; with
good liking to decyde this quarrel between them of the said league, and him
the said King of Navarre, without hazarding his Majesty's life therein, which
would be too great a loss in this kingdom: and without any further pains to
be taken by his M. about the same. Hoping that God will give him grace, to find
sufficient friends, and allies of his crown, to bring them to reason, and to
drive the^ to acknowledge their most bounden duetye, which they owe to the
said Lord the king his sovereign, and the respect and honor that under his
M. ought to appertain to the said king of Navarre.

But specially for that he can not without sighing and shedding of tears,
think upon the great spoiling of the Nobileties blood, which may proceed of
this war: nor upon the extreme pouertye and desolation, which the poor
people of this Realm shall be driven to suffer, neither upon the disorder and
confusion which thereby will be brought into all estates, in steed of the
great piety, mereye, and wisdom of his Majesty, in preparing, (if this
commotion had not happened) as all men know to establish this estate again,
in her former beautye, prosperity, dignity, and integrity in all resperts: and
above all the rest, he can not without sighing and great anguish of mind,
think on the execrable blasphemies which war brings forth against God, and
the ouerflowing of vices which grow through the license and liberty of ye
Armies. To shorten these mi series, which the said L. the King of Navarre would
willingly redeem with his proper blood, he most humbly and with all duetifull
affection, beseeches his Majesty, not to think strange of the offer which
presently he makes to Mounsir de Guyse, seeing the adversaries have taken him
the said king of Navarre, for party in their pretense, and the said Lord of
Guyse commands in their Armies, to wit, that this quarrel (as well without
puttyng all the orders and estates of this kingdom to any further damage,
molestation or trouble; as also without leuying or bringing in any domestical
or forrayne Army, touching the same, which could not choose but be the
destruction of all poor people) may be decyded and determined, between the
said king of Navarre and the said Monsir de Guyse, by way of Combat in their
own proper persons, either one against one, two against two, ten to ten, or
twenty to twenty, more or less, in such number as ye said L. of Guyse will
appoint, with such kind of Armor and weapons as are accustomed to be used
amongst Knights of honor. And concerning ye place, if be desire it within this
kingdom, the said K. of Navarre most humbly be^cheth his M. to vouchsafe him
the honor to naminate the same. Or in case Mounsier de Guyse shall suspect this
Realm, then the King of Navarre offers him, to be ready in such other
place out of this Realm, as he the said L. of Guyse shall choose, so it be a
place of sure access, suspected to neither party. An honor certainly,
considering the difference and in equality of their persons and degrees (being
such as all men know) that the said L. of Guyse ought by all means to embrace
and purchase: a felicity also, which the said Lord the King of Navarre, and my
Lord the Prince his Cousin, will most wyllingly buy with their own bloods, to
redaeme the King their sovereign Lord, from ye vocation and (...), which the
adversaries most distoyally put him to, his estate from trouble and confusion,
his Nobility from destruction, and all his people from extreme misery and
calamity. The said Lord the King of Navarre protesting before God, and in his
conscience, that he is not moved to choose this way, through any ambition
reigning in him, nor by any hatred that he bears to his enemies, nor for any
revenge that he wysheth toward them, nor yet in regard of that spightfull and
malicious spoil and destruction, which they would tryumphe and rejoice to see
executed upon him.

But contrariwyse, his resolution to take the fortune of the Combat, proceeds
as well from ye great zeal and fervent desire which he has to see God true
ly served and honored, his King free from vexation and trouble, his estate in
peace, and the people at rest and quietness, as also from the great
displeasure, annoyaunce and woe, (which every moment he sets before his
mind) not only to see God blasphemed again in this estate, being in the
waves and perils of shypwracke: but also to see this poor people cast again
into the extreamytye and myseryes paste, whereinto (if they fall once again,)
skant can any man relieve and deliver them from the same.

Finally the said Lord the King of Navarre is most certainly persuaded, and
reposeth all his trust and confidence in the almighty, who sees the secrets
of all hearts, and is chief president and bea reth the whole sway in all
exploytes and deeds of Arms, that he of his infinite mercy and goodness, by
the event and success, will manifestly declare, and shows to all the whole
world, not only the sincerety, but also the righteousness of the cause, to the
intent it may serve for an example to all posterityes and ages: whose wrath,
vengeance, and curse, he wysheth to fall upon him, if he protest falsely, or
ever imagined barme, either toward the kings person, or against his estate or
subjects, of what calling, degree or religion soever they be. If ever he
contrived any deuyse or plotte to take effect upon the kings Tomb or death:
Or ever compassed or cast in his mind, any violence, against either the Romish
religion, or the Catholics: reposing his whole and only hope in God, to
receive from his eternal Majesty his merciful blessing, gracious goodwyll,
and loving favor, against all them that without occasion seek his
destruction, and under shaddowe of his name, molest the kingdom, overthrow
all good order, destroy the people, and mean to stryp the king out of his
royal estate and diguity.

Given at Bergerac the tenth day of June, in the year of our Lord, a
thousand, five hundred, fourscore and five.

Signed. Henry. Lallier.


