ANSWER TO THE PETITIONS OF THE Traitors and rebels in Lyncolneshyre.

ANNO. M.D.XXXVI.

FIRST WE BEGIN and make answer to the.iiii. and.vi. articles, because upon
them depends much of the rest. Concerning chosyng of counsailours, I never
have read hard nor known, that princis counsaylours and prelates should be
appointed by rude and ignorant common people, nor that they were persons mete
or of ability to discern and chose mete and sufficient cou^sailours for a
prince. How presumptuous than are ye the rude commons of one shire, and that
one of the most brute and beastely of the hole realm, and of least
experience, to find fault with your prince for the electinge of his
counsaylours and prelatis? and to take upon you, contrary to goddis law and
man's law, to rule your prince, whom ye are bound by all laws to obey and
serve with both your lives lands and goods, and for no worldly cause to
withstand: the contrary whereof you like traitors and rebels have attempted,
and not like true subjects as ye name your selfs.

AS TO THE suppression of religyous houses ano monasteries, we woll, that ye
and all our subjects should well know, that this is granted us by all the
nobles spiritual and temporal of this our realm, and by all the commons of
the same, by act of parlyament, and not set forth by any counsaylour or
counsaylours upon their mere will and fantasy, as ye full falsely would
persuade our realm to believe. And where ye allege, that the service of god is
much thereby diminished, the troth thereof is contrary, for there be no houses
suppressed, where god was well served, but where most vice mischief and
abomination of living was used: And that does well appear by their own
confessions subscribed with their own hands, in the time of our vysitations,
and yet were suffered a great many of them (more than we neded by thacte) to
stand: wherein if they amend not their living, we fear, we have more to
answer for, than for the suppession of all the rest. And as for the
hospitality, for the relief of poor people, we wonder ye be not asshamed to
affirm, that they have been a greatte relyefe to our people, when a great many
or the most part has not past iiii. or.v. religious persons in them, and
diverse but one, which spente the substance of the goods of their houses in
nouryshynge of vice and abhomynable living. Now what unkindness and
vnnaturalitie may we impute to you and al our subjects (that be of that mind)
that had leauer such an unthrifty sort of vicious persons should enjoy such
possessions profits and emolume^tes, as grow of the said houses, to the
mayntenaunce of their unthrift life, than we your natural prince, soueraygne
lord, and king, which doothe and has spente more in your defenses of our
own, then.vi. times they be worth.

AS TOVCHYNGE the act or dies, we marvel what madness is in your brain, or
upon what ground ye would take authority upon you to cause us to break those
laws and statutes, which by all the nobles knights and gentylmen of this
realm (whom the same chiefelye touches) has been granted and assented to,
seeing in no manner of things it touchethe you the basse commons of our
realm. Also the grounds of those uses were false, and never admytted by any
law: But usurped upon the prince, contrary to all equity and justice, as it
has been openly both disputed and declared by all the well learned men of
England in westmynster halle: whereby ye may well perceive, how mad and
unreasonable your demandes be, boothe in that and the rest, and how unmeet it
is for us and dishonorable, to grant or assente unto, and less mete and
decente for you in such rebellyous sort to demand the same of your prince.

AS TOVCHYNGE the.xv. which ye demand of us to be released, Think ye that
we be so faynte hearted, that perforce ye of one shyre, were ye a great many
mo, could compel us with your insurrections and such rebellious demeanor, to
remytte the same? or think ye that any man will or may take you to be true
subjects, that first make a show of a loving grant, and than parforce would
compel your sovereign lord and king to (...) payment whereof is not yet commen:
ye and saying the same will not counteruayle the tenth penny of the charges,
which we do and daily must susteygne for your tuition and safegarde. Make you
sure, by your occasions of this your ingratitudes unnaturalness and unkindness
to us now adminystred, ye give us cause, which has always benne as much
dedicate to your welthes as ever was king, not so much to set our study for
the setting forward of the same, seeing how unkindly and untruely ye deal
now with us without any cause or occasion. And doubt ye not, though ye have
no grace nor naturalnes in you to consider your duitie of allegiaunce to your
king and soueraygne lord, the rest of our realm we doubt not, has. And we
and they shall so look on this cause, that we trust it shall be to your
confusion, if according to our former letters ye submit not your selfs.

AS TOVCHYNGE the first fruits, we let you wit, it is a thing granted us
by act of parlyament also, for the supportation of part of the great and
excessive charges, which we supporte and bear for the mayntenance of your
welthes and other our subjects. And we have known also that ye our commons
have much complained in times passed, that the most of the goods lands and
possessions of the realm, were in the spiritual men's hands: and yet
berynge us in hand, that ye be as loving subjects to us as may be: ye can not
find in your hearts, that your prince and soueraygne lord should have any
part thereof: and yet it is nothing prejudicial unto you our commons, but to
rebelle and unlawfully rise against your prince, contrary to your duty of
allegiaunce and gods commandment. Wherefore syrs remember your folies and
traiterous demeanours, and shame not your native country of England, nor
offend no more so greuousely your undoubted king and natural prince, which
alweys has showed him self most loving unto you: and remember your duty
of allegiance, and that ye are bound to obey us your king, both by goods
commandment and law of nature. Wherefore we charge you eftsoon upon the
foresaid bonds and peynes, that ye withdraw your selfs to your own houses
every man, and no more to assemble contrary to our laws and your allegiances,
and to cause the prouokers of you to this mischief, to be delivered to our
lieutenantes hands or ours, and you your selfs to submit you to such
condygne punishment, as we and our nobles shall think you worthy: For dout you
not else that we and our nobles can nor will suffer this injury at your hands
unrevenged, if ye give not place to us of souerayntie, and show your selfs as
bounden and obedient subiectis, and no more to entremedle your selfs from
hensforth with the weighty affairs of the realm, the direction whereof only
apperteyneth to us your king, and such noble men and counsaylours, as we list
to elect and choose to have the ordering of the same. And thus we pray unto
almighty god, to give you grace to do your duities, to use your selfs toward
us like true and faythefull subjects, so as we may have cause to order you
thereafter, and rather obedyentely to consent amongst you, to deliver into
thandes of our lieutenant.C. persons, to be ordered according to their
demerites at our will and pleasure, than by your obstinacy and wylfulnes, to
put your selfs your lives, wives, children, lands, goods, and cattalles,
besides the indignation of god, in thutter adventure of total destruction and
utter ruin by force and violence of the sword.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI RECII IMPRESSORIS.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


