A DECLARATION Exhibited to the French king by his Court of Parlyament
concerning the holy LEAGVE. Whereunto is adjoined: AN Advertisement to the
three Estates of France, comprehending a true report of such occurrences as
have passed between the house of Guize, in favor of the holy League: and the
king of Navarre and his adherents for their necessary defense.

Faithfully translated out of French.

Imprinted 1587.

A Declaration exhibited to the King, by his Court of Parlyament.
THe members of your Court of Parliament having consulted upon the Edicte and
Bull which your Majesty sent to them, do beseech you to accept in good part
such humble declarations as they desire to geeue you to understand of before
they verify, or record the said Edict or Bull. For notwithstanding the small
access that our prayers have aforetime had unto your Majesty do almost stop
our mouths, by taking away all hope of other answer then heretofore we have
received, yet so long as it shall please your Majesty to continue us in our
offices, we are bound to continue in our accustomed fidelity to the discharge
of your conscience and ours, which now with your majesty's good liking and
favor, we do, taking so much the more boldness in liberty, as the enemies of
your estate, do ween to have license to abuse your godliness and devotion for
the covering of their impiety and rebellion.

If it had pleased God that those reasons which were debated in your presence
concerning the publishing of the Edict of Iulie last past, might have pierced
the ears of that patience and good affection which your majesty was
accustomed to reserve to the voice of this company, we should not now be
driven to this extremity: for even then Sir, you might have perceived that
those persons who under a very uncertain hope of reuniting your subjects to
one only religion, did paune forth your authority and conscience to the most
assured destruction of your Estate: That they had not leagued and united
themselves to any other end but to disunite your subjects from your
obedience, wherein through an espetiall and singular grace of God they remained
united, notwithstanding their disunion in Religion. That although their armies
are great and terrible, as appears by the great mischiefs and oppressions
that your people do bear at their hands, yet we may by the experience of
that which is past, judge them to be ouerweake to put their purposes in
execution: That notwithstanding they had means to do it, yet your majesty
ought not to imploie them, because the offense which you seek to correct is
tied to the consciences, which are exempt from all power of iron or fire, and
may be entreated with other means more convenient to that fatherly affection
which your people have evermore found in you, considering that even those men
whom so often you have sought by force to compel, do now voluntarily offer
to submit themselves to all reason, and unto that course they have evermore
been allowed in the church.

But in as much as that that is decreede cannot be revoked, also that the edict
which is now upon the file, is but the execution and conclusion of the former,
we do not desire to declare unto you any other thing, but that it may
please your Majesty to call to mind that kings are shepherds, and the
Edic^es their shepheard^ staves, wherewith they guide their flock under a
mild and gracious government, which is more profitable to the flock then to
the shepherd: For your maies^^e may of your self conceive that the name of an
Edict can no way be acco^modated unto this bloody prescription which in so
express terms contains the general cause of the flock, and so
consequently the disanulling of the office and authority of the shepherd.

Admit the whole number of Protestants were reduced into one only person,
yet is there not that man among us that dare conclude upon death against the
same, before the formal determination of his process, Whereby if he were not
duly attaint and convict of some capital or heinous crime, such as might
condemn the offender, we should be loathe to destroy a good Citizen. Who
therefore is he that without any order of law dare dispeople so many Towns,
and destroy such a number of Provinces, and so convert this Realm into
ashes* Who I say is he that dare pronounce the word that shall expose so many
millions of men, women and children to death? Yea and that without any cause
or apparent reason, considering they be not taxed with any other crime the^
heresy: an heresy (if it may be termed heresy) as yet unknown, or at the
least undecided: an heresy which they have defended even in your own presence
against the most famous Divines in your Realm: an heresy wherein they have bin
borne, and for the space of these 30 years brought up, by the sufferance of
your majesty, and the late king your brother of happy memory. Even an
heresy which they remit to the judgment of an universal, general, or
National Council.

The breach of the Edict of pacification has brought us forth so many
calamities, as there is no tongue able sufficiently to express them: and it
were a hard matter to note one sole benefit received in exchange of the
same, except that it has a far larger scope then was thought for. For those
that make so cheap markets of the Protestants skins, would never have brought
you to their opinion, if they could have imagined the number to have been so
great as at this day, now that they are forced to assemble themselves
together, it appears. And who is he that with himself can conspire the
murdering of such a multitude without horror, or that may consent thereto
unless he abandon all feeling of humanity?

Consider sir what affection those men can bear to your service, when they
thirst so much after your blood, what fidelity they bring to the preservation
of this so frail and ancient estate, when they soake out that our remainder
of force and strength by so unreasonable bloodletting, that even those that
shall be the Barbers and Surgeons, shall be in danger of drowning themselves. For
we alas, have at over high a price learned that thirty or forty thousand
Protestants, armed for the defense of their lives, and of whatsoever else they
hold dear in this world, cannot be overthrown without the loss of very near
as many Catholics, who marching against their wills to this warfare, can
hardly counteruaile the forces of those whose hope rests in despair and who
have nothing left but courage and weapons.

If the Lords vengeance does so fiercely pursue us, who shall remain to obeie
this Edict? If both parties once come to flesh themselves each upon other, even
to the utter destruction and ruin of the one or other party, who dare promise
himself that he shall remain and enioie the victory, if it may be termed a
victory after such destruction? or rather, what shall remain for the plague
and famine which alredie do plead against war, for the honor of the utter
ruin of your Realm?

But what may the posterity say, when it shall hear that your court of
Parliament has propounded the honoring of the articles of a league, assembled
against the estate: armed against the kings person: risen up against God
himself: Yea such a one as spiting nature, commands the fathers to be no
longer fathers to their sons: the mothers to be no mothers to their
daughters: inuiting one friend to betraie another, and calling the murderer to
the succession of the murdered, with the fatherly name of your edictes?

We will no longer stand upon the particularities of the iniquities, and
wrongs, in an infinite number gathered together under this form of Edict,
whereby those that are authors thereof do hope to be able to win the Realm,
when they have once put you to lose it. But we beseech your majesty not to
be led by their counsels, which proceed only from blind ambition: but
rather as you have begun, so to follow the so renowned example of the wisdom
and justice of Solomon, for as he, to the end to try out the true mother from
the supposed, fained to become cruel, so do we likewise hope that your
majesty having made show to communicate in the tirannous desires of the
league, to the end to discover them, will take heed of fulfilling them, and
rather make your profit of the same to the preservation of your natural and
obedient subjects.

We mean not herein, for to excuse the taking of Montlymar, and many other
places surprised by those of the pretended Religion, neither do we desire any
thing so much, as that a good peace might restore strength and authority to
your laws, whereby to do you right: but Nature permitting all men to defend
their lives by whatsoever means, does somewhat excuse those that have been
brought to that necessity, and contrariwise the sin of the others is
inexcusable, in that, that they counsel your Majesty to so pernicious a
warfare, only upon licourishnes of the confiscation of the Protestants goods,
whom with such rigors they have forced to seek recompense of their losses at
your cost, and to confiscate whatsoever they may be able to enterprise upon
your majesty.

As for the Bull, the curat finds the style thereof to be new, unusual, and
so far from the modesty of former Popes, that it does no way therein
acknowledge the order of a Successor to the Apostles. And because throughout
our records, or in any antiquity we find not that the princes of France
have been subject to the Popes justice, either that subjects have taken notice
of their Princes religion, the Court cannot determine thereupon until the Pope
can prove his right which he pretends in the translation of Realms
established and ordained by GOD, before the name of Pope came into the world:
Until he has declared unto us by what title he entermedleth in the succession
of a youthful and strong prince, who by the course of nature may have his
heir in his loins: Before he has instructed our Religion, with what
appearance of justice or equity he denies the law of nations* to such as are
fallen into heresy, yea against the holy canons and ancient decrees, which
never suffer any to be holden for an heretic, until he has been freely
heard in his reasons, admonished by sundry synodes and judged by a Council
called and freely gathered together: He must teach us with what kind of
piety and holiness he gives that which is not his own, or takes away that
that lawfully belongs to another: That he stirs up the vassals and
subjects to mutinies against their lords and sovereign Princes, and
overthrows the foundations of al laws and polliticke order: To be brief, he
must show us by what authority he enterpriseth to condemn your blood to the
fire, and as it were, to send part of your soul into hell.

But in as much as this new Pope in lieu of instruction, does in his bull
breathe out nothing but destruction and changes his shepheardes staff into a
flaming or fiery torche, wherewith utterly to destroy those whom if they be
straied, he ought to win again to the flock of the church. The Court can no
longer consult upon the publication of a Bull so pernicious unto all
Christendom, and to the soueraintie of your crown, even presently deeming it
worthy no other recompense, then the same which one of your Predecessors
caused us to give to the like Bull sent unto him by one of this Popes
predecessors: and that was to cast it into the fire in the presence of the
whole French Church, inioining his Attorney general to make diligent
inquisition after those that had prosequuted the expedition thereof in the
Court of Rome, to the end to minister so severe and speedy justice against
them, that it might serve for an example to all posterities.

For who knows not that all those suttleties are sued out by all the enemies
of this estate, who under the name of your heirs do directly address
themselves against your own person, imagining that alredie by their practices
they have atteined the type of their attempts, and that they have no more to do
but by the cloak to pluck you out of your seat, to the end to take full
possession of that which they have barked at, and followed so long.

These things are so evident, and have been so narowlie searched out, that it
were in vain for us to abuse your patience with any larger declarations,
whereof we do not hope any greater effect or virtue then of the former. But
if it be so that our sins have utterly closed up the ears of your clemency
against justice, yet do us this favor, to take into your hands again those
officer wherewith it has pleased your majesty and the kings your
predecessors to honor us withal, so shall you be freed from the importunate
difficulties which we are forced to make at such Edictes, and our consciences
discharged from the curse that God has prepared for wicked magistrates and
their Counsailors.

The necessity of your affairs have many times heretofore forced us to wink
at sundry oppressions and pernicious inventions.

The opinion which your majesty had conceived that those of the pretended
reformed Religion would habandon the exercise thereof, and that that faction
might be oppressed without much bloodshed or destruction of this estate, have
yet received so much power over our aduises as to cause us to pass the
reuocation of very many Edictes, so solemnlie sworn unto.

We do now to our great grief and confusion perceive how small profit to you
our cowardlines has brought, how hurtful it has been to all your subjects:
and how shameful to us and our posterity. Our patience can no longer be
obedience, but inexcusable astonishment if it stretches any further, or
proceeds to carelessness and contempt of all Commonwealth.

It is therefore more convenient for your majesty to have no Court of
Parliament, then to see the same unprofitable as we are, and it will be more
honorable for us to return private into our houses, or in our bosoms to
bewail the public calamities with the rest of our fellow Citizens, then to
enthrall the dignity of our offices to the cursed inventions of the enemies of
your Crown.

An advertisement to the three Estates of France, concerning the war of the
League.
MY Masters you were heretofore sufficiently advertised yt the league,
notwithstanding whatsoever it promised, would breed great calamities in this
Realm, and yet do small harm to the king of Navarre, and his partakers.
Likewise that it was made properly against this Realm, and so acknowledged at
the first by both the king and all your selves. The K. of N. as he in him self
feels the least harm and you the principal, so is he but the ^ullor and
pretense.

The worst is that you had more mind to see it then to prevent it, and to
feel it, even to the quick, then to believe it. Notwithstanding in deed I
know that many of you have served for Cassandra^s unto Troy, as having small
authority to turn away y^ mischief, though wise enough and sufficiently
advised to foretell it.

The authors of this League to the end the more easily to induce you to enter
into this war, did propou^d great facility therein. It would be done in
three days, the best houldes were not to hold out the first sound of their
name. The K. of Na. was by and by stumbled: there wanted no more but the making
of his Epitaph: If any man presumed but once to make mention of 25. years evil
spent in this like purpose, that is to say, much time wasted in consuming our
selves, it was an offense and proved heresy, neither wanted there these
ordinary replications, namely that the League that now was taken in hand was
a far other matter, and that these Capteines knew other sleights, and thus
vio^ence in lieu of reason made them to prevail.

Mark here my masters the progress of their affairs in one year, measure
by that years work all the ^est, notwithstanding their principal ^eate be
vanished in smoke, and the most part of their choler converted into phlegm, and
thereby you may be able to judge of the success of that which is to come:
for you shall see that as wearied and tired as already we be, we have not set
forward any one good step, but that we have gone back two for it.

After the edict of Iulie which proceeded by the violence of the league, the
Lord of Main took upon him the province of Guyenne, and to that end had
beside the forces of the league, all the kings power committed to him, whereby
each one may judge what army that was: (for of two reasonable strong armies
he made but one) he departed possessed with a great mass of money, and had
in a manner dried up the whole devotion of the Clergy: he wanted neither
artillery nor munition. But besides if you will but call to mind either their
brags, or your own imaginations a^ that time, you shall find that all the
walls in Guyenne mouldered away and vanished in dust: yea even the King of Na.
wist not where to become to shroud himself.

And in deed it is most certain that he was then unarmed as one that neither
would, neither could be persuaded that the obedience which he still yielded to
the king, could have turned to his destruction: he was armed with sure
confidence in God the mainteiner of the right, yea, even naked against armed
injury, he thought him self sufficiently covered under his kings armor,
which should have defended him, since he had so far honored him, as to
acknowledge and take his quarrel for his own.

Well the said L. of Main comes into Poictou and Xantoigne: he leaves
behind him Rochel, and S John d'Angely, Pons, etc, And setting upon nothing
(yet were these places nearest the heart of the realm, and occasion fell very
well out, for at that time they were so vexed with ye plague, that the
soldiers could scarce a bide to continue among them) he thence took his way
through Perigord, where by composition, he took the Castle of Montignac le
Conte, a place that had been as it were the banner of all the former troubles
as every one knows, and the course of his voyage did bear as if he should
have gone to Bergerac, there to have tried the first fury of his army, but he
took his way by Souillac, where he passed over Dordonne leaving Monfort,
Turenne, Saint Cere, places belonging to the Vicount of Turenne untouched.
Thence he entered into Queacy, where the adversary held Figeac, Cadenac,
Ca^earc, and other places, he was lodged in the midst of them three whole
weeks, he was desired by the estates of the country, urged by the Bishop of
Cuhorls, and importunatly called upon by the Seneschall, to deliver them: yea
it is not unknown to what words the Lords of St. Supplice and Camburat grew
unto with him, when they see all the country waste and brought into famine,
and all without profit, and in deed he did nothing but compou^d with two or
three gentlemen of the weakest lodged, with condition that they might exercise
their religion in their houses, so that they prosecuted no war from their
holds, saving that in their own persons they might do it in any other place.

His excuses were that he would go cleanse the rivers and assure the traficke
of the country. Also the most trusty he told in their ears, that he would
surprise and assail the K. of Na. wheresoever he were. A truantlike
stratageme if ever there were any, which nevertheless was their foundation, as
if France had been a chesse board, wherein a prince could not have walked
above four steps, and in deed the K. of Nau. having as well as he could
furnished such places as he left behind him, passed over the river of Garonne
between the two armies of the said Duke of Main, and the marshall of Matignon
which lay not past four or five leagues from him, and so came to Bergerac
even in the face of the Duke of Maynes army and there aboade a whole month
together without either river or brook betvveene them, and yet had never so
much as one all arume given him, and so finally went into Xantogne setting
forward toward France, and visiting his government even to the banks of
Loyre. This did he who^ they should have chased away within four months, yea
he whom they should have brought to the baie, unless he had resolved
speedely to avoid the realm.

The marshall of Matignon had besieged Castetz, a house of the L. Faba^
standing upon Garonne, when the L. of Main came. The said Lord of Main
without his knowledge, to the end to rob him of that small glory,
compounded for xii. thousand crowns to have it yielded to him, which was an
unusual matter among soldiers, that a place being beaten and the breach made
should be assaulted with silver.

Since that time he took S. Bazeill, Montsegur and Castillon, places unknown
before these vvarres: places never mentioned in the most particular maps:
places of no name but only for the resolution of defense, and yet such places,
especially Montsegur and Castillon, as have cost him dear every way. And
it is most certain that had not the pestilence vexed Castillon more then a man
would vveene, he had been hardly set before it, considering that the Lord of
Turenne did succor and refresh it even in the sight of the said D. of Main.
This is the sum of all that he has done in Guyenne in one whole year: Where
you are also to note that the K. of N. has increased himself with
Tayllebourge and Royan, places that be strong both by art and nature, havens,
yea the mouths of Charent and Garonne, I speak not of St. John d'Angely
Tonnay-Charent and others, which besides them are recompense sufficient for
Castetz and St. Bazeile.

I leave to say that Garonne which was promised to be opened for the
contenting of Tholouze and Bordeaux do still remain shut, yea more straightly
then before the war: for you must not think that after the taking of St.
Bazeile the said Lord of Main durst set upon Caumont which having the river
between the^ stood in his face, neither Mas and the other places that
command over Garonne, besides that at the same time they fortifi^d the town
of Meillan, which is more worth then all that he has taken, as the country
men know well enough, besides also certain sorts on each side of the water,
which since they have builte beneath Clairac, whereby the merchants to whom
he had given his word to make free the trafick before the last Christmas,
forbidding them expresselie upon pain of death to compounde for the liberty
and assurance of the passage for them, and their wares do find themselves
further to seek then at the first, while in the mean time for want of
traffike they have incurred sundry losses wherebie diverse are become
Bankerupts, have finally grown to composition, cursing the League and all the
favorers thereof. But that was it which marshall Matygnon very well
perceived, which also how modest soever otherwise, he could not in some of
his letters conceal, namely, that the Duke of Main had enterprized more upon
Tholouxe and Burdeux, meaning by Castle Trompet, then upon Mas of Verdun or
Caumont.

Now judge you what likelihoode there is that herafter they may make any
great account of the rest of Guyenne: For all such places as at the entry into
the war, that began about the latter end of the year, might have wanted
victuals, have now at ease made their provision, even with their neighbors
consents, whether it were, that common necessity of both parts urged them to
such mutual offices, either else that they abhor such extremities and detest
the misery of the time: and yet in their notes which they exhibited to the
King vvherebie to persuade him of the easiness of this affair, the same was
set down as an especial mean that they pretended against the principal
towns, a mean truly that holds more of the nature of extremity then of a
mean, and which is more, such a mean as they cannot come to again in two
good years and more.

Neither have the affairs of the League prospered any better in other
Provinces. For the L. of Mountmorancye, who in respect of the injury that he
perceived to be done to the K. of Nauar, has associated himself unto him*
has brought to his devotion Lodeue and Pons two Bishops* Seas, with their
Dioceses. He has fortified both the banks of Rhosne, He has shot out his
roots so far into Prouence that they have been forced to grant to the
Gentlemen free exercise of Religion. All that may be said to be vvonn in
Languedock is the forte of Montesquyon, lately won rather by treson then
strength, which may be cou^terpeized with a number of Fortes of like mettle
taken in Prouence, and Marueyolz, which hereafter will serve only to make
all other resolute, in respect that contrary to the promised faith there were
such cruelties and excesses committed therein that hereafter we must seek to
find out new names wherewith to describe the^. But the siege of Mas St. Puels
alone is enough to counterpeise all the glory thereof, as being the most
miserable and weakest place of all L'A^ragois, which giving the repulse to the
army of the L. of Ioyeuse slew him 32 capteins and 5. hundred Harguebuts,
dispersed or barred his regiments, and cracked his credit with the men of
war, yea drove him to such an exigent, that in the estates since holde^ at
Castelnaudarry he resolved to meddle no further therein.

As for Daulphine, that province which every man knows (if we respect the
contrary party) to have bin the weakest of al other when the trobles began:
to be brief, the province wherein the Lord of Main thought to have made ye
first trial of his fortune, whereupon also he assured himself of an easy
overthrow of ye rest, no man is to learn how they suffered Mo^limart a notable
town be taken, also Ambru^, the metropolitan of the countreie, those two that
they thought they had won to the league, which now the L. of Desdiguires has
made impregnable, besides that they have let them recover Dye, Liuron, and
other places of whose conquest the Lord of Main triumphed and grounded the
foundation of his glory.

I leave sundry castles in diverse provinces taken with less then ten pound of
powder, for the which the league would have rung al their belles, and enriched
all the mercers of the Palace, if it had won them with the canon: neither do I
say that these small holds which ye Lord of Main sounds in our cares, do
every of them cost a million of gold, besides the lives of the best of our
soldiers, whereas the good towns before mentioned, cost not the K. of Na. and
his associates past some Petronel shot, and scarce one man. Also that in all
the small bickerings that have happened (for there have been no great
battle) we shall find that the greatest loss have fallen upon the League,
so as we may truly say that for one of the pretended reformed Religion
there have died at the least 30. of the League. To be short, all things
considered, vvil any man be so fond as to exchange Royan and Taillebourg in
Guyen, Lodeue and St. Ponsun Languedock, Mountlimart, Ambrin and Dye in
Daulphine etc. for Montgnac, Castetz, St. Bazeil, Mountsegur and Castillon, the
tokens of the victories of the League, the Trophyes of the Duke of Main, but
costly and ruinous triumphs, yea I dare well say funeral triumphs

Now that they have spit all their fire comes in a mighty Foreign army to
the succor of the K. of Na. what miracle will the League here bring forth to
cover us? When before the King it was alleged that undoubtedly he should
have aid from the Princes that professed the same Religion with him, though
they shot expreslie at Religion, and that they would needs have the visard
pulde of, they had, if we would believe them, long before seen to that:
Concerning the Queen of England they should cut her out so much work from
the Scottish parts even in her own Realm, that she should have enough to
do, and it is no doubt but they have kindeled all fire brands, stirred up all
ashes, and blown at every spark that they might, and yet it has pleased God
to breathe such a blast upon their purposes that England was never so quiet,
never so strongly united to Scotland* neither had ever more evident view of
Gods blessings either at home or abroad, for that God many times and freely
has miraculouslie discovered those practices that the Jesuits stirred up
against the said Q. of England her person and estate, and contra wise favored
her enterprises that she has taken in hand for the defense of those whom she
knew to be wro^gfullie oppressed.

To the end to take away al difficulties, they did in a manner enter into bond
to the King, that the K. of Na. should have no succor out of Germany. To
color this vain hope, they allege those old controversies upon some points
of religion between the French and the Dutch churches, which they promised by
their practices to nourish. And now to the contrary, we see that such polices
have served only to reunite their hearts, and cease their disputations: that
they are most firmly reconciled together to the end henceforth to make it
all one body and one cause: that the King of Denmark, the Princes and
Electors of the Empire, the L. of the Cantous of the Swytsers, and the Grisons
do find them selves grieved in the person of this prince, feeling themselves
hurt in his wounds, and teinted in his injuries. As in deed, who would not
have been moved: who would not perceive the consequence of that which was
framed against him? When for the religion that they profess, which themselves
first admitted into their countries, his state, life and honor, are g^uen in
pray, himself incapable of all dignities and goods? They should have armed
the Germans, one against another: they should have renewed the old braules
between the Catholic and Protestant Princes, neither, said they, did they
want devices to divide the Protestants among themselves. Where be now these
great policies? what is become of all these discourses, since that Germany was
never at better union in it self, or more disposed to succor their enemies:
or now what will they do to that wretch Casimire (for so do they term this
Prince) who one of these dai^s (which will be no nues unto them) will march over
the belly of the trunk of these goodly waterboughes, of the eldest of
Lorrayne.

But if the worst fall out and for the breaking of all, when the R^ystres do
come in they will bring an army out of Italy that shall consist of the
contributions of the Princes of the League. It lies in an ambush in the Alps
even ready to break forth at the time appointed. The state of it trotted all
over the Palace, it was read over the Court of the Loure, But where I pray
you does it now sleep? why does it not appear at this need? nay who
knows not that to the contrary the Lords of Venice the most ancient friends
and confederats of this Realm have offered the king succor against the League,
and do now exhort him to peace. That the king of Spain upon whom they build
all their purposes, since they have not performed what they promised, has
left them in the mid way and with reproach returned their agentes. And what
will they say to Pope Sixtus himself, who has confessed to the Lord of
Mountmorencie that they had ouerreached him in their declaration published
against the King of Nau* and the Prince of Conde, he prays him to pacific
matters, even he under whose shadow they sought to provoke them: The Pope who
even in Auignon, and that by express treaty, permits to the contrary
party of Daulphine and Prouence free access, to the end with his leave
daily to dravv thence victuals, weapons, powder, and all other munition of
war.

This Itilian army being thus either moulten, or not having been built but in
the air, and contrariwise the dutch army being in nature and having one foot
alredie upon the borders, who sees not into what extremities thorough their
illusio^s they have brought the people? who perceives not what peniworths they
make of our calamities? of all our blood? of the kings honor and of the Realm?

But they will fight with them, and in deed that is one of the greefes
published in their pamphlets, vz. that in the former troubles the strangers
were not fought with upon the frontiers: Feign would I learn who let them
when in the first troubles the late D. of Guyse commanded over the power of
France? In the second the D. of Aumale had an army upon the borders to
debar them the entry, besides the death of the P. of Conde which fell out
n^^^ for his purpose: and in the last the D. of Main took it upon him, who
was 3. months before lodged upon the passages: who had at leisure chosen out
all places of advantage: who also nevertheless in all that long voyage never
gave them so much as one alarm. But this is their wonted manner. To the end to
have weapon in hand and to become arbitrators of the affairs, they will for a
time be holden for Protestants. It is for the kings service if they be not
alloued to fight: and when they have the bridle let lose, they be the first
that seek excuses, and then do like very well that any man shall say, it is a
dangerous and bad course to hazard the Nobility of France against an army of
strangers yea and in the heart of all France.

To be brief, will you see the good that the League has done generally in all
France. It has kindeled the fire both in all the four corners there of and
in the midst also. It has filled all the best Provinces and the best towns
with famine, and has not yet set one step forward in all the pretended
enterprise. It promised to root out all the Protestants, and see they have now
taken more anchore hold. It should drive them into Germany, and behold it
has brought Germany into France. It promised to root out their doctrine, and
now mark how it has brought us to strive with them who shall have the staff,
and to make new lottes, and as it were to reenter into a new division with
them, where before they were content with such share and condition, as we
listed to grant them.

Let us* therefore look whether the League that has confounded all this
Estate, has at the least done any particular good to our estates. They were
shrouded, as you all know, under the thr^edbare cloak of Commonwealth, (for
so do they term it.) They had promised to discharge the people: and gave out
very loud that they were the very offspring of king Jews the twelft, yea and
that it went hard if they were not Successors to the beautiful surname that he
deserved, namely, Father of the people. Hereupon you had warning enough that
you should be more ouercharged then before. That a new war would bring in
nevve impostes. That the League to the end to bind you, gave you an earnest
penie, but vndoutedlie only to bind you to the bargain, and to make you to
pay the contract. Mark now therefore at one years end the suttletie of the
league Consider what this Commonwealth has in gendred: Seven and twenty new
Edicts at one clap, which seven and twenty years could not have brought
forth: Burde^some edictes edictes to the whole world. The dregs and scum of all
the invention of the Italian Courtiers. What wanted there more to oppres the
poor people? to fulfill ye confusion of this realm? In the Estates holden
complaint was made that multitude of officers in matters of Law was no
other but multitude and delaie of causes, and now behold an increase of
presidents, cou^sailers and other officers in sovereign Courts and presidiall
seas: mark the alternatiue receivers for the spices, in paying rent for the
multiplying, mainteining, delaying and enhaunsing of processes. Infinite times
had the suppression, or ordering of the unbridled number of Atturneies been
propounded, and now we see them not only innumerable, but also successiue or
hereditarie. Now I say we may see our causes that hold margent and line*
and passing from hand to hand, from father to son in the atturneies, grovve
to be perpetual to our posterity. How much better had it been to have let
the king alone quiet, who at the beginning of this League tended only to the
reestablishing of the ministration of Justice throughout his Realm? who so
carefully consulted with the principal of his sovereign Courts what means
were most convenient to restore all things into order* Long enough had we
perceived that number of officers in the de^^^ng with the treasury did breed
nothing but loss and diminution, so as the crown passing from the poor man,
going through so many treasurers hands, was scarce worth a testerne to the
kings purse, which bred the counsel to restore the ancient manner, which was
that all the kings coin should immediately be transported into the kings
treasury, so should they spare both the auditor and the accomptes: So might
they save two third parts of the treasury, and by this saving the K. might
without hurting him self have cased his people of one third and more. But
what shall we do now, now I say that they give us new generalles and
generallities* that they set up again without any reason the elections which
upon so good reasons had bin suppressed? that they make the offices of the
chambers of accounts hereditarie and al other offices saleable? which is as
much to say as to make the treasury of the Realm patrimoniall, hereditarie,
and saleable both to the dealers themselves and to those that should judge of
the dealing therein? These be the goodly successions that the controversy of
succession, so out of season propounded, have taught us. Successions of
pleaders and triflers: Successions of thieves and robbers of the Commonwealth,
Successio^s of deuourers, a thousand successors, eue^ during the kings life, to
this Realm seeing they succeed in his treasure.

The king before these commotions propounded the releeuing of his poor people,
but now we see them reduced into the extremity of confusion: he purposed to
redeem his demaines, now he sells them outright: to diminish courts and
subsidies, he now doubleth them, yea he sells them, which he never did
before: he went about to abolish old tributes, now from time to time he
raises new, and those of so many sorts that we shall need a Calepine to
learn to know their names. All these new charges and oppressions, al these
inventions, are the subtlety of the League which would not give the king
leisure to benefit his people, as envying ye wealth, peace, and restoring of
this Realm: envying the honor that should redound to the king for
reestablishing it: and envying the good affection and love that he should
win with his people, by granting them some release after so many labors.
Neither think but the Capteins of this league do reap the chief commodity,
for besides that one part of these new Edicts is dedicated to the maintenance
of the war that they have bred, and is guided by their hands, and so
consequently goes through their fingers, it is not unknown that the Duke of
Guyse has gotten to himself particularly the edict of ten sellers of Sea
fish, and the edict of twelve sellers of cattle at Paris, the edict that makes
us the alternatiue receivers for the spices, and the edict of amplification to
all the seas royal to tax throughout ye realm. That ye D. of Maine has also
had the Lieutenants of the long robes in every province, and that they both do
participate in ye heredity of offices venall, and of the chamber of accounts:
they that should by a new edict abolish all old tributes, even they that (as
they protest) should b^ing again the world of king Jews the twelft in to this
Realm.

It may be they have dealt better with the Nobility, for they seek so much
as they may to ^it^^gate their minds, and peradventure may have restored
them into their prist^nate emine^c^e* For they entitle themselves princes of
credit and they promised it: Al we that have tried their armies may know
whether gentlemen's houses which before were sacred, were euerles regarded then
by their troops, whether ever Huns, Gotths or Wandals could look for worse
dealing the^ they have had of them. Those of ye contrary part (because the
League sought to turn all the hatred of the war unto the K. who was forced
thereto) found favor, because also through their friends they compou^ded half
with wares and half with war. The Catholics contrari^^se because they
gathered assurance in themselves, their privileges, services and deserts, were
as it were given for a p^a^e, and entreated like enemies and strangers.

I say not that with such extraordinary charges as the comminaltie seems to
bear, the nobili^ie stands more charged then they: and that is it wherein
we ordinarily flatter our selves, for under color that we have not p^ide
forth the money, they persuade us that we pay non^* as if when a man is let
blood, the blood proceeded only from the arm that is lanced, and not from
the higher part^s, which are still to suppl^e it: truly if the farm be
spoiled, it is evident that it is the gentlemen that loses: If the customs
be dubbled upon the merchandise, it is the gentleman that bears it: he that
wears most silks discharges the custom: he that buieth up most horses,
stands charged with the edictes of the post. He that has largest walks of
land, is most charged with the entries of his wines, corn, and flesh, with
the dobling of subsidies, with the impost of hostries: let us go farther, he
that has most land has usually most matters in law, and therefore to speak
vprightlie, it is we that are charged with new preside^ts, councelers,
lieutenants, offices etc. It is we that pay the alternatife receivers for the
spices, and are to wage the hereditie of the begging atturneies. The lance is
first stricken into ye skin of the pesant, of the marcha^t, of ye officer, and
of the atturnie, etc The first blood, the first silver comes from them and
out of their purse: but they fill them selves again out of the higher parts:
they lick them selves hole at our cost. For the peasant has skill enough to
enhaunce his labor and fruits: the merchant to cast his accountes and to
raise the price of his merchandise, the officer by perticulers to bring in the
graunde sum that he has disbursed, the atturnie to enlarge his lignes and set
a greater rate of his writing and steps. Finally all of them do recover what
they have paid aforehand, and of whom, forsooth of the gentleman who sticks
to his losses, and have no further or higher degree where to recover himself.

Concerning our honors, you remember that in their protestation they should
restore each thing into his eminency, lodge every one according to his
degree, cause the gouernmentes to be restored to those from whom they pretend
them to be taken, etc. And because some men were vexed even at the hearts to
see certain gentlemen about the K. which through his favor and good will had
at once atteyned to the greatest honors, this argument did they use to poison
us with all: but you may call to mind that when the peace was concluded,
there was no one word spoken thereof, neither seemed they to restore any one
of those for whose sakes they seemed to take offense. And as for those whom in
their writings they so mangled, they have since most vildlye sought their
favors and endeavored by all means to bind them to them, and in deed you
and they see them both greater and in further authority then ever before. I
here meddle not with the kings choice, I touch not their deserts, I know
there is no dignity so great, but is opened to the nobility, or to which the
arm of virtue can not reach: but only I would have you mark what prete^ces
they make and how they do dally with us at pleasure, also that we may know
that they use our displeasures, our mislikes and our greefes: and so sone as
they have done with us, they remember us no more.

At the least they have done good to the Clergy: They have done somewhat for
the Church, their chief pretense: the Clergy that pauned forth themselves
and with so good a will sold themselves for them. Let us see, they promised
to disperse the Protestants of France, and now behold they have more
firmly united them; Mark how they have reunited and reconciled them with all
other Nations, Englishmen, Frenchmen, Germains, Danes, Scots, Swethians and
Switzers, see also how they have made them to associate themselves with our
Catholic Princes, and the chief Lords of this Realm. The faction of the
Religion grows to union and ours even manifestly disperseth it self, how
much better had it been to proceed by holy admonitions, by gentle
conversation, and by good examples, means peraduentute too gentle for the
impatient, but at the least healthsome and assured, peradventure less
agreeable to the pretended Physicians of our sickness, but at the least
profitable, but at the least nothing dangerous to the diseased.

What had the Clergy then gained? which of all the Bishops, notwithstanding
whatsoever his charges, ca^ say that he has been made whole again? that he
is any thing amended by their armies? Naie to the contrary, have not the
Lords of Ambrun, Lodeue, St. Pens, and others even of late lost their
Bishoprics? How much of their temporalties must they sell for the recovery
of them by force? Will not all their affection and heat of pledging, selling
and contributing be first wasted like smoke.

But will you also see that it was but a pretense. The capteins of ye league do
skirmish together as it seems: For when there was any speech of preaching
in France, they wrested forth the kings Edict expreslie to stop it, yet have
they permitted and consented that the Gentlemen of the contrary part,
compounding for their houses, shall have free exercise of the Re^igion, so that
from their said houses they make no war against the^. They have offered the
like co^ditio^s to other towns, castles and particular persons, They suffer
the reistres in the midst of their armies to have their ministers and
sermons, who have preached in their Churchyards and Churches, yea and
celebrated the supper openly in their camp. That which they permit to some,
why should not the K. permit to all? Wherefore may not the K. permit that to
his Subjects which the; so voluntarily do suffer in strangers? Wherefore
shall that be a ^^te of heresy in the king, which in them is zeal of the
Church, meritorious or venial? Wherefore should it be damnable or mortal to
their Superior?

These men have in the end robbed and polluted the holy places: these men have
spoiled and ransommed the priests and monckes: these men under pretense of
piety have committed 1000 impieties: these men upon a merriment have soaked
out all our goods and drowned us in all mischiefs. Of such and so great
inconveniences what good can redound to us? to the commons? to the nobility?
to the clergy particularly or generally? And who did ever any mischief,
at the least if he list to be obstinate in it, but for hope of good. But may I
yet sale more? what good have they done to themselves? For God has in such
sort cursed their actions that in the mean time while they ween to fee their
confraries in the Towns under pretense of that authority that the war
grants them: The best place^ that they had surprised, are withdrawn from
their subjection. Again and Auxonne with some other, though newly bought again
by the K. and restored into the League: And note that upon the least
coffeehouse this example will shortly be followed in all other places.

What follows? Since this League is unprofitable to it self, also that was is
hurtful to all: Seeing that in one and twenty months, being in greatest
force, it has done nothing to any purpose, but in lieu of going forward has
lost ground, what shall we do but have recourse to some other remedie^ and
never stand obstinately in this: in this corosiue and venomous Antimony which
expels both good and bad together: and many times the good rather then the
bad: which under color of driving forth the hurtful humors will make us void
blood, and peradventure our lives in the blood. Truly we must address our
selves to our king: he is a merciful Prince and one that loves his people,
^ee knows that a king dies in the ^eath of his Realm: he is vndoubted^^e
wounded in us deeper then our^^lues: he will pity himself in us and ^^ our
wounds. Let us therefore pri^atelie open them unto him and show ^im such as
threaten us. Let us with ^pen throat tell him what harm the ^eague does us.
Let us beseech him according to his singular wisdom to ^^nde some remedy,
some durable re^edie, such as may consist: with the ^sposition of our bodies:
some such ^^medie as our weakness can bear: ^^me such remedy as may
convert and ^^pple the humors, not such as wee^^g to purge, shall wholly
overthrow ^^r body: Let us above all things ^aie to God to turn the sweet
eye of ^^s mercy toward us: For who is able ^^ bear the rigorous countenance
of ^^s justice? That it may please him ^^th his spirit to assist our King in
ru^^g his Scepter. That he will vouch^^fe to inspire him with good council ^^d
to raise him up good Counsailers: to endue him with force and courag^ to heal
the humors and to stop v^ the vvounds of this Rea^lme: that to say, to
quench the cursed subtleties of the league, so to restore a holy, happy, and
permanent peace to this Estare.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Abell Ieffes, for Thomas Cadman. 1587.


