Directions from the King, to the governors of the Provinces, concerning the
death of the Duke of Guyse.

Together with the kings letter to the Lord of Taian.

Translated out of French into English by E. A.

LONDON, Printed by John Woolfe, 1589.

Jnstructions to the L. of N. concerning the death of the Duke of Guise, to the
end to inform all such as he shall think convenient, in place whether
presently his Majesty has sent him.
THe first troubles moved in this realm by the D. of Guise, anno 1585. have
given sufficient notice of a far other intent in him, then the same which he
pretended, therewith to abuse the over great credulity of those that are more
ready to embrace novelties, then wise to consider what ensue. For having
cloked his bad purposes with Catholic religion and the rooting out of heresy,
all his exploites have been put in execution in the Catholic towns, even in
the best that he could seize upon, to the end to begin to lay sure and firm
foundations of his said purposes, notoriously contrived long since for the
atteining to the usurpation of this crown. By means hereof, so far is heresy
from weakening through his rising, that contrariwise it is grown and waxen
much stronger then before it was in this land: and that the rather through his
with drawing of a great part of his majesty's forces and helps, whereby he
has bin hindered from working those effects that are necessary to the rooting
out thereof: whereof the said Duke has been the only cause, who
nevertheless has made himself falsely to be proclaimed, The persecuter of the
not Catholic religion.

His majesty nevertheless desiring to reunite all his Catholic subjects, did
by his first edict extinguish this fault, upon their goodly promises never to
return to the like: which notwithstanding, his forces being occupied in the
wars, as well in Guyen as in Prouence and Daulphine, the said D. yet seized
upon other strong holds, and spared no practices or devises daily to withdraw
more out of his majesty's obedience.

The seizing upon Paris, was the tipe of al mischief: which notwithstanding his
Majesty purposing to eschew all occasion of war among his said Catholic
subjects, endeavored also to bury this transgression with a second edict, and
hoping to mollify the hardness of the said D. of Guises heart, by favors and
courtesies bestowed upon him, so many as he seemed any way to demand.

But his ambition having a farther intent then to depend upon any other, in
lieu of acknowledging his duties to his majesty, and converting the same to
his service, he used them as bridges to new practices and attempts.

He never left practicing the good towns that yet remained steadfast in his
majesty's obedience, and it may be said, that in such of them as he yet could
not draw wholly to his side, the division was through the said drifts so
great, that the magistrates in the most part were not able any longer to
restrain the inhabitants from murdering, and cutting each others throat.

His partakers being detected of diverse heinous crime, were under his support
maintained in all freedom, so as the magistrates have not been able to
minister justice.

The insolency as well of himself as of his, proceeded so far, as to face,
threaten, and terrify those that would not be other then his majesty's
servants, to the end to force them to abandon him, that they might afterward
the more easelie use them at their pleasures.

In the assembly of the states they spared no means through the ministry of
diverse their partakers who^ they had practiced throughout the provinces, to let
fall the elections, so to take away all authority and obedience from his
Majesty, and make him odious to his subjects: whom they had stirred up to make
unto him sundry absurd requests, to the end by obteyning them to cast down
the dignity of his Majesty, or being refused, to take thereof a pretense to
break off, and then to impute the cause to his Majesty, and so bring him into
hatred with his said subjects.

His Majesty has used all discretion possible, even so far forth, that he
knew himself to have encurred the contempt of his said subjects, which was a
great preparatiue to the said duke of Guize to strike his long forecast blow:
and indeed his Majesty has received advice from sundry places, even from
such persons as otherwise were affected to the said duke of Guize, and yet
abhorred his bad mind, that without speedy regard to his affairs he was in
hazard to loose both crown and life.

All this importing not only his own person but his whole kingdom, to the
preservation whereof, together with the peace of his subjects, he owes all
care, as taking himself to be answerable before God if he look not thereto,
finding the mischief otherwise irremediable, but only by the death of him
that was the author, and purposed thereof to reap the profit he was forced to
put the said D. of Guize to death, which he performed the ^^^ of December
last, 1588.

And because there might hereof r^^ne diverse reports, also that according to
men's passions the truth might be disguised, and so the action misliked* which
nevertheless can not be imputed but to Gods justice, which the said Duke had
by all means provoked against himself, his Majesty thought it good to publish
this brief discourse, to the end as well his subjects, as all others might
thereby be made capable of the truth of the matter, attending greater light
which may in few days be gathered.

As also he wills his said subjects to assure themselves of his
perseverance in his purpose to prosecute the rooting out of all heresy, a
matter not depending upon the affection of the said Duke of Guize or any
other, but only of his said Majesty's proper motion and firm intent, who in
heart does not desire any thing more then to see God honored and served, and
the Catholic Apostolic Romish religion to flourish throughout this realm as
much as ever it did.

He is also in the same mind that he always made solemn declaration of, viz.
to relieve his subjects so much as possibly he might and has given to
understand to the deputies of the general estates assembled in this town,
that his pleasure is, the same to be finished in all liberty, as also that
they open unto him whatsoever good motions they can conceive for the attayning
to the said relief, which next unto the service of God, his Majesty does
most affect.

Howbeit his will is, that all partialities, leagues, associations,
intelligences and practices do cease among his subjects, to the end from
henceforth next after God to rely upon no other but their king, whom the
divine goodness has given them, assuring them, that in so doing he will love
and cherish them as his own children. As also he is determined no longer to
suffer the contempt of his authority, but to use such severe punishment of
those that shall forget their duties in this behalf, as may be to the example
of all others.

Thus signed, Henry, and underneath, Renot.
Given at Blois, December. 24. 1588.
The kings letter to the Lord of Taian.
MY Lord of Taian, God has at the last freed me from him that to the end to
enfeeble my authority (as already he had well begun) and withal to wrest
away both my life and scepter, did keep my kingdom in trouble. Yesterday
morning had he his deserved punishment, whereof I thought good to advertise
you, and withal to send you a summarie discourse of the truth of the matter,
as well that it be not counterfeited unto you, as also that you might impart
the same to my subjects in those parts, and withal set your hand to the
containing of all men in peace and quiet: likewise, if any should peradventure
be so foolish as to make any commotion, to take so good order that the same may
receive due punishment for his trespass and disobedience, praying God (my Lo.
of Taian) to have you in his holy and worthy custody. Written at Bloys this 24.
of December. 1588.

Signed, Henry, and underneath, Renot.
The Superscription.

To the Lo. of Taian, who commands in our name in our countries of Xantogue
and Angumois.




