A HELP TO MEMORY AND DISCOVRSE: WITH TABLE-TALKE, as Music to a Banquet of
WINE.

Being a Compendium of witty, and useful Propositions, Problemes, and
Sentences, Extracted from the larger Volumes of Physicians, Philosophers,
Orators and Poets:

Distilled in their assiduous and learned Observations:

And which for Method, Manner, and Referent Handling, may be fitly termed, A
Second MISSELANY; Or, Help to Discourse.

LONDON: Printed by T. B. for Leonard Becket, and are to be sold at his Shop in
the Temple, near the Church. 1630.

Ad Lectorem.
AS Bastard once the Epigramist said,
As every skill is nothing when it is shown:
So were his labors slighted when they were known.
Four lines (says he) which tug'd me hours twain,
My Reader swallows up and takes no pain.
Of Books and Pamphlets I commerse with many,
Before I drew a good conceit from any.
A hundred Ballads had not so much wit,
To yield one platform for to build on it:
And yet my Printer thinks that he shall leese,
That buys my Epigrams at pence a piece.
Yet a wise looker on, that viewes a ground,
Set with rich grafts and plants but rarely found,
From several nurseries brought in and set,
Must think some pains was taken such to get.
And if a Gardner much waste woods pass by,
Before one wholesome fruit makes glad his eye;
Why should he think that such a plot does suit
But he should reap the harvest of his fruit?
Though Bastards Printer seemed to be so nice,
Matter and Lines are good, must bear me price.
To the Reader.
OF all th'internall faculties of man,
None nobler then the memory: for when
Our youthful industry with labor took,
Has sucked Schools dry, and made it self a book,
This trusty Treasourer that turns the key,
Must locked in memories chest, or 'twill away;
For man is truly said to know no more,
Then what he can remember of his store,
And vouch at need, I Would have a man to be
A Minshaw, or Gesuers History,
To know all names, and natures, and to read*
A lecture to each question does proceed.
In praise of the Work, and the Author.
HE that does read, and fain would understand
Shall find instruction here at the first hand.
Welcome his willingness: lead him along
To the choice Arbo^s, where a fragrant throng
Of sauors delicate seems to inuit him,
And mutually agree, all to delight him.
This book's the Garden, and since thou art in,
Walk through each Arbor, whilst alone unseen,
Then contemplate the beauties that be there
Planted, to fill thy pleasure every where:
Let then thy memory strive to regaine,
These preparatiues and cordials for the brain,
Since by it plausible discourses is cherished,
Which else by ignorance and fate had perished.
Glad then the Author, since his willing hand,
Twixt thee and ignomy, is content to stand:
And let him praises have; for thankful spirits
Give solace to the man that truly merits.
W. Lort.

DIRECTIONS for DISCOV^SE.
IN your discourse use not many circumstances before you come to the matter,
for that begets a weariness in the Auditors: and yet for eschuing of
bluntness, use some preamble thereunto; for that persuades attention, and
conceit of some methodicall consequence. Of all the excellent attributes and
faculties of man, in none does he differ more from a beast, then in his Ratione
and Oratione, in his Reason and Discourse: In the excellency and perfection
whereof, like the pen of a ready Writer, is the tongue of a perfect speaker,
which in the wise management and excellency of that quality, in the prosecution
of his relation and story, possesses with a silent (...)derment and
admiration, the ears and (...)fes of those within the compass of his c^^ning:
for as the Poet could say, Dic mihi musa virum --
Qui mores hominum multorum vidit and vrbes,


So I say, Give me the man for Discourse, that has seen the manners and
situations of Cities and men; which has scene, and is obseruable in the
passages and occurrences of the world, the creatures thereof, and the
casualties therein: for that draws up to the ^are of life and fresh view, what
has past, and is buried in the grave of oblivion. For without discourse and
the preciousnes thereof, how should fore-passed actions which to that end are
sometimes done, be Presidents, Examples, or fore-warnings, both to present and
future times, and which though done, and to us known, yet in a dead
understanding appear to the sense like Landscape to the Eye, till some perfect
musician with the excellency of this instrument present them to the Ear, in
more fresher colors and life. Oh the tedious hours that have been posted
away with this enchanting Siren! This it is that presents education, Gentility,
understanding, memory: this it is like music to a banquet of wine, luls the
sense in the sweetest and highest fullness and melody of content: it has been
a porter to admit many a poor outside for his preicous inside, To silken laced
and perfumed hindes,
That had rich bodies, but poor wretched minds.
And though in the cross carriage and misimployment, it has subdued many a
rich chastity of it self, which though it make not for the good, yet it argues
for the power: But where Lady Pecunia and she join hand to hand in conspiracy,
they make havoc and deuastation of all in the way. I^ luls asleep heavy
senses after large suppers, and takes captive many a fair Lady, that if the
first and second bait take them not, they are not mist with the third.
Travelers and Historiographers go a fishing with no other bait: In a word,
communication and conference between man and man, is the life of living: but
Discourse the life of that life.

Q. Since Discourse is so excellent, precious and profitable, and yet so few
can orderly manage it, wherein consists the greatest help thereunto.

A. In Relation and Memory: for as without knowledge our memory has no su^iect
to work upon, even so without m^mory, our knowledge is always in the A^tumne,
withering, and decay; the brittle and slippery footing whereof (as testifies
each man's experience) forgets much more then it can contain. For as once one
learned in the Laws, told his fellow Advocate at the bar, entering into some
wrangling comparisons, that he had forgot more law then ever the other learned;
to which I easily assent, because I know all memory to be Infida and labilis,
untrusty to keep, and trusty only to deceive; and which was peradventure more
then he himself at that time was master of, that being only ours that we
remember: for every man may say of the much seed that has fallen into his
ground, little harvest has been gathered into his barn; not unlike the fruit
which the sower in the Gospel received from his seed, of which whilst he cast
it forth, some fell into the highway, a ground unfit to receive it in, like the
incapable memory of the old man, by reason of his too much dryness, of the
young man; by reason of his too much moisture: And though it fall as some of his
s^^d fell into good ground, that of it self had that reasonable fruitfulness,
in regard of some proportionable mixture of heat and moisture, that it might
have yielded an increase suitable thereunto; yet then the cares and troubles of
the world, do either exhaust and drink it dry, or like the seed which fell
among thorns, choke it up, that it can take no root or impression.

Qu. But if the memo^y be so precious, that the waste of the tongue spends upon
the storehouse there* so useful, so delightful, that to it we walk as to
some Castle or Tower of Antiquity, to view the Records and Registers of
forepassed ages and accidents, there hung up as monuments to our view; without
which, whatsoever has been done, had been as soon forgotten as done,
without further use or consequence, but that there we find it registered by the
finger of Gods providence and power, and committed to this great Custos
Recordorum: where of every man is a keeper, that somethings detaines in such
capital letters, that many years obscure nor deface not: and yet other things
again so slightly and negligently apprehends, that in a short period of time
they are wiped out as with a sponge; yea, even such as w^ grieve to forgo, and
thereupon it growe^ that the question is, By what means (...) ordering, this
precious Virgin ( secretary of the soul) may be kept uncorrupted, ever
flourishing, in her best and middle youth and ripest apprehension.

An. Though I am not ignorant of the precious virtue of this most excele^^t
handmaid of the soul, that lodges in the hindermost closet and chamber of the
Brain, the volume and contents whereof she so often ouerturnes with delight:
yet am I not so skillful to propose any rules whereunto she may be wedded to
become more fruitful, though I know there are that have laid down such: but
that any were ever much bettered thereby, has not come unto my knowledge, more
then by doubtful Relation. In Authors I have read of some men of wonderful
memories, as of Seneca, that he could recite 2000. names.

Of others again so weak, that they have forgotten to read, nay, their own
names; and all these out of the strength or weakness of their natural memory:
For how should it be that a weak memory by nature, should become much bettered
by Art, when it must recount or set down by so many Ideas, or Imaginations
formed in the mind; by certain places, colors, or letters the circumstances
whereof require a reasonable strength that way, without which there is no
possibility of working. For in this artificial memory distinguished by places
as it were paper leaves, the Ideas or Images, letters, the disposition of the
Images in their places, the method for the reading, all which are a charge to
the memory; yet the Authors in this Art say, this is done more by the
understanding then the memory: The helps whereof by this Art memoratiue, they
would prove to be as effectual, by these conceived fictions in the eye of the
mind, as those we remember by the visible eye of the body: for example whereof,
say they, concerning the latter we read in the holy Scriptures of 12. Stones
that were erected in the river Jordan in memory of the wonderful transpassage
of the Israelites, Ios. 24.27. Likewise the Sacraments ordained of God (say
they) are as visible Ideaes to remember invisible things, to which we easily
assent: or as by the tying of the finger with a thread, we are sometimes
remembered, what that cannot tell us, but points us to, as an adiunct to ou^
memory.

So in like manner are these places, and ^^deaes, mementoes, and helps for the
ey^ of the mind, as significant as the other for the body.

The Art whereof by reason of some difficulty therein, I leave to the
practisers, and those that will further wade therein, whilst I only relying
upon a natural Memory, and the strength thereof infused by God, am careful,
not disparaging any other either Help or Art, both to preserve it in my self,
and to commend to others, such preservatives and helps, as are drawn from the
works of the learned in this kind.

Directions for the preservation of the natural Memory, consisting first in
avoiding of things hurtful: Secondly, in embracing such things as are helpful.
THe Memory, whose Eyes are seated in the back part of the Brain, has no
object till something be effected: she looks not forward at things to come,
but records events already succeeded; the edge whereof, like the finest razor,
is quickly turned or blunted: wherefore among many things that are required to
preserve it in a perfect temperature, these especially ensuing, are respected
as principal furtherers or decayers thereof. And first of the offensive part.

Things hurtful for the Memory to be anoyded.
First, we are to observe, that all co^rupt airs, noisome vapors and sent^
are offensive thereunto, and therefore o^ chiefest respect ought to be, that
the Air wherein we breathe, be not thick, foggy, and unwholesome, annoyed
with stinking marshes, standing ditches, and lakes, etc.

Secondly, that we walk not forth in foggy or mystie Euenings or Mornings,
before or after the Sun be down or up.

Thirdly, that we abstain from all crude and gross Flesh, unripe fruits,
green herbs, and all other things, cold by nature or vaporous, which send up
gross humore into the brain.

Fourthly, that we avoid all fuming drinks, strong Wine, and Ale, or any
broths made of unwholesome water.

Fifthly, from Beans, Pease, Garlic and Onions, which especially cause
Headache, hurt the Eyes and the Sinews, and by weakening the senses, cause
dreams and fantasies.

Sixthly, Likewise from such things as are flow of digestion, as Cheese, Nuts,
Wallnuts, and meats of diverse sorts at one meal.

Also we are to avoid (as dangerous therinto) immoderate sleep, too much
Venery, especially when the stomach is full, or the body dry: at change of
the moon, or where sleep may not follow.

But from it altogether should young men abstain, as likewise old men, and
women with child.

All cold in the hindermost part of the Head, Neck, Stomach, and Belly, is
offensive. Likewise immoderate labor, which dryes up the strength and duls the
Spirits, especially in moist and windy places.

Much care, fear, grief, and all violent passions of the mind: too much
Reading and Study, Night-watching, long-hayre, washing the head in cold water,
with the distraction of the mind into diverse studies, all offensive and
hurtful.

Things good to preserve and restore the Memory,
Are for the most part the use of these precedent contraries, aa all meats
that yield good juice or nourishment to (...) body: more especially the brain
of (...) Partridge, the Sparrow, Hare, Conny* (...) Hen, the last whereof is
the first and (...) in reckoning.

For, some Physicians write, that (...) brain of the Hen, adds to the very
su^^stance of the Brain: of whom it is thus Written: The Hen of all fowls
is accounted best:
In two things far excelling all the rest.
For first, for those that want or Brain or wit:
The Hens brain does augment both that and it.
And in her body she the egg does breed,
The yolke whereof turns to much blood and seed.


Likewise the vapor and decoction of these Herbs infused into the ear
through some Tunnell, much comfort the brain, that is to say, of Nigella
Romana, the flowers of Rosemary, and Cardnus Benedictus: and these not only
comfort the brain* but also sharpen the wit, exhilarate the mind, and procure
healthful sleep. The washing of the feet in warm water once a month, and
thoroughly boiled, wherein has been decocted Camomill, the leaves of Laurel,
and the like.

After meat abstain one hour from all ^mmoderate labor, either of mind or
body; as after supper some reasonable time from sleep; for to fleepe upon a
full stomach, much dulleth the brain, as it indangereth the body, which some
say is thereby exposed to as much as to serve in the face of an enemy.

When thou go to thy bed, shut the windows of thy chamber, to exclude the
wind, and draw close the curtains to shut out the Moone-light, which is very
offensive and hurtful to the brain, especially of those that sleep, much
more then of those that wake. Afterward in thy lying down, first turn thee
upon thy right side, when thou awakest again, upon thy left side, that thy
blood and digestion may the better replenish thy body; ever practicing the
memory to record and repeat things received in the Evening, the Morning
following: for by want of practice, the retentiue faculty becomes dull and
forgetful, as the Verse to this purpose seems to insinuate; Saepe recordari
medicamen fortius omni.
Solus et artificem qui facit, vsus erit.


Englished.

It Is use and practice that becomes each (...)
For that makes perfect, what neglect (...) kill.
Neither desire superficially to read man^ things, but rather well to
understand those few that thou do; for even as it little avails the
stomach to have received much meat, except it be thence disgested into
nutriment to the body, so does such reading bring as little profit to the mind.

Signs to judge of the Debility, and Constitution of every Brain, with some
advice for remedy of the ill disposition thereof.
THe Debility of each weak memory arises out of one of these four causes:
that is to say, either out of the too much heat of the brain, or too much
cold, or too much moisture, or too much dryness; for too much heat dries up
the Spirits, too much cold hinders their operation and motion in the cauerne of
the brain, too much driness^ the reception of forms, and too much moisture
drownes them up; the signs whereof are thus perceived.

1. If the brain be ouer-hot, you shall perceive an extraordinary heat in the
head by the touching of it, and the parts about the head will be hot and red, as
likewise the eyes very nimble in turning, the hayres quickly growing and fast
increasing.

2. But if ouer-cold, the head expresses it by his coldness, in the face
scarce appears any redness, the turning of the eyes are slow and weak, the
pulse and breathing very deliberate, the hayres long a growing, the head never
offended with any hot cause: such are for the most part sleepy, fearful,
slothful, slow to anger, and dull of memory, cold in their desire to women,
and weak of sense.

3. Those of a moist brain, are for the most part hairy, and such as are never
troubled with baldness: they smell slowly, but sleep soundly, and are seldom
troubled with dreams.

4. But if the brain be ouer-dry, there the apprehension is but slow to
conceive, yet strong to retain what it has received: those of this
disposition have their hairs hard and curled, the eyes hollow, and become
quickly bald*

The state and disposition of the brain being thus known, it remains then,
that (...)ry man be obseruant and temperate (...) diet, to take or forbear
such things, as (...) be either good or hurtful unto it: (...) the brain be
ouer-hot, those things are (...) be observed, and accustomed, that dimin^^^ and
allay the heat thereof, as the other to be forborne that increase it. If
ouer-cold, then are we to abstain from all cold meats, and betake to their
contraries such as increase heat, and so moderating the extremity thereof, it
may be reduced by this means, to a perfect perfection, and so of the rest.

And thus much shall suffice to have sp^^ken of the four Constitutions or
qualit^^ of the Brain, the direction whereof is c^^pious, in the works of
many learned A^^thors, which here I pursue not, because purpose breuity, but
betake my self to fu^^ther matter of Discourse, History, and (...)ty
propositions, furniture and talk for (...) trial of Wits and Brains.

Of Memories true use.
HE that remembers what he should forget,
Has taken Memory from her seat, and set
(...) three degrees below her.
^e that forgets what he remember should,
(...) equal balance in account does hold
^^th him, that does not know her.
^e that remembers what he knows is fit,
And to oblivion does the rest commit:
That man has learned all the rules of it,
And may proceed to practice --
Of the excellency of Memory.
MEmory, it is that keeps alive all the old Ages of the World, and Actions of
men, from Adam to him that dyed yesterday: all which were else raked vp^^ the
embers of oblivion; but that Mem^^^ takes them up, Discourse lays them open
and keeps them alive. Were it not for (...) excellent Sense; how should the
just be ^ewarded, whose Memory shall be blessed* when as the memorial of the
wicked shall ^ot? We see Memory to be a Record, let us then put nothing on this
file, but what is worthy a lasting durance: for it is a perpetual Register;
deface it not then, blot it not, choke it not by any distemper, but cherrish
and refresh it by these or better ^duices in this kind, when thou meetest with
them; she cannot want food: (...) the world is her diet, and in these Di^^^ses
thou shall find Sentences and (...) Conclusions, some whereof will be (...)
worthy to be hung up in this Store-ho^^^ and so I leave thee to gather what
thou ^^dest worthy, and to lay up what thou ^^therest.

Propositions follow.
Qu. What is the chief virtue and b^nefit of the Memory?

A. Recordare Beneficia. Iudicia, Exempla. Nouissima,


Englished,

To remember 1. Benefits long, to require them. 2. Judgments, to auo^^ them.
3. Examples, to be forewarned by them. 4. The 4 last things, that we never dow
amiss by thinking on them.


And withal as we must remember benefits long, so we must forget injuries
quickly, so that Memory, and this forgetfulness will be equivalent in
goodness.

Q. What do we account the best staeyes and helps to Memory?

A. Writing; for that has conveyed and carried along, one Ages actions to
another; has enriched one age with another knowledge; by that we do confer
with the deceased, and call the dead to living conferences: From Saint Austen
and other those Fathers and Lights of the Church, how are our studies divinely
enlightened, whose continual vigilance and labor has discovered unto us the
bottom of those deepes, where the Elephant might be drowned, at the end of
whose labors we set to our meditations, and go forward to our much ease and
comfort, as is most decent; as one writes, That she that is nearest to the King
of Kings,
Should be most searched of any thing of things.


By these and such like helps have our modern Divines the veyle of miseries
drawn from before the face of Divinity, and she her self set more resplendent
before them.

From Esculapius, Hippocrates, and Galen, Fathers of Physic, (which though
Heathens) did acknowledge a Deity in the wonderful composure of man's body; but
from them have not our modern Physicians le^^ into the quicker and more
certain know^ledge: and as other ages to come shall b^ bettered by ours, so
have these been bettered by others, as the latter age has ever been the
Scholar of the former; heretofore a wry neck, or the stone, went to the grave
with him that had it: now Art has found out common repaires for either, so
that although Memory be Infida and labilis, having but slippery footing in the
mind; yet, by this means we find where she has and may rest her foot.

Q. Who have the best natural Memories?

A. They that exercise them most, and abuse them least: and therefore I have
known diverse unlettered persons trusting only to strength of Memory, could
record and retain much more then the Scholar or Penman that commits all to
Record. And now of late years was there a woman, one Mistress Iostlin of
Cambridgeshire, who for excellency of memory deserves here to be remembered, who
by use and moderate preservation thereof, was so strong and quick, that upon
the first rehearsal he was able to repeat 40. lines Latin or English, and to
carry a whole Sermon from Church, and after set it down almost verbatim in her
chamber. She wrote a Legacy to her child before it was borne, and prophesied of
her own death, and died accordingly at the time.

Q. Whence comes it that some Memories are as dull as lead, or as a deep Gulf
that swallows all, and retains nothing? or like some quick Prodigal, that
lays up nothing for time to come?

A. Late Suppers, the too much use of Tobacco, meats that engender gross
humors, too much woman, too much surfeiting and costly fullness; all bad for
Memory, ill for the purse, and worse for the health: for the rich Prodigal or
wealthy unthrift is like a powder-master, that has provision against an enemy,
but is in danger of being blown up himself.

And therefore here let us a little stay and ballase our selves with these or
such like considerations.

With little, Nature is content*
whilst hers we do ^bide:
And at our death, a little grave
does cover all our pride.
Imperious Caesar dead and turned to clay.
Is now but night, that once had so much day*
Why sell we then our selves so cheap,
To buy repentance dear?
To hang proud robes upon our back,
To out Dives in good cheer?
Why should the Worm exceed the Sheep,
Whose fleece does cheaper warm,
And better then the Silke-wormes twist
Against wind and weather arm?
In which the rich man finds less ease,
With Gout and pains oppressed,
Within his softest downy bed,
Or in his wealthiest chest,
Then does the poor man in his wants
Whose health does far exceed,
Although his sinews first must stretch,
Before his belly feed:
Whose leg a cushion must attend
For that is the rich man's dance:
His wealth but buys the Doctors skill,
And hyres the Surgeons tance.
To which purpose it is as one writes,

That Fortune never comes with both hands full; either she sends a stomach,
and no food; such are the poor in health; or else plenty of food, and no
stomach: such are the rich.

And therefore says the Wiseman, Spare diet is my food,
My clothes more fit then fine,
I know I feed and cloth a foe,
That pampred would repine.
Enough I reckon wealth,
Content my meanest lot,
That lies too low for base contempt
Too high for Enuies shot.


Q. What is the most precious thing in the World, yet the most brittle and
uncertain?

A. The life of man, which although it has but one coming into the world,
has a thousand ways to go out, the frailty whereof considered, should be
like a Preacher, ever to admonish us of our end, crying unto us sinful
creatures, as the Sailors cried to Jonas in the storm* Arise, O sleeper, O
arise and see,
There Is not a twiny thread 'twixt death and thee.


To which purpose is here annexed a story of one, who traveling by the way
side (which is the wilderness of this world) fell into a well, in the fall he
caught hold of certain twigges that grew on the side thereof, by which he
staid himself; at the bottom thereof, looking down, were crawling Serpents,
Toades, and other noisome creatures, which came in upon the lapse or fall of
man, rather then in the first creation; for then God pronounced of all things
that they were good, and the most savage creatures rebelled not against man:
but now hereupon so changed in this change, as observes du Bartas.

There Is not the smallest Fly, but she dares bring
Her little wrath against her quondam King.
Now whilst he staid himself by this weak support, came two little beasts, a
black and a white, and did gnaw the twigs upon which he hung, to his greater
terror. Now the moral hereof is; The man that fell into the well, is every
man, which so soon as he comes from the womb, is traveling toward his
tomb, through the dangers of this world: the well that he fell into, is the
Grave, that lies open for all men; the two twigges that he caught hold of, the
brittle thread of humane life; the black and white beasts, Day and Night,
which in some small continuance wear in sunder this thread.

Q. Wherein consists the natural life of man?

A. Of Heat and Moisture, which as the one is daily decayed, and the other
dried up by the operation of that Limbecke of man's body, are again replenished
by meats and drinks, and so vpheld by this parget and plastering.

Q. But may not then this life of man thus continually supplied, be continually
maintained in health, sickness and old age kept by, and kept back for ever?

A. No, in despite of all prevention, Age shall waste the one, and sickness
dry up the other, and so resolve them into their first matter.

For when our sand is runn^, and hours are spent,
Death comes; no Herb nor Doctor can prevent.
For further illustration hereof, Friar Bacon, a man of infinite Learning,
Study, and Capacity in his time, amongst many his strange and impossible
endeavors, published a book De Retardanda s^nectute, or the keeping back of
old age, the which whilst he himself was ouer-curious in observing, and
studying this Art of health, grew old in the Act, and himself was overtaken
with age. Let then the Air, the chief preserver thereof, blow from his
healthiest corner, and from thence brush over Rocks, and Hills, and Fields,
and Fountains, and breathe into the nostrils of the healthiest man living;
nay, Though he have sucked the Indian minds,
That have k^st ten thousand leaves
Of Synamon tr^es, their barks, their Rindes:
All which of sweetness them bereaues.
Yet all this Air, so sweet, so fair,
For ever cannot health repair.


So by this we find, it cannot be prevented of his purpose, though it may be
something tardied in his speed: so that he may hang up his Motto, as that
daring Artist did: Cedo nulli, nec domi, nec for as:


I yield to none neither at home nor abroad.

Q. Whether is man, that is said to be made after the Image of God, according
to his corporal substance, like unto him, or does in any wise represent the
Divine Majesty?

A. The Image of God is in the soul of man, and the admirable faculties
thereof, and in nothing does the body resemble it more, then that it is the
representation or glass of the Soul, that immediate stamp of the Image of
God, erectus ad coelum, of an elevated stature, that his thoughts might ascend
where their object is, and not ^robble below on the earth.

Q. Whether is the woman made to the Image of God, or not?

A. There be some that auerre, the woman is made only to the image and glory
of man, but these does the Text confute: for when it was said, Let us make man
after our own Image, he made them both male and female; and man is said to
resemble the Image of God, as he is an intellectual and reasonable creature.
So likewise the woman, being both endued with an immortal soul, and
supernatural gifts of grace and glory, man being made little lower then the
Angels.

Q. How many, according to some Writers, are the degrees or Hierarchy of Angels?

A. Nine, which say there is a mystical resemblance of the holy Trinity, there
being in 9 thrice 3. and in every 3. thrice one, so that there are 3
superiors, 3 inferiors, and three middle degrees. The superiors, are
Seraphins, Cherubins, and Thrones: The middle, are Dominions, Principalities,
and Powers: and the inferior, Virtues Archangels and Angels.

The most usual Names and Appellations of the Son of God through the
Scriptures.
SP^s, via, vita, salus, ratio, sapientia, Lumen,
Iudex, Porta, Gigas, Rex, Gemma, Propheta, Socerdes,
Messiah, Zebaoth, Rabbi, Sponsus, Mediator,
Virga, Columna, Manus, Petra, Filius, Emanuelque,
Vinea, Pastor, O^is, Pax, Radix, Vitis, Oliua,
^ons, Paries, Agnus, Vitulus, Leo, propitiator,
Verb^m, Homo, Rete, Lapis, Domu^, and sic omnia Christus.
Englished, THe Hope, the Way, the Life,
Health, Reason, Wisdom, Light,
The Judge, the Gate, that is past with strife,
A Giant, King of might,
A Gemme, a Priest, a Prophet hie,
Messiah; Zeboath, named
Rabbi, from her whose eyes never dry,
Whose Heart all these inflamed.
The Mediator, Bridegroom decked,
The Rod, the Dove, the Hand,
The Rock, the Sun, who^e beams reflect,
Ore-spreading Sea and Land.
The Vine, the Shepherd, Sheep,
The Olive, Peace, the Root,
The Lamb, the wall, that o^t does keep
The Darts that Sa^an shoot.
The Fount that does refresh all dry,
The Truth, the Lion strong,
The Calfe that fatted was to die
For him that had gone wrong.
Emanuel, the Man, the Word,
A Net, a House, a Stone,
A merciful and loving Lord,
And Christ that is all in one.


Q. Whether are men of short and little statures, or those of the more ample
and spacious, commonly the wisest or the longest lived?

A. Those of the lesser volume, by reason that in them the soul and faculties
thereof are more near and nimbly compact, and with greater vigor and dexterity
impart their functions over all the body; and therefore Homer Prince of Poets,
for whom seven Cities stro^e for his birth-righ^, (whose proper name was
Melesegenes, but called Homer for his blindness) does describe Ulysses to be
short and wise, and Ajax long and a fool.

In Ajax and Ulysses what Art
Of Physiognomy might one behold?
The face of either cipher eithers heart,
Their face, their manners, most expressly to^d:
In Ajax eyes blunt rage and rigor rold,
But the mi^d^glance that sly Ulysses lent,
Showed deep regard, in smyling merriment.
Q. Of all moral virtues, which is reputed the most beautiful?

A. Humility, for she both shunnes honor and yet is the way to it, prevailing
often with meekness, when the haughty and proud are put by: for example, two
Goats met upon a narrow bridge, under which glided a deep and violent
stream, get back they could not, the planke was so narrow for the turning,
and forward they could not, without hazarding their lives, stand still they
might, but that was but a prolonging of their misery: that they might therefore
both pass by in safety, the one lies down, whilst the other goes over him, and
so by this quiet passage they both secure their lives, and prevent their
further danger. The want of this yielding, is for the most part, the beginning
of all controversy and trouble; for when Iron meets Iron, they meet with
violence, but let wool meet Iron, there is a gentle yielding and end:
according to this, the Poet wittily obs^rues: The meek and gentle Lamb with
small adoo,
Suckes his own Dam, we see, and others too.
In Courts men longest live and ke^pe t^e^r ranks
By taking injuries, and giving thanks.


Seneca faith, The meek and the Wiseman, in good turns lou^s not to owe more
then he must, in evil to owe and not to pay.

Q. Which is thought to be that Wilderness through which the Children of
Israel wandered 40. years, where their food was so miraculously sent down from
heaven, and their clothes preserved from not wearing out?

A. The Desert of Arabia, from whom is brought the excellentest Mummia.

Q. Where of is it made, and whereto does it serve?

A. It is a thing like pitch, some say it is made of man's flesh boyld in pitch,
others, that it is taken out of old tombs, being a corrupted humor, that
droppeth from embalmed bodies: or those there buried in the hotter sands, it is
the principal of poisons, which Physic in some kinds makes use of.

Q. Since we have a little entered to speak of the Hebrews, whose deriuation
Haebraei quasi Abrahaei I purpose to relate a little further, for the better
understanding of their names in Scriptures, the quantities of some of their
measures, and first of the Gomer, what may that signify?

A. The Gomer was the name of a measure containing more then a Gallon, the
Israelites in the Wilderness received every day this measure full for a days
allowance.

Q. What the Cab?

A. A measure of 3. wine quarts.

For the rest of the Hebrew measures they are further related in the first part
of the Help to Discourse.

Q. The Manna that they received, what was it in the similitude and likeness?

A. It was like a dew that fell every Evening, and white like the Coriander
seed.

Q. Who was the chief deliverer of the Children of Israel from the oppression
of Pharaoh?

A. Moses, by the hand of God miraculously preserved by Pharaohs daughter, by
her there found in the Bulrushes cast forth to be drowned; where note, that all
the Kings of Egypt were called Pharaohs, as all the Emperors of Rome, Caesar's:
For it is said, there arose another Pharaoh that knew not Ios^ph; Of which
great Prophet thus further illustrated by the Poet: Lo here an object utterly
forlorn,
Left to destruction as a violent prey,
Whom man might judge accursed to be borne:
To dark oblivion molded up in clay,
That man of might in aftertimes should be
The bounds of frail mortality that brake,
Which that Almighty gloriously should see,
When he in thunder on Mount Sinai spoke.


There was one that came upon a time to a great Counselor of this Kingdom to
crave his direction, what good moral or political book he would commend to
his reading, seeing the world was full of books, and there was no end of making
many books that were made to no end, and that much reading was a weariness to
the flesh, and bad for the eyesight, and too little ^^ading a friend to
igno^ance, worse for the insight: and what was his answer?

Quoth he, Read the World, read men, record remarkable events, set them as a
pattern before thee for thy own instruction, read over thy own actions, see
where thou have trained worthily, where thou have digrest wickedly, and thou
shall observe, as one writes: That by bad courses may be understood
That their events have n^uer fallen out good.
With which opinion this Author seems to accord.
For many books I care not, and my store
Might now suffice me, though I had no more
Then Gods two Testaments and therwithal,
That mighty volume which the world men call:
For these well looked on, well in mind preserved
The presentages passages observed
My private actions seriously ore viewed,
My thoughts recal'd, and what of them insu'd,
Are books that better far instruct me can*
Then all the other paper-workes of man.
If thou will read History, lay thine eye to the French Story, go through that
volume of Kings from Pharamond the first, to the last: there see how the good
and virtuous have flourished; how the evil and tyrannous have ruined and
decayed. Likewise to the Dutch, to the Spanish, and there see the various
occurrences and changes of times and men; the wheel of fortune sometime
deiecting one, and as suddenly exalting another. Read the Turkish History, and
there thou shall find obseruable matter; amongst many other things thou shall
there find Bajazet the scourge of Princes, himself captiued in Tamberlaynes
Iron cage. The Scottish, from Donaldus the first, to the last of that line, to
this present. Then survey the English Speed, Hollinshead and others, and in
these and all the rest, thou shall find rewards and punishments of virtuous
and vicious Princes, as inherent to them as their Blood and Crowns, and many
their wicked Actions repayd by way of retribution and retaliation: to example
in two or three presidents of our own (...) home:

Henry the First, by cruelty disinherited his elder brother, Robert Duke of
Normandy, and put forth his eyes; and this, to make hiw own children the more
secure heirs of the Kingdom: But see what happened hereupon; His own being
at that time in France, and to come over to keep their Christmas here in
England with their Father, put forth to Sea, and were all drowned in their
coming over. The manner* thus, the Saylors and Ship-men through excess of
wine, which was plenteous at their parting, were a^l drunk, so that the Master
could not well guide the Stern, nor the Mariners the Ship, but it rode at
random; which the Ladies (being launced out into the maine) perceiving, fell a
weeping, praying, and lamenting: in this state the Ship for a long time
continuing in a doubtful perplexity, betwixt hope and despair, when at last
in some hope of safeguard and in view of land, the Ship upon a sudden split in
two pieces against a rock; upon this was a grievous skrieke, till the water
had quickly silenced it. Now whilst every one sought to get upon something to
defraud the gaping billows of their prey, if it were possible, the Prince had
taken the Cockboat, where being in some likelihood of safety himself,
aduenturing to save his Sister, who had hitherto maintained her life by
grappling to a planck, recovered her into his boat; into which, the rest so
violently thronged after one another, every one willing to reprieue a life, so
ouer-loaded the little Vessel, that with the weight and number, the boat
sunk, and all perished, except one Butcher, that swomme to shore to tell the
heavy tidings.

So likewise the Conqueror, his Father, who, to erect New Forest in
Hampshire, pulled down ^6. Churches, all the Towns, Villages, and houses far
and near, and brought all within 36 miles compass, to a Wilderness for wild
beasts; in which afterward his 3. sons were slain, as you may read more at
large in the first part of the Help to Discourse.

By Hastings advice, the Earl Rivers and Gray, with others, were without
trial of Law, or offense given, executed at Pomfret, and in the same day,
near about the same hour* in the same lawless manner, Hastings himse^^e was
beheaded in the Tower of London: a greater judgment then this of Hastings you
shall not find in any story. And thus much for a taste of some few. Examples
are copious in this kind, and for mu^^bility, Chronicle this in thy breast, that
there is no stability under the Sun, Kingdoms alter and change; The Eastern,
the Grecian, the Roman, the Turkish Empire succeeding one another into a
continual succession of change, and so of all things under the Sun. He that
had ^eene I^lius Caesar go into the Senate (...) his royal state, and his
poniarded body and ^loody robe, Seianus in the Morning* and his complexion at
Evening, of which one thus writes of him magnifying himself: Swell, swell, my
joys, and faint not to declare
Your selves as ample, as your causes are*
I did not live till now, this my first hour,
Wherein I see, my thoughts matched by my power,
But this, and touch my wishes great and hye,
The World knows only two, that is Rome and I.
My Roof receives me not, it is Air I tread,
And at each step, I feel m'aduanced head.
Knock out a Star in Heaven --


It were infinite to instance in this kind these downefalls of greatness,
Philotas, Bellizarius and others.

Richard the Second, a man of misery, as Richard the Third, a man of cruelty,
the first whereof, of a King became a captive, delivering up his Royalty with
his own hands into his enemies; whose ominous Reign was pointed at from
Heaven, at his landing with his young Queen Anne of Beme from France, where at
his first setting foot upon his own shore, arose such a Tempest, that it dashed
in pieces and drove the Ships all out of the harbor, and withal two
Ship-wrights hewing of a Mast, at every stroke dropped blood out of the tree:
an ominous portent, and after fearfully succeeding: First, losing his Crown,
and after, his life at Pom^r^t Castle, slain by Sir Pierce of Exon and 8. men
more that he brought with him, whereof King Richard slew four of them. Richard
the Third, first affrighted by dreams, and after slain in Bosworth Field,
where by force and number beaten from his hor^^ he bit the ground with his
teeth, and to^ it with his hands; and in contempt of death and man, died as if
he would have carried his kingdom with him; and so much for example in this
kind.

Q. Which are the most dangerous years r^puted in a man's whole life?

A. Every seventh year of a man's life is noted to be dangerous: some hold the
ninth year very dangerous, and by this account the 18.27, etc. but the most
dangerous year of all is 63, for that both accounts do meet in this number;
namely, 9. times 7. and 7. times 9. either of which numbers make 63. the most
dangerous year of all.

Certain Divine Precepts or Aduertisements that a Wiseman first observed
himself, and after left them to his Son and Friends.
1. If a weaker man then thy self does wrong thee, spare him; if a stronger,
then spare thy self.

2. Gods hand is heauiest on the Conscience, when it is lightest on the
carcass, if lie suffer it to surfeit on pleasure till death.

3. The Usurer and the Broker may be ^ompared to two milstones that grind the
^oore to powder: come not therefore under their Sails.

4. Observe how Pharaohs dream is verified amongst us in these days, that the
^eane Kine eat up the fat; for Gods lean blessings, which are riches and
pleasures, blessings of his left hand, eat up the fat, which are Grace and
Religion, blessings of his right.

5. Good Laws without execution, stand like the picture of St. George, with
his hand always up, but never striking.

6. Pleasures do not always follow a man living, but ever leave him dying.

7. A virtuous man is famous on the earth, glorious in the grave, immortal in
heaven.

8. Christ calls the godly, Kinsmen, be they never so poor, but the rich
scorn them be they never so honest: so proud is the servant above his Master.

9. It is miserable for a bold sinner to meet with a cold Preacher.

10. Two things out of every Sermon are to be noted: first, that which thou
did not know: Secondly, that which speaks to thy conscience: for by the one
thou shall increase knowledge, by the other lessen thy vices.

11. The Usurers money to a man in time of necessity, is like cold water to a
hot Ague in time of extremity.

12. He that drinks on follies cup, shall have small cause to lick his lips
after it.

13. Fear does not more multiply evils, then Faith diminish them.

14. It is good so to diet the body, that the soul may be fatned.

15. One sin opens the door for many virtues to fly out.

16. A man would have Teachers do as they teach: so God would have hearers do
as they hear; for else the hearers shall be no more saved by hearing, then the
Preachers by preaching.

17. Lending was ordained to be a staff or support to the borrower; now Usury
has turned this staff into a Serpent.

18. The man that has a quiet conscience, is like to him that has a good
wife, he is always sure of peace at home.

19. In Prayer be not like the Pharise in popular ostentation, but pray in
secret: for he prays with a witness, that so prays with out a Witness.

Precepts or Aduices concerning Marriage.
1 Woo not by Ambassadors.

2 Make not thy friend too familiar with thy wife.

3 Conceive not an idle Jealousy, being a Fire once kindled not easily put out.

4 Affect him not that would ill possess thee.

5 Blaze not her beauty with thy own tongue.

6 If thy estate be weak and poor, marry far off and quickly, if otherwise
firm and rich, at home, and with deliberation.

7 Be advised before thou conclude, for though thy error may teach thee wit,
it is uncertain whether ever thou shall again have occasion to practice it; for
marriage is like a stratagem in war, wherein a man can err but once.

8 Marry not for Gentility without her support, because it can buy nothing in
the market without money.

9 Make thy choice rather of a ver^^^^s then a learned wife.

Esteem rather what she is, of her^selfe, then what she should be by
inheritance.

11 In tactam quaeris Intactam esto:

Be that example to thy wife, that thou would have her to imitate; for he
that strikes with the point, may be content to be beaten with the pommell.

12 She whose youth has pleased thee, despise not her age.

13 That thou may be beloved, be amiable.

14 Sail not in this Sea without a compass, for a wicked woman brings a man
sooner to repentance then suretiship.

15 It Is the greater dispraise to children, to be like to wicked Parents.

16 It Is more torment to be jealous of a man's wife, then resolved of her
dishonesty; and more misery, that a man may be assured of her vice that way,
but cannot be of her virtue.

17 True Chastity does not only consist in keeping the body from
uncleanness, but in keeping the mind from sin; and she may be more a maid,
that has been muisht against her will, then she that has but only wished
amiss.

A Wiseman was wont to say, that by marriage four Joys most undoubtedly
accrue unto the husband. 1 A wife. 2 Alliance and friends. 3 Patrimony. 4
Children, all strong walls and Bullwarkes to fence a man. But now see (says
another) which of these are firm, and which fleeting: 1. for the wife no man
will deny, but that she sticks firmly till death. 2. For friends they depend
upon fortune; for who never lackes, shall never want a friend. And who in want
a hollow friend does try,
Directly seasons him his enemy.
Lastly, by death many times friends are cut off for portion, without wary
government, charge increasing, that quickly decreaseth.

Then see the Anchor, that remains alone,
The Wife and Children, Friends and Portion none.
The Lovers complaint written by a Gentleman of quality.
He is stark mad who-euer says
That he has been in love an hour,
Not for that love so soon decays,
But that it can ten in less space deuource.
Who will believe, if I swear
That I have had the Plague a year?
Who would not laugh at me, if I should say
I saw a flash of Powder burn a day?
O what a trifle is a Heart,
If once into loves hands it come,
Al other griefs allow a part to other griefs,
And ask themselves but some.
They come to us, but us love draws,
He swallows us, and never chawes.
By him, as by chain shot whole ranks do die,
He is the Tyrant-Pike, our hearts the Fry.
His Abiuration.
Hence all the fond delights,
As short as are the nights
Wherein love spends his folly:
There Is naught in this world sweet,
If men were wise to see it,
But melancholy: Hence
Welcome folded arms and fixed eyes,
A sight that piercing mortifies,
A look that fastened to the ground
A tongue chained up, without a sound.
Fountain heads, and pathlesse groves,
Places which pale passion loves,
Moone-light walks when all the fowls
Are warmely housed save Bats and Owls.
A Panting Bell, a midnight groan,
These are the sounds to feed upon:
Then stretch our bones in some close gloomy valley,
There Is nothing dainty sweet, save melancholy.
The Husbands complaint.
I took a wife, I loved her dear,
Her love to me was due,
Yet she was false, O who would think
A wife should prove untrue?
Thus you poor birds that honey make
From many a several flower,
Not make it for your selves, but them
That you and it devour.
The unbounded lover.
My choice of women I enjoy
Of them what I desire,
My children eat not yet my bread,
Nor warm them by my fire.
So you poor birds, that make your nests,
In right they are your due,
For others, yet you hatch your young,
They Are not enjoyed by you.
Q. Which was the most deadly meeting that ever was?

A. Eve and the Serpents meeting wrought our sin,
Would the one had deaf, or the other dumb had bin:


Or as another, Eve and the Serpents meeting wrought our woe,
Would they had never met, or parlied so.
So great a loss upon mankind did fall,
One woman at one blow then killed us all;
And singly one by one they kill us still,
Partly against, and partly with our will.
Our eyes thus dimmed, our understanding blind,
We kill our selves, to propagate our kind.


Q. Of how many genders do women consist of?

A. Of three Genders: all of the Foeminine, many of the Doubtful, for as the
saying is, Long absence from a wife, though chaste, if fair,
Does fill a jealous husbands head with care.
-- And some there are of the Common: and those are the common subjects of
misery to themselves, and ruin to other, and join with sickness, to
out-shuffle health.

Q. Which is the fittest season for marriage?

A. Marry in thy youth; for it is in marriage, as it is in gathering of
flowers, where for the most part we delight in the bud, and leave the full
blown to seed: Yet a learned man in this kingdom was wont to say, Wives are
young men's Mistrisses, Companions for middle age, and old men's Nurses: so that
a man may have a quarrel to marry when he will. Old Haywood was wont to say,
He that marries a widow, is like to him that buys a Suit in Long-lane, where
he shall hardly find any, but they are turned, or dressed, or old, or rotten, or
bad linings; like to a cunning widows dissembling chests: he further thus
describes a woman, Aut amat, aut odit mulier, nil tertium.

Q. What is the greatest comfort or addition of happiness in this world?

A. A sure friend, and yet in that this is the misery, that he cannot know him
to be his friend without being in misery; and as it is vulgarly said, He is
happy that finds a true friend in adversity, but he is happier that finds not
adversity wherein to try a true friend: As says another, It is good to have
friends, but naught to need them: which is agreeable to that which the
Physician wrote at the end of his Rules.

Now you our Physic lines, that friendly read,
God grant that Physic you may never need*
To which another added: Who takes his diet by the Doctors skill,
Shall eat no meat that is good, drink drink b^^'s ill.


Q. Whether it is better to dream upon dreams that are good or bad?

A. Whilst we breathe waking, we live all in one common world, but at night in
our dreams, we go every one into a several Region, and in these my
visitations I desire rather my dreams should be bad then good; for if my
dreams be good, I grieve when I wake that they were dreams, but if evil, I
rejoice that they were not truths but dreams. To this purpose, a poor man
that had dreamed the night before, that he was as rich as Croesu^, and that he
had abundance of gold and treasure, met a great Lord the next day following and
besought him for something, saying, If his dream that he dreamed last night
had been true, he had not needed to ask a reward; for I dreamed that I was a
King. This Lord replied unto him, It had been good for thee if thou had
never waked, for it is better to be a King in a dream, then a beggar awake.

A great Lord of great stomach, sharply in the fury thereof that sought to
give satisfaction to his belly and lose no time, so eagerly slasht in the
cutting up of a Capon, that he cut off a pi(...)f his finger; whereupon it was
repo(...)hat this gluttonous Lord had at one b(...)ft his finger and his
stomach. No worse ^ewes, quoth the hearers, but if a poor man find it, and
so cherish it, it will undo him.

Q. Whether is it of a certain or not, that is vulgarly reported, that when we
are talked of abroad by friends or others, our ears tingle and glow, and
whether may this be thought the reason thereof?

A. Nothing less, there is in man or woman a certain flushing of blood and
heat, which naturally runs through the body, and is sometimes more inward, and
sometimes more outward, as the body does need; which falling into the Cheeks
or Ears of a sudden by the motion of the body, and her natural heat, does
extraordinarily warm those parts, which some, though unwisely do attribute to
this first cause.

Q. What is that only which has an audible voice, but not a visible body, and
what the contrary, which presents the shape of a body, but without any sound of
voice?

A. Echo, and the Looking-glass.

Instruction for Bel^efe and Action.
Twice 6 believe, bu(...)ein do not rest:
Ten things perform ^^oue all things the best.
Thy wants and duties howsoere they rise,
In 7. petitions thou may all comprise.
To these add love, and so thou may asce^d
Higher then Faith, or Hope, that here do end.
Q. There are four things do what they list, and are vnreprou^d: and what are
they?

A. The wind blows where it lists, a woman talks and does what she list, a
traveler lies what wonders he lists, and a Wiseman, of all belieues what he
lists.

Q. Whether is it of a truth or not that is v^^gularly, or are they Popish
Fables, that m^n^ Spirits walk after their deaths, for treasure (...), for
murders committed, or the like?

A. They are not truths: for after death (as Divinity will tell us) the soul
goes either to joy or pain, from whence there is no recession; as Abraham told
Di^es, and as that Divine Poet wrote to that purpose, and if any such
appearance there be, the Devil does assume the shape.

For doubtless such a Soul as up does mourn,
And does appear before her Makers face,
Holds this vild world in such a base account,
That she looks down, and scorns this, wretched place.
But such as are detruded down to Hell,
Either for shame, they still themselves retire,
Or tied in Chains, they in close prison dwell,
And cannot come, although they much desire.
To this purpose is here annexed a sto^^ of a Divine and a Lawyer, that
meeting at dinner, the Lawyer, to help Discourse, proposed this question to
the Divine: When Lazarus had lain four days in the gra^e, and after was
raised up again, where was his soul in the mean time? The Divine not
answering his question, proposed unto him another; which was, If Lazarus and
his heirs should have fallen at strife about his Lands, the Quaere was, Whose
ought they to have been? This was according to the question in Virgils
Eglogues, Di^ quibus in terris. One difficulty choked by proposing another, and
yet,

For further confirmation thereof, says Lemnius, A Scholar traveling with
his family, came into a Town to ask lodging, and finding none, It was told
him there was a fair house that stood empty, that he might either lodge, or
dwell in gratis; but the inconvenience was, it was haunted with Sprites, and
every night in it was heard a great iumbling, and rattling of chains: he
nothing affrighted hereat, desired to have it: which was accordingly granted.
At bedtime having disposed his family to rest, he himself sat up in a
chamber reading: about midnight (the time that Churchyards yawne, and Spirits
take their progress) he heard a noise at bottom of the stairs, and presently
it came up: he nothing daunted, ^ate still reading, till at last it appeared on
the top of the stayres in the similitude of Askeliton, or Anatomy, wrapped
about with chains of Iron: which coming up, beckened with his finger, and so
went down the stayres to have him follow him: which he did; and first he led
him through an outward room, then through a yard, and thence into a garden where
he left him; in which place he pulled up some grass and left it for a mark;
and in the next day dug up that place, where was found a man buried, that
had been there strangled, which man being taken up and buried with due Rites,
the house was ever quiet after. But this do I take rather to be an ancient
fiction then a certain truth.

A certain Mountebancke having long cheated with his drugges and playsters,
and having profited little, left his old profession and turned Priest; and
patching together diverse remnants of old Sermons and Homilies, so unfitly
applied, that his want of Schollership was soon discovered, and he of his
Ministry as soon discarded: (...) dismission from thence he made this
p^^testation; Now shall this business you (...) done, cost many a good man's
life: The Parishioners thus threatened, accuse him before a Justice; The Justice
demanded what he meant to do: (Why quoth he) I mean to fall to my old trade of
Paracelsus, and that I am sure will cost some dear.

Q. Whether does a dead body in a Ship cause the Ship to sail slower, and if
it do, what is thought to be the reason thereof?

A. The Ship is as insensible of the living, as of the dead, and as the
living makes it to go the faster, so the dead makes it not go the slower, for
the dead are no Rhemorahs to alter the course of her passage, though some there
be that think so, and that by a kind of mournful sympathy.

A Philosopher seeing a young man proudly decked out like a Ship under sail,
said; I could wish I were such a one as that fond man thinks himself, but my
enemies such as he is. Seeing likewise the world full of contention, wished he
might live to see men strive for love, and not love to strive.

Q. What is the Epitome or sum, the ^^uare, and measure of a Christian man's
duty, which even Nature teaches, and God approues.

A. To do to others, as we would be ^one unto our selves, a most upright
justice, and the fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets.

Q. What is the Epitome or sum of all Philosophy?

A. It is collected out of the infinite volumes of Philosophers, that those
precepts that pertain to humane felicity, are comprised only in these two
words, sustinendo, and abstinendo, or in ferendo, and sperando, In sustaining,
and abstaining, in enduring, and hoping, in bearing adversities patiently, and
abstaining from pleasures warily; hope still supporting us to the Haven of
happiness, that we be not too much cast down by the one, nor corrupted by the
other.

Q. What is that, which they that have nothing else for the most part are not
without?

A. Hope.

Q. What is the most beautiful thing of all others?

A. Thal. Mil. answered, The World, the admirable work of God, and nothing
more beautiful, himself only excepted, wherein we have the green Carpet of
the earth under our feet, the goodly Canop^^^ heaven over our heads fretted
with gold^^ Stars, the wa^y Curtains of the Air beside us, all the
creatures to serve and delight us, and all to set forth the praise of the
Creator; of which both from the Greeks and Latins it receives the name.
Clemen^ Alexandrinus says, The Creation of the World, is the Scripture of God,
whose 3. leaves are the Heavens, the Earth, and the Sea, being as many letters
therein, as there are creatures in heaven and earth: For the heavens declare
the glory of God, and the earth shows his handy-worke.

Q. By what Element most has it pleased God to express to the world his
Justice and his mercy?

A. By Water, when for the sins of his people he therewith drowned the
World: But his mercy thereby in the institution of Baptism by water, and in
that he would have the holy Spirit by which we are Regenerate, called by the
name of Water.

Q. What ship of all other was the most ancient, the most spacious, the most
holy, and the most rich that ever was or will be?

A. The Ark of Noah, in which all the ^en, wealth and creatures that escaped
the ^ood, were preserved; and this is noted to ^^a type of the Church, for as
without the ^^rke was no safety, so without the Church (...) no salvation.

Q. Who was he that of a dumb Father, came (...) the most excellent Orator in
the world?

A. S. John Baptist, of whom Christ himself affirms no greater to have risen
among the sons of women; upon whom and the disparity between Christ and him,
^^is thus observed, That at his Nativity the days begin to shorten, as at
Christ's Nativity to increase and lengthen: so likewise in their deaths, when
the body of Christ was exalted, and stretched out upon the Cross, the body of
S. John was shortened by the head, according to his own testimony, It behoues
Christ to increase, and me to be diminished.

Q. Of the children of Job and their number, is a question I will now propound:
When Job had all his goods restored him double, yet had he by generation but
seven sons, and three daughters, as many as he had before: how then did he
receive all things doubled?

A. Concerning his goods* and cattle: first I will instance for his 7000.
sheep, he had 14000. for his 3000. Camells 6000^ and so of the rest. And
concerning his children; true it is, he received but his former number: yet it
is conceived that the number of them was likewise doubled, because these his
10. former remained yet with God; therefore it may be said he had 20. For as
Saint Hierome says, Quicquid reuertitur ad domin^m, in familiae numero
computatur. Whosoever they are that are returned to the Lord, are reckoned in
the number of the family: wherefore if he had received them doubled upon earth,
he should have had them trebled: And in this lies a mystery of the Resurrection.

Q. Who, and how many were those, that had their names foretold before they
were borne?

A. Six, Ismael, Isack, Josias, Cyrus, Saint John Baptist, and Christ our
Savior for ever blessed.

Q. What number is it that our Romanists so much dignifie above any other?

A. The fifth, which they affirm to be a number of great efficacy and power,
and much honored by God: fot by five words say they he would be incarnate, a
Virgin should become a Mother, and he himself God and man; Fiat mihi secundum
verbu^ ^uum, Be it unto me according to thy word: by five words he would have
his body consecrate in the Eucharist, Hoc enim est Corpus meum, This is my
Body. Lastly, by five words he absolved the Publican, Deus propitius esto mihi
peccatori, God be merciful unto me a sinner: and so with other numbers they
fable and trifle, which we pass over with many other of their errors.

Q. Much disputation and controversy has risen amongst the Philosophers,
about Theseus ship; but what may we resolve thereon, and wherein does it
resemble the n^w present Romish religion?

A. This was the ship in which Theseus sailed into Creet, when he passed the
Labyrinth, and slew the Minotaure; which ship being long time after kept for
a monument, was so supplied and preserved by pieces, that the question grew,
whether it were any part of Theseus ship, or not; and it was afterward
resolved that it was rather a new ship all of pieces, then any part of the
old: much like unto the modern Religion of Rome, that has been so pieced from
time to time by tradition and nouelty, that it now scarce retains any thing of
the ancient verity.

Q. Luther committed two great sins, say some, and what were they?

A. He took from the Pope his treble Crown, and from the Monks their fat
belly-cheare.

Q. What was he the most wretched and poorest of all creatures, that offered
to the most rich and mighty in the world, what he neither had to give, nor was
able to perform?

A. Satan, when he offered Christ the kingdoms of the world, and to fall
down and worship him.

Q. What riches are those that cannot be wasted?

A. Good turns, for those in bestowing are not wasted, but increase: if thou
bestow them, thou art the richer, if thou keep the^, thou art the poorer, if
thou scatter them, thou do not lose, if thou keep them, they lose thee.

Q. Wherefore did not God make all alike rich?

A. Because in his secret Counsel and wisdom he saw it not fit, in which we
must rest our selves content in this wise distribution of his own: For as one
says, the poor and the rich are two contraries, but either necessary unto the
othsr: for if all ^ere rich, who would labor? if all were ^ore, where were
relief or help? There^^re God made the poor for the rich, and ^e rich for
the poor, and either for each ^ther: and it had been a controversy a^ong
some, whether of the estates is the more happy: most are of opinion that in
poverty is the less evil, the more freedom: for compare the rich man and the
poor together: the poor man laughes oftener and more heartily, without any
deep care: if it appear, it does no more, but so passes over like a cloud;
but the rich man's mirth is fained, but his griefs are not, but indeed deep
rooted, and of long continuance: and what does it profit a fool to have
riches, when they cannot buy wisdom? the sick man, when they cannot buy
wealth?

Q. Whether is Art or Wealth more precious?

A. Res valet, ars praestat,
si res perie, ars mihi restat.
Ars manet, ars durat,
fortuna recedere curat.


English.

Riches are good,
but Art commands that dross:
And sticks to life,
not subject to that loss.
Q. Whether has Law, or Physic the high^est place, or precedence?

A. This in times past was a question disputed in Greece, touching the
professors in those parts, where the Physicians thus argued for superiority,
that since there are three chief goods pertaining to man his welfare and
support, over which, every one has a Regent and Guardian assigned; which are
the goods of the mind, the goods of the body, and the goods of fortune: The
first whereof, was the care of the Divine the, highest officer, for the
worthiest Mistress.

The second of the Physician, because the body is more worth then raime^t, or
goods; and the last of the Lawyer: Hereupon Physic challenged the second
place and precedence before Law: The Lawyer I know not what arguments he used;
but after a long controversy it was concluded, that law notwithstanding,
should walk in equal balance, and in some places take the upper hand of
Physic, for as the one intends to preserve health, which is the Jewel of the
body, so the other, to preserve peace and wealth, which is the hand that wears
it, being the thread by which we ^ut between all estates and rights, being ^o
less needful to the Commonwealth, ^hen the Sun is to the world: but for
such ^ degenerate from the truth of their pro^ession, and only like Vultures
prey upon ^he carcasses of spoil, it were not amiss if such were cast out of
the society of men, as most hurtful infections to the Commonwealth.

Q. From whence had Physic his beginning and perfection?

A. Out of Diseases, Sores, and distemperatures of the body, which consisting
of 4. contrary Elements, are ever at opposition and odds among themselves,
still menacing and offending each other: and so upon this regard, to maintain
unity and preservation, this great Lord Sickness admitted Physic (...) wear
his Livery, which now since is grown greater then his master. For it has the
way to increase.

For, what in health men grapple and retains,
If sickness comes, it flies to ease their pain.
And it is the Physicians rule, well apprehending the advantage of extremity,
to cry Give, Give: whilst the sick hand replies, Take, Take.

The truth whereof was well approved by Philip king of Macedon, when being
dangerously sick, and having a most skillful, yet most covetous Physician,
that every day asked him a reward: (Quoth he) Take what thou will out of my
Treasury: for thou have the key that will open the lock of it. Whereupon it is
guessed that sometimes Physicians use their Patients, as Lawyers do their rich
Clients, who keep them long in hand, not for difficulty of the Cause so much,
as for the prolonging o^ their gain: and if it be always true, that as the
market goes, the market-folke will talk, some say, and which is a worse fault
too, that their conclusions are as dear as men's lives, and that no Physician
can be expert, before he have made (...) dangerous experiment: but they are
happy say some in this regard, because their successes the Sun shall behold,
but their errors the Earth shall bury: and as one once spoke to a Paracelsian
Quackesaluer: I commend thy Art, because thou suffer not poor men to
languish long in misery, but helpest them quickly to their graves.

Q. What Art or faculty has the most Professors?

A. One answered, Physic, but another replied, that could not be, because
there was not above two Physicians in a whole Town: when the other to
maintain his argument, thus proceeded to the confirmation. Upon a market day
he sets one in the principal place thereof very ruthfully aspected, his gummes
trust up with a Handkercher, making lamentation, and to every one that demanded
his grief, he answered, his pain was toothache: unto which every one that
demanded, taught a medicine; so that he had as many medicines as market folks,
with which pretty conclusion, the verdict was given upon his side: To which
purpose one thus writes,

In mundo omnes volunt esse medici, omnes volunt aliorum infirmitates curare,
nemo suas: Every one would be a Physician to cure other men's infirmities, but
no man his own.

Q. What is that we first wish for, and are never after weary of?

A. Health, which makes the most excellent harmony of content, especially where
there is a sound mind, in a sound body.

Q. From whence had Law his original and commencement?

A. It had his Original from the corruption of cunning and corrupt brains,
and since by the infection thereof has spread and infected far and near, that
if it be demanded what is the reason that men, houses, and volumes increase so
fast: It is answered in these two verses: Queritur vt crescunt tot magna
volumina legis
In prompt^s causa est, Crescit in orbedolus.


Q. What effect of all other is the most just, and the most unjust?

A. Envy, unjust, because for the most part it pursues good men.

But secondly just, because it most hurts those that most cherish it, for the
envious man is grieved, not so much for his own evil, as for others good: and
so says David, concerning the felicity of the godly, Impius videbit and
irascitur, the wicked shall behold it, and be sorrowful, and as the Poet
says: Inuidia Siculi non inuenere tyranni,
Tormentum maius.
No Tyrant ere did greater torment find,
Then envy, that corrupts and frets the mind.


And as Seneca likewise says, The envious man drinks the greatest part of his
own poison himself, and therefore let us avoid that evil, if not for others,
yet for our own sakes.

Q. In how many days consists the whole span of man's life?

A. Ah, the many days that we can remember, when as yet our whole life is but
one day; for what see we in our whole life, that we see not every day, the same
Sun, the same Moon, the same Winter, the same Summer, the same business?
and what is that, that has bin, but the same that shall be? and there is no
new thing under the Sun: yet for this little inch of time, and the lesser
variety therein, how many sell themselves to perdition? for computate the whole
extent of time, I do not say from this day to the end of the world, but from
Adam: and what is it but a drop of water to the whole Ocean? not a minute to
eternity. And yet says one, We live here as if eternity were upon earth, and
time only in heaven.

Q. What two things are those that make equal the happy and the wretched?

A. Sleep and death, that makes one the oppressor and the oppressed, the
servant, and the master, Codrus and Crassus, and so like the Publican gives
away the one half from our use, out of the little that we have.

Q. What is the Nature of sleep?

A. Aristotle affirms it to be the porch between Life and Death, for he that
sleeps, is neither alive nor dead, neither mortal nor immortal, but having a
kind of temperature of either.

It is mentioned in the Roman Histories, of a certain man, that being in much
debt and danger, the perturbations of humane minds, and depriuers of this
nurse of Nature sleep, notwithstanding as one insensible thereof, he securely
took his rest: After dying, the Emperor would needs have his bed, as though
persuaded some hidden virtue had been in the same, that nothing could breed
his distemper thereupon.

Q. There are three messengers of death, and which are they?

A. Casualty, infirmity, and old age: The first shows it lying hid, second
appraring, third at hand.

An Explication of the word Mors, and the letters thereof.
M-ordens O-mnia R-ostro S-uo.
M-utans Omnes Res sepultas.
English.

Death controules all mortal things,
Wasting subjects, changing Kings.
Q. There are three things especially, that are enemies to sleep (deaths
Image) and what are they?

A. An unquiet bed, vnrestlesse cares, a troubled mind.

And therefore as the Poet says: When all things else to rest themselves
betake,
Then thieves, and cares* and troubled minds they wake.


And so the contrary.

Where vnbrused youth with vnstuft brain
Does couch his golden limbs, there sleepe^ reign.
Her sovereignty being for the (...) sooner found in a thatcht Cotta(...) a
Lordly Palace.

Question.

BEfore I proceed any further, I know tho(...) not ignorant, that it has been
a question(...) old, and discussed by wise men of either part, (...) as yet I
think sub iudice lis est, whether it (...) necessary for a wise man to marry,
and enter the society by which generations are produced, and death is
exercised, notwithstanding his wastfull sickle, with still ple^tifull Haruests
and increase?

A. Though some hold it a weakness in a wise man to marry, to deliver up his
freedom, and inthrall himself and his liberty into the hands of a woman: yet
wise men that better have wayed the condition thereof, find many profits that
accrue unto man thereby, without which, a wiseman can hardly live a contented
life: as first, the benefit of society. For, It is not good for man to be
alone. Secondly, of the Marriage bed: For avoiding of Fornication, let every
man have his wife. And thirdly for the fruit thereof, which are Chil(...): Thy
Wife shall be as the fruitful (...)d lastly, herby thou have found out
(...)uardian for thy house and goods; (...)er of thy Servants, a comforter in
(...)nd misery, and the full accom(...) of thy joy and felicity. Away
there(...) ye haters of women; for it is verified (...) by the Oracle of God,
that they are (...)dfull, necessary, behouefull. The Author^^^y whereof,
without further question, here ^eales up the controversy. And as another
says, He that has no wife; is as a man unbuilt, wants one of his ribs: is
like Jonas in the midst of the Sea, ready to be overwhelmed with every surge
and billow; but then comes a wife like a ship, and wafts him ashore, and so
saues him from perishing. Of whom the Poet thus further adds, Prima fuit
mulier, patuit cui ianua lethi:
Per quam vitaredit, prima fuit Mulier.


English: As by a Woman entered Death by sin:
So, by a Woman, Life and Grace came in.


Q. What was the Wise-mans counsel for the choice of a Wife?

A. Non solum est oculis ducenda, sed auribus Vxor: Not to choose a wife by the
eye, that is, for beauty, a brittle and fading dowry; but by the care, that is,
from the good report and commendation of others.

Q. What comparison have the Ancients made betwixt the Woman and the Ribbe, and
what reasons have they thereupon framed, for their much Loquacity and babbling?

A* These: That first as the Ribbe is a bone, hard, crooked, and inflexible: so
is a Woman in her will, like the form thereof, crooked and perverse, and
hardly inclining to the desire of her husband: and for their much loquacity,
hereupon they ground their reason: That, as if you put a company of bones or
ribs into a bag, they will rattle and clatter together, but if you put
certain lumpes of earth therein, the metal of man's creation, they meet
without noise or iarring violence. But we pursue this argument no further,
because we have formerly touched upon the same in another kind, and place.

Q. Who was he that had that one woman, that was to him both mother, sister,
and wife?

A. Euphorbus, of whom the verse follows, Me Pater e nata genuit, mihi iungitur
illa:
Sic soror and coniux, sic fuit illa Parens.


Q. What is the true law of friendship?

A. To love our friend as our self, and neither more nor less, but so: to
which purpose is here inserted a story of a certain wise woman, that had but
one only son, whose society in the way of friendship many desired: to him
she gave three Apples, willing him to give them to his three friends, when they
were hungry in the way to be cut and divided among them. In the doing whereof,
the first cuts his Apple in two, in equal parts, giving this less to the
woman's son, and reserving the greater part unto himself. The second likewise
unequally divided his, but yet gave the bigger to this woman's son, and kept
the lesser for himself: but the third divided his equally, reserving just the
one half that he gave; which being told to his mother, she bade him choose the
last for his associate; because the first was unjust to another, the second to
himself, and he only upright in his division.

Q. Who was he that first forbade Priests marriage, and whereupon did he
afterward alter that constitution?

A. P. Greg. 1. was the first that proceeded in that restraint: But when
afterward he heard to be found the heads of 6000. infants, that had been
drowned in the river Tiber: he then sighing, repelled his decree, and said, It
is better to marry then burn.

Q. Whence proceeds it, that those creatures that are most useful and
beneficial to man, are so fruitful and plenteous, whereas those other wild,
ravenous, and cruel, are more rare and retired?

A. This proceeds merely from the providence of God, and his goodness to
mankind; for otherwise how would it be* it there should be as many wolves as
sheep, which though killed and eaten daily, are notwithstanding plentiful, as
diverse others of his good creatures, whom he multiplieth above measure? As for
example likewise; The Hare whom all do hunt and pursue, yet her kind is not
diminished in regard of her fruitfulness, which is such, that when she is with
young, she again coupleth, having within her some of a former maturity
already hairy, others naked without their furre others not yet formed, and yet
others conceiving: whereas the Lion, a cruel creature, brings forth but one in
her whole life time.

Q. What little creature is that, that has the softest body but the hardest
teeth of all other?

A. The white worm, the body whereof is more soft then wool, yet with her
teeth does she pierce the hardest Oak.

Q. What Artificers are those that have most Thieues come under their hands?

A. Not Tailors nor Myllers, as the old saying is, but Barbers: for every
thief and Knave, to disguise themselves, falls under their hands.

Q. What was S. Chrysostomes opinion concerning Dancing?

A, That where dancing was, there was the Devil: neither (says he) to that
end did God give us our feet, so want only to abuse them. For, if we shall
answer for every idle word, shall we not likewise for every lascivious and idle
motion of the body, which tend only to folly and lust?

Hereupon was annexed a story of a certain dancer, whose ambitious actiuity
was such, that forsaking the ground, he would needs show his tricks in the
Air; to the which purpose having there fastened a Rope, he beginning after his
accustomed manner, to caper and dance, his footing failed him, and down he
fell, whereat some laughed: when among the rest a Fool not standing far off,
fell a weeping; of whom a reason being required, he thus answered:

I weep, because Jam counted a fool, yet have more wit then this Dancer,
because I know that it is written in the Psalm, that not the Air, but the
Earth is given unto the sons of men: upon which I content my self to tread,
not atttempting further, as Icarus, and Dedalus, and some others as well as this
fellow, that has paid for his presumption.

Q. What two things are those that many desir^ before they have them, and when
once possessed, with a greater desire would be deprived thereof again?

A. Old age and Marriage, the latter whereof, has often been compared to a
Feast, where those that are within and full, would feign come out, and those
that are without empty, would feign come in.

Q. In what things does laudable Old age most solace, and make glad it self?

A. In the remembrance of an honest fore-passed life, and in the hope of a
better n^^re succeeding.

Q. Whence was it that of old, Bacchus or the God of Wine, was pictured like a
Child?

A. Thence it was, because the drinking of wine puts care and troubles out of
the mind, and in stead thereof, fills it with mirth and lightness, making men
free from sorrow, louiall, lightsome, and pleasant as children: And secondly,
Like children it makes them speak all they know.

Q. In what part of the Earth does no Snow fall?

A. In the Sea, which by reason of the hot vapors it sends up, dissolueth it
before it falls therein.

Q. In what part of the Earth doht it never rain?

A. In Egypt, which is watered by the ouer-flowing of Nylus.

Q. A certain Scholar told Esop, he had heard there was nothing more strong
then Iron, by which all things are wrought and overcome: but yet for all that
(quoth he) I think the Smith to be more strong then it, which works and
inforceth it as he pleases: But what was Esops answer?

A. The mother of the Smith which he held to be more strong then either, which
bore the tamer of Iron.

Q. Dionysius the Tyrant demanded the reason why Philosophers visited the gates
of rich men, and not rich men the gates of Philosophers?

A. It was answered by Diogenes, Because Philosophers know what they want, but
these know not, and therefore seek it not; for if rich men understood they
wanted knowledge, they would much more visit the doors of Philosophers: for
the poverty of the mind, is much more then the poverty of the body, for he is
a man that wants money, but a beast that wants knowledge.

Dionysius King of Sicilia sent for an excellent Musician, to sing and play
before him, promising him a reward therefore. The Musician, after three dais
employment, demanded his reward, which this King refused to pay, telling him,
the pleasure of the hope of his reward, was as much to him as the pleasure of
his singing, and so he should take one pleasure for another.

Q. Who of all other were the best Orators?

A. Tully and Demosthenes.

Q. Wh^t did the Ancients think of Homer?

A. That he was the Father of all wits: and hereupon it was that Palaton the
painter drew Homer vomiting, with a flock of Poets standing about him, ready
to sup it up; one of which, it was objected to Virgil, that he had been, in
that he had stolen some of Homers verses, and framed them into his own
work: who thereunto answered, Am not I then a strong man, that can wring
Hercules Club out of his hand?

Q. Whether is that Commonwealth more happily governed, in which the Prince is
evil, and the Counselors good, or where the Counselors are evil and the
Prince good?

A. Most true it is, that Lampridius reports, that that Commonwealth is more
safe and better governed, where the Prince is evil and the Counselors good,
then where the Counselors are evil, and the Prince good: and the reason is,
for that one evil man or disposition, is more easily amended by the example or
persuasion of many good, then many evil by the example of one good may become
bettered: for instance whereof, Saul was a wicked King; yet by the Counsel of
Samuel did he those things, which otherwise he would not have done: on the
other side, there is no Prince so good, that may not be seduced by wicked
Counselors.

Q. S. Austen wished he^ had lived to have seen Rome in her flourishing estate,
to have heard S. Paul preach, to have seen Christ in the flesh. But what says
Lactantius and Bid?

A. Thereupon, Peradventure (says he) the first we shall never see, that is,
Rome, neither is it any matter to see that harlot as she now is, but for the
other two, I trust both to see and behold in a greater perfection. But says
Bid, my soul desires only to see Christ my Redeemer, in his exaltation and
glory.

Q. Wherein does principally consist the worship of God?

A. In one word, God is to be worshipped. AMORE.

Amore summo
More vero
Ore fideli
Re omni
With all our love,
With the right ma^^^^
With faithful mouth,
With all affection.
Q. How is his Kingdom to be purchased?

A. Hearken, and S. Austen will tell thee, where in the person of God he thus
says, Venale habeo: Quid, domine: I have to be sold, What, Lord? The Kingdom
of Heaven. How is it to be purchased? My Kingdom is to be purchased by
poverty; my joy, by grief; my rest, by labor; my glory, by ignominy; my life,
by death, etc.

Q. What heirs are they that first die, before they enter into their
possession?

A. The Faithful.

Q. Wherein consists the faith of most ignorant Romanists?

A. To believe as the Church believes: for instance whereof, says one, A
Collier being tempted of the Devil about his faith, the Devil thus asked him
how he believed? (quoth he) I believe as the Church believes. And how believes
the Church, quoth the Devil: As I believe, says the Collier; and further the
devil could not drive him* Even such is the faith of the Church of Rome, and
her ignorant followers, understanding nothing, but following others opinions,
in believing as they believe.

Q. A certain godly man being invited to a banquet on the morrow following,
what was his answer?

A. If you will any thing with me, now I am ready; but I will not promise you
to be so to morrow: for of all the days that I have lived, I have not been
assured of one morrow.

Q. Wherein consists true wisdom?

A. Not in gravity of look, in face or hair, but in the wisdom of the
mind, which is to remember time past, to embrace the present, and wisely
provide for the time to come; to which purpose is here inserted the error of
King Frederick, to whom the Venetians sometimes sent Ambassadors two Gentlemen
very seeming young, but of ripe wisdom and understanding: the King distasting
their too-much seeming youth, would not admit them into his presence: who
thereupon answered him, that if the Senate of Venice had imagined wisdom to
consist in hoarinesse or beard, they would have sent him two long bearded
Goats: to which purpose the Poet thus supplieth: Si prolixa facit sapientem
barba, quid obstat
Barbatus possit quin caper esse Plato.


English, If wisdom did consist in hair or beard,
A Goat might then, to Plato be preferred.


Q. What part of what creature is that which mingles all the four Elements in
one?

A. The belly of man, which receives into it the fruits of the Earth, of Trees,
the fishes of the Sea, the fowls of the air, and in stead of the Element of
fire, strong wines, spices, and the like, that it is no wonder if they ruin
the whole, where such diversities of mixtures are -- Frigida cum calidis
pugnant humentis siccis,
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.
Where cold, and hot, and moist, and dry,
And soft, and hard, things light and heavy lie.


Q. What was the Greek Monks answer to him that demanded the reason:
wherefore he would not eat his meat sitting, but walking?

A. Because (quoth he) I will not make of it as a work, but as an accessory
thereunto: but our seasons yield more Philoxines, then such Greeks that will
not only sit with ease to prolong time, but with him could wish there crane
necks might more long retain their pleasure.

Q. Three things are moderately to be used, and what are they?

A. Baths, wine, and women: the mean or excess whereof, either much help, or
hurt the body.

Q. How does the wise man interpret the drunkards cups?

A. The first (says he) is for health, second for pleasure, third for excess,
the fourth for madness, the fifth for quarrel, and the sixth for sleep?

Q. What four good mothers are those, that bring ^orth four bad daughters?

A. Truth, hatred; security, danger; prosperity, pride; familiarity, contempt.

Q. Whence was it that Architas that famous Architect became so admired for his
Art and skill?

A. By his wooden Dove that he so quaintly made for the trial of his
workmanship, which as many Authors do deliver, being filled with air and
breath, and hung with wings and appurtenances necessary, flue in the air like
another live Dove.

Q. Whether are there Antipodes or not?

A. The ancient Philosophers and Geographers have gathered by strong
conjectures and reasons, on the other side of this habitable world, to be
another earth beyond the Ocean, and covered therewith, in which are men that
with their feet walk opposite to ours: Saint Austin and Lactantius deride the
conceit hereof, without showing any reason to the contrary: But Pliny is not
of their opinion, who says, that there are such, even reason it self
persuades, and experience shows.

Q. An old Courtier being asked by what means ^e continued so long to live,
and grow old in Court, being a thing so rarely happening?

A. Answered, By taking of injuries, receiving wrongs, and returning of
thanks: And thereupon grew his happiness, to be one of those few, according
to the saying, for Paucos ^eauit Aula, pl^res perdidit, and quos beauit,
perdidit: The Court has made few happy, it has undone many; and those that it
has most favored, it has undone; dealing with her favorites as Dalilah with
Samson, or as Time with her Minions, that still promises better and longer
days, when in a moment she withdraws the one, and performs not the other,
but falsifieth in both; as one lately to this purpose has both experienced,
and uttered as follows.

Even such is time, that takes in trust
Our youth, our joys, and all we have,
And pays us but with age and dust,
Within the dark and silent grave.
When we have wandered all our ways,
Shut up the story of our days.
-- But this general rule is not without exception.

Q. What Western Island is that, that has lost more people and blood, then all
the Eastern can repair to her former station again?

A. The Island of Hyspaniola, oner-runne by the Spanyard, where the poor Indian
Savages have been slaughtered in greatest number, in greatest cruelty, yea
even upon wagers laid upon their lives, for sport and merriment; upon the
simplicity of one of which, this ensuing story has dependence.

A certain Spanyard sent his poor Indian servant of a message with Birds and
other gratuities to another of his countrymen, with a Letter therein
mentioning the particulars sent, which this vassaile something pinched by
hunger, not trustily carrying* had made bold by the way, now and then to eat
one of the Birds, thinking his master could never come to knowledge thereof.
But after, delivering the residue and the Letter: He to whom they were sent,
finding his number short, wrote back he had not received his due: whereupon
the Master questioning his servant, with threats and blows, compelled him to
reveal it: whereupon he wondering, gave notice to his country men, that they
should take heed of those white papers with black notes in them, for they could
tell tales.

Q. The Roman Indiction is a Phrase much met withal in Almanackes, and there
likewise are the Dogdayes noted in July and August; now I would know the
signification and meaning of both these, and what they import?

A. The Roman Indiction is the space of 15. years, by which account Charters
and public writings are dated at Rome, every year still increasing one till
it come to 15, and then returning to one again.

The Dogdayes or Canicular days, which are in July and August, are so called
of the Star Canis, which then rises with the Sun, and makes his progress
in an equal conjunction therewith, and much adds to the heat of the Sun,
and faintness of that season, much infeebling thereby man's body.

Of Thought and Opinion, that travel the world without a pasport.
Says a merry conceited wanton, Every Bird thinks his own the fairest, the
Crow thinks his own Bird the whitest.

Not always so, says another, for many there be that think their neighbors
wives fairer then their own, and of such their speech will somewhat point them
out: for no man can so change himself, but his heart will be seen upon his
tongues end.

Hereafter follow certain collections or choyces of things most material and
civil, out of Albertus Magnus, Lemnius, and others.

Of the Longing of women.
ALbertus says, that the longings of women most commonly have their beginnings
at the end of three months, especially conceived of a female child, which is
the time that the hair begins to grow; and the effect thereof proceeds of
the abundance of cold, and raw humors concreted in the womb. The reason
oftentimes that they are endangered, disappointed of their longings, grows
through the vehement pursuit, and desire of the object presented to the mind,
which is so extreme, that it alters and stops the course of nature, and office
of the members within, whereupon many times death ensues, but most commonly to
the child. For proof whereof, A woman there was, that longed for a bit of the
buttocke of a man, and having obtained it, was not satisfied, but likewise
desired another, which failing of, she afterward was delivered of two
children, whereof the one was living, preserved thereby, and the other perished.

Of the strength and power of Imagination.
IMagination according (...) Lemnius, etc. of that strength and force, that it
makes the things to be, that many times it ima^^neth are: as for example, It
has infe^^^^ a body by mere imagination that it has taken infection; and
strong it is, that it makes a beggar a King, and a King a beggar, deceiues
poor fathers, blessing their children for their own, by appearance of
similitude. In forming whereof; the imagination of the mother is of no little
force, as is witnessed by the story of an Ethiopian Queen: Which by her
husband of the same kind, conceived and brought forth a child, of a delicate
hiew and complexion, by fixing her eyes and intention upon a beautiful picture
that hung before her. To which effect Sir Tho. Moore likewise in an Epigram and
other writings of his, wittily iesteth at one, who exceedingly doted on his
child, because it so truly resembled him, when his wife, and some other, knew
(as he adds) it was begot when he was not at home: for which similitude he
thus gives like reason: The strong imagination of the mother dwelling upon her
husband, in thought of his wrong, and fear of his return, had power to create
in this act, his similitude of body, by his presence in mind. And this likewise
is the reason, says another, that children are sometimes like their uncles,
grandfathers, or others (one more of thought most commonly seated upon them
then strangers.) And therefore we conclude it of more certainety to judge our
children our own, by their inclination and disposition drawing near unto
ours, than by the Physiognomy or feature.

Whether monstrous births, or abortiues of reasonable souls, shall be
partakers of the Resurrection?
IT is answered, that whatsoever endued with humane form, and takes from our
first parents, the due order of their natural procreation and birth, although
monstrous in shape, and deformed in habit, endued with the gifts of reasonable
souls, shall be partakers of the resurrection: yet those things which present
nothing but the shape of man, and commixt with other creatures, exercising
their actions otherwise then men, they have no part of this promise, nor shall
have the honor of renouation at the latter day: such are Fawnes, and Satyrs,
Centaures and Sirens, and such like: but for the other borne and begot of
reasonable souls, they shall be raised up, and their deformities done away.
But for such untimely births, whose bodies vncompact and destitute of
reasonable souls, deserving not the name of humane creatures, shall not be
raised up again. And therefore we conclude, that whatsoever is brought forth
of humane seed, and not engendered of the concourse of vicious and superfluous
humors, although never so deformed, having once received the breath and Spirit
of life, shall be raised up at the latter day, and made beautiful and perfect.

What it is that pricks the conscience, guilty of any notorious crime?
THe Conscience is the true witness of Gods divine power and justice, seated
in the bosom of every living man, by that finger that made all men and
creatures, as the faithful Test or witness, to approve or condemn, to our
joy or grief the whole actions of our lives, either good or evil, performed or
intended: the force whereof is so great, that in its own purity it acquits
amiddest a thousand condemnations, but tainted, condemns it self where no
man accuses: It is like the upright Judge that will not be corrupted, but ^ay
open the sown bosom, ever presenting the most carlet sins, and such as we
would labor to put from us, and wash away in wine and strong drinks, or
forget with merriment, setting them before the face and forehead of him that
commits them, with the deserts and punishments due unto them, from which
continual apprehension and terror, as our naturalists do observe, is stricken
a chilling and coldness into the blood, and a retyring of it self into the
more interior parts: which fear and apprehension of justice, an instinct of
that divine impression, suddenly strikes and startles, thereby causing as it
were a sensible compunction or pricking in the breast; and by which terror of
the mind, and inordinate retirement and shrinking of the blood and spirits,
the countenance becomes pale and meager, the body and all the parts thereof
deficient. For as (says Solomon) the body will bear his infirmity, but a
wounded and broken spirit who can sustain? etc.

Of the strange nature of the Cock.
THe Cock, as Pliny writes, and as our own experience witnesses, is a bird
not great, yet of that height and courage, that it rather dies in fight, then
yields to his adversary: of that piercing voice, that it daunteth the Lions
courage* of that observance and intelligence, that he distinguishes hours,
and seasons: and whereas all other creatures after the act of venery, are dull
and melancholic, only the Cock, the country horologe, as one terms him, is
otherwise; as appears, by the after-clapping of his wings, sprightly rowsing
of himself, and sending forth of his note, yet in his age, it is observed, as
at 5.8.12.14. years, sooner or later in some than in others; he lays an
egg, which is round and small, in some hole, or hedge, which by sitting upon,
he brings forth to some venomous serpent, or other thing, but most commonly
to the Basiliske, a serpent that poysoneth by his breath or sight: As Africa
and some parts of Germany do witnesse^ as our Poet writes to that effect.

To lurk far off, yet lodge destruction by,
The Basiliske does poison with the eye.
Of the strange nature of the Wolf.
PLiny likewise notes of the Wolf, a creature outwardly resembling a dog, yet
for her sense in some degree drawing near unto man, that, minded to make prey
upon any thing, as by extremity of hunger oftentimes enforced thereunto, She
first suruayes the likelihood of advantage to be made against her, which if she
find too able for her single encounter, she presently by howling draws
together more of her cumrades; which so assembled, devour either man or beast.
And it was credibly informed by a Gentleman long resident in Ireland, of one
that traveling in an Evening betwixt two towns in that country, some three
miles distant, was three several times set upon by a Wolf, from whose jaws
by his sword he so often delivered himself; approaching near the town whereto
he was bent, he incountred a friend of his traveling unarmed toward the
town from whence he came, unto whom (aduising him of his peril, and assault,
accounting him self secure so near the town) he lent his sword: now having
parted and divided themselves some little distance, this old Wolf sets upon
his new guest, who finding him armed with the others weapon, presently leaves
him, making after the other with all speed he might; ouertooke him before he
came to the town, assaulted and slew him. Pliny likewise adds, that the
breath of a Wolf, who-euer it breathe upon, makes hoarse.

Of the Tiger and the Elephant.
THe Tiger, as Gesner and Pliny make mention* is of stature not great, yet o^
foot the swiftest of many swift ones, which i^ noted of her in the pursuit of
her young, fetched off when she trauelleth for prey, which when she returns
and finds not, she presently coasting the country about, in a moment
ouertaketh her fellon, that many miles was before her, which he warily
observing, as behooves his safety and cunning, perceiving, sets down one of
her young ones, which she taking up in her mouth, seeks no more till she
have brought that home to her furre again, how far soever in distance, which
there delivered, out she makes again, and unless more speed prevent, or
cunning prevail, she recouereth another, which sometimes by looking-glasses
and such like, laid in her way; wherein viewing her self, or the like of
young, she amazedly stays: so hindered and disappointed, loses the substance
for shadows; which when she perceiues, returning with rage, she furiously
assaulteth what ^re she meets in her way.

Of the excellency, virtue, and nature of Stones.
THe Turcoyse stone, if the wearer of it be not well, changes his color, and
looks pale and dim, but increases to his perfectness, as he recouereth
to his health, with which our Poet thus accords in his comparison: As a
compassionate Turcoyse that does tell,
By looking pale, the wearer is not well,


Many other precious Iemmes there are, that lose their virtue and splendour,
worn upon the finger of any polluted person; and therefore lewd and unclean
livers, such as defile their bodies with women, never adorn themselves with
these dissenting jewels, which would blush at their shame, and betray their
guiltiness. A rich inuesture, says one, they are, but of small use in our
days, hardly meeting with a finger that spoils them not.

In the end of August, the Moon increasing, there is found in the Swallows
belly a stone of excellent virtue, for the cure of the falling sickness, and
which dries up the thin and glutinous humors whereupon it is chiefly engendered.

There is likewise found in the head of an old Toad a stone very precious
against all inflammations and swellings; as bytings of venomous beasts,
poysonings, and such like* Likewise there is sometimes found in the head of a
Carpe, a stone that stancheth all bleeding at the nose.

Hereafter follow certain Epigrams, Riddles, and witty Positions.
Epitaph 1.
Upon Matilda, Augusta daughter to Henry the first of England, wife to Henry
the fourth Emperor, and mother to Henry the second of England.

Magna Ortis, maiorque viro, sed maxima prole,
Hic iacet Henrici, filia, sponsa, parens.
English.

Great by thy birth, but greater by thy bed,
Yet by the issue greater then both the other,
To dignifie all which, it may be sed,
Here lies a Henry's daughter, wife and mother.
2.
A thing there is has neither flesh nor bone,
Yet of the living once depending on:
So dry it is, no creature can it cate,
Yet may stened by some. Art, it words can speak.
It works not treason first, like traitors many,
But i^ beheaded ere it can do any;
And then it falls to action without rest,
Whispers with secrets of a Ladies breast:
Conuayes a message, be it far or near,
Five hundred miles from hand unto the ear.
It faster binds by dashes and by blots,
T^en does a Cable with a hundred knots.
Thus and much more it works by slight of hand.
Now what this is I feign would under stand.
Resol. A quill, of which is made a pen.

3.
h. b.f.
Musca. a ^lie.
h. b.f.
Musica, musi^ke.
1. With head I run, with foot and head I fly:
2: With these entire, I musicks sweet notes try.
4. In Tibiam.
Non ego continuee morior, si spiritus exit,
Nam re dit assidue, quamuis and sape recedat.
Englished.

All creatures that subsist and live by breath,
When it departs, is life for ever fled,
But mine is contrary, that brings no death,
But as it wastes, is new breathed in and bred.
5. A Harp. Thus the Harp sounds out it self.
A Silent tree I was, and mute did stand,
That now does speak sweet tunes to every hand.
My life was death, my death to me was life,
For here with nature, art begins her strife,
That since in life by her I might not live,
Art after death a life to me did give.
6.
Q. What is the ground and use of Music, and wherein does it consist?

A. It consists in these five keys or words, turned into these two Verses.

Ve releuet mi-serum fatum solitosque La-bores*
Eua sic dulcis Musica noster amor.
Englished.

Sweet Music does refresh and ease those cares,
To which, by Eues offense we al are heirs.
7.
Si caput est, currit; ventrem coniunge, volabit;
Add pedem, comedes, and sine ventre bibes.
ca. ven. pes.
Resol. mus. musca, muscetum mustum.
A mouse, a Fly, Muscadel.
Englished.

With head I run, with head and belly fly,
With foot thereto am food, and for the dry
Without my belly drink, all this am I.
8. Sir Tho. Moors Epig. upon a poor Physicion.
TV te sers medicu^, nos te plus esse fatemur:
Vna tibi plus est litera quam medico.
Englished.

Thou tearm'st thy self Physician, and would be,
And yet thy Art and Skill both keep thee poor,
That I can hardly yield thee that to be,
And yet I will allow thee something more.
Not Medicus a Physician, but Mendicus, a Beggar,
A word of a letter more.
9. In somnum.
Sponte mea veniens, varias ostendo figuras,
Engo metus varios, nullo discrimine very.
Sed me nemo videt, nisi sua lamina claudit.
Upon Sleep.
Of self accord I come and fill the mind,
With thousand toys and fancies I devise;
But few thereof for truth I noted find,
And none sees the^, or me, but winkin^ eyes.
10. Aliud.
Dum nihil ipse vides, facio te multa videre,
Lumina ni claudat, me quoque nemo videt.
Thou seeing nothing, many things I show,
Which but with closed eyes thou can not know.
II.
Ter tria dant septem, septem sex, sex quoque, (...) sunt,
Octo dant quatuor, quatuor faciunt tibi septem,
Haec numeres recto, faciunt tibi milli^ quinque.
It is understood of the letters in the words, for the 2 first words, ter tria,
yield seven letters, the word septem six, the word sex 3. Octo 4. quatuor 7.
millia 5. though it signify 1000.

12. Upon a Hammer or Mallet.
THe strength of all my body's in my head,
With what I fight, am never vanquished,
My head is great, my body is but small,
A Hammer, or a Mallet most me call.
13.
Mulae Asinaeque duos imponit seruulus vtres
Impletos vino, signemque vt vidit Ase^^am
Pondere defessam, vestigia figere tarda
Mula rogat, etc.
Englished.

A Mule and Ass did each a vessel bear,
Repleat with wine, the Ass slow creeping on
The Mule did thus regreet, My pare^t deer,
Why do so heavy
pass and make such moan?
If thou one measure unto me do lend,
Then twice thy Burthen's,
borne upon my back:
But out of mine, if I to thee one send,
Then both of us do bear one equal pack.
Now learned Arithmetician, I would know
Under what burden each of these did go.
Resol. The Mule bore 7. and the Ass 5.

14. In clauem.
Virtutes magnas de viribus affero paruis,
Pando domos clausas, iterum concludo, petentes
Seruo domum domino, sed rursum seruor ab illo.
Upon a Key.
Great virtue I afford in substance small,
To shut and open when mine Owner will,
Whom faithful I attend at beck, at call,
When many times
the Thief does curse my skill.
15.
Sunt duo quae duo sunt, and sunt duo quae duo non sunt:
Quae duo si non sunt, sunt duo nulla duo.
Englished.

There Is two that are not two,
yet are not one,
Which two another says, are two, none.
The wedded pair.

16.
Dictio lassat equum, mel comedit,
abstrahe primam,
Toll sed inde duas, remanebit amica luto su^.
Cursus, versus, sus.
The Horse for Race,
the Bear for hunny sweet,
The durty Sow makes these three names to meet
For of Cursus for a Course, take away c. it is Vrsus for a Bear, and the
latter part o^ the word is sus for a Sow.

17. How is this verse construed?
Sunt oculus clari qui cernis ^ydera tanquam.
Dico Gra^maticum versum qui construit istum.
c. o. q. s. e. t. s. Cernis oculos qui sunt clari
tanquam sydera.
Thou beholdest eyes,
As clear as the skies.
18. In iuris Consultum.
A Lawyer sitting plodding at his book,
Expecting Clients in a long vacation,
Sometimes Fitzarbert,
turning sometimes Brook;
In comes his man and brings him this relation;
That one had late discharged to his cost,
A Piece for pleasure,
that might breed his pain,
For by the Statute there was 5. pound lost.
To whom his Master thus replied again,
Who was the man so fondly him behau'd?
Quoth he, I know;
then there is five pound saved.
19. Upon disparity of dispositions in two sons.
TWo Sons there were that issued from one Mother,
In disposition far unlike each other:
The one delighted only in his pride,
His care was for neat clothing, naught beside,
And rather if his coin did fall but scant,
Three days he would fast, before one button want.
The other made his belly all his care,
To clothe his carcass, that had little share:
As the other all he got, hung on his back,
So this would eat his shoos rather the^ lack;
The mother 'twixt them twain, this difrence puts,
Her silken son, and son with silken guts.
Upon a bragging Angler.
ONe that to Angle often did resort:
For well it seemed,
he liked the patient sport:
Meeting another, would relate and show
What store of fish he caught,
as braggards do:
When passing by a May Pole, he did say,
He caught a Trout as thick as that lait day:
This thought incredible by his gaping friend,
His man must thereto confirmation lend*
Quoth he, Because I would
not speak a wrong,
I think 'twas scarce so thick,
but 'twas as long.
Of money and the quality thereof, that well known metal, first made by man,
as afterward man seeks to be made by it.
THat which imployes the world,
toils Sea and Land,
Is but t'atchieue this creature of man's hand,
Which since the world began,
what sundry shapes,
It has transformed it in,
what murders, rapes,
It might have blushed for,
but that guiltless pale,
It is being so pursude being each man's tale:
It cannot color, can in no place lie,
Made after with such ceaseless hue and cry,
It sets the world a sweating by the ears,
Entering the rich with cares,
the poor with fears,
To either sometimes both a foe and friend,
Sometimes prolongs a life, hastens an end,
So sly a shifter, that it finds an hour,
To break each prison, to escape the Tower*
Though all the warders round about it stand,
Yet out it gets and flies about the Land,
As by experience many a one to his sorrow,
Has bin today his keeper, not to morrow.
Worse for to fit a garment, and more strange,
Then for the Moon,
which every month does change.
Because no Worke-man
has the skill or power,
To fit the thing that is changed every hour,
Within that leathern Channel that it goes,
It like the Sea continual ebbes and flows,
And is of such strong power,
such secret might,
It makes the Lady, as it bought the Knigh^*
It sends the Merchant over shelues and sands,
To foreign Regions and far distant lands;
Who in his watery pilgrimage is sed,
To be with neither living nor yet dead:
To deal with doubtful foes,
for firmest friends,
Leaving his wife at home to doubtful ends.
This draws the Lawyer, dwell he never so far,
With gainful terms, to wrangle at the bar,
Whose breath like to
a whirlwind this to boot,
Towseth a State, and turns it up by th'root
For this the Doctor deals out his skill,
Which sometimes ^aues,
and oftentimes does kill.
For this the Broker to the devil drawn,
Writes bought, and half worth
seaseth on your pawn.
Who coozning Statutes
strangely to be wondered,
Makes forty of his fourscore or his hundred*
The gain of this each Tradesma^s living ca^^
Opes every shop, and vttoreth every ware.
This makes the usurer, and no wonder then,
That would be boundles, be confined to te^
Defraud his brother, ventersoule and nam^
Though Scripture say,
thou shall not do the same.
This from that fatal Newgate,
old gate Iayle,
Has sent forth many, a short life to bewail:
Her helpelesse fortune, and her fatal hap,
On Doctor Stories first three cornerd cap;
Many a rich chastity strongly pursued
By just, effectlesse, yet by this subdued
Has here been captived to this ruin won,
That else in former times had been a Nun.
More Orator then Tully to prevail,
By force of Tongue, then Samson, to assail
By might of strength.
For this men swear and sin,
Seek both by good and bad to gain and win.
And in a word, this is that good and evil,
Brings some to God,
but more unto the Devil.
A Supplication to Lady Pecunia.
GReat Lady, how unlike
some sollid maid,
That long in vain has for a suitor staid,
Art thou, which not for worth,
but beauty too,
Makes all in love, and all the world to woo!
Grant me, tho neither favorite nor friend,
Nor none that thy great troops
nor trains attend;
Not of so mean a favor to be bard,
That crave, though not redress,
yet be heard:
That since thou often
have progrest by my door,
That makes all rich, and yet I still am poor
That thou would one day call,
and lodge, and rest
With one had never more need
of such a guest.
Which if thou daigne,
this favor thou shall find,
I Will not vplocke thee with a Mysers mind
But use thee as a Lady of Respect,
Which do from care and misery protec^
All that embrace thee with a plentious hand
Most constant, that most aydfully do stand
Where friends forsake us,
and where kindred fall,
A Bulwark to us, thou that all in all
Command; art sought unto, to thee I cry
To fall some drops into a ground that is dry
Unlike to Usury that ever yet
Applied her needless moisture wet to we^
O^ Monarchs hands, that let not bounty fa^
Where want cries some, but where exces^ gets all.
Her reply.
OF all the Ladies ere were wooed or wed,
Or ever forced unto a loathed bed,
Am I most wretched,
that the least may choose
Where I affect, or where I loath, refuse,
But like some misers Daughte^
made a Bride,
To Riches only, and naught else beside:
Am I thrust off to every worthless clown,
When men of virtue, goodness and renown,
Are barred my presence, whilst I am inforst,
Ravished, offended, strive to be deuorst,
Abused with Usurers, and forced to br^ed,
Quite against Nature,
without womb or seed;
Yea, held in darkness under bars and bolts,
Where none but earth-wormes
court me, fools, and dolts,
Deprived of light, of liberty, and view,
And whatsoever else a Ladies due.
Could I deceive those Argoses me keep,
With many thousand eyes that never sleep:
I would take my progress
to each prison door,
Shake off their Shackles, and let out the poor
That long have looked with poverty and pain
Expecting my return, but all in vain.
I would build Churches, be in godly motion,
But that such Nabals hinder my devotion.
From a captiuing hand I broke of late,
And out I got, and straight raised up a gate.
From thence I took my progress into Paul's,
And glas'd some windows
that did want no holes;
And if it were not for such stays and lets,
I Would give security for all men's debts.
For without me, where-euer I am staid,
is no bond canceld, nor no reckoning paid.
For me are al brains labored, hands imploid,
And without me the world is not inioyd.
And therefore at my latest cloze of breath,
Great King of Mortal things
(I clipped death)
To thee I humbly my petition make,
That thou thy harvest of such Iaylors take;
That till their death
will grapple what they have,
And naught shall part them
but thy sith and grave:
That thou would mow them
down, even unto dust,
From others wants, that bar me till I rust.
Deaths supplication to Time.
WIthin a Dungeon
all in darkness grounded,
Sat a grim Ghost, of sinews al co^pounded:
Where more to increase
his melancholy moanes,
He grapples to himself, the sculs and bones
Of men departed, and with these he plays,
As sorrows were his joys
and shortning days.
Which though his workmen,
sickness, ach, and pain,
Were all in labor, yet he thought his gain
Was small or nothing,
without plague, or war;
Which Time still favoring,
did prolong too far.
Against whom, was deadly enmity and hate,
For safe protecting all things to their date:
Before which expiration Death may stand*
In expectation, but with empty hand:
And therefore to this Lady did reply,
The fault was times, though hers the injury*
For if that I were master of my will,
With blood I Would surfeit,
and the whole world kill.
There should not such a miser live so long,
To iniure many, by one Ladies wrong.
And therefore unto Time I humbly pray,
To stir his wings more swift and fly away,
That I with grief and stay, no longer pine,
But so many have my wish,
and thou have mine.
Times reply.
OF all the Ages that are past and fled
By me out-worne,
decayed, deceast, and dead:
Was never any spoke with so small heed,
To say that Time was slow and had no speed.
Although I might fly faster far away,
With Snayle I ever creep,
when swift things stay.
And that our Parallells a sudden have,
Which swiftly does begin, but slowly last.
Indeed it is true, all living things depend
On my supplied minutes, which shall end,
And every sublunary thing below,
But when that time shall be,
Time does not know.
Yet now I must confess, that I grow old,
Having five thousand years
six hundred told.
In which long Summer I am so well read,
That I do teach all Arts that skill are bred.
I know all History how ere it run,
And the truth thereof,
being witness when 'twas done.
The death of Kings,
of Princes, change of State,
What is it I know not, to discourse, relate?
With many secrets I do counsel keep,
Done at dark midnight,
in contempt of sleep.
Which some Petitioners to me
would know:
To all which sifting thoughts, I answer, no
I must not tell, the Linnins then are tossed,
Those dainties touched,
and those nice things lost.
This minutes guiltines of loss of strength,
Decay of stomach, and eclipse of length.
Of which, another time I more may say,
But now must answer death,
which craves with stay,
License to hurry forth, to mow and kill,
Which yet I cannot give, but shortly will.
For I am but a servant, and this sore
Must be endured with grief,
or patience bore.
For till this worlds co^sumption there must be
Rich Dives, and poor Lazar, wants to see.
And yet I cannot hasten to amend,
What here thou do
complain until the end.
And then this Lady
that thou would set free,
Shall want her Courtiers
and a vain thing be.
Table-Talke, AS MUSIC TO A BANQVET of WINE: Served in, in witty
propositions, Seasoning and Questions: Together with their Resolutions and
Answers: To exhilarate and recreate the bodies and minds both of our selves
and our friends at our Tables and Meetings.

Singula cum valiant, sunt meliora simul.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Brudenell, for Leonard Becket, and are to be sold at
his shop in the Temple near the Church. 1630.

PREFACE.
AT Bed and Board, where pleasures are exact,
At both we complement as well a^ act:
And at them both should every one desire
Something to bring, to crown delight the higher.
Who brings himself as an invited guest,
Only to fill a room and taste the best,
And nothing more retains, nor can impart,
Does recompense but ill by his des^rt
The favor he has found, to taste g^^^ fare,
And come in company where betters are,
That can discourse, that know what does befit,
Whose every word, out-values every bit,
So wisely strow'd befitting time and place,
Such shine like lamps, whilst the unlettered base
Smother t'th socket, whilst these lights excel,
To the ear as welcome, as theirs harsh to the smell.
Therefore to further such as would partake
Of the best things, but cannot, for their sake
Is here a Dictionar^, where phrases walke^
And subjects of Discourse and Table-Talke,
Are various intermixed, some grave, some light,
Like to our courses method, noone and night:
Here Is Questions, Answers, Riddles, Tales and Jests,
To crown with laughter both our friends and feasts.
Here is a Garden, wherewith weeds are flowers,
To stick in Princes Halls, and Ladies Bowers,
To give their pretty persons some delight,
In tedious day-times, that are made for night,
The which to all I wish of either gender,
In lieu whereof the sequel here I tender,
Wishing it music to the enchanted ear,
Unto the taste a feast of Christmas cheer.
And this is all the trumpet shall be blown
To the troop so small, that will so soon be shown.
The Introduction.
HE that knows not what he ought to know, is a beast among men.

He that knows no more then he has need of, is a man among beasts.

But he that knows all that may be known, is a God amongst men.

He that knows only but to know. has a silent, but a fruitles knowledge.

He that knows only to make others know that he knows, has an ambitious*
but a vain glorious knowledge.

He that knows only to instruct others, and make use himself, has the
true and blessed knowledge.

Table-Talke.
Question. IN what part of the year (according to the conjectures of the
learned) was the world created?

Answer. Concerning the resolution of this question, much controversy has
arisen, as well betwixt several Nations, as men: As among the Hebrews, the
Chaldeans, the Arabians, the Egyptians, the Greeks and Latins: some
conceiving it to be created in the Summer, others in the Spring, others in
Autumn; to which (as say some) Moses seems to assent, where it is said in
Genesis, Let the earth bring forth the green herb, and trees bring forth
fruit according to their kind. The Egyptians think it was created in Summer;
most in the Spring. Likewise they vary about the Planets, and what houses they
were created in: some think when the Sun was in Leo, the Moon in Cancer,
and so of the rest. Which may be somewhat more confirmed by this necessary rule
following, for the falling of Easter day, which is, As upon the 10 day of the
first month from the creation, which is March, at the conjunction of the Sun
and the Moon, next the Equinoctial; the Paschall Lamb was chosen out of the
flock, and kept till the 14. day, or full Moon: so the tenth day of the first
month, being Palm sunday, our Savior entered into Jerusalem, and the 14 day
suffered his passion; so as the next Sunday after the 14. day of the Moon or
full Moon in the month of March is always Easter day, and probable to
confirm the former supposition.

Q. But of this what shall I determine?

A. That by the wisdom, mercy, and goodness of God it was created, in the
fullness of time, in what part his wisdom thought most meet: the admirable
composition and frame whereof, that we daily contemplate and behold with the
eyes of our understanding, with the diversity and distinction of all the
creatures therein; they and all these for the several uses and service of man,
and man only for the service of God.

Q. Wherefore then, since the world was only made for man, (for man only
knows the vs^ thereof) are the days of his pilgrimage v^^on earth, contracted
from the length of many cubits to a span-long, in comparison of the trebled
date and extension of bruit beasts, senseless and irrational creatures; as the
Heart, the Daw, the Oak, Ravens, Rocks, and such like, most of which have
trebled dates beyond the short period of man's life? For concerning the Heart,
one of the most doubtful, of whons notwithstanding Hist^ries make mention: How
Alexander desirous to aepproue to posterity the long life of this creature, to
that end caused to be put certain golden collers about diverse of their necks,
with the time of their dates, some of which were found 100. years after his
death in full vigor and liuelihood, not perceived to decline, or grown into
age, but continuing and lasting: when the life of man does vanish like a
shadow, like a flower; when neither Absolons beauty, Samsons strength, Salomons
wisdom, Asaels swiftness, Croesus wealth, Alexanders liberality, Hectors
strength, Homers eloquence, Augustus fortune, Traianes justice, Ciceroes zeal,
one, nor all of these can protect it, but that he falls from the grave of the
womb, to the womb of the grave, cut down like a flower, as these verses
seem to import: Est hominum status per florem significatus:
Vt flos cito perit, sic homo puluis erit.
Man's life is fitly semblanc'd by the flowers,
Which flourish now, and fade ere many ho^res*


Therefore this inequality considered, may it not be thought injustice and
wrong to man in this disposure? and if not, by what consequent or reason may he
settle his appeasement? For as the Poet: If death destroy us quite; we have
great wrong,
Since for our service al things else were wrought,
That Dawes, and Trees, and Rocks, should last so long,
When we must at an instant turn to naught.


A. By this, Because the wise Creator foresaw that these in their dislolution,
though never so long protracted, should altogether perish, but man at his end
should but renew a better, nay an immortal life: and therefore what he is
abridged of here, he has amends for hereafter.

Q. Wherein consists the natural life of man, that it so soon does cease, and
so quickly wheel off from the thing of so unstable continuance?

A. In heat and moisture, which daily wasting themselves to keep life afoot,
are again daily replenished in us by our meat and drink; for by our meat is
our natural heat maintained, and by our drink the radical moisture daily
replenished.

Q. Why should the Epicure then say, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
shall dye, when by eating and drinking, our life is strengthened and renewed?
and why may not the life of man by this moderate and seasonable supply, be
preserved continually, at leastwise the life of our forefathers?

A. Because as the Sea has bounds which it cannot pass, so is there to every
life a period set, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further: which though it
may be shortened, as it is in the Psalm, The bloodthirsty and deceitful man
shall not live forth half his days, yet can it in no wise be prolonged
further, at leastwise prorogued ever: for set all other adversaries aside, Time
it self shall at last bring in age, whose antipathy shall be such, that it shall
quench thy heat, and dry up thy moisture; for be thou never so well fenced*
comes death at last, and with a little pin bores through thy Castle wall, and
farewell man: But of this formerly more at large.

Q. What were the opinions of the Egyptian Sages and Philosophers concerning
the longitude or breuity of man's life? and whereupon did they ground their
reasons?

A. They were conceited that men did live according to the increasing or
diminishing of the heart, some thinking the heart to grow and increase till 50.
years, and that it did* augment every year 2. drachmes weight; and grown to
the full bigness, did again diminish every year as much, until it came to
nothing, whereupon ensued death.

Q. What are the opinions of some more modern Physicians for the natural
length or shortness thereof, upon the dependencie of Complexion either good or
evil?

A. Some think that the more better complexion, as those of the Sanguine, be
long in growing old, because they have much heat and humidity.

That the melancholy waxes soon old, because they be cold and dry; and as
touching the feminine sex, they become sooner old then the masculine.
Hipocrates reports that female children, in their mothers wombes are formed
in seven months, and then after grow slowlier then men; but borne, grow
faster, and become sooner wise, and sooner old, for the feebleness of their
body and manner of life, being for the most part idle, is an inducement to old
age.

Q. Whether are the tall or low of stature, according to the conjectures of
some learned, of longest health or life?

A. Some think the shortest statures, because their vital spirits are more
strong and nimble, imparting their liuelihood with more vigor in their shorter
circuit, then in the more spacious compass: others again that they are more
durable, because the Cedar many times is sooner blasted with a tempest then the
shrubs; others are of a contrary opinion, that the taller limbs have the more
temperate humors and complections, that fumes not so much do offend the
brain, because the stomach and it are more separate: but howsoever we
conclude these arguments of small validity, because Death looks not so high,
that he passes by the low, nor so low, that he passes by the high, but
leuels equally at both alike, as that more high Providence guides the hand from
which there is no evasion.

Q. Whether were the years of th^^^ncient Patriarchs, when they lived eight
or nine hundred years, of the length of our years with us; or so short as
some have imagined, that ten of theirs made but one of ours, or an hundred of
theirs but ten of ours?

A. Of equal length and parity with ours, finished by the course of the Sun:
and for further proof hereof, the Scriptures affirm, that in the 600. year
of Noah's life, in the second month, and 27. day of the month, the flood came:
now if the year were but 36. days, so little a year must either have no
months, or it must have but three days in a month, to make twelve months in
a year after that computation. And as in this, so likewise it may be inferred
in diverse other places, to prove that their years had their equal longitudes
and continuance with ours.

Q. What accidents or other remarkable consequence of time and place, have
followed the day and hour of the week, since the creation of Adam, as I have
seen it recorded in an ancient manuscript, but of what probability I aue^re not?

A. That as upon the 25. day of the month of March, the first month from the
creation, the 6. day of the week, and 6. hour of the day, Adam was created,
brake the Commandments, the seed of the woman was promised, and he for
disobedience banished out of Paradise: So the same day of the month, the same
hour of the day, Cain slew his brother Abel, the promise was renewed unto
Abraham, Isaac was to be offered up in sacrifice, the message by the Angel to
the virgin Mary, our Savior Christ was conceived, delivered, suffered his
passion on Mount Caluary, the same place where Adam was buried, that the second
Adam might there by his obedience, make good to man, what the first Adam lost
by disobedience and sin, and that the Cross whereupon he died, was a part of
the same tree from which Adam plucked the forbidden fruit. But of the certainty
hereof, I can avouch no warrant.

Q. We read in the Scripture, after Cai^ had slain his brother Abel, that he
was our^^ to be a vagabond and runnagate upon the face of the earth, and that
he had a mark set upon him, that no man might slay him? yet after it is said
that he built a City, and dwelt at the East side of Eden: now I would know what
was the end of Cain: How if he were a householder and a Citizen, he was a
runnagate? And if he built a City, who were his workmen? what Masons and
Carpenters had; for it is thought by some, there were not as that time above
five or six persons in the whole world, neither are there more nominated in the
Scripture?

A. In that primitive age of the world men lived long, for Adam his father
lived 930. years; and some are of opinion, that he lived the longer, by reason
that he knew the virtue, nature, and operation of every beast, and herb, and
plant, as well as to name them, and could apply them, wherein they were most
serviceable to his use. Now it is not improbable that Cain in his longinquity
of life might wander four or five hundred years, and in his latter age build
a City, which might be caused out of his fear, for before that guiltiness of
conscience that he had, no man intrencht himself within walls or bulwarks,
neither feared the violence of man or beast. And for his worke-men, they might
be many; for in the latter end of his age, it may not be thought but his
children, and his childrens children might be many generations, and enough to
build and inhabit a City, though Moses only names but some principal parties.
And for his death, we leave it as doubtful, though the Hebrews do report,
that Lamech being led a hunting (being blind) by his son Tubalcaine,
shooting at wild beasts, killed Cain in the thicket unawares; and after hearing
thereof by his son, struck him over the head with his bow, that he died
likewise: grounding their opinion upon the words of Lamech, Genesis 4. where he
says to his two wives, I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to
my hurt: both which we leave as uncertainties.

Q. By what signs do we judge men to be the more long or shorter lived?

A. The life of man is compared unto an Apple, which being ripe drops down of
it self, and sometimes in the immaturity is cast down by winds and tempests.

The signs of a short life are ancientl^ noted to be these three: 1.
Thinnenesse of Teeth. 2. Longnesse of Fingers. 3. Leaden or heaviness of
Color*
The contrary, or of a long life. 1. Straight Shoulders. 2. Wide Nostrils, and
the opposite adverse signs, that is, 1. Many Teeth. 2. Short Fingers, and 3. A
good Color.



Hereafter follows a Triplicity of somemore divine, witty, short and
compendious Precepts and Conclusions to several natures and purposes.
Q. THere are three invisible virtues of God, and which are they?

A. Power, Goodness, Wisdom, which are thus explicated: Of Power, all things
proceed.
Of Wisdom, all things consist.
Of Goodness all things are governed.


Q. What was the wise man's Memento to prevent sin?

A. Recordare nouissima, and non peccabis in ^ternum.

First, to remember these four last things, before we accomplish any evil,
and then we shall seldom do amiss: which are Death, Judgment, the pains of
Hell, and the joys of Heaven.

And they are so called for these four reasons: 1. Because Death is the end of
life, and the last thing which is to happen to us in this world. 2. Because
this Judgment is the last of all judgments that are to be given, and
therefore there is no appealing from it. 3. Because Hell is the last evil that
Malefactors are to have, and they are to remain therein for ever. 4. Because
Heaven is the last good which the good are to have, and they are never to lose
it.


Q. What four things are those that most plainly prove the books of the
Apocrypha not to be Canonical?

A. 1. Because they are not written by any Prophet, neither contain they any
Prophesies in them. 2. Because they were written in Greek, and all the rest in
Hebrew. 3. Because Malachy the last of the Prophets, says, that after him they
should not look for any other Prophet, till the coming of Eliah, that was, S.
John Baptist. 4. Because the Author of the Machabeas in one place craves
pardon for his work and says, If it be not so well as it should be, yet it was
as well as he could, which is no fitting phrase for a Penman of the holy
Scripture.


Q. There are three sayings found in Saint Paul's Epistles, which are taken from
the Heathen, and which are they?

A. The first out of Menander, Evil words corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.32.

The second out of Aeratus, Covetousness is the root all evils, 1 Timothy 10.

The third out of Epimenides, Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, flow
bellies, Tit. 1.12.

Q. What are the three parts of Repentance?

A. Contrition in Heart, Confession in Mouth, Satisfaction in Works.

Q. What four things are those that overcome one another?

A. 1 Death ouercomes Man. 2 Fame ouercomes Death. 3 Time ouercomes Fame. 4
Eternity ouercomes Time.


Q. There is held to be a scarcity of two sorts of men in our age, and who ore
they?

A. 1 Of Noblemen, because Citizens do daily aspire to honor and buy
Nobility. 2 Of Jews, because Christians make an occupation of usury.


Q. We cannot know the Authors of three mischiefs which happen oftentimes,
and what are they?

A. 1. He that is drunk, cannot justly say, This cup of wine, or that, made
me drunk. 2. He that walks among thorns, knows not which wounds him. 3. A
common whore being with child, knows not who is the father of it.


The Husbandmans lesson to his son.
Be holy in Lent.
Be painful in Harvest.
Be merry at Christmas.
A further counsel or lesson.
Touch nothing in a Smiths forge.
Taste nothing in an Apothecaries shop.
Be not curious in reading other men's let.
Brag not of three things, if thou would (...) joy plenty, and preserve a
good name.
That thou have good wine in thy house.
A fair wife for thy bed.
Plenty of money in thy chest.
Q. Whether is a good name sooner lost, or found?

A. As soon lost as sound, and therefore be diligent to atchieue it before
thou have it, in embracing wise counsel; and can^full to keep it when thou
have it: For Actum est de homine,
Quum actum est de nomine.


There be three manner of Sages.
The Sage herb, The Sage wise, and The Sage fool.
Of which one writes, Whost for wise himself does accept,
May match any Sage, the Sage wise except.


He that comes to a Lawyer, must bring with him three pockets, which must be
thus employed:

In the first must be his Declarations and his Evidences.

In the second his silver and his gold.

In the third his patience for expense and delay.

Likewise three things are said to be necessary for him that is a Student in
the law.

1 An Iron head. 2 A purse full of gold. 3 A leaden tail.
Q. What and how many are the properties of a good servant?

A. To have the back of an Ass,
The tongue of a sheep,
The snowt of a swine:
To bear all patiently,
To keep all silently,
To digest all things heartily.


Likewise: To be long of ear,
Light of foot,
Trusty of hand:
To hear quickly,
To run swiftly,
To execute honestly.


And not to have, Mel in ore, verba lactis,
Fell in cord, fraus in factis.


Q. Three things should be always at (...) and what are they?

A. The Hen-roost, the Cat, and the good Wife.
Three occasions many times move deate, and these are they:
To talk with him that is angry.
To send him of an arrand that is weary.
To wake a man out of his sleep.


Q. How stand the English, the French, the Italian and the Spaniard affected to
their w^^men for stature or complexion?

A. The English is indifferent for stature,
so she be amiable and beautiful.
The French affects the pale and the sle^der.
The Spaniard, the round and the tender.
The Italian, the ruddy, and the tall, as
their own Proverb seems to confirm it*
Grande and alia me fare Dio
Bella and bianco me fare i^.


Englished: If God will make me tall and hye,
What wants in beauty, I Will supply.


And therefore it is said, As he affects dearly, so he suspecteth deeply: yet
cannot his most narrow suspicion so turn the key to his own safety, thereby
solely to ingrose and secure the portion of his own right, without a most
hateful rival; to which purpose upon the general inconstancy of women, after
trial of so many beauties abroad* in so many several Countries, by two such
worthy personages so unworthily wronged by their own wives, and none found
constant or of better condition, then their own at home, but many worse;
returned homewards, refuging their sorrows with the generality of others
fortune* a in my Hosts tale in the story of Orlando, is more largely dilated
to the comfort of his* country men, where this was acted.

To which purpose and effect, one ill opinioned generally of women, thus
further adioyneth.

Go and catch a falling Star,
Get with child a mandrakes root:
Tell me where all past years are,
And who cleft the devils foot.
If thou be'st borne to strange sights,
Things invisible to see:
Ride ten thousand days and nights,
Till age snow while hayres on thee.
Then a hen thou returned wilt tell me,
All strange wonders that befell thee.
And swear, no where*
Lives a woman true and fair.
Or as another woman-hater thus w^^teth causelessly, if he meant all.

Go and diue the Ocean under,
Where vnfathom'd deepnesse be:
Then go scale the clouds of thunder,
Where the fiery Regions be.
Through the ^ildernesse go creep,
Through the brakes where never shone day,
Where the venom wonders keep,
And the Dragons have their way,
And thou as soon shall know the skill,
All these wonders to impart,
As to know the winding will
Of a woman's Protean heart.
Upon the evil and inconstancy of which wicked women, one began thus to make
an Alphabet.

Auidissimum animal, Bestiale barathrum, Concupiscentiam carnis, Duellum
damnosum, etc.

Englished.

Auaritious, Beastly, Concupiscentious of the flesh, Dangerous duellists, etc.

Which afterward, another as their friend, thus inuerted it upon the good,
Alphabeticall wise.

Amabiles, Beneficae, Castae, Deuotae, Elegantae, Fideles, Gratae, Humiles,
Iucundae, Lenes, Misericordes, Negotiosae, Obedientes, Prudentes, Qu^stuosae,
Reuerentes, Sapientes, Tacitae, Verae, Xenophilae, and Zenobiae.

Englished.

Amiable, Bountiful, Chaste, Devout, Eegant, Faithful, Grateful, Humble,
Ingenuous, Lightsome, Merciful, Needful, Obedient, Prudent, Quiet, Reverent,
Silent, Trusty, Virtuous, Expert, etc.

Q. For the precedence betwixt England, France and Spain, which kingdom may
the most justly challenge the priority?

A. Some writers affirm that the King of France may justly claim the first
place, and that for these reasons, as they allege.

1. For that it pleased God to send from Heaven, unto Clodoneu^, the first
Christian King of that Nation, three Lillies as a divine favor to be from
thencesorth borne in the arms of that Kingdom, before which time, the Kings
arms was three Toads, as some write.

Secondly, for that, as they affirm, France is the most ancient Kingdom in
Europe, and that Swardus was King of that (...) in the time of Alexander.

Thirdly, because the King of France is anointed, which seems a note of
antiquity.

Fourthly, for his Title, the most Christian.

Others hold that it belongs to Spain, and that for these reasons.

1 Because he is entitled the most Catholic. 2 Because he is King of many
Kingdoms, and so of much honor.
But we conclude, the chief place and precedence belongs to the Kingdom of
England.

First, in respect of antiquity, for Brute was King of England, when Alexander,
the first King of the Grecians called, himself King of the whole world.

Secondly, the King of England is anointed, and so is no other king but the
French King, the King of Cicill, and Jerusalem.

Thirdly, the King of England is a Prince most absolute in all respects. But
the reason is, for that England received the Christian faith before either
France or Spain, notwithstanding the title of most Christian.

There are 6. happy men among many others, and these are they.

1 Foelix qui Deum timet, qui mundum odit, qui nemini fert iniuriam. 2 Foelix
qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. 3 Foelix qui didicit contentus viuere
paruo. 4 Foelix qui nihil debet. 5 Foelix qui possidendo nihil, omnia possidet.
6 Foelix qui omnia quae vult habet, and (...) mali vult.
Englished.

1 Happy is he which fears God, hates the world, does no man injury. 2 Which
has learned to be content with a little. 3 That owes nothing but love. 4 Which
knows the causes of things. 5 Which possessing nothing, yet inioyes all things
in not desiring. 9 That has all that he desires, and desires nothing that is
hurtful.
Q. What three things are those to be avoided*

A. 1 Medicus inctoctus. 2 Cibus non coctus. 3 Praua mulier.


An unlearned Physician,
Meat ill dressed,
A wicked woman.
Q. Three things to be bewailed, and the^ (...) are they. Tempus amissum,
Peccatum commissum,
Bonum omissum.
Time lost,
Sin committed,
Good omitted.


Q. Who are the famous fools?

A. A faithful lover of an unfaithful friend. An honest gamester. A merciful
soldier.


Q. Three things are to be taken heed of an^ these are they; A dogs tooth, A
horse heel, and A woman's tongue.


Q. There are three things, for which a wiseman should not give counsel, and
which are they?

A. For another man to take a wife, To make a voyage by sea, To follow the
wars.


Q. Three things concur to make a man quickly rich, and what are they?

A. The fall of wives, and the standing of sheep and Bees.

Q. What four things kill a man before his time?

A. A fair wife, A troubled household, Immoderate meat and drink, and A
corrupt air.


Q. There be three shooing-hornes to pluck on a Cuckolds cap, and what are they?

A. A fair wife. A jealous husband. A wanton lover.


Four works of a Tyrant.
1 To destroy the good. 2 To hate the poor. 3 To extol the evil. 4 To root
out the virtuous.
Q. What one thing is that, that is both the hardest and easiest thing of all
other?

A. It Is the hardest for a man to know himself, and the easiest to deceive
himself.

Four vnlikelihoods, which yet sometimes come otherwise to pass.

He that is not Fair by 20. Strong by 30. Wise by 40. Rich by 50.
It Is unlikely he will ever be any of them.

Q. When is the best time to undertake a journey?

A. To answer as one merrily answere^. It is then, when a man has a good horse
money in his purse, and good companions.

Q. Two things thou may show, but not lend, and what are they?

A. Thy sword, and thy wife which is thy scabberd.

Q. What in times past was the controu^^ between the Coffin-maker and the
Chest-ma^ for superiority?

A. The Chest-maker vaunted, that the commodity that he made, was of greatest
worth, for that it locked up money that commanded all things.

But (quoth the Coffin-maker) The chest that I make, locks up him that
commands money, even the money-master himself; and as the worthiest thing, he
takes that with him when he leaves all other behind.

Q. What creatures are those that sleep with their eyes open?

A. The Lion, and the Hare, that bold, and fearful creature.

Q. What binds faster then Obedience, Wedlock, suspicion, or necessity?

A. Fate and Death.

Q. It is an approved Maxim, that in nature is no vacuity, nothing produced in
vain: and has this general rule ever passed without exception?

A. Not so, for the wisest and most precious good, but has found some Momus to
carpe at it, and like the Wolf, turn their throat against the Moon, to
quarrel the highest and best things, as to this purpose is here annexed a
story of some trial.

Certain ordinary Gentlemen meeting at an Ordinary, amongst many propositions
and discourses one to another, according to the too much liberty of such
places, one at last began to fall into this admiration, that since God and
Nature, the common parent^ of all creatures, produced nothing in vain, why
man, a creature of their principal workmanship* in himself was altoget^^
vanity? For confirmation whereof, sai^^ he of some, I knew a Country Church
welfurnished with a Clock, whose (...) was stricken with an image like a man,
upon the wheel stood a ca^^ which when the image struck, made such haste
away, as (...) parishioners, when they should have (...) for their sins, fell
a laughing at the (...) nimblenesse: And to furnish the Ch^^^ with better
merriment, their Parson (...) conceited as their Clock, amongst (...) of his
digressions, falling to sp^^ke (...) providence of God, and such like, (...)
sometimes in the first it might seem weak to humane capacity, when
notwithstanding it was wise in the ends propounded: As for example, (said he)
Walking one evening in my garden under mine Apple tree, I looked up, and saw
the little Apples advanced on the top of the high tree, eminent to the sight,
whilst at my foot grew grubling the huge Million, and the Pumpion (as me
thought) unseemly, because obscurely on the ground: Whereupon I began to
think, it had been more seemly and fit, that this worthier and fairer fruit
should have grown on the more high and perspicuous place, and the apples
nearer to the ground, or in the place thereof: when suddenly thus gazing up to
behold the unfitness of their growing, one blows me down from the top of
the high tree, and hits me on the top of my bald head. Being so amazed, I began
to think on mine own folly; for thought I then, If this Pumpion had grown
and fallen in this apples place, it had knocked out my foolish brains.

To this seconded another, to falsify the general proposition, that Nature
had erred in many t^^ngs, and might (as in others) have been better advised in
these: for a man to repent in; and he (...) Repent a day before thy death.
Quo(...) that is ignotum per ignotius, one vnknown^ thing answered by another
more unknown For (quoth he) I know not when the day (...) my death will be.
Why then (quoth (...) repent to day, for (for ought thou (...) thy death may be
to morrow.

Q. There are three powers of the soul (...) signed unto three parts of the
body (...) are they?

A. Reason to the Head, A(...) Heart, Lust to the Liuor: like(...) yields
sense, the Heart Life, (...) nourishment.

Q. Why does the bayre and nail (...) man, as also Onions, and Garlic, (...)
grow and increase after they are (...)thered?

A. Those have their issue (...) out of the abundance of mo(...) in men, though
dead, or these (...) not in a long time diminishe(...)

Q. Why are Bastards (...) strong, forward, witty, and (...) those which are
legitimate an(...) lock?

A. Some think, (...) (...) vehement and perpetual, and (...) whatsoever
outward heat is pre^^reunto, is weakened by the grea(...) ^^ued within, which
allayeth the (...)eof, as the heat of the fire is aba(...) beams of the Sun.

(...)omes it, that by looking upon one (...) sore, our own many times
be(...)?

(...) done partly by the mutual (...)ween the eye and the eye, but (...)lly
because the eye does attract (...) it beholds, certain rays (...)nto it, by
which it sees, and so (...) from thence what is infectious, it (...) the
likewise infected it self.

(...) does the Tyranny of age most ap(...) it self thy changing the hair from
(...) into white, and dying the locks (...) what means does it most vsu(...)?

(...) that Summer is decayed, (...) approaching on, the frosts and (...) of she
effects by drying (...)ch should digest superflu(...) ours, through the
defect (...)lly proceed.

(...) through the overmuch much care and fear, by which di(...)ned men
affirm that some men (...)prehension of death, have grow(...) their youth,
even at 25 years o(...)

Q. How does the Basiliske poy(...) eye; and the sight of the woolfe (...)
voice of him that beholds it, (...) Poet?

To lurk far off, yet lodge de(...)
The Basiliske does poison with (...)
The Wolf that howles for han(...) noise
Does by her near approach (...) voice.
A. By infection of the ay^e (...)gre^s approaches the ray (...) so likewise
is the hoar^nesse (...) effected, by drawing in ^y degrees(...) after another, till
that app(...) infected by the first. Wolue(...)red and destroyed in
Eng(...)mand of King Edgar, and (...) Princes had been devour (...)

Q, What substance or (...) commonly oppresses hea(...) and is commonly called
th(...)

A. The Night-ma(...)mour or blood, whi(...) (...) the vital spirits of those
that (...)pecially on their back, in such (...) if some heavy weight or lump
(...)heir stomach, which they would (...)ff, but cannot, and is not, as many
(...) living thing or spirit.

(...) four things are those, that being (...) be recovered?

(...) Time, Virginity, a Word (...)erefore for many causes we (...) them
present, and to a(...) in words, especially for (...)easons*

(...)cause in multiloquy the wisest (...)fend.

(...) because it is a sign of folly. (...)ecause many words are the (...)
d^^tents and displeasings, (...) more manifest by these exam(...)

(...) the gates that are always (...) time admit an enemy as (...) is ever
uncovered, is un(...) infectious: to which pur(...) Philosopher, amongst
(...)ing his peace, and be(...) so, answered, Because (...) times for speaking,
but never (...)


