THE PREAcher, or Method of preaching, vvrytten in Latin by Nicholas
Hemminge, and translated into English by I. H. Very necessary for all those
that by the true preaching of the word of God, labor to pull down the
Sinagoge of Satan, and build up the Temple of GOD.

1. Corinthians. 1.18. The preaching of the Cross, is to the^ that perish
foolishness: but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God.

Seen and allowed according to the Queens Majesty's Iniunction.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Marshe.

Anno. 1574.

Cum Priuilegio.

To the right Honorable Dougles Lady Sheffeld, late wife of Lord John Sheffeld
disceased: John Horsfall, her most humble and faithful servant wishes all
health and godliness long to continue with increase of virtue and zeal in
Religion. (*)
AFter that I had by the good advise and earnest persuation of certain of my
brethren Ministers of this city of London translate out of latin into our
vulgar tongue ^^^s little book entitled The preacher or Method of preaching
etc. necessary for all those yt by the true and sincere preaching of the word,
labor to pull down the sinagogue of Satan and to build up the temple of God,
I thought it my bounden duty (right Honorable and my singular good Lady) to
dedicate ye same unto your honor, and that for diverse and sondrye causes.
VVherof the first and chiefest is that zeal and godliness in the true religion
and faith of our savior Christ, which I by experience have noted and found to
be such in you, that you do not only your self dailye serve God by prayer,
but do also straightly command all your family and see them do the same.
Imitating herein the example of the faithful father of all the Sons of God
Abraham, who did not only himself but also appointed his whole family which
was great to serve God daily. The second cause is ye correction of sin, by
displacinge and puttinge clean out of your house al such which by their
ungodliness might either bring upon themselves the just plague of Almighty
God, or else be an evil example unto others to commit the like. The third is
your honors great meekenes, patience and modestye toward all me^ and in all
your affairs. The last cause is for yt it pleased your honor of your goodness
and mere liberality to accept and take me to be your household Chaplain, and
as it were a guide and helper of that godly zeal of calling upon the name of
God, and receiving of his Sacraments. These causes therefore diligently
considered, I thought it my duty to dedicate ye first fruits of this my labor
unto your honor, partly to declare unto you mine obedient thanckfulnes of
mind, and partlye that both honorable and all others in this land,
beholdinge your honors virtuous and Godly life, might not only imitate and
follow the same, but also glorify God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
To whom I commend your honor, heartily beseechinge him to increase in you
daily more and more al manner of virtue and godliness, to bless and enriche you
with all manner of prosperity, and to grant that for our good ensample and to
the settinge forth of Gods honor and glory, you may live long many quiet
and happy years amongst us, and after this life, to live with Christ for
ever. Amen,

To his brethren and fellow Ministers of the Church of Christ in England,
the interpretour wishes peace, and true knowledge, to the honor and glory of
God, and to the edification of the said Church, by true understanding and
since preaching of the word of GOD.
THis little book entitled Ecclesiastes, and first written in Latyne by
Hemminge, was thought meet, and very profitable to be translated, and turned
into English, not only by me, but also by the judgment of diverse others of
my brethren, godly and zealous Ministers of this citi of London, who
considering ye great profit that hereby might come, first unto the Church of
Christ, and next unto them selves, and to all their other brethren and
fellow Ministers throughout this little realm of England, according to their
calling, which do or ought to thriste and hunger, after the increase and
advancement of Christ his kingdom, to the overthrow and utter destruction
of blindness, error, Popery, superstition, and of all the tyranny of
Anti-christe, have persuaded me to accomplish their great and earnest desire,
and to translate into our vulgar tongue, this little and necessary treatise of
Himmenge, called Ecclesiastes, wherein what pains I have taken, I had rather a
great deal the learned in reading should judge, then that I would speak any
one word of my self. This only (as I trust) without offense of any, I may
truly say, that it would have been a great deal easier for me, to have
meddled rather with some one whole and continual comme^tarie, the^ with this
little treatise, which in my judgment may not unfitly be termed Christiana
Rhetorica, that is to say, an art out of the which the true and faithful
Ministers of Christ, may learn plainly, and orderly, to break and
distribute the word of God unto the people, and flock committed to their
charge. Now it is not unknown how hard a thing it is to translate any art
written, either in the Latyne, or in the Greek tongue, especially into our
English and vulgar tongue, in the which we have words, neither sufficient,
nor yet apt enough to declare and express the same: that is to say, the
terms and proper names of art: as Genus, differentia, species, adiuncta,
exordium, enarratio, genus didascalicum, paraeneticum. etc. not withstanding
this great difficulty which might altogether seem to have been sufficient to
dissuade, hinder, and discourage me, to have taken this little hard, and
profitable work in hand: yet the examples of other wise and learned men (who
before me have brought into our tongue the arts of Grammar, Logike,
Rhetoric, Arithmeticke, Astronomy, Geographie. etc. did not a little
encourage and bolden me hereunto: so that I thought if other grave, wise, and
learned men, before me, both Romans, Italians, Germans, Frenchemen, and
Englismen, have thought good for the advancement of Philosophy, and human
knowledge, to bring into their mother tongue those and other like arts first
written in the Greek tongue, though they could not always find out proper
words every one in their own tongue to declare ye proper terms of art. I
with much more bouldnes might take in hand to interpret this little art of
Christian Rhetoric, especially seeing that the same does so far pass the
art of Rhetoric, as ye holy word of God does exceed the knowledge of all
manner of human philosophy. For that art does teach thee, cunningly to
handle, and eloquently to speak of worldly things, and of men's matters: and
that either in praise, or disprayse, either in defending and proving, or else in
reproving, impugning, disco^mending, and disalowing, whereof we have examples in
Demosthenes, and Cresiphon, among the Greecians: in M. T. Cicero, and Mar.
Antonius among the Romans, and in diverse other Orators, who flourished in
their time. But this does instruct and teach thee, the true division of the
scriptures, home they have been diversely of diverse godly writers divided: What
the use and profit thereof is: what tongues are necessary for thee to learn
and understand the scriptures: what the use of them are. How thou must study
diligently and above all other writers the holy scriptures. How thou must, for
thy better understanding, confer them together, not leaving altogether,
either to thine own or yet to other men's opinions: And to conclude, how thou
may orderly and with profit of thy hearers preach, and expound the word
of God, whether me^ are to be lifted up, and comforted with the sweet promises
of God, or else to be beaten, and cast down, with his dreadful minaces, and
threatninges: whether wickedness be to be defaced and trodden underfoot, or
virtue to be praised, and exhorted unto: But all these and many such others,
thou shalt more at large better learn out of the treatise it self, and
therefore I refer thee unto the dilligent reading thereof, and do exhort
thee, so to read, that thou may not only hereby learn to know a ready and
easy Method, or way of preaching out of the word of God unto others, orderly
for the help both of thine own memory, and also of thy hearears: but also,
and that especially that with the study of this art and Method, thou always
make thy prayers unto almighty God, for ye assistance and help of his holy
spirit, which may teach thee, the true end, and right use of ye same. For
as art helps nature, and nature art, so that art can do nothing without
nature, so must we always remember that the Method or art of preaching,
shall littell, or nothing at all profit us, unless the the spirit of God be
joined thereunto, which is, as it were the true nature unto it, and without
the which the art it self is able to do nothing: for this holy spirit of
God, does not only make us apt, and able to learn this art, or Method, but
does also teach us that the true end, and right use hereof, is not only to
preach learnedly, orderly or cunningly the word of God unto others, but also
and that especially unto ourselves, that our audience seeing our wise and holy
sayings to agree together, with our good and godly deeds may by our example
frame also their life, and conversation according to our preaching out of the
word of God, and so together with us both in word and deed glorify God the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

I have to desire thee (Christian Reader) to bear with some faults escaped in
the Printing, yt which are these as follows.

Fol. 4. page 2. lin. 12. for therefore, read there are. Fol. 7. page, 1. lin.
3. Cathechists, read Cathechesis. Fol. 39. pa. 1. lin. 27. for fractificat,
read ^ructificat.

The contents of this book.
THe division of the holy Scripture. Fol. 1. The first division Fol. 1. The
subdiuision 1. The second division 3. The third division 4 The fourth division
6 The forms and kinds of Narrations. 7. The aids or helps of an
interpretour. 7 The causes of interpretation 10 The kinds of interpretation 11
The Grammarian his kind of interpretation 11 The Logitian his kind of
interpretinge 12. The first Canon. 12 The second Canon. 12. The third Canon.
13. The fourth Canon. 13 The Orator his kind of interpretinge 14. The mixed
kind of interpreting. 14. The use of commentaries. 14. The way to frame or
make holy Sermons. 15. The kinds of Sermons 15. The kind of teaching. 18. Of
the simple kind of teaching which belongs unto persons. 19. Of that treatise
of persons which belong to examples. 19. Of that kind of treatise of persons
which belongs to demonstration. 22. Of that simple teaching which belongs
unto things 24. Of the simple kind of teaching of things by a figure called
Dicresis, that is to say, division. 24 Of definition. 25 Of division and
partition 30. Of causes. 31. Of the effect. 32. Of the use and abuse. 32. Of
Contraries. 33. Of the simple kind of teaching called Sintheticall. 33. Of the
simple kind of teaching called Analiticall. 33. Of the compound kind of
teaching. 35. Of the invention or findinge out of common places. 37. The first
Rule. 37 The second Rule. 38. The third Rule 38. The fourth rule to make
abstractes. 39. The fifth Rule. 39. The sixth Rule. 40. The seventh Rule. 41. The
eight Rule. 42. Of the manner of handling of places inverted, both plentifully
and profitably. 43. Of the diduction of questions. 44. Of plentious
confirmation 45. Of the kinds of proof 46. Of the heaping of arguments. 47 Of
the expolition or dilating of arguments 48. Of the confutation. 50. Of
Digression. 51. Of Artificial conclusion. 52. Of that kind of Sermon which
consists in exhortation called Pareneticall. 53. Of the perswasible Sermon.
53. The example of the perswasible Sermon. 54. Of the Consolatorie Sermon, or
which consists in comforting. 58 The Method of geeuing of comfort. 59. Of
the chidinge Sermon. 64. Of Memory. 65.
The end of the Contents.

The division of the Holy Scriptures.
THe holy Scriptures is not after one sort but diversely of diverse writers
divided, which thing ought not to seem strau^g, or unseemly unto any man,
for sometines even of one and the self same things, there are many
differences according to the diversity whereof, the diuersityes of division may
be taken, and authors have been accustomed, to appointe such kinds of
deuisions, which do seem to serve best for their purpose. Wherefore saying
that the Scripture is diversely divided, I will recite in order the chief and
principal deuisions of the same and will also declare the use of them, to the
end that the profit of this varietye and difference may appear unto all men.

The first division.
THe most common division of the Scripture is this, whereas it is divided into
the old and new Testamente, which being joined together, are in the Greek
tongue by a certain figure called Antonomasia) named the Bible, which also is
therefore sometimes called an Instrumente, because that by it, as by an
Instrument, or ready mean, the holy will and word of God is brought and
declared unto us. Now the Epithetes, or names of old and new, are taken from
the crycumsta^ces of times. For it is called the old Testament, because in
respect of the time it was the first. Again it is called the new, for that
according to the time, it was the last. But if any man should think this
difference to be taken from the diuersitye of couenauntes, it were no great
matter: yet the first reason is crewer and fitter for this place.
Notwythstanding they which call the old and the new Testamente, by the name
of books, do use the word Testament contrary to the common use.

The subdiuision.
THE old Testamente is called of the Jews, [Esrim veorba] and that of his
number of Books. For they do receive xxiiii. Books of undoubted aucthority,
which they divide into four parts, or orders. The first is called of them
Thora, that is to say, the Law or doctrine, and it does contain five Books,
to wit Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numeri and Deuteronomium, which the
Grecians call also (...), that is to say, A volume containing five books. The
second part is called of them Rhesconim Nebiim, that is to say, the former
Prophets, and this part has four books, to wit, the book of Joshua, the
book of Judges, the book of Samuel and the books of the kings.

The third part is, Acharonim Nebijm, that is to say, of the latter
Prophets, and it does comprehend four books, Esaye, Ieremye, Ezechiell, and
the book of the twelve Prophets, which they call the lesser, as are Osee,
Ioell, Amos, Abdias, Jonas, Micheas, Nahum, Baruch, Sophomas, Haggeus,
Zachary, and Malachie. The fourth part is Chetubim, that is to say, of the
holy writers, and it does contain eleven books, Paralippominon, the Psalter,
the Proverbs of Solomon, Job, Ruthe, Ecclesiastes, the Lamentation of Ieremye,
the Song of Songs, Haster, Daniell, Esoras, and Nehemiah, which two latter,
are taken for one book. So that we have 24. books of the old Testamente of
undoubted auctority, divided into 4. parts, or orders. Notwythsta^ding besides
these books they have certain, also which they do call Apocrypha, that is to
say, secret or hidden Scriptures, therefore so called, because they were not
brought forth into the light, to confirm any opinion or doctrine. Of this
sort are Jesus the son of Syrach, Iudeth, Tobias, the books of Machabees,
the wisdom of Solomon, Baruch, ye scribe of Jeremy, and this is the division
of the old Testament, after the manner of the Hebrews and the Greatians.

The new Testamente is divided into 4. parts. The first contains the four
Evangelists. The second the acts of the Apostles. The third, the 21. Epistles
of the Apostles, that is to say, 14. of Paul, 3. of John, 2 of Peter, one of
James, and one of Judas. The fourth part contains the Apocalips of S. John.
Moreover all the books of the new Testament, are found in the Cannon,
except the second Epistle of S. Peter, the second and third Epistle of
John, and the Epistles of James, and Jude, with the Apocalipse. Some also do
put the Epistle to the Hebrews out of the Cannon.

Now somewhat seems to be added, concerning the use and profit of this
distinction rehearsed: for it little avails dilligently to distinguishe,
unless thou perceive also what profit proceeds thereof. First of all
therefore the distinction profitely much to judge truly of the authority of
Holy books: for all the books of the old and new Testament, are of an
undoubted faith, and are of great force to confirm opinions: except those
which I said before were called Apocrypha, which truly may be read with
profit. But in disputations of opinious they are not to be alleged. For those
books only are of an undoubted auctority, which are truly attributed to Moses,
to the Prophets, to the Evangelists, and to the Apostles. Wherefore since
that the Primative and pure Church, has doubted of the auctors of the secret
Scriptures, called Apocrypha, they are of right rejected, when as they are
alleged by the aduersarye against the wrytinges of the Prophets and the
Apostles. There is also another commodity of this distinction, for it is
commodious to have a certain order of books, that. Students may distribute the
reading of the Bible into certain times, as it shall seem to be profitable for
them, to learn the holy books. The third commoditye is that a certain way
or means may be had (whether thou preach or interpret the sacred Scriptures
in the schools) of recyting or alleging ye Tastimonyes of Scriptures, that the
place of the testimonye, may be showed as it were with the finger, when as the
aucthour of the wrytinge, and the Chapter of the Book is named and rehearsed.

The second division.
THe deuines in the schools, do divide the books both of the old and new
Testament, into Legal, Historical, Sapientiall, and Prophetical books. As
of the old Testamente, the five books of Moses are Legal: the books called
Historical are Joshua, the book of Judges, Ruth, the 4. books of the Kings,
Job, the two books of the Machabees. The Psalter, ye Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
ye Song of Songs, the book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, are Sapiential. And
the xvii. Prophets before rehearsed are Prophetical: In like manner also, to
the end their ignorance might the more evidently appear, they divide the
books of the new Testamente, so that the books of the Evangelists may be
Legal: the Acts of the Apostles Historical: the xxi. Epistles of the
Apostles Sapiential: and the Apocalipse of S. John to be Prophetical. This by
no color may be excused: for it is altogether absurd in as much as it is of
them applied to books. But if they would apply this their subtle division
to the things (as I think) ancient writers have done, it might
peradventure be borne wythall: but because it is manifestlye false, as it is
applied to books, I will not in so evident a matter, make any longer
confutation. Furthermore the use of this division as it is applied to things,
perhaps may be hear in, that learners in readinge may wyselye put a
difference between histories and laws, the Prophets, and the sayings of
wise men, that is to say, Gnomas, worthy and approved Sentences.

The third division.
THe whole Scripture, if thou consider ye things subject, are fitly divided
into History and Doctrine, which two the dilligente reader will search out
studiously in reading of holy books. Now therefore two kinds of Histories, ye
old and the new, the old contains all Histories, even from the beginning of
the creation of the world, until the conception of our Lord, or the beginning
of the Evangelical history. This Historye takes his original (as I have
said) from the first condition of things, and so continues until the
Monarchy of Cyrus. The weeks of Daniel follow after, until Christ crucified
Moreover I have made a computatio^ of years for memories sake, in these Verses
which I will put down in Latin.

M.D.C.L.V.I. post Adam mundus inundat.
Post vndas ad Abram, ducent nonaginta duoque.
Exodus hunc sequitur, quingentos quinque per Annos.
Exodus ad Babylon, nongent, decemque recenset.
Post Babel ad Christu^, D. and L. tribus, X. datur vnus.
Englished thus. The world a thousand six hundredth fifty six years is found,
After Adam our father by Noes flood drowned.
And from Noes flood to Abram again,
We find two hundred years ninety and twain.
Exodus does follow him, v. hundred years and five,
Exodus to Babylon ix. hundredth and x. co^triue.
And to our Savior Christ from Babylon,
Are five hundredth four score years and one.


If thou join these years together, thou shalt have 3944. years from the
first beginning of things, until Christ's his coming, the which number I am
wont to comprehend in these Verses.

Ter mill, and no^gent, quater, X. duo bis numeratur,
Christus adest nobis, gloria vita salus.
In English thus: After three thousand nine hundredth 44. years,
Christ our glory, life and health to us appears.


Furthermore the new history, is discribed of the Evangelists, which
entreats of the Conception, Natiuitye Cyrcumcision, Offering, Banishment,
Disputation, Baptism, Fasting, Temptation, Doctrine, Miracles, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ into Heaven. Also it entreats of the
geuinge of the holy Ghost in the day of Penticost, and of the Primative
Church, and his persecutions: for unto these Chapters and poinctes, the new
history shall be reduced. And thus much concerning the Historye.

The doctrine is dispersed throughout all the books of the old and new
Testament, and is divided into doctrine of things, and of signs. The doctrine
of things is afterward divided into the Law and the Gospel. The doctrine of
signs does contain the Ceremonies and Sacraments, whereof we have hear no
time to entreat at large, notwithstanding the use of this distinction is not
simple, and of one sort.

For the holy historye ought to be the glass of a Christian life. For it does
contain many examples of true godliness, of confession, of Faith, of
Patience, of calling etc. It recyteth the rewards and punishments, both of
obedience and disobedience toward GOD, and comprehends many testimonies
and witnesses of GOD. The difference of doctrine verelye, does cause us not to
confound rashlye with the Papists the Law and the Gospel, who dream the
Gospel to be the new Law, but they are deceived: For neither the Prophets,
nor the Apostles, teach any other thing then Moses does, although in their
manner of teachinge there is great difference. For Moses commits to
wrytinge the doctrine delivered, as it were by hand from GOD, and the fathers:
which does contain the perfect worshippinge of GOD, but he is more obscure
and dark then the Prophets.

The Prophets are the interpretours of Moses, for that which Moses does note,
as it were with certain Aphorisms, that is to say, briefly and summarilye,
the Prophets do expound in whole Sermons. But because that thing which the
Prophets did foretell, the Apostles saw before their eyes, therefore are the
Apostles made plainer interpreters of Moses, and of the Prophets. Who so
observes this difference, shall read with greater profit, the wrytinges of
Moses, of the Prophets and of the Apostles. But in what estimation the
scholars of the Apostles and other holy interpretours of the Scriptures are to
be had, I will declare hereafter, where I shall entreat of the manner of
Interpretacion.

The fourth division.
THere is yet another division delivered or given us by the Gretians, which we
may not ouerpasse: For the word of God bringinge salvation unto man, is
divided into Protreptico^, that is to say, appertayning to exhortacion:
Gnosticon, that is to say, appertayning to knowledge, Practicon, yt is to
say, appertayninge unto that which they call practice. And unto that which is
called Protrepticon, do appertain exhortatio^s, co^solations, threatenings,
chydings, which all are certain prouocatio^s, or sterrers up, to hear the
word of God, to embrace and to obey it. Gnosticon, is a part of knowledge which
does co^tayne the worshipping of God, ye knowledge of the Law, of the Gospel,
and of the Sacraments, the Epitome and brief sum whereof is Cathechisis,
that is to say Instruction. The last appertains unto practice, for it is
convenient that the obedience of the heart, and innocence of life should
follow knowledge: For faith as S. Paul witnesses, ought to be unfeigned, and
effectual through love.

This division serves to this end, that thou may know the use of the holy
Scriptures, that is to say, that thou may obey the exhorter, believe the
teacher, and do according as thou beleeuest. For he is worthy (says Agapetus)
of God who does nothing unworthy of God, but thinks those things which are
of God, and speaks the things which he thincketh, and does the thing which he
speaks.

Of the forms and kinds of Narrations.
IN speakinge of the forms of a Narration, I will declare four things in
order. First with what helps he ought to be instructed, that will become a
profitable interpretour. Secondly which are the causes of Narrations. Thirdly
what be the kinds of interpreting, and last of all what is the use of
co^mentaryes, or expositions.

The aids or helps of an interpretour.
THat a profitable interpretour ought to be instructed with liberal doctrine,
and especially with the knowledge of Rhetoric and Logic, there is no man
which will doubt thereof. Wherefore I will come to certain other helps by
which heed is taken, that the interpretour go not astraye from Godliness.
Therefore in entreating of holy misteryes, four kinds of care especially do
belong unto him, who desires reth to be free from error, and safe from the
deceites of heretics: Let the first care be to seek God and his will in the
Scriptures, with fear and humility, that he may know him truly in our Lord
Jesus Christ: Let the second care be to have the sacred word of God for a
rule. This care joined with the former shall cause thee to be conuersaunt in
the Scriptures without arrogance or contention, and that thou be not puffed
up with foolish rashness, but rather crave his help with humility, who^ in
the Scriptures thou seek faithfully: ye second care causes thee also, that
thou be not careful of those things which are not found written in the
word of the Lord. For thou ought to be content with that light, which
the Lord has showed thee to be followed. Let the third care be diligently to
conferte the Scriptures, to the end that the consent of Moses, of the
Prophets, of Christ, and of the Apostles, may euidentlye appear, and that
such sentences as seem to disagree, through conference may be reconcyled,
the cyrcumstaunces of the places being dilligentlye observed.

This care causes thee not rashlye to take houlde of any one sentence of the
Scriptures to assault or repugne another therewyth, from whence no doubt all
the sects of heresye have spronge up, which thing that it may the more
euidentlye appear, we shall openly declare by examples.

Arrius doothe hear the Son saying: The Father is greater then I. This
Sentence he snatcheth, and therewyth, is girded, and armed to vanquish and
overcome the deuinitie of Christ: Co^trariwyse, Manichaeus to the end he
might take away ye humanity of Christ, snatcheth the saying of S. Paul in
his first Epistle to the Corinthians, the 15. Chapter, where Christ is called
the second Adam from heaven heavenly. Again there are some which acknowledge
the deuinitie, and confess the humanity, but they make two persons in Christ,
the word, and the son of the Virgin. Osiander, because it is written yt Lord
is our righteousness: does ascribe justification to the divine nature alone, as
though the humanity were of no force at all, to the benefit of salvation.
Stancharus on the contrary side (because the word of promise, is of the seed
of a woman, and Paul calls Jesus Christ, being man a mediator) with
draws the benefit of redemption from the deuinitie, and does attribute the
same to the only humanitye. Here if there had been ye fear of our Lord, and
true humility, and if the desire of contention and pride had been absente,
they might easly have judged of these mysteries, by conference of the
Scriptures. Let the first care be to refer every interpretation to the
proportion of faith, from the which if the interpretation do disagree, it shall
be accounted false. But contrariwise, if it do agree with it although
sometimes it erreth from the mark, and mind of the aucthore, yet ought ye to
know, that this is done without the danger of salvation. But what is it to
call an interpretation to the proportion of faith: it is so to ordain it, yt
it may be corespondente to the first principles of faith, and that it may
seem to be as it were builded upon them. For those things are said to be
done according to the proportion which are made by comparison to another
thing, or else when other things are framed by the comparison of others.
Whereupon when Paul does command that Prophecye, that is to say, the
interpretation of the Scriptures, ought to be proportionable to faith, he
wylleth that the interpretour should have respect to the first principles of
Religion, which are plain and manifest, as conserninge the law and the
promises of the Gospel, with the which every interpretation ought to agree.
Wherefore the Papists in the exposition of this saying: (If thou will enter
into life keep the commandments) Do depart from the proportion of faith,
when they do conclude of this saying, That men may obtain salvation by their
own proper works, for this interpretation does strive with clear and
manifest principles: As are these, The seed of the woman shall break the
Serpents head, also, The Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the
world: and again, If righteousness be of the law Christ dyed in vain.

And always after this manner the mind of the interpretour ought to be bent, to
the first principles of our Religion, from the which he shall not suffer
himself to be drawn away by any Sophistical reason: For he that
countemneth this proportion of Faith, commended of S. Paul to the
interpretour, and else where does seek an interpretation contrary to the rule
of faith, let him be assured that he shall be plagued of GOD. For like as in
times paste under the old Testamente, fire ought always to be taken from the
fire of the Altar, wherewith their Sacrifice should be burned: so every
interpretation of ye Scriptures, should depend upon the everlasting word of
God. And even as Nadab and Abihu, for putting strange fire in their Censors,
which they were commanded to do, were punished of the Lord: so heretics
bringing in the division of reason, and the deceites of Philosophy, in steed
of true religion, are to be judged worthy of punishmente. And thus much
concerning the helps of an interpretour: now will I declare that which in ye
second place was propounded.

The causes of interpretation.
IN ye preface of Philip Melancthons places, four causes of interpretatio^s
are rehearsed, whereof this is the first, yt the kind of speech may be
understood: for hearers or readers do not in every place understand the phrases
of a strange tongue, yea sometimes men of singular learning take great pains
in this thing: for oftentimes it happens that a sentence being expounded
w^^^ the word of a straung tongue, which tho^ghe they aunswering truly in
significat^^^ yet notwithstanding they keep not (...) same sense in both
tongues, and the (...) the difference of the phrase, or manner of speech.
Therefore least here unawares we may be deceived, oftentimes a learned
interpretour is needeful. The second cause, is the judgment of ye order of
things: For he yt perceyueth not the manner of the handling, shall certainly
very often times be deceived: as they are which recyte out of Paul, this
saying against ye Justification of faith: Not the hearers of the Law but the
doers shall be justified. Here if they had considered the manner of the handling
they might have seen Paul in that place, not to have preached of the
justification of works, yt is to say, ye men should be counted justified
through works before God, when as Paul there labors to confute this
opinion against ye doctrine of faith. Therefore an interpretour is needeful,
which may show cunninglye an order, and the parts thereof: the profit of
which thing is greater then that it ca^ be declared in few words. The third
cause ought to be the witness of a true interpretation, for when the hearers
perceive the interpretations to be brought from the word of God, and do see the
agreement of the word of God, and of the pure Church with ye interpretation:
they love the doctrine more earnestly, and do learn it more greedely. The
fourth cause, is the confutation of false opinions, least learners should be
infected with the poisons of heretics These causes are sufficiently great
enough for yt which God will have the mynisterye of his word both in schools,
and in Churches to be preserved.

The kinds of interpretinge.
ALthough by those things, which I have said already, concerning the causes of
interpretations, the kinds of interpreting may after a sort be understood,
yet because it is needeful to have them separated, I will entreat of them as
plainly as I can, according as before I have promised: wherefore I have noted
four kinds of expounding holy things in reading the commentaryes of diverse
aucthours.

The Grammarian his kind of interpreting.
SOme nothing careful of the Method of a treatise, do only expound the
words and ye phrases after a familiar and plain manner, which kind of
interpretation, because it consists of a certain exposition of Grammar, it
shall be called Grammatical: This kind did Athanasius, Theophilacte, Ambrose,
and many others follow: truly this is praise worthy, that such excellent
men which were able both abundantly, and eloquently to make long disputations,
and orations of every matter: that notwithstanding has submitted themselves,
to ye Gra^maria^s. For they knew well that from thence a true sentence should
be taken. Furthermore this kind of an interpretour, ought to be instructed
with liberal learning. For first he ought to have the knowledge of that
tongue, which ye authore of the writing uses: unless he desire to see rather
with other men's eyes the^ with his own. Although a perfect knowledge is not
here required, yet there ought to be so much skill yt he be able to co^ferre
together these three tongues, the Hebrewe, Greek and Latin. For a divine
interpretour has need of these three tongues, the conference whereof, he that
is studious shall perceive to yield more profit then the tedious comme^taries
of great me^. Again to the end he may interpret that thing aptly, which he
understands truly, Logic is necessary, which oftentimes to a Grammarian
interpretour, does put to her willing hand. He shall also be not a little helped
with the commentaries of variety, from whence he may learn diverse forms of
varying one and the self same sentence.

The Logician his kind of interpreting.
OThers when they see, that order obtayneth the chiefest parts in all things,
they seek out and declare the Method and order of a treatise, and do put
forth questions, arguments, collations, and do briefly reduce the arguments
to certain chapters, or common places, as though they were consultations.
This is a most especial care to this kind of interpretour, yt all things may
be expounded openly, and declared distinctlye. But because this kind is most
profitable in the schools, I will briefly show the way, which ye interpretour
in this kind may safely follow, which thing yt it may be done more plainly, I
will comprehend all the whole matter in four Canons, or general rules.

The first Cannon.
IN the beginning of ye reading of any holy Scripture, he ought first of all
things to speak of the kind of doctrine, and yt (as it seems to me) may
fitlye be done after this manner. First, he ought to expound what kind of
doctrine it is, from whence he may fall into the commendation thereof. Secondly,
he should show auctority. Thirdly, he should signifye of what certainty it is,
and from whence it should be taken. Fourthly, what is the necessity. Fiftlye,
he should declare what profit and commodity should proceed from thence to
the hearers. These five points in the beginning of any holy book (in my
judgment) are very profitable to be handled. Neither do I disalowe it, if
either he add some things to these, or take othersome away, so that he
deceive not the hearers, who when they learn, do also greedelye seek for the
Method of immitation.

The second Cannon.
Whereas according to this first Cannon, we have generally spoken of the kind
of doctrine, we may profitablie discende to Hypothesis, that is to say, to the
particular wrytinge, which is laid before us to be expounded, in which place,
these things are needful to be spoken off, by him which follows the
Logicians kind of interpreting. First, who and what manner of man, the aucthour
of the wrytinge is, and from whence the aucthoritye of the wrytinge does
depend. Secondly, what was his occasion of writing, the observation whereof
helps to understand the order of the treatise. Thirdly, what is the state of
the matter or principal question, whether one or many from whene, Judgment
may be given of the kind of the cause, and the endeavor of the whole writing,
that is to say, the end and very last scope, may be perceived and known.
Fourthly what is the Method of this present writing, or (which is all one)
what is the order of the treatise, which except it be observed, the labor
of the teacher shall be little or nothing profitable.

The third Cannon.
WE must diligently observe this, in all ye writings of the Prophets and ye
Apostles, that whilst they teach, they oftentimes fall into admonitions,
reprehensions, praises, threatenings, comforts, etc. wherewith they apply their
doctrine to the hearers, and do prick them forwards, to receive their
doctrine. They that consider not this, can neither observe the order of ye
treatise themselves, nor yet show the way well to any others. But I will
speak more of this Canon hereafter, whereas I shall entreat of the large and
ample treatise of common places.

The fourth Canon.
AN exposition of every chapter may very fitly be made after this manner, in ye
first place the whole chapter must be gathered into a certain brief
collection or sum, which none may co^uenie^tly do, unless he be skilful in
Logic. For those things which are spoken specially and by parts, he shall
reduce to generalities and to the whole, and cut of those things which are
accessaries and of less value, neither shall he add to al manner arguments of
things, but shall be content only with a sum of things: and all other matters
which are added for amplification, or deduction of things must be removed.

In the second place he shall declare the order of the chapter, in showing how
it agrees with that which went before, (if any thing went before) and
shall declare the chief parts, and give admonition how they follow. In the
third place the exposition of the text shall ensue, the common places shall be
noted, that all things may be converted to profit. But the way of the
invention of places, shall be taught hereafter, where we shall entreat of the
places that belong to a preacher: at this time it suffiseth briefly to have
showed what is needful to be done.

The orator his kind of interpreting.
THere is also a kind of interpretation pertaining to Orators, most profitable
in Churches and schools, wherein the greateste wits have exercised themselves:
as Basile, Gregory Nazia^zene, Chrysostom, Augustine, and many other Greeks
and Latins, for these do exposio every question more at larg after the manner of
Rhethoritians, of which thing we must speak again when we come to the
treatise of common places.

The mixed kind of interpreting.
THe mixed kind of interpreting is, when ye interpretour either mingleth all
things above rehearsed, or else joins certain of them together, which thing
not a few in our time, are wont to do with great profit, in whose number
Philip Melancthon, without doubt is the chief, whom many worthy men: as
Bucer, Calvin, Brentius, Beza, and diverse others, do immitate and follow.

The use of Commentaries.
MAny do abuse Commentaries, whilst they labor continually in them, little or
nothing esteeming the text of the Bible, who do like unto him that trauayling
some whither, determines to abide always in his iourneye. For Commentaries
are like to the Image of Mercury. For like as they are set up of purpose to
show the right way to trauelers, least they should go out of the way, so
commentaries do lead, as it were by the hand, the unexercised reader: which
he should not always use, but so as ye trauaylour does use the Images of
Mercury. For the trauaylour looks not upon them, when by often times goinge
that way, he knows the way perfectly. Here first of all ye interpretour is
admonished of his duty, that is to say, that he think he ought to show a
way, and that a most ready way to the hearers, and not to hinder such as make
have to go forward. Moreover even hear it is evidence in what estimation the
disciples of the Apostles, and their successors being interpretours of the
Scriptures are to be had. For all these are to be followed in so much as they
have the scriptures of the Prophets and of the Apostles going before them, but
if sometimes they do err from this, let us acknowledge our common facility and
readiness in falling, and pray to God earnestly, that he suffer us not to fall
into dangerous errors.

The way to frame or make holy Sermons.
THe Method or making of Sermons, is a sure way and means showing a reason of
making sacred Sermons. And because those things which are needful to be
declared in the Church, are not of one kind, nor can be handled after one
sort: It were very profitable first to show the kinds of Sermons,
afterward the means whereby every thing may be entreated of with profit,
to thend there may be a certain prescript and compendious way of making
Sermons. For such as shall be ministers of the most holy ministry of the word
(then the which nothing can be more holy) which being confirmed with use and
exercise, they may increase with precepts of Logic, and Rhetoric. I do not
forge new precepts, but do apply the common rules of Logitians and
Rhetoritians, to a certain matter, and do join together with precepts the
practice of learned men, who^ I have heard preach, that the immitation might
be the more easy, which truly would be but very weak: unless it were helped
with precepts, as I have said before in the preface.

The kinds of Sermons.
BEfore I come to the kinds of Sermons I will briefly touch the parts, which
may very well be counted four in number, the Exordium or beginning, the
Treatise, the Digression end the Conclusion. The Exordium in this place, is the
beginning of the sermon, after invocation and prayer is made, and the holy
lesson, or text read and recited, which we purpose to handle and to entreat
of. This may very aptly sometimes be taken upon the occasion, or opportunity,
sometimes from other cyrcumstaunces. And it should be so handled that it might
be, as it were a certain way, to that thing which we mind to entreat of. It
must be modest, brief and grave to the end it may obtain the good will of the
hearers, may stir them up by easines of teaching, and may keep them
attentive. The treatise or manner of handlinge, does alter through diversity
of theames, whereby it happens that sometimes it is content with a division,
and an exposition: and that when it is a simple theme. Division is a sentence
by the which we briefly declare what things we will speak of, this is
commended for the breuitye, the perfectnes and fewnes of words, for the which
ask counsel and help of the precepts of Orators. Exposition is a sentence,
wherein the parts of a division are declared, and it is three fould.
Synthetical, Dicretical, and Analyticall, of which hereafter we shall entreat
more at large.

This exposition is sometimes simple, when as no arguments are added:
sometimes mixte, when the reasons of the parts of an exposition are
intermingled: sometimes with division. Ye may seek out the confirmation of the
parts of division, and the co^futation of the opinions of others stryuing with
ours, and that so often as the theme is compounded. The Wisdom of the
preacher shall easlye judge, when the confutation should go before the
confirmation, and when it should follow: it must go before of necessitye when
the minds of the hearers are before hand possessed and holden with error:
for they cannot receive the truth before they are delivered from the error and
falsehode. Digression is a sentence, whereby the doctrine is applied to ye
hearers, by co^forting, chiding, fearing and admonishing. In this ye beginning,
the end, and the place are specially to be considered: the beginning is yt it
may seem of his own accord to flow out of ye doctrine. The end yt it may go
together and agree with the doctrine following, if any doctrine be expounded:
The place yt it may be put to the end of every member of a division or
partition, lest the judgment of learners, should be troubled with interruption
of doctrine, more shall be spoken of digression hereafter. Peroration, is the
conclusion of the treatise. This does both briefly rehearse the sum of the
things which are handled, and does also fiere up the minds of the hearers
with the commendation of the doctrine expounded, and by showing the use
thereof. Now let us come to speak of the kinds of a sermon. There are
generally tw^o kinds of preachinges, the one appertains to teaching: the
other to exhortation. That which appertains to teaching, is of simple
places, and those as well of persons as of things, and of places compounded,
of general sentences, and particular arguments. The other which appertains
to exhortation, is divided into three parts, for either it persuadeth, or
rebukes, or comfort. This difference or distinction of sermons may be
proved. First of the diversity of hearers, to whom the sermon shall be applied.
For either they are altogether rude, and must be taught, to whom the first
kind does appertain, or else they are not rude, but rather feeble and faint
hearted, and must be lifted up with consolations: or else slow, and they must
be pricked forward: or else contemners, and are to be chastened with
threatninges. To these four kinds of hearers all the sermons of Christ are to
be derected, for sometime he teaches the ignorant which are desirous to
learn, and sometime it comfort, and styrreth up the faint hearted: now he
exhorts the slower sort, and now with threatninges, he terrifieth such as
are profane, and ungodly. Hereof we may euerywhere easelye find examples in
the history of the Gospel. Again, the same is proved by the use and custom
of the holy Scripture: For Paul writes thus in his second epipistle to
Timothe, and the third chapter. All scripture given by inspiration of God, is
profitable to improve, to amend, and to instruct in righteousness that the
name of God may be perfect and prepared unto all good works. Here the four
fold use of the scripture is declared, and that with four words which are
in the Greek tongue named Didascalia, Elenchos, Epanorthosis, and Paidia.
Didascalia, is to be handled in the first kind, that is to say, in that which
appertains to teaching. Elenchos, has chiding. Epanorthosis is when the fall
is lifted up, and made steadfast, which manifestly appears to be done with
consolations and comfortes. Paidia, is the teaching of children, whose chiefest
office is, to persuade to goodness, and honesty, and to dissuade from wicked
and filthy things. Our distinction therefore agrees with the variety of the
hearers, with the ensample of Christ, and with the tradition of Paul. But
because the hearers are mixed in public assemblies it comes to pass, that
the prophets, Christ, thapostles, and all the godly ministers of the word do
oftentimes build and frame out of doctrine, consolations, persuasions, and
chidings, all which the force of doctrine has as it were joined with it: even
as I have said before, is done in the wrytinges of the Prophets and Apostles:
whose examples it becomes godly ministers to follow in making of Sermones.
Neither is our distinction to be disallowed which does appertain to the
nature of teaching of things, and does show what order and way is to be
observed in making of Sermones, although sometimes those things which I have
named as accessaries, and impertinent, are applied by the figure of digression,
which thing who so ever does not observe, can neither make their own sermons
well, neither judge of other men's, nor yet bear them away in mind. Wherefore
the kinds of sermons must first be distinguished, and then those things
which are added, may very well be formed and framed.

The kind of teaching.
THat part of sermon which appertains to teaching, is that whose end is, to
teach the ignoraunte hearers. In this kind of sermon the godly preacher shall
imploye his whole strength first that he himself do perfectly understand the
thing that is to be taught: Next that he frame with him self a full and
perfect order of the same in writing. Thirdly, that he expound the same in a
plain and common speech, not having any respect to his own commendation for
his eloquence, but rather to advance the glory of God, and help the capacity
of the present hearers, which if he do, he may hope that the hearer shall
not waver in opinions any more, but consent to the true and clear doctrine.
And because there are two kinds as before in division I have declared, that
sermon which appertains unto teaching, to wit, Simple or of simple places:
and compounde or of compounde places: The order of teaching requires that in
the first place, we speak of the simple manner of teaching, but because in
the simple kind of teaching, sometimes the persons, some times the things are
entreated of, it seems best first to speak of the treatise of persons.

Of the simple kind of teaching which belongs unto persons.
THere are two kinds of the treatise of persons, the one belongs to
examples the other unto demonstration. For if any deed of the person is
laid before us, it is an example: but if the whole person be discribed it is
(...), that is to say, demonstration of the person.

Of that treatise of persons which belong to examples.
When any person therefore is set before us out of the holy histories, whose
whole life is not described, but some deed of ye person is brought forth, and
that for the cause either of the doctrine, or of ye immitatio^, or else of the
admonition, it shall be a treatise Paradigmatical, yt is to say, belonging unto
examples. After this manner Paul does set forth Abraham to the Romans, and
to the Galathians, after this manner the epistle to the Hebrews, chap. xi.
recites a great scroule, and number of prophets and of kings. By Abraham his
deed, the doctrine and nature of faith is taught, the immitation commended,
yt exercises of vocation, and the fruits and works of true godliness are
confirmed. The repe^tau^ce of Manasses does teach us yt such as do fall, are
received again, and therefore is profitably set before us for immitatio^s sake:
it puts us in mind of ye mercy of God, which of his mere goodness, receives
into favor so cruel a persecutour of his church, and so vile an Idolater.
But here we must speak against those men, who oftentimes do abuse the examples
of saints For there are some who had rather immitate ye wicked deeds of
saints then their virtues: and do defend the^ selves with the examples of
saints. There are some also which out of the personal deeds of saints and
extraordinary commandments, do il fauoredly frame a form of an act, and do
co^me^d the same as a general law: they are not worthy of any answer. These
ar to be called again into the right way by an abmonitio^. For it behooves us
to keep a difference between ye common and personal co^maundeme^ts, or precepts
of godliness, which only do touch one people, or one man. The Hebrews were
commanded to rob the Egiptia^s. Abraham by Gods commandment makes
himself ready to slaye his son, for a sacrifice in the mou^te Moria. These
personal acts are not to be applied particularly, but only generally: For out
of both these examples we must learn obedience unto God in those things which
he requires of us in his word. Also in this treatise of thexa^ples of
persons, it is manifest, yt the papists, and especially ye monks have
dau^gerously erred: who and their sermons have laid before us I know not what
counterfeit petie saints, and have fained them to have lived al their life
long so blameles, yt they never offended, no not in the least thing. Such a
fained description of persons, makes rather to disperatio^ the^ to ye edifieng
of ye conscience, wrestling with the greatness of sin, and of the wrath of God.

Therefore let us take unto us true examples, and let us leave feigned examples
for the Poets, which are not to be handled of the^ which are called by saint
Paul the Stewardes of the mysteries of God. The sacred scripture and the true
history does minister examples sufficiently: as of Abraham, Job, of Joseph, of
Manasses, of Mary Magdalene, of the thief which was converted, and of such
like: for out of such as these ar, we may not only reach the hearers true
godliness, but also ye form of living according to their kind of calling.
Therefore the godly preacher must remember to show forth examples profitable
unto godliness, and not those which seem to cause disperation. Now it is time
that we declare those things whereof we have spoken with a plain example. And
because none can be more famous the^ the example of Abraham, I will lay that
before you to be examined. Paul says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed
to him for righteousness. In this place Paul brings forth the example of
Abraham, especially for doctrines sake, and from thence draws forth not only
the firm and sure doctrine of righteousness, but also ye nature of says: and
from thence does show of what holiness of life the believing man ought to be.
After this manner let us learn, by the immitatio^ of Paul to observe two
things in examples to wit, the fact in it self, and then the circumstances
of the person, and of the fact. The fact in it self does teach that true
righteousness does consist of faith, in the promises of God. The circumstances
of the person, and of the fact, do put us in mind of many things. First
that Circumcision of necessity is not required to justification: For Abraham
was justified before Circumcision, but afterward circumcision was added, as a
seal of righteousness which is of faith. Secondly, the profession of Abraham,
his life before justification, witnesses yt he was received of God, not for
his own proper merits, or works going before, but by the only goodness of
God.

Thirdly, in this example of Abraham is declared that justification of faith,
pertains equally to all. For Abraham was justified before men were discerned
by any outward works. Out of this circumstance the Prophets without doubt have
drawn and framed their sermons, of the calling of the Gentiles. Fourthly,
that the ceremonies of Moses are not required of them that are to be
justified: for even as Abraham was justified without them, so they that shall be
justified after his example, must not require them to the accomplishement of
their justification. Fifthly, that righteousness does come without the moral
law, and the works commanded in the decaloge or two tables, for if we be
justified according to Abraham his example, and he was justified many years
that is to say, 430. years before the law: truly it can not be that
righteousness is of the law. But if any man should obiecte that the moral law
was from the beginning, and that Abraham did not want it, the answer is easy:
for no reward is due to works without the covenant of God. For works are
not meritorious of their own worthynes, but by the acceptance of God and by
reason of the covenant: Therefore the conclusion of Paul abides firm and
steadfast: Abraham is justified by the faith of promise before the covenant of
works was published: to wit, the man that does them shall live in them.
Wherefore he is justified by faith and not by works. Sixthly, that the true and
justifying faith, is a certain full assurance, which is not subdued by
arguments of reason, but steadfastly believes that he which promyseth cannot
lie, how soever the whole nature of things may seem to gain say it. And
that faith has good works, and obedience toward God joined with it, and
that nothing ought to be esteemed dearer to a Christian man, then to be
obedient to the will of God. And so the Prophets, godly kings, Apostles, and
in like manner all godly men after Abraham, first by example have learned the
true way of justification, and afterward by the circumstaunces of the
person, and the fact, have been admonished of most weyghtye things. By this
means the godly preacher by the example of Paul, may apply other examples,
both in them selves and also in the variety of circumstaunces, and all ways in
his application, he must remember to have a regard to the proportion of faith.

Of that kind of treatise of persons which belongs to demonstration.
THat kind of treatise of persons which belongs unto demonstration does
handle the whole life, and also every part of ye life of any person, and that
in the same order, as the places of persons are rehearsed in the questions of
Philip Melancton. For that order is not only natural but also profitable to
the speaker and to the hearer. But first of all this is to be observed in this
kind of treatise of persons, that those members especially are to be
adourned, and beautefied, from whom these three above rehearsed, doctrine,
immitation, and admonition may be taken. For Paul in the.xv. chapter to the
Romans, does admonish us of this of application, when he says: what soever
things are written, are written for our learning. etc. Therefore such members
ought to be applied to the whole body of ye church which thing is done when
we transfer aright the particular to the general sentences: as if the life
of John Baptiste, were to be handled after the manner of demonstration: to
observe the natural order, we should entreat of his parents, of his
conception, of his nativity, of his education, of his vocation, of his office,
of the testimony of Christ, of his death and of those things that happened
both about and after his death. In the member of his pare^tes, these things are
contained, that the continual prayers of all godly are heard at the length,
that the afflicted which believe do obtain comfort at the last, and that God
does allow the marriage of priests. In the member of his conception first
the office of Angels is to be considered, that they are the Ambassadors of
God, and the ministers of ye church. Secondly, that God is myndefull of his
promises. Thirdly, that the power or work of God is not hindered by natural
impediment, that is to say, through barrenness and want of nature. Last of
all, because John as yet in his mothers womb did acknoweledge Christ, it
teaches us, that children are received of God, and that God will be
acknowledged and honored of children. In the member of his nativity,
thankefulnes toward God, for his benefits received is commended, the mutual
office of the godly is showed, that they ought to rejoice with them, on whom
God pours his blessing: and to conclude, that the godly ought to bring and
offer their children unto God. Again his straightnes of life does commend
unto us, not a monkishe or solitary life, but sobriety and obedience unto God.
After all these things in his office, and in the circu^stau^ces of his person,
and office, not only his doctrine, but also his consolation, his consta^cie in
his office, his confession, his cross, and love of the truth, with other
innumerable virtues are set forth unto the godly His comfort or consolation, is
in that he did show, or point out with his finger our savior Christ's his
constancy in that co^temning the threatninges of Herod and of the Phariseis:
he caught the Gospel without any fear: his confession, in that he confessed
him self to be the voice of a crier in the wyldernes. His cross, in that
according to his vocation, he did not only wander abroad without any
certain mansion place: but also doubted not to suffer death. All these things
which are so drawn forth of the circumstaunces of the person and of his
office, are first laid before godly ministers of the word, for the cause of
doctrine, of immitation, and of admonition, and afterward generally to the
whole universal church, so far forth as it belongs to the common duties
of godliness. simple teaching, and also of other Logicia^s diligently declared:
yet I think it profitable in this place, to prescribe a way of entreating,
which shall be commodious to new beginning preachers. First therefore I will
set down the chief chapters, and next declare the Method of the of the
treatise. The chapters or chief points ar these.

1 Definition. 2 Division or partition. 3 Causes. 4 Effects. 5 The use and the
abuse. 6 Contrarieties.
Of definition.
OF definition some are ours, and some ar our adversaries. Those which are ours,
we must expound as true, we must prove, confirm, and gather together: The
others we must confute as false. In both kinds there is a peculier Method,
but first we will speak of the former. The definition therefore which the godly
preacher shall declare as true and immouable, must have four parts in the
treatise, Exposition, Reason, Confirmation and conclusion. Exposition is a
sentence whereby we expound our own diffinition of any thing with manifest and
plain words. And there is two kinds of definitio^s, pertaining to a divine,
the one short and brief, ye other copiouse and large, that is content with the
kind and with the difference. This does apply to the kind, and to the
difference, causes, things adjoining, or annexed proprieties, and sometimes
circumstaunces.

The reason is the proof of the definition. Confirmation, is that whereby we
confirm and declare the reason, either by examples, or by any other manner of
declaration.

Conclusion is a brief comprehension of ye exposition of the reason, and of
the confirmation. Furthermore, I would have yt which is spoken of the reason,
and of the confirmation to be so understood, not that a simple reason, or a
simple confirmation only, but that also both many reasons, and co^firmatio^s,
may be added, as shall seem proffitable to the hearers, and to the thing yt
is to be entreated of. Furthermore, this is to be observed, that a large
definition which is to be confirmed, and proved, must first be resolved into
propositions, sometimes also into bosides or terms, then afterward by little
and little, ye parts must be joined together by composition, and the
necessity of the definition must be showed: and all these are to be added to
the manner and way of definition. Now by one or two examples, let us make our
precepts manifest, and let us take Matrimony in hand, for to be first of all
defined. Matrimony is a lawful conjunction of a man and woman (this is the
exposition of the definition ye reason follows) for it is writ, wherefore
let ye man forsake father and mother and cleave unto his wife (the confirmation
follows) if these words were truly examined, we should find in them, yt
which we did put in the definition. For first they testify that there ought to
be a coniunctio^ which is lawful, when it is done according to ye word and will
of God. Furthermore where as he says: they shall be two in one flesh, he would
have the copulatio^ of one man and one woman, not of one husband and many
wives, neither of one wife and many husbands, even as the first wedlock of
Adam and Eve does witness and declare unto us. (Complexion follows.) Therefore
since God has commanded by his own law yt two persons should be lawfully
coupled together, and yt there should be no mo persons in matrimony the^ two.
It follows that Matrimony is a lawful conjunction of man and wife: By this
example the treatise of a simple definition may after a sort be understood,
which if thou will apply to the laws and rules of Logic, the first part
is called the question: the second, the reason, the third the confirmation of
the reason, or the showing of the cause of the reason: the fourth is the
conclusion, wherein by a particular form the reason is repeated with the
question. Notwithstanding the names of the members which I have above
rehearsed, do serve rather the popular and vulgar treatise, and are more easy
to be understood Let us also add an other example, of a large definition,
which we will declare more at large. And let us take the Gospel to be defined.
The Gospel is a doctrine revealed from God, wherein deliverance from sin,
and from the curse of the law, and the wrath of God is preached and remission
of sins, salvation, and life everlasting is proclaimed, to al beleuers in the
son of God for his sacrifice, that the goodness and mercy of God toward men
might be preached, and that being delivered by ye son, they might declare
forth fruits worthy of the Gospel. Thus far goes the exposition of the
definition, which is to be resolved by resolution into these propositions,
whereof the first is yt the Gospel is a doctrine revealed from God. The
second, that the Gospel does declare deliverance from sin, from the curse of
the law and the wrath of God. etc. The third, that it proclaims remission of
sins, salvation, and life everlasting. The fourth, that those benefits
happen to them that believe in Christ. The fifth that the force of the Gospel
does rest in the sacrifice of Christ. The sixth, that out of the Gospel God is
to be preached. The seventh, that man ought to show his thankefulnes to God,
in godly living. These propositions must be in order confirmed. The reason
therefore of the first proposition does follow, that the Gospel is a doctrine
revealed from God. Paul does reach manifestlye calling the Gospel a secret
mystery, from the beginning of the world. (The confirmation) by which words
he teaches openly, that the Gospel depends not of man's reason. For if reason
by any means were able to know this doctrine of his own strength, it had not
been called a secret mystery from the beginning of the world. (The reason of
the second proposition (furthermore that deliverance from sin, from the
curse of the law, and the wrath of God is declared in the Gospel many
testimonies of the Prophets and of the Apostles do teach us. Daniel says
plainly that Christ shall take away sins. Paul teaches that the curse of the
law is abolished by Christ his coming. The father cries from heaven that he
is pleased by his son, (the confirmation) that this is true al godly men have
experience, having the testimony of the holy ghost, by whom they cry Abba
father, which certainly they would not do, unless they did steadfastly believe
that sin is taken away, the curse of the law abolished, the wrath of God
pacified, (the reason of ye third proposition) furthermore yt the remission of
sins, salvation, and life everlasting, is proclaimed in the Gospel, these
testimonies bear witness. The lord himself says, it is thus written, that
repentance and remission of sins ought to be preached in his name, the same
preaching beginning at Jerusalem. In the last of saint Mark salvation is
promised to all beleuers. Likewise in the x. chap. to the Romans: Furthermore
the lord him self does promise everlasting life to al them that believe in him.
what needs many words. The universal scripture does promise remission of
sins, salvation and everlasting life, to al people embracing the Gospel. (the
confirmation.) For it cannot be chosen, but yt the wrath of God, the curse of
ye law, and sin being taken away: salvation, righteousness, and life must
needs be obtained. But because these things happen not to al men. For Caine
Judas, Saul and many others have perished, and at this day a great part of the
world (a grief to hear) do fall into everlasting destruction. In the definition
fourthly is added yt these benefits do happen to them yt believe (the reason)
for the lord says plainly, he yt believes in me, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life. (The confirmation) and lest any man should think that this
does depend upon the condition of works, Paul writes that a man is justified
by faith without works, and with long disputatio^s confirms the same in his
epistle both to ye Romans, and to ye Galathians. Moreover in the fifth place is
added, that the force of the Gospel does consiste in the sacrifice of Christ,
(the reason) for so Paul says: by the redemption which is in Christ Jesus
(The comprobatio^) for the word which Paul uses here is Apolytrosis, that is
to say, redemption which is done when by death the price is paid. For Lytro^
properly is the price of redemption. Such a price Christ paid for us when he
was made sin for us, that we may be made the righteousness of God. In the sixth
place, is added that God should be preached for his goodness and mercy, (the
reason) which thing the multitude of Angels do sufficiently prove, and
convince, singing this himne to God, at our Lords birthe, Glory be to God on
high, and peace on the earth, and unto men good will. (The confirmation) for we
ought to think that this thing done therefore yt al me^ which do acknowledge
this Christ, may learn by the example of the Angels, to preach ye goodness and
mercy of God, especially when nature it self does cry out and teach us, ye
thanks ought to be given for benefits, or good turns. In ye last place, is
added ye fruits which they ought to show, who are delivered by ye Gospel (ye
reason) which thing is confirmed by the testimony of Paul, saying we are
created in Christ Jesus to good works, in the which the Lord would have
us to walk (the Confirmation) for how may these two agree that we are delivered
from sin, and yet fulfill the desires of sin, when Paul affirms that the
healthful grace of God appeared to all men, that we denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, should live godly, soberlye and righteously. etc. Saying
therefore that we have showed by strong reasons, that sin, the curse of the
Law, and the wrath of God is taken away by the Gospel, and that in their place
do succeed Righteousness, Salvation and life through Christ, which whilst we
believe in him, and that God would that we should preach his goodness for this
his benefits, and in all our life time be thanckfull: that follows which
before we propounded that the Gospel is a doctrine revealed from God, wherein
is showed. etc. Now when our definition is after this manner handled, if there
be any of a contrary opinion, they are to be confuted with the Method of
confutation, which consists of proposition, sublation, the opposite,
contrary, or proposition, and the solution. The proposition in this place is
the promise of the sublation, sublation is the proposition of our adversaries.
The opposite proposition, is the promise of the solution. The solution is the
confirmation opposite proposition. But the matter shall be made manifest, by a
brief example. Neither am I ignorant that our adversaries the Papists, do
babble (this is the proposition of the confutation, sublation follows) that the
Gospel is the new law of not reue^ging, of casting away of riches of not
swearinge etc. The opposite proposition follows, but how vain a thing that
is, may easily be declared (the solution follows:) For that which they
affirm is directlye against the sacrifice of Christ, yea and against ye whole
Scripture, which plainly shows that we obtain the benefits of the Gospel by
faith. What? are not Paul his words manifest? If righteousness be by the law,
Christ dyed in vain: this confirmation of the opposite proposition is to be
taken out of the places of confirmation, that is to say, out of the places of
Logic, of which thing I will speak in the compou^d Method of places. But
what generally both in confirmatio^s, and confutations is to be observed, hear
those yt are studious are to be admonished. First therefore after that with
manifest and plain arguments, thou have confirmed the contrary proposition in
order, the arguments of our adversaries are to be refelled, and if the matter
suffer it so to be, first of all the first kind is to be taken, and afterward
we must come to the special arguments: as in this present cause. First we
must confute this that the Gospel is a Law. Secondlye that it is not a law of
forbidding of reueng, of casti^g away of riches, of not swearing etc.
Furthermore this also both in the confirmation of our own opinion, and in the
confutation of the contrary part is diligently to be noted and marked, that
thou prevent those things which either the wisdom of the flesh or else the
contrary part may obiecte against those things which thou say and confute
them. This seems to be oftentimes used of Paul in his wrytinges, as in this
confutation laid before us of ye opinion of ye Papists, yt the Gospel is ye
new Law: the flesh vnthanckful to God, from thence takes weapons unto himself
against the doctrine of works, and infers or concludes after this manner: If
the Gospel does deliver us without our works, wherefore should we work well?
This objection is to be taken away by prevention. And after this manner the
faithful preacher must have a respect what may be said on the contrary part.
But the precepts of a large confutation, and confirmation, are to be handled
afterward.

Of Division and partition.
THis member of the Method may be handled very profitablie after this manner.
First if thou expound thine own division, or partition. Secondlye if thou
prove it. Thirdly if thou confirm it. Fourthly if thou gather it again
together. Let this be ye example of division: we have heard what the Law is,
it remains now that we declare into how many parts it is divided (for such a
form of transition is to be used, when we go from one thing to another.) The
Law of God therefore is three fold, Moral, Ceremonial and Judicial. This
was the exposition (The reason) For all the Laws of God either teaches
manners, or commends Ceremonies, or practices judgments. (The confirmation)
for by these man's life is very well conserved and governed. For in a civil
life there is need of judgments, in the public assemble of the Church
Ceremonies are necessary, and that religion of the mind toward God, and
godliness toward men (in the spiritual kingdom of God) do consist in the
precepts of manners It is most evident (the collection) Therefore that is most
sure which we have said, that the Law of God is threefold, Moral, Ceremonial,
and Judicial. Especially since the true government of life consists of
these three, whether thou consider the common life, or the Church or the
spiritual kingdom of God. If these members of division be darcke and obscure,
they are to be expounded by definitions, and subdiuisions, and are to be made
manifesse by reasons and examples. But if the adversary do obtrude or bring in
any other division that is false, it is to be overthrown by ye Method of
co^futation. There needs no ensamples in a manifest thing. Moreover
partition, is to be framed after the same sort. As the parts of repentance
are, contrition, faith, and a desire to lead a godly life: (the reason) for it
becomes us to be sorry for our sins, and because the contrition is of no
force unless there be also faith in Christ, this is of necessity required.
And because neither of these is true, unless the desire to live a good and
godly life does follow, a good purpose of necessitye is joined with the former
(the comprobation) for we see both the Scriptures and the examples do join
these three together: David being fallen was sorye yt he had sinned, he fled by
faith to mercy, and the rest of his life withal the endeavor he might he kept
innocente. These members of partition if they be joined with definitions,
deuisions and their reasons, a great, profitable, and plentiful Oration will
ensue and arise thereof.

Of causes.
NOw we must ad ye causes of a thing altogether after a natural order, and
must seclude or set a part those things which seem to be the causes of a
thing, and yet are not. To every kind of cause their reasons are to be added
out of the word of the Lord.

Compounded causes do run together in their actions, and do stand with
mutual helps, and every one has a certain proprietye in actions. Wherefore
the orders of causes are diligently to be considered, least there should be
a confusion of causes, from whence afterward great darcknes might arise.
Furthermore this is also to be observed, when any thing is commanded or
forbidden, al coordinate causes are commanded and forbidden. As when the
sanctification of the name of God is commanded, which cannot be without
Faith, neither without the knowledge of God, which knowledge of God cannot be
without the preachinge of the word of God. Therefore when we are commanded
to pray for the sanctification of the name of God, we ask and pray for
these things in order, for the preaching of the word, for the knowledge of
God, for Faith, and for the sanctification it self of the name of God. Now I
will brieflye show an example hereof. The causes of repentance are not the
free will of man (this is the separation) but first the word of God, next the
holy Ghost, who inwardlye reproves sin, and stirs up a hatred of sin in
the heart of man, and last of all a will not resistinge the divine motion, and
the word. The ends are the glory of God, and the salvation of the penitente
person. These are compounde causes, and do stand with mutual helps in
their actions, and it easelye appears that every of them has a certain
propriety in their order to the effect. Moreover, how these are to be declared
by definitions, and confirmed by testimonies, may by the former precepts be
understood.

Of the effect.
THe effects are to be expounded, proved, confirmed and gathered to gether, and
they which are attributed to a thing falsely, are to be overthrown by the
Method of confutation. As if a man should affirm ye contrition deserves
remission of sins, he is to be confuted after the same manner, as before I
have declared.

Of the use and abuse.
IF the thing have been abused, first the abuse must be confuted by the
Method of confutation. Secondlye the true and right use, must be expounded
proved and confirmed.

Of contarries.
COntraryes have no certain place, neither in this Method, nor in others, but
are to be dispersed hear and there, for illustration and amplifications sake.
For Rhetoritians do think that nothing makes a thing so plain and easy, as
the conferring of things which are contrary.

Of the simple kind of teaching called Sintheticall.
THe Sintheticall exposition is, when we begin with those things that go
before the matter, and by little and little, by certain steps and degrees do
put them together, and lay them on a heap, until al those things do seem to
be gathered, which are sufficient to discuss the nature of the thing: As if we
should entreat of that peace which we have in God by faith, these things may be
expounded by the figure called Synthesis, that is to say, composition. First we
must declare what the offense is. Secondlye the parts of the offense. Thirdly
the mediator. Fourthlye the recompense and satisfaction of the iniurye and
hurt. Fifthly the reconsiliation. Sixtlye the covenant of reconciliation.
Seventhly the declaration, or publishing of peace. Eighthly the fruits of
peace. If these were proved one after another, confirmed and examplifyed by
testimonies and examples, there would spring and arise a large and plentiful
Oration. On this wise Synthesis does follow the order of nature, and finds
out, expounds, proves and confirms all those questions, yt naturally go
before, and does by co^traries, examples, similitudes, and dissimilitudes,
examplifye them. Furthermore this also is to be observed that large and
plentiful definitions by this Method are made and framed as before ye may see
in the definition of the Gospel.

Of the simple kind of teaching called Analyticall.
THe Analyticall exposition is when we begin from the whole, or from the end,
and afterward find out the parts, and those things which are required to
the end by an order, clean contrary to the former, as if we should entreat
of prayer in this Method, we must expound what invocation is (for a
definition contains the reason of the whole) and what is the end thereof:
After that we must number and count those things which appertain to prayer,
as though they were necessary members thereof, as are the affections of the
mind, the causes, wherefore we pray, who is to be prayed unto, by whom, and
what we must pray for. Which for memoryes sake, I am wont to comprehend in
this little Verse: Affectus causae, quis per quem quidque, petendum.

That is to say: In prayer these things are chiefly to be observed.
Affections, causes, who, by whom, and what is to be asked. Last of al
indifferent circumstances may be added: as the indifferent circumstaunces of
prayer, are place, time, and gesture. If these truly were proved and made
manifest by the Scriptures, and by examples, a great and profitable copy of
Oration would grow thereof. Moreover, what so ever we have hither to spoken of
the simple treatise of things, or places, ought so to be understood, yt they
ought al to be done according to the artificial manner of diverse Methodes, of
simple questions. But because varietye delights them that are exercised, some
times learned Preachers do not follow the laws of this Method exactlye, but
do call the hearers as it were to counsel, and to choose those things of
great pleney, which they think most profitable for to be known of the
present hearers. And this reason of entreating of things, some do call the
Method of Prudence, which considers the weight of things and the
cyrcumstaunces of the present hearers. As if a man would entreat of the Law
of God. Hear first he should behold the hearers, and then consider the
waighte of the things, and then he should more easily reduce the treatise unto
a few Chapters, easy to be understood and borne away. And first perchance
he should expound what the Law is: Secondlye whether any man may fulfill the
Law of God: Thirdly what is the use thereof when no man fulfilleth it: Fourthly
what manner of abrogation of the Law is to be understood. The like may be
done in other simple questions. And although these things he so, yet shall
the Method of this art which I have expounded, profit the new preachers which
are not as yet practiced, and that both to strengthen their memory, and also
being long time and much practiced therein, that they may afterward luckely
follow both kinds. Philip Melancthon of most holy memory, applyinge himself
to the common capacitye of men in the explication of any simple matter, judges
that these four are to be propounded, declared, and amplifyed. The definition
of the thing, the causes, the parts, and the duties.

The definition being drawn out of the conference of many sayings, and noble
examples, does gather the whole matter as it were in one bundle, and
propou^deth briefly the sum of the matter: the explication of causes does
fortifye the definition, the rehearsal of parts does more distinctly set the
nature of the thing before our eyes. In the word offices, the use, the
effects, and the final causes of the thing are comprehended

Moreover this is also to be admonished yt in handling of places, whether they
be simple or compounde, if there be many places, we must diligently take
heed that that place which naturally goes before, do also go before in the
treatise: And if we should make an Oration of sinnne and grace, first we
should speak of sin before grace, but if the places be utterly separated, it
skilleth not in what order thou do expound them, unless perhaps in
confirmation, the one do mynister help to the other, for then that is to be
expounded in the first place, which being done the other must be helped.

Of the compound kind of teachinge.
THe Sermon which consists of the compound kind of teaching, or of compound
places, is when certain compound places, that is to say propositions, and
general and particular sentences are handled, which thing although it be
properly done by the Method of confirmation, and of confutation: yet most
commonly it chances that a mixed Method is added, for if the parts of a
proposition be obscure, and dark, resolution shall unfold them, and set
down the parts each part by him self. Division shall expound the parts set
down. Compositio^ afterward shall compounde them: and the Method of
confirmation and confutatio^ shall prove the compound, and shall confute that
which stryueth with it. As if the first petition should be propounded to be
entreated of (hallowed be thy name) here of necessity, first resolution must be
added, which might unfold this simple proposition into two parts, into the
name of God, and the word halowing. Secondly division would express both
parts, one after another, with definitions and deuisions. Thirdly composition
would compound the parts again. Now from hence confirmation and confutation
might be added in their due time. And this precept is always to be followed,
when the parts of a proposition have need of an explication, otherwise not at
al. Furthermore in parables, resolution is to be added ye first thou may put
down the parts unfolded, and the^ apply ye same by the comparison of ye thing,
to the which the parable does appertain, and afterward frame the lessons and
exhortacions, as in the parable which is in ye Gospel of the seed: there be
five parts of that parable. The sower, ye seed, the sowinge, the earth, and
the fruit. To ye sower, God: to the seed, the word: to ye sowing, the
preacher of ye word: to ye earth, the hearers of the word: and to the fruit of
the seed, the fruit of ye word may be compared. These being once declared
thou may frame lessons and exhortations as the lessons of this present
parable are. The first ye great care of Almighty God in procuring our
salvation. For hear the Lord is compared to the diligent husband man. The
second the dignity of the word. The third, the worthiness of the mynisterye.
The fourth, that if ye word bring not fourth good fruit, it shall be imputed to
us and the devil. Furthermore exhortations are to be drawn out of the end of
the parable, for the ends of this present parable are: That the Lord might
storre up ye bearers to the love of the word: That he might reprove the
negligent, and might comfort the obedient. But in this kind of preachinge
there is yet a greater force and wisdom of ye Preacher to be required.
Wherrfore to the end that in this part (which otherwise is hard enoughe) I may
somewhat aid and help the new Preachers. I will entreat of two things in
order. First I will show the Method of finding out of places, and then I will
declare a way to handle them eloquently and profitablie, in which two chapters
this whole facultye seems to consist.

Of the invention or findinge out of common places.
LEst any man should take that for a common place which is spoken at all
adue^tures, even as they are wont to do, who almost out of every word do hunte
out some thing, little regardinge whether the same appertain to the purpose
or no, for that they only seek this that they may seem to be great deuisors
and no less skillful crafts men of common places: Rules are necessary,
within the limittes whereof, the mind of the Inquisitour may be comprehended.
And although the matter be greater then that it may be accomplished in few
precepts, yet is it profitable for young beginners to keep certain common
Rules, which they may safely follow to their benefit who^ they shall instruct.
First of al therefore when any text is read, and understood, the occasion,
the brief sum, and comprehensio^, and the end, and the use of ye text must
be sought out, which thing, how and in what order it ought to be done, in the
Logitia^ his kind of interpreting before is declared. Secondlye the parts, or
the propositio^s of the text must be sought out. And last of al out of these
according to the rules following, common places must be drawn, which seem to
conduce to the end of that matter which we have compounded.

The first Rule.
IF the subject of the proposition be a singular bond, or end, in steed
thereof put by degree and in order his superiors, that is to say, the form
in the first place. Secondly ye kind next. Thirdly if you so think good, the
superior and higher kind. And let these be compounded in order with the
predicate of the proposition. Psalm. 122. in the beginning this is the
proposition: I rejoice (says David) when it is said to me, let us go into
the house of the Lord. First make a permutatio^ of the person, after this
manner: David reioyseth when it is said unto him, Let us go into the house of
the Lord. Here according to the rule, first put the name of a king. Secondlye
of a magistrate. Lastly of a man. This being done, join these in order with
the predicate after this manner: It is the duty of kings to rejoice in that
they have subjects which agree with them in Religion: It ought to be a
comfort to all men to agree in the worshipping of God. Behold how many
general sentences, this first and childishe rule does minister unto us,
whereof the last is most common, and may be spread into many particular
arguments: of ye certainty whereof we must judge out of ye rule followinge. The
example being confirmed in ye subject, the thing is confirmed in the kind.
Therefore when this fact is approved in David, the thing in the kind ought
not to be disalowed. And on the contrary side: the example in the subject
being reproved, in matter is reproved in the kind. As for example: Ozias the
king of Judah taking an other ma^s office upon him displeased God. Therefore
kings, yea all men which meddle with other men's matters do displease God: for
it was ye office of the priests, not of kings, to offer the insence of a
sweet perfewme.

The second Rule.
IF in steed of the predicate, superiors be by degree and in order
substituted, as ye next forms: and afterward other, and other kinds, a
ple^tiful invention or finding out of places will ensue thereof. This rule
certainly most often is to be followed in other things, but always in the
Historyes of Christ. As for example: Christ heals ye Samaritan Leper
calling upon him. Because this Samaritane is an Ethnicke and a man afflicted.
Gather thou from hence ye Christ will help the afflicted Ethnickes, and all
men which call upon him. And because out of the particular acts of Christ, his
office generally is gathered, it is lawful to frame a place after this manner.
That it is the office of Christ, or of Messiah, to help the miserable and
afflicted calling upon him.

The third Rule.
IF in steed of the subject and predicate, thou substitute by order forms
and kinds: plenty of common propositions will grow thereof. As for example:
David committing adultery was banished ought of his kingdom, Therefore kings
greeuouslye offending and generally all men which live wickedlye, shall some
times or other suffer due punishmente. The filthiness of wicked men was drowned
in an universal flood, Therefore wicked men at one time or other shall be
punished.

The fourth rule to make abstractes.
SOmetimes it is profitable out of the co^cretes, as the believing woman of a
Cananite (Mat. 15.) in her necessitye came to Christ, called upon him, would
suffer no repulse, but was more earnest, even as also the ruler of the Synagoge
who believing, did also convert his whole family unto the Lord. From hence
gather thou the proprieties of Faith, that is to say, that faith inforceth a
man, in necessity to come to Christ, to call upon him for succor, and makes
him earnest to the end he may obtain it: and then he proves the increase and
receives it, and at length brings forth most acceptable fruictes unto God.
This rule has his force out of that place which is called Comugata, that is
to say, things joined together. But because those things, which I have
rehearsed concerning Faith, are the principal parts of faith, I have
encluded them in two Verses after this manner.

Vera fides Christu^ petit, and rogat, instat, ab ipso,
Impetrat, and crescit, fractificatque simul.
In English thus. True faith does seek for Christ, does ask and makes
earnest suit:
Obtaynes of him, and does increase and also bringes forth fruit.
An other example this is. The man is blessed that fears the Lord. The
common place is. True felicity consists in the fear of the Lord: the use of
this rule is great, not only in inuenting of places, but also in defining of
Concretes. For as Aristotle and Rodulphe do teach out of the description of
Concretes, ye definitions of Abstracts are gathered. As for example: if thou
would define what godliness is, take first the Concrete in a notable example:
As, godly Abraham did fear the Lord, and did worship him in true faith and
obedience: Therefore godliness is the fear of the Lord, faith and obedience
toward him. By this way Aristotle found out the differences of many
virtues, which they that are studeous in diuinitye, shall easily perceive, not
to be unprofitable for them.

The fifth Rule.
THose things are dilligently to be considered which go before the matter
propounded, which are joined also with the same, and which of necessitye do
follow the same, and are to be included into common places, As Psalm 2. Blessed
are al they that put their trust in him. First here it follows out of the
antecedents, yt without Christ none are blessed. For if they be then blessed
when they put their trust in Christ, without this confidence al men are
miserable. This place also, by a contrary sense is concluded after this manner:
all yt put their confidence in Christ are blessed. Therefore all that put not
their confidence in him are not blessed. If they are not blessed, certainly
they are miserable.

Hear thou see how this place does mynister occasion to reason of the
wretchedness of mankind. The second place is of things adjoining, which is
framed according to ye.4. rule to wit, ye true felicity and blessedness
consists in ye co^fide^ce which we have in Christ. The third place that the
benefit is universal. For a general proposition is not restrained to any
nation or man, but the benefit is offered unto al which refuse not to put their
trust in him. The fourth place, that faith in Christ is a mean, whereby men
are made the partakers of the benefits of Christ.

The fifth place of the divinity of Christ, does follow out of this place: For
if faith is only to be reposed in God, and be is pronounced blessed that
puts his confidence in Christ, it follows of necessitye that Christ is
true God.

The sixth Rule.
THe necessary consequence of causes and of effects, is not to be neglected.
For if the cause be set down, ye effect is supposed to be concluded: as in
our Creed, when we acknowledge God to be omnipotent, Faith from thence draws
forth a double effect, the one is that God does bestow his benefits upon
whom he will, the other that he has power to defend them whom he has taken
into his custodye. But let us add a more famous example. In the Lords Supper,
as out of a consequence of causes and effects, particular sentences are to be
gathered out of a true meditation of the Sacrament: Therefore seeing that the
Lords Supper is a Sacrament of our redemption by the death of Christ. First
the celebration of the Supper, both by little and little put into our minds
the thought of sin: For the Lord died for sin. Secondlye, it admonished
us of the sacrifice accomplyshed for the redemption of mankind from the law
of sin. Thirdly, the dignity and excellency of this sacrifice, does
minister unto godly minds, the thought, not only of the greatness of the wrath
of God in striking his son for our sins, and of the unspeakable mercy of
God, receyuinge us unto his grace, for the sacrifice of his son: but also, of
the love of his son, making his intercession for us, and taking or deryuing
his fathers wrath and displeasure upon himself. Fourthly, contrition
springs out of the thought of sin, and of the wrath of God. Faith verily
is styrred up by the unspeakable mercy of God, and the love of his son,
payinge the price of redemption for us. Fiftlye, this faith is confirmed and
increased by the use of the Sacrament so great a thing. Sixthly, faith being
confirmed and augmented, does show it self acceptable to God, and does
begin a godly, honest, and just life, and loves his neighbor, with whom
he has the price of redemption common. Behold what doctrine and lessons,
what plenty, how godly a meditation of the holy supper, the consequence of
causes and effects does minister unto us an other example. Christ remitteth
sins of his own authority. Here the effect does declare the divinity of
Christ. The thief rebukes his fellow who was a blasphemer, and calls upon
Christ, out of which effects, the contrition, the faith and the new life of
the thief is to be gathered.

The seventh Rule.
LEt the repugnauncie of a saying, or word, and the repugnancie of a
consequent be sought out: from whence two kinds of places do arise. Let the
saying be, he that does teach any other Gospel, is accursed. The repugnancie
of this saying is this: he that teaches the same Gospel, is not accursed,
the consequence of the saying is, that the Pope is accursed, because he
teaches an other Gospel. The repugnancie of this saying is overthrown. As
the Pope is not the head of the church, and we must not obey the Pope.

The eight Rule.
IT is good sometimes by the contrary sense, to frame a place when the terms
or bounds be equal, as for example. The just man lives by faith, ergo, he
that is not just lives not by faith. Whereof it follows that neither
righteousness nor life, is of works. For so Paul does gather it. Gal. 3.
That no man is justified by the law in the sight of God it is evident, because
it is written the just man lives by faith. In like manner a form by
conterpositio^ does some times minister places, as, every one that is of God
does hear Gods word. Here the place by conterposition does gather, that he
which hears not Gods word, is not of God. These be the principal rules of
invention of places, whose fountains are places of Logike, and rules of
consequences, and there may be more added to them, but I think yt these are
sufficient to new beginning preachers, which if they will vouchsafe to follow,
they may both have a ready way to seek out these common places, and also they
may judge well of those places which are observed by others. Furthermore,
hereby they may also judge what is ye cause, why diverse autors do not always
show forth yt self same places. The reason of the difference is as well the
diversity of invention, as also that other places, do more content, or please
our aucthours. After that the godly preacher has found out places, he must
enter into a multitude or swarm of places. To this he shall apply a
threefolde instrument. For first he shall diligently consider, whether the
place found out, may expressly, word for word, be seen in any place of the
Scripture.

Secondarely, the place must be examined by demonstration to an impossible
thing, if it be not expressed in the word of God.

Thirdly, the place must be concluded with some sillogisme, and by a
sillogisticall conversion, it must be tried as it were with a touchestone. Let
this be an example of a demonstration, to an impossible thing. The place to be
proved is, that Christians may possess that which is their own, take the
opposite of this place. No Christians may possess that which is their own.
Now seek out the proposition which is manifestly true, which with the
opposite saying, may be one of the premises in the sillogisme as for example:
all that do give Alms, ought to possess their own, of which two premises
a most false conclusion does follow, to wit, that no Christian man shall
give alms. By the manifest falsenes of this the other of the premises is to
be overthrown, wherefore since ye Mayor is manifestly true, it follows that
the Minor is false: front hence now is inferred the truth of the place,
propounded by the law of contraditions. Now let us gather together that
which we have said. All that should give alms, ought to possess their own.
No Christians may possess their own: Ergo, no Christian shall give alms. But
the conclusion is false, ergo, one of the premises: not the Mayor, ergo the
Minor, which says that: No Christians may possess their own. Let this be
the example of a sillogisticall conversion. The place, some hearing Gods word
are not godly. The sillogisme. None that walk after the flesh are godly, some
hearing Gods word walk after the flesh: Ergo, some hearing Gods word are
not godly. convert it after this manner. If none that walk after the flesh
are godly, and some that here the word, walk after the flesh: ergo, some
that hear the word are not godly. For all they that hear the word are not
godly. For all they that hear the word are godly, or else none that walk
after the flesh are godly. None that hear the word shall walk after the
flesh, or else some men that hear the word, walk after the flesh:
certaynely some that walk after the flesh shall be godly. but none that do
walk after the flesh are godly, and some which hear the word walk after
the flesh. The conclusion therefore remains firm and sure, that some which
hear the word are not godly.

Of the manner of handling of places invented, both plentifully and profitably.
TO the plentiful and profitable handling of places, four things are chiefly
required, whereof the first is, the diductions of questions, that is to say,
of the places invented. (The second a plentiful confirmation. The third, the
digression to an other matter. (The last is the artificial conclusion. I will
entreat of these four after that order as they are set down before your eyes
declaryng every one of them playnelye with precepts and examples.

Of the diduction of questions.
HEre we must speak not of the inventions of Common places, whereof now we
have entreated, but of ye diduction of common places invented, that is to say,
of multiplying them into many questions or places. Therefore the place
invented is diducted, either into simple places, or into compounde places: as
for example. If the fifte commandment were said before us, to be expounded.
First here, thou shall seek the common place according to the precept of the
first rule after this manner. Fathers are to be honored, parents are
superiors, ergo superiors are to be honored. This common place in the
handling of the fifth commandment, is the principal, and chiefly to be
touched. But yet yt it may plentifully be entreated of, it shall be expedient to
diduct or reduce it into other places, either simple, which the very words
them selves do give: or compounde, which either do co^siste of them which are
necessarely included in the words them selves, as the forms or particular
sentences, are included in their kinds: or general sentences, and what
things soever are necessarely joined with the matter: or else are taken out of
them, which are annexed and joined to the condition and state of the matter, as
in this example laid before us, are included two simple places, one of honor,
the other of superiors. These are to be handled a sunder, by the simple kind
of teaching of things, after the same sort, as I have handled before.
Secondly, out of the division of this general sentence: superiors are to be
honored, many particular sentences do arise, according to the contrary
division, of the subject and predicate. The subject may be divided into these
forms that of superiors, some are private, which are either natural, as
parents: or else not natural as scholemaisters, patrones, and householders:
some are public, as the civil and ecclesiastical magistrate, with their
differences. Further more the predicate (to be honored) may be divided into
parts of honor, for he which honors an other, does reverence him, obey
him, and is thankful unto him. So there are three parts, or differences of
the predicate. From hence as out of a grove, we may gather particular
sentences. As we must reverence our parents, we must obey our parents, we
must be thankful to our parents, we must reverence our masters, we must
obey our masters, we must be thankful to our masters, we must reverence
patrones, we must obaye patrones, we must be thankful to patrones. After
the same manner particular sentences are to be framed, out of the rest which
I have declared, from whence may ensue a most great plenty of needeful
questions. Over and besides this, places oftentimes, are proffitably taken out
of the^ which consist of the state and condition, as: if parents,
scholemaisters, patrones, are froward, or ouerthwarte, hard, or cruel,
whether then we should show them any reverence, obedience, or kyndnes? and to
what end? and so out of other conditions, questions, are multiplied. But this
last kind of questions, which does grow out of the condition may be handled
very fitly by a figure called occupation. Behold if thou will unfold these
particular sentences, by resolution and wilt handle them by division, and
confirm, and garnishe them with the method of confirmation: not one sermon,
but so many as there are particular sentences, may be made, and framed. I
confess that all common places, do not show so great plenty of particular
sentences, not withstanding there is none so barraine, but at the least, it may
minister some sentences, which ye may frame out of a common place, by the same
reason which is declared, which thing that thou may do cunninglye, it
would much profit thee if thou had sailfull knowledge in the doctrine of
predicables, predicamentes, and propositions.

Of a plentious confirmation.
A Plentious confirmation consists in the kinds of proofs, in heapinge and
in dilating of arguments, and in confutation of the contrary opinion of which
we will speak in order.

Of the kinds of Proof.
THere is a three fould kind of proofs in Divinity. The first and most safest
kind, is when proof is brought out of the evident and clear propositions of
the Scripture. As for example, Parents are to be honored, because the 5.
Comaundeme^t, euidentlye and plainly commands: Honor thy father and thy
mother. In like c^^^, Righteousness is of faith and not of works, because the
word of the Lord does so pronounce. We hold that a man is justified by faith
without works. The second kind is reasoning as oftentimes as it is not
pronounced by plain words, but is gathered by a strong and immovable
consequence. And this kind is double, straight and indirect. The straight is
when that which is to be proved, is gathered plainly in the first conclusion,
which kind is borrowed from ye place of invention, of the kind, of the form,
of the definition, of ye causes, of ye destinates, and of things, adjoining. As
if this question were asked, whether scholemasters are to be honored? out of
ye kind, or general, thou may conclude well that all superiors are to be
honored, ergo scholemasters also, but ye indirect kind concludes not simply,
that which is set down to be proved: but does gather an inconvenience out of
the opposite or contrary, wherewith he overthrows the Antecedent which being
overthrown the truth of the opposite immediately flows: as if superiors are
not to be honored, neither parents are to be honored, but this is false,
ergo, ye also. Therefore it follows superiors are to be honored. The third
kind is, of less reputation, when we labor in the testimonies, and examples
of the^, which seem to have flourished in ye church, which kind is disproued,
if it be deprived of the former proofs. Let us propounde an other example. And
let the question be whether Christ be God. This is first proved by a saying,
or by ye first kind of proof. For thus is it spoken of Christ in the first of
John, chap. 5. he is true God and life everlasting. Secondlye by reasoning,
Christ has done the works pertaining to God of his own proper power, and the
honor of God is attributed to Christ, ergo, he is God by the indirect way:
If Christ were only a creature, every one only were accursed, that would put
their confidence in him: but now Gods word pronounces them blessed which
put their trust in him, ergo, he is no creature, but true God. Thirdly, ye
testimony of the church, as the creed of Athanasius, and the voice of all the
people, in giving their consent, do testify Christ to be God. Furthermore
this our distinction of proofs wa^teth neither reason, nor example. The reason
is this, whatsoever is proved, or disproued in sacred things, it is needful
yt the same be done, either by testimony of the scripture, or of the church.
If it be done by the scripture, it shall be either by the express words from
whence the first kind does grow, or else intricatly, or obscurely, and that
either in ye general, or in the particular sentence, from whence the second
kind of proof is taken. But if any thing be proved by the testimony of the
church, it shall be the third kind of proof. Hereof truly we have an example of
Paul, who in his writing as it is well known, has used this threefolde kind
of proof. That righteousness is of faith: by saying or words he proves it
when as he says: The just man lives by faith, by reasoning thus. If
righteousness be of works, Christ died in vain. From hence now that
follows which he propounded, that righteousness is of faith. By example:
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Also we
believe in Christ, that we may be justified by faith. If these kinds be
delated or spoken of at large, there will arise great plenty of proofs, but yet
a mean is to be kept, lest plenty come out of season, and so breed lothsomnes.

Of the heaping of arguments.
COngeries, or Heap in this place is when in proving the proposition or common
place the Chapters of principal arguments are added, and as it were gathered
together into one bundell, as if this proposition were to be handled. No man is
able of his own strength to fulfill Gods Laws, the Chapters which follow of
the Arguments, may by heap, be added after this manner: For the experience of
all men does prove this manifestlye. This our wounded nature groaning does
acknowledge this, the universal Scripture cries out of this. To conclude the
Sacrifyce of the son of God, torn after a most horrible manner upon the
gibbet of the Cross, does prove unto us. After this manner, Cicero joins to
the proposition, a heap of Arguments, whom in disposinge of Arguments all the
best learned men are wont to immitate and follow. Notwithstanding although
Cicero sometimes begins from the last Chapter, a dilatinge of Arguments put
in the Heap, whereunto he joins first, and after goes forward unto the
last, which is the last in the treatise. Yet for the Divine and the Preacher,
it is the surest way to follow an order in the Heap put in the Expolition.

Of the Expolition or dilating of Arguments.
EXpolition or dilatinge, is by the which an Argument propounded is confirmed
and beutifyed. But a copious Expolition consists of a proposition, of a
reason, of a showing, the cause of the reason of Exornation, and of Conclusion.
The Proposition is that, which sets before our eyes some Chapter of an
Argument, as though it were the proposition of a confirmation. The reason
allows the proposition, and it ought to be such a one, as may be the minor
of a sillogisme. Aetiologia, does show the cause of the reason, and it is
meet, that it be such a one as may either be the mayor of a sillogisme, or
else the proof thereof: So that a whole sillogisme is made of a proposition, of
a reason, and of the cause of the Reason. After the cause of the reason,
Exornation shall follow, which is to be borrowed of sentences, comparates,
contraryes, similitudes, examples. The last shall be the conclusion, which
gathers together the sum of the former, and concludes the principal
proposition. These are the precepts of an expolition, neither does that which
I have said, strive against the opinion or judgment of them which have
nombred seven parts of an expolicion. For there is not only one kind of
expolition, but I have chosen ye only which I thought to be most meet for
preachers, that are but new beginners. But to the end the precepts of an
expolition may be understood. I will put down one example. I have before
propounded this common place: No man of his own power or strength is able to
fulfill the laws of God. Furthermore to this place I have added four Chapters
of proof, by a heaping of arguments. Whereof the first was, that the experience
of al me^ did prove that to be true. Let this Chapter be the proposition of an
expolition after this manner. The experience of all men conuinceth this, that no
man is able to fulfill the Law of God. (the reason) For all men do easelye
perceive in themselves, how far they are from the perfect and perpetual
obedience of the Law of God. (The reason of the cause) For they see that the
Law of God is holy, and a rule of perfect life: and that they themselves are
altogether wicked by nature, and also feeble, and weak (the exornation from ye
sentence.) So that is true whereof the Prophet speaks, that all our
righteousness is as the cloth of a menstruous woman: which sentence how cold it
consist, if the experience of any wise man had proved the contrary. (the
exornation from the co^parisons) For even as a tree whose root is rotten, and
infected with a poisoned sap ca^ never bring forth but poisoned fruit: so
man whose heart is infected with the poison of sin, cannot show a pure and
perfect obedience to the law of God. (The exornation from the examples what:
did not holy Abell confess this in his Sacrifice: truly it is even so: For
God had never allowed the Sacrifice of Abell, unless that holy man had known
Christ to be him which was promised, that should iustifye all believers, and
understood his own sin: whereby he knew himself to be hindered, that he
could not fulfill the law of God. For if he had thought himself able to
fulfill the law, he could never have sacrificed a right, that is to say have
declared in his sacrifice, that the promised seed, should be the fulfiller of
the Law. Hereunto David also as a most sufficient witness may be added, who
crying unto the Lord, confesses openly, that no man is justified in ye sight
of God. For he complayneth yt all have erred, and are made unprofitable, etc.
The conclusion) Since therefore we have David as a witness: since we
acknowledge the poison of sin, since we behold the purity of the Law, and
our own uncleanness, who I pray you, (unless he wear a mad man would deny
this: that he tells his own weakness, and imbecillitye in rendringe
obedience to the Law of GOD. In this example after a sort ye may see the
use of expolition: which if I had determined to have handled at large, every
part being dilated and multiplied, a whole Oration even out of the first
Chapter of the proof, would plentifullye have proceeded. After the same order
the other three Chapters, which consiste in the heap of Arguments, must be
handled. From hence studious young men may easelye judge, that great profit
comes of this Expolition. Wherefore they shall take a most profitable work
in hand, if they will busilye practice themselves in the handlinge of an
Expolition. For from hence they shall obtain such a facultye and facilitye,
that hereafter when they shall have occasion, either to speak of weightye
matters, or to preach the word of GOD, these precepts of an Expolition
shall come into their minds, even as it were upon a sudden.

Of the confutation.
THe Method of confutation, which consists of proposition, of sublacion, of
an opposite proposition, and of the solution, is before declared and made
manifest by examples: Wherefore in this place I will only show the bea^ers the
place of a confutation. The proper place for a confutation is assigned
immediately after the confirmation, which place notwithstanding he has not
always. For so often as any other opinion besides our own does occupye the
minds of the hearers, the Exordium or beginning may be taken from the
confutation: which rule not only Aristotle and Cicero, but also S. Paul
follows in his Epistle to the Romans, for there labouringe to confirm this
proposition: that righteousness is of Faith. First he confuteth the preiudices
or fore judgments of the Gentiles, and of the Jews: Of the Gentiles which
thought that they wen justified by the law of Nature. And of the Jews who
boasted that they were justified by the Law given unto them by God. Out of
this confutation of preiudices S Paul falls into a proposition, which he
first repeateth, and after joins to it a just confirmation. My judgment is
that this example of S. Paul is to be followed, so oftentimes as the hearers
minds are occupied with any other opinions then with their own.

Of digression.
THe precepts of digression may be reduced to five points, which are, Place,
mean, matter, time, and the return from the digression. As concerning the
place, this is to be observed that digression ought to be added unto any
proposition that is proved. For that is a digression out of season which is
made when the matter is not as yet confirmed. Such a mean is to be added,
which may not interrupt the memory of learners, with troublesome tediousnes:
For they teach vnluckelye, who neglectinge the doctrine, and being vexed
with some small iniurye, do declaime, and spend whole hours against some
one or other, whom they think have offended them. The matter of digression
appertains to exhortations, consolations, chidinges, but not to every sort.
For such ought the matter of Digression to be, that of his own accord, it
may seem to flow out of the Doctrine, and not to be fetched any where
else. For except the force, and nature of Learning, do offer the matter of
digression, it can make nothing to edification at all. This precepte is
therefore more dilligentlye to be observed, because often times they that are
unexercised offend against it, not without great iniurye of the word of
GOD, and hurt of the hearers. In the fourth place I have put down Time, which
of necessitye requires a Digression, for when the hearers do either abhorie
the Doctrine, either are somewhat more slothful, or else be faint hearted, then
are they to be chidden, provoked, and comforted. The return from the
Digression, ought not to be violente, but the end thereof ought to be
applied, that it may be joined with that part of the Sentence, from whence
the Digression was made, which can be scarcelye brought to pass, unless
the force of the doctrine have showed the matter of the Digressio^: or some
figure being added, it may have recourse to the doctrine.

As soon as blessed LVTHER began to defend the doctrine of the Gospel
against the tyranny of the Pope, there was need of more sharper pricks, and
therefore he was more oftener occupied in Digressions, as may appear by his
writings. But now (the doctrine is fortifyed and establyshed, and a more
peaceable estate restored to our Churches) we must use these sharper pricks
more sparinglye. Furthermore because neither the vocation is a like, neither
the aucthoritye of all men equal, new Preachers will think it to be a part
of modestye, seldom to wander beyond the mark. Notwithstanding if any shall
require examples of the Digression of these precepts, let him read the
Epistle to the Hebrews, for that only will mynister a great number of
examples.

Of Artificial conclusion.
I Have toulde you before, what manner of conclusion, ought to be added in the
expolition of every argument. In this place we must speak of the
conclusion of any place or whole Sermon, where in these things are to be
observed. First the place explicated, is to be repeated in one proposition.
Secondlye a short reconinge of Arguments is to be ordained, and especially of
the chiefeste Chapters. Thirdlye the illation, or inference may follow in the
which three things may be joined which are to be finished in three
propositions: what the present place teaches, what it confuteth, and what it
admonishes us of. Fourthlye, al things are so to be disposed, that the
passage may be more easy into the place followinge, if many are to be
expounded: as for example, the place which I proponed above being declared:
That no man of his own power is able to fulfill the Law of God, this
conclusion were not unprofitable (the repetition of the place) who now after
this will think himself to be able of his own power to fulfill the law of
God (the enumeration of arguments) when as not only experience and nature do
deny it, the scripture in every corner by manifest testimonies does confute it:
but also the sacrifice of the same does teach a far contrary thing (the
Illation) wherefore this place teaches us all to acknowledge our weakness and
sin, confuteth the Iusticiaries, which do boaste of the righteousness of the
law, and admonishes us all, that confessing our sins and weakness, we
should fly unto Christ, (the transition) whom the Gospel offers unto us,
whereof we must speak presentlye.

Of that kind of Sermon which consists in exhortation called Parainetical
kind.
THe first kind of preaching being exposided after a sort (which because it
consists in teaching, I have named, (...). Now follows the other the
pareneticall kind which therefore I will more briefly handle, for that very
seldom it is had alone, and by it self, for most commonly it is wont to be
myngled with the doctrinall kind. The parenetical kind is that whereby we
persuade or dissuade, we comfort or rebuke the hearers. From hence springs
a three foulde pareneticall Sermon, to wit perswasible, comfortable, and
rebukeable, of the which these things in order are to be declared. First the
difinition, next the invention, and afterward the treatise, to whom I will
join most brief examples, to the intent the precepts more easelye may be
understood.

Of the perswasible Sermon.
THe perswasible Sermon is, whereby we persuade the hearers, either to do,
to suffer, or to forsake some thing. The places of invention in this kind are
these especially: the necessity of the cause, of the commandment, of the
vocation, the private and public commodity, the dignity of the person and
the thing. Examples old, new, Christian, Ethnicke: Also parables, and
sentences, the profes, confirmations, and exornations, of all these may be
sprincled here, and there, and as I have said before in the Logic Method,
the exhortations, consolations, and rebukes, must be myngled with the figure of
digression So here with the Method of Confirmation, the pareneticall places
ought to be confirmed. Moreover, in this treatise, four things mete
together, the occasion, the proposition, the confirmation, and the conclusion:
The occasion recites the cause of the exhortation. The proposition must be
amplified, and multiplied, and oftentimes with other words, and figures must
be iterated. The confirmation is to be sought for, out of the places now
rehearsed, in which confirmation moreover, there are two things, to be
considered, the degree or steer, and the figure. The degree makes us by
little and little, to ascend from lighter, and lesser matters to weyghtier
things, and of more importance, and so to most weyghtie and great matters.
Otherwise exhortation is of no estimation, or price. The figure does not
only serve the affections, but also (if I may so term yt, makes the
oration more sharp and wyttye, to the end it may altogether pearce into the
minds of the hearers, and so possess the whole heart it self. Hereunto
interrogation, subjection, exclamation, admiration, dubitation, hypotyposis,
dialogisme, A^topo^a, and others of the like sort, which are named and
expounded of Rhethoricians ought to be referred. The conclusion, which I have
made the fourth part of the treatise, has no need of new precepts, but is
to be confirmed by the same means, which is above declared, notwithstanding
to the end that the use of the precepts, may be seen, I will set down one
example only.

The example of the persuasible sermon.
THe occasion, because I see many slack and slow to hear the word of God
(proposition) I have determined brieflye to stir you up to the love of the
heavenly word, whereby ye are compelled to the more dilligent hearing and
kepinge of the doctrine brought unto us from heaven. (the passion of the mind)
although it is to be lamented that mortal men be so unmindful of their
salvation, that they have need of pricks, to the end they may make speed
thither, whether they ought to be carried with all violence. (The necessity of
the cause) for therefore such a slothful heaviness is rooted in our minds
because we do not consider, as we ought to do, what is the necessity of the
heavenly word: can any man understand the will of God without his word?
verily if the wisdom of the world as Paul truly affirms) is but foolishnes
before God, it can not come to pass that we should know the wylll of God,
until we have understood, the foolishnes of the fleashe. (The necessity of
the commandment) truly the commandment of God the father, does seem to
slip out of our minds, whose words do sound from heaven: This is my
well-beloved son hear him. The son him self does desire, that his word
may be heard of them that are his: My sheep here my voice: whereof it
follows: that those which do contempne the voice of Christ, which he
sounds by his ministers, are not his sheape. The holy ghost, by the voice of
the Prophets, and of the Apostles, does inuit and call us to the law, and
the testimony. Therefore who art thou which despisest the commandment of
the eternal father? Who art thou that despisest the son which suffered for
thee, calling thee to the hearing of his word? Who art thou that refusest the
dominion and rule of the holy ghost? (the necessity of the vocation) we are so
forgetful from whence, and whereto we are called: are we not by the word
brought out of the darkness of Satan into ye marvelous light of God? This
word has called us, this word has made us Christians, but we in the mean
season being unmindful of so glorious a name, have contemned the mystery of
salvation. (the profit) but and if this royal and noble vocation moves us not
truly, the reason of our proper commodity ought to move us: where withal we
perceive that even ye very brute beasts are touched. But who is able by any
reason of man or of Angels, to recite at the least but certain porcions of this
commodity, specially when Paul after Esaye says, the eye of man has not
seen, neither the ear has heard, neither has it ascended into the heart of
man what things God has prepared for them which love him. Neither yet is
there any cause, why any man should dream that he loves God, which does
not hear his word nor meditate it, neither compares it together, that the
misserie which lies hid therein, may by little and little be of him the
better understood, for Christ the everlasting word of God, says: He that
loves me will keep my sayings, and my father will love him. To this love of ye
father, and of the son there are annexed greater good things, then which by
man's capacity may be perceived. Although Paul has comprehended, the sum
of them in these words: The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to all
beleuers. O foolish man, O stony heart, that despyleth, rejects and treads
underfoot so great a salvation offered. That we may provide for the belly.
What do we not? do we not learn arts? do we not sail upon the Seas? we
fly no froste, we refuse no heat, we slomber at no time, to the end we
may provide for our miserable bellye. When these things are ready to
peryshe, we are moved, and in the mean season we leave our salvation. So
great is our madness, so great is our perverseness, and wickedness, we poor
miserable wretches are so much infected, with the poison of satan, that we
would with more willing minds dye in our wickedness, then take hold of the
stretched out arm of God and so to be saved. But when we have nothing else to
do, then we hear the word of the Lord, and that with less reverence truly,
the^ those three halfpeny servants which in times past did hear Esope
reciting of his fables. Would to God this our negligence were not an evident
sign of the punishment of our ingratitude. (The dignity of the person and of
ye thing) who would have thought at any time that men are so obliuious, that
they should be unmindful of their promise made in baptism, for there they
are consecrated to the body of Christ, and are made his members, that they
may be fellow co^paignions with him of heavenly things: neither can we by
any other means abide in the body of Christ, then by faith which comes by
hearing: here, not without a good cause a man may doubt, whether this may be
ascribed to our madness, or dulnes, that we oftentimes, most vngratefullye do
reiecte, so great a dignity which we have in the body of Christ, and so
great a treasure of heavenly goods, which we possess by Christ. (examples.)
It is marvel that we are not made more wary by other men's harms. It is a
wonderful thing that it sinketh not into our minds, how all the world
perished in the floode, for the contempt of Godswoorde. We are not moved by
the examples of the holy patriarchs, Abell, Seth, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, and of
a great sort, who now enjoy the most joyful presence of God in heaven. I
rejoice says David when it is said to me, let us go into the house of the
Lord. But we on the contrary side rejoice, when the world does inuit us to
pleasures, wherewith not withstandyng we are bayted till at the length we
hang, snared and taken upon the hook. Blessed is he says the same David,
which does meditate in the Law of God day and night. But we (O grief to
tell) do not otherwise fly from the meditation of the heavenly word, then if
all these things which are set before us in the word were but fearful
things to fear children withal. The Tomuri priests of Dodonae, never
departed out of the temple which notwithstanding did embrace deuelishe
superstition, instead of the word of God: we never, or seldom, do enter
into the churches, who are not withstanding enstructed by the word, and by
manifoulde testimonies, in our religion, but would to God we wear
instructed, would to God we would think, that in our hearts, which we
profess with our mouth and tongue: which if we would do, we would not so
obstinatly contemn the ministry of the word. What answer I pray thee,
will thou make to the son of God, when he in ye last day shall show to thee
his wounds? when he shall accuse and condemn thee, for his blood cruellye
trodden under thy foot, then shall that verelye happen unto thee, which the
Lord has fore spoken shall comme to pass: that for shame and the just
judgment of God, with the wicked company of the damned, thou shall say to the
mountains fall upon us, and that for this cause, least thou should behold
the face of the son of God, whom here thou haste despised, whose word thou
haste here rejected, whose blood thou have cruelly trodden under foot, whom
stretching out his arms, wette and bespotted with blood, and desirous to
deliver thee out of the mydle of death, and the Jaws of Hell, thou wretch
haste despised: A wretch in deed, and such a one, as the just judge,
(unless thou repent) will cast into everlasting darkness, and prison. (The
conclusion.) Let us pray unto God therefore, that he would convert us, by
whom being converted, we might be moved with the sweetenes of the word of
God, that he would styre us up with his spirit, to hear the word of
salvation, by the which we may learn, the will and true worshipping of God,
by the which so many commodities, come to us, by yt which so many Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Saints, Martyrs, and many other godly men, have
obtained salvation, by the which the right way is showed to us, by Jesus
Christ our Lord: to whom with the father and the holy ghost, be praise honor
and glory, world without end. Amen.

This example of a treatise, after a sort, does show the use of the places of
invention: I have myngled a few figures, I have some what more often touched
the proposition, neither am I ignoraunte, that this my treatise of example, is
far inferior unto the dignity of the matter. Where fore, I council them
that are studious that while they may, they often exercise them selves, in
declayming in writing that hereafter they may come the more furnished to the
function, of the most sacred ministry, the which to defile with long
pattering, and unlearned bablinge, is a thing most wicked.

Of the consolatorie Sermon or which consists in comforting.
THe Consolatorie or comfortable sermon is, wherein the preacher, does lift up
the man afflicted, and striving under the cross, least being overcome with
impatience, he should be subdued, and ouercomme with sorrow. These are
especially the commune comfortable places. The first is the will of the
heavenly father. The second, the condition. The third, the promise of
deliverance. The fourth, the nececessitie of the conformity of Christ, and
his members. The fifth, the commodity which is manifould. For by the cross
the presumption of a man's own power, is overthrown, hypocrisy is disclosed,
confidence in the flesh is shaken of, obedience is confirmed, patience is
proved, contempt of the world follows, humility ensues, error paste is
corrected, evil to come is taken head of before hand, faith is exercised,
hope is taught to be reposed in our God. Read more concerning this matter in
the places of Philip Melancthon. The treatise consists of occasion,
proposition, confirmation, and conclusion, even as in the perswasible kind, to
which it is like, moreover because it is profitable to know a certain way
of applying of comfortes, I will brifly declare the Method of comforting.

The Method of geuinge of comfort.
But least consolation should be applied out of season, or vnsaylfully, we
will distinguishe. First, between pryuate, and public comfortes, and
afterward describe the just form of them both. I call that a private
consolation, which happens to one alone oppressed with some grief or
cross. I call that commune which in the time, either of persecution or of any
plagne sent from God, falls upon the whole congregation: But first, we will
entreat of the private, in which threateninges are generallye to be
observed. First, who it is that is to be lifted up with consolations.
Secondlye, what it is that does grieve him. Thyrdlye, a fit application of
the medicine to the present grief. He that feels pain or grief, either is
godly or ungodly: If he be godly, streightwaye the common inheritance of
the sons of God being showed, be is to be lifted up, to be comforted, and
cherished with consolations, and that by the places above rehearsed, and here
with much profit the eight chapter to the Romans, may be alleged. But if
he be ungodly, it is needful as in a grievous disease, that a greater care
be applied, for such a one is not to be lyfted up streyghtwaye, but is so
much the more to be cast down, with the thundryng of the Law of God, and
to be beat down with threateninges, until he acknoweledge his own
ungodliness without hypocrisy, until he understand the wrath of God to be
styrred up against him, until he cry with Manasses, that he is gyltie many
ways. For he that applies comfort by and by, to a wicked man, either sick,
or otherwise oppressed with any calamity does apply a most dangerous an
unseasonable, and a deadlye poison. And does much like to that Physician which
heals the wound outwardlye, the matter of putrefaction remaining within,
from whence afterward a greater wicked and deadly mischief bursteth out.
Wherefore as the skillful Physician, the tent being put in often, draws out
the corrupt matter, which beiynge drawn forth, covers the wound over with
a mollifying plaster: So the godly preacher, should first touch the byle of
the wicked man, by the threatening of the law, that his disease being known,
may the more easelye be cured, for it is truly said, that the first
step to health, is to know the disease. The second thing, which in
consolations I have said, should be considered, is the thing which causes
the grief, or ye thing which does grieve him, which I think needful to be
examined, for the right application of the medicine, for he is otherwise to
be lifted up, which by his own fault has brought a mischief upon him
self. And he also otherwise to whom by an other man's fault, evil happens.
For if any man by his own fault has brought a cross upon him self, as
infamine, poverty, sickness, death, etc. The medicine or comfort is not to
be applied forthwith unless thou see the guilty person earnestlye touched with
the feeling of his sins, for then this feeling of sins, is to be confirmed
with the word of God, and to be augmented, if need shall require. Then we
must descend to consolations: but if he be either an hipocrite, or
otherwise wicked, so long the curse of the Law, and the wrath of God are to
be set before his eyes, until he know the greuousnes of his sins, and
confess the same to him self out of the gryefe of his mind.

But if he cannot be brought thereunto by the Law of God, and
threatenynges, a precious stone is not to be cast before Swyne. On the
contrary part: If the guyltie person, shall be brought to the knoweledge of
him self, and be touched with the true feeling of grief, for his sin
committed: then at length the art of Physic is to be applied, and these
three in order are to be expounded. First his fall, next the punishment, and
lastly the end of both. The fall is to be taught first to proceed of this,
in that he did cast from him the fear of the Lord: and that may be confirmed
fitlye and plentifully out of the first Chapter of S. Paul to the Romans.
Secondlye that now the deceites of the devil, the filthiness of the flesh,
and the wantonness of the world, might more easelye prevail against him,
being as it were unarmed. The fall being declared, and confirmed with these
causes. In the second place, we must declare, that the punishment, is in no
wise equal with the offense committed, but is a testimonye of two most
contrary things that is to say of the wrath of GOD and also of his
fatherlye good will and clemencye: of the wrath of God, if the guiltye person
will not repence, and not suffer himself to be corrected, with the scourge of
God: Of his fatherlye good will and clemencye, if he being corrected, be made
better by the punishmente, and will fly to the haven of repentance. After
this in the third place, the end both of the fall, and also of the
punishment, is to be declared. Of the fall to thend afterward he may be more
circumspecte and warier. Of the punishmente in that by the singular council
and purpose of God (when in the mean time he spares many wicked and
mischeuous men) he is chastened, not to the end he should perish, but that
he may have a ready testimonye of his fatherly good will toward him. But
because this will very hardly persuade him that labors under the Cross,
witnesses and examples are to be brought forth out of Gods word, such
testimonies verelie as these are: Paul the 1. Epistle to the Corinthia^s ye
11. Chapter says, that we are chastened with adversity of the Lord: least we
should be damned with the world. See, the end of the Cross is, least we should
be damned, if to wit being admonished by the Cross we repent again. Pro. 16.
My son (says Solomon) do not refuse the correction of the Lord, neither be
thou weary when thou art reproved of him, for whom God loves he chasteneth,
and yet embraces him as ye father does his son. The aucthour of ye Epistle
to the Hebrews the 12. Chapter says that we are bastards and not sons, if
we be without discipline and correction, such like places are most fit,
wherewith the mind of the guiltye person now being penitent, may be lifted
up, that now he would suffer any kind of punishmente as one ready to obey
Good let the examples be Manasses, David, the sister of Moses, King Vsias, the
people led into Captiuitye, and many others, which were punished for
certain sins, and after through repentance, have returned home again.
The example of the thief in comparison of others is famous, who has set
forth a notable example of patience and faith. He did not therefore compte
himself an abiecte because he suffered so shameful a death for his
wickedness, but patiently sustained the deserved punishmente, by Faith
reposed in CHRIST. After such like testimonies and examples, wherewith the
judgments of God are to be made known, in co^paring the manners of men in
our age, with the manners of the people in the old time: For God is always
like to himself: (whether thou have respect to punishment or mercy) the common
places before mentioned may be added. But if that which greeueth him do come
through an others man's fault, that order in applyinge of comfort is to be
followed, which in a common comfort I am about to declare, whereto we must
speak at this time. That common comfort therefore may be rightlye framed,
three things are to be observed. First from whence common calamity proceeds.
Secondly which be causes thereof. Thirdly the applyinge of the Comfort
according to the difference of the calamity and of the causes. The calamity is
either sent from God, or else brought in by the enemies of our Common weal. If
the calamitye be of God, as the plague, want of food and vittaile, droughte
and tempests, the causes are not to be sought for without us, but in our own
houses, and within our selves, for the sins of particular men are the causes
of common calamities, and oftentimes for one man's fault the whole common wealth
is plagued: whereof Acham, David, Oedipus, and many others are witnesses, who
by their own wickedness have brought in a common calamitye. Here it is no hard
matter to apply a comfort, if we will follow the examples of the holy
Prophets: for the examples of them do teach us, what is to be done: for they
are wont openly to rebuke wickedness, and that after three sorts or kinds of
wickedness, to wit: The forsaking of God, hypocrisye, iniurye done to the
neighbor and such like, as most chiefelye seem to abound among the people.
Examples are extant hear and there in the wrytinges of the Prophets. Again
they are wont to call publicly together all the congregation to repentance,
fasting and prayer, Certain notable examples of these two things are of late
years set forth, at the commandment of our most noble King, by the
mynisters of our Churches, not without great profit and mittigation, of
deserved punishments. Last of all the Prophets were wont to admonish them,
who^ they perceived to be defiled with wickedness, more then others, leaving an
example to our mynisters of the word, that they should admonish, rebuke and
correct them priuatelye) whom they perceive, by their idolatry, usury,
adulterye, tirannye, deceites, covetousness etc. to bring in a plague to ye
whole common wealth. Tyresias, although he were an Ethenicke priest did call
Oedipus the tyraunte, (for whose mischeuous deed, the Theban common wealth was
punished with the pestilence,) to painful penance. And after this manner
Esaye and Ieremye have corrected and reprehended the kings of their time, and
have ascribed common calamities unto them. And the ministers of the word ought
to know that this is not the least part of their function and duty, which if
they neglect either for fear or sluggishnes, they shall suffer grievous
punishments of God, as in the threatenings of Ezechiell is declared, and else
where.

But if either private or public calamitye do come from men, it is either
for Justice or not. If for Justice, we must then take the comfort from the
common condition of the sons of God in this world, and declare of how great
honor God reputeth us worthy, yt he has marked us with a peculier proper
mark of his warfare and exercise. Wherefore the Apostles being scourged do
rejoice for that they are counted worthy to suffer reproach for the name of
Christ: For this kind of cross is most proper unto the faithful, wherewith
Christ will be glorified in us, even as S. Peter teaches in the fourth Chapter
of his first Epistle.

But if not for Justice the common calamity be broupht us from men, then the
causes are to be sought out in our selves, and as before I have said whereas I
have spoken of the Cross or affliction sent from God: the comfort is to be
applied. Out of these I think it is manifest by what way and means both
private and public comforts are to be applied.

Of the chidinge Sermon.
THe Chidinge Sermon is that in the which the preacher chydeth either the
loytring or the offendinge, or the stubburne and disobediente hearer. The end
of this ought to be the correction and the amendment of him which is rebuked.
Here these places are chiefly to be considered. The first, the filthiness of
the thing committed. The second, things adioyninge or appertayning: as are
an evil, conscience, the peril of reiection, or to be a cast a way, and the
fear of God, his judgment hanging over our head, and of the present and
everlasting pains. The third a conference together of the dignity of the
person and of the filthiness of the thing. The fourth, examples. The fifthe the
knitting or joining together of the person, as Christ our head and king, the
Church which is the spiritual country, our body which is dedicated to God, that
it may be ye temple of God, hereunto the common weal the house the familye
etc. may be referred. When I reckon these places, I do not think that all
are to be applied in every chiding, but now these, sometimes the other, even as
the wise Preacher shall see to be expedient. Let the example be taken out of
the first Epistle to the Corinthians and the 6 Chapter, where S. Paul rebukes
fornicatours. The Method of a treatise is not unlike to the treatise of an
exhortation. Wherefore I think it not needeful to add any example:
especially, when the places are so plain, and it is known that all things
are to be proved, allowed, and garnished by the Method of confirmation. But
here I thought it needful to add two^ things. The first that the mind of
him which is to be chidden, must be mollifyed to hear chidinges patiently,
which thing may very fitlye be done, if the mynister declare his duty toward
the giltye person, and show the common necessity laid upon him to do the
same, least the chiding should seem to proceed of some noughtye affection:
So S. Paul did before hand mollify the minds of the Corinthians, before he
used sower and bitter chidings. The second that conditions of repentance may
be mingled, least any being discouraged, with somewhat more rougher chidinges,
should fall into desperation or wilfullye kill himself.

These are the things good audience which I have thought needful to be
declared, to new Preachers, and I trust (unless my opinion do foulye beguile
me) that young men shall not be a little helped by declaring this Method. For
all the precepts which are recited by me are taken out of the fountains of
Logitians and Rethoricia^s, and are applied to the use of the Preacher
profitable both to the exposition of the holy writers, and also to the making
of sacred Sermons, with the which if young men will suffer themselves to be
ruled, I doubts not to promise them an easier proceeding in divine studies, and
making of Sermons. But because it is not sufficient to have invented fitly,
or to have ordered and disposed those things which we are about to speak of
wiselye, unless blessed Memory be also present. I will add a few things of
Memerie in steed of a conclusion to this Method: and that not after the manner
of the old fathers (...) did inuente Images and signs, which ^^re as certain
notes and helps of Memory, (for this subtiltye of wit, I willinglye leave
to them) but I will gather those things only, wherewith they yt are
desirous to learn to make Sermons, shall perceive themselves to be much helped.

Of Memory.
LEt us appointe two manner of ways of helpinge the memory, whereof the former
is more artificial, ye latter more rude, and rusticall: that which is more
artificial does consist of two things, that is to wit, of order and number,
for by these it is manifest that arts are both taught and learned. For as
order places every thing in his proper place, and considers the
beginnings, proceedinges, and marks or ends: so does number measure things
together, and their parts and porcions. Because therefore the Method which I
have taught, does show an order of things and as it were nombreth the parts,
the best way of learning by heart is diligently to consider the same order in ye
mind, for it cannot be, that he which has conningly framed an order of
things, and has observed the least points of things and as it were nombered
them, but that he may easelye keep the same in mind, and require the same
again of it, when and as often as he shall have occasion to speak: whereby it
may seem a foolish thing to prescribe any other way of learning by heart,
especial to those men which are taught and exercised in the art of eloquent
speakinge. Notwithstanding although these things in very deed be thus, yet
are they not forthwith perceived of all men. Wherefore that these may be
understood more orderly, and may be applied more nearer to the use of ye
preacher, I will divide this whole reason of learning by heart which I have
said, to consiste of order and number, into four members or precepts. The
first is that he understand the matter perfectly, and minding to preach, do
keep in mind a certain brief comprehension of the whole matter. The second
member is, that he have the places, that is to say (...) as the Greeks do
term it) by number. The third member is, that he make deuisions of the places,
that are to be handled, which is needful to be comprehended in a certain
number, which if it may be done by any Verse, fit for the same, it shall not be
unprofitable: as if the use of the law wear to be expounded. First he might
not unfitly make a third division, which he might comprehend in this Verse.

Instruit, and damnat sontes, docet atque renatos. In English thus.

It does instruct, and eke condemn,
all such as godly are:
And to inform the new borne men,
it has as equal ear.
And because the first part of this division, has many parcelles, and causes,
he might, comprehend them also in this verse: Man datum, poenae, pax publica,
dux ad Iesum. The pains and the commandment, and also public peace:

The guide and leader unto Christ.

The true meditation of the Law (Doctor Peter Palladius, our most watchful
Bishop, very much deserving of the churches of the Danes, of Noruegia, and
Iselandia) has comprehended in this verse: Lex quid eram, quid sum, quid ero,
per quem manifestat.

In English thus: The Law does make apparent what I
was, and what I am:
What I shall be it does declare,
and eke by whom it came.
The fourth member is, that in certain places digressions into threateninges,
consolations, and exhortations be placed, least in making digression to an
other matter, the memory be hindered, and the preacher with drawn from the
matter propounded, which commonly is wont to happen, to the^ which do not
observe this precept. Now when as according to these four precepts, he that
will preach has disposed his Oration, and as it were reconed it. He must
settle him self to learn it according to the order of his disposition. And
first of all, he must commit to memory the brief, and summarie
comprehension, for that is first to be recited. Secondly, he must learn the
places, or the chapters a sonder. And thirdlye the treatise or handlindling of
the places with their divisions and the parcels of them. I doubt not but this
way of learning by heart, is the best of all, which all learned men without
doubt do follow. Furthermore, the latter reason which I said is more rude
and rustical, is profitable to men unlearned, which have not tasted of the art
of Rhethoricke. And this whether it be framed with notes of numbers, or with
letters, it is all one, and it may be done in this manner. First, those things
which a preacher ignorant of arts will learn by heart, he shall divide
with notes of number, or with every letter. Afterward in repeting, he shall
see what he has set down at every note or letter. Last of all, he shall
learn by heart according to the distinctions which he has made, and shall
demand again of every note or letter, as a thing committed to their custody
that which before he had committed unto them. It will not a little profit him
if first he write out his Sermon, and afterward according to the prescript
rules do divide, and learn it by heart. For the mind does more easelye
retain and keep that which the hand before has noted.

FINIS.



