A SHORT DECLARATION of the mystery of iniquity.

Ier. 51.6. Flee out of the midst of Babell, and deliver every man his soul,
be not destroyed in her iniquity, for this is the time of the lords vengeance,
he will render unto her a recompense.

Hosea 10.12. Sovv to your selves in righteousness, reap after the measure of
mercy, break up your fallovv ground, for it is time to seek the lord, till
he come and rain righteousness upon you.

Anno 1612.

To the Reader.
THE fear of the almighty (through the work of his grace) having now at
last over vveyed in us the fear of men, we have thus far by the direction
of Gods word and spirit strecthed out our hearts and hands with bouldnes to
confess the name of Christ before men, and to declare to Prince and People
plainly their transgressions, that all might hear, and see their fearful
estate and standing, and repent, and turn unto the lord before the decree come
forth, and before the day of their visitation be past, and that the things
that belong to their peace be altogether hid from their eyes: and whereas in
this vvriting we have with all humble bouldnes spoken unto our lord the
King, our defense for this is, that we are taught of God especially to make
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and give thanks for our lord the King:
and we are taught that the gracious God of heaven (by whom the King reigns)
would, that the King should be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth, and
therefore we the Kings servants are bound especially by all the godly
endeavors of our souls and bodies to seek the salvation of the K. although it
were with the danger of our lives: for if we savv our lord the Ks. person in
danger either by privy conspiracy or open assault we were bound to seek the
Ks. perservation and delivrance, though it werewith the laying down of our
lives, which if we did not, we should readily and most worthily be condemned
for traitors; how much more are we bound to seek the preservation and
delivrance of the soul and body of our lord the King seeing we see him in
such great spiritual danger as we do. And if any shall be offended at us for
so doing, they therein love not the King: and if our lord the King should be
offended at us his servants for so doing, the King therein loves not himself:
and if all men, and the King should for this be offended with us (which God
forbid) yet herein we are sure our God will be well pleased with us, in that we
have with our best strength and faithfullnes obeyed him, who comaunds and
teaches us, to admonish all men every where to repent, and this is our sure
vvarrant, and our assured hope and comfort. Now as we have, (according as we
hold our selves bound) thus far confessed Christ's name before men by writing,
so we shall (the lord assisting us) be ready, as we hold our selves bound to
confess Christ before men by word of mouth, not fearing (through Gods grace)
them that kill the body and after that are not able to do any more. In this
duty to God and his people, we must needs confess we have hitherto greatly
failed, but we will now be ready the lord strengthening us rather to be
sacrificed for the publishing, of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and for the
service of your faith, then to fail as we have done both in our duties to
God and you. This we readily vow to God and promise to you and to will to
do this good is present with us, but we find no means in us to perform
this duty and service, and we see a law in our flesh strongly rebelling
against the law of our mynds but our assured trust and confidence is, that
Gods grace alone is sufficient for us to make us every way able unto these
things, unto the which of our selves we are no way able, yet we will say
with the holy Appostle Paul, If God be on our side, who can prevail against
us? and who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation or
anguish, or persecution, or famine or nakedness, or peril, or svvord? no the
lord we trust in these things will make us conquerors: and though our
outvvard man should perish, or suffer many afflictions, (which we were most
folish if we should not vvait for) yet let the people of God look unto the
truth we witness, and consider with holy and wise hearts whether we have
not good vvarrant, yea direct commandment to do that we do, though we be
unfit and unworthy for such a service. Shall we hear the lord say, Come
out of her my people: and shall the Spirit of God comaund him, that hears:
say Come: and shall not we say Come? Shall the word of the lord comaund to
Call up Archars against Babell, and all that bend the bovv to beseig it round
about, and let none escape, and to recompense her the dubl, Ier. 50.29. Revel.
18. And shall we spare our arrows though they be vveake? and shall the
Spirit of God say, All ye that are myndfull of the lord keep not silence Esa.
62.16. And shall we hold our peace because we are not eloquent? No, no, we
have too long neclected our duties herein, and now through Gods grace we dare
no longer do so: and therefore do we thus cry unto you the people of God,
saying Babylon is fallen, she is fallen, Come out of her, Come out of her, for
if you still partake with her in her sins, you shall certainly be partakers of
her plagues: and therefore also we say. Let him that is a thirst, Come: and
let whosoever will, take of the water of life freely: and we call unto all
valiant Archers that bend the bovv, to come to the seige against this great
City: and we pray all that are myndfull of the lord not to keep silence, nor
to give the lord rest, till he repair, and until he set up Jerusalem the
praise of the world. And our continevvall prayers unto the lord are, and
shall be that the lord will enlighten your understandings, and raise up all the
affections of your souls and spirits, that you may apply your selves unto
these things, so far as his word and spirit does direct you, and that you may
no longer be deceived and seduced by those false Prophetts who prophecy peace
unto you, when war and destruction is at the door, which the lord give both
you and them to see, that you may all fly unto the lord for your delivrance
and salvation. Amen.

Tho: Helvvys.

The principal matters handled in the Book.
A Declaration with proof, that these are the days, of greatest tribulation,
spoken of by Christ. Mat. 24. wherein the abhominatio^, of desolatio^ is seen
to be set in the holy place.

That there has been a general departing from the faith, and an utter
desolation of all true Religion.

That the Prophecy of the first Beast. Revel. 13. is fulfilled under the
Romish spiritual power and Government.

That the Prophecy of the Second Beast is fulfilled under the spiritual
power and Government of Archbishops and lord Bishops.

How Kings shall hate the whore, and make her desolate.

What Great Power and authority: what honor, names and titles God has given
to the King.

That God has give^ unto the K. an earthly kingdom with all earthly power
against the which, none may resist but must in all things obey, willingly,
either to do, or suffer.

That Christ alone is K. of Israel, and sitts upon David's Throne, and that the
K. ought to be a subject of his Kingdom.

That none ought to be punished either with death or bonds for transgressing
against the spiritual ordinances of the new Testament, and that such Offenses
ought to be punished only with spiritual svvord and censures.

That as the Romish Hyrarchy say in words they cannot err: so the Hyrarchy of
Arch-Bs. and lord Bs. shevve by their deeds, they hold they cannot err: and
herein they agree in one.

The false profession of Puritan-isme (so called) and the false Prophet is
thereof discovered.

Their two deceitful excuses for their vndergoeing of all those things, they
cry out against, made manifest.

The false profession of Brovvnisme (so called) plainly laid open with their
false Prophetts, and with their false supposed seperatio^ from the world.

The vanity of their most deceitful distinction betwixt a false Church, and
no Church (whereupon their whole false building stands) made evident.

Some particular errors in Mr. Robinsons book of justification of Separation,
laid open.

That no man justifying any false way, or any one error, though of
ignorance, can be saved.

The perverting of those words of our Savior Christ Mat. 10. when they
persecute you in one City, flee into another, contrary to all the meaning of
Christ plainly shevved.

What Godly Reader can without mourninge affections, read the great destruction
and overthrowe of Jerusalem, ^ with the house and people of God, Prophesied of
by the Prophett Ieremyah. And what heart is not much affected to see the
exceeding great sorrow of the Prophett, when he utters the prophecy
thereof, and declares the sins of the people. Ier. 9. And when al these
things were come to pass, (according to the word of the Lord), and that the
Prophet saw it with his eyes: who could not yet sit down and lament, to hear
the most grievous lamentations that he poures out, for that so great desolation
and destruction, wherewith the Lord had destroyed, and made desolate that his
own City, House, and people. Lam. 1.2.3. chap. Nay, they that gave no regard
to the words of the Lord, spoken by the Prophet concerning these things Ier.
37.2. Yet when they saw the prophecy accomplished, the^ deep sorrow took
hold upon them: then, the Elders of the Daughter Syon, sat upon the ground,
and kept silence, and cast dust upon their heads, and girded themselves with
sackcloth, and the virgins of Jerusalem hanged down their heads to the
ground, Lam. 2.10. And who so reads cannot deny, but their was just cause of
all this sorrow: and therefore well might the Prophet say. Behold and see if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, Lam. 1.1^. And if it cannot be
denied, but that the hearing and seeing of this prophecy of so great desolation
fulfilled, was just cause of this so great sorrow: Where are then the eyes,
and ears of men, that might hear and see far greater tribulations and
desolations then these, prophesied of, by a greater Prophet then Jeremiah, and
even now fulfilled in the feirce wrath of judgment by the most Highest, and
that in the sight of al men: and yet who considers of it? Or who takes up a
lamentation for it? are men's hearts utterly void of mourning affectons? or are
they destitute of understanding in the cause off sorrow? or do men think the
danger is past. Surely one of these must needs be the cause, or else men's
hearts would abound with sorrow, and their eyes would power out floodes of
tears, and they would utter with their tongues and penns, lamentations of
great woe.

Now if it can be showed by the word of truth, that deep error of darkness
does possess the two last, that is, those which through ignorance think in
themselves there is no such cause of sorrow: and those that through ignorance
do think that the danger is already past: then the first that cannot mourn,
must needs fall under the sharp censure of great hardness off heart, and
incensible deadnes of all affections.

We in the humility off our souls confess that this work is too great for
our abilities, but our strength is off the Lord, who is able to make us
sufficient for these things, if we by faith in Christ depend upon him, the
which our faith being so full off infidelity, it must needs follow that our
strength is full of all weakness, which would beat us to the ground for
vndertakeing this or any such work off the Lord, but that the Word off God
compells us. which commaundes us strickly to show our selves faithful in a
little: Mat. 25.19-30. From which ground (by the grace off God:) we have been
drawn to do that little we have formerly done, and undertake (through the
Lords gracious assistance) now to do that we shall do, beseeching, and
trusting off his mercy toward us herein, that all the praise may be given
only to the glory of his name.

First then to show unto them their error that through ignorance do not see
there is great cause off lamentation and woe, we require them to turn their
ears to the prophecy of that great Prophett Christ Jesus. Mat. 24.4-28. and
Luke 21.8-31, Where he foretells that when men shall see the abomination of
desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet set in the Holy places, then
shallbee great tribulation such as was not from the beginning off the Creation
to this time, nor shallbee. And except those days should be shortened, there
should no Flesh be saved. Has the like Prophecy ever been heard off? Or can
there be any desolation like unto this desolation? Wherein no Flesh shallbee
saved; No, from the beginning off the World there has not been the like, nor
shallbee says our Savior Christ. Who can remain ignorant off these days and
times and what ignorance is it, not to know that these are even the days and
times here Prophesied off: Have not wars and rumors of wars been heard off?
Has not Nation risen against Nation, and Realm against Realm? Has there not
been famines, and pestilence, and earthquakes in diverse places? And have not
many been offended and betrayed one an other, and hated one another? And have
not many false Prophets arisen? Does not our Savior Christ say, these are the
begininges of sorrow? Now all these things being come to pass, which are the
begininges of sorrow; it must needs be that the days of the hight of sorrow
are now come. And do not men now see the abomination of desolation set up in
the high places? Is it not deep error off ignorance then for men not to see
that there is now the greatest cause of sorrow and lamentation that ever was.
And next to show in few words the error of them that think the danger of
the days is past. Let them look upon the words of our Savior Christ, when
he speaks off the shorting of those days, he says in Mat. Then if any shall
say, Lo here is Christ, or lo there is Christ, believe it not. And in Luke.
Take heed, be not deceaved, for many will come in my name, etc. Is not this
instant these days? was there ever so many saying, Lo here is Christ, lo
there is Christ? And was there ever so many false professio^s of Christ, and
false Prophets? showing great signs and wonders, if it were possible to
deceave he very elect, who can then deny, but that these are deepest days of
danger, whereof Christ gives such warninge to take heed. Therefore easily may
they hear see their error into whose hearts that ymagination has once entered
to think that these dangers here prophesied of are past. Why then if the end
of these sorrows be not past, and the beginings be past, as is showed, then
must it needs be confessed that the days of greatest tribulation are
present. But who considers these things? Or who regards the words of this
great Prophet? If men did consider and carefully behold these things, what
heart could conceave sorrow enough, and what head could conteyne tears, or
tongue have sufficient words to express and utter, the sorrows fittinge these
days. If Jeremiah complained for want of tears, and could not be satisfied
with sorrowing, for the slain of the daughter of Syon, that perished by the
sword* and famyne, (which was but bodily death) how much more cause have men
now to sorrow, to see men poisoned with bitter waters killed with fire, and
smoke and brunstone, stung with scorpions, hurt with Servents. Revel. 9.5. and
8.11. And cast into the great winepresse of the wrath of God, rev. 19.20 which
is the everlasting destruction of soul and body in Hell, to suffer all the
plagues, torments, and judgments off wrath for ever. Was the famine of bread,
and the sword of Nabuchad-nezzar, and the seaventie years captivity, a full
sufficient cause, to make Ieremiahes eyes fail with tears, his bowels swell,
his heart turn within him, and his liver to be powered upon the earth: And are
not all the woes uttered by the seven Angels from the sound of seven trompets,
whereof an Angel flieing through the midst of Heaven, said with a loud voice,
woe, woe, woe, to the inhabitants of the earth, from the soundes remaining of
the trumpets of the three angels, which yet must blow their trumpets: And have
not these three last Angels blown their trumpets? and does not the sound
thereof yet sound in our ears? and are not all the woes thereof yet in the
sight of our eyes? are not al these woes (which are woes of everlasting death
and destruction) sufficient to break men's hearts al into pieces? What stony
hardness of heart possesses men in these days, that their hearts do not melt for
these woes.

A maine and general reason of all this is, because this prophecy is of
spiritual desolations, distructions and woes, and cannot be understood but
with spiritual hearts, nor seen but with spiritual eyes, and the hearts and eyes
off men are natural and carnal, and therefore these things cannot affect
them. 1. Cor. 2.14.

Another special reason is, because men do not consider how far these things
concern themselves, but every Nation, and every people, and every Man puts
these days far from them, as no way apperteyning to them. If we therefore
could prevail (Oh that we might prevail) by all the fear and love off God to
persuade men: and by the compassionate pity of the salvation of their own
souls move them, with deepest consideration to consider how nearely those
things concern them, least they be under these woes, and be not aware
thereof, which men may easily be by reason of the great ignorance: that is in
all men perticulerly in the understanding of the Prophecy of this book off
the Revelation: Which most men (though otherwise accounted mighty in the
Scriptures) do pass by, seldom or never touching them in their Teachings, or
writings, being taynted (we doubt not) with their own insufficiency
therein, which if they would acknowledge it were comendable (their
acknowledgment we mean, not their ignorance): But yet their ^ourse is much
more comendable, then all theirs that have busied themselves, to bring forth so
many ymaginarie expositions of that holy writ, we say ymaginarie
expositions, because they are for the most part but according to the vain
ymaginations and fancies of men's minds, without the warrant of the word and
spirit.

We confess in humility to our own shame, we are better able to reprove
this, then to correct it, acknowledging unfeignedly, and growning daily under
the burden of our own great ignorance and blindness in the understanding off
the prophecy off that book. All this may further provoake us with you, and
you with us to take heed, least we be under any part of this desolation and
woe, under which whosoever is, and remains, he must perish, as by the grace of
God, we shall make evidently appear from the Scriptures, therefore let al
People, and nations, and Tongues take heed and beware.

And first to proceed in this cause, we will endeavor to prove by the witness
of the undoubted word of truth that all Nations and Peoples upon the earth,
that have, or do profess Christ (for of them only is this prophecy) have
been under this abomination of desolation. The words of the prophecy
thereoff by Daniel, makes is most plain, where he says. In the midst of the
week he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease, and for the
overspreading of the abomination, he shall make it desolate. Daniel. 9.27.
Agreeable to this prophecy, is that Revel. 11. Where it is said. That the two
witnesses off God (which are the spirit of truth, and the word of truth in the
testimony of thapostles Ioh. 15.26.27. act 5.32) Which are two Olive trees,
and two candlestickes standing before the God of the Earth, having power to
shutt heaven that it rain not, and to turn the waters into blood, and sinyt
the earth with all manner of plagues as often as they will. Their Corpse shall
lie in the streets off the great City, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt.
Three days and an half, and after three days and a half, the Spirit of life
from God shall enter into them, and they shall stand up on their feet. And with
these two prophesies agrees also the prophecy Revel 12.14. Of the woman
flieing into the wilderness into her place, where she is nourished for a time,
and times, and half a time. Let us compaire these prophesies together. Daniel
says the sacrifices and oblations cease in the midst of the week, which are
three days and a half. John says: Revela. 11. The two witnesses (the Word and
Spirit off Truth) lie killed in the streets, three days and a half. And Reve.
12. The Woman (which is the Kingdom of Christ the heavenly Jerusalem, the
mother of all the faithful, Gal. 4.) fleies into the wilderness for a time, times
and half a time, which may with good warrant according to these prophesies be
expounded to a day, two days, and a half. Thus then we conclude. The true
sacrifices, and oblations of the people of God. The word and spirit. And the
Heavenly Jerusalem, the spowse of Christ, Ceasing, speing dead in the streets,
and being fleed into the wilderness, it must needs follow that there was an
utter desolation off all the holy things, and of all the means of salvation.

For further confirmation of this, see the words of Thapostle 2. These. 2.3.
speaking of the last day, where he says: That day shall not come except there
come a departing first. It were much weakness in any to think that this is not
spoken of a general departing, in that there were many particular departings
in Thappostle times. But here he speaks of a departing from the truth, and an
exalting of an adversary the man of sin, to sit in the Temple of God, as
God, showing himself that he is God, whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and abolish with the brightness of his cominge: These
words show to the understanding of the most simple, that there is an utter
departing, in that there must be a comeing again, for the abolishing of this
wicked man. And here may be discovered by the way, the damnable heresy of
those men, which are twice dead, and plucked up by the roots, and those are
they which are fallen from grace, which were once dead, and have been quickened
by the word and Spirit of God, and are dead again, which now hold and say that
the man of sin sitts and rules in the Church off Christ. In this place it is
showed that the spirit of the Lords mouth consumes the man of sin, and the
brightness of Christ's coming abolisheth him. Now we confess, if there can be
a Church of Christ, where the spirit of the Lords mouth is not, and where his
brightness shines not, in such a church the man of sin may sit and rule as
God, and these men are only fit subjects for such a Kingdom: but let the
children off God learn to know and profess that in the Church of Christ,
there is the spirit of the Lords moves, and his shininge brightness, which
consumes and utterly abolisheth the man of sin, and therefore they cannot
both cule in one house. Now for the bare words about which they contend, thus
much we say (not to them, but to such as may be in danger to be seduced by
the^) These are the words. Thappostle (speaking of the man of sin, who
exalts himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped) says
thus. So that he does sit as God in the Temple of God, showing himself that he
is God. Now as it is said, he sits as God showing himself that he is God, even
so does he sit as in the Temple of God, showing it to be the Temple of God,
This exposition is agreeable to the ground of the scriptures, and according to
the proportion of faith, for the scriptures teach us every where, and we
believe. that Christ is the head of his Church, And he walks in the midst of
the seave^ golden c^ndlestickes: and he sits in his church being God, and the
man of sin cannot sit with God, as God, in the temple of God. Therefore we
say unto these me^, as our savior Christ said unto Satan, hence from us. It
is written 2. Cor. 9.15.16. What concord has Christ with Belial. And what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols, etc. and 1. Cor. 10.21. Ye cannot
drinck the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils, ye cannot be pertakers of
the table of the Lord, and the t^ble of Devils. But seeing these men can find
no better a pretense to follow, and to help to heal the deadly wound of the
head of the Beast, then by pret^ding that they have found him sitting in the
Temple off God, they looking with the same eye, may find also in the same
place, that he shows himself, that he is God, and if they will abide by the
letter of the Scripture herein likewise, then have they found a new temple. and
a new God most fitting for them: because that their Temple, and God, and they
shall all perish together: we mean those only that have been enlightened,
with this truth, that Christ, and the man of sin, cannot rule and reign, or
dwell together in one house. and now have they found (as they most blasphemou^^y
affirm) Christ, and the man of sin, exalted both in one Temple.

In all this we have not digressed from the matter in hand, in that we have
showed that by the departing, the man of sin was exalted, and therefore the
departing was general, and the man of sin his exaltation general, as does
further appear by the words of Daniel. 9.27. where he says (speaking of the
sacrifices:) and for the overspreading of the abominations, he shall make it
desolate. Answerable to this prophecy, is that prophecy in the book of the
Revel. 13.7. where it is written. and it was give^ unto him (speaking of the
Beast, that had 7. heads, and 10. horns) to make war with the Sa^cts, and to
overcome them: and power was given him, over every kindred, and tongue, and
nation. Who can deny but this is general? eve^ a general desolatio^ / when the
Saints are overcome. And when all that dwell upon the earth (as follows verse.
8. Shall worship the Beast. All our particular knowledge of the fulfilling of
this prophecy will make it more evide^t. And who does not know and see / that
this prophecy is fulfilled in that Romish mystery of iniquity, who yet sits
upon many waters, with whom have committed fornication the Kings of the
Earth, and the inhabitants of the earth are dranken with the Wine of her
fornication. Revel. 17.2. We doubt not but many will agree with us in this
understanding: and we that wish unfeignedly the salvation of al, and that they
would come to the knowledge of the truth, do earnestly desire, that those that
are overwhelmed in this mystery of iniquity, and under the power of this
deceaveablenes of unrighteousness, would but consider, which way it can be
avoided, but that this prophecy is fulfilled, in that great exaltatio^ of the
man of sin in that Romish profession: and if they would come out to the
Scriptures, and perticulerly unto this book of the Revel. they should be
forced either to deny the prophesies of this book to be true, or else they
must needs yield that they are fullfilled in that their profession: for how
shall they be able to point our upon the face of the whole earth, any one part
of this prophecy fulfilled, but it shall be found in and from them: For which
way should they go about to show the man of sin, being the mystery off
iniquity (in the deceaveablenes of unrighteousness) to be exalted sitting as
God, and as in the Temple off God, Sitting upon ^eave^ Kings: and ten Kings,
giveing their power thereunto. if these prophesies be not fulfilled in that
their Romish profession, then is it not nor ever was it begun, nor fulfilled in
any false profession of Christ upon the earth, which cannot be because we see
here thapostle to the These. says. The mystery of iniquity does already
work. And in that this prophecy of Christ also is come to pass, Mat. 24.
where he says: Many will come in my name saieing: lo here is Christ etc. this
proves that the abomination of defolatio^ is set up already in the high
places. The prophecy then being fulfilled, it must needs be fulfilled,
according to the due proportion thereof, in exaltation and power, which must of
necessity be in that Romish Church: as if they were not altogether blind they
might see, by lookeing upon that Church at Rome, which Thapostle Paul writ
unto: And by compareing that Church in Rome, and this Church of Rome together,
they shall see a straing exaltation of power and pomp, such as there is no
prophecy of Scripture for to be in the Church of Christ. A spiritual power
setting up a Pope or Bishop, by virtue of his Office with a Triple Crown,
Kings and Princes bowing to him, and serveing him, and (by virtue off his
Office) carrieing a bloody sword, and his hands full of blood: this is part of
his outward pomp and power. Also bearing spiritual names of blasphemy, as to
be head of the Church, and Bishop of the universal flock: taking upon him to
have power to cast soul and body to hell, and to send to heaven whom he will:
to make spiritual laws and decrees what he will, and to bind men's Consciences
to the obedience thereof.

If this be not he that sits as God, showing himself to be God. If this be
not the abhommation of desolation set up, where it ought not to be, where
should it befound? Can the earth afford a greater exaltation of the man of
sin then this? and does it not reach from hell to heaven? what heart would not
tremble, to see and hear of such high blasphemy and sin, against God: If it
were not the Lord of hosts that shall judge these things. there could not
judgme^ts great enough he found: but these sins of highest pride toward
God, and greatest cruelty toward his Saints, shall go up into heaven, and
God shall remember al these iniquities, and reward the duble: whereat although
the spirit of God, bidds the heavens rejoice, and the holy Apostles, and
Prophets, because God has punished and revenged for their sakes. Revel. 18.20
Yet who can but with compassionate hearts, lament to see so many souls perish
daily and continually under this destruction: For all the souls upon the earth
that exalt, give power, and submit themselves to this Man of sin, and so dye,
they perish to everlasting destruction* although they do it ignorantly: A hard
doctrine will this seem to the most: But the moves of the Lord has spoken it:
Thappostle in this place of: 2. These. 2. proves it without al contradiction,
where it is said verse. 10. That the man of sin his comeing is, in all
deceaveablenes of unrighteousness among them that perish: First then here is
proved that the mystery of iniquity prevails by deceaveablenes, now men are
deceived by being ignorant of the deceit: and they that are thus deceived
through ignorance, are they that perish, for (says Thappostle) this
deceiveablenes is effectual or prevails among them that perish, and verse. 12.
That all they might be damned which believe not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, speaking of this deceiveablenes of unrighteousness by the man of
sin. For further proof thereof take the voice from heaven. Revel. 18.4.
which says. Go out of her my people that ye be not parraker of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues. Here is no exception; ignorant, or not
ignorant, if they come not forth at the voice of the Lords call, but still
remain and abide there, they shall surely be partaker of her plagues: and her
plagues come at one day, and they are death and sorrow, and famine, and
burning with fire: and in one hour shall she be made desolate, verse. 8. and
19. Whose soul would not mourn to hear of so many great Princes, and
States, and people abroad, and to see Nobility, Gentry, and people at home
perish, and ready to perish daily under this so great and swift destruction,
it were to be wished, that al good and holy means were used for their
information and instruction herein, with love and meekenes by the sword of the
spirit, which sword only is to be used to compel men's consciences to submit
to the truth that is the spirit of the Lords moves, whereby he will consume
the man of sin.

Aff by this we have said we can neither persuade them to be careful of
their own estates (which is fearful) nor persuade any other to be more
careful of them, and more compassionate of their estates, yet thus much have
we gained toward the cause in hand, that it being proved that the mystery of
iniquity, and the abomination of desolation is exalted to the highest in that
Romish profession, then we doubt not but it will be yielded, that all Nations
(acknowledging Christ) have been overspred, and under the power of that Romish
profession, and so are al these prophesies fulfilled in our eyes, which have
been produced to prove that there has been an utter desolation of Christ's
power and authority: and the power and authority of the man of sin exalted:
and it has also been proved, that all that submit themselves to that power of
the man of sin, do, and must perish, except they repent. Therefore according
to our first words we exhort al peoples and nations, and tongues to take heed
and beware, least they be under the woes of everlasting destruction prophesied
of in this book of the Revel. and they themselves be not aware thereof.

And seeing it is proved that al peoples, and nations and tongues have been
under it, let them that think they are come forth, look how they are come
forth, least they be deceived: or least comeing forth they have booked back
again, to whom our Savior Christ says Luke 17.32. Remember Lots wife. We
doubt not but we shall have the ready consent of diverse nations, and peoples,
to approve of our understandings, and application of this prophecy, of the
exaltation of the man of sin to be fulfilled in the Sea of Rome: and we
need to make no question, but therein we are of one judgment in the truth: for
it is impossible that the hare of man should device a mystery of iniquity, or
deceaveablenes of unrighteousness above it, in that there is in it the hight and
power of al pride and cruelty, reigning and ruling over men's consciences as
God, under a most glorious show of godliness, where by all Nations have been
made drunk, with the wine of that Cup of fornication, and whereby the whole
power of Christ (in his laws, statutes, and ordinances) has been and ye^ is
abolished utterly: and in the streets of this great City (we mean n^
particular place, but the whole mystery of iniquity, spiritually called
Sodom and Egypt) has the corpse of the two witnesses of the Lord (his word
and spirit, in the doctrine of the Apostles) ^yen dead: For who does not know
that they have altogether taken the word of God from the people that they migh
not have it ^o much as in their own language: neither may they meddle with the
spirit of knowledge and understanding of it, but from th^^, as they thought (and
yet do think) good to deliver it unto them: and that must stand for the Word
and spirit of God without trying. And this may suffice for a plain and general
discovery of that Babilo^, Sodom, and Egypt, (spiritually so called) and of
that Beast wi^h ^eaven heads and ten horns, and the rather, seeing there are so
many excellent discoveries written thereof,

And shall we now sit down as though our danger were past in finding out the
first Beast, and so make the prophecy of God. Rev. 1^.11. of no effect, which
so plainly sets fur^h and describes a second beast, off no less danger then
the first? shall we so betray the cause of God, and the souls of thousands and
ten thousa^ds of me^? God forbid: and will any of you that freely approve of all the findings out and discoveries of the first Beast, not with willingness
consent to the finding out off the second? far be it from you to have so little
love to Gods truth, and the salvation of men. Well, we will do our endeavors to
di^cover the second beast, leaveing it to the consciences of who^soever it may
most concern to judge whether we deal faithfully or no, and we will forejudg
our selves to deal most weakly. Revel. 13. From the, 1. verse. to the 18. It
is written. I saw another Beast comeing up out of the earth, which had two
horns like the lamb, but he spoke like the dragon and does exercise the
power of the first Beast, saieing to the^ that dwell on the earth, that they
should make an image of the first Beast, and causes as many as would not
worship the image of the Beast should be killed: and made all to receive a
mark in their right hand, or in their fore heads. and that no man might buy or
sell, save he that has the mark or the name of the Beast, or the number of
his name.

Which way now (in finding out the second Beast) shall we be able to look
besides that great Hyrarchy of Archbishops, and Lord-Bishops? are not you they
that pretend (in meeknes and humility) the word and power of the Lamb, who
says: Learn of me that I am meek and lowly, etc. But exercise the power of
the beast, and speak like the dragon: have you not made and set up the image
of the Beast? is not your pomp and power like his? and has there not been
much like cruelty used by that power? Does not the blood of the dead cry? and
have not the imprisoned groaned under that cruelty? and do not the silenced at
home, and the banished abroad daily complain? may not all these cry. How long
Lord, how long, when will thou revenge? Are not your Canons and Consistories,
and all the power that belonges unto them, with all the rest of your Courts,
Offices, and Officers are not these parts of the image? are they not like the
Beast? will you say they are like the lamb, or like his Apostles, it cannot be
that you should say they are, the fear of the Almighty would astonish you.
And if you cannot possibly prove that power, that Pomp, that cruelty, those
Canons and Courts with the belongings and belongers thereunto to be like the
la^be Then let the terror of the Almighty possess you, and make you afraid
to use and possess al those things under the pretense of the power of the
Lamb. Have you not souls to save? pity your selves and perish not there is
mercy with the Lord if you will fear him: What will it profit you to enjoy
these things for a little while (as many of your predecessors have done
before you) even a little while, and then be condemned and fall under the feirce
wrath of God? had you not much better, a thousand times better, yea ten
thousand times better, and more too, be ministers of Christ abounding in labors
in wearines and painfulnes, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and in nakedness, that you might say (at your last ends)
not as Apostles, but as thapostle says. We have fought a good feight, and
have finished out course: and we have kept the faith. Hencefurth is laid up for
us the Crown off righteousness: But if this be your feight (as it has been
the feight of diverse of your predecessors) to cause as many as would not
worship the image of the beast (your Hyrarchie) should be killed: and to make
al both small and great rich and pooer, bond and free, to receive a mark in
their right hand, or in their forehead, and that no man may buy or sell, save
he that has the mark of the beast, or the number off his name, if this be
your feight it is evidently the feight of the second Beast, and not the feight
of Thapostle Paul. And there is no Crown off righteousness laid up for such a
feight.

And do you not al these things, when you force and compel men to submit to
your whole conformity which is the perfect image of the beast? Not to speak of
your surplice, and Cross, and Churchings, and Burials, and Coopes, and
Chauntings, and Organs in your Cathedrales, and how many mo such abominations
we cannot reckon up, neither need we seeing so many writings are full off
them: but whosoever shall look upon them, with an eye of less then half
vprightnes shall easily see them to come out off the bowels of the beast, and to
be the deformed image of his ugly shape.

To let al these pass, (the least whereof shall be called to account in the day
of the Lord) we come to your Common Book, not meddling with every particular
of it, but with the most general. By what power do you make prayers, and bind
men to them, and appoint the order of them in time and place? Whereoff two, you
appoint to be read every evening without alteration, some prayers to be said
after the Curate be paid his due, some on the North side the Table, some in
one place, some in another: Will you see a special ground of these four
abominations, in appointing your Priests what to pray, when to pray, and where
to pray, and what to put on when they pray: Because you made ^o many Priests,
and have so many yet among you, as niether know what to pray, where, nor when
to pray, nor what to put on when they pray: in so much as if you did not allow
them a sum of made prayers, they had been, and yet would be, altogether
without prayers, and this does the mystery of iniquity with the
deceiveablenes of unrighteousness, hide from the simple, and from the great and
wise, by your made order of prayers: For take your Common book from them, and
then would the impudent be ashamed of such a ministry. Oh that ten of the
best and chiefest off a thousand of those your Priests might be debarred from
you book, and be set in a Congregation off very partial herers of their
side, to show their best abilities for the Office of the ministry. Baals
Priests were not more discovered (1. King. 18.) Then they would be, for the
fault was in their God in that he had no care to hear: But your Priests fault
would be found in themselves in that they would have no one word to speak to
Gods glory, nor to edification. How can you but know this as well as you know
your right hand from your left? How will you answer this when you come before
the righteous judge: shall you be able to stand in his presence? the Lord give
you hearts to repent, otherwise how shall you think to escape the feirce wrath
of the Lord. Did the Lord bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and swept it
away, as a man sweeps away doung til al be gone, and did: The dogs eat him
of Ieroboams house that died in the City, and the fowls of the aite eat him
that died in the field. Because he set up Calves to worship, and make Priests
of the meanest of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi. 1. King.
14.10.11. and 12.31. And do you think to escape with less judgments that set
up the image of the Beast; and such a blind Preisthood to support it? For you
know that it is blind ignorance that supports the mystery of iniquity: And
therefore shall the Lord by the brightness of his coming abolish it. What shall
we say of your bare-headed and barefooted white sheet penance, whereunto (to
mock the Almighty) is joined a written repentance.

Thus do you device men's prayers, and device men's repentances, and they must
pray, and repent as you by your power appoint them. Have you power also to
appoint the Lord to accept these prayers and repentances? Or do you not care
whether the Lord accept them or no, so that you be submitted unto therein,
then do you seek your own Worship and not the Lords. Judge your selves, and
let all judge. betwixt the most Holy Lamb, and the most poluted Beast, and
confess and testify, whether these things be of the Lamb, or off the image
of the Beast.

The like off these things are without our numbering, and there would be no
end made if we should follow them. But we will draw to an end, hopeing that
they that see these, will see al.

Yet let us speak some thing of your excomunicatio^ by the power whereof are
cast out those that most seek to serve God in sincerity, and if the most
wicked fall under it, ^hey may be remitted (submitting to the power) by paying
large fees, especially if they be rich, and simple or mean off degree. And
whosoever withstands the power off this, forty days, then upon a writ off
signification he is to be cast into prison, without bale, or maynprise. Is
this learned off the Lamb or off any off his Apostles? We read that
Thappostles suffered such violences and tiranies, but the word off God teaches
not the Disciples off Christ any such administrations, and this is not the
meekenes off the Lamb, but the image off the cruel power off the Beast.

The power off this excomunication is off another especial use off profit, in
that by the power thereof are brought in all duties, Tithes and Court fees. What
horrible profanation off the holy ordinance of Christ is this, to make it an
instruement to compel men to bring in exacted fees and due^ies, and tithes.
We read 1. Cor. 16. That Paul appointed in the Churches gatherings for the
Saints, and 1. Tim. 5. giveing direction for the releife off widows, he also
gives a special charge for providing for the Elders and especially for those
that labor most. The Elders says Thapostle: that lead, go before, or rule well
let them be had in duble honor, especially they that labor in the word and
doctrine. First here is showed the power whereby they must lead, go before, or
rule, that is by the word and doctrine. The^ thapostle proves by two reasons
from the scriptures, that such Elders are worthy off duble honor, because the
Scriptures say: 1. Thou shall not mousell the mouth off the Ox that treads
out the corn. 2. The laborer is worthy of his wages. And here is showed what
thapostle means by honor, that is mainteynance: But all this is from a
voluntary liberal distribution as is showed* 2. Cor. 9.13. How unlike is this
^o your ruling power, and to your duble honor and maintenance. Here is no
imprisoning by power, nor excommunication for fee^, tithes and duties. We
confess our Lord the King may give you what his pleasure is, but it were to be
wished, that al those goodly Palaces and possessions with all the previleges
and prerogatives belonging to them, were preserved for the maintenance of the
Kings State and dignity, and they were much more be fitting for the King and
his posterity / to support them in their due pomp and Royalty, then to
support the pride and pomp of such as pretend to be ministers of the Gospel.
Thapostle Paul was better worthy off duble mainteynance then you, and all the
Priests in all your Provinces and dioces, and yet he labored with his hands,
although he had the care of mo and more worthy churces the^ are now upon the
earth, that would willingly have administered unto him, but he would make the
Gospel free. Oh that we might live to see al them that preach the gospel (if
they stand in need) to live off the gospel, that is of the free liberality off
the Saints: those Pastors would not devour the flock, but feed it. And we
pray that the Lord would put into the heart of the King to take into his own
hands al those possessions, and tithes, wherewith those devouring shepherds
(that destroy the flock) feed themselves: That day shall be the most happiest day
to the whole Land, that ever was since it was a Land, and that in these 4.
things. First it would overthrowe that high pride and cruelty off the image
of the beast and mystery of iniquity. Secondly it would make a way for the
advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ in the sincere and humble
profession thereof. Thirdly it would in-ruch the Crown and fill the Kings
coffers vpheaped, with such a yearly revenewe as no peace nor war should ever
be able to make the^ half empty, and all this may be done by a holy, good,
just and lawful means. Fourthly it would in-ritch the whole land above
measure, and that in disburdening the land, of al those Courts with all the
suites, and services, that belong unto them, the taxations, fees and penalties
whereof are without number. And the King would stand no need of taxes and
subsidies, although we would not wish the Kings people to with draw the
showing off their loyale love to our Lord and King in those things.

Oh what a full and ready consent would there be in the kings people to these
things, how profitable would it be unto them: the Lord persuade his heart to it,
seeing it would be for Gods glory, his own benefit, and the so great good of
his whole land: and it would be the greatest and chiefest benifit of all to
them, to whom it may seem the greatest loss: for they should be disburdened
of those things, which although they he pleasant for a season, yet they will be
most bitter in the day of account, which will come let them be sure, and it
would make them live moderately of that they have, and use good and honest
endeavors to support themselves, and there would be true comfort in such gain.
Lastly to make it appear plainly enough, that this Hyrarchie of Arch Bishops
and Lord Bishops is the image of the Beast, let al behold the names off
blasphemy which it bears, and they are these, so far as we know the number
of them.

Archbishops. Prym^ts. Metropolitanes. Lords Spiritual. Reverend-Fathers
Lords Grace.
What names of blasphemy are here? they are the titles and names of our God,
and of our Christ. What words of detestation were sufficient to be uttered
against such blasphemous abomination? who is able to keep silence? If men
(professing Christ) will not speak, the stones shall speak, rather the^ the
lord will be without witnesses. Shall men be afraid to speak for fear of loss
of goods, of Lands, or for fear of imprisonment, banishment, or death? No, no,
let them take al, life and all. Let them shed blood until they have enough: and
let the servants of God rejoice in the saieing of the Angel of the waters.
Revel. 16.5.6. Lord thou art just, which art, and which wast, and which shall
be because thou haist judged these things, for they shedd the blood of the
Saints and Prophets, And therefore haist thou given them blood to drink, for
they are worthy. This has the Lord fulfilled upon all those that are dead, and
have not repented of this abomination, and this will the Lord fulfill upon all that are alive, if they repent not. Is it not sufficient to dispoyle and rob
Christ of al his power, but you will also take from him the rules of honor due
unto his name? To pass by your derived Grecian names, which we (to speak the
truth) are not able to our own satisfaction to declare the interpretation of:
and that no way lesseneth the iniquity of them, but rather shows it more,
that you should get you names of such hidden blasphemy, that simple men cannot
understand without an interpreter:) let us speak with fearefulnes off that
name, which you might al tremble to hear off: and that is Lords spiritual. The
very artribute of the God of al spirits, for he only is the Lord spiritual
and the spiritual Lord. And give us leave to show you how you are hedged in,
that al subtle sophistry shall not help you out. Bear you not this title by
reason off your spiritual power and authority? and do you not by this your
spiritual power and authority make spiritual Canons and decrees: and are not
al your Courts spiritual Courts? and do you not require spiritual obedience in all these things? is not your title and power a differing title and power from
al other Lords? see how the style does hedge you in, which goes thus. All the
Lords Spiritual, and Temporal. So that you cannot say, you are spiritual Lords,
beca^use of your profession, for you will not deny but the temporal Lords are
spiritual Lords in profession as well as you: Therefore must it needs be that
you are spiritual Lords because off your spiritual power, and spiritual power
is over the spirits off men: so then as Temporal Lords have power over men's
bodies, so must spiritual lords have power over men's spirits, but there is
only one spiriritual Lord, which is the Father of spirits: and therefore
whosoever takes this title and this power upon themselves, they take upon them
the name, title, and power of God: and this is the man of sin that sits as
God, sheweing himself to be God, which herein the second Beast does according
to, or in the image of the first.

Do you think that God has forgotten to be just? and are his judgments gone
for ever? Can you see and condemn in your words and writings, the exaltation
off the man of sin in the Romish profession: and can you not see and condemn
it in your own? to such says thapostle Paul Romans 2.3. O thou man that
conde^nest the^ that do such things, and do the same, think thou that
thou shall escape the Judgment of God

And for that duble degree of Reverend-fatherhood which you take to your
selves, some of you being most Reverend, and some Right Reverend Fathers, how
might we find out under what condition you bear this name: It is plain that
you bear not that name because you have begotten all that people in Christ,
for most commonly you are their Reverend Fathers in God, before they ever heard
your voices: then must it needs be in you a name by inspiration, seeing it is
not by operation or work. So are you inspired with a Reverend Fatherhood upon
the instant time of your entrance before you have wrought any work among
that people. When you shall meet Christ in his coming, what will you answer
him for the breach of his strait commandment herein, where he says. Call no
man your Father upon the earth, for there is but one, your Father which is in
Heaven: Are you not exalted above your brethren by this name? then you are they
of whom Christ speaks of in this place, and whom he will bring follow. Mat.
23.9.10.11. For thus taking upon you the name of God, and exalting your selves
above the brethren. And if you have not sold your selves to work wickedness
(which God forbid) and if you think it robbery to make your selves equal with
God, let your hearts tremble, and your hands shake to subscribe to such names of
blasphemy: and let your ears tingle when you hear the^ uttered and red in
your presence: and observe but what magnificency is upon you when you sit upon
your high places, and hear your selves thus entitled, and remember that he
sitts over you that will tread you under foot, for thus robbing him of his
honor if by repencance, You maae not your peace with him.

Now for the next name of blasphemy (that is within our capasitie to speak of)
it is the title of Lords Grace, and this is your household title, we mean it is
a title that may not be omitted in all ordinary occasions: does not this
attribute belong only to the lord off grace? and will you have this prerogative
with him: Now although this title be used (in what sense we know not) in the
styles off some civil Magistrates, where with we meddle not, yet we know
all your titles off degree, you bear by a spiritual prerogative, and therein
consists the mystery of iniquity, and there fore are al your names of honor
and prerogative (where by you challeng superiority) names of blasphemy, and
directly against the express comaundment of Christ, who by his comaundment
(that were worthy to be obeyed) charged his Disciples, that they should in no
wise seek superiority in his Kingdom, neither in name nor power.

The Lords of the Gentiles bear rule one over an other, and are called
gracious Lords, or bear names off honor* but it shall not be so among you, he
that wilbee greatest shall be least in my Kingdom, that is he that will be exalted
in name or power by being a Disciple of my Kingdom, he shall be the least. Luke
22.25.26.

But the words of our Savior Christ are not at al regarded herein, the man of
sin will have a Kingdom where there shall be mighty power and authority one
over another conscience, appointing and co^pelling men, how they shall worship
their God, and to imprison, to banish, and to cause to dye them that resist:
and the man of sin will have in his kingdom names of most high honor, yea
even the names, titles and attributes off God, and thus does he sit as God both
in name, title, and power. And this prophecy is now fullfilled, as he that
has an eye may see and he that has an ear may hear: For let any man but
hear the prophecy of this book of the Revel. and he may see it fulfilled in
the first and second Beast as evidently as if Christ should send one from the
dead and declare it unto him, and say this is the first Beast, and this is the
second: and they that will not believe him in his word, neither would they
believe him if he should send one from the dead. Luke 16.31. And now all that
do agree with us in judgment concerning the first Beast, that it is plainly to
be seen in that Romish profession, and that it is impossible that the man of
sin should be exalted in a higher measure of exaltation, we call you al
fu^th, for witnesses before God and Men, whether it be not as plainly to be
seen, that the second Beast that has the two horns like the Lamb,
pretending, or making show of the word and power off the Lamb in humblenes
and meekenes, but speaking like the dragon, and exercising the power of the
first beast: And making the image off the first Beast. We call you all to
witness whether the second Beast be not as plainly to be seen in the Hyrarchy
of ArchBishops and LordBishops: and whether it be possible that there should
be made so lively an image of the first Beast as is in this Hyrarchy in all
titles and names of blasphemy, in all Pomp, and in all power throughout,
beginning at their Book-worship, with all the conformity belonging to it, and so
going through all their Offices, and Officers, Courts, Canons and decrees, if
al these be not the image of the first Beast, conceived in his bowels, and
brought out off his bosom, let Heaven and Earth witness, and let all the men
upon Earth deny if they can, and show any other image of the first Beast.
And therefore all you whom this may most may most concern, either deny this
prophecy of God, and wipe it out (which if you do, God will deny you, and wipe
you out of the book of life) or eis confess it, to be fulfilled in and among
you, and give glory to God, and cast away your abominations, and take heed off
hardness, and hearts that can not repent, which heap up as a treasure unto
themselves wrath against the day of wrath. Oh why should you for the pleasure
of unrighteousness (for a very few days, little do you know how few) utterly
destroy your own souls and perish, yea and destroy the souls of all that
submitt unto you in the least of these things except they repent.

And if you will yet justify your selves in these things and make show of your
selves to be the servants off the Lamb, and not the servants of the Beast,
then stand forth and defend your Kingdom and cause, with the spiritual sword
of the Lamb, which is the word of God, and convince your gain-saiers, and stop
their mouths therewith, and so shall you approve your selves Bishops in deed.
And if you can prove by Gods word, that we ought to say prayers, as you
comaund us, we will both sing and say, as you bid us: and if you can prove your
names of blasphemy, and titles of degree, your Pomp: and al your cruel
spiritual pouwer, good, by that warrant, we will yield it you al, and not
diminish you of the least tittle there of. What need you fear to bring it to
trial? You have learning enough, you have partakers enowe, if you had but half
a good cause: which battle if you will feight, we say unto you as Michaiah said
unto Ahab, when he would go up to Ramoth Gilead: Take it in hand go up and
prosper: But we will tell you also with the same Prophet, that if you stand in
this cause The Lord has determined evil against you. 2. Chro. 18.16.22.

But in all this let us persuade you in fear to God and shame to men to cast
away all these courses, we shall now mention. Do not, when a poor soul by
violence it brought before you, to speak his couscience in the profession of
his Religion to his God, do not first impose the, Oath Ex Officio. Oh most
wicked course: and if he will not yield to that, then imprison. him close. Oh
horrible severitie: if he will not be forced by imprisonment, then examine him
upon diverse articles without oath, to see if he may be intrapped any way.
Ogrevious impietic: and if any piece of advantage (either in word or writing,
or by witness) can be gotten, turn the Magistrates sword upon him and take his
life, Oh bloody cruelcie: if no adva^tage ca^ be found, get him banished out of
his natural country, and from his Fathers house, let him live or sterve, it
matters not. Oh unnatural compassionatnes without pity. Let these courses be
far from you: For there is no show off grace, Religion, nor humanity in these
courses, this is to lie in wait for blood, and to lay snares secretly to take
the simple to slay him. And to conclude this point in hand, let it be truly
observed, whether those that are off the Romish profession (servants of the
first beast, coming in question before this Hyrarchy) have not found much more
favor, then those that have stood most for reformation: and has there not
been gnashing of teeth, and gnawing off tongues, with all extreme perverseness
and contempt against the one, when there has been good, myld, and eeven
carriage toward the other? Which good carriage toward them, we disaprove
not, nor envye not, but could wish, that the wholesome word of doctrine withal
the cords off love were applied and used unto them, for their information and
drawing them from their blind errors: But we mention it to this end, to show,
what vprightnes there can be to God or the King in this: For first: it is not
possible but this whole Hyrarchy will confess, that those which seek
reformation, have much more light of truth, and gifts of knowledge, for the
building up of a people unto God then the other: and that the first, and they
are al of one judgment, concerning the doctrines off the Scriptures in the
foundamental points of Religion: (as they speak) and yet there is no
comparison betwixt their pacient enduring them of the Romish profession, and
there impacie^t not enduring of the other: is this vprightnes to God? Secondly
touching the King and State, the Children in the streets, know the treachery
and infidelity that has been found in diverse of the one profession: and they
themselves know the ever untouched fidelity of the other: what vprightnes is
this to the King and State? the evident reason of this may appear unto the
wise, and may not this appear to be^ it? That the Romish profession is but
chiefly an enemy to the Kingdom of Christ, and but dangerous in some of them
to the Kingdom of the King, approving of ArchBishops, and Lord Bishops, and
could wi^h they were Cardinals: But those of al sorts, that seek reformation,
are most chiefest enemies to the Kingdom off ArchBishops and LordBishops, and
would have them humble and faithful Pastors to feed the f^oth, and therefore
in no wise are to be suffered how true soever they be to God, and their King.
And does not all this show the affinity and nearnes betwixt the first and
second Beast?

But least any should stumble at this part of the prophecy, Revel. 13. verse.
12. Where it is spoken, that the second Beast causes the Earth, and them that
dwell therein to worship the first Beast, and therefore the Romish Beast being
the first, this Hy^archy cannot be the second, in that it does not cause men
to worship the Pope off Rome: We pray it may be observed how that it is showed
2 Thessalonians. 2.7.9.10. That the mystery of iniquity is a working power of satan
which working power (according to the degrees there of) is set forth unto us in
the book of the Revel. after diverse manners, and discribed unto us in diverse
shapes or similitudes, and named unto us after diverse names and in the hight
off the exaltation thereof, this power is set forth and discribed unto us,
under the two names and similitudes of the first, and second Beast, both which
exercising one power, (though in diverse likenesses) do bring al, both small and
great, under the subjection of that one power, both their hearts being set to do
mischief, and talking of deceit at one table Dan. 11.27. And so does the
second beast, cause al to worship the first, in that it is al one power
building up one kingdom. And the Popes person is not the mystery of iniquity,
for then, (when the Pope were dead) the mystery off iniquity, and the Beast
were dead, until another Pope were set up: and if the Popes person were the
man off sin, then the Lord (by the spirit off his moves) should abolish and
consume the Popes person, but there is no such prophecy of scripture. And then
should the prophesies of the fall off Babylon be understood off the overthrowe
and consumeing of the earthen or stone walls, and timber houses off a City: But
this were too carnal an understanding, to conceive that the spirit off Gods
mouth (which shall consume the man off sin, spoken off 2. These. 2. and shall
shake in sunder the City, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt. It were
to carnal to understand this to be of earthly houses and Cities, and fleshly
persons, they are not the matter and substance, that shall be abolished by the
brigtnes of this his comeing, here spoken off, as we doubt not but will easily
appear to the wise though some have been, and are, much mistaken herein.

And that we may come to the true understanding of this part of the prophecy:
Chap. 13. verse. 13. And he did great wonders (speaking of the second Beast) so
that he made fire come down from heaven in the sight off men. And to see how
it is fulfilled in the second Beast, we must remember (as we have formerly
said) that this is a spiritual prophecy of a spiritual mystery of iniquity,
which none may deny, and then does it appear that these wonders wrought (by
making fire come down from heaven) are lying spiritual wonders, and the fire
is a false spiritual fire: The which (even as the true spiritual fire, which is
the holy Ghost,) does truly work wonderful powerfully, upon the hearts and
affections of them that believe the truth, even so this false fire (which is
the spirit and power off Satan) does work effectually upon the hearts and
affections off those that receive not the love off the truth and that after a
wonderful manner off deceivablenes off unrighteousness: so that men are strongly
persuaded and believe, that it is the true Fire from heaven, even the spirit
off God. And this Fire has the Hyrarchy off ArchBishops and Lord-Bishops made
come down from heaven, especially in their former times when men had their
word and power, with their prayer book, and al their Cathedral abhominatious
in such admiration: and with such zeal were affected unto them: and as yet
some are to this day, zealously persuaded off the holiness and goodly order off
these things, al which (in the Beast that has two horns like the Lamb) made
such a glorious show being compared to the former things, as men were
ravished in their spirits, and thought (and yet some few do think) that their
hearts and affections were kindled with fire from heaven. By this false fire
(which is by an effectual working power in all deceivablenes of unrighteousness)
even hereby has, and does the first, and second Beast work all their signs
and lying wonders: and whilst men (through great ignorance) have, and do look
for some straing seights from heaven, to know the two Beasts by, their hearts
have been, and are with the pleasures of unrighteousness) stolen away. This can
all (that are of any understanding) who now remain under the power of the
second Beast, easily discern, how by a wonderful fiery blind zeal, all those
that are under the power of the first Beast are misledd: but they cannot
discern their own estates, which are one and the same under the second Beast,
who is more deceiveable, because of his two horns like the lamb, and
therefore men had need more carefully to look unto themselves, least they be
still deceived, except men will rest in security and perish to destruction,
which all must do, that obey the power, either of the first or second Beast, as
is withal evident plainnes showed Revel. 14.9.10.11. where it is written. If
any man worship the Beast and his jmage, and receive his mark in his
forehead or in his hand, and whosoever receives the print of his name, he
shall drink (says the spirit of the lord) of the wine of the wrath of God,
which is powered into the cup of his wrath, and shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone, and they shall have no rest day no^ night.

What will prevail with men, if neither the fore warning prophesies, nor
threatening judgments of the lord, will move them, to consider and flee the
feirce vengance that is already come: Does our Savior Christ tell that the
abomination of desolation shall be set up in the holy places? and does
Thappostle Paul show that the man of sin, exalts himself and sitts as God
in the Temple of God? and does the prophecy of the Revel. so duly set down
and declare the manner of the workeing of the mystery of iniquity according
to the several degree thereof, until it come to that hight of exaltation
before spoken of by Christ, and by Th-appostle in the similitude of the first
and second Beast, who bears the names of blasphemy, in taking upon them the
names and attributes of God, as is before showed, causing all that dwell upon
the earth, to worship the Beast and his image, and so sitts as God, in the high
places, and in the Temple of God, which is in the hearts of men 1. Cor. 3.16.
and 2. Cor. 6.19. and do we see all these things fulfilled before our eyes,
and will not he that reads consider? And does our Savior Christ show the
greatest judgments of the lord to be upon men in those days, in so much as no
flesh shall be saved, and except those days should be shortened no flesh should
ever be saved, and does th-Appostle Paul show, that because men will not
receive the love of the truth, the lord shall send them strange delusio^s that
they should believe lies, that all might be damned which believe not the truth,
but have pleasure in unrighteousness? And does the spirit of God, in the Revel.
by John say, that all who worship the Beast, or bear the least mark of the
Beast and his jmage, shall drink even of the mere wine of Gods wrath out of
the cup of his wrath? And will not all this move the hardened hearts of men to
look about and carefully to search out the prophecies of scripture concerning
these things, and compare them with these times, and seek and find out, how
they are fulfilled, which (through the grace of God) every faith fuil heart,
seeking, shall now easily discern, seeing the first Angel Revell. 16. has
powered out his vial, so that noisome and grevious sores do appear upon the
men which have the mark of the Beast and upon them that worship his image:
yea, (Glory and honor, and praise be given to our God) the fifth Angel has
also powered out his vial upon the throne of the Beast, and his Kingdom does
already wax dark, who does not see this, that looks but with any seeing eye
after religion? Does not now (more then ever) the noisome botches of many
gross absurdities appear in the bewitched understanding of those men, that
bear the mark, and worship the Beast and his jmage? and is not the palpable
darkness of blind ignorance openly discovered upon the throne of the Beast? And
does not the bewty of his image fade? Is not the baptizing by midwives quit
vanished? And does not Bishoping of young and old much decay? Does not the duly
reading of Injunctions and homilies grow to forgetfulness? and are not profane
perambulations well laid aside? and do not holy evens and days, and ember wekes
almost pass out of mind? and is not the book it self become much out of use?
Has not whole conformity received a blow? and, will not any halting
subscription serve the turn? Oh that the spiritual Lords of this spiritual
Kingdom could see that the smoke of the burning there of is already deeply
begun and does highly ascend, that they themselves might help to heap coals
upon the throne thereof, and flee from the burning therewith.

Let them not fore cast to preserve it, nor seek to deliver it out of the hand
of the Almighty, they may more easily pull the pray out of the lions mouth, or
dravve out leviathan with an hook, then prevent the mighty one that has
judged these things Revel. 18. who is clothed with a garment dip^ in blood,
and his name is called The. word of God. And who has upon his garment, and
upon his thigh a name written. The King of Kings and Lord of Lords. Revel.
19.12.16.

Thus have we (according as we foretold of our selves) set down these
things with great jnability, but yet with all fidelity according to our
consciences in the best measure of understanding concerning the second Beast,
who has caused to make the jmage of the first. And we disire the Godly wise
that seek salvation by the Lamb, that they will compare the Beast (which we
all agree to be the Romish Hyrarchy) and his jmage (which how can it be
ymagined, but the Hyrarchy of Arch. Bishops and lord B. must needs be) compare
them together in their spiritual Pomp, spiritual names of blasphemy,
spiritual power, and Cruelty, and cast but a partly indifferent eye upon their
administrations in their Offices, Officers Courts, Canons, and decrees, and
then let the word and spirit of God direct the to judge righteously of the Beast
and his jmage; to know them that thou may not submitt to the spiritual
power of the Beast and his image, neither receive his mark in thy forehead nor
in thine hand, or the least print of his name, for if thou do, thy portion is
to drink of the Cup and wine of Gods wrath, and to be tormented with fire and
brimstone before the holy Angels and in the sight of the Lamb. The word of
the lord has spoken it, and his word is true and not lieing.

But shall we now think we have fully discharged our selves to God and men
in speaking generally unto all, and shall we not in humility, perticulerly
call upon those servants of the lord, of whom he has especially prophesied,
that they shall hate the whore and make her desolate and naked, and shall eat
her flesh and burn her with fire; and this shall be done (says the lord) by the
Kings of the earth. Revel. 17.16. of whom we could be content not once to
speak for fear of offending, but therein is infirmity in us, and no
faithfulness to God, nor them. The wise King, (that knew right well the power
and authority of a King) advises not to stand in an evil thing before the
King for he will do what soever pleases him Eccle. 8.3. But in a good cause,
why should we fear to stand before Kings, seeing their thrones are
established by justice Pro. 16.12. Our cause then being good, for it is the
cause of God, as all shall confess. Thus much is it, that we do in all
reverend humility beseech of all Kings and Princes, that they will perform
this service unto the lord according to this prophecy prophesied of the^, in
the performance whereof the lord requires their ferve^t zeal, which they ought
to show by their perfect hatred and detestatio^ of the whore: by which zealous
hate they are to be provoaked to make her desolate and naked, and to eat her
nesh and burn her with fire: and after this manner and with these great and
ferve^t affections shall these Kings that obey the lord in this work serve
him. In all this we beseech that we may not be understood as though we meant,
that Kings should do this by their temporal sword of justice, no, nothing
less: the lord requires no such means in this business, for he has testified
by Prophecy, as we have formerly showed, 2. These..2. that he will abolish and
consume the man of sin, the mystery of iniquity, which is this Beast, and
whore, and city, by the spirit of his mouth, and by the brightness of his
comeing: and therefore this prophecy may not be understood, that Kings ought
to do this by their temporal power, but by the word and spirit of the lord in
their testimony, withal holy zeal, and this cannot be done except they first
take all their power and authority from the Beast, for no man can serve two
Masters, but he shall please the one, and displease, the other: Kings cannot
serve the lamb and the Beast, but they must needs hate the one and love the
other, and this is most plainly set down in this Prophecy. Revel. 17. for in
the 13. and 17. verse. it is said of Kings, that they shall have all one mind,
and be of one consent with the Beast, and shall give their power and aucthority
unto the Beast, and shall feight with the lamb until the words of God be
fulfilled. And in the 16. verse. They shall hate the whore and make her
desolate, for God has put in their hearts to fulfill his decree. Thus we see
these Kings propresied of by the spirit of the lord, to do this great work of
God, when they shall take it in hand, they shall not halt betwixt two opinions,
they shall not be, neither hot nor cold, but they shall be most zealonis for
the glory of God, and shall no longer retain any friendship with the Beast
(always our meaning is spiritually): now ^^en those Kings and Princes that
will in this service obey the most high God, and adva^ce his glory, that has
so greatly advanced them to high honor and dignity, let them take all their
power and aucthority from the Beast, and with draw all the affections of their
hearts and souls, and turn them to hatred and to an utter abhorring of the
Beast and whore, and so shall they make it manifest unto all the world, that
they are true lovers of the lamb, and perfect haters of the Beast: and that
they, are they in whom this prophecy is fulfilled. Oh, that Kings and Princes
would strive to go one before an other in giveing honor to God herein.

And amongst all the rest of the great and mighty Kings and Princes of the
earth, loyalty, nature, and grace does bind us, with disires of exceeding
dutiful and reverend affections, to wish and desire that our lord and K. might
be with the foremost in this great and acceptable service of the King of
Kings, and lord of lords, which were a worthy service, most well beseeming our
lord the King for whom the King of heaven has done so great things: and if
our lord the King will do this service for his God, then must he not by his
power, support the Beast nor his image, which are one and the same power. And
seeing our lord the King has seen the deep iniquity of the peremptory ruling
Presbitery, let him much more see the high iniquity, of the proud, ambicious,
cruel, ruling Prelacy, which is a power set up in the place of God, bearing
the names of high blasphemy. Oh let it be far from our lord the K., to give his
power which God has given him to punish evil doers, and to reward them that
do well, 1. Pet. 2.14. Let it be far from our lord the King, to give this power
to the Beast or his image, for that advances the mystery of iniquity, and
smites down the mystery of godliness. God has not comunicated his own power
to Kings and Princes for this end.

And seeing we have begun to speak to our lord the King, let us declare what
power and aucthority God has given to him, whereunto his subjects ought of
conscience to obey.

Our lord the King has power to take our sons and our daugthers to do all
his services of ware, and of peace, yea all his servile service what soever,
and he has power to take our lands and our goods of what sort or kind soever,
or the tenth thereof to use at his will: and he has power to take our men
servants, and maid servants, and the chief of our young men, and Cattle, and
put them to his work: and we are to be his servants 1. Sam. 8.11.18. in all
these things our lord the King is to be submitted unto, and obeyed.

Also he has power to make all manner Governors laws and ordinances of man 1.
Het. 2.13.14. Thus does God give our lord the King power to demand and take
what he will of his subjects, and it is to be yielded him and to comaund what
ordinance of man he will, and we are to obey it. And in all these things we
acknowledge before God and men we ought to be subject; not for fear only, but
also for conscience sake. ^o^n. 13.5. We meddle not with any conditions or
contracts, made betwixt the King and his people, whereby our lord the King (in
favor) may, or does abridg himself of his prerogative, and so make himself
subject to his own covenants or conditions, which our lord the King ought to
keep though it be to his disadvantage, if they be not merely unlawful: but
we speak only of that power, which God has given to the King, all which our
lord the King ought to use lawfully; but if he should do otherwise (which God
forbid) he is in these things to be submitted unto Eccl. 8.3.4. and 1. Pet.
2.18.-24. and whosoever resists, resists the ordinance of God and shall
receive to them selves condemnation Romans 13.2. Thus has God given our lord the
King, all worldly power, which extends to all the goods and bodies of his
servants. And does our lord the King require any more? we know he does not:
then let not our lord the King now be angry that we his servants speak the
second time unto him. Does not the King know that the God, or Gods, and lord
of ^ords, has under him made our lord the King an earthly King, and given him
all earthly power: and that he has reserved to himself a heavenly Kingdom, a
kingdom that is not of this world Ioh. 18.36.37. neither are, the subjects of
his kingdom of this world, Ioh. 17.14. and yet this King was in this world and
his subjects are in the world. Verse. 12.: and that with this kingdom, our lord
the King has nothing to do, (by his Kingly, power) but as a subject himself:
and that Christ is King alone, only high Priest and chief Bishop: and there
is no King, no Primate, Metropolitan, ArchBishop, lord spiritual, but Christ
only, nor may be, either in name or power to exercise aucthority one over
another Luke 22.25.26. Mat. 23.11.12. And will our lord the King not
withstanding all that Christ has done for him, in giveing him such a kingdom,
with such great dignity and power therein, will the King not withstanding,
enter upon Christ's kingdom, and appoint (or by his power suffer to be
appointed) Laws, Lords, Law makers over or in this kingdom of Christ, who,
(we may be bold to say with warrant) if he were upon earth in the flesh, he
would be subject to our lord the King in his earthly kingdom, for so was he to
Caesar Mat. 17. he paid him tribute, and he commanded to give unto Caesar,
things that were Cesars. Yea he would not meddle with any thing that belonged
to the King, not so muchas to comaund the two beethren to devide the
inheritance: nor to judge the woman taken in adultery. Far be it the^ from the
heart of our lord the King, to give his earthly power to any to rule as lords
over the Kingdom and heritage of Christ, which he has reserved to himself, to
rule and govern only by his word and spirit, where no earthly power may be
admitted, in that it is no earthly kingdom.

Behold now we have begun to speak unto our lord the King, and we are but
dust and ashes, and our lord the King is but dust and ashes as well as we,
therefore let not our lord the King be angry that his servants speak the third
time unto him, we know our lord the King may do what soever pleases him, and
who shall say unto him, what do thou? Eccles. 8.3.4. Yet though he should
kill us we will speak the truth to him. It is the Kings honor to search out a
thing. Prove. 25.1. And we know the King is a wise man and a man of
understanding: thus then we speak unto him. Will the King challeng to
himself to sit upon the throne of David, and to judge Israel? we (the Kings
servants) mean, will the K. have the same power now over the church and house
of God, that the Kings of Israel had under the law? who satt upon David's
throne, will and ought the King to make a covenant and cause all to stand to
it? and must all stand to it? and will and ought the King to compel all that
are found in his dominions to serve the lord as the King comaunds? 2. Chro.
34.32.33. and will and ought the King to slay all that come not to the
passover? Number. 9.13. If our lord the King have this power the^ he ought duly to
execute it, and then he sitts upon David's throne: and then the King of Spain
has the like power to compel all in his dominions to serve God as he
comaunds, and so every king sitts upon David's throne, and all Kings are herein
to be obeyed: for will not our lord the King that is a man of understanding,
yield, that Queen Marie the Kings noble predecessor had the same power and
aucthority by her sword of justice over her subjects, that our lord the King
has, and that her subjects were bound to obey her in all things, and submitt
to hi^ sword of justice, as well as our lord the Kings subjects are to obey
him, and submitt to his sword of justice: for all earthly Kings, have but one
manner of power and sword. Romans 13. Chap. If our lord the King by his deserving
judgment see this, then our lord the King will easily see that as Queen Mary
by her sword of Justice had no power over her subjects consciences (for then
had she power to make them all Papists, and all that resisted her therein
suffered justly as evil doers) neither has our lord the King by that sword of
justice power over his subjects consciences: for all earthly powers are one and
the same in their several dominions. And if our lord the King will have any
other power it must be a spiritual power, and the^ that must be with an other
sword, even a spiritual sword, for an earthly sword is ordained of God only
for an earthly power: and a spiritual sword for a spiritual power: and
Offenses against the earthly power must be puinshed with the earthly sword, and
offenses against the spiritual power with the spiritual sword, and with this
sword / the King of Kings make our lord the King mighty through him / to cast
down holds, casting down the ymaginations, and every high thing that is
exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought
to the obedience of Christ. 2. Cor. 10.4.5. Who is the fruit of David's loins,
concerning the flesh, and only, sitts upon David's throne for ever. Act. 230.
Luke. 1.32.33. and Esa. 9.7. And upon his kingdom to order it, and to stablish
it with judgment and with Justice. The rod of whose power is sent out of Syon,
who is ruler in the midst of his enemies, whose people shall come willingly.
Psalm. 110.2.3. and requires not any earthly power to build up his Church, as
he shows, when he declares, that all power was given him in heaven and in
earth, he bids his Disciples. Go therefore and teach all nations Baptizing them
in the name of the father, etc. he that shall believe and be Baptized shall be
saved, But he that will not believe shall be damned Mat. 28.19. Mark. 16.16. who
when he ascended upon high he led captivity captive and gave gifts unto men, he
gave some to be Appostles etc. for the reparing or gathereing together of the
Saints Ephesians. 4.5.12. Here is showed unto our lord the King, that which we
know he is not ignorant of, that Christ only sitts upon David's throne to
order it and we the Kings servants show it, that the King might not be
deceived by deceivers, who would persuade the K. that he has the same power
over the Church of Christ that the Kings of Israel had over the Church of the
old Testament, to this end, that they might use the K. earthly power, to rule
over and build up (as they pretend) the spiritual Tabernacle, Temple, and
Church of Christ, which if the King shall suffer them to do, he shall sin
against God in entering upon the kingdom of Christ, who only is King of
Israel Ioh. 12.15. whose power and sword are spiritual, whose Tabernacle,
Temple, and house is holy, made with out hands. 2. Cor. 3.17.1. Pet. 2.5. Heb.
9.11. and therefore has given spiritual gifts unto men, for the gathering
together of the Saints for the work of the mystery, and for the building up
of his body which is his Church; and does not will nor require to have people
commanded and compelled, by an earthly sword or power as in the days of
Hezekiah, and Josiah Kings of Israel: for that was an earthly or carnal
commandment. Heb. 7.16. and they had a worldly Tabernacle made with hands, and
worldly ordinances, and Carnal rites. Heb. 9.1.2.10 and therefore were the
Ordinances or law commanded to be kept by a worldly power, and the Tabernacle
to be built by hands: but now we have a Tabernacle which the lord pight, and
not man Heb. 8.2. and that carnal commandment is changed Heb. 7.12. and we
have a commandment after the power of endless life verse. 16. unto the obedience
of which law, no earthly Kings power, can cause or bring any one man to obey,
in any one thing: and the which Tabernacle not made with hands, no earthly
power, which consists only of the strength of hands, can cause to be built in
any one part thereof: but all this is to be done only by the K. of Isreal's
power, who has all power given him in heaven and in earth, whose power is all
sufficient to bring under obedience all his subjects, where unto no earthly
power can be helpful, whose sword is his word, which is lively and mighty in
operation, and sharper then any two edged sword Heb. 4.12. and therefore needs
not the help of any Kings sword. If his sword will not prevail to bring men
under obedience to his own laws, what can our lord the Kings sword do? it is
spiritual obedience that the lord requires, and the K. sword cannot smite the
spirits of me^: and if our lord the K. shall force and compel me^ to worship,
and eat the lords supper, against their co^scie^ces, so shall he make his
poor subjects, to worship and eat unworthily, whereby he shall compel them to
sin against God, and increase their own judgments.

On let not our lord the K. suffer such evil to be done by his power; little
does our lord the King know how many thousands of his people, have been
compelled through troble, and for fear of troble, to worship and to eat the
lords supper unworthily, and so to worship and to eat and drink to there own
damnation: who, although they perish in their own sins yet their blood will be
required at their hands, that have compelled them so to sin against their
consciences, and the lord in mercy give the K. a heart to look unto it, that it
be not laid to our lord the K. charg, if he shall suffer them to exercise such
power by his authority.

And we bow our selves to the earth before our lord the K. in greatest
humblenes, beseeching the K. to judge righteous judgment herein, whether there
be so unjust a thing, and of so great cruel tyranny, under the sun, as to
force men's consciences in their religion to God, seeing that if they err, they
must pay the price of their transgression with the loss of their souls. Oh
let the K. judge, is it not most equal, that men should choose their religion
themselves seeing they only must stand themselves before the judgment seat of
God to answer for themselves, when it shall be no excuse for them to say, we
were commanded or compelled to be of this religion, by the King, or by them
that had authority from him. And let our lord the K. that is a man of knowledge,
yet further consider, that if the K. should by his power bring his people to
the truth, and they walk in the truth and dye in the profession of it, in
obedience to the Kings power, either for fear, or love, shall they be saved?
The K. knows they shall not but they that obey the truth in love, whom the
love of God constrayneth, their obedience only shall be acceptable to God. 1.
Cor. 13. Thus may our lord the K. see, that by his Kingly power, he cannot
cause or make men bring an acceptable sacrifice to God, and will the King make
men, (whether they will or no) bring an unacceptable sacrifice to God? and
shall the King herein think he does please God? God forbid. If the King will
please God in such service, then must he seek to convert sinners from goeing
astray Iam. 5.20. and turn men to righteousness Dan. 12.3. not with his sword
of justice, but by the foolishnes of preaching, for that is the means whereby
God has appointed to save them that believe 1. Cor. 1.21. and 27. for God has
chosen and appointed the foolish things, of the world, the weak things: the
vile things: the things that are despised: and things which are not, to
confound and bring to naught things that are: and these things has God chosen
to set forth Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom of God. Here is not the
absolute auctenticall word of comaund, nor the mighty powerful punishing sword
of our lord the King required to this work of the publishing of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. And let the King call to mind, that which (no doubt) the King
has often redd in the gospel, according to Luke Chap. 9.52.56. That when the
Samaritanes would not receive Christ, and that his disciples said, will thou
that we comaund fire to come down from heaven and consume them. Jesus
rebuked them, and said, ^ye know not of what spirit ye are, the son of man
is not come to destroy men's lives but to save them: whereby the King does see,
that Christ will have no man's life touched for his cause, if the Samaritans
will not receive him, he passes by them: if the Gadarens pray him to depart he
leaves them: if any refuse to receive his disciples, he only bids them shake
of the dust of their feet for a witness against them.

Here is no sword of justice at all required or permitted to smite any for
refusing Christ. Then let not our lord the King suffer his swore of justice,
which God has given him with power from himself, to defend and rule with
aucthority, and keep in all obedience, his own people, and people of God,
unto the Ks. own laws and statutes, which apperteynes to the well governing
and ruling of the Kings state and kingdom, which is worldly and must fade
away. Let not our lord the K. suffer this sword to be used to rule and keep in
obedience the people of God and of the K. to the laws, statutes, and
ordinances of Christ which apperteyne to the well governing and ruling of the
kingdom of Christ, which is heavenly and endures for ever: the sword of whose
kingdom is spiritual, by the power of which sword only, Christ's subjects are
to be ruled, and kept in obedience to him: by the which sword our lord the K.
must be kept in obedience himself, if he be a disciple of Christ, and a subject
of Christ's kingdom. And this takes away (with out gainsaying) all the Kingly
power and authority of our Lord the K. in the kingdom of Christ, for he cannot
be both a King and a subject, in one and the same kingdom: the Kings
understanding heart, will easily deserne this.

Then let our lord the K. in all happiness and prosperity sit in his own
Princely throne of that mighty Kingdom of Great Britanne. Which God has given
to the King and to his posterity, and the lord give the K. a most wise heart to
rule and judge his people: and the lord give all his people faithful hearts to
love and obey him: and let all those the K. enemies that would not that he
should reign over them, bestayne before him.

And let our lord Jesus Christ in power and Majesty sit upon David's throne,
the throne of the Kingdom of Israel / which his father has given unto him,
and let Christ according to his own wisdom judge his people Israel, and let
our the K. be his subject, the which our lord the King yiedling himself to be,
the K. must needs grant that as he is an earthly King he can have no power to
rule in this spiritual Kingdom of Christ, nor can compel any to be subjects
thereof (as a King) whilst the K. is but a subject him self for there may be
but one King in Israel.

And let not our lord the King be now angry, and his servants will speak but
this once. Will our lord the K. being him self but a subject of Christ's
Kingdom, take upon him by his Kingly power to make Primats, Metropolitans,
Arch. Bishops, and lord Bishops to be lords in the Kingdom of Christ, and over
the heritage of God? And will our lord the K. do this against the whole rule of
Gods word? wherein there is no one tittle to warrant our lord the K. thertoo.
Will not our lord the K. be supplicated by the humble petition of his servants
to examine his power and authority herein? Far is it from the hearts of us the
Kings servants, to move the King to depart from the least tittle of his right
that belongs to his Royal Crown and dignity: and far be it from the King to
take from Christ Jesus any one part of that power and honor which belongs to
Christ in his Kingdom. Let our lord the King pardon his servants for meddling
in this matter: for we profess our selves bound (upon the peril of our
souls) to be faithful subjects both to Jesus Christ our K. and to our lord
and K. and there fore it stands us upon, to know what belongs unto Christ our
heavenly K. and unto our earthly K. and Christ our spiritual K. has freely
spoken unto us, and commanded us to give unto our K. that which is our Ks. and
will not our lord the K. say as freely unto us, give unto God, that which is
Gods? We doubt not but our lord the King will say so, why then we appeal unto
our lord the K. that is our earthly K. and let the K. speak according to the
true judgment, of his heart, will the K. say, that it belongs to him to make
spiritual Lords over the house of God? And will the K. warrant his saying to
be Good? And if the King warrant it only by his Princely prerogative, may we
therepo^ give unto the King this power in submitting our selves to such
spiritual Lords, and to their power? were not this to take from our Spiritual
Lord and King, that which is even his own name, title, and power, and give it
to another? what greater evil can be committed against Christ, then to take his
honor and power from him and give it to earthly me^, who should fear and
tremble before him, in giveing to him glory and honor, and not taking from
him. Let not our lord the King be partaker in such great evil to suffer, a
power and name of blasphemy to be set up so directly against the express
commandment of Christ, who forbidds all Lordly titles and ruleing power one
over another in his Kingdom: we dare not but think it is done ignorantly,
both by our lord the K. who suffers this, and by them that administer in this
greatest evil, we the Kings servants say, this greatest evil, in that it is
the abomination of desolation set up in the high places, which are the days of
greatest tribulation, that ever was or shall be, the which days except they
should be shortened no flesh should be saved.

And if it shall not yet appear unto our lord the that this Hyrarchy of
Archbishops, and lord Bs. is this abomination of desolation set in the high
places, then we beseech the K. upon our knees, by his highest honor and
renown, by his truest justice and most righteous judgment, by his most Godly
Princlike care of the salvation of al his subjects, and lastly and above all by
his chiefest love unto God and to his holy truth. That our lord the King will
with his Royal consent give way that this cause may come to an equal trial,
but thus far: that the K. will but take and hold his sword of justice from
this Hyrarchy, that they may not smite the faith full true, and loyal subjects
of the K. therewith, neither to death, nor to imprisoment, nor to banishment,
for speaking or writing only against their Kingdom. And let our lord the King
(by the humble supplication of us his servants) be entreated, to leave them to
defend their spiritual power and names by the sword of the spirit, (which
ought only to be the weapon of their warefare, if they be spiritual Lords as
they pretend, and then shall ^ur lord the K. see this cause truly decided, to
the Ks. honor and great comfort: for the K. knows that this Hyrarchy, withal
their learned dependancy, if their cause be good, they cannot lose it for want
of learning, in that they have wisdom and learning if it be according to
godliness, sufficient to convince the whole earth, and if they can with all that
mass of learning, mainteyne their Primacie, and Prelacy, Arch-Bishopry and
spiritual Lordships, then may our lord the King let them enjoy it with
comfort; but if they cannot with all the spiritual weapons and armor they have,
uphold it, then let it fall and go into the bottomless pit, from whence it is
come. Revel. 9.2. and whether it must go, though all the Kings on the earth
should strive to uphold it. Revel. 20.1.2.10. Let not our lord the K. therefore
give the least support thereunto, by the power of his sword. The lord grant
that we may find favor in the Kings eyes, in this so just and equal a cause,
which is, that we may but try the power of these (called) Spiritual Lords:
and that by earthly power they may not force men to yield unto their spiritual
aucthority. How can it but seem equal in the Kings seight, that spiritual
lords should have no more spiritual authority, then they can get and
mainteyne by spiritual power. And if the Hyrarchy themselves think it unequal
that the doctrine of their power should be tried, and be not most willing and
ready thereunto, but shall by policy and secret intimations shift it of, then
shall our lord the K. that is wise easily deserne that their deeds are evil,
and they hate the light neither comes to the light least their deeds should be
reproved Ioh. 3.20. But they that do truth, come to the light, that their deeds
may be made manifest that they are wrought according to God. Thus shall our lord
the King and all the world, have a full trial of them, whether their deeds are
wrought according to God, or no, for if they will now come to the light of Gods
word in the sight of all men, and manifest their deeds to be wrought according
to God, then have they approved them selves: but if they do not, then has our
Savior Christ here condemned the^ with his own mouth, and let our lord the
King also condemn them in his own wisdom. Shall we need to be importunate
with our lord the King in this cause of his poor people which concerns the
condemnation of all their souls? what need we, seeing our lord the King
knows, that a King that judges the cause of the poor rightly, his throne
shall be established for ever. Pro. 20.14. Then let our lord the King here the
cause of the poor: and the rather in that the Kings most noble Predecessor,
has before justly adjudged the same cause, and freed his people so far of the
bondage wherein they were. King Henry the 8. that Prince of great renown,
freed his people from the bondage of the first Beast, especially in these two
great and maine perticulers, in causing the scriptures to be set over and
printed for the people in their own language, that so they might hear the
word with their own ears: and also that their worship should be in their own
tongue, that they might speak to God with their own tongue, and not in a
straing tongue, as they did.

Let heaven and earth judge, and let our lord the K. judge, and let all the Kings
people judge, whether this was not the depth of all darkness, when men might not
know what God speak unto them, nor know in their public worship what they
speak unto God. Let our lord the K. judge whether ever there was such
spiritual cruelty upon the earth, when the poor people of God for whom
Christ died, were debarred from the presence of God, in their public worship,
and might neither hear god, nor speak to God, with their own outward cares
and tongues, but as the Ministers of the man of sin appointed and in astraing
tongue, as they taught them. We know our lord the K. does see that here the
abomination of desolation was set up in the high places: as also that the
Corpse of the two witnesses of God prophesed of Revel. 11.8. (which are the
word and spirit of God) lay dead in the streets of that great City, there
being no true use at all of them, and the people being deprived of the life of
them, for the word was a dead letter unto them, and the spirit a dead spirit.

The Kings predecessor of famous renown, thus freed his people from that
bondage of the first Beast: but there is risen up a second Beast, which
exercises the power of the first Beast, and now our lord he Kings people cry
unto the King with the sighs and groans of their spirits (and would cry also
with a loud voice, but for fear of the Beast) and humbly beseech the King that
he would put too his helping hand to free his people from the bondage of the
second Beast, that their souls may not perish to everlasting perdition, which
all must do which are under the bondage of the same, and so continewe. And now
let the King hear with an ear of compassion, and see with an eye of pity,
the cruel spiritual bondage that his poor people are kept under by the
second Beast in these perticulers.

The Kings people have the word in their own language and may pray in their
own tongue: But they must not understand the word, but as the Lord Bishops
will have it understood, and they must not pray nor administer in the holy
things but as they appoint. Now let the King with a godly wise heart consider in
what woeful Spiritual bondage, Gods people, and the Kings, are kept by this
Hyrarchy. Now plainly would our lord the King see the cruel Spiritual tyrany
hereof, if the King would make it but his own cause. Would not the King think
it a must cruel tyranny, if the King should be by force compelled to
understand and believe the scriptures as the Hyrarchy of Rome would have him?
And to worship God and administer in the holy things as that Hyrarchy would
appoint? And if the King would not so do, that then that Hyrarchy should have
power to put the King in prison, and if that would not serve the turn, to
procure or cause the Kings life to be taken from him, or at least to banish the
King from his Kingdom, and nation would not our lord the K. think this great
tyrany and cruel bondage? We know the King would: for which cause the K. and
his predecessors have cast of this bondage. Then let the King see that the
Kings people are under this same bondage: for if they will not understand the
scriptures, and worship God, as the Hyrarchy of Arch. Bs. and lord Bs. comaund
and appoint, they straight send a pursivant, apprehe^d them by violence and
force, imprison them, sometimes diverse years, many times not suffering so much
as their wives to come at them, and if their lives cannot be gotten, then
procure their exile or banishment. The lord give the King a heart to pity his
people herein, the King is ignorant of these dealings, and none dare tell the
King thereof, the Prelacy have been so mighty and so cruel.

And will it please the King to veiwe the cause of his people, (being true and
faithful subjects) yet further: what does it profitt the Kings people to have
the word of God to hear, and read it, seeing they are debarred of the spirit
of God to understand it, but according to private interpretation, by the the
lord B. as though they had the spirit and could not err. Oh that our lord the
King that is a man of excellent wisdom, would but be^d his wisdom to
behold, how that herin (wherein the whole power of the Beast consists) this
Hyrarchy of Arch-Bs. and lord Bs. does nothing differ, from the first Beast:
for the first Beast kepes both the word and spirit from the people: and they
keep the spirit of God in bondage, and then is the word of God of no effect,
debarring the people of God thereof, tying them to their spirits in the
understanding of the scriptures which none may try whether they be of God or
no, but must believe and obey, or else go to prison, and if they will not yield
either he hanged or banished.

Judge? O King is this a rule of direction, and ordinance of the Lamb? That
comaund Bishops to be gentle, toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the
evil men patiently; instructing them with meeknes that are contrary minded,
proveing if God at any time will give them repentance, that they may acknowledge
the truth, and come to amendment, etc. 2. Tim. 2.24.25.26. By these fruits may
our lord the King and his people know the Bishops of the lamb, that is lowly
and meek, and bids, learn so to be of him. Mat. 11.29. but to pull men (that
are contrary minded) out of their houses by Pursevants, to cast them into
prison, and cause them to lie there at excessive charges, utterly vndoeing
them, their wives, and children, and bringing them to all out ward misery: and
causing them to be banished, from under their natural Prince, (to whom they
are most true subjects) forth of their native country, and from their fathers
houses, and all their friends and familiars. Will not our lord the King say that
these are the Bishops of the Beast, who is like a leopard, and his feet like a
Bears, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion Revel. 13. of whom they learn,
to be proud and cruel. And all these eviles and many more, have come upon the
Kings people because they will not understand the scriptures by the spirit of
the lord Bs. and pray in their worship to God by the direction of their spirit.

Will our lord the K. hear the earnest complaint of his people herein: and
grant redress that as the Ks. people, by the means of the Kings most noble
predecessor enjoy that blessed liberty to read and hear the word of God in
their own language and to pray in their public worship in their own tongue:
that so by our lord the Kings means the Kings people may enjoy this blessed
liberty, to understand the scriptures with their own understandings, and pray
in their public worship with their own spirits, and then if men err, their
sin shall be upon their own heads, and the Kings hand shall be innocent and
clear from their transgression, which it cannot be, if the K. shall willingly
suffer his power to be used to compel men to pray, and understand by the
direction of the Lord Bs. spirit: and if the King shall give his power to the
Lord Bs. but to compel me^ to eat meats which through our lord Jesus Christ
are all clean, yet to him that judges them un clean to them they are
vncleame. Romans 14.14. in which case if a man freely of his own accord, do eat
and doubt, he is condemned, because he eats not of faith; why then, if a man
in this case be forced by the Kings power, (whether he will or no) to eat when
he doubts, and so he be condemned verse. 24. is not this to wound the weak
conscience, and to sin against Christ? 1. Cor. 8.12. and can our lord the Kings
hand be innocent herein? When by the Kings power men shall be compelled to sin.
Oh that the King would then see, that if he may not give his power to rule men's
consciences in the least things, that are indifferent, much less has the King
power to comaund men's consciences in the greatest things between God and man.

This being so, we the Kings servants (with all the humility and reverence
that can or may be given to any earthly Prince) do out of the true Loyalty,
obedience, and faithfulness of our hearts, thus speak unto the King: Let it
suffice our lord the King and let it not seem a small thing, that the God of
Gods has made our lord the King a mighty earthly K. over diverse nations: and
has given our lord the King an earthly power, to make laws, and ordinances
(such as the King in his own wisdom, shall think best, and to change and
alter them at his pleasure) to rule, and govern his people by: and to appoint
Governors and Officers to execute the Kings will, and all the Ks. people are
bound of conscience to God, and duty to the King to obey the King herein, with
their goods, bodies, and lives in all service, of peace and war: and whosoever shall resist the King herein, they resist the Ordinance of God, and
shall receive judgment from God, besides the punishment with the sword of
justice, which God has given to the K. to punish evil doers that tra^sgresse
the K. laws. And God has also honored the K. with titles and names of Majesty
that are due unto himself. Psalm. 82.16. Dan. 5.18. and has commanded honor to
be given unto the K. 1. Pet. 2.^7. And God has commanded all his people
specially to pray for the K. 1. Ti. 2.2. Let this Kingdom power and honor
fully satisfy our lord the Ks. heart, and let it suffice the K. to have all
rule over his peoples bodies and goods; and let not our lord the K. give his
power to be exercised over the spirits of his people, for they belong to
another Kingdom which can not be shaken Heb. 12.22.23.28. differing from all
earthly Kingdoms: for our lord the K. knows, that the chief of earthly
Kingdoms are compared to gold, silver, brass, iron, Dan. 7.37.46. But this is
the Kingdom which the God of heaven has set up, which shall never be
destroyed; and this Kingdom shall not be given to another people, but to the
holy people of the most nigh God; and all powers shall serve and obey him. da^.
2.44. and 7.27. Therefore in this Kingdom, let our lord the K. give us his
servants leave, again to tell the K. that he must be a subject, and that our
lord the K. has no power nor prerogative (as a King) to make laws, for in
this Kingdom, there is but one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy.
Iam. 4.12. neither has our lord the King power to appoint Officers in this
Kingdom and much less to make spiritual lords over this Kingdom to bring
all men's spirits in subieccion to their spirits in the understanding of the
scriptures and worshipping God.

Wherein least we may seem to speak untruly to the K. we humbly beseech
our lord the K. that it may be law full for his servants, with his Princely
fouour to show the K. some few perticulers out of a multitude. And first we
show the K. that whereas our Savior Christ Mat. 18.15.^0. gives a rule of
direccion to admonish a brother, if he sin, not speaking perticulerly of some
sins, but generally of all or any one sin, as we the K. servants
understand with all the understanding that God has give^ us. The lord Bs. say,
this is not to be understood generally of every sin against God but
perticulerly of some, and herein must we be subject to the spirit of their
understanding and that rule of Christ must be made no sure nor perfect rule.
Next let us show the K. that if there be such a sin committed, as the Bs. do
iugd to be a sin, according to their rule, (which let the K. give his servants
leave to suppose to be adultery and that it proceeds or comes to this degree
that it must be told unto the Church, which we understand to be the whole
congregation, more, or less: The lord Bs. by their spirit of understanding,
say, tell the Church: That is to be understood, tell the Ordinary, which is
either the Bishops cha^cellor, or the Archdeacons Official, they are they,
that have power to bind in earth, and it shall be bound in heaven, and their fees
being, paid the^, they have power to loose on earth, and it shall be loosed in
heaven. Oh that the Ks. ear would but hear half the depth of this iniquity,
and the Ks. servants know the Ks. heart would never endure it that his peoples
consciences should be thus wounded and their souls destroyed, by being
compelled to submitt to such spirits of understanding. Furthermore let our lord
the King know that whereas the Holy ghost testifies Act. 14.23. saieing that
they had ordained Elders by Election in every Church, and prayed and fasted:
this we understand, was the whole Congregations fasting and praying, and
Election; and that the Church has power to appoint some to ordeyne or lay on
hands, if there be no Elders as they did Act. 13.2.3. but all this (say the
Lord B. by the spirit of our understandings) does belong unto us, and the
Patron: and the people have nothing to do, but must be content to have such a
Pastor, as we appoint, though they never heard him, knew him, nor saw him:
and although the congregation after, ward should like never so well of him; yet
the Lord Bishops they have power to take him away from them, and to deprive
him, and silence him, and punish them if they hear him, although he be never
so well approved amongst them. Thus must the Kings peoples be compelled to
understand the scriptures, for the advancement of their power of Ordination,
and deprivation. And whereas we the Kings servants understand, according to
the best understanding that God has given us that Th-appostle Paul, giving a
rule of direction for the people of God, how to worship God, when they come
together 1. Cor. 14.26.33. That every one as he has a Psalm, or a doctrine,
or a tongue, may speak to edification, and if any thing be revealed to
another that sits by, the first is to hold his peace, for all (that have
gifts) may prophecy one by one: and in all this, God is noe the God of
confusion, but of Order. Thus do we hold the disciples of Christ, ought to come
together, to worship God and edify one another, in the liberty of the spirit,
according to the gifts and graces that are given to every one Romans 12.6. And
that every man as he has received the gift, may administer the same one to
another 1. Pet. 4.10. The lord Bs. utterly deny the substance of all this
understanding, and their spirit of understanding directs, that when the
Congregation, is come together, the Priest, or Curate, that is licensed by
them, only must perform the worship, and must begin their worship with
their book, strictly tying them to such sentences: and then to that which is
written after: then a Confession: then an absolution, with virsickles and
answers, and Psalms, and lessons, and Te Deum, and the Latany. 3. days a
week, and at other times, when the Ordinary shall comaund.

Thus may our lord the King see, how his peoples spirits are in bondage to the
lord Bs. spirit in the understanding of the scriptures: and they must of force
against their consciences, understand them as they comaund, or else go to prison.

And our lord the King may also see that whereas neither Christ, nor his
Appostles, ever commanded, or practiced any set form of worship, whose
spirit had been most fit to have ordained such an order, yet the Lord Bs. (in
the perfect jmage of the first Beast) have composed a proportion, and framed an
order of prayers and readings for the worship of God, comaunding absolutely the
observation thereof, forceing the spirits of the Kings people to be subject to
there limitations herein: and so deliver Gods people their bread by weight, and
their water by measaure, not suffering the hungry to be satisfied with the
bread of life: nor the thirsty to be quenched from the rivers of waters: but
forceing the unwilling to drink stolen waters out of their Cesexons, and eat
hidden bread out of their storehouses: but the simple that eat and drink
thereof, know not that the dead are there, and that their ghests are in the
depthes of hell. Pro. 9.17.18. Let not our lord the K. be despleased, seeing
his servants speak but the words of sobriety: and if the K. shall think we
misap^y the^, that is the thing which we so humbly and earnestly beseech the
K. may come to trial; by the Ks. free consent, and that the Kings hand of
power may not be against the just and due trial thereof.

Now when we the Kings servants do sue for a trial, we disire our lord the
King not to conceive that his servants mean a day of dispute, and so to handle
the cause of the lord, as men that contend for prizes, who submitt their cause
to private censure, for that it is private and concerns but themselves: but
our humble and most equal suit to our lord the K. is, that seeing this
Hyrarchy of Arch. Bs. and lord Bs. do challenge such power and prerogative over
our consciences, that all who cannot of consciente yield it unto the^, may
walk according to their consciences, and publish their defense against them:
and that these that bear the names of spiritual lords, may by spiritual
power only, convince their gainsayers: and not pretend to be spiritual
Bishops, and use only the Kings temporal sword to rule and convince men with:
And that our lord the King would suffer us his servants to demand of them
(that take upon them to be lord Bs. of whom they have learned to rule by such
power, and who has taught them to put the contrary minded in prison; and how
they will be able to answer him (that will bring the greatest of them to
answer) who taught all his disciples, to (...) not the contrary minded with
meeknes, proveing if at any time God will give them repentance, and has
taught them to be gentle suffering the evil 2. Tim. 2.24.25. And let our lord
the King give us his servants leave to ask these Lord Bs. whether they think
that God has forgotten this his commandment? or that he will quite forget to
put it in their account, because they have al together forgotten to keep it?

Oh that our lord the King would but take his sword out of these lord Bs.
hands, to whose Officie it does in no sort apperteyne, if they were Christ's
Bishops and that the K. would let them only use that sword which is sharper
then any two edged sword, which only belongs to Christ's Bishops in their
Office, let the King turn them out, and let them (if there be any manner of
vprightnes in them) come forth with that sword and armor only, which the holy
ghost has appointed them if they be Christ disciples Ephesians. 6.11.17. And we
will come to them through Gods grace in the spirit of love and meeknes: but when
they smite us with the Ks. sword of justice, and maynteine their aucthority
only by that power, and yet will be spiritual lords how can we with
faithfullnes to the cause of God, but shoot them through with the arrows of the
Almighty, and filling them the double. Revel. 18.6. Discover by the word of
truth the height of their iniquity: for if it may please our lord the K. to
consider there is no other way to try, and discover them whether they be
spiritual or no, but to apply the word of God unto them, examine, and compare
them by it, as the Church of Ephesus did them which said they were Apostles but
were not, and found the^ liars. Revel. 2.2. and if this Hyrarchy of Arch-Bs.
and lord Bs. will not nor may not be tried by the word of God but will still
cause, (by all the means they can) as many as will not worship it, should be
killed, so that none may speak, or write against it, but they shall be by death,
by imprisoment, or by banishment destroyed, the^ our lord the K. ca^ judge, that
knows the practice of the first Beast in all these things, that where the
first Beast has full power, none may write, nor speak, nor look amiss, but
they dye, the King can judge, whether this Hyrarchy of Arch B. and Lord B. be
not the second Beast, who has thus caused to be made the jmage of the first
Beast. And if the Kings people may not thus say and write, and by the word of
God, prove this Hyrarchy so to be; but must without gainsaying, believe the
scriptures and worship God, as they comaund, then are they Lords over our
faith, and the people of God have no power from God to understand the
scriptures, but all power is given to them: and then must we believe they
cannot err.

And we beseech our lord the King (that is a man of wisdom) to give
righteous judgment herein, whether the Lord Bs. do not challenge only to
themselves all power to understand the scriptures and not to eer, when they
will by force and violence of imprisoment, banishment, or death Compel the
Kings people to yield obedience to their understanding only: for if the Kings
people must not believe, that they only have the power of the spirit, and
cannot eer, how comes it that the Kings people must be compelled only to obey
them in all their understandings and practices? Except the Kings people must
obey them though they do err. And if our lord the King will not altogether
turn his ear from the deep complaints, of his servants, then let the King
hear his servants in this point, which is so hateful to the King, and is of
all estates (that have any understanding in the mystery of godliness) so much
detested; yea the Lord B. themselves do in words profess great detestation
thereof: and that is; that presumptious sin of blasphemy of that Romish Beast,
who holds, he cannot err, and therefore thinks that he may change times and
laws, as is prophesied of him. Dan. 7.25. and this he does, as our lord the
King well knows, appointing or comaunding, laws, days, and times, and
forceing obedience, and saying he cannot err: so that what soever he does it
must be obeyed, as holy, and good. Oh that our lord the King and all his
people, would see that the Hyrarchy of Arch-Bs. and Lord Bs. do no less,
although in word they deny it, yet in deeds they practice and hold the same
thing, that they cannot err. And this can never be denied, neither shall they
ever be able to open their mouth to deny it, if they might but be brought ta
answer: for shall they ever be able to anniswere it, that they should expound
the scriptures, and make spiritual laws Canons, and decrees, and comaund
absolute obedience: and in diverse of their Canons, decreeing excommunication
ipso facto, but that they shall be forced to show by their deeds that they cannot
err: and men must obey them upon that ground, because they cannot err, or else
upon this ground, that they must be obeyed although they do err: for they must
be obeyed: upon which last ground, thausends do obey them. But we beseech our
lord the King that it may be lawful without offense unto the King to try the
Hyrarchy upon the first ground, which is, that as the Hyrarchy of Rome say in
words, they cannot err: that so in their deeds this Hyrarchy do absolutely
profess they cannot err. We with our best ability make it plain to our lord
the King and to every eye and ear thus.

The Hyrarchie of Rome, expounds the scriptures: makes laws, Canons, and
decrees, and binds all men's consciences to obey, forceing them thereunto by
excommunication, imprisoment, banishment, death, and none may examine the
power, aucthority, or warrant thereof by the scriptures, but all must be
received for holy and good, because the Hyrarchy of Rome, say in words they
cannot err. And we beseech our lord the K. to see that the Hyrarchy of
Arch-Bs. and Lord Bs. do all the same things; they expound the scriptures,
make laws, Canons, and decrees, and binds all men's consciences to the
obedience thereof, forceing the Ks. true and obedient subjects thereunto, by
excomunicatio^, imprisoment, banishment, (the K. in mercy and justice
restraning them of blood) and none may examine the power and aucthority of any
of their decrees by the scriptures, but all must be received for holy, and
good. Does not the K. in the wisdom of his heart see, and may not all the K.
people see, that this Hyrarchy of Arch-Bs. and lord Bs. in all their deeds, do
show, they challeng to have the same power not to err, which the Hyrarchy of
Rome do say in words they have? and thus do they absolutely in deeds profess
they cannot err, which the Hyrarchy of Rome profess in words, and herein the
Hy: of Arch-Bs. and lord Bs. are the more deceit full deceiveablenes of
unrighteousness.

And now we beseech the Creator of hearts to give our lord the King a new heart
to consider of all the exalted abomination of desolation executed and practiced
by this Hyrarchy of Arch Bs. and Lord Bs. and let our lord the K. know, that it
concerns the King highly on to consider of it, in that it is set up, and
supported, and all the cruelty thereof executed by the Ks. power, whereby they
make our lord the K. gilty, of all the imprisoment, banishment and persecution,
which by the Kings power, they impose upon all the faithful subjects of the
King who with stand their abominations But above all, let our the King (for
the glory of God, and for the salvation of the Kings own soul) suffer us the
Kings servants, thus far to prevail with the King that our Lord the King would
but search the scriptures (whereby the K. knows he must be directed, if he
will be saved) and let the King see with his own eye, what show of warrant can
be found, that the King should take unto himself power to Elect Bishops. Oh we
beseech the King that the successive possession, and the goodly appearance of
this power may nothing sway with our lord the King herein: but let the King
set before his eyes, the worthy recorded remembrance (by the spirit of God) of
Cyrus King of Persia, who brought forth, the vessels of the house of the lord,
which Nabuchadnezzer had taken out of Jerusalem, and had put them in the house
of his God Ezra. 1.7.11. Not regarding the monuments of his predecessors great
conquest, nor the dispoyling of his Gods of such bewtifull ornaments: nor the
departing with treasure of so great value. All these respects could not hinder
this King for restoring the vessels of the house of the Lord. Let our lord the
K. be no less minded to the house and Church of God: but let our lord the King
freely restore at once, to the Church and house of God the whole glorious power
of Christ the only King thereof, and perticulerly that most bewtifull ornament
of Election and ordination of the Bishops and deacons thereof, who ought to be
elected and ordained according to the rule of the holy ghost Act. 14.23. and
6.3. and who ought to be qualified withal and every one of those gifts and
graces set down up Th-appostle 1. Tim. 3. and Tit. 1. yea and their wives and
children also, or else it is grevious iniquity to choose them. And who must only
by their Office bear those names and titles which the holy ghost has given
them: and lead or rule by that power which Christ has appointed, and by those
laws, and ordinances: and live by those maintena^ces, if they stand need. And
will our lord the King change all these and many mo laws, statutes, and
ordinances, which Christ Jesus the mediator and King of the new Testament, has
appointed and ordained in his Church? Will the King take this power to himself
to Elect in such manner, and such men, as the King thinks good? And give
names, titles, and power such as best pleases the King? Has Jesus Christ with
his blood purchased to himself this honor to be the head of his Church? Ephesians.
5. And has he showed himself a faithfilll Mediator? And has he been accounted
worthy of more glory then Moses? And has he builded his own house himself?
Heb. 3. And shall he be dispoyled of all his honor? And will our lord the King
be entised by evil men to enter upon the inheritance of the Son of God, in
appointing and (by the Kings power) suffering to be appointed Lords and laws
in and over the house of God which are not according to the pattern? Which
lords, because Christ is not their buckler, nor faith their shield: nor the
sword of the spirit the weapon of their warfare, they have deceitfully seduced
our lord the King bringing themselves under his protection for their defense,
and getting the Ks. sword into their hands to destroy all that speak or write
against them, preferring their own Kingdom before either Christ's Kingdom, or
the kingdom and State of our lord the King as we have already showed unto the
King in that they with such loveing patience suffer and permit so many
thousands of Romists, who by their profession, and the practices of some of
them are dangerously opposite to the Kingdom of Christ, and to the King and
State: But these Lords Bs. Cannot in any wise endure one, that does faithfully
seek for reformation, because such are only adversaries to their kingdom.
We still pray our lord the King that we may be free from suspect, for having
any thoughts of provoking evil against them of the Romish religion, in regard
of their profession, if they be true and faithful subjects to the King for we
do freely profess, that our lord the King has no more power over their
consciences then over ours, and that is none at all: for our lord the King is
but an earthly King, and he has no aucthority as a King but in earthly causes,
and if the Kings people be obedient and true subjects, obeying all humane laws
made by the King, our lord the King can require no more: for men's religion to
God, is betwixt God and themselves; the King shall not answer for it, neither
may the King be iugd between God and man. Let them be heretics, Turcks, Jews,
or what soever it apperteynes not to the earthly power to punish them in the
least measure. This is made evident to our lord the King by the scriptures.
When Paul was brought before Gallio deputy of Achaia, and accused of the Jews
for persuading men to worship God contrary to the law. Gallio said unto the
Jews, if it were a matter of wrong or an evil deed, o ye Jews, I would
according to right mainteyne you, and he drove them from the judgment seat Act.
18.12.17. showing them that matters of wrong and evil deeds, which were
betwixt man and man apperteyned only to the judgment seat, and not questions
of religion. The like is showed by the Twne clerk of Ephesus in Act. 19.38.39.
And further Paul being in like case accused of many things Act. 24. in the
25. chap. he appeals to Cesars judgment seat, where he says he ought to be
judged approveing and justifieing thereby, that Cesars power and judgment seat
was the holy Ordinance of God: and our Savior Christ is himself obedient
thereunto, and comaunds and teaches his Disciples obedience: but this judgment
seat, and power which was of God, had nothing to do in the causes of the
Religion of God, as our lord the King may see: for if it had, then could not
our Savior Christ have commanded obedience thereunto, but he must have utterly
overthrown his own kingdom and power: Neither could Th'appostle Paul, have
said he ought to be judged at Cesars judgment seat if Caesar had, or might have
judged in causes of Religion to God, for then had he utterly overthrown the
Office of his Appostle-ship, and then had he submitted his Appostle-ship wholly
to the judgment of Caesar, and so had the power and aucthority of it, been
altogether destroyed, and made of no effect, which might in no wise be.

Now let our lord the K. (whose honor it is wisely to judge in things that
differ) judge, whether there be in these days, any other earthly power or any
other spiritual power, but the same that was in Christ and his Appostles
times, in which times, all earthly power, was in the hands of earthly Kings and
Princes, and them that were in aucthority under them, and Christ and his
Appostles diminished not Kings and Princes of the least tittle thereof. And all
spiritual power was in the hands of Christ and his Appostles, that were in
aucthority under him, of which spiritual power and aucthority, Christ nor his
Appostles would suffer no earthly K. to diminish them of the least tittle
thereof, but rather gave them their lives: if then our lord the K. do deserve
that earthly Kings and Princes, had the same power then that Kings and Princes
have now, and that Kings and Princes had no power then over men's religion,
which was spiritual and belonged to Christ: men were then to give unto God,
that which was Gods: and unto Caesar, and so unto all earthly Princes, only
that which apperteyned to them. Then let our lord the King judge by what warrant
of Gods word the King can now, take to himself a spiritual power, and set up
an Hyrarchy of Arch Bishop and Lord B. and give aucthority to them to make
laws and Canons of Religion, and to give them power to compel men unto the
obedience there of; by such seveer courses as they have done. Let our lord the
King consider (and the Lord give the K. wisdom therein) that if no King nor
Prince could have set up such an Hyrarchy, with such power and titles then, but
they had utterly trodden under foot all the dignity and power of Christ and his
Appostles (for Christ, and his Appostles must have been subject thereunto)
neither may any King set up such an Hyrarchy now, because it does utterly
tread under foot, all the dignity and power of Christ and his Appostles, as
well now, as it had done then: for we have now Christ and his Appostles in all
their power and dignity as well as they had in those days according to that
saying of our Savior Christ in the parable. They have Moses and the Prophetts.

And we humble beseech our lord the K. a little to suffer the foolishnes of
his servants, although we may seem as fools unto the king herein. If there
had been such a steaing Hyrarchy set up in Christ and Th-appostles days, would
the Hyrarchy have suffered us (that are thousands of the K. of great Brittans
subjects) to have gone to Christ and his Appostles to have asked them, whether
we should have obeyed them or no, in all their Canons and ordinances? And
whether we should have given the^ those titles of superiority, and all that
ruling power which they challeng over us the Kings subjects? sureby they will
say, they would not have denied us that liberty to have gone, in so weighty a
cause, and being so many, to have asked Counsel of Christ, and his Appostles,
what we should have done: 20. thousands being ignorant, and 10. thousands
being doubtful whether any such power might be submitted too or no; and
thousands being out of all doubt, that it might not be submitted unto; they
will say they would not have denied us: but we know what their Canons would
have made of it, and we may suspect justly, that they would have informed the
King that it were very dangerous to suffer so many to go unto Christ, and his
Appostles for counsel and that it were not fit to suffer such giddy heads to
have that liberty, for making rents and divisions: and that it were much more
safety, for the King to suffer them, to make all whole by their power, and to
subdue such busy refractary spirits. Let the King with favor suffer his
servants, thus to speak by the way, least peradventure any such things come
in the way. And we the Kings servants now taking it for granted that the Arch
Bs. and lord Bs. (that profess such great holiness) would not have deneyd us to
have gone to Jesus Christ and his Appostles to be directed. And if Christ and
his Appostles, had, (in the hearing of all our own ears, being so ma
witnesses) commanded us absolutely not to yield the Arch-Bs. and lord Bs. any
such power or names, could we yield it them? Although the Arch-Bs. and Lord Bs.
should (with 20. thousands of witnesses) affirm, that Christ and his Appostles
spoke otherwise, to their hearing. Would our lord the King think it equal,
that we should be forced to believe their hearing, because they are lord Bs.
contrary to the hearing of our own ears, and being so many witnesses of one
Nation and tongue, besides hundredth thousands of witnesses of other Nations and
tongues? We know our lord the K. would think it no more equal (if the case
were so) that we should be forced to believe the lord Bs. heari^g, then that
they should be forced to believe our hearing.

Then iugd O King, for the case is all one and the same: for we have Christ
and his Appostles in their writings, and they do absolutely speak to our
understandings, that in no wise there ought to be any such Hyrarchy of Arch
Bs. and Lord Bs. in Christ's Church. And the Lord Bs. say, that Christ and his
Appostles, speaks to their understandings, that there power and names are not
contrary to Christ's words. Can our lord the King (that is accounted a most wise
and just Prince in his judgment) judge, that we are all bound to cast away our
own understandings of Christ's speaking, and are to be compelled to believe and
understand Christ to speak, as the lord Bs. understand Christ's speaking? Oh
let our lord the King with compassion, consider, whether ever since the heavens
and earth were created, there was a more unequal extreme cruelty then this,
that the Kings people should be compelled (in a cause that concerns the
everlasting condemnation of their souls and bodies to Hell) of force to
submitt their souls and bodies to the understanding of the Lord Bs. that are
not able to direct themselves from the ways of death, but are perished every
man, that ever bare that Office with those names and power, if they repented
not thereof, although they had no other sin: and they also that do now bear
that Office with those titles and power shall likewise all perish to
everlasting destruction, if they do not repent thereof, and cast it away: the
spirit of the lord has spoken it Revel. 19.20. the Beast was taken, and with
him that false Prophet that wrought miracles before him, whereby he deceived
them that received the Beasts mark, and them that worshipped his jmage, these
both were cast alive into a lake of fire, burning with brimstone. And thus
manifesting to our lord the K. that Jesus Christ is only K. of Israel, that
sitts upon David's throne, and therefore only has the power of the King of
Israel, and none may partake with him in that kingdom and power, who had the
Spirit without measure: and yet neither he, nor his Appostles that had the
Spirit without error to deliver the Counsels of God, did ever by example,
practice, nor by rule comaund nor give power that any should be compelled by
any bodily punishment to obey their laws and Ordinances, which were infalibly
true holy, and good: How much less ought our lord the King to comaund, or give
a power to Arch-Bs. and lord Bs. (men full of the spirit of error) to make
laws and Canons with aucthority from the King to compel by imprisoment and
sharp persecutions, the Kings true subjects, and people of God unto the
obediente thereof: who for their religion to God (although they be contrary
minded to the K. therein) ought not (seeing they deserve not) to be punished
either with death or bonds: and this is confirmed to the K. by the testimony of
King Agrippa and noble Festus the governor, who adiuged Paul to have done
nothing worthy of death or bonds, but that he might have been loosed, if he had
not appealed to Caesar: and yet Paul was contrary minded to Caesar and to the
jews in his religion to God: But they judged him by the law of Nations: by
the power of which law, the Kings of the nations are to rule and judge,
according to their own several laws, against which law, Paul had not
transgressed for his cause was concerning the faith of Jesus Christ which could
not be judged by that law.

And let our lord the King give his servants leave to comend this to the Kings
best observatio^, which is worthy to be observed: that, where soever in the new
testament throughout, the professors of the faith of Jesus, were adjudged by
earthly rulers and Governors, for any thing that they did or held of
conscience, to God, and of faith to Jesus Christ, if earthly Rulers and
Governors took the cause in hand by their power, the judgment was alwaes
wicked and abominable. And if our lord the King will but begin his observation
at the forerunner of Christ, John Baptist, whom Herod put in prison and
beheaded. And then let the King come to Jesus Christ, whom they judged and
crucified, finding no evil he had done. And so if it please the K. to look
throughout the whole book of the Act. there the King knows how the disciples
of Christ, were imprisoned, threatened, beaten, stoned: The made Saul hauock
with his letters of Commission, and entered into every house and drew out both
men, and women and put them in prison. Then Herod stretched forth his hand and
vexed certain of the Church, and Killed James the brother of John with the
sword, and Caught Peter and put him in prison. Then were Paul and Sylas taken
at Philippi, by the Governors and people, and were sore beaten and cast into
prison, and the Iailer commanded to keep them surey, being charged to preach
Ordinances which were not lawful for the Romans to receive nor observe.

Here may our lord the King see a true pattern, how the people of God are
persecuted, when the Civil power does judge their cause of their faith, and
profession in their religion to God. Thus have worldly Governors dealt with the
Church of Christ, when the disciples fell under their censure for their faith
to God. And all these sentences of death, bonds, and persecutions the King can
iugd to be unjust and unlaw full, in that these Rulers and Governors had no
lawful power nor aucthority to judge Christ, nor his disciples for matters of
faith, they being in all other things obedient to their laws. But men will say
all this is answered in one word. They were heathen Rulers. Now if our lord the
K. will challeng a Prerogative or power, because. he professes Christ, then let
it be lawful for the King servants, to tell the King that it he will profess
to be a disciple of Christ, that gives the King no power to do any of all
these things to imprison, to banish, to put to death, that belongs only to
his earthly Kingdom: for Christ and Appostles had no such power given them:
neither taught they the disciples to take upon them any such power, and to
execute it upon the contrary minded, but taught them the contrary to instruct
the^ with meeknes, and by preaching the word seek their conversion, with all
long suffering, and not to destroy them by severe punishments: yea the
disciples of Christ must wait and labor for the grafting in again of the
Jews, according to the prophesies of the scriptures. Romans 11.24.27. and
therefore the King knows they may not be destroyed, although they be the
greatest enemies of Christ that are upon the earth, and have, and yet do cast
the greatest reproach and contempt upon Christ, with such words, as are most
fearful to utter: yet must the disciples of Christ wait for their conversion,
and not work their destruction. And let our lord the King call to mind, how
the Appostle Paul teaches all the disciples of Christ to be minded toward all
infidells Romans 1. 14.15. where he says. Iam debtor both to the Grecian and to
the Barbarian both to the wise and to the un wise. And the same Appostle 1.
Cor. 9.20.21.22. says, To the Jews I become as a Jew: to them that are under
the law, as though I were under the law: to them that are without the law as
though I were without the law: to the weak I become as weak, that I may wi^ne
the weak, I am made (says Th-appostle) all things to all men, that I might
by all means save some. All these instructions and directions, are for our
lord the King to direct the King how he should go in and out with holiness and
all meeknes before his people to win them to Christ: and not to set up a
Cruel Hyrarchy to make havoc of the K. people, (as. Saul did) pulling them
out of their houses both men and women: casting them into prisons: forceing
them to flee the land, and persecuting them with all cruelty. May the King
suffer all this to be done by his power, upon this ground of being a Christian
King? the Kings servants show the King yet once again in all humility, that
Christ the King did not so himself: he never appointed to be punished any one
man for desobeing his Gospel, with the least bodily punishment. And therefore
we instantly exhort our lord the King that the King would be no longer seduced
by those most dangerous deceivers, that have gotten the Kings power to punish
those, that Christ, the King of Israel would not punish: and that persuade the
King that the King has the same power in the Kingdom and over the house and
people of Christ, that the Kings of Israel had in that Kingdom, and over that
house, and people of God, as it was the Church of God.

We (according to our great weakness) have showed to our lord, the King before,
that the King cannot challeng that power, meaning only in respect of Religion.
And we will by the Kings favor repeat the substance, of the whole ground in
few words: and we beseech the King that we may the rather do it, in that the
whole cause depends thereon. And we repeat it unto the King in these few
words, which shall never be disanulled or made void, whilst the heavens and
earth endure: not because they are our words, God forbid, any such arrogancy
should possess our hearts: but they shall never be made void, neither shall
any ever be able to gainsay them with any show of truth, because they are
the words of the everlasting God of truth, whereby we show unto the King, that
the King cannot have that power (in respect of Religion to God) in the kingdom
and over the house and Israel or people of Christ now, that the Kings of
Israel had in the old Testament, or in the tune of the law. The ground we
repeat unto the King is this. That the kingdom of Israel was an earthly or
worldly kingdom: an earthly or worldly Temple, Tabernacle, or house: an
earthly or worldly people: and the King an earthly King, who in and over all
that kingdom, Temple, and people could require only earthly obedience. But
the kingdom of Christ now, is an heavenly kingdom not of this world: his
Temple, Tabernacle, or house an heavenly Temple, Tabernacle, or house, his
people, a heavenly, or spiritual people, not of this world: and the King
Christ Jesus a heavenly spiritual King. requiring spiritual obedience.

Therefore our lord the King can not as a King have any power over this
kingdom, Temple Tabernacle, house and People of God in respect of the Religion
of God: because our lord the King his kingdom is an earthly kingdom: and to
our lord the King belongs only all earthly obedience service, and duty, which
ought to suffice any earthly man. And the God of all Grace, give our lord the
King a gracious heart fully, to be satisfied and contented with that great honor
power and dignity that belongs unto the King and to give glory and honor to God
for it, that it may go well with the King and his posterity for ever. And the
God of heaven deliver the King from all such enchanters of Egypt, as shall
persuade the King to take upon him the power of the Kings of Israel, over the
Church of Christ, only for the setting up, and supporting of their High Priest
hood with vrim, and Thummim, with Pomp, and power: and the Leviticall
revenewes of Israel, which they challeng and hold as apperteyning thereunto
forceing the Kings people by cruelty to obey them, as though with them only
remained, the oracles of God.

And now if they will show any manner of vprightnes unto God, or faithfulness
to the King or any regard to Gods people, let them not mainteyne their
kingdom, which they have obtained of the King by deceit and flatteries, as is
prophesied Dan. 11.21. Let them not mainteyne it by the Kings sword and power:
but let them come forth with that sword and power, whereof they glory so much,
and use so little, and mainteyne their names power and cruelty with it, and we
profess before God, and the whole host of heaven: and before our Lord the
King and all his people, that if they can prove evidently to our consciences by
the holy word of God, that we may obey them in all their Canons and decrees,
and give them those names and titles, without the everlasting destruction of
our souls and bodies in hell: yea if they can but prove that we ought to rest
or depend upon their iugdments and understandings in the exposition of any one
part of Gods word: or that they have power to ordeyne and appoint any one
Ordinance, or the manner of administering any one Ordinance in the worship of
God and Church of Christ, we profess. unto our lord the King we will yield
them all the obedience they require. But if they will prove these things only
by Conuotation Canons, how can our lord the King require that the Kings
servants should dishonor God, by casting his holy truth away, and with it the
salvation of our souls, and depend upon their Canons, and yield them
obedience, and perish both in souls and bodies. We have rather chosen thus to
say down our lives at the feet of our lord the King in presenting the cause
into the Kings presence. Saying with Ester. If, we perish, we perish for coming
thus boldly uncalled into the Kings presence: but we will wait with hope and
expectation, that through the gracious work of the lord, the King will hold
forth his golden rod, that we may live: and not so only but also that by the
Kings means comfort and delivrance shall appear unto Israel. And that our
lord the King will say, as that great King of Persia said, Ezra. 1.2. The lord
God of heaven has given me many Kingdoms of the earth, and has commanded me
to build him an house in Jerusalem, who is he amongst you of all his people,
with whom his God is, let him go to Jerusalem and build the house of the lord
God of Israel. And as King Darius said, Ezra. 6.7.16. Suffer the work of the
house of God, that the Israelites may build this house of God in his place,
that they may offer sweet odours unto the God of heaven, and pray for the Kings
life and for his sons. And as Artahshashte King of Persia said Ezra. 7.23.
what soever is by the commandment of the God of heaven; let it be done spedily
for the house of the God of heaven, for why should he be wroath against the
Realm of the King, and his children.

Thus beseeching the director of all hearts to direct the Kings heart in these
things, we continue praying for the King and his Son, and the Kings Realms
and children. That the King and his seed, to Gods glory, may sit upon the
throne of Great Brittane whilst the earth endures, possessing from God,
wisdom and Riches, and Honor befitting the dignity of their high Renown: and
that they may walk in the ways of god that god according to his promise may
prolong their days. And the Lord give all the Kings people faithful, upright,
and honest hearts, that they may all with one heart as one man. Fear God: and
Honor and obey the King, with all the honor and obedience that has, or can be
due to any earthly King or Prince, which is, all earthly and worldly obedience
with lands goods, body, and life.

And we most humbly supplicate our Lord the King and all the honorable and
worthy Governors under the King that they will not suffer them selves to be
missed in judgment in condemning us as movers of Sedition, and our books for
seditions books, because we differ from the recieved profession of Religion
in the land, but that they will according to that great gravity and wisdom
that is upon them, wey what Sedition is, and they will easly find that to
profess and teach a differing judgment in Religion to the State, cannot be
proved Sedition: for then had our Savior Christ, and all his Disciples been
found seditious persons, which never could be proved against them: neither
could Tertullus with all his Oratory prove Paul a mover of Sedition to Felix
the Governor who was willing to pleasure the Jews in this matter Act. 24. if
he could have found any advantage against Paul: but under all that excellent
and mighty Government of Caesar, under whom there was so many wise Kings and
noble Governors, difference in Religion could never be proved Sedition against
the S^ate. Neither could it ever be proved Sedition in all or any of those
that differed from the profession of Religion established in Q. Mary's days
although they taught and professed the same as even the Lord B. them selves
will confess.

And it is neither accounted nor found Sedition, in diverse excellent well
Governed Nations round about, to profess and teach a differing judgment in
Religion from the profession generally established, as our Lord the King and
all his worthy Governors see and know. It is but the false surmise and
accusation of the Scribes and Phariseis, who feared their own kingdom: and of
Demetrius the Silver-smith with the Craftsmen, whose Craft was in danger,
whereby they got their goods Act. 19. they them selves raised tumults and
moved Sedition, and ever laid the blame upon the Disciples: even so is it now
and ever will be, that such as fear their own kingdom and private gain, do,
and will falsely accuse the Disciples of Christ as movers of Sedition against
the State. And if the lord Bs. will not be found false accusers herein, as
their predecessors have been, the^ let the^ (if they can) forbear to accuse
before they have cause.

But let them take heed least when they shall see fyve in one house divided,
three against two, and two against three, the father divided against the son,
and the son against the father ect. let them take heed, they call not that
Sedetion, if they do, they shall call Christ a sower of Sedetion, for what was
his disire, but that the fire of such Sedetion should be kindled Luke
12.49.52.53. And may it please our Lord the King and all that are in authority
of Government under the King, with their wise judgment to consider that it will be
a straing thing to condemn men for Sedetion, who profess and teach that in
all earthly things, the Kings power is to be submitted unto: and in heavenly
or spiritual things, if the King or any in authority under him shall
exercise their power against any, they are not to resist, by any way or
means although it were in their power, but rather submitt to give their lives,
as Christ and his Disciples did, and yet keep their consciences to God: and
they that teach any other Doctrine, let them be held accursed.

WE being yet (through the help of our God) most disirous to a wake^ all you
of our own Nation out of that dead securiy, and spiritual slumber, wherein as
in the Sea, you are all over whelmed, and finding no better nor any so fit
portion of Gods word to effect these our unfeigned disires, as this prophecy of
our Savior Christ Mat. 24.15. which prophesies of days of so great
tribulation: and it is repeated Mark. 13. and Luke 17. and Luke 21. all which
places of the Evangelists must be most carefully and diligently compared
together, because the wise reader shall find (by good observation) that there
are 4. Prophesies of our Savior Christ's, by the Evangelists set down
together, which are, 1. the destruction of Jerusalem 2.ly the days of the
exaltation of the man of sin, seen and discovered 3.ly the days of the Son of
Man, in the brightness of his coming for the consuming and abolishing of the
Mystery of Iniquity; the abomination of desolation, the Man of sin. And lastly
the day of Christ's coming to judgment.

Every one of these Prophesies must be diversely considered of, with their
proper apperteynings, for the true and holy understanding thereof, and not
confounded together. Two whereof, we have, and shall (by the grace of God)
speak of, as God shall enable us 1. the exaltation seen and discovered, and
the dangers of those days 2.ly of the days of the Son of Man in the
brightness of his coming, for the consuming of the Man of sin, as being most
fit Scriptures to stir you up, to the consideration of your spiritual estates
and standings, and to direct you therein (the Scriptures we mean, not we) if
you will not harden your necks and perish in the ways of death and sin.

And as we have endeauored to proboake you to look up, that you might see the
abomination of desolation set up in the holy place, and how the kingdom of
the Man of sin is even within you all that submitt your selves in any
obedience to the power of the first, or second Beast, bearing the Beasts mark,
or the print of his name: so shall we also be willing, with the help of our
God, to stir you up to consider of the great danger that our savior Christ
has fore-shewed shall be in these days, when men see the abomination of
desolation set up, and according to our Saviors exhortation begin to flee, as
all that have eyes may see, men now begin to do. The danger that Christ
foretold of, is: that in those days (which are these days) many shall come
(who now are come) in Christ's name, and say: Lo here is Christ, Lo there is
Christ: and many false Christ shall arise, and many false Prophetts, and
shall show great signs and wonders so as if were possible, they should
deceive the very elect. Way then with your selves whether you had not need to
consider, when the days are so dangerous and perilous, as if it were possible
the very elect should be deceived: such is the danger of these days, by reason
of the false professions of Christ, and false Prophetts that do arise. And
seeing the false Prophetts are the Teachers and mainteyners of the false
professions, we shall endeavor to discover them both under one, and will only
speak of such false Prophetts, and professions as are amongst you, and known
to you, not burthening you with the multitude of straing and forreyn false
Prophetts and false professions that are in the world; whereof we generally
admonish you to beware of; but it is full time that you took to those false
professions and false Prophetts that are among you, if you have any regard at
all of Gods glory, or the salvation of your own souls.

And seeing we cannot speak of the false Christ's, or false professions of
Christ that are amongst you, but we must name them, we pray it may not be
offensive that we term them by such names and titles, as men distinguish
them.

The first where of is, that great, and so much applauded profession of
Puritanisme. The which profession to prove it is a false profession, yea and
such a false profession, as we know not the like upon the earth, we shall not
need to produce any testimony but your own: for whereas in your so many
books, you cry out of the things that are amiss among you, and sue, and
supplicate, and yet still continue in your former ways, you testify hereby
against your selves, that you are unreformed, and that there is a way of
reformation, wherein you would be, if you might have leave or license to enter
thereinto: which seeing you cannot obtain, you justify it lawful to walk in
an unreformed profession of Religion, upon this ground because you may not have
leave by act of Parliament to reform. What falser profession can be found upon
the earth then this of yours, who profess that you know a way of much truth
where in you would walk, but you do not, because you cannot by the superior
power be permitted.

Let this suffice in this place to prove that you walk in a false profession
of Christ, by your own acknowledgment, calling daily for liberty that you
might reform your selves, but seeing it will not be granted; you go on in the
false way you disaprove of. Your grounds and reasons we shall hereafter (by
Gods assistance) try: but in the mean time let Gods people know, that there
will never warrant be found, to give men liberty for any time, to deferr to
eschew evil, and to refrain to do good, for fear of men, or in obedience
unto men, or under any pretense what soever. Most wicked and false is that
profession; and most false Prophetts are all those that profess and teath such
a doctrine that men are not bound without any delay, al respects laid aside,
with all speed to eschew evil and do good, as that true Prophett, David did,
and taught who says, Psalm. 119.60. I made haist and delayed not, to keep thy
comaundements. And so we proceed to show that all your Puritan Prophetts (so
called) are false Prophetts, and such as our Savior Christ fortells of, who
say, Lo Here is Christ, but comaunds, believe them not.

And although we might prove you all false Prophetts because you teach many
false doctrines, yet we hold it the most easy and plain way, for the
understanding of all to show you to be false Prophetts, because you are not
sent, nor called of God, and herein shall you have the least deceaveable show
for your selves.

But before we speak of your not being called and sent of God (which must
appear by your Election and ordination unto the Office or work of a Bishop or
Pastor, for other Prophetts we know none amongst you) we will set down the
gifts and graces, wherewith they are to be qualified, that are to be elected
and ordained, and undertake that Office: as also how their wives and children
are to be qualified And these are the words of him that said, Let there be
light, and there was light. And of him that said thou shall have no other Gods
before my face, and of the Lawgiver, all whose laws are perfect laws.

These are his words, and this is his law. Let a Bishop or Pastor be the
husband of one wife, watching, temperate, modest, harborous, apt to teach, and
able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and to convince them that say against
it, nor given to wine; no striker, not given to filthy lucre, but gentle, no
fighter not covetous, one that can rule his own house honestly, having
children under obedience withal reverence. Let him not be a young Disciple, or
newly planted in. Let him be well reported of, even of them that are without.
Let his wife be honest, no evil speaker, sober, faithful in all things. This
is the law of God 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. according to this law, in every
particular, must a Bishop or Pastor, and his wife, and children be qualified
for it is the law of the perfect lawgiver. And thou shall have no other Bishop
or Pastor before his face. This we set down to put you and the people of God
in mind to look first, that you their Bishops or Pastors be thus qualified,
for all that are not so both in them selves, and their wives and children are
not sent of God to be Pastors of his flock, but are false Prophetts in the
first degree, for God sends none but those that are according to his own
rule: and hereby may you see that every holy man and excellent preacher may not
be a Bishop and Pastor over the house of God.

And now Election and Ordination, which is the door and way, whereby the true
Bishops and Pastors of the flock do enter. The holy ghost does teach. Act.
14.23. that election and Ordination were performed in and by the Church or
Congregation with fasting and prayer: this is the door and way, and all that
have entered by any other way, are theves and robbers, as our Savior Christ
testifies Ioh. 10. Are you not all now at once convinced? and must you not all
be forced to confess that you have no such Election nor Ordination? is your
purchased Election of Patrons either particular men, or of deane and Echapter,
or some College* or the private Election of some friend like unto this holy
order of Election, which Christ has appointed in his Church, to be made with
the gracious free and full consent of every heart and tongue in the whole
congregation? how woeful and wretched is the estate of you all (if you repent
not) that join in this great wickedness to deprive the Church of Christ of such
a blessed and comfortable ordinance of Christ, how blessed and confortable a
thing were it, for a holy people so to Elect their Pastors that should lead
them, and feed them with the wholesome word of doctrine and Exhortation, and
watch over their souls in the lord.

And what a blessed comfort were it for a holy man to be so elected of a holy
people: so should a Godly people have holy Pastors over them, whom they would
all love and reverence: and so should Godly Pastors have a holy people to
follow them whom they would carefully feed and cherish, and this is the
Ordinance of God, and law of Election: but to get an Election for money either
of a man's own, or of his friends, or by private favor or friendship or
beholdinges to men, and so corruptly to become a Pastor over a flock of people
diversely affected, and many openly profane and wicked, here is an unholy
Election of an unholy Pastor, over a corrupt and unholy flock, this is not to
enter in by the door but to clyme up another way, which seeing you all do, not
any one of you entering by that holy Election which Christ has appointed,
Christ him self has adjudged you all, not to be the shepherds of the sheep,
but to be thieves and robbers.

And thus are you all false Prophetts: how shall you be able to stand before
the lord in this matter? or how can you justify your selves before men? will
you make the word of the lord of no effect, and bless your selves in your own
ways, if you shall still do so, as you have long done, yet shall you not be
blessed of the lord, in that you do herein violate and utterly abolish that
holy law of Election, which Christ has ordained in his Church for the choosing
of the true shepherds of his sheep, and for the keeping of thieves and robbers
out of his shepefold.

Next in order to be spoken of is Ordination, a holy ordinance of God, commanded
by the holy ghost Tit. 1.5. and the example of the administration thereof,
given us by th-Appostles in the church of Christ Act. 6.6. and practiced by the
disciples Act. 13.1.3 And taught us to be a doctrine of the beginings of
Christ, and of the foundation Heb. 6.1.2. being called the Doctrine of laying
on of hands. And this Ordinance was performed and done in the presence of the
Church or congregation by fasting and prayer and laying on of hands, ordeyning,
and appointing, and seperating thereby those that were Elected and chosen to
Office Act. 6.6. and 13.2.3. and 14.23. And all this was performed and done by,
and in that Congregation whereof they were chosen Officers, the Church or
Congregation being in this holy manner assembled together to perform this
(...) ordinance all fasting and praing to the lord with one heart and soul to
give a blessing unto that his own Ordinance.

Is your Ordination like unto this? which the best of you all are feign to get
by suit and service, by riding and running, by attending and waiting, by Capping
and curtseing, and at last by prostrating your selves on your knees at the feet
of an Archbishop or lord Bishopp receiving your Ordination from him, who
herein exaltes him self above God, exercising the power of the beast,
dispoyling Christ and his Church of this holy Ordinance taking it wholly into
their own power, and disposing of it only to such as promise faith full
obedience unto the Hyrarchy of Archbishop, and lord Bishop which is the second
Beast, and which your selves say, both in words and writings is an
Antichristian Hyrarchy. The lord give you eyes to see how you have broken the
Covenant of the lord in polluting and abolishing this his holy Ordinance, and
be ashamed to remember the Covenant you have made with this Hyrarchy, by which
Covenant of obedience you have gotten your Ordination, and so are the Prophetts
of the Beast: for to whom soever you give your selves to obey, his servant you
are to whom you obey.

Romans 6.6. although you deny him in words as you do. Have you gotten an Office
of the Hyrarchy, and under the Hyrarchy, and will you in words and writings
protest against the Hyrarchy, and yet reteyne your Office, which you have
gotten by promissing obedience thereunto? and think you to serve Christ with
this your stolen Office? Halt not so between Christ and the Man of sin: but
if you will deny your lords that have preferred you to Office, deny their
Office also, in both which you shall do well, but if you will reteyne your
Office reteyne your Lords also that have preferred you, in both which you shall
do evil. What conscionable answer will you make to these things? dare any
affirm that Christ has appointed such an Ordination, either in the manner of
administration, or in the means of coming by it? has Christ appointed you to
sue, and make means to a Prelate and ride many miles with letters of
comendations, and pay all fees that are due (we speak within our compass) to
get Ordination? Did Th-appostles ever ordeyne Pastor but before, or in the
presence of the flock? did any ever go and sue or seek to Th-appostles to be
ordained? and when any were ordained did they kneel down at Th-appostles
feet? and did Th-appostles bid them receive the holy ghost? is this the manner
and means set down in the scriptures of coming by Ordination? and if it be
not, how dare you seek and submitt your selves to it. Will you say that Christ
has appointed no certain due order and means of Ordination? then do you
blaspheme in saieing the rules and examples of the new Testament are uncertain
rules of direction, and so make you Christ not so faithful as Moses. Is the
holy Ordinance of laying on of hands one of the doctrines of the foundation
Heb. 6.1.2. and may it be come by, by any means, or from any persons yea
even from the Pope? and you approve of it as you do, seeing you have no
Ministry but from Rome, it is the root from whence all your Ministry is
sprung, and the Wild Olive wherein you are all by your Ordination engrafted:
and therefore as the root is, such are the branches: and the root you all
confess is most unholy, and so does the lord judge you, you evil servants out
of your own months, you are all most unholy, and false Prophetts, the
Prophetts of the Beast, and not of Christ in that you are not Elected, and
Ordained by the rules of Christ and have not the word of God nor testimony of
your flocks for your true entrance.

What can you now have to say for this your Office thus unjustly come by?
except you will plead possession (how unjustly soever it be come by) for a good
title, and so justify Ahabs possession of Naboths vineyard, when Iezabell had
slain the right owner thereof. As the lord lives, no less, but much more is
the wickedness of your possession, in that the Beast has trodden under foot and
crucified the Son of God Revel. 11.8. and sitts as God in the Temple of God,
and has appointed you his Priests to serve at the Alter, and thus have you
consented together in evil, and trample under foot the Testament which Christ
has purchased with his blood, and have broken into the sheepfold of the lord
like thieves and robbers and do nothing but steal, kill, and destroy: for you
distroy all the people that submitt to your Ministry, in that you bring them
thereby under the power of the Beast, you having fallen down on your knees
and worshipped the Beast, receiving your spirit and Office from the Beast, and
the people are all partakers of this sin in that they admit of you in your
Office, and thereby yield that power which Christ has reserved, in his own
body, (which is his Church) unto the Beast: so are you all dispisers of the law
of God, and have given away his holy Ordinance of Election and Ordination,
which he has by his own word and Spirit appointed in his Church you have
given Christ's honor herein unto the Beast: and so are all both Priests and
people worshippers of the Beast and his jmage, and have received his mark, and
therefore shall you all drink of the mere wine of the wrath of God, if you
repent not Revel. 14.9.10.

And thus much to the ministry of the Puritan profession, to prove them all
false Prophetts, as those that run and God has not sent them, their Election
and Ordination to their Office, and their possession of their Office being most
unholy and unjust, not being according to the exact rule of the law of Christ
Jesus distinctly and most perfectly set down in the new Testament, which he
has purchased and sealed unto us, with his blood, to stand for a law of
Election and Ordination for ever: unto which whosoever adds or takes away
either in word or action, by Doctrine or example, the Lord will add unto them.
all his judgments, and take away all his mercies Revel. 22.18.19.

You being thus by the word of truth all declared and proved to be false
Prophetts, not having entered into the shepefold by the door, it must needs
follow according to the words of the Lord, that all the great signs and
wonders that you show in this your false ministry are lying signs and wonders.

Let it not be grevious unto you to hear of these things whereby to provoake
you to wrath, but let it be grevious to you, that you thus sin, and so be
provoaked to indignation against your selves, that you may come to repentance.

Here is all your Zeal of wonder, and signs of so great fervency, whereby you
work upon the blind consciences and ignorant affections of the simple deceaved
souls, proved to be false and deceaveable: all your fire wherewith you kindle
the hearts of men, and seduce simple women, making them believe you have
brought it from heaven, all this is but the false enlightening and heat of a
false spirit, even of that spirit which your spiritual Lord breathed upon you,
when you kneeled on your knees before him, and he laid his hands upon you, and
most blasphemously, even in the high dishonor of the spirit of grace, bad you
receive the holy ghost, by and in the power of this spirit do you preach and
pray, and do all your great wonders, and other spirit have you none, for this
is the spirit to which you have submitted, and by this spirit only are you
sent, and therefore are you all false Propheets, and you have not the spirit of
God abiding in you, ye are gone out of the way, ye have caused many to fall,
ye have broken the Covenant of levi, in that you are admitted to the Order of
Priesthood by the Man of sin who is an adversary against God, to whose
blasphemous consecrating of Priests directly contrary and opposite to the holy
established ordinance of Jesus Christ in the Gospel ^ the spirit of God can
give no approbation (...), neither admit of such to be the Prophetts of God
(that have not entered by Christ the true door and way, but have entered by him
that sitts as God in the Temple of God) but adiudgeth you all to be false
Prophetts.

Leave of therefore your great days of humiliation by fasting and prayer,
wherein sometimes you make the people to Cover the Alter with tears, and
whereby some of you have taken upon you to cast out many Devils, goeing on to
the hight in showing signs and lying wonders, to deceave if it were possible
the very Elect according to the prophecy of Christ which is thus fulfilled in
you. Kindle fire upon the alter of the Lord no more in vain, the Lord has no
pleasure in you. neither will accept an Offering at your hand, but will curse
you as deceavers, who vow a holy Offering, but bring a Corrupt Sacrifice unto
the Lord Mala. 1.14. and all this you do, and shall do, so long as you serve in
your Office and Ministry, received by the power and authority of the Man of
sin, contrary to the holy Ordinance of Election and ordination appointed by
Christ in the new Testament.

And now al these things we dare not but think you have done, and do through
ignorance. Amend your lives therefore and turn, that these your great and
grevious sins may be put away, when the time off refreshing shall come from
the presence of the Lord. And take heed both you, and all the people that do
with such admiration run after you, as we our selves have done (we speak
it to our own shame) take heed least that now your ignorant zeal and fiery
spirits of error wherewith you have enflamed the hearts off the simple, being
discovered, take heed least you boil in great heat, and gnawe your tongues for
sorrow, and blaspheme the God of heaven for your pains, and for your sores,
and repent not of your works, as is prophesied men shall do, Revel. 16.9-11.
From which hiest measure off sin the Lord for his Christ's sake deliver you,
and through Gods grace we will hope better things off you, which the Lord
grant we may find in you, for the Lord knows our unfeigned hearts disire is,
that you might al be saved. And we exhort the people off God no longer to
harken to the voice off straingers, but that they flee from them, according to
the Counsel of our Savior Jesus Christ. Ioh. 10.5. And let the people see with
their own eyes, how you have al showed your selves to be hirelings, which are
not the Shepherds, neither the sheep are your own, in that seeing the wolf
coming, you have fledd, and left the sheep, nay many of you even of those
that are accounted most faithful and holy, have, and do go your selves and lead
Your flocks to hear the voice of strangers that are set up, and stand up in
that Office, and public place, which you challeng for your own, and are glad
your selves to preach in corners: Others of you make a secret composition with
the Hyrarchy (which you profess to abhor) and then heir some wretched man
under you, to surplice and cross, and sin for you. Oh how hateful and
abominable are the works off darkness of this kind, which are done off you in
the light, and all this under a great seeming show off holiness, but is mere
hypocrisy and dissimu^ation because you are hirelings and not good shepeherds,
who would lay down their lives for their sheep, rather then lead them into
the hand of the destroyer: and if you deny them to be thieves and robbers that
come into your places, and are made pastors over your flocks, against your
wills, and against the mind off the flock: then must you needs acknowledge them
true shepeherds over the flock, and that they have come in by the door, and
acknowledge your selves justly thrust out, seeing you in your judgments hold but
one Pastor over a flock.

We will not follow you in these perticulers, except further occation be
offered. But remember how you compare your fellow Priests to Circumcellions or
Friars, goeing up and down with the bishops bulls like beggars, to see where
they can get entertainment and see not all this while your selves, yea some of
your chief spirits for working lying wonders, stand in the market place to be
hired from the East to the west, and to be transported from North to South,
wheresoever you can get a good Town pulpit, or a privileged Chapel a great
Chamber or dyning parlor to administer in, how profane soever the Town or
household be, you will not let to make the^ all partakers of the holy things at
first, before you know your sheep, or your sheep know you, contrary to
Christ's own works. Ioh. 10.14. And all the power you have to administer is, by
the authority of the Bishops bull, which you have in so great contempt, and yet
it is all the seal of your admittance to your ministry, and warrant for your
administration therein, a most sit warrant for such administrations. Oh that
you could see these things, if you have any, the least love of God in you
cast of al these abominations, and become the disciples of Christ, and preach
Christ in his own ordinance as his disciples did. Act. 11.19. which if you will
not do, bu^ run on in the heat of your blind zeal in this your false
ministry, the^ shall you be found to be those false prophets that come in
shepes clothing, of whom our Savior Christ has fore told, Mat. 7.22. that
shall say, Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied? and by thy name cast
out Devils? and by thy name done many great works? To whom he will answer: I
never knew you. depart from me ye that work iniquity. Let this suffice to
have proved by Gods word, that your Election and Ordination to the Office off
your ministry is not off God: and that you have not entered in by the door,
but have climed up another way, and therefore are thieves and robbers, false
Prophets, hierlings, straingers, whose voices Christ's sheep know not, but
they flee from you and will not follow you. Ioh. 10.5. And by this are all they
that hear you, and follow you, most plainly proved up the most evident words
off Christ, that they are no one of them his sheep: for he says: His Sheep
know his voice, and follow him, and they will not follow a strainger, for
they know not his voice. And this is all the comfort that Gods word does afford
any one of you in your flocks that follow you, they are not Christ's Sheep.
And this is all the comfort that the people can have off you. You are not
Christ's Sheepherds: so are you like people like Priest, like Sheepherds like
Sheep. And you shall perish every Man for teaching and drawing them after
you, because you are false Prophetts and are not sent of God: and the People
shall perish every one off them, for hearing and following you because you are
straingers and hirelings* if you and they repent not Luke 13.3. This is the
word off the Lord, the which you shall neither al nor any one off you be able
to gainsay, for you shall never be able whilst heaven and Earth endures to
make any show from Gods word for your entrance into your Office off ministry,
and then are you utterly confounded in all your ways, and all the people that
follow you.

We have spoken sharply unto you as it may be thought, and if we have not
we had need, seeing you have been so often spoken unto, off this your false
ministry, and that with excellent words, and yet you have not regard^, which
might discomfort us in you and discorage us in our own simple playnnes: But
the love of Gods glory which (through his grace) we hold most precious, and
the longing disire off our souls after your salvation: and the salvation of
this whole land which is so dear unto us, and we so much wish and pray for:
And the hope and assurance we have of Gods mercy and power to prevail by
weak means, these causes have stirred us up, driven us on, and encoraged us
to speak thus unto you. And we pray you by the name off Jesus, that as there
is any purpose off heart in you to fear God, and walke-in his ways, or any
love in you to this people, whom you are bound so much to regard, with all
faithful carefulnes, make haist to reform your own ways, and to inform this
people in the way to life, and salvation, according to the strict rule off Gods
word, and do not still lead them on in the way to death and condemnation,
according to the new inventions off your own hearts, and old traditions off
other men.

We will now return to speak a few words off your ground, and reasons (or
rather excuses) that cause you to undergo these things whereoff you cry out so
much for reformation. One (...): because it is under a Christian King. We
demand off you, how if the King should bid you truly inform him, whether it
were more lawful for a Christian King to restrain the Church off some off the
Ordinances which Christ has appointed, then for a Heathen King? It can not be
that you would tell the King that a Christian King might more Lawfully do such
evil, then a Heathen King, if you should, you would make Christianity a
liberty ^o sin, which may not be: why then if a Christian King may not more
lawfully do such evil (evil sure you hold it to be, else why cry you out so much
for reformation) neither may you more lawfully obey him in such evil, then a
heathen King. Leave off such deceitful pretenses and vain ymaginations for
the which if you should be required warrant out off Gods Word, you would
easily see that it is but an excuse off a false show. The Disciples off
Christ, who were most obedient subjects, and taught you and us all obedience
unto our King, yet they would not be restrained in the causes off God, but
chose rather to obey God then men, and rather to suffer imprisonment and
beating, then to be restrained either of preaching or practicing any off the
ways off God although they were commanded, imprisoned and beaten by the High
Priest, the Counsel, and all the Elders off Israel that were no heathen
Governors. Act. 5. Those were faithful disciples and were content to obey in all
sufferings And such obedience should you have submitted unto, if your hearts
had been upright to God and the King herein: but you have al been found
deceitful upon the weights and lighter then vanity it selff in these things
when you came to trial, and have dawbed with untempered mortar, and no marvil
though you fell, because the lord was not your strength in that you sought not
the right way, but would have established a Presbitary Hyrarchie, and a
decreing Synod, which would have been no more pleasing to God then an Hyrarchie
off Arch Bishops and Lord Bishops, and a Canonical Convocatio^ house: for they
have both one mind with the Beast, and give the right hand off fellowship one
to another, seeking and exercising one power, which is, to rule over men's
consciences by their own laws and decrees. Therefore strive no more for that
your way. the Lord will ever be against you in it: For if a Ruling Presbitary
by their Synodal decrees and ordinances be lawful, then why not a Ruling
Prelacy by Convocation Canons lawful? and then why not a Ruling Pope? These
are all off one Condition in their degrees, and not any one of them more
pleasing to God then another, although they be every one more sinful in their
degrees then other, yet they al abolish Christ's ruling power: but if they
repent not, Christ will crush them with a septer of iron, and break them in
pieces like a potters vessel. and will rule his people with his Septer of
righteousness.

Your next ground and cause off undergoing these things, you so much dislike,
is, because you are loath to break the peace of the Church. Where you have
learned to undergo sin for peace sake we know not but sure we are of God you
have not learned it. Paul and Barnabas had not learned your lesson therein, for
if they had, they would not have made such great dissension in the Church at
Antiochia as they did about the doctrine of circumcision: If Paul had been of
your peaceable mynds, he would (seeing he had suffered Tymothy to be circumcised
for peace sake) also have suffered a little the doctrine of circu^cisio^, but
he would not. Furthermore Thapostle comaunds the Church. Ro^. 16.17. To avoid,
or have no fellowship with those that cause division and offenses contrary to
the doctrine which they had learned. And the same Apostle warnes the These. (2.
These. 3.6) In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ that they withdraw themselves
from every brother that walks inordinately' and not after the instruction
which they had received. Now if there be in you any conscience of the Religion
of God, see how corruptly you walk in these things, making a show of godliness
but denying the power thereof. Do not your brethren the Archbishops and
Lordbishops with Archdeacons, Chacellors, and the rest, cause divisions and
offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned? and do they not walk
inordinately and worse too, and not after the instructions that both you, and
they have received of Thapostles? how then is it, that you will not (according
to the Apostles comaundment, exhortation, and so strait warning) avoid them,
and have no fellowship with them, and with draw your selves from them? is this
your peace a Godly peace? which is so contrary to the whole word of God.
Besides this we must tell you (bear it patiently) that it is but ignorant
dissimulation in you to say, you undergo all these things because you would
not break the peace off the Church, for if you did so much tender the peace
off the Church as you pretend, and that you would not have your beloved stirred
up, nor wakened before she please, why then have you written so many books
off open contempt? Why have you sought so much, and made challenge for
disputations, why do you make so many loud outcries and daily complaints and
tedious Parliament suites? How can you possibly device more unpeaceable
courses, except you should raise tumults contrary to the law of God and of the
King (which we know is not in your thoughts) you can no way device to be more
unpeaceable: Had it not been a much more peaceable course quietly to have
separated with love and humility; then to have stirred up so much bitter strife
in the bosom off the Church whose peace you pretend so much is regard. Oh that
you could see that it is your own peace that you respect in all this. For what
breatch off peace had it been in the Church, if you al had peaceably
withdrawn yourselves, and loveingly admonished the Church holding it a true
Church as you do, had it not been much more peace, and much less troble for
the Church if you had so done? There is no question it had: but whether your
peace and profit would have followed, is the question, and take heed that be
not the cause of your ( for peace as you call it) undergoing off these things.
We could speak largly of this point, but we spare you, only wishing you not
to persuade your selves, nor to make the people think that you have suffered
great things, whilst you eat the fat of the Land, but know this, all you that
eat any bread from whose hands soever, by, or in respect of your Office of
ministry, that you feed off the portion of his meat, whom you seek to
destroy, fulfilling the prophecy of Dan. 11.26. Where he prophesies of the
destruction of the Man of sin, saying They that feed of the portion of his
meat shall destroy him. And may not the simple understand, that you getting your
bread by that Office, which Office (as is proved) you have and execute by the
power and under the authority of the man of sin, you feed of the portion of
his meat, serving at his alter, and so eat you of the things that apperteyne
to that Alter, you gayning them by that Office. And let all the poople know of
all Estates and degrees whatsoever that give you any maintenance or
entertainment in respect of that Office, entertaning you as Prophets, they shall
never receive a Prophets reward, but sin against God, in maintening and
entertaning false Prophets, although they be as full off good meanings as the
Papists are in entertaning their priests. We have not the least intent herein
of diswading any from doing good unto you, but that they should not receive
you, nor give you a Cup of cold water in the name of Prophets, for all their
liberality bestowed upon you in that regard shall never receive recompense of
reward at Gods hands, seeing you are all false Prophets, and so adjudged by
Christ himself in that you have not entered by Christ into the sheepfold. And
if you shall any of you open your mouethes to defend your selves herein, the
word of the Lord shall convince you, and stopp your mouths, that you shall not
be able to speak with any understanding. And now we advise you to be
ashamed, to plead that you do undergo these things for the peace off the
Church, except you will hold your peace: For you are wise enough to know that
there is no other way to break the inward peace of the Church, which peace you
must needs mean, for it is not in your powers nor hearts, to break the
outward peace of the Church, and there is no other way to break the inward
peace of the Church, but by words and writings of opposition and contention,
and making devision, al which you have practiced to the uttermost of your
powers, and when for fear of your own peace you durst go no further, then
have you set out your books of unknown Authors (which therein are no better
then Libels) wherein you have no regard what troubles and dissentions you make
in the Church so you can preserve your own peace. And thus do you maintain by all force and violence of contention a most troblesome civil war, which of all
is most dangerous in Church and Common wealth, and yet you profess you suffer
and undergo al these evils you complain of, because you tender the peace of
the Church, and so through ignorance you fall into great dissimulation and
hypocrisy, it being (if you could see) only your own peace you seek, and
therefore it is you undergo these things that you disaprove off: For would you
not if you might (without danger or loss) reform your selves and as many as
you could? according to that reformation you sue for: your own consciences can
tell you, you would If the King at first had made a law, that al should have
been in subjection to the Bishops power and Government in the Church, but he
would have no man punished by imprisonment nor put out of their liveings that
should refuse, would you not all that make any conscience off your ways have
reformed? If you would not then the reformation you plead for, is not needful
except the King will approve of it, and so have you striven all this while about
needles things, if the Kings comaundment may disanul the necessity of them,
then are they needful, if the King will permit, if not your reformation may be
spared, and so ought you not to have gainsaied it, as you have done.

And in this does your iniquity greatly abound in that you make so small a
matter off those things, wherein you in judgment differ from the Lord Bishops,
seeing the difference is no less then for the whole Government off Christ in
his Church. And the Lord give you and al his people Grace duly to consider off
it, how greatly you dishonor Christ, and make a mock off him, when you profess
him to be your King, and yet say his Government is not of absolute necessity,
so do you hold it of absolute necessity, to give him the name off a King, but
not to give him the power of a King, what great impiety off high contempt is
this? What earthly King would endure this at his subjects hands? If you should
do so by our Lord the King off Great Brittanne, acknowledge him to be your Lord
and King, and call him by that name and title, and bend and bow to him with
words of al reverence, but wholly submit your selves to be Governed by the
laws and Officers off a forreyne power, and that by Rebellious subjects who
ought to be obedient unto the King, and yet are set up as Kings, and take the
Kings power from him, were you not al worthy to be accounted traitors and
Rebels? and would not the King cast you all out off his Kingdom, or destroy
you al in it? would the king be satisfied withal your words off flattery that
you could use in acknowledging him, and calling him by the name off your King,
when he should see he had no power to Govern you by his laws and Officers
but that you did submitt to be ruled by the Laws and Officers off his
Rebellious subjects and enemies: Would our Lord the King endure this? Having
power in his hand to avenge himselff off you: would he not after his often
proclamations made and his many messingers sent unto you, to command you to
come from under those Governors, and that Government, least ye be destroyed
with them: and to submit your selves to him, and he will be your King and your
defense: if for all this you would not harken and obey, would not the King come
with his power according to his word, and destroy you all together that would
not suffer him to rule over you. Certainly the King would do it in justice, and
for his own honor, and having protested it with his word. Eve^ so be you sure
will Christ Jesus your king do by you all, if you stand still in rebellion
against him, submitting your selves to that rebellious Hyrarchie of arch B. and
lord B. who ought to be his subjects, but are his enemies, and exalt themselves
above him, governing you by aforteyne power and Government, and not by Christ's
power and government, and the kings proclamations are come unto you, comaunding
you to Come out from among them, and separate your selves, and be his Children
and people: And he will receive you. and be your God and Father. 2. Cor. 6.
And Go out of her my people that ye be not partakers of his sins, and that
you receive not of her plagues. Revel. 18. Thus does Christ Jesus your King call
unto you, and if you will not yet harken to his voice, but flatter with your
tongues and say, you acknowledge him to be your King, but submit not to be
governed by his power, he will certainly in his justice for his honor, having
protested it by the word of his mouth, come against you al, and give you the
Cup off the Wine of the feircnes of his wrath. Revel. 16.19. Oh people
destitute of understanding, Oh Nation not worthy to be loved: Can you think in
your mynds that God has given all earthly Kings, power to make good laws, to
rule and govern their people by, and commanded their subjects to be obedient
thereunto. And has he not given Christ Jesus his beloved Son, (whom he has
set upon David's throne for ever, and made King over his people Israel) power
to make true laws and good ordinances to govern and rule his people by? and
has he not commanded al his subjects to be obedient thereunto? will no king of
power suffer his subjects to submit themselves to be governed by the government
of any other, and so to be deprived of that government which God has given
them over their subjects: and can you be so unwise to think that Christ Jesus
who is a King of greatest power, will suffer it in his subjects? Can you not
see that a King is no King if his Government over his people be taken away, and
can you think that Christ may be a King without his government? What vanity
does possess your minds whilst you make so small a matter off Christ's
government, saying you differ with the Bishops in no fundamental point, but
only in matter of Government. See (if there be any sight in you) if the Lord
Bishops power of government were taken away, where were their kingdom? their
names and titles would not support their kingdom, and this they see, and you
find by their Can. 7. Anno 1603. which they have made for the firm
establishing off their Government, knowing it to be fundamental, without the
which, their kingdom would presently come to naught even in one hour, even so
have they brought Christ's Kingdom to naught amongst you, by taking his
government from him. Who has be witched you thus to say and teach, and seduce
the simple as though government were no fundamental point: know you not what
Government is? Can you devide Christ's government (as he is a King) from his
power, or his power from this government? Will you make him a king without
government? Wherein then is he a King otherwise then in name? If the
Lord-Bishops should compel you to deny Christ off the name of a king, in, or
over his Church, would you not then say, they overthrew a fundamental point
off faith? And have you not understanding to deferne, that the power or
Government of a King is off far greater authority then the name of a king, and
were it not a much less matter for a king to be deprived of the name and
title of a king, then of the power and government of a king. Let the simple judge
whether is greater, a king of great power and government, or a king of great
name and title. Let them contend, and see who shall get the victory. All this
we set down to show, how greatly you do er through ignorance that cannot
deserne that power and government in earthly kings is much greater the^ name and
title, and therefore you err in Common judgment: But you do err much more in
spiritual judgment in that you cannot deserne Christ's name, and power off
government to be of equal estima^ion, for if you do not hold al things in
Christ, and all things of Christ, to be equal, and of like condition or
proportion, you overthrow the nature and property off God: as thus: All the
Graces of Christ in himself are equal a like: and al his works are equal a
like. It was all one with God to make Behemoth spoken of, Job. 40. and the
Pismice Pro. 30. and God estemeth the^ both a like: so all the word of God is a
like and of like power and authority, as Christ himself shows, when an
expounder of the law asked him, which is the first and great Commandment?
Jesus answered. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul, and
mind, this is the first and the great Commandment* and the second is like to
this. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And thapostle James makes it
most plain that the comaundements of God are all of like power and authority,
and al of like necessity to be obeyed: and the holy ghost does show an
evident reason, wherefore every commandment is a like to be obeyed, and why
the breaking of one is the breaking of al, because (says the holy Ghost by
Thapostle) he that commanded one commanded al. Iam. 2.10.11. From which ground
of truth we thus speak unto you in the words of the holy ghost: He that has
commanded in the Church, the true preaching of the word, true baptism, and
true administration of the Lords supper: The same God has commanded also true
government in the Church: therefore although you should have the word of God
truly preached, and baptism and the supper of the Lord truly administered,
yet if you have a false Government* you are transgressors of the whole law of
God, and gilty of al.

Thus does the word of God disaprove and utterly condemn that blasphemous
doctrine of pous whereby you fearfully deceive your selves, and the people of
God, whilst you hold and teach that Christ's government in his Church is not
fundame^tall And besides the word of God we have endeavored to show you that in all humane sense and understanding, a king that has not the power of government
over his subjects, but they submit to the government of strange lords, they are
disobedient and rebellious, and give their king only the name of King: and
such subjects are you, giveing Christ only the name of a king, but give his
power of government to strange lords, your lord Archb. and Bishops, who enlarge
you by their spirit, and you are enlarged, and who restraines you by their
power, and you are restrained, who sets you up for shepherds, when you please
the^, and puts you down like hirelings when you offend the^: who if they
destroy your flock before your faces, and you stand by you dare not aid the^,
but give Council for peace, to submit to their cruelty, although they should
condemn your most innocent, and justify the most gilty: and all this evil and
much more you justly bring upon your selves, and the people, in teaching and
professing, that you differ not from the Lord Bs. in any fundame^tal point,
making and accounting there by the government which Christ has appointed in his
Church not to be fundamental, wherein you sin against God with an high hand,
making Christ Jesus a vain Lawgiver whilst by your practice and profession
both in deeds and words you declare that the Ordinances of Christ, which he
has appointed for the whole government of his Church, are not of absolute
necessity, and fundame^tal. If the Jews had so said and practiced against the
ordinances which they received for the government of the Temple and Tabernacle,
and appointing the officers by the mouth of Moses, it had made an utter
co^fusio^ of al, and they must have died. And behold a greater the^ Moses is
here, giveing ordinances for the government of his Temple and Tabernacle, and
for the ordeining of Officers, against which if you resist, and admit of any
other you must dye, except you repent Heb. 10.28.29. and 12.25. for you make an
utter confusion of al. Oh that you would but look with your eyes and see, what
a confusion it would have brought into the Temple and Tabernacle, if any other
Officers, and any other government had been brought in, then Moses appointed,
had not all their sacrifices and services been polluted and most abominable to
the Lord? would Moses ever have endured it, and would Aaron have consented
there unto? They would not: and if all the people had, they al had been
destroyed with Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, who would have overthrown the
government and Officers of the temple, for the Lord would have been as just in
his judgment upon al, as upon some. Oh that you would consider this, and forget
not God, least he tear you in pieces, and there be none that can deliver you.
Are the Laws and Ordinances given by Jesus Christ for the government of his
Temple and Tabernacle, and appointing of his Officers, not so perfect, as those
that was given by Moses? and will not the bringing in of any other Officers and
government into the Church of Christ then he has appointed, cause as great as
confu^ion, as it would have done in the Temple? and shall not all the sacrifices
and services be polluted, and most abominable? as theirs would have been: will
Christ Jesus the Mediator, and high Priest endure it, or consent unto it, any
more then Moses and Aaron would have done? if you say he would then you make
Christ less faithful then Moses, and make his Church, less holy then the
Temple was, and his laws and Ordinances not to pe^fit, as those that were
given by Moses, and so shall the transgression against them deserve less
punishment: but but all the Prophets, and Apostles, and Christ Jesus himself
testifies the contrary to this, as you know right well, and most especially
the Author to the Hebrews handles these things at large, showing that the
Temple, Tabernacle, and all the Officers, and offices, and ordinances off
administration for Government and service, given by Moses, were but a pattern,
shadow, and similitude of the Heavenly Temple and Ordinances established and
given by Christ, who is the Mediator of a better Testament, established upon
better promises, and is the High Priest of a more perfect Tabernacle: and has
purified all the ordinances with a better blood, and he is faithful as Moses,
and is worthy off more glory and honor. Heb. 8.5.6. and 9.11.23. and 3.2.3. and
he will punish with much sorer punishment, those that despise his Law, then
Moses could. Heb. 10.28.29. Therefore take heed to your selves for you have
brought an utter confusion upon the house of God, by submitting unto another
government and other Officers then Christ has appointed in his Church, and so
are al your sacrifices and services polluted, as theirs would have been in the
Temple, if they had permitted any such thing: and if the Government of the
Temple was fundamental, how much more the government of the Church of Christ.
Be wise in spiritual wisdom, and then you will yield, that true government is
of as absolute necessity in the Church of Christ under the Gospel as it was
in the Temple under the Law. And if you will be of understanding according to
all the understanding off men, you will confess that a kings own government, by
his own laws and Ordinances is fundamental and of absolute necessity in his
own kingdom, and over his own subjects, or else he is a king but only in
name, and not in power: then must you needs confess that Christ's Government is
of absolute necessity and fundamental in his Kingdom, or else you make him but
a king in name: and how can you in all true judgment, but acknowledge that it is
much better, to have the power and government of a King, without the name of
King, then to have the name of a King, and not the power and government of a
King. And therefore you might as well submitt to the Lord Bishops to take away
Christ's name of a King, as submit to take away from him the power and government
of a King: but therein lies the depth of the mystery of iniquity in the man
of sin, in taking wholly from him his power, and yet professing his name:
and here by are all the Nations of the Earth deceived, and this it is that
blinds you al, because you have the profession off Christ's name amongst you,
saying he is your king, this makes you rest satisfied, although you yield unto
him no one thing else that apperteynes to his Kingly Office, but only the
name and title off a King. That we may make this plain unto you (for you see
it not) that you give Christ only the name off a King in your Church, we
show it unto you thus: all that can be given to a King off his subjects, is
to give unto him all the titles off honor due unto his name, and to submitt in
obedience unto his power: This is all that God requires to himself in the
1.2.3. and 4. Commandments. And this must every King have, their name, and
power, and especially Christ our King: Now the name of a King you give unto
Christ, but no power of a King: The which that it may appear evidentlie unto
the simple we pray you to consider that all the power of a king co^sists in
punishing the evil doers, and rewarding the well doers, as is proved Romans
13.1-4. where Thappostle shows, that all the powers that are, they are of God,
and they are to this end only, to punish the evil, and reward the good. Speak
now uprightly before God and men, has Christ this power in your Church? and
are his Officers and people permitted to execute it? are the good by Christ's
kingly power cherished, comforted, and rewarded, and are the evil by the power
of Christ corrected and punished? has Christ power by his own ordinances,
laws, and officers, to receive and keep in the good, and to cast out, and
keep the bad out off the Church? if you should say, Christ has his power in
your Church, you al (called Puritanes) are condemned at once, for the most evil
doers in the whole Church, because you above al are most evil spoken of,
mocked, contemned, hated, Cited, silenced, excomunicated, and imprisoned: is all this done by the holy kingly power of Christ? then are you the most evil
doers, and the^ are all the proud boasters, cursed speakers, malicious,
covetous, and flatterers, that have peace and preferme^t in the church,
weldoers, is this the power of Christ? if it be not as we know you will al
confess it is not, the^ must you needs confess that Christ has not the power
off a King in the Church: For if he have no power to punish the evil doers, and
reward the weldoers the^ has he no manner of power by his Kingly Office among
you, and then do you give him but only the name of a King, and so do you give
him no more then Pilate gave him, when he wrote a title and put it on the
Cross. This is Jesus the King off the Jews. But in all this you think to
excuse your selves in that you are innocent in these things, and protest and
seek much to have it otherwise: even so was Pilate, he washed his hands, and
would be innocent from the Blood off that just Man: He protested he saw no
evil in him: And he sought to loose him, but when he saw he availed not, he
belivered him to the high Priests and Elders to be Crucified: And thus do you
the best of you all, that when you cannot prevail that Christ might have his
power set up, (as you pretend,) you deliver it into their hands that destroy
it, and submitt your selves unto them also. Will you yet say, Christ is your
King? When it is thus evident that he has no power to rule over you, will
Christ be such a King: be not deceived, God is not mocked, he will comaund, you
his enemies which would not that he should reign over you to be slain before
him, if you repent not, no pretense of excuse shall be admitted for comitting of
evil, neither excuse of fear, nor of ignorance, the Lord does teach al men
every where to repent, and they that believe and obey shall be saved, and they
that do not believe shall be damned, which you shall all be every one of you
that submit to any other government, then that most holy and blessed government
which Christ has established in his Church, whereof he is the Head and King.
And therefore the Church of Christ is in subjection in every thing, Ephesians.
5.24. And our Savior Christ will no more be the head nor savioux of such a
Church that submits it self unto the power of a stranger, his ennimie, then
any Godly wise husband wilbee the head of a wife that submits her body unto
the power of another man, although she make never so many fair prete^ces of
excuses: and for this e^d and to show al other love and duties, has the H.
ghost aptly here by Thapostle compared, Christ and his Church, and a husband
and a wife together, to teach thereby all the love and duties of Husband and
Wife one to another, and to declare all Christ's love to his Church, and the
duties of his Church to him again: how can the holy Ghost by more fit and
plain comparisons to the capacity of man show, and declare the power and
love of Christ, over and to his church, and the subjection that the Church is
to yield to him in every thing, which subjection seeing your church, will not
yield to Christ, but denies him the whole power off Government over it. Christ
cannot be head off such a Church, neither can your Church be his body, for
every body is guided and Governed by it own head, and none of a^ you that
are members off that body, are members of the body of Christ: But the
spiritual lord Arch Bishop and Lord Bishop are head of your Church, in that it
is in subjection to the^ in every thing, as you well know, and therefore is
it their body, for every head has it own body, and you al are members of
their body, whereof Christ is not the Savior, but he is the Savior of his
own body, which is his Church, whereof he is head. Ephesians. 5.23. The God of
grace give you grace to consider your fearful estates and standings herein,
and deliver you from that dangerous delightful security wherewi^h your hearts
are so overipred, all your senses and affections being bewitched and ravished
by that ware of Gold, and Silver, and al excellent mettales of pearls, and al
precious stones, of silk, and scarlet, and al costly vestures of vessels of
yvory, and of al most precious wood, and off Cinnamon, and odours, and
ointments, and frankincense, and Wine, and Oil, and fine flower, and wheat,
and Beasts, and Sheep, and Horses, and Charetts, and Servants, and Souls of
Men, and Apples that your Souls lust after. All these things has the Holy
Ghost set down most larglie Revel. 18. to discover the deceiveablenes of
unrighteousness, in all the precious delightful sweet, and pleasant spiritual
baits and snares that are in that your glorious profession of Puritanisme
whereby your souls are bewitched and ravished as also in all other professions,
amongst those people that are the waters, whereupon the woman arrayed in purple
and Scarlet does sit. Revel. 17. Of which people you are in that you are in
subjection unto the power of the Beast and his image, and therefore are al your
sacrifices oblations and incense in vain, your Prophesieings or preachings,
your prayers and praisings of God are an abomination unto the Lord, your
silver is become dross, your wine is mixed with water. The Lord has covered
you with a spirit of flumber, and has shut up your eyes. Your Prophets and
your chief Seers has he covered, because you come near unto him with your
mouth, and honor him with your lips, in calling Christ your King, but you have
taken Government from his shoulder, who is called wonderful, Councellor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, the increase of whose
government and peace shall have no end. Esa. 9.6.7. and here does the Prophet
show likewise, that he sits upon David's throne, and upon his Kingdom to order
it: but all this power you give unto your strange Lords, and yet you cry and
say, that Christ is your King. Thus do you flatter with your lips, and
dissemble with your tongues, and your ways are not upright before the Lord.

What might we say to provoake you, to set your hearts to seek the lord, and to
turn your feet to walk in his paths, and your ears to harken to his voice,
which seeing you will al with earnestnes profess to do, do it with faithfulness,
and cast away al ignorant hypocrisy, and now that the abomination of
desolatio^ is set up before your eyes, hear this voice of the lord. flee into
the mountains: and Come out of her my people and turn not back to that which
is left behind. Remember Lots wife. Math. 24.15.16. Revel. 18.4. Luke 17.31.32.
We will use no more reasons to prove you are not come out of Babylon, but you
own confession shall witness against you, in that you daily complain of your
bondage, therefore you may see you are in the house of bondage, but there is no
bondage in the house off God, where the Children off the free Woman standfast
in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made them free. Galat. 4.31. and 5.1. Why
are you then still in bondage, under all those Ceremonial Traditions, (which
you say your souls abhor) if you be off those that Christ has made free?
Shall we entreat you with Godly advisednes, to consider what the bondage is,
and see how you look to be delivered, is not your bondage you complain off a
spiritual bondage? in that you are restrained of spiritual liberty in the
holy things: Having Ceremonies and Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons pressed
upon you, which of Conscience you cannot obey, so is it plain your bondage is
spiritual. And how would you be delivered from your spiritual bondage, and who
should be your deliverer? Can you be delivered but by a spiritual power? and
ca^ you have any deliverer but a spiritual Lord? if you seek to and depend
upon any other Lord to be delivered from spiritual bondage, you take unto
yourselves another God, and set up a spiritual power against the power of God.
And whereas you should put on the whole armor of God, and wrestle against
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses, which are in the high
places, and stand fast, you have shrunck in the day of bat^le, and have not
faithfully contented for the maintenance off the faith given to the Saints.
But have, and do yield to the Spiritual wickednesses, which are under the
power of those spiritual Lords, the Arch Bishops and Lordbishops, and have
cast of the armor, and sword off the Spirit, wherewith you should resist and
overcome, and whereby these spiritual wickednesses shall be consumed and
abolished, and you have taken unto your selves a direction after the device off
your own hearts, seeking and sueing, by petitions not to God, but to me^, that
you might have leave (as you pretend) to set up Christ for your King and
Governor: and if you could get leave, you make show, as though you would
reform matters that are greatly amiss: but seeing you cannot, you are content
to let them alone, and groan under them (for so you speak) and not to be too
busy, least you should make matters worse. Of this same condition were the
people of Israel, when Moses was sent to bring them out of Egypt, for when they
saw that leave would not be granted, but that more work was laid upon them,
and that there was danger and trouble, they would have made their peace, and
have groned still under their burdens as they had done, and so have continewed
in that their bondage, as you do in your spiritual bondage, but the Lord was
merciful unto them according to his own promise, and brought them out by a
mighty hand, and with great signs and wonders: and even so has the Lord
promissed to bring his Elect (which are those that harke^ to the voice of his
Call) out of this spiritual bondage of Babylon, Egypt, and Sodom, (wherein you
are) by great and marvelous signs and wonders, as the spirit of God has
declared. Revel. 15. and 16. Chap. by the seven Angels, which power out the
seven vialls of the wrath of God upon the Earth: But you must know that this
is a spiritual Prophisie, and al these are spiritual signs and wonders, which
the lord has graciously promissed to show upon Babylon, Egypt and Sodom,
(spirituallie so called) to the destruction and everlasting overthrowe of the
Scarlet cullored Beast, and the Woman that sits upon him, which woman is that
great City Babylon: and upon all the people that come not forth at the call of
his voice. Revel. 17.18. Chap. But take heed you be not deceived by lookeing
for their things with carnal eyes as the Jews did, who looked for an earthly
King to deliver them, so that when their spiritual king came they knew him
not, but hated him, despised him, persecuted him, killed him, and cast him out,
and so remain in transgression and under condemnation unto this day, by the
just judgment of God. Take heed least you do so in sueing after and seeking by
earthly means to be delivered out of your spiritual bondage, and when the
spiritual means and way is showed you, you contemn it, despise it, hate it,
persecute it, speak al manner of evil against it, oppose it, reject it, and
condemn it, and so remain still in your transgression, and under the
condemnation of the just judgment of God, which the Lord has pronounced
against all those that come not forth of Babylon, partaking thereby with her in
her sins, and so shall be made pertakers of her plagues, which plagues you
cannot escape if you come not forth, but believe those false Prophets that
prophecy lies unto you. Be not deceived by your good intents, and meanings,
and good desires whereof you are full: Nor by your great affections of zeal
wherewith you abound, above al people that we know or have heard of, that have
any knowledge of the Gospel: we speak not of the ignorant zealous Papists
that go before you and all the earth (that know the name of Jesus) in these
things, which makes them think their estates most happy. Take you heed least
you be also still hereby deceived: We confess these are excellent things, if
knowledge and faith go with them. Furthermore your obedience unto the second and
great commandment, which is, Love thy neighbor as thy self, and all the
particular duties thereof, as Honor Parents, do not commit adultery: Kill,
steal, bear false witness, Covet nothing that is thy neighbors. In these
excellent duties very many of you greatly abound, and we cannot but with
great affections look upon you, and love you for them, yet know that many
Papists are nothing behind you in these things: Therefore let not these
things deceive you as though you had all things, because you have these. You
see it testified by our Savior Christ: that a man may have, or do all these
things, and yet not follow Christ, as is showed in the example of that
excellent Ruler whom Christ looked upon and loved for those excellent things
in him Mark. 10.21. And therefore please not your selves so much in those
things, although we acknowledge they are worthy of great comendations in you,
and our souls are much affected to you for them: But if you follow not
Christ in the regeneration, that is, if you be not borne again of water and
of the Spirit, and so enter into the Kingdom off Heaven, all is nothing, as
you see by the example of this Ruler. And Cornelius Act. 10. If he had not been
baptized with the holy ghost and with Water, for all his prayers and alms he
had not, nor could not have entered into the Kingdom off Heaven.

Thus entered all the people off God of whose entrance the Scriptures give
testimony, either by rule or example, and therefore if there be any other
entrance found out, it is not, nor cannot be of God: this only is the door
which Jesus Christ has set open for all to enter in at, that enter into his
Kingdom John. 3.5. and the Lord sanctify al your hearts with grace, that you
may enter in thereby: For no other way off salvation has Christ appointed but
that me^ first believe and be Baptized. Mark. 16.16.

Thus have we freely spoken the truth unto you from our hearts, suspect us not
of the least contempt or dispite, if we seen sharp: There are multitudes of
you of that Puritan profession (so called) that know our love is most true
and unfeigned to you all, and that we cannot but love and reverence you, and
therefore we cannot but the more seek your reformation wish it, and pray for
it, and we will not give the Lord rest therein until he hear us, that we
may see your salvation accomplished.

THe next false profession off Christ, and false Prophets amongst you, that we
will (by Gods assistance) speak of, is that false profession, and those false
Prophets which are usually called Brownists, you are they that say you are
Jews: but are none: and have made your selves a name to be the Separation,
and are falsely so called, but are not, as through the help of our God, we shall
make it plain by the Word of the Lord, both to your own consciences: (if you
will not always resist the truth,) and also to the consciences of al others.
And this we will do by those grounds of truth which you acknowledge, which you
must be forced either to forsake, or else be co^vinced by them.

And the first ground is this, in your Book called the Apologies, the first
part of your third position stands thus set down.

A true visible Church is a Company of people called and separated from the
world by the word of God, and joined together by voluntary profession of the
faith of Christ in the fellowship of the Gospel. And by this means, that is by
the word of God: and by thus doing, that is, seperating themselves from the
world and joining together, (say you) they are become a true visible Church.
Now to come to a full discovery off your false profession off Christ. Let it
be observed, that you confess you were off the World, before you separated:
Which when you were, then were you Enemies unto Christ, for Christ testifies
the World hates him, John 7.7. Then were you none off Christ's, for those that
are Christ's, or off Christ, are not of the world. Ioh. 17.1^. and now to be
come Christ's, you say you are called and separated from the World by the word
of God, and joined together by voluntary profession of the faith of Christ, in
the fellowship of the Gospel: This is your constitution, wherein you have erred
as may plainly appear, for when you were called, and (as you say) separated
you should have joined to Christ, and have entered into his Kingdom, which
seeing you have not done, you are not separated from the world: nor have no
fellowship in the Gospel. We confess the Lord has called unto you, and you
have joined your selves together in a voluntary profession, but you have not
joined your selves to Christ: and therefore is your profession a false
profession, and you have a false Christ that is no Christ, as shall be hereafter
plainly proved. And to show you that you are not joined to Christ you being of
the world before you constituted or set up your Church, by your own
confessions, the word off the Lord does evidentlie declare, that there is no
way for them that are of the world, who are not in Christ, but enemies to
Christ, as all that are of the world are, there is no other way to join and
come to Christ, but only to. Amend their lives, and be Baptized. Act. 2.38.
and Gal. 3.27. Al ye that are Baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Let us
now entreat you on Gods dehalf that you will no longer be feighters against God
in contending against his truth, from the which we trust through the mercy of
God, you shall not be able any longer to hide your selves: For if al men that
know God, and his Son Christ Jesus, will not confess that infidels and
unbelievers have no other way to come, and be joined to Christ, but only by
believing and being baptized, then you that confess you were of the world
before you set up your Church, must needs confess also that you were infidels
and unbelievers: for you shall be ashamed to say that there are any believers
of the world, seeing our Savior Christ says: John. 14.17. The World cannot
receive the Spirit of truth: and John. 16.8.9. The Comforter shall reprove the
world of sin, because they believed not in me. and John. 17.25. O righteous
Father the World has not known thee. and John, in his first Epist. Chap.
5.18.19 speaks thus, We know that were are of God, and this whole World lies
in wickedness. And this being the condition of the^ that are of the world. 1
That they cannot receive the Spirit of truth. 2. That they believe not in
Christ. 3. That they know not God. 4. That they lie all in wickedness. You
confessing your selves to be of the world before you joined your selves
together in your voluntary profession, by a Covenant of your own devisings
(you being of the world) your Condition was the same: Then were you without the
Spirit of truth: vnbelevers, not knowing God: Lying al in wickedness, and so are
you all infidels, and their was, nor is, no way for you to join unto Christ,
but to amend your lives, and be Baptized, and by Baptism to put on Christ.
Which seeing you have not done, you are still of the world: the spirit of truth
is not in you: you are infidels and unbelievers: you know not God: and you
remain in your wickedness and so is your profession a false profession of
Christ, and you have not the true Christ, but a false Christ, and so is your
Baptism a worldly baptism brought out of the world, an Ordinance of the
world, and not the baptism and Ordinance of Christ, whose baptism is not of
the world, as he is not of the world.

Shall we need to lay down any other ground to convince you, and stop al your
moueths? is not this easy, plain and evident enough. What can be more
plain. You confess (your selves) you were of the world before you made your
separation from England: and our Savior Christ says, that they which are of
the world believe not in him: and who will not grant that they that believe not
in Christ are infidells or unbelievers, then you being of the world, were
infidells or unbelievers, and the Holy Ghost teaches that infidels or
unbelievers, must Amend their lives and be baptized, and by Baptism put on
Christ. And our Savior Christ Mark. 16.16. giveing a general direction to his
disciples to preach the Gospel to al, gives likewise a general direction, what
al unbelievers must do, if they wilbee saved. They must believe and be
Baptized. This strait are you now driven unto, either to confess that before
your separation you were infidells or unbelievers, and then you must believe
and be baptized, or else that you were believers and faithful: and then have you
Separated from a faithful and believing People, and not from the World, and
you must return to your vomit with that false prophet your first and chief
Shepherd, that has misled you up on these false grounds, who not being able
(through his infidelity) to keep his face toward Jerusalem, and the Land of
Canaan, has fainted in the way, and rebelled in the wilderness, and is returned
to his so much formerlie detested Babylon and Egypt.

And next let us show unto you that your Prophets are al false Prophets, and
although it be a full sufficient proof that they are false Prophets because
they are Elected and ordained to their Office, by a congregation of infidels or
vnbelevers that are not joined to Christ, and have not put on Christ by
baptism, yet we will further show them to be false Prophets, because they
Prophesies lies, and by their lying wonders would if it were possible deceive
the very Elect, these are deceiptful workers, and transform themselves into
the Prophets of Christ, as though they were the Ministers off righteousness,
whose end (says Thapostle) shall be according to their works. 2. Cor.
11.13.15. yet they doing it ignorantly through unbelief, if they repent, may
be received to mercy. 1. Tim. 1.13. but they must repent as Paul did, who left
of being a persecutor, a blasphemer, and an oppressor, else he could never have
been saved: so must they leave of being false Prophets, seducers, and
deceivers, or else they shall all be damned: Revel. 19.20.

And first to show how your false prophets do tra^sforme themselves, whereby
they are most dangerous deceivers and tempters they in the forefront of their
cry, come with a maine ground of truth, and this they utter with a loud voice.
It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great City. Go out of her my people
etc. and separate your selves, and come out, this is al their cry to bring the
people from the assemblies of England, and then they run upon England and
prove it Babel, and Babylon, we confess with proof enough which when they
have done, working a just distaist in the hearts of some people, of the
spiritual abhominatio^s in those assemblies, so far as they themselves dislike,
but being loath to cast Babylon clean to the ground, and utterly to make her
naked and desolate, and to lay all her honor in the dust, and not being
willing, through hardness of heart, and want of true zeal and holiness to run
the rate to the end, and to separate themselves from al uncleanness, they teach
you still to retain your first and chief badg or mark of Babylon, which is
your baptism, wherein you receive the seal of the covenant of grace as they
say, and teach you, and this you may not part withal upon any condition. Is
there any false Prophetts, like these Prophets? that will teach you to separate
and Come out from Babylon* and to touch no unclean thing. And when they have
done, teach you to retain the Baptism received there, which they teach, and
you profess to be the seal of the Covenant of Grace: so are you sealed unto
the Covenant of grace by Babylon: so are you made Christians and members of
Christ by Babilo^, for without this baptism you are no Christians. Oh how you
cry out against the sweetness of the stolen waters of Babylon, and yet your
selves cannot beware thereof, but are bewitched therewith, the which you
retain with as little understanding as when you received it, and were washed
or Baptized therewith.

But your false Prophets to make good the reteining of your Babilonish
baptism, like deep deceivers with turning of devices, plead that your
baptism must be retained, and is not to be repeated, no more then Isreal's
circumcision, when they came to the passover, in Hezechias time. Oh that al men
would see your deceiveablenes of unrighteousness herin: that to draw simple
people after you, and to build your selves up a kingdom, you cry against the
assemblies of England, they are Babylon, Egypt, and Sodom, separate your
selves, be not unequally yocked with infidels. What fellowship has light with
darkness? What concord has Christ with Belial? etc. Therefore a^ must be cast
away: no comunion is to be kept: But when you are urged or called on for the
reteyning off your baptism you received in Babylon, then Isreal's circumcision
is your hold: so make you England Israel, and your selves Judah, pretending
hereby as though you came out of Israel, what deceitful deceiving is this?
What turning of devices? to cry, Come out off Babylon, and touch no unclean
thing, and to show and declare in all words and writings, that if any man
worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in
his hand, he shall drink of the Cup of Gods wrath, applying this perticulerly
to England: and when you have done come farth sealed in the forehead with the
seal of baptism (as you cal^i.) having no other seal for your whole
Christianity, for we hope you will not say that there may be a Church of
unbaptized Christians, and all this you prove good, because Isreal's
circumcision was good under Jeroboam, so make you a show in this particular as
though you came but from Israel: but if your first cry had been come out from
Israel, and separate your selves from Israel, You might have cried long enough
before any that had feared God, or had any understanding of his truth, would
have followed you to have built new Churches, and set up an Hyrarchie of
Ruleing Elders, as they and you, (brethren in evil therein also) have done. To
draw to an end in this point: if you be come from Israel, then were you true
Israelites before, then all that you have left behind you, are true Israelites
as well as you: for all the Ten Tribes under Ieroborm were true Isralites: and
you and the assemblies of England from whence you came / were all in one estate
and condition off profession before you separated, and they still remain as you
left them, and as you daily leave them, they are not become Samaritanes if
they were non before: if you like therefore to stand upon this ground that you
have brought your Baptism fro rebellious Israel, then you Judah must needs
acknowledge Israel to be your sister, for the Lord testifies that Israel was
Iudaes sister: Neither did Judah ever deny Israel to be her sister: therefore
may not you utterly cast off England that is your sister Israel.

And whereas you acknowledge in your book called the Apology, Page 113.
Through ignorant dissimulation and flattery, that you never doubted, but there
are thousands in the Romish Apostacy in England which receive not the Beasts
mark in their forehead or hand, but be careful to keep the Commandments of
God and faith of Jesus, must you not acknowledge, except you be destitute of al
understanding, that these thousands that are baptized with the same baptism
that you are, and that receive not the mark off the Beast: and be careful to
keep the comaundements off God, and faith of Jesus, must you not acknowledge
that these thousands are a true Church, or true Churches as well as you? Dare
you say more of your selves? whereby to challeng any pre-eminence: are you
any more (if you were so much) then truly baptized, free from the mark of
the Beast, careful to keep the Commandments of God and faith of Jesus? What
dark blindness is this, and palpable words of flattery? To confess in words,
there are thousands in Englands Apostacy in as holy and blessed estate as
any people of God can be, and when you have so done, both by practice,
writing, and teaching, deny all spiritual comunion with any one of them, and
not to suffer any one of them, to have comunion with you, except they make and
submitt to a new Covenant with you, which covenant you have made according to
the devisings off your own hearts. What Syon have you built that will not open
her gates to men (as you confess) truly baptized, having no mark off the
Beast, kepeing the comaundements of God and faith of Jesus: how woefullie are
you overtaken in these things, how ca^ we think less of this, the^ that it is
ignorant dissimulation and flattery, with such fair words to stopp the
mouths, and blind the eyes of Mr. Bilson, and the Oxford Doctors, and when you
had walled up that breach, and dawbed it with morier of deceitful temper, then
to profess and practice the contrary. Thus do you when it will serve your
turn, make England Israel, and when you please it is Babylon, Sodom, Egypt:
and hereby have you a long time, and still do, like most subtle charmers,
charm the simple and ignorant, so that they receive not the love of the truth,
that they might be saved, building and holding up hereby your kingdom and
throne: and if any incline to return from you to England again, then is
England Sodom, Egypt, Babylon, and worse if worse could be: and if any make
question of casting away that Baptism or washing received there, then England
is but rebellious Israel, and let her take away her fornications out of her
sight, and her adulteries from between her breasts, and she may still be a
wife. What can be said to this your deceitful duble dealing? we must be
forced to leave a simple duble answer thus: If you were Babilonians, and have
Babilonns baptism upon you, then have you no rule nor example, that the
Babilonians circumcision could be accepted and admitted to the passover: and
if you were true Israelites before you separated, and have Isreal's Baptism
upon you, and so become to Judah, then must you acknowledge Israel from whence
you are come, (which is England) your sister and so may you again go follow
the voice of that old deceiver, that has so long bewitched you, who lies in
wait for you, knowing that you cannot stand upon these grounds, but you must
be forced either to cast away your baptism: or else, return from whence you
had it, except you wilbee the most wilful blind people upon the whole Earth
that have any knowledge off Christ, of the which you give just cause off
jealousy. Therefore in Gods fear take heed and perish not in your stifnecked
perverseness.

To show yet further, that you are false Prophets, and prophecy lies: we
produce out of your Book subscribed with general subscription, your Apology
Page 110. Where you gainsay Mr. Bilson, for saying you affirm by consequence,
their Sacraments no Sacraments, and Church no Church. To clear your selves of
this imputation, you teach that we must be careful in all such causes always
to discern and distinguish between a true Church, a false Church, and no
church: Between true Sacraments, false Sacraments: and no Sacraments. Your
proof and example is. Judah a true Church: The Ten Tribes of Israel a false
Church: The Philistimes and others the like, no Church. and so at this day, the
Turks and Pagans may be reputed no Churches: The Romish Synagogue and al her
daughters false Churches: The Christians which be set in the true faith and
order true Churches. Thus you say the difference may be put, but you are al
false Prophetts herein and teach lies, these are but the devices of your own
hearts, these are your school distinctions where by you pervert the holy word
of truth, and we exhort all the people of God, to take heed of you when you
distinguish, and when you bring your matters about with, in a respect, and in a
duble respect, not but that we hold it lawful to use distinctions, and to show
respects, but because you usually deceive thereby: there is no truth off God so
evident, but with your distinctions and respects, and twofold respects, you will
pervert it, and when you are not able with evidence off truth to mainteyne your
false ways, then your distinctions and respects must make it good, whereby you
ensnare the simple, and compass them about as with a thick mist, wherein they
cannot see which way to go, but are feign through hardness of heart and
infidelity (which are the causes, of their ignorance and blindness) to give
their hearts to you to be led, and you like deceiptful blind guides lead them
into the pit, as in this pecticuler in hand, wherein if you be overthrown and
discovered your whole cause is thus far destroyed, as you are al yet once
again proved infidels and unbelievers. And we doubt not but by the gracious
aid and help of our God, we shall be able by his word to convince you al
herein, without whose great help and aid, we in humility confess, we are
not able to withstand such strong and wise adversaries of his truth as you
are, who do exercise your selves to deceive, our own experiences and knowledge
of you causes us thus to speak: we hope you do it ignorantly, or else there
were no hope of your repentance and salvation.

To the point in hand we say and prove by the word off God that you can in no
ordinance of God distinguish or put difference by the warrant of Gods word,
betwixt false and none, and your vain distinction will hold only in worldly
things, and you are carnal herein and sold under sin, blame us not though
we reprove you sharply for this, because you have deceived your selves and
the whole World hereby so far as your voices have sounded, and you have and do
daily destroy the faith of many.

We proceed to prove that you cannot by Gods word distinguish, nor put
difference betwixt false and nons, in Gods ordinances, and this the eternal
word of truth does show. Revel. 2.2. Where the holy ghost speaking of false
Appostles comends the Church off Ephesus, for examining them which said they
were Apostles, but were none, and were found liars. And verse. 9. I know the
blasphemy of them which say they are Jews but are none, but are the Synagogue
off Satan. And Revel. 3.9. The same words are uttered by the holy Ghost. Thus
does the spirit of God teach us, that a false Church is no Church, but a
Synagogue of Satan: and false Appostles are no Appostles, so then are false
Sacraments no Sacraments, and so false and none in Gods ordinances are al one,
and you cannot distinguish nor put difference betwixt them. And for further
manifestation of the truth hereof, let us referr the things that are of God,
to God, and so shall it appear to all but those that will not see, that there
is no difference nor distinction to be made in Gods ordinances betwixt false
and none, as thus: A true Church of Christ: a false Church: and no Church of
Christ, if now a false Church be not no Church of Christ, then it is a false
Church of Christ, so is there two sorts or kinds of Churches off Christ, and so
should Christ have two bodies, a true body, and a false body, what blasphemy
is this? when thapostle says: there is but one body: so likewise if you say,
there is a true faith of Christ, a false faith, and no faith of Christ, if a
false faith, and no faith, be not all one, then there are two faiths of
Christ's, a true faith, and a false faith of Christ, but Thapostle says. There
is but one faith, In like manner, if you will say, as you do, that there is a
true baptism, a false baptism, and no baptism, if a false baptism, and no
Baptism be not al one, then is there two baptismes, but Thappostle says,
there is but one baptism, and of all these there is but one, as there is but
one God and Father off al, which is above all, and rhrough all. Ephesians. 4.4.5.6.
Who if he were in you all, you would submitt to this his truth, and never open
your mouths more against it. Cast away these your logical distinctions, which
are fit to distinguish betwixt a false houreglasse and no hour glass, and a
false looking glass and no looking glass, and not fit to distinguish betwixt
a false Baptism and no Baptism, a false Church, and no Church, betwixt which
the holy ghost admits of no distinction nor difference. We conclude therefore
with the word of truth against al these your deceitful distinctions and lying
prophesies, that a false Church is no Church of Christ at all, for Christ ha^h
no false Church: Therefore you holding England a false Church, it is no Church
of Christ, and so your false Baptism is no Bapti^me off Christ, and so are you
all infidels vnbelevers, and false Christians, that is no Christians, and you
are they that say, you are Jews and are not, but are the Synagogues off
Satan. And let this suffice for the overthrowe of your most false and
deceitful distinction.

And whereas you bring for your proof of a true Church, a false Church, and no
Church, and say: Judah was a true Church, Israel a false Church, and the
Philistimes no Church, these are but your own sayings and devisings without
proof, whereby you have and do mightily deceive, although your words be
without all understanding, for Israel was a true Church as Judah was, for the
Israelites were the true seed off Abraham, separated from the world under the
Covenant off God, which was the Covenant off Circumrision, Genesis 17.7-15 as well
as Judah in Hezechiahs time, when they same to the passover: And if they had
been the false seed off Abraham, then had they been false Israelites, then
had their circumcision been false, and they had been a false Church: So had
they been no seed off Abraham, no Israelites, their Circumcision no
Circumcision, and so no Church. For a full conclusion, and a certain rule off
drection from the Word off God, whereby the People off God may try all your
deceitfil distinctions off this kind: when you put difference betwixt True,
False, and none, in, or off any Ordinance off God, Let all observe, and would
to God you your selves would be informed, that God and his laws and
Ordinances are one. John. 14.6 Off equal power, authority, and truth, and
therefore you can no more say, a true Church, a false Church, and no Church, a
true Baptism, a false Baptism, and no Baptism, which are holy ordinances of
God, then you can say a true God. a false God, and no God: and your distinction
will hold no more betwixt a false Church, and no Church a false baptism, and no
baptism, then betwixt a false God, and no God: and if a false God be no God,
then a false Church is no Church of God, and a false baptism is no baptism of
Christ. Your false Church then being as is showed and proved no Church of God,
then it is the Synagogue of Satan, and your false baptism being no baptism of
Christ, then it is the baptism of Satan. The Lord give you to consider of
your estates and standings herein, that although your contempt of ve is, and
has been great, yet you may not still con^emne Christ and his truth the means
of your salvation, though witnessed by us, that are so much despised in your
eyes.

Having thus showed you by evidence off truth, that you bringing your false
baptism out of a False church (both which yourselves confess) your baptism
is no baptism, and that false Church is no Church, this being made plain, as
the indifferent may judge we will try Mr. Robinsons ground for this retained
baptism, who wilbee found to make haist to deceive with as many windings and
turnings as any, an^ he not altogether trusting to bring his baptism from
Israel, he strives withal deceitful skill to prove that their baptism is true
in one respect, though brought from Babylon. And this matter he undertakes af^^
this manner, in his book off justification of seperition. Page 184 185. He
Commends unto the Reader a distinction off a twofold respect: Baptism says
Mr. R. is to be considered first nakedlie, and in the essential causes, the
matter water. The form washing with water into the name off the Father etc.
These are the essential causes of Mr. R. naked Baptism, in this respect he
confesses true baptism both in England and Rome. Mr. R. shall we speak
angerlie to you and mourn for the hardness off your heart, and great blindness
and ignorance? Have you lost the beginings of knowledge in the, mystery of
Godliness? is all light shut from your eyes, and al truth debarred from your
understanding, that you should write thus? That water, and washing, and words
are the essential causes or matter of Baptism: if you had known Christ, of
whose Baptism you pretend to speak, you would never have written thus, do you
know that Christ's Kingdom is a spiritual Kingdom? his Ordinances spiritual
Ordinances: and will you confess this with your tongue, and with your tongue
and deeds deny it? Which that it may appear plainly you do, consider with
your self, and let all that seek the Lord in spirit and truth consider, with
what understanding you can say, that naked Water, washing, and words are the
essential causes of a spiritual Baptism, thus do you spoil men through
Philosophy and vain deceit in which iniquity you abound: away with your
naked respect, and be counseled to buy whit raiment that you may be clothed,
that your vile nakedness do not appear. Know you not that al they that are
baptized into Christ have put on Christ. And do you come with your Philosophy
to teach simple souls a naked baptism, and make it good with respects? The
Lord give you grace to see your great evil herein, and the Lord deliver his
poor people from these your deceitful ways, and the lord give them to learn
to know from the word of God that there is but one Baptism of Christ. Ephesians
4.5. And that whosoever is baptized into Christ, has put on, or is clothed
with Christ. Gal. 3.27. and therefore whosoever shall walk with your naked
baptism shall be found naked at the day off Christ's appearing, though you piece
it and patch it with green leaves: and for your essential causes, lay down
plainly what baptism you speak of, and you shall be convinced in your self,
as thus: if you say off Christ's baptism which is spiritual, that the essential
matter thereof is earthly water, would not your ignorance easily appear? the
like of your form, if you should say that the form of spiritual baptism is
bodily washing only with bare words, your own understanding would reprove
you. It were to be wished, and you have often been required to lay away your
school terms in the causes of God, whereby you do for the most part but hide
the truth, and blind the eyes of the simple. How do you think the simple
should understand you in the essential causes and matter, and form of
baptism? do the Scriptures show that any of the holy men of God did ever
thus distinguish? if your Art had been good or profitable, could not our
Savior Christ have used it for the manifestation of his truth? and would he
not have endued his Apostles with that gift? Yea the Lord endued them with the
most excellent gifts, for the evident declaration of his truth, whereof
Lodgick, and Philosophy was none: which vain sciences if you had not used,
you could never have forged so many deceits as you have in your book. And now
we disire you to know that the Scriptures teach not any Baptism that is in
one respect true, and in other respect false: there is no such thing in the
whole word of God: these are but your own devices, wherein you devide Christ,
to serve your own turns to deceive, persuading men that they are in one
respect truly baptized, and in another respect falsely baptized, and if they
will come and walk in your way, and join to your societies, you can make that
part which was false, true: What Popery is this to take upon you to dispense
with the false administrations in the ordinances of Christ? thus do you run
into dark places whilst you forsake the lantern that should light your
paths, which light of truth teaches you, and all men that the baptism of
Christ, is the Baptism of amendment of life, for the remission off sins.
Mark. 1.4. And our Savior Christ says: Except a man be borne off water and
off the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. John. 3. and Heb.
10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith, our hearts
being pure from an evil conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water.

Here is the true Baptism set down, which is the Baptism off amendment off
life for the remission off sins: And here is the true matter where with men
must be washed, which is water, and the Holy Ghost, that is pure from an
evil conscience, and washed with water: Therefore can you not devide the
water, and the spirit in this Baptism, Christ has joined them together, and
he that denies washing, or is not washed with the spirit is not baptized, and
he that denies washing, or is not washed with water, is not Baptized, because
we see the Baptism of Christ, is to be washed with water and the Holy
Ghost. And to take away a subtle exception, if a man be in prison, or any
place, and be co^verted to the lord, and would be baptized with water but
cannot, he is accepted with God, who accepts the will for the deed. 2. Cor.
8.12. and herein is the Lords mercy equal with his justice, for if a man's heart
consent to evil, he is gi^^ie before the Lord, although he do it not Mat.
5.27.28.

Thus much to discover the great deceitfullnes off your way in the first
respect of your false distinction, wherein you would prove, only, the
essential matter water, and washing with water, and words, he essential form:
We pass by your form of words, because we think you will not stand upon it,
in that you see there is no certain form of words held. Act. 10 48. and 19.5,
And take this with you to consider of, that if there were any truth in your
distinction and respect, then were any washing with water, with those words,
the true matter and form of Christ's Baptism: and so if one Child baptized
another with water and those words, it is true baptism in that respect, and
let that Child come and join to you, ad you can make it good in all respects.
Pass not these things over as you have done, for you are not able to answer
them with any true understanding from Gods word and so we come to your second
respect.

Secondly you say, baptism is to be considered, clothed with such
appurtenances as wherewith the Lord has appointed it to be administered: as
for example, a lawful person by whom, a right subject upon which, a true
Comunion wherein it is to be administered and dispensed, in which regard, you
say, you do not approve it to be true Baptism either in Rome, or England. If
darkest error did not possess your heart, you could never have written such
things, but that we know your stifnes in your false ways we should pity
to point out your palpable ignorance in these things: did ever man of any
understanding in religion write thus? You are lighter then vanity herein: Will
any man that has any knowledge of God be so blind as not to see, how the
spirit of error does lead you to justify that a baptism, where there is
neither the spirit off God, lawful minister, right subject, nor true comunio^
is the true baptism and ordinance of Christ in the essential parts thereof.

Has the like ignorance appeared in these days? esspecially amongst men that
will ^rie out for proof by Scripture in all things. If this your ground were
true, then a Turk baptizing a Turk with water and those words in any assembly
whatsoever, is the true Baptism of Christ in the essential parts thereof: see
what rocks you run upon, whilst you forsake the way of truth: it may now
appear no marvil, though you would have baptism to be nakedlie considered,
you have made a most naked baptism and ordinance of Christ of it. First, where
there is no spirit of God, no lawful minister, no right party, to be
baptized, no true comunion it may will be called a naked baptism, and you a
naked man of al grace and godly understanding to maintain it for a true
baptism and ordinance of Christ, in any respect. If all this will not serve to
convince you, we will yet smite you with the rod of from, and break you like
the potters vessel in this point. You profess and acknowledge, that Baptism
comes in the f^ead off Circumcision, then let all men judge, whether if
Circumcision being administered by an unlawful person, upon no right subject,
and in no true Comunion, could ever have been approved for the true ordinance
of God in the essential causes thereoff: and whether one so Circumcised could
upon any conditions have been admitted to the passover? you will (we hope) be
destitute of al devices to a^swere this: al those that are any way
indifferent betwixt you and us, will see your great error herein, that if a
Babilonian had circumcised a Babilonian in their babilonish assemblies, that
Circumcision had not been in any respect the Ordinance of God, and such a one
could upon no condition have been admitted to the passover by that
Circumcision. Now to show that you hold England Babylon in your book
throughout it appears, but we especially hold you to these. Page 277. and
338. where you affirm that Rome and England were never within the covenant of
God, as Judah was: So have you debarred your selff from bringing your
circumcision, and so your baptism from Apostate Israel, and therefore you must
hold your self to this, to prove circumcision administered in Babilo^ by an
unlawful person, upon a wrong subject, and in no true Comunion, you must prove
such a circumcision the Ordinance of God in any respect, and that one so
circumcised might be admitted to the passover, prove this, and we will
confess that your skill is above all men's herein, and Ezra, and Nehemiah
shallbee reproved off you, for causing the people to put away the Children that
were borne off the straing Wives in Babylon. Ezra 10.3. Nehem. 13.23.24.25. Off
whom if you make question whether they were circumcised you cavell without
cullor, for then had the Israelites been guilty of the breach of the Lords
covenant, whereby they were commanded to circumcise all their males in their
household. But we will leave you to prove your Babilonian Circumcision to be
in any respect the Ordinance off God, and prove it by Scripture, and by sound
reasoning from the ground off Scripture, and not by Lodgick and Natural
Philosophy, showing things in nature to be true, which will not in Spirit be
proved true: And thus do you deceive natural men, and your self, as in this
point in hand, because with your carnal eyes and ears you see and hear
water, and washing, with such words to be used in the administration off the
Lords Baptism, therefore you according to your natural understanding judge
these things to be the essential causes of spiritual Baptism, and teach
simple souls that these things being once truly done they are not to be
repeated or done again, when they are wholly natural actions, and prophanelie
done, as you confess, and therefore can in no respect be said to be the
Baptism off Christ, which is wholly a spiritual action, and ought holilie to
be performed and done. Thus do you make the ignorant believe that you can put
the spirit off grace into natural actions formerlie prophanelie done, and make
the same actions Spiritual and acceptable to God.

Thus do you make Mid-wives baptism good, and the holy ordinance of God in
the essential causes: so can you make all the profane prayers and sermons in
plays, (which are usual) holy, and good actions, and the Ordinances of God.
This then is your rule (deny it if you can) every washing with water into the
name off the Father, etc. is the true Baptism and Ordinance of Christ, in the
essential causes thereof, by whom soever administered, and upon what person, or
thing, soever: This may be good in lodgick and Philosophy, but this is
blasphemous cursed doctrine in divinity: and woe are we for you, that ever
such abominations should be uttered by you: we are a shamed to follow you in
the particular application of these things, which if they should be urged to
the full, it would make every heart that had any grace, and knows you,
tremble, and greive for you, This has your Lodgick and Philosophy brought you
to, whereby you have confounded many a simple heart, and weak understanding,
and whereby (you think) you have a Privilege to understand the meaning off
God, in the Scriptures, before them that are ignorant of these Arts: But now
has the Lord confounded you in them, glory to be his Name, and the Lord give
you a heart to acknowledge it, and to repent, and deny your self and give
glory to God. We will omit to speak off your improper speech, saying, that
Baptism must be clothed with a right person upon whom it must be administered:
Thus to make your ma^ters to agree, you speak preposterous things, for the
party must put on and be clothed with baptism, and not baptism be clothed
with the party.

The next thing, that (by the help of our God) we will endeavor to discover
you to be a false Prophet, and a deceaver in, is in a strong ground you have,
whereupon you much rely and often repeat it in your book, and that is this:
You say: Baptism is the vessel off the Lord, and as when the house of the Lord
was destroyed, and the vessels thereof, together with the people were carried
into Babylon, they remained still the vessels off the Lords house in nature, and
right, though profaned by Belshazzar. and made quaffing bowls, and being
brought again out of Babylon to the house of the lord were not to be new
cast, but (being purified) might again be used to holy use: So this holy
vessel Baptism though profaned in Babylon being brought again to the house
of the Lord, remains still the holy vessel off the Lord. This is a strong
doctrine from example both with you, and all the rest of the false Prophets off
your profession, and no marvil though you deceive greatly hereby, because the
doctrine and example is good, but most deceitfullie misaplyed of you, for you
pretend hereby as though your baptism were brought from the house of the Lord,
as the holy vessels were: will you, if there be any vprightnes in you show
how, and from what house of the Lord, your holy vessel of baptism was
brought? you show us plainly from whence you have brought it again out of
Babylon, that is England: But out of what house of God came it, before it came
into Babylon (that is England) that is not showed: how deceitfully do you feign
these things: These are the imaginations off your own vain hearts, far have
any of you brought your Baptism from the house of the Lord into England? have
you any other root or foundation for your baptism then England: do not all
men know that your vessel off Baptism was composed, formed, framed and made
there? How shall any man be able to open his mouth to deny this? Why then
your holy vessel (falflie so called) was made in Babylon: Thus are you found
false dissemblers to say and feign that your baptism is a vessel brought out
of the house of the Lord into Babylon: as the vessels of the Temple were, when
it is most evident that it was molded and made in the Church of England, which
you confess is Babylon. Mr. Rob. had not you and al your Congregation the true
matter (as you call it) and true form of your baptism in England? and was it
not administered upon you al in the assemblies of England? then was your vessel
off baptism made there: see your deceit herein, if there be any grace or
understanding in you: How have you blinded the eyes of the simple herein, and
how has Satan seduced you, and your own heart deceived you? Now the Lord
Jesus give you a heart to repent, and in the name of the Lord, we beseech you
repent, for you have been and are a malicious adversary of Gods truth, and you
lead many souls in the way to destruction. The lord for his Christ's sake
deliver you out of these and all the snares ^f Satan, and the Lord deliver his
people out of the net, wherein you have like a cuning fowler taken the^ and
overthrown them. And we pray you that you will with patience suffer us to show
you, how you are al deceived in this point, in saying, baptism is the vessel
off the Lords house, and brought from thence, and so apply it to your own
baptism, which you may see, if you do not both winck and cover your eyes
never came out of the house of the Lord, except you will say: The Church of
England is the house of the Lord, which we hope the Lords word has convinced
to al your consciences that it is not therefore your baptism; can not be the
vessel of the Ls. house, but it is the true doctrine or Ordinance of baptism,
that may be said or called by way of comparison the vessel of the Lords house:
and this we and al must needs confess is the vessel of the Lords house whether
soever it is carried, either to Rome, or England, and though it be polluted and
profaned there, as both it, and many other doctrines and ordinances of the
Lord are, yet being purged from those errors and abuses, wherewith both they
and you have and do pollute the^, they may, and ought to be brought into the
house of the Lord again, and remain holy vessels unto the Lord for ever: but
the corrupt pollutions and administrations in this holy vessel or ordinance of
baptism, wherewith it has been defiled and profaned, these may no more be
brought into the house of God, then Belshazzars quaffings, or any other
profane administrations wherewith he did abuse and pollute those holy vessels,
yea although he had used them to the same uses unto the which they had been
used in the house of the Lord, as if he had set shewbread upon the vessels,
and had kindled and made the same lights for the candlesticks, al must be cast
away as abominable, withal the uses that he had used them unto, and the
vessels must be purified and brought again into the house of the Lord only
as they were carried forth: therefore even so must this holy vessel the true
doctrine or ordinance of baptism he brought again into the house of the Lord
only as it was carried forth, and all the corrupt uses and abuses whereunto it
has been used, and all the profane administratio^s in this holy ordinance,
must be cast away as being al abominable before the lord: and none off those
uses and profane, and false administratio^s may be admitted into the house of
the Lord. This now is the some of all that we have spoken of this ground: the
vessels of the Lords house are carried into Babylon, and Belshazzar and his
Princes, his wives and Concubines drinck in the^ and profane the^, the vessels
off the Lord are brought again to the house of the lord, and are sanctified,
but Belshazzars drinckings in them, and profaning of the^, is cast away as
abominable

So the like may be said, following your own example of comparison: The vessel
of the Lords house the holy ordinance of baptism, is carried into Babylon,
and the Babilonians they wash or baptize in this ordinance, and profane it:
this vessel of the lord the holy ordinance of baptism is brought again to
the house of the Lord, but the Babilonians washing, or baptizing, and
profaning it must be cast away as abominable, and thus must your baptizing be
cast away and may not be permitted in the house of the Lord, you confessing
England to be Babylon where you received it, except you will also admit
Belshazzars drinckings and quaffings. Do not still deceive your self and delude
others, in saying baptism is the vessel off the lord, making a deceitful
show, as though therefore your Baptism were the vessel of the Lord, and by an
example of the vessels of the lord that were brought forth of the house of the
lord, and carried into Babylon and polluted there in use only, and being
sanctified from that polluted use, were brought again into the house of the
Lord: by this example to bring in an ymagination, as though your Baptism were
brought out of the house off the Lord, when it is brought forth off the
assemblies off England with whom you justify, God never made Covenant and
that they never were his people, nor God their God. page 338. You er not knowing
the scriptures, or else will fully misaplie them for your purpose (which God
forbid) for it is the Ordinance of Baptism; that is the vessel of the Lords
house which has been, and is carried into Babylon, and has been polluted in
use in Baptizing of you and al of your profession, which vessel or Ordinance of
the Lord, is to be brought again into the house of the Lord, and to be
sanctified from that polluted use of your Baptizing, which it cannot be if it
bring that polluted use which is your baptizing into the house of the Lord with
it, no more then the vessels of the Lord could have been sanctified if
Belshazzars quaffings had been brought into the house of the Lord with them,
and this is a due proportion according to your own example of comparison.

We will pass by many things in your book wherein their is great falsehood
and deceit, because it were an endless work to follow you, you are so
intricate, tedious; and full of turnings, and windings, loosing your self and
loosing such simple Readers as we are, and that is one hope we have of your
book, that the simple will not read it, because they are not capable of
understanding you: and amongst them that are as full of art as your self we
think it will do small hurt. We cannot deny but there are many worthy
truths in it, but mixed with so much falsehood, as the reader had need to be
wise hearted, and in that you and all the false Prophetts of your profession do
mix your falsehood with diverse truths, all Gods people had need to beware of
you, for that is but your Sheep clothing, by the fair show whereof you in
snare, and work your lying wonders, as when you smite men's hearts to the ground
with laying out the deformities off Babylon, and ca^^sir their affections with
the discriptions of your Syon (falsely so called) declaring the beauty and
supposed comely order thereof: and setting forth the comunion of Saints, as
with the tongue of an Angel of light. Thus do you deck your bed with ornaments,
Carpets, and laces, and perfume it with mirrhe, aloes, and Cinnamon, and so with
your great craft cause men to yield, and with flattering lips you entice, many
straight following you as an Ox that goes to the slaughter, and as a fool to
the stocks for correction, and they are stricken through as a bird that hastes
to the snare, not knowing he is in danger, of such has the wiseman by the
wisdom of the spirit forwarned us. Prove, 7.

We have endeavored to show you your halting betwixt Babylon and Israel, we
exhort you to tread straight stepps before the Lord, and that men may see your
paths to be right: show us the writing of your Genealogy, that we may see
certenlye from whence you are come: if you be come from Israel, and be Judah,
then war not against England as against Babilonians, but remember they are the
Ten Tribes your brethren, 1. King. 12. 24. Which Ten Tribes were no: falfe
Isralites / but the true seed of Abraham and so true Isralites, for the two
Calves set up at Dan and Bethel, did no more make them false Israelites, then
the Calfe which they made in Horeb: and this wickedness of Jeroboam did no more
make Israel a false Church, the Solomon his wickedness made Judah a false
Church, when he followed Ashtaroth the God of the Zidonians, and Milcom the
abomination of the Amorites, and builded high places for Chemosh the
abomination of Moab, and to Molech the abomination of Ammon in the mountain
over against Jerusalem, And who knows not that reads the scriptures that
Judah abounded in abominations, in so much as the Lord by the Prophet Ezekiel
16. says of Judah, Samaria has not committed half they sins, but thou haist
exceeded them in all their abhominatio^s and verse. 35. The Lord by the Prophet
called Judah an Harlot, because of the greatness of her fornications: and yet all this made not Judah a falfe Church. If therefore you hold or account England
as Israel, then must you hold and account England a true Chur. for it is but
your devisings to say Israel was a false Church: and if England be as Israel
a true Chur. then are al your sins exceeding great, who have made such a
separation as you have. And if you be come from Babylon, then look the whole
book off God throughout, and you shall find that no Babilonian circumcision
could be admitted into the house of the Lord. And let all behold in the book
of the Revelation what the estate and condition off Babylon is, and of al them
that are in her: and how the voice off the Lord is come out of her my people:
and if any shall worship the Beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or in his hand, or receives the print of his name, he shall drink of
the wine of the wrath of God. Therefore there may nothing be retained that is
brought from Babylon, no mark, nor print off name: And will you bring the
Print, seal, and name of your Christianity from thence? what veil of darkness
overspreads your hearts herein? you are deceived through the vain ymaginations
of your own hearts supposing that although you come out of Babylon, yet you
were not Babilonians, but if you hold the assemblies of England Babylon, (as
you declare you do) then, except you can show your genealogy, that you, with
your vessel of baptism (which is your baptizing) were brought from Jerusalem,
and out of the house of the Lord, if you cannot prove this, (which were duble
folly to go about) ^hen must you be con^ent to know your selves that you were
Babilonians, and yet are, in that your seal of Christianity is the seal of
Babylon, and so are you but Babilonian Christians, and servants of the Beast
bearing the beasts mark, title, and name in your foreheads. And whereas you
and all the rest of the false Prophets of your profession do in flattery and
dissimulation, not knowing the mystery of Godliness, affirm and acknowledge of
the assemblies in England, that there are thousands among them that truly
fear God, alluding to the seven thousand in Israel, you make them believe
thereby, that they stand in the estate of grace and salvation, so do you
prophecy peace and salva^ion, where the lord prophesies destruction: for the
Lord prophesies that all that come not forth of Babylon, shall be partakers of
her plagues: and that whosoever yields any obedience or braces any mark of
the Beast, shall be tormented with fire and brimstone. Reve. 14. but you
prophecy that there are thousands in England (which you acknowledge to be
Babilo^) who receives not the beasts mark and that are careful to keep the
comaundements off God, and faith of Jesus: and that truly fear God, if such
be not in the estate of salvation then no flesh is, or can be, but this
cannot be the estate of any one in Babylon, which (if you understood the
mystery off Godliness) you might easily see, for the bondage of Babylon is
spiritual bondage, and all that are in Babylon, are in spiritual bondage, and
none that are in spiritual bondage can be in the estate of grace and
salvation: For all that are in the estate of grace and salvation must stand fa^
in the liberty wherewith Christ has made them free, and may not be entangled
with the yock of bondage. Gal. 5.1. And where the spirit of the Lord is there
is liberty. 2. Cor. 3.17. Add unto this that which is formerlie showed, that
all that come not forth of Babylon, must perish with Babylon. Deceive not your
selves therefore, and flatter not them off England, for there is no one person
either of them or you (we speak off persons of understanding) that are in the
estate of grace or salvation, or shall ever be saved, if you come not forth of
Babylon, and cast away the mark of the Beast, wherewith you are al marked.
Revel 19.20.21. We exhort you all therefore that by grace in Christ you work
out your salvations with fear and trembling: or else you perish from the
highest to the lowest. The King off Kings, the Lord of Lords, has said it,
that Babylon shall be destroyed, withal that are found in her. Ier. 51.6 Revel.
18.4.

We will now conclude with you, putting you in remembrance, that seeing no
distinction, nor difference can be made betwixt a false Church and no Church,
but they are both one: For a false Church are they that say and make show,
they are a true Church but are not: as false Apostles are they that say and
make show they are Apostles, and are not. 2. Cor. 11.13. and false Jews are
they that say and make show they are jews, and are not. Re. 2 This your
distinction being utterly overthrown, so as you shall never be able to open
your your mouths to maintain it: But the simplest soul amongst you shall be
able to discover your deceit: Your whole false building is at once fallen to
the ground, for a false Church being no Church, then England being by you all
adjudged to be a false Church, is no Church: so is your baptism brought out
of no Church: and your false Baptism is no Baptism: and thus shall the
simplest amongst you be able to say to you, is our baptipsme that we had in
England a false baptism? then is it no baptism, then are we not Baptized, and
to this you shall never be able to answer them, although you should set your
selves to vercaie Gods truth, and their souls: so likewise if you tell them
that England is a false Church, they shall say unto you then is it no Church:
and you shall not know which way to contradict the^ in that the scriptures do
teach that a false Church is no Church, as a false God is no God, a false
Christ no Christ, a false Appostle no Appostle, so is a false Ordinance no
Ordinance off Christ, a false Baptism no Baptism off Christ. Thus we doubt
not but (through the grace of God) we shall see by the brightness of Christ's
coming, that your dark deceitful ways will be discovered to the simplest, and
you shall be ashamed to speak of a false baptism, and to say, it is partly
the true baptism of Christ, and partly the baptism of the Devil, and so
join Christ and Beelzebub together, and make them partners in one baptism.
We hope the fear off God will teach you better wisdom ^hen thus still to
blaspheme, for the supporting of your kingdom off darkness. And if you were not
a stifnecked people, and of uncircumcised hearts and races, you would not thus
long with contempt and violence have resisted the truth of God, as you have
done and do, persecuting it with bitter envyings and raylings, for the which
the Lord may justly give you up to hardness of heart: but the Lord in great
mercy, show mercy upon you al, that do it ignoratlie: we having from the
word of the Lord showed you with all the evidence of truth that we are for the
present able to do, that your distinction betwixt a false Church and no Church,
is vain and fained, and that the word of God admits of no such distinction in
the Lords Ordinances, but that which is a false Ordinance, is no Ordinance off
God, for God has no false Ordinances: You must therefore now be forced to hold
and say off the assemblies off England, that they are either true Churches of
Christ, or no Churches of Christ: and if you hold them no Churches of Christ,
then can you not with any manner of show, of truth say, that you may retain
your baptism which you have received in no church of Christ, but in a church
or congregation of infidels and unbelievers, which you must needs account them,
if they be no Church of Christ: for now al people in the world, are either of
the world or chosen out of the world, and those are Christ's disciples Ioh.
15.19. And al people are either with Christ, or against Christ. He that is not
with me, is against me, says Chr. Mat. 12-30. It is now high time to leave of
halting between opinions and ^a^^ering one another in our sins: It is time
now to leave of talking of Separation, and to separate indeed, and to tell the
people of God their sins, and show them their transgressions: and not to
account them Christians that by the hearing of the word do become almost
Christians as King Agrippa did, but to show the^ that if they do not become
altogether Christians they must be content to be accounted infidels as Agrippa
was, for all the world are either believers or infidels. If there be any
knowledge of God in men, they will grant thus: and who will not grant that all
that believe in Christ Jesus, are holy and Elect, and shall be saved, if they
continue to the end. Concerning England therefore, you must either make the
tree good, and the fruit good, or the tree evil, and the fruit evil. If the
faith off the Church of England be a true faith, then is the Church of England
a true Church: and if the faith be a false faith, then it is a false Church,
that is, no faith of Christ, and no Church of Christ: and if their faith be no
faith of Christ, the^ are they al infidels and unbelievers, of whom, although
you have so accounted by your walking toward the^, yet by your words you
declare them to be otherwise, when you are urged to speak plainly, though
in your writings you show them to be infidels, when you affirm that God never
made Covenant with them: But you have too long walked deceitfullie in this
point, therefore we press you to it, if you profess vprightnes either to God
or men, to manifest in all plainenes, whether you hold the assemblies off
England, believers in Christ? Let us have no respects, no duble respects, nor
no putting off difference off persons: for all the Church off England are one
body, seeing they all drink of one Cup, 1. Cor. 12 And if you hold them
believers in Christ, and truly baptized into his name, then are they your
brethren, and you may not account them as enemies, but admonish them as
brethren. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.15. Then is your separation most wicked, and your
building of new Churches contrary to all rule of Scripture, and you have
falsely appi^ed the voice of the Angel. Crieing against England, Babylon is
fallen, she is fallen. Come out of her. If they be believers in Christ Jesus,
the voice of this Angel can not be applied unto them, you must walk toward
them by an other rule, even by that rule which Christ has appointed, that all
should walk by toward their brethren, if they sin Mat. 18. and not
separate from them and build Churches upon new foundations. If in this our
writing concerning you called Brownists we be judged to convince sharply,
we hold it lawfully done, because you are a froward generation, and great
deceivers of mynds: making a glorious vain shaw to come out of Babylon: but
do not: and notwithstanding that we have written in some things sharply, we
could desire to be fe^ed from froward suspects, which you might free us from,
the rather because there are diverse off you both near and dear unto us, whom
we require in love (as we do all) to apply the sharpest reproves to
themselves, for they had need. And touching you Mr. To. remember that you have
a letter of most loveing respect in your hands concerning these things, to
which you have not made answer, whereby to prevent the publishing of this that
especially concern you.

Now as we have said unto you called Brownists in this point, so say we to
England, and to the Presbitary. If the Pope and they off that profession be
believers in Christ Jesus, and be truly baptized into his name, then have
you of England and all the Nations off the Earth sinned greatly to separate
from Rome in that you were al off one body, and members one of another, and
being believers in Christ Jesus, they are your brethren, and you ought to walk
toward them as brethren, and ought not to separate from Rome as you have done,
and do, and build new Churches every one upon several foundations. If you of
England, and the Presbitary, and you called Brownists did make any conscience
to walk by the rules of Christ herein, you would not walk toward Rome as you
do, If you hold them believers in Christ Jesus, and truly baptized into his
name, which if they be, then are all the scriptures that are applied against
Rome to prove her Babylon, and that Great whore that sits upon many waters,
and upon the scarlet cullored Beast, and Antichrist, al these scriptures are
misapplied to Rome, these cannot be applied to, any Persons or People that
are believers in Christ Jesus, and have put on Christ by baptism. And there is
no voice of the Lord that calls to come out from believers in Christ Jesus, the
scriptures teach no such thing: Therefore Brownists must return to the Church
of England, and the Church of England and the Presbitary must return to Rome,
and be al Sheep of one sheepfold, and repent of your unjust separation from
the body whereoff you were, and are all members, we say, are all members
because by one spirit you are all Baptized into one body, and though you say
you are not off the body with the Church of Rome, are you therefore not of the
body? 1. Cor. 12.13.15. You have and do al by one baptism put on Christ, and
you al have brought that your baptism from Rome, and so are you all Christians
and believers by succession from Rome, and you al account Rome believers in
Christ: Therefore though you say you are not off one body with Rome, yet you
are all members of one body with Rome.

Furthermore if Rome be believers in Christ Jesus then are these Prophesies of
scripture no where to be found fulfilled upon the whole earth: First the
prophecy off Christ. Mat 24. Off the Abomination of desolation set in the
holy place, is not to be seen: the days of such great tribulation, as was
not from the beginning of the world, in which days no flesh shall be saved, and
except they should be shortened, al flesh should be condemned, these days are
not yet heard of: And the Prophecy off Daniel the Prophet 9.27. and 12.11 Who
prophesied, that the Sacrifices and the oblations shall cease, and the daily
sacrifices shall be taken away: this Prophisie cannot yet be come to pass, if
Rome be believers in Christ, and that their sacrifices and oblations be the
true sacrifices and oblations, for Romes sacrifices and oblations have never
ceased: and the Prophisie of thapostle 2. These. 2. Who Prophesies that there
shall come a departing, this prophesy is in no part fulfilled, if Rome be
believers, except it be fullfilled in them that have departed from Rome, and
then the Church off England, and all the Presbitarie had need to look to it
who first departed: But if Rome and England and the Presbitarie, and the
Brownists be al believers, and of the faith of Jesus, then has there been yet
no departing from the faith, but a great increasing far beyond the primitive
times in that the scriptures no where show, of whole Nations, Kingdoms, and
Countries, to be of the faith off Jesus as now there is, yea a great whole
part of the world, the like was never heard off, nor Prophesied of if all you
be believers as you either are all believers or al infidels, for you are al of
one faith and baptism: But if you be believers, there is no departing yet
heard off, neither is the man off sin yet disclosed or reveiled, nor exalted,
nor sits or has sitten as God in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is
God: there is no such prophecy yet come to pass. And if Rome be al
believers in Christ, that prophecy Revel. 11. Where it is prophesied that the
people and kindreds, and tongues, and Gentiles shall see the Corpse of the two
witnesses of the Lord, killed and lie in the streets of the great City which
spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt, and that the inhabitants of the earth
shall rejoice over them: this prophecy cannot yet be accomplished nor begun.
And if Rome be believers, then that prophecy of the first beast to whom is
given a mouth to speak great things and blasphemies, and to make war with the
Saints, and to overcome them: and to whom power is given over every kindred
and tongue and Nation, so that all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him.
And that Prophecy of the where that sits upon many waters, with whom have
committed fornication the Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the
earth are made drunck with the wine of her fornication. All these prophesies
and many more cannot in any measure be fulfilled, or begun, if the Church of
Rome be believers and of the faith off Jesus.

And if these prophesies be not fulfilled nor begun, then has the mystery of
iniquity that began to work in Thapostles days, to the exaltacion of the man
off sin, give^ ever working, which were contrary to the prophecy of
Scripture, and that may not be. Let Rome therefore and all that profession see
and consider that al these prophesies of exaltations are fulfilled in that
profession, and thus is their glory their shame: for they glory in nothing
more then in their exaltation, and great power, authority and magnificencie
of their Church, and all that is true, and thereby is this also true, that all
these prophesies are fulfilled in that their exaltation: the which you of the
Church of England, and the whole Presbitarie confessing, and protesting against
them for the same, you must needs hold them al infidels and unbelievers, except
you will fall into great blasphemy and say, that they are believers who execute
the power of the man of sin, and cause the sacrifices and oblations to cease,
and to be taken away from the alter of the Lord, so as there are no sacrifices
offered unto him. Will any say that these are believers that take from the
Lords alter his daily sacrifices? causing that none shall be offered unto him,
if these be believers that utterly overthrowe the worship of the lord, then
can there be no infidels.

Further, you cannot say the church of Rome are belevers except you will say
they are belevers that depart away from the faith, and are the ministers of the
man sin exalting a power, above the power of God, and setting up this power
(the ministers whereof they are) to sit as God in the Temple of God, making
show of that power that it is the power of God, when it is the effectual
working of Satan with all his power and signs and lying wonders, and they that
are subject in this power are such, as the holy ghost testifies, receive not
the love of the truth, and which beleve not the truth. Ca^ you of the church of
England: and you of the Presbitarie: and you that are called Brownists that
hold this Prophecy is fulfilled in that exaltation of the Romish profession,
can you hold these to be believers in Christ? of whom the Lord says they
receive not the truth, nor believe nor the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness, and exalted a power against God, to be worshipped as God, wha^
wickedness and blasphemy is this to say, these are Christians and believers in
Christ.

Moreover you cannot say that the Romish Professors are believers, except you
will say they are believers that set up the first Beast, and are the ministers
off that power or Beast, which Beast or Power, has 7. heads and 10. horns,
and upon his horns 10. crowns and he is like a Leopard, and his feet like a
Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, to whom the dragon gives his
power, throne and authority, all this do they of that profession, and not
this only, but they also worship the dragon which gives power to the Beast,
and they worship the Beast, saying who is like the Beast, who is able to feight
with him: and they being the ministers off this Beast or Power do in their
ministration, open their mouths to blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell therein: and by this Power, they
have made war with the Saints and overcome them. Can you without great
blasphemy against the holy one off Israel, the most high God, say, that these
are belevers in Christ Jesus, and Christians? That do these fearful things,
seeking to destroy God, and the faith of Jesus, and all his Saints that hold
the faith of Jesus, if you cannot say, that they which do such things are
believers and Christians, then cannot you say, that they of the Romish
profession are believers or Christians, but that they are infidels and
vnbelevers seeing you confess this Prophecy is fulfilled in the Romish
profession, so are al these things done by the^. And moreover to these the
prophecy. Revel. 17. of the woman, and the Beast, and the Ten Kings, that give
their power and authority to the Beast, these feight with the Lamb: Can you
say that any of the^e are believers and Christians? that feight against the
lamb: No, the Spirit off God testifies in this place, that they which are
called, and chosen, and faithful are on the lambs side, They then that feight
against the lamb are those that are not called, nor chosen, nor faithful:
therefore must they needs be infidels and vnbelevers. Al these prophesies
being confessed of you to be already accomplish by, and under that Romish
profession, how shall you of the church of England and the Presbitarie be able
to say that they of the church of Rome are believers and Christians: and if
they be not believers and Christians, then are they infidels and unbelievers,
and so is your baptism and minist^rie off England, and the Baptism off the
Presbitarie, and all the ordinances that you have received from Rome to be cast
away, as the marks of the Beast, and most abhom^nable to the Lord.

But it shall not be a miss seeing there arises so just an occasion to show,
(the Lord directing us) the ground and root of all this evil and sin,
against the majesty and holiness of God, against all which you off England, and
the Presbitarie, sin, in accounting Rome and all them of that profession
Christians, although all these abominations which we have showed in all these
prophesies, (and might be showed in many more) be committed, and to this day
maintained by them, to the highest dishonor of God, in exalting the man of
sin to sit as God in the Temple of God, and to the utter polluting of all the
holy ordinances of God, in abolishing the witness of the Lord his word and
Spirit, and killing the Saints, feighting against the Lamb, making all the
Nations of the earth to worship the Beast, and to drink of the wine of her
fornications that sits upon many waters, notwithstanding all this, these you
account Christians, upon this ground and from this root because when they are
infants, they are washed with water in the name off the Father, ere, and you
approve that they are Baptized when they are infants because they are the seed
of Christians and of the faithful.

What words might we take to our selves to make your madness, and the madness of
all the world, herein to appear, who pretend that all the seed of Christians and
of the faithful are to be Baptized only, and under this pretense baptize, and
approve of the baptizing of the seed of all the wicked and ungodly in these
parts of the World, yea those that have been wicked to the third and fowrth
generation, and to the tenth generation enemies of God, and bloody persecutors
of his truth, destroying the faith of Jesus, and advanceing the man of sin:
The seed of all these are baptized, and by reason of this Baptism they are all
held and accounted Christians by you, although they walk in the stepps off
their Forefathers. Is there any knowledge of God in these things? Or do men
think that now under the Gospel they may do and approve off what they will?
will men neither walk by the Law of God, nor by the law they propound unto
themselves? Do you set down a Law to your selves that the infants off the
faithful are to be Baptized, and do you approve off the Baptizing of the
infants of the enemies of God, that feight against the lamb and the infants of
some also, that have not so much faith as the Devils, who believe and tremble:
In the word of unspeakable wisdom has the holy Ghost said that the Nations
shallbee drunck with the Wine of her Fornications: Who may not see this
Prophecy fullfilled* For if men were not druncke so as they can neither see
their way, nor tell what they say, they would not walk thus, and speak thus,
like drunken men.

The Church of England and the Presbitarie do allow of the Baptizing of all the Infants of Rome, whose Pope and Cardinals and al their whole ministry that
administer the baptism, and the parents of the infants that are baptized, and
those infants being already come to be men of years, would destroy their
Kings, and Princes, and Countries, and al them, for professing Christ as they
do: are these the seed of the faithful? and is this to baptize and allow of
the baptism of the seed of the faithful? Wey wi^h your selves what truth their
is in this? And the Brownists they approve of the baptism and baptizing of
the^, whose parents persecute their own children for walking in their way: are
these the seed of the faithful? What blindness and invprightnes is this, to
profess a ground, and walk by no ground. You must agree (if you can) among
your selves, and make a new law, this (you se) will not serve your turn, for if
you allow none to be baptized but the seed of the faithful, you will not have
whole Countries and Nations all Christians, as you have: It is apparent
therefore whatsoever you say, that you hold that al infants whether their
parents be faithful or unbelievers shall be baptized: your rule then is, that
both the seed of the faithful and unfaithful shall be Baptized, and that is your
practice: what warrant ca^ be found for this? or it is no matter whether there
be warrant or no? You allege circumcision for your ground, that because
infa^ts were circumcised, therefore infants must be Baptized, but yet you
cannot find that the infants off any people were to be circumcised, and if
any were circumcised but those that God commanded, he Lord, nor his faithful
servants never approved off it: And will you now, approve of any Baptism, and
make it good? and yet make circumcision your example? The Lord persuade your
hearts and the hearts of all men to begin while it is day, to examine the ground
of your p^actice herein, that you may stand before the Lord in the last day,
and through Christ be able to approve that you have walked by the strict rule
off Gods word, and not by the vain inventions of men which God hates, and let
al Gods people hate, but his law let them love, which is a perfect Law, and
converteth the soul, and it is pure and gives light to the eyes. Psalm. 19.
But by this your practice, it is made a most inperfect law when you say, that
the infants of the faithful are to be Baptized only, and when you have laid
that down for your law, you both Baptize, and approve for good the Baptism
off the infants of he unfaithful and unbelievers, and enemies off God, and his
truth: this is neither perfect nor pure law, therefore it is not the law of
God. You there that wait for salvation by Christ Jesus may not walk by that
imperfect and impure law, but must seek diligently with your whole hearts,
the law and statutes off the Lord, that you may keep them: which lov^ when you
shall diligently and faithfully search into through out, you shall no where find
it once mentioned that any infants are to be Baptized, and therefore it is but
the mere vain invention and tradition of men, which who so follows can
never have favor nor acceptance with God, because they make the Law off God,
of no authority. Mark. 7.13. In this great and weighty cause, we will not
(through the grace of God burden you with many grounds, or arguments, but lay
down before you some few things withal the plainnes and evidence of truth
wherewith God shall make us able.

And first, we pray al those whose hearts God has inclined to seek his truth,
and who desire in vprightnes to walk in the light, that they will duly
consider what the Covenant of the Gospel is, and with whom it is made: and
thus has the Lord set it down. This is the Covenant says the Lord, that I
will make with the house of Israel, I will put my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their ^a^ts and I wilbee their God, and they shall be my people.
Iere. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. And our Savior Christ declares this more fully. Mark.
16.16. Where he says. Go ye into all the World and preach the Gospel to every
Creature, he that shall believe and be baptized shall be saved. Thus does the
Lord by his spirit, in the preaching of the Gospel, put and write his law in
the hearts of men, according to the Parrable of the sower. Mat 13.23. And they
shall believe in him and be Baptized: Thus they shall be his people: and he will
save them, and so is he their God. Here is the new Covenant set down by the
Holy ghost, both on Gods behalf, and on their behalf with whom it is made,
and here is it plainly declared and expounded by Christ himself. The Lord on
his behalf does Covenant that he will put and write his law in men's h^res, by
the power of his spirit in the preaching of the Gospel, and he wilbee their God
and save them: and the Covenant on his peopls behalf which they are to keep
and perform is, to believe the Gospel and be Baptized. Let al men now that
have any willingness of heart to be informed by the word of God, and whose
hearts are not wilfully set, to go on in their igno^ (...) ^old ways, without
trying their ways whether they be of God or no: let them we say search,
examine, and try by what show of truth, it can possibly be conceived, that
under, or by this Covenant of the new Testament, infants should be baptized
where the Lord requires no such thing in this Covenant of men to baptize their
infants: and if you will but see and consider with wise and gracious hearts, how
the Lord does set down the Covenant which he made with Abraham. Genesis 17. You
shall see with what evidence the Lord in mercy does set it down. Thus says
the Lord to Abraham I will establish my Covenant between thee and me, and thy
seed after thee in their generation for an everlasting Covenant to be God unto
thee and thy seed after the, and I will give to thee and to thy seed after thee,
all the Land of Canaan for an everlasting possession, and I wilbee their God:
this is on the Lords behalf: and says the Lord, This is the Covenant that thou
and thy seed after thee shall keep. Let every man-child among you be
circumcised, ye shall circumcise the foreskinne of your Flesh, and every
man-Child at eight days old, as well he that is borne in the house as he that is
bought with money. this is the Covenant on Abraham's behalf* and his seed. Thus
does the lord declare in every particular, his Covenant with his people, as well
what he will do for them, as also what he requires them to do in obedience to
him: and here we see God has commanded Abra, and his seed to circu^cise all the males in their house. And now this Covenant is disanulled, and all the
Ordinances thereof, as is showed. Heb. 7.18. And the Lord says he will make a
new Covenant with the house of Israel, not like the old, teaching us that we
should not form and frame it according to the old, but that we should receive
it, according to the new form and frame wherein he delivers it: under which
Covenant the Lord does not command or require of his people that they should
Baptize all their household, and infants, both borne in their house and bought
with money, according as under the old Covenant, he commanded that they should
circumcise them. How dare you then thus contend against the Lord: and whereas
he says he will make a new Covenant not according to the old, you will say, and
have it according to the old, for you will have it that according as infants
were circumcised under the old Covenant, so you will have infants Baptized
under the new, is not this to set yourselves against the lord and to change his
Covenant: which he has sealed with his blood, and after your own wills in what
you think good, to make it according to the old Covenant, directly contrary to
the Lords own word and saying, and you have no way to mainteyne the baptizing
of infants, but by saying the new Covenant is according to the old, and this is
to say directly contrary to the saying of the Lord, who is the Covenant maker,
and who says, in plain words, the new Covenant which I will make with Israel
shall not be according to the old. Here it is made evident to all that will not
resist the truth, that your baptizing of infants is contrary to the new
Covenant of the Lord. Thus do you to make your own tradition good, make the
new Covenant like the old, which the Lord says is not like the old: how can
you possibly oppose the word of the lord more directly? Furthermore the holy
ghost by the Author unto the Heb. Chap. 9. endeavoring by all evidence to prove
that the new Covenant is not like the old shows that the old Testament or
Covenant had a worldly Sanctuary, and that the service of that Tabernacle only
stood in meats and drincks and diverse washings, and Carnal rites, which
purified the Flesh, but purged not the Conscience: and the holy Ghost shows
there, that the new Testament or Covenant has not a worldly Sanctuary, and
that the service of that Tabernacle stands not in carnal rites, which purge not
the conscience, but (...) is a perfect Tabernacle, the sacrifice where of does
purge the conscience from dead works to serve the ljveing God. Thus does the
scripture show that the ordinances of the new, are not according to the
ordinances of the old, and for this cause says the holy ghost, Christ is the
Mediator of the new Testament, that is: because the new Testament or Covenant
and Cabernacle, and ordinances are not carnal but spiritual: But if you will
have infants Baptized, that is washed with water, and certain words, then you
bring in a carnal rite, which purges not the con^cience, (for you do not hold
that the Infants consciences are purged thereby) and so do you make the new
Covenant, and ordinances, carnal, like unto the old, which may not be, except
you will directly oppose the evident word of the Lord, as you have long herein
done, to your utter destruction except you repent. We disire moreover the
people off God whose hearts are sect to seek his face that they will search the
Scriptures to see what the baptism of the new Testament is declared to be,
which being faithfully searched into shall convince unto all the Earth, that
it cannot apperteyne unto infants.

And first in the gospel according to Mark. 1.4. It is preached by John to be
Baptism of amendment of life, for the remission of sins: And Thapostle Romans
6.4. says. Baptism is a burieing into the death of Christ, that we should
walk in newnes of life: and Gal. 3.26, 27. Thapostle says: Baptism is the
putting on of Christ by faith. How should this Baptism belong unto infants:
can there be amendeme^t off life, for the remission of sins in Infants? and
can Infants be buried into the death of Christ to walk in newnes of life? and
can infants put on Christ by faith? if they can do none of al these things,
which is most plain they cannot, then may they not be Baptized. What were
sufficient to give satisfaction in this long conceived error of baptizing
infants You may see, by the ordinance it self they are not capeable of it: and
you may see that the lord by the covenant does not command nor require any
such thing at the hands of parents to Baptize their Infants and all their
household. The Covenant is that men should believe and be Baptized, but their
is no one word to comaund them to baptize their infants, and all their house
hold. Oh that you would be weary of this your great ignorance, to say that
baptism is the seal of the Covenant, and yet you will seal them, that cannot
receive the seal, and them that are not once mentioned in the Covenant,
bringing in under the Covenant whom you will, without the will and mind of the
Lord: and although the Covenant shall still overthrowe you, that there can none
be under the Covenant, but they which believe and are Baptized, for the Lord
will admit of no other then he has mentioned in his Covenant, though you seal
never so many with water and words: although this might suffice yet we will
endeavor by the Lords assistance to convince you by your own ground.

You cannot deny, but that there is neither rule nor example in all the new
Testament for the Baptizing off infants, whereby you confess that the Mediator
off the new Testament has not appointed it, therefore you are drive^ to prove
it by consequence making your selves and the simple believe, that it must
needs follow by a necessary consequence: that as infants were circumcised, so
must they be baptized. If you will have a necessary consequence of this, then
must you make it off the whole matter and not of part, as you think good, as
thus: He that will be a Proselite must be circumcised, and all the males in
his household: so then if your consequence from this ground be necessary, he
that will be a Disciple of Christ must be baptized and al his household, it
follows* he upon your consequence that no man can be admitted a Disciple
except al his household wilbee baptized: for no man could be admitted a
Proselite except all his males were circumcised. If then a Jew that has a wife
and diverse Children and bondmen (as they have) come to the faith of Jesus, if
his Wife or any of his Children or bondmen will not be Baptized, then cannot
he be admitted to be a disciple of Christ, except you will allow him by his
authority to cause them to be Baptized whether they believe or no, as they
did by their authority circumcise their house hold. Thus must your consequence
stand if you will not be willing to deceive your selves in the means off
your salvation. Deal Faithfully therefore with God and his truth, and his
people, you that take upon you to be guids, and lead not Gods people to
destruction by such deceits as this, that when you have neither rule, nor
example, to prove that infants must be baptized, yea and when the Covenant of
the Lord does evidently debarr them: and the Ordinance off Baptism considered
in it self also, yet you will to bring in and mainteyne, he tradition off your
Elders prove it by a consequence from the Covenant of the old Testament, and
make the new, like the old: When the Lord says it is not like, nor shallbee
according to the old. And if the people off God would but with upright hearts
read diligently, the whole Epistle to the Hebrews, they should (through the
grace off God) find to their full satisfaction the difference betwixt the old
Covenant and the new: and the Preisthood, and the Tabernacle, and the
Ordinances, Services, and Sacrifices set down so plainly as it would make an
end of this controversy, and many more, to the advancement of Gods truth, and
the salvation of the souls of his people, that shall follow him in the
regeneration or new birth, which is to be borne again of water and of the
spirit: In which regeneration or new birth who so follows him not, cannot
enter into the kingdom off Heaven. In that Epistle to the Heb. they that read
shall find (as we have formerly showed) that the old Covenant was a carnal
Covenant and commandment. Heb. 7.16. and as the Lord speaks to Abraham.
Genesis 17.13. speakeing of the Covenant off circumcision, says: my Covenant
shall be in your flesh for an everlasting Covenant, and as the Covenant was, so
was the Preisthood, and the Tabernacle, and the sacrifices / and service, al
carnal and worldly, (...) is withal evidence and plains in that Epistle set
down: but the new Cove^. is not a Cove. in the flesh, but is a Covee^. in the
spirit, a spiritual Cove^. written in the hearts and mynds of Gods people,
established upon better promises then the first Covenant, and all this is
evident by the words off the Covenant, which are: They that believe and are
Baptized shallbee saved: And as this Covenant is spiritual, so is the
Preisthood, so is the Tabernacle, and all the Ordinances, Sacrifices and
services there off, and all this is most plainly set down in that Epistle to
the Hebrews, Which difference betwixt the old and the new Covenant if it were
carefully searched unto, and found out, it would overthrowe your deceitful
consequence which ^yo^ draw from Covena^ts that are dislike, or not a like in
substance, contrary to al understanding: and it would make you cast away your
carnal baptizing of infants and to Baptize no infants, but such infants as were
Babes in Christ, such as are begotten by the imortall seed of the word: and it
would discover unto you your carnal ignorance and blindness in holding that
Isralites beget Isralit snow, as under the law, or that Christians beget
Christians by generation, which has brought in such madness amongst men, as the
Brownists hold and profess, that no infants that dye are under the Covenant of
grace and salvation, but such as they beget. Thus do they only beget infants
that are heirs off salvation, and all this, and much more evil comes upon
making the new Covenant like the old, and so make them both carnal, which you
do herein, in holding that parents begett Children to be under the Spiritual
Covenant by carnal generation.

But because some through the great weakness off their judgment and
understanding cannot see the old Covenant to be a carnal Covenant, we will in
short yet further endeavor to show how it is a carnal or worldly Covenant.
First it was a carnal Covenant in that all the promises that God made to
Abraham in that Covenant of Circumcision were of worldly things, as we may
see Genesis 17.5.6.7. where the Lord says, I will make thee exceeding fruitful, I
will make Nations of thee, yea Kings, shall proceed off the^e: and I will give
thee and thy seed after the all the Land off Canaan for an everlasting
possession. Here is this wh^le Covenant of circumcision which God makes,
wherein there is no promise but of worldly things. Secondly in this
Covenant of circumcision the lord requires, a carnal obedience, that is: Let
every man Child be circumcised in the foreskinne of the Flesh. Thirdly the
judgment for the breatch of this Covenant is a worldly judgment verse. 14. The
uncircumcised man-child in whose Flesh the fore-skinne is not circumcised that
person shall be cut of from his People, because he has broken my Covenant. Add
moreover verse. 13. Where the Lord says: This is my Covenant in your Flesh. Who
wilbee so blind as not to see, that this is a carnal Covenant: Wi^ men be so
void off all understanding, as to say that God makes a Spiritual Covenant with
a people in their Flesh? though men have been so ignorant, let them not be so
ignorante still.

After the like manner as has been spoken off the Covenant, may be spoken of
the Tabernacle, Preisthood, and al those services and carnal rites, in all
which Covenant and worldly ordinances, their is no promise of salvation for
the keeping of them, nor cannot be, because they make not holy concerning the
conscience. Heb. 9.9. Neither sanctify they the comers thereunto. Chap. 10.1.
Nor there is no judgment of condemnation pronounced against any, although they
should presumpteouslie break thine, but bodily death Number. 15.30. Heb. 13.28.
etc. yet through repentance such might be saved: But now under the new
Covenant, which is spiritual, there is promise of salvation to them that keep
it: For he that believes and is Baptized shall be saved. And there is
condemnation pronounced against them that keep it not: he that will not believe
shall be damned: and he tha^ sins presumpteouslie or willingly of knowledge
against this Covenant, or any of the ordinances thereof shall never be
forgiven. Heb. 20.19. Thus may all see that will not winck with their eyes, that
the new Covenant is not likt the old: But is a Covenant established upon better
promises, and that the first Covenant is established upon Worldly or Earthly
promises: But the new Covenant is established upon spiritual or heavenly
promises even of life and salsalvation. The difference of these two Covenants
being with a spiritual eye discerned, it will easily overthrowe that most false
and improper consequence which is drawn from the old Covenant to the new, for
the Baptizing of infants, which consequence if it were rightly laid down,
the darkness of it would easily appear as thus: Under the old Covenant infants
were circumcised in the flesh: so under the new Covenant, infants must be
Baptized in the flesh: what ignorance is this? What wine of Fornication? That
has made drunck al Nations: there is no such Baptism in the new Testament, as
Baptism in the Flesh. God forbid that men should remain still so ignorant as
to think that Christ Jesus in his heavenly Kingdom and new Covenant has
established any carnal rite, or Ceremonial Ordinance the handwriting whereoff
he has put out and abolished, Col. 2.14. And therefore the Baptism of the new
Testament must needs be a spiritual baptism of water and the spirit, Ioh. 3.5.
with which baptism infants cannot be Baptized: so is it great wickedness and a
prop^anation of the holy and divine ordinance off God to use such
administration upon infants, making hereby the ordinance of God of no effect,
there being no benifit or advantage, end, or use of it, for you will al confess
that al infants must be regenerate and borne again, or else they cannot enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven: and our Savior Christ the Savior of us al says,
that they that are borne again must be borne of water and the Spirit. To what
end then is the Baptizing of infants? they not being regenerate thereby.

Furthermore you frame your consequence with these words, as infants were
sealed with the seal of the Covenant under the law, so they must be sealed
with the seal of the Covenant under the Gospel: We demand of you, is washing
with water a seal? If it be a seal, it is a seal in the Flesh, where then
is the print, or impression thereof? It has none, therefore it can be no
seal: Oh how blindlie are the wisemen of the world carried away in these
things, contrary to al understanding, to be brought to ymagine that washing
an infant with water is a seal: are not these vain inventions? without ground
of Scripture, reason, or common sense? Can you walk thus and think to please
God? Will God be pleased with you when you walk in those ways that best
please your own mynds? Be not deceived, God will not hold you gilties for
thus using his name and Ordinance in vain. If you will examine the new
Testament throughout, you shall find no seal, nor none sealed, but they that
believe, who are sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise. Ephesians. 1.13. By which
Holy Spirit we are all Baptized into one body. 1. Cor. 12.13. And there is but
one Spirit, one Baptism, and one body. Ephesians. 4.4.5. Which holy seal of the
Spirit seeing infants cannot have, they cannot be Baptized with that one
Baptism, into that one body: so is your consequence for the baptizing of
infants directly contrary to the Covenant and ordinance of God: the Covenant of
the lord being that they which believe and are baptized shall be saved, and the
ordinance being the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.

To conclude this point with a ground that al who have any knowledge of the
word of God will confess which is this: the Covenant of the new Testament is a
Covenant of life and salvation only to all that believe and are baptized.
Mark. 16.16. The seal off the Covenant must needs be aunswereable to that holy
Covenant: a seal of life and salvation only to them that believe and are
Baptized Ephesians. 1.13.14. Revel. 2.17. and 28. Thappostle here to the Ephesians.
does show that after they believed they were sealed with the holy Spirit of
promise. Let all then confess with whom there is any vprightnes that
infants who cannot believe, (for Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God. Romans 10.17.) cannot be sealed with the seal of this Covenant: it
is not in the power of parents to set this seal upon their infants, as it was
in their power to set the sign of Circumcision upon their Flesh: Therefore is
it not required of them by the Lord: and it is altogether impiety and
wickedness, and a profaning of the holy ordinance of God to take in hand to
administer it upon infants and the Lord will revenge himself for such
wickedness if it be not repented of. But against this ground of truth that the
Covenant of life and salvation is made only with them that believe and are
Baptized, it is objected, that the Covenant is made with them and their seed,
and though many writers write thus, and most men affirm it, yet Mr. Robinson,
being next hand, we will produce his warrant for this ground being as good as
any others, and he as vnadvisedlie overseene in the setting it down: Thus
speaks he in his Book Page 282. The Scriptures every where teach that
parents by their faith bring their Children into the Covenant off the Church,
and entitle them to the promises, little does Mr. Rob think how suddenly in
his accustomed haist he has brought in a meritorious faith, it were to b^
wished, that he and al me^ did see, and feel that their faith is little enough
to bring themselves under the Covenant of God, if it were not for the gracious
and most merciful acceptance off God in Christ: But God has not promissed
any where, to accept to salvation, of the parents faith, for their Children,
nor to condemn them for their parents infidelity, this is but one among many
of Mr. To. doctrines of Devils which he has heaped up in his tedious book:
his proof for his doctrine is. Genesis 17. And we prove his doctrine most false
by Genesis 17. where Abraham his faith, and earnest prayer to God could not bring
Ismael his Child, of 13. year old under that Covenant, verse. 18-21.

Thus is Mr. To. altogether overseene in the scripture that he himself
allegeth: Add moreover to this Genesis 25.23. Where Izhaks faith, could not bring
Esau under the Covenant. Thus may all see that Mr. To. does but quote scripture
for his proof, and not show how it proves his ground. The next proof for
this ground is Act. 2.39. Where Thappostle speaking, to, and of all the
unbelieving Jews and Gentiles says, the promise is made to you and to your
Children, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. How Mr. To. will apply
this to his purpose we know not, but we confess that this promise, (They
that believe and are Baptized shall be saved) is made to all the unbelieving
Jews and Gentiles, and their Children, to this day: but this does no way prove
that the faith of the parents in titles children to the promises, nor that the
promise of salvation is made to the unbelieving Jews and Gentiles, or to their
Children, except they and their children amend their lives and be baptized. And
whereas Mr. Rob. as it should seem understands, children in this place, to be
infants, we will first leave that to him to prove, that thappostle speaks
hear concerning infants, and then we will require of him how he proves, that
the inheritance off the Kingdom of heaven goes by succession of generation, as
the land of Canaan did.

For the second part of his unjust and ungodly affirmation that God takes
occasion by the sins off the parents, to execute his justice to condemnation
upon the children: herein Mr. To. dubles his sin, in that as he has before
made the parents faith the cause of blessing to salvation, which (he says) is
every where to be found in the scriptures, but shows no where: so now he
affirms, that parents infidelity, is the cause of Gods judgment to
condemnation upon their children. Mr. To. propounds his doctrine and rule for a
general rule and doctrine. To prove him a falfe Prophet in this also we refer
the Godly reader to the 1. King. 14. where it is showed, that Abyah the son
off most wicked Jeroboam being but young, was not cursed for his Fathers sins,
and Josiah being but eight year old when his Father died, the Lord blessed him
abundantly in his infancy, notwithstanding all the grevious transgressions of
his Father Ammon. 2. Chro. 33. and 34. Chap. Neither did the Lord punish the
people of Isreal's children for that their great transgression Number. 14.27-39.
when they murmured because of the spies, by which sin, although they so
provoked the Lord to wrath, as he caused al their carcasies to fall, to be
waisted and consumed in the wilderness, not suffering any one of them to go
into the Land of Canaan, save Joshua, and Caleb, yet eve^ then in his anger, he
declared his mercy to al their Children, promissing to bring them into the
Land. Now we confess with Mr. To. that we are al by nature the Children of
wrath: conceived and borne in sin, but we disire to know of Mr. To. whether
he hold not that al Children are alike the Children of wrath? and alike
begotten in sin? or that some parents confer grace by generation more then
others: and if they do not (as we assure our selves you will confess) but that
all Infants are alike in themselves the Children off wrath, then let us see,
not after a sort, but directly, by what evide^ce of scripture it can be proved
(their sins being al alike in themselves) that God should execute his justice
to condemnation upon some children, for the sins of their pa^ents, and show
mercy to salvation upon others for the faith of their parents, seeing the just
God has said, that every one shall receive salvation, or condemnation,
according to that which he has done in the flesh, and not acording to that
which his parents has done. And let al se Mr. To. great iniquity in this his
affirmatio^, in that he bla^sphemously charge the most holy and just God to
punish infa^ts to condemnation, for the actual sins of their parents when
they themselves have not sinned, after the same manner of transgression Romans
5.14. and we pray M.R and al men to consider the words of the lord. Exo. 20.
who says, he will visit the sins of the Fathers upon the children of the^
that hate him which hatred is showed by the breach of his comaundeme^ts: but do
infa^ts hate God and break his comaundeme^ts? you al confess with the Prophet
Eze. 18.14.17. (notwithstanding these words in Exo. 20. That if a wicked man
begett a son that sees al his Fathers sins, which he has done, and
fears, neither does such like, he shall surely live: then must you grant that
the infants of wicked parents that do not such like sin as their parents do,
shall not dye. Thus much to stop M. To. for the present in his speedy courses
who runs his race as though he were strong and none could stay him, but the
lord and his word will overthrowe him in these his ways if he repent not, whose
repentance we much disire to Gods glory, and for his own good.

And now let the covenant of the lord stand firm and good against all the
adversaries thereof, which Covenant is, they which beleve and are baptized,
shall be saved. the words whereof being spoken by him that made it, do with
authority convince to the Consciences of all that will hear them, that this
Covenant is made only with them that are believe and are baptized, which is
with them that of the faith of Abraham. Romans 4.12-16. And not they that are of
the Flesh of Abraham: there are (says thappostle) Children of the Flesh, and
Children off the promise. but the Children of the promise are counted for the
seed. Romans 9.8. How ignorant and obstinate are men become, whom no word of God
can persuade, but they will have the Children off the Flesh, to be the Children
off the promise, and the seed: for they will have the seed of the faithful that
is, all the Children begotten off their bodies, to be the Children of the
promise, and the sead with whom the Covenant is made, saying: the Covenant is
made with the faithful and their seed, meaning all the Children begotten of the
Flesh, yet ^happostle faith, the Children of the flesh are not the seed, but
thapostles testimony will not serve the turn, the Pope says it is not so: and
the Bishops and Presbitary (having learned it of the Pope) say it is not so:
And the Brownists (having learned it of the Bishops) say it is not so: Here
are many witnesses, and they have long and ancient custom, and the fcuyt is
fair to look upon, and pleasant to the eye and mind, that infants are
begotten and borne Christians: the most wicked and profane parents that are,
like this well, that they may be accounted to beget Christians, and that their
Children may be made members off the body off Christ, when they are newborn:
the best men like this well: and the worst like it well: This pleases al Flesh
in these parts of the world, there was never any one doctrine of Christ, nor
of thappostles, that ever was so acceptable to all men: it must needs be
acceptable, because so good a thing is so easily come by. what a geevious
thing would it be if one might not be a Christian, and member of Christ's
body, before they had learned Christ, and to believe in him: this would troble
Children if they should be forced to learn to know Christ before they could
be admitted to be his Disciples, and to be Baptized: and this would be a
great troble to parents that there Children should not be baptized before they
had carefully brought them up in the instruction and information of the Lord:
and this would be a great burden to Bishops and Priests, if they should have
none admitted members of heir Church, until by their diligent and faichful
preaching of the gospel, they were brought to knowledge, faith, and repentance,
and to amend their lives and be Baptized. If these old doctrines of Christ and
his Appostles should now be put in practice it would troble and offend all the
world, being so contrary to al custom, and Counsels, and affections off men. O
crooked and foolish generation, how long shall the Lord bear with you, how long
shall he suffer you, will you make the way broad and wide which he has made
strait and narrow? will you still walk in the traditions of me^ after the lusts
of your own hearts and tread his statutes under your feet? shall the long evil
custom, and false testimony of men, agreeable to your own affections,
overthrowe the divine, and true witness of our Lord Christ and his Apostles?
Does our Savior Christ say, that those with whom he has made the new
covenant are they in whose mynds and hearts he has written his Law, whom he
declares to be those, that believe and are baptized? and will you add unto the
Covenant of the Lord, and say, it is made with the faithful, and their seed
before they can believe? and does Thappostle say, that the seed to whom the
promise is made are they which are off the faith of Abra? and not they that
are of the flesh of Abraham and will you say, that they that are of the flesh of
the faithful, are the seed with whom the Covenant is made? can you device in
your hearts more directly to oppose the Lord, and falsefie his truth, the^ you
do herein? Will you thus contend against the lord and dispite the Spirit of
grace, and trample under foot the blood of the new Testament, and think that
you shall escape, much more punishment, the^ they that despised Moses law?
deceive not your selves, and do not think that God cares not for these
things, and that he regards not the breach of his holy ordinances, because he
seems to hold his peace, in that he strikes you not with bodily judgments: but
except you repent, he will reprove you, and set al these things in order before
you, and tear you in pieces; when there shall be none that can deliver you. Oh
consider this and forget not God: what shall it profit you to have your infants
washed with water, and a few words, whereby the name of the Lord is blasphemed,
and you perish for so profaning his Ordinance? the infant is never the better,
it shall not be saved thereby: and there is no such obedience required at your
hands, let the word off the Lord be your guide in these things, and not the
word of man nor long custom, although it be in a thing that is most pleasing
to your carnal mynds.

Thus leaving to your remembrance that Abraha^s faith could not bring his
Children under the Covenant in that it did not bring Ismael, nor any one of
his six sons that he had by Keturah his Wife, under the Covenant, Genesis 25.
and therefore that is a most deceitful and false ground to say, that they were
circumcised, because they were under the Covenant, and that they are under the
Covenant by Abraham's faith, for then had al Abraham's bondmen and household been
under the Covenant, and Ismael whom the Lord denies to be under the Covenant,
and yet he, and they al were commanded to be circumcised.

This then is the ground of truth, which cannot be gainsaied, that all the males
free, and bond, that were borne in Abraham's house, or bought with his money,
which were not of his seed, were al to be circumcised because it was the
Covenant that God commanded Abraham to keep, to circumcise al his males: and
not because they were al under the Covenant of circumcision by Abraham's faith,
this is but a vain invention of the man of sin, and a mystery of iniquity to
deceive them that have pleasure in unrighteousness, having no show, nor
warrant of scripture, to say they were circumcised, because they were under the
Covenant by Abraham's faith: al evidence of Scripture is against it, in that the
lord does plainly declare in his word, that they were to be circumcised that
were no^ under the Covenant, even all Abraham's household, whereoff there was no
one under the Covenant but himselff, when the commandment was given: Now the^
you having no cullor show nor warrant, from the scriptures for the baptizing
of infants, but a deceitful consequence from the example off circumcision, we
beseech all that hope for salvation by Jesus Christ, to see the deceit of your
consequence: thus you say, and this is all your hold: that as the seed off the
faithful were circumcised, so the seed of the faithful must be baptized,
proof for this your ground you have none, but your strong persuasions and long
custom, wherein no one of you have faith: but to show yet again the deceit of
your consequence.

First: it is not drawn by due proportion, which is a most deceitful way to
deceive the simple for thus ougt your consequence to be drawn: as Abraham
beleving was circumcised and all the males of his household both me^, and
children of eight days old, bond and free, so now any man beleving must be
baptized withal his household both men and children of eight days old, bond and
free. Secondly the deceit of your consequence is, because it is not a necessary
consequence; for you must prove nothing by consequence; but that which must
off necessity follow: but this does not off necessity follow, neither can it
follow, that because infants were circumcised with circumcision in the Flesh
under the Law, therefore infants must of necessity be baptized with the
baptism of repentance for the remission of sins under the Gospel, with which
baptism, they cannot be baptized, as all of any understanding must needs
confess, and there is but one baptism: and therefore most blindly,
ignorantly, and deceitfully is this consequence drawn, being neither drawn by
due proportion, neither can the rule possibly follow by true consequence:
neither shall you be able to tell what to say, when you shall be required, to
prove it a necessary consequence. If therefore you will not wilfully go on in
the ways of everlasting destruction, forsake this root off error which
overthrowes the Covenant, of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, in the first
foundation thereof, bringing in the seed off the flesh off the faithful, by
carnal generation, for the seed of the promise, in steed of the seed of the
faith of Abraham by spiritual regeneration, making the infants that are
begotten of the faithful after the flesh, members of the body of Christ, and
heirs of the Covenant of the new Testament (which is the Covenant of faith and
repentance) through the faith of their parents: and by this means you have and
do daily bring all the wicked and ungodly in these parts of the World to be
members off Christ's body, and heirs off the Covenant, by natural birth, which
our Savior Christ says Ioh. 3. Can no way be, but by new birth that is by
being borne again of water and the Spirit, which is by believing and being
Baptized. Thus do you utterly destroy and overthrowe the holy Covenant of the
Lord, the holy baptism, and the body off Christ, making them Common to all
young and old wicked and profane, blasphemers, persecutors, murderers,
adulterers, and witches, and al their Children: but let all know this, such as
the members are, such is the body, and such is the baptism, and such is their
Covenant, the Covenant of death and condemnation unto all that are under it, and
not the Covenant of life and salvation, which is only made with them that
believe and are baptized: and the Lord persuade every honest heart to ground
their faith upon this rock, that as under the Law, none were circumcised but
those that were expressly commanded by rule or example, so under the Gospel,
none may be baptized, but those that are expressly commanded by rule or
example: and keeping to this true ground no simple soul shall be deceived, and
so we leave this point, with Godly care to be considered of, beseeching the
Lord to give you understanding hearts.

Thus have we with our most willing (though most feeble) endeavors, manifested
unto you, these two salse professions of Christ, and the false Prophets that
mainteyne them amongst you, with diverse particular errors and strong delusions
whereby they deceive you, transforming themselves as though they were the
Prophets off God, but they are all deep deceivers, and Prophecy lies, as we
have proved, wherein they shall never be able to justify themselves, neither
before God nor his people: and we much rather disire their repentance, then
that they should go about to approve themselves in their evil, whereby they
shall heap sin upon their own heads, and bring shame to their own faces,
seeing the time is come, that the lord will reprove the foolishnes of such false
Prophets who make show off Godliness, but deny the power thereoff, who lead
captive simple women, which are ever learning and never able to come to the
knowledge off the truth: These are they that Thappostle foretold of 2. Tim. 3.
Who like Iannes and Iambres resist the truth, who are proud boasters in
exalting themselves, and challenging to themselves, special power to know and
understand the counsels of God, when they are me^ of corrupt knowledge and
mynds, and to be reproved concerning the faith: but (says Thappostle) they
shall prevail no longer for their madness shall be evident unto al men, and we
exhort you with the words of thapostle, turn away therefore from such.

It follows, that we speak some few words, of the second prophecy, which is
of the days of the Son of man in the brightness of his comeing for the
consuming of the man of sin spoken of 2. these, 2. the which days our savior
says, shall be as the lightning that comes out of the East and is seen into the
west, mat, 24. wherein is set forth unto us, that the Lord shall make his truth
to appear with unspeakable evidence of light, so as his people shall plainly
see the way and light thereoff according as the Lord by the Prophet Esa.
speaks 42.16. I will bring the blind by a way they knew not, and lead them by
paths they have not known, I will make darkness, light before them, and crooked
things straight, and the lord will not speak in secret, neither in a place of
darkness, in the earth, and Esa. 30.26. the light off the Moon shall be as the
light off the Sun, and the light off the Sunn shall be seven fold, and like
the light of seven days, in the day that the lord will bind up the breach of
his people, and heal the struck of their wound. And Esa. 32.19. thou shall
not see a feirce people, a people of dark speech, that thou can not perceive,
and of a straing tongue, that thou can not understand. All this teaches the
people of God to look for plain paths to walk in, which do shine with
brightness: as also that the witnesses of the lord, shall be a people, that shall
speak plainly to the understanding of the simple: therefore the Lords people
must not walk in blind and secret ways, nor desert paths which are not light
and plain, nor be seduced by false Prophets and deceitful people, that speak
in their feirce heat dark and obscure things, who are full of deceitful
distinctions, blind consequences, and al turning of devices to deceive the
simple, saying, lo here is Christ, lo there is Christ: of such our Savior
forewarnes his people, that they believe them not, although they shall show
great signs and wonders: but that they shall set their hearts, and turn their
eyes unto the clear light of truth which is the everlasting gospel that the
Angel flieing through the midst of heaven, preached unto them that dwell on the
earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. Revel. 14.6.
This is the spirit off the Lords mouth, wherewith he will consume the man of
sin, and abolish him, by the brightness of his comeing 2. These. 2. By the
ministry of the seventh angel, who when he has poured out his vial, their
shallbee sounds, and lightnings. and thunders, and a great earthquake such as
nevers was and the great City shall be rent in three parts, and the Cities of
the Nations shall fall, and that great Babylon shall come in remembrance before
God, and he shall give unto her the Cup of the wine of the feirenes of his
wrath. Rev. 16. Thus by the glorious light off the Gospel shall the misterye
off iniquity be abolished.

And whereas our Savior Christ says, that this his comeing shall be as the
lightning comes out off the East, and is seen into the west, this makes it
manifest unto us that the glorious overspreading off the gospel again, shall be
as at the first, General over all, and that men shall seek after. and resort
unto the light of the truth of God, as Eagles do to their pray, according to
the prophecy of Esa. 60.4. Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold all
these are gathered and come to thee, thy sons shall come from far, and Esa.
66.18. The Lord says it will come that I shall gather all Nations and Tongues,
and they shall come and see my glory. And the Lord by the Prophet Amos. 9.11 12.
says: In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen down,
and close up the breaches thereof, and will raise up his ruins, and I will build
it as in the dais of old, and Esa. 11.11.12. In the same day shall the lord
stretch out his hand again the second time to possess the remnant of his
people, and he shall assemble the dispersed of Israel, and gather the scatered
of Judah from the four corners of the world. And hereunto agrees the
Prophecy. Revel. 19.17. Where the Angel that stands in the sun cries with a
loud voice to all the fowls that fly through the midst of heaven, come and
gather your selves together to the supper of the great God, and Revel. 21. The
Holy Spirit speaking of the glorious exaltation of the Holy City, after the
destruction off Babylon, says: The Kings of Earth shall bring their glory and
honor unto it, and the glory and honor of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it.
And this yet ^s the hope and comfort of the Saints of God, that it shall come
to pass, that they which now come against Jerusalem shall go up from year to
year to worship the King, the Lord of hoasts, and to keep the Feast of
Tabernacles, Zach. 14.16. Therefore says the voice out of the Throne, praise
our God all ye his servants, and ye that fear him both small and great, for
the Lord, that almighty God does now reign, let us be glade and rejoice, and
give glory to him, for the marriage off the lamb is come, and his wife has
prepared hirself. Revel. 19.5.6.7. These words are faithful and true, which
must shortly be fulfilled, blessed is he that observes the Words of the
prophecy off the book. Revel. 22.6.7. But woe, woe, woe then be unto all
that do not mark and observe them, and faithfully and carefully keep, the
Words off the Prophecy off this Book.

But we demand, in all these days of tribulation which are such as never
were, nor ever shall be, where shall the ignorant appear? if in the days of so
great danger when there shall be (as there now is) so many false Prophets
showing such signs and wonders, so as if it were possible they should deceive
the very elect, if in these days, the ignorant be seduced through their
ignorance, shall they drinck of the Cup of the wine of Gods wrath? The word of
the Lord is perfect and plain they shall al perish, that are ignorant and are
deceived, because they receive not the love of the truth therefore God shall
send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies, and be damned. 2.
These. 2. And it is just with the Lord, their ignorance being declared to be for
want of the love of the truth. Thus then is this ground off truth most evident
and plain: they that through grace in Christ receive the love off the truth,
they are the Elect of God, and shall not be deceived, but shall be saved: But
they that through the effectual working of Satan, withal his signs and lying
wonders, receive not the love of truth, they shall be deceived, and believe
lies, and be damned. Moreover our Savior Christ says, if the ignorant lead
the ignorant, they shall both fall into the pit. Mat. 15.14. let al therefore
take heed, and learn to know the truth of God, and to love it, and to
understand his word themselves, seeing the Lord has commanded them, not to
follow such as say: Lo here is Christ lo there is Christ, but to look unto
the shyning light of truth, whereof, if they be not able to judge and deserne
of themselves (by the direction of Gods spirit) they can never have faith nor
assurance in the way they walk, so shall they run blindfold to destruction,
not knoweing whether they are sedd: False prophets, or true Prophets are al
alike to them they being ignorant of the scriptures, whereby they should
examine them and find them out, and try their doctrine, such must needs be
carried away with every blast off vain doctrine, when they are not able to try
the spirits whether they be of God: these are the fruits of ignorance, not to
know the voice of Christ, from the voice of false Prophets. and yet such would
have their ignorance excuse them, although their ignorance be only for want of
their love of the truth. And if they that through ignorance are led into false
ways shall be saved, then they that through ignorance lead men into false ways
shall also be saved, and so shall (almost) all flesh be saved, for who can not
plead ignorance for all their transgressions, in all false worship, and all their
false ways? But they that are ignorant, let them be ignorant: and let all the
disciples of Christ covet spiritual gifts, that they may prophecy, and pray
with understanding, and singe with understanding, and speak with
understanding, that they may instruct others, and in understanding be of a ripe
age. 1, Cor. 14. this knowledge of salvation is required off all the Disciples
off Christ alike, there being but one law of obedience for all: and Christ has
not appointed any one to be more ignorant the^ another, and to every one that
ask alike, he gives alike and they that seek a like, shall find a like. Mat.
7.7. For there is no respect of persons with God. Romans 2.11.

Now there is one ground that is most dangerously perverted to the destruction
of many souls, wherein we pray the best advised Godly consideration of every
reader, and that is this: if men walk uprightly in the truth, according to
that they know, and endeavor to attain to better and more knowledge of Gods
truth, that they may walk in it, such men though they commit much sin
through ignorance, yet repenting of al their sins of ignorance, there is
mercy with the lord for such sins and sinners. We confess this is a most
true ground, or else no flesh could be saved: if the Lord should not accept of
the willingness of men's mynds in the truth, according to that which they have.
But this ground is most wickedly perverted and brought in to excuse al
unwilling mynds to be informed, who willingly resist the truth, and have no
willing mynds to be directed by Gods word, no furthee then sta^ds with their
good likeing, and yet this ground must excuse al their false worship, and al
false ways, and al false doctrine, and exposition of the scriptures, and all the profanation off the holy ordinances of God, which they do through
ignorance, although they repent not there off, but justify themselves to do
well therein. Can any Godly heart thus conceive? that because God in mercy does
pardon the sins off ignorance, men repenting of their ignorances, that
therefore God will perdon men, that through ignorance commit sin, and justify
themselves in those their sins, either by word or practice? Cannot men see
the great difference which is betwixt repenting of their sins of ignorance
and iustifieing off their sins committed through ignorance? but will they make
it al one, to confess sin, and to justify sin? Can the just God, contrary
to his own word, and law, forgive any one sin, that is not repented off? if
we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from al unrighteousness: but if when we have sinned in any
particular thing, we say, therein, we have not sinned, we make God a liar,
and his word is not in us. and we cannot be forgiven, nor cleansed. 1. John.
1.9 10. Can the holy and just God forgive such sinners and sins? as when they
have through ignorance sinned, in diverse things against the Word of God, they
will justify themselves, that they are not ignorant and that they have not
therein sinned, and so make the word of God a lie? the word of the Lord is
plain that they which are ignorant and sin, and say there in they are not
ignorant, their sins remain upon them, they are the words of Christ Ioh. 9,
41. If you were blind, that is, if you did ^e and acknowledge your blindness, ye
should not have sin: but now ye say, we see* therefore your sin remains.
Thus does our Savior Christ show in as plain words as the heart of man can
disire that all and every sin, men commit through ignorance, and say therein
they do not sin, all those sins are not pardoned, but remain upon them,
and the judgment of the Lord is against them that so sin, as the wiseman
further shows. Prove. 28.13. Saying, he that does not confess and forsake his
sin shall not have mercy at Gods hands, but he that confesses and forsakes
them shall have mercy: How shall men yet vainly persuade themselves, that God
will pardon their sins of ignorance which they neither confess nor forsake,
but justify themselves in many grevious sins, and say they have not sinned,
and that they do not commit evil in doing them, but that they do that, which
is good, and just in the sight off God. what sin shall be condemned? If this
sin shall be pardoned, shall not the adulterer that confesses he does evil, in
comitting adultery: and the drunckard that confesses he sins in his
drunckennes: and the blasphemer that confesses he does evil in blaspheming,
shall not al these be much rather pardoned (although they forsake not their
sins, in that they confess them) then they that neither confess nor forsake
their sins but justify themselves in their sins? does this cause God to
pardon their sins* because they are fully persuaded in their mynds, that they
sin not? Why then if the adulterer, drunckard, blasphemer, ydolater, and
Covetous man, be fully persuaded in their mynds, that they sin not in doing
those things, they shall also be pardoned. Thus must the Lord accept of
ignorant strong persuasions of men's mynds in error and disobedience, for true
knowledge, faith, and obedience: For if they that through ignorance being fully
persuaded in their mynds or consciences obey unrighteousness and justify error
shall be saved, and through Christ be accepted with God, as they that of true
knowledge and faith obey righteousness, and justify the truth: so then is there
salvacion by Christ, through ignorant persuasion off mind and disobedience
as well as through true knowledge, faith, and obedience. What will men make of God?
how has the mystery of iniquity prevailed? First to take from him his power
and government in his kingdom, as we have showed, and then to take from him his
justice and judgment: for if the Lord shall not in his justice, judge those that
ignorantly pervert his laws, statutes, and ordinances, who call light darkness,
and darkness light. sower sweet, and sweet sower. Esa. 5.20. Speaking evil off
that they know not: teaching for doctrines men's precepts, overthrowing the
doctrines off the Foundation off the beginning off Christ, following the
ymaginations of their own hearts, and setting up the traditions off men in
stead of the holy ordinances of God, and because in all these things, they are
ignorant, and walk as far as they see, and do as they are persuaded in their
mynds, thinking they do God good service, therefore they shall be accepted with
God: if the Lord shall not in his justice judge these that thus sin and
transgress against him, then is the righteous judgment off the Lord
overthrown, and the Ordinances of Christ under the Gospel made of none effect:
and if men know them, and do them, they shall do well: But if they be
ignorant, and walk in false ways, mainteyning diverse errors, they being
persuaded in their consciences that it is the truth, they also shall be accepted:
of what use the^ are the ordinances of Christ? the^ is truth and error al one,
if men be as well persuaded of the one, as off the other. This destroys all the
religion of God; if every one may take liberty to themselves, to walk
according to the persuasion of their mynds though it be error; yet if they
know no better, so long as they confess the name of Jesus, al is well, if they
be so persuaded, they shall be saved: then not only they that walk in the way
of life, but they that are persuaded they walk in the way of life, shall also
be saved, though they walk in error.

Thus as you have set open the door of the Kingdom of heaven, and let al in
that confess the name of Jesus with their infants; making them (as you
think) members of the body of Christ: so now you will also set open the gates
of the Kingdom of glory, and let in all that confess the name of Chr, though
through ignorance they walk in much darkness, and make the^ as you ymagine in
your foolish mynds, fellow heirs with Christ in his glorious inheritance, and
yet the Holy ghost says. If we walk in darkness, and say we have fellowship
with Christ, we lie and do not truly. 1. Io. 1.6. Therefore you shall al be
deceived with the foolish virgins, who were overtaken in their foolishnes, who
though they hoped, and were persuaded they should have been let in, yet were
shut out, and so shall al you be, that through ignorance justify false ways,
although you should begin to say: we have eaten and drunken in thy presence,
and thou haist taught in our streets, and we thought we had done well, and we
knew no better, yet the Lord shall say unto you. I tell you, I know you not,
depart from me, ye workers of iniquity: then shall you see (if you will not
learn before) that though you should plead, you had done it ignorantly will not
serve the turn, yea though you should say you had sought to enter in at the
strait gate, but through your ignorance you were not able; notwithstanding your
seeking to that you have not sought aright, the door shall be shut upon you, and
when you shall knock and say: Lord, Lord, open to us, the lord shall answer and
say, I know you not, whence you are. Luke 13.27 Then shall you see that your
deceitful hearts have seduced you, and that your good meanings were not
according to Godliness, but according to your own mynds and perswations: then
shall you see that you casting down, destroying, and rejecting the holy
ordinances of Christ, and setting up the vain inventio^s and traditions of
your Elders (as you do) thinking you do God good service, you shall no more be
excused therein then they that have rejected and killed the disciples of
Christ, and think they have done God good service. Your sins being much
greater then theirs: for they ignorantly kill, destroy, and reject the disciples
of Christ for keeping the ordinances of Christ, and you ignorantly destroy, and
reject the ordinances of Christ, that none should keep them, and set up other
Ordinances abolishing Christ thereby. Will the lord think you, hold you giltles
for these things although you do them ignorantly? especially you justifying
your selves and saying you do that which is good in Gods sight, and that you
sin not therein: hear what the Lord says to his own people, who justified
themselves in their ways of wickedness, saying, they were giltles. Be hold
says the lord, I will enter with thee into judgment because thou say I have
not sinned. Ier. 2.35 eve^ so will the L. enter into judgment with every one of
you that say you see, when yet you are blind, and continewe in the works of
darkness, and say you sin not therein. hear us with patience and consider
what we say, the judge al hearts knows that we earnestly disire the salvation
of your souls. Will the just God forgive any one sin unrepented of? Or can
he justify them that justify themselves in any one evil? Who so knows God,
knows this cannot be, for he that is gilty of one sin, being gilty of al,
Iam. 2.10. Ezec. 18.11-13. if God should forgive any one sin unrepented of,
he must needs forgive all sins unrepented of: but there can no sin be
pardoned without repentance, ignorance shall not excuse any. For a furtherful
proof whereof take the words of our Savior Christ, who says. He that is
ignorant and knows not his masters will, and sins, or does things worthy of
stripes, shall be beaten or receave punishment: Therefore let the ignorant never
plead their ignorance more, the Lord has judged them, they shall al perish
except they repent, and come to the knowledge of the truth: and is it not just
with the Lord to condemn all the ignorant seeing the Lord has given them al
means of knowledge, and they will not seek for it, nor ask after it, no
further then they themselves think good.

What think you with your selves: If a King make laws just and good, and
bind himself by oath that without respect of persons whosoever shall break
any one of those laws he shall certainly dye, except he acknowledge his fault
and repent: and whosoever shall keep them shallbee advanced to great dignity
and honor: and these laws the King causes to be written so that al men may
have them: And yet further the King in his great mercy, because he would have
none of his subjects perish for want of the right understanding off his laws,
the King to prevent the^ of that danger appoints in every place such a one as
shall always be ready truly to inform his people in the right understanding
of every one of those laws and statutes, and charging them to be directed by
no other, for the understanding thereof, if notwithstanding the commandment,
and all this love and care off their Lord and King over them to perserve them
from falling under the judgment off death, his people and subjects shall either
carlesly neclect to be informed, or shall think themselves wise enough to
inform themselves, or shall go to be informed for the understanding of those
laws to any other then the King has appointed, and resting upon their
information, break any one of those laws of the King and do not acknowledge
their fault and repent, shall their ignorance excuse them? When they had one
ready at hand always to inform them, before they offended, and yet ready to
inform them that they might repent if they would, but ask to be informed,
but they would not be informed before they break the commandment of the
King, neither after they have offended wilbee informed to repent thereoff, but
justify themselves that they have not offended: Can a just King break his
Oath, and pardon and forgive the wilful ignorance of such careless subjects? and
advance them to the same honor whereunto he advances his dutiful subjects? But
he shall dishonor himself, and make his oath and law of no effect: No wise and
just earthly King will ever so dishonor himself.

How shall then the most glorious King of Kings, who is most wise, just, and
Holy, having made most righteous, holy and perfect laws, and to show the
stabsenes off his counsel, has bound himself by Oath and promise. Heb. 6.18.
Without respect of persons, that whosoever shall break any one of those laws
he shall certainly be damned except he confess his sin and repent. Mark.
16.16. Luke 13.3. and whosoever shall keep them shall in herite glory, and
honor, and imortallity: and these laws has he caused to be written by
inspiration that al men may have them: and yet to make his mercy further to
appear that he would not any off his people should perish for want of the
right under standing thereof, has sent the co^forter, and gives the holy
ghost to every one that asks him, to teach and lead the^ into al true
understanding Io. 14.26. Luk, 11.13. charging them to be directed by no other
(Iam. 1.5.) for the understanding thereof. If notwithstanding the commandment
and all this love and care of the King of heaven over his people, to preserve
them from falling under the just judgment of eternal death, his people and
subjects shall either carlesly neclect to be informed or shall think they are
wise enough to inform them selves or shall go to any other to be informed off
the understanding of those laws then the Lord has appointed, and relying and
trusting upon their information, break any one of the laws of the King off
heaven, and do not acknowledge their sin and repent shall their ignorance
excuse them? when they might always have had the holy Ghost for asking to have
informed them before they offended, as also after they have offended, that they
might repent: Can the most holy and just God and King, contrary to his Oath,
pardon and forgive the wilful ignorance of such careless subjects as break his
laws, and will not acknowledge their sin and repent? and give them eternal
glory and honor with his servants? (who though they have offended yet they have
repented) but he shall dishonor himself and make his Oath and law of none
effect. Oh that men would consider that the most holy wise, and just God cannot
do so, against his Oath, and make himself unjust and untrue. If men would
consider what God is as he declares himself to be, that is, a Jealous God,
not making the wicked inocent, visiting iniquity to the third and fowrth
generation of the^ that break his comaundements: A God of severity against
them which fall through vnbeleeife. Romans 11.22 A God that will certainly take away
their part out of the booce of life that takes any thing away from his word:
And that will add all the plagues written in his word, unto them that add any
thing unto his word. Revel. 22

If men would believe God to be such a one as he declares himselff to be,
they could not be so vain as to persuade themselves that God would forgive
them their sins of ignorance, their ignorance being through their own
wi^full neclect, and when through such their ignorance they overthrowe the
ordinances off Christ, and abolish the Laws off his Testament, and repent not,
but justify themselves in those their sins, saying they sin not therein.

What were sufficient to say in this great deceiveablenes of unrighteousness
wherewith men are seduced to think, that if through ignorance they justify
sin it shall be forgiven them they knowing no better, although they repent not,
which they cannot do, in any sin wherein they justify themselves, for men
cannot both justify and repent of one and the same sin, at one instant. If
men will be so far void of al grace and understanding, as to hold and think that
any sin committed through ignorance, and through ignorance justified,
(because they know no better) shallbee pardoned, then it cannot be denied but
that they that put Christ to death through ignorance, and through ignorance
justified they had not sinned, but that they had done well and according to the
word of God, in putting a blasphemer to death, that said he was the Son off
God, they shall also be pardoned, for they did it ignorantly, and knew no
better, as our Savior Christ testifies, when he says. Father forgive them,
they know not what they do: And Thappostle Peter acknowledges the same Act.
3.17. saying: Brethren I know you did it through ignorance, as also your
Governors.

Now let us compare things together, so shall we through the grace of God the
better see the deceith of this ground, as it is misapplyed: The ground we are
to remember is this. That if men walk conscionablie as far as they know, and
disire better knowledge, yet through ignorance commit much sin, there is mercy
with God, and they, ackowledging and repenting of their ignora^ces, shall be
pardoned by grace through faith and repentance. Ephesians. 2.8. This ground is
misapplied as we trust will easily appear, being brought to prove that if men
walk conscionably as far as they know and commit some sins through
ignorance and through ignorance justify the same, thinking they do well, and
knowing no better, their sin shall be pardoned, which if they be, it must be
by grace through persuasion and ignorance, for their is no faith in ignorance,
where is there any warrant for such a ground? Who is so blind that cannot see
the grevious error off this ground thus misapplyed? this is to excuse sin by
sin, that is, by ignorance. We conclude this point by the word of truth that
none can deny that have any knowledge of the means of salvation: there is no
salvation, but by grace in Chr, through faith and repe^ta^ce, so is there the^
no pardon for any sin, but by grace in Christ, through faith and repentance.
This being an undeniable ground, none then can be saved, nor have their sin
pardoned by grace in Christ through ignorance, justifying any one sin: for
there cannot be either faith or repentance in ignorant justifying any sin,
therefore no such sin can be pardoned, but al such sinners must be condemned
And for this end and purpose have we spoken all that we have spoken in this
point to show unto al men, that if they justify any one sin or evil though
it be of ignorance, they can never be saved, but shall peri^h to everlasting
destruction, such sins cannot come within men's general repentance of al
their ignora^ces, seeing they justify themselves in them, and say they sin
not, therefore their sin remains, and cannot be taken away, by Christ: As
for example: You all justify the baptizing of infants, now when you repent of
all your sins of ignorance, have you any thoughts to repent of that? and if
you were asked, would you not with your last breath justify that you have done
well therein, and that the baptizing off Infants is a holy ordinance of Christ?
but if it be no ordinance of Christ, and that you sin therein, ca^ you be so
simple as to imagine that this sin shall come within your general repentance?
Wherein you bless and justify your selves: You can no more be forgiven at
Gods hands then they that ignora^tly set up a false Christ, and justify him to
be the true Christ: or the^ they that put the true Christ to death, and justify
he is a false Christ. We know your answer in this willbee, that if you could
see it to be your sin to baptize infants, and to mainteyne it to be a holy
ordinance off God, you would repent of it, but before you cannot: will not God
answer you? that when he can see you repent he will forgive you, but before he
cannot. Ezekiel. 18.21.27.

Will not the Pope make the same answer for all the bloody persecutions
wherewith he has, and does persecute al Protestants: so called, Will not the
lord Bishop make this answer for all their wicked and cruel persecutions
against the Puritanes and Brownists? (so caled): but shall they be pardoned?
they justifying themselves in all these wickednesses (wherein they think they
do God service) because they repent of al their sins of ignorance, whereof
they justify these to be none: will God pardon the^ in all this their
wickedness? because they cannot see it to be their sin: You al will grant they
cannot be pardoned of these sins, they justifying themselves therein: neither
can any be pardoned of any sin, they justifying themselves therein.

If this were duly considered it would make men take heed what they profess
or practice in the profession of Christ, seeing if they profess or practice
any thing that is not according to the word of God, and justify it for good,
they must perish and cannot be saved: it stands therefore al men upon the peril
of their souls to look to their ways, and to be upon a sure ground from
Gods word, what they condemn for evil or error: and what they mainteyne and
justify for truth: for if they that justify the wicked, and they that
condemn the just, be an abomination unto the Lord. Pro. 17.15. Then they that
justify error and wickedness, and condemn truth and righteousness, calling
light darkness, and darkness light, such must needs be an abomination to the
Lord. If all the learned Scribes and Pharisees and false Prophets, in the world
had hearts to believe this, and confess it, it would make them take heed what
they justified for truth, and what they condemned for error, and how they
taught others to do so. If all the careless professors of Christ that profess
him in word, would believe this word of the lord to be true, it would make
them look more circumspectly to their ways, and not think that any
profession of Christ is sufficient, and that they may profess Christ after
that manner that is best pleasing to their own mynds, making the way large
that they may walk therein at liberty according to the vanity and excess of
their own hearts. If the simple hearted, who in many things are weyued from the
world and who have many zealous disires in them, did faithfully believe the
Lord herein, that if they justify any false ways, untruth, or error, and
condemn any way off light, and truth, their sin remains, and they are an
abomination to the Lord, if they did believe God herein, it would make them
take heed how they went on in their ignorant zeal, being led by their Teachers
approving and justifying what they teach the^, and disapproveing and
condemning, what they reach them to disaprove and condemn: Forsakeing the
teaching off Gods Spirit, not thinking it possible for themselves to attain to
the understanding off the Scriptures, but by the teaching of their learned and
good men (as they falsely call them): but if they did believe this word off the
Lord that they must perish, if they justify any one error or false way, and
condemn any one truth, it would make them with fear and trembling to seek
wisdom, knowledge, and understanding of God, that they being taught off God
might be able of themselves, by the help of the holy Spirit, (the only true
Teacher and leader into all truth) to discern and judge betwixt good and evil,
light and darkness, truth and error, least they relying upon men, be seduced and
led to justify false ways, and condemn the way of truth in any particular,
and so fall under the just judgment off the Lord, eve^ the judgment of eternal
death and condemnation, a right recompense of reward for all that will of
ignorant simplicity, out of their good meanings and zealous affections, (falsely
so called) submit themselves to be led, and taught only of men, seeking for
knowledge at their mouths, and not wholly depe^ding upon the scriptures for
instruction, and the spirit of God to teach the^ the understanding thereof,
neclecting (of faith) the reading and searching and meditating of the
scriptures day and night, and earnest praying without doubting, that the Lord
would give them the spirit of wisdom to direct the^ to the true understanding
and meaning of God in the Scriptures, that they might be able, if an Angel
from heaven should come and teach them any other doctrine, then Christ and his
Apostles has taught, to judge him accursed: when this way shall be once truly
learned and faithfully practiced of Gods people, to attain to true knowledge:
then shall all that seek after Christ, strive to enter into his kingdom by
regeneration and new birth, being borne again of water and the Holy Ghost.
then shall men learn to know the true baptism of Christ, which is the
baptism of repe^ta^ce for the remission off sins, and be therewith Baptized,
and put on Christ, and not satisfy themselves with childish baptism, in which
baptism they have not, nor could not put on Christ: and without which baptism
of repentance for the remission of sins, they cannot put on Christ: and then
shall the elect of God not be deceived by the multitude of false Prophetts, with all their lying wonders, that say, Lo here is Christ, lo there is Christ, but
they shall take heed to the glorious brightness of his coming. which shall be in
the shining light of his truth, unto the which the chosen of God shall fly* and
come from far, as Eagles to their pray. And to this clear light of truth the
Lord that has bought you all with his blood, raise up your hearts that you may
seek his face, and be filled with the fulness of his presence.

Amen.

We hold our selves bound, to acknowledge, and that others might be warned to
manifest, how we have been (through our great weakness) missed by deceitful
hearted leaders, who have and do seek to save their lives, and will make sure
not to loose them for Christ, and therefore they flee into foreign Countries
and free States, and draw people after the^ to support their kingdoms, first
seeking their own safeties. and then publishing (as they pretend) the gospel,
or seeking the Kingdom of heaven, as far as they may with their safety: and
this they justify by perverting and misapplying the words of our savior
Christ, where he says: when they persecute you, or drive, or thrust you out
off one city flee into another. mat. 10.23. these words have they picked out
for their purpose casting away or leaving forth, diverse rules of Christ goeing
before, and following in the same scripture, which cannot permit of their
exposition and practice, but we will only instance the reason why our savior
Christ bids them when they are persecuted in one City, go to another, and his
reason is this: for verily I say unto you, ye shall not go over all the Cities of
Israel til the Son of man come. This shows that our Savior Christ's meaning
was, that when they were driven or expelled out of one City, they should go to
another City in Israel to preach the gospel unto it: but these men flee to
Cities to the which they cannot preach the gospel, being of a straing tongue,
neither have they any intent or meaning to preach the gospel to those Cities,
their fleeing is not to that end, but to save themselves for being as sheep in
the midst of wolves, and for being delivered up to Counsels, and for being
brought to Governors and Kings, for Christ's sake, in witness to the^ and to the
Gentiles: these men need not this advise of our savior Christ, who Counsels
his Disciples to take no thought what they shall speak, or what they shall
answer when they are brought before Princes and Governors, for they flee to
such places (where they make sure they shall never come in question before them.

The Disciples of Christ unto whom he speak these words (when they persecute
you or drive you out of one City, flee into another,) did not understand our
Savior Christ as these men do: if they had, they would not have believed the
Angel. (Act. 5.19.20.) that bad them, when he had delivered them out of prison.
Go: and stand in the Temple, and speak to the people all the words of this
life, they would have said, We have been imprisoned and persecuted, therefore
we are to flee: our Lord taught us so: But they obeyed the voice of the Angel,
knowing it did not contradict that rule of Christ, neither would they (if they
had understood Christ, as these men do) after they had been beaten, and comaund
to speak no more in the name off Jesus, still have staped in that City, daily
in the Temple and from house to house, teaching and preaching Jesus Christ,
Act. 5.40.42. but these me^ flee before they feel either strokes or bands,
and teach me^ so. The whole scriptures are against them in this their
understanding. The 8. of Thact. 1 -- 4. might suffice to satisfy them in this
point, and to discover their error fully, where it is showed, that there was
great persecution against the Church, at Jerusalem, and they were al (except
Thapostles) scattered abroad, through the Regio^s of Judea and Samaria: and
Act. 11.12. they that were scattered abroad, went throughout til they came to
Phenice and Ciprus, and Antiochia, preaching the word. Here we may see that
notwithstanding the great havoch Saul made of the Church, and entered into every
house, and drew out both men and women, and put them in prison, yet thapost^es
did not flee: and they that did flee, went to Cities to the which they could
and did preach the gospel: but neither the example of Thapostles that did not
flee, nor of them that were scattered, who went to Cities to which they
preached the Gospel, will serve these men's turn, but they flee to Cities most
comodious for their safety and profit, to which they cannot preach the Gospel.
Furthermore Act. 14. although there was an assault made both of the Jews and
Gentiles against Paul and Barnabas, to do them violence at Iconium, and
although Paul was stoned and left for dead at Listra, yet they returned again
to Listra and Iconium, to confirm the disciples hearts, preferring that duty
before the fear off persecution.

For further overthrowing off this misunderstanding off these words off our
Savior Christ, when they persecute you in one City, flee into another. Let
all Godly hearts consider, how Thappostle Paul commended and rejoiced in the
Church of the Thessalonians, because off their patience and faith in all their
persecutions and tribulations that they suffered. 2 Thessalonians. 1.4. And in the
first Epist. 2.14. in commendation off them he says. Brethren, ye are become
followers off the Churches off God, in Judea, which are in Christ Jesus,
because you have also suffered the same things off your own Countriemen even
as they have done of the Jews. Thus does Thappostle commend the Churches of
Judea, and off Thessalonica, for their constant suffering of persecution in
their own Countries, not once advising or teaching them to flee out off their
Countries, to avoid persecution: This is a new doctrine of devils brought in by
men, that were never sound in the faith.

Further, hear what the Spirit says to the Church of Pergamus. I know thou
dwell where satan's throneis, and thou haist kept my name and haist not
denied my faith, even in those days when Antipas my faithful marter was slain
among

you, where Satan dwells: and to the Chur, of Smyrna the spirit says: Fear
none off those things which thou shall suffer: behold it shall come to pass
that the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that you may be tried, and ye
shall have tribulation ten days, be thou faithful unto the death, and I will
give thee the Crown of life. Re. 2. Who will not be blind may se hear how the
spirit of God commends the Saints for holding the faith, and dwelling where
there was bloody persecution, and where Satan dwelled: and does not exhort
them to flee: but not to fear what they should do unto them. Let then the
simple hatred be no more seduced by these men, who have rent the words of our
Savior Christ, (when they persecute you, or drive you out of one City, flee
into another) from the true sense and meaning wherewith they stand compassed
^cund about in. Mat. 10. And whereas our savior Christ in these words gave a
rule off direction unto his disciples, how they should proceed in the
publishing off the Gospel, appointing them, when they were expelled or
persecuted in one City, that they should go to another to preach, because
there was many Cities off Israel to go through: these men of corrupt mynds,
lovers off themselves, utterly pervert the meaning off our Savior Christ in
these words, and say, he gave it for a rule to his disciples, to teach the^ to
flee to save themselves from persecution, and so by this their understanding,
when the disciples of Christ had found a City of most safety, there they
should hide themselves as these men do, and let the publishing of the gospel
alone, except any would follow after them, or come to them where they might be
in safety.

How does the ignorant blind, corrupt hearts and tongues of these me^ conceive
and speak against God and his truth, and pervert it to their own destruction
overthrowing the whole doctrine and meaning of Chr. in this place of Mat. 10.
from 16. verse. to the 39. verse. where Christ withal the wisdom of the spirit,
does set himself to teach his disciples to suffer persecution, showing them
what persecutions they should suffer, and what persecutors they should have,
and how far they should suffer persecution even to the loosing off their lives.
Thus does our savior Christ teach his disciples to suffer persecution,
exhorting them not to fear them that kill the body, and declareing unto them
for their unspeakable comfort his providence and protection over them, telling
the^ that all the hairs of their head are numbered in his sight. And these
deceivers they teach their disciples to flee persecution and persecutors and to
spare and save themselves that it may not come so unto them: but when the
worthy disciple of Christ, Peter, advised his master so, Christ bad him, come
behind me Satan thou art an offense unto me, and taught him saying: If any
man will follow me let him forsake himself, and take up his cross and follow
me ma^r. 16. Judge then what Christ will say to these false prophets that are the
disciples of the man of sin, supporting and preserving his Kingdom by this
their doctrine, for the disciples of Christ cannot glorify God and advance his
truth better, the^ by suffering al manner of persecution for it, and by
witnessing it, against the man of sin, with the blood of their testimony. we
must leave this point to Godly consideration (It had been much fitter (we
confess) to have been part off a book, then such an addition) and we leave
these men withal their disciples (if they will not be informed here in) to be a
reproach to al men, who shall say unto them where have you learned to fle into
foreign countries and not to suffer persecution for Christ of your own
countriemen? where have you learned for fear of me^ to flee from your own
country, and fathers houses to whom you ought, and where you might best
publish the gospel? and where have you learned to draw parents from children,
and children from parents, to who^e they are especially bound to witness Gods
truth? and to be as lights unto the^. You have not learned it of Christ, who
would not suffer him that had been possessed when he prayed him that he might
be with him, but Christ said unto him. Go thy way home to thy friends, and
show them what great things, the Lord has done unto the, and he went and
published the^, Mark. 5 18 Yea all men shall say unto them, where have you
learned to set up your light in secret plaees? and where have you learned to
pull your shoulder from the yock and to seek to save your lives? but therefore
(says Christ) surely you shall loose them except you repent.

Furthermore if Christ gave this for a rule or precept to his disciples to flee
persecution to save themselves, then was it an absolute commandment, and so
did al thapostles and disciples of Christ, break his commandment and sin,
in that they did not flee to save themselves always when they were persecuted:
and hereby do these men condemn all their brethren that flee not as they do,
except they will ad error to error, and affirm as some of them do, that it is
indifferent to flee or not to flee, making hereby this precept of Christ,
indifferent to be obeyed or not to be obeyed, which can not be affirmed of any
one precept of Christ: for nothing can be both commanded and indifferent to
be obeyed or done: and those words of Christ will no way permit such
indiffere^ci, for they are an absolute precept for that end for the which they
are given: which is not to flee to save themselves: but to flee or go to
another City to preach the gospel. And we put these seducers in remembrance
that our Savior Christ gives this rule also unto his disciples, that if they
shall enter into any house or City, that shall not receive them, nor hear his
word, when they depart thence, they shall shake of the dust of their feet for a
witness against that house or City: But when will these men according to this
rule of Christ ^hake of the dust of their feet for a witness against Amsterdam
and Leyden, which Cities, neither receive them nor the word they bring,
otherwise then they receive Turks and Jews, and all sorts, who come only to
seek safety and profit. It should seem this rule of Christ, apperteynes not
to these me^, but let them, and al mense, that this rule apperteynes to
whomesoever the other apperteynes, they being both given at one time and upon
one and the same occasion, and to one and the same persons: and when these
great deceivers have learned not to devide Christ they will learn also, not to
devide his precepts and ordinances, taking what is agreeable to their corrupt
mynds, and forsakeing what is contrary to them.

We will pass by the lamentable fruits and judgments that we have, and do see
with our eyes follows this damnable error, when many, yea the most men that
had in a great measure forsaken the love of the world, and began to be zealous
of some good things, being drawn by this opinion and these seducers into
forreyne Countries, not knowing which way to support their outward estate, have
turned again unto the world, and are feign to hunt too and froo, far and near
after every occasion, and al is too little to satisfy most of their wants, and
nothing will satisfy some of their disires: al these things and many mo,
these hirelings their shepherds, can welbeare withal, so that they return to
the hive, that their portion may not be reproved. And those of best hares, and
some of best quality that cannot run and rove, and set their hearts to seek
the world, consume that they have and fall under hard conditions, and by littel
and littel loose their first love also. It is the general judgment we aim at
in all this, in that by these means, former zeal and the best first beginings
that were in these men do vanish, fade away, and come to nothing, to the
unfeigned grief of our sonles to see it: how much better had it been that they
had given their lives for that truth they profess, in their own Countries.
Now as we through the grace of God, and by the warrant of his word, (as we
have here manifested) cast away these perverters of the holy scriptures and
their doctrines, so we wish al to do, that fear God and seek the glory of his
name, and come and lay down their lives in their own Country for Christ and
his truth. And let none think that we are altogether ignorant, what building,
and war fare we take in hand, and that we have not sit down and in some
measure thoroughly considered what the cost and danger may be: and also let none
think that we are without sense and feeling of our own inability to begin,
and our weakness to endure to the end, the weight and danger of such a work:
but in all these things we hope and wait for wisdom and strength, and help
from the Lord, Who is able to establish us, that we may stand, and by weak
means to confound mighty things, 1. Cor. 1. Let none therefore despise the
day of small things. Zach. 4.10. Nor be greived and say with that scorner,
Nehem. 4.24. What will these weak Jews do? Thus comending all our poor
endeavors to the best acceptance of every well disposed reader, beseeching the
Lord to make his grace to abound to you al, for the glory of his name, and the
salvation of every one of your souls.

Amen.

