OBJECTIONS: Answered by way of Dialogue, wherein is proved By the Law of God:
By the law of our Land: And by his Maties many testimonies
That no man ought to be persecuted for his religion, so he testify his
allegiance by the Oath, appointed by Law.

(...) 2.4. He shall judge among the Nations, and re^uke many people: they shall
break their swords also into mattocks, and their spears into sithes, Nation
shall not lift up a sword against Nation, neither shall they learn to feight
any more. (...) 11.9. Then shall none hurt nor destroy in all my Holy
mountain. ^ Cor. 10.4. For the weapons of our warrfare, are not carnal, but
mighty through God to cast down holds. Printed 1615.

To all that truly wish Ierusalems prosperity, and Babilons destruction,
wisdom and understanding be multiplied upon you.
IN these days if ever, that is true which the wisema^ said. Eccl. 12.12. there
is none e^d in making many books, and much reading is a wearines to the
flesh: yet considering how heinous it is in the sight of the lord to force me^
and weme^ by cruel persecutions to bring their bodies to a worship, whereunto
they cannot bring their spirits: we thought it our duty for Gods glory and
the reformation thereof in this our own nation to publish this little writing
following, wherein is manifestly proved by the law of God, the law of our la^d,
and his Maties own diverse testimonies, that no man ought to be persecuted for
his religion be it true or false, so they testify their faithful allegiance to
the King. What shall men do striveing about matters of religion til this be
ended. For if this be truth that the kings of the earth have power from God to
co^pel by persecution all their subjects to believe as they believe then wicked
is it to resist, and the persecutions of such is justly upon the^, and the
Magistrates that execute the same are clear from their blood, and it is upon
their own heads: but if the kings of the Earth have not power from God to
compel by persecution any of their subjects to believe as they believe (seeing
faith is the work of God) then no less wicked is it in the sight of God to
disobey, and the persecutions of such are upon the Magistrates, and the blood of
the persecuted cries unto the lord, and will be required at the Magistrates hands.

Wherefore in all humility, revere^ce and loyalty we do humbly desire of our
sovereign lord the K: and al Gods ministers under him, as Judges Justices of
peace, etc. by whom this persecution is executed, themselves to consider, not
whether herein they please lord Bbs: but whether they please the lord Jesus
Christ, who after a little while shall judge all judges, according to their
works without respect of persons, and therefore are commanded to kiss the
son least he be angry and they p^rish in the way. psa. 2. our humble desire
is, that they would consider what is testified in the scriptures: that, The
kings of the Earth shall give their power unto the Beast, til the words of God
be fulfilled the^ shall they take their power from her. If it be granted (as it
is) that the kings of this nation formerly have given their power unto that
Romish Beast, it shall evidently appear, that our lord the king and al
Magistrates under him do give their power to the sa^e beast though the Beast be
in another shape: For as that spiritual power or beast of Rome sets up a
worship (as they pretend) for God, and force al thereto by cruel persecutions,
the kings of the earth giveing their power thereunto, so this spiritual power
or beast of England sets up a worship (as they pretend) for God, and force al
thereto by cruel persecutions, the kings Matie giveing his power here unto. Oh
that all that are in authority, would but consider by the word of God (which
shall judge them at the last day) what they do, when they force men against their
souls and consciences to dissemble to believe as they believe, or as the K:
and state believes, they would withdraw their hands and hearts therefrom and
never do as they have done partly through inconsideration, and partly to
please lord Bbs: being in favor with the King.

It cannot but with high tha^k fulness to God and to the king be aknowledged of
all that the kings Matie is no blood thirsty man for if he were, bodily
destruction should be the portion of all that fear God, and endeavor to walk
in his ways as may be seen in the primitive time of this spiritual power or
beast of England, after that king Henry de 8. had cast of the Romish beast, and
since, (so far as leave has been granted them) by hanging, burning banishing,
imprisoning, and what not, as the particulars might be named. Yet our most
humble desire of our lord the king is, that he would not give his power to
force his faithful subjects, to dissemble to believe as he believes, in the
least measure of persecution, though it is no small persecution, to lie many
years in filthy prisons, in hunger cold, jdlenes, divided from wife, family,
calling, left in continual meseries and temptations, so as death would be to
many less persecution, seeing his Matie. confesses that to change the mind
must be the work of God. And of the lord Bbs: we desire, that they would a
little leave of persecuringe those that cannot believe as they, til they have
proved that God is welpleased therewith, and the souls of such as submit in
safety from comdemnation let them prove this, and we protest we will for ever
submit unto them, and so will thousands: and therefore if there be any spark
off grace in the^ let the^ set themselves to give satisfaction either by word
or writing or both. But if they will not, but continue their cruel courses as
they have done, let them yet remember that they must come to judgment, and have
their abominations set in order before them, and be torn in pieces when none
shall deliver them.

And whereas they have no other cullor of ground out of the scriptures, then
that they have Cano^^zed a law. viz: that whosoever shall affirm hat the K: Ma:
has not the same power ove^ the church that the godly kings of Israel had
under the law etc Let him be excomunicate ipso facto. The unsound (...)s of
which ground is manifested in this Dialogue followeing* wherein is showed their
pal^able ignorance in that they know not the mi(...)iay of God, and therefore
have they made this canon in flattery to the king only to support their pride
and cruelty: for if the kingdom or and of Israel, or Canaan now under the
gospel be an earthly kingdom or land, or Israel now a worldly or fleshly
Israel as both were under the law. Then we would confess there should be an
earthly king thereof, but if the king some of Israel now be not earthly but
heave^ly, Ioh. 18.36. and the Isralites now not of this world. Ioh. 15.19. then
the king thereof is not of this world, as they are not of this world. Ioh
17.16. and if these spiritual lords confess that Chr: and king now of the sand
and people of Israel, but yet he has left our lord the king h^s deputy to make
such laws and lords over the church as pleases him: the word of the lord is
against the^ ^ere is but one lord 1. Cor. 12.5. and one law giver. Iam. 4.12.
over his Church. Nay his Ma: himself is against the^, who says. There is no
earthly monarch ever the Church, whose word must be a law, and says further.
Christ is his Churches monarch, and the holy ghost his deputy alleging luke
22.25. the kings of the Gentiles bear rule one over another. etc. but I shall
not be so among you saying further. Christ then he ascended, left not Peter
with them to direct the^ in all truth, but promissed to send the holy ghost to
them for that end. etc. If any wish rebellions against the word of the lord
herein, yet let them not be rebellious against the word of the king. Oh that
any thing would prevail with the^ to make them leave of, these cruel courses
of persecuting poor souls that desire truly to fear God, and are most
faithful subjects to the king and desire also the salvation of the souls of
these their cruel persecutors, who do seek their utter vndoeing by all the
forenamed persecutions, only because they cannot of faith offer up such
worship to God as these spiritual lords comaund, and the rather let them leave
of persecutinge, seeing the kings Matie acknowledges. It is a sure rule in
divinity, that God loves not to plant his church by violence and bloodshed.
And if it be a law for all Christians, that in indifferent things one must not
offend another, but the strong but forbear, rather the^ offend his weak
brother, other wise he wounds the weak conscience and sins against Christ.
1. Cor 8. The^ how much less has any man power to be lord over the weak
conscience, forceing it to practice that it has not faith, in bringing it
thereby unto same, and unto condemnation. Romans 14. we do unfeignedly acknowledge
the authority of earthly Magistrates Gods blessed ordinance, and that al earthly
authority and comaund apperteynes unto the^, let them comaund what they will,
we must obey either to do or suffer upon pain of Gods displeasure, besides
their punishment. But al men must let God alone with his right which is to be
lord and lawgiver to the soul, and not comaund obedience for God where he
comaundeth none. And this is only that which we dare not but maintain, upon
the peril of our souls, which is greater then bodily affliction And only for
the maintenance of Christ's right herein, do false Prophets and deceivers (who
by that craft are clothed in fine apparel, and fair deliciously every day)
labor to make us odious i^ the ears and eyes of Prince and people, knoweing well
that if they had not power by persecution to force me^ to dissemble to believe
as they, their kingdom and pain would soon come to naught, the wickedness of
which course is discovered in this writing followeing.

For the manner, being Dialogue-wise, we thought it the fittest in two
respects. First, for the understanding of the simple, to whom especially Gods
mysteries apperteyne, more then to the wise and prudent of the world. Secondly,
because all the objections that we have met with, might be set down, and the
playnelyer answered. And because we have faith and assurance that many will see
and acknowledge the unlawfulness of tyra^nyzing over the conscience, un
persecuting the bodies of such as cannot be subject, we have also thought it
meet to manifest the careful estate of such subjection, that they may deliver
their souls, if they will be saved: and also have set down the beginning of
that old and good way, that John Baptist, Christ Jesus, and his Apostles have
left, unto all that will be saved unto the end of the world. Beseeching that
Almighty worker, that he would work in the hearts and consciences of men, that
they may enquire for it, and that out of the scriptures, and walk therein,
the^ shall they find rest unto their souls, although afflictions to their
bodies. Oh (...) is time for the Lord to work, for they have destroyed his
law, and have set up in many Nations such worship for God as best pleases the^
that are in authority, and have power to persecute the contrary minded. Let all
Gods people cry. How long Lord? when will thou come to destroy Antychrists
cruel Kingdom, and establish Christ's meek and peaceable Kingdom, as thou
haist begun, even come Lord Jesus by the Spirit of thy Moves, and the brighnes
of thy coming, even come quickly. Amen.

By Christ's unworthy witnesses, his Majesty's faithful subjects. Commonly, but
most falsely called Annabaptists.

Antichristian. Why come you not to Church?


Christian. What should I do there?


A. Worship God.


C. I must worship God as he requires, and not as any mortal man requires.


A. True, but the worship that we require you to offer up, is the worship,
God requires.


C. If it be so, I will withal willingness asse^t unto it, but my conscience must
be satisfied there of by the word of truth, that I may have faith in it, other
wise it is my grevious sai. Romans 14.23. For I may not believe it so to be
because you affirm it.


A. Well you must go to Church, otherwise you are disobedient to the law, and
vvil fall under punishment.


C. But still remember that you would have me worship God as you pretend,
therefore let us agree what worship God requires: Christ says. Ioh 4.24. God
is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth.
Here we see what worship God requires, viz: That we worship him with our
souls and Spirits, and also that we worship him according to the truth of his
word: And therefore for your book worship: If it were according to truth,
(from the which it is as far as light is from darkness) yet if I cannot offer it
up with my Spirit it is not acceptable to God, but most abominable.


A. Well you must come to Church


C. I pray let ask you a question, do you seek the glory of God, and the
salvation of my soul herein, or your own obedience?


A. I seek the glory of God, and the salvation of your soul, and not my own
obedience.


C. Then manifest it, no by words only, but by deeds and truth, which if you
do, you will not threaten me punishment to cause me to come, but with meekenes
and patience satisfye my conscience by the word of truth, (for this is the
duty of the Minist. of Christ. 2. Tim. 2.24.) that I may come with a willing
mind, so shall I be accepted. 2. Cor. 8.12. Psalm. 110.3. For if by threatening
me punishment as imprisonment, banishment, or death, you cause me to bring my
body, and not my spirit or soul, so shall I come near to the Lord with my
lips, when my heart shall be far from him, which he accompteth vain worship and
hypocrisy. Mat. 15.


A. I perceive what you aim at, you would have none brought to Church, but
such as come willingly of themselves, so should every man worship God as
himself pleases.


C. Your conclusion I aim not at, for I acknowledge that as there is but one
God, so there is but one way of worshipping him, out of the which way,
whosoever is and repe^teth not there of shall pay a dear price, and therefore
it stands all Men upon not to please themselves in worshipping him. But you
perceive aright that I aim at this, that none should be compelled to worship
God: but such as come willingly for I will (by Gods assistance) prove most
evide^tly by the Scriptures, that none ought nor can be compelled to worship
God to acceptance, by any worldly means whatsoever.


A, Prove that.


C. Well I prove that I have affirmed, thus: First Heb. 11.6. Without faith it
is impossible to please God, and Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.
These two Scriptures prove most evide^tly that whatsoever I have not faith in
inworshiping God although it were undoubtedly true, I may not offer it up unto
God, for it is displeasing to him, and it is sin against him: as also it
appears plainly by him, that came into the Kings supper and wa^ted his
wedding garment. Mat. 22.


A. It is the Kings law that you must go to Church, and therefore you must be
obedient.


C. The intent of the Kings law is not so, as appears both by the statute for
the oath of allegiance, and also by his Maties. own words, manifested in his
Apology for the oath of allegiance, as hereafter is more fully declared. For
if the intent of the law were to make me come to Church to worship God, and not
of faith, the intent of the law were to compel me to sin, which his Matie.
requires not.


Antic. I deny not but whatsoever is not off Faith is sin, but we would
have you come to Church, to worship God of faith.


C. It is not so, you regard not whether I have faith or no, for if you did,
you would not urge the Kings law against me, which is but a carnal weapon, and
cannot beger faith, and there fore is no sure ground of faith. For in my
obedience to God I must not presume above that that is written. 1. Cor. 4.6.
For the Word of God is the only ground of faith Romans 10.17. and therefore if
you would have me come of faith, you would only urge the law of the King of
Kings against me.


A. Has not all the Learned of the Land considered of these things, and set
the^ down, are such simple men as you likely to see more then all these?


C. I demand of you whether they be not all subject to err as all men are,
and therefore I must try their spirits, whether they er or no. 1. joh. 4.1. For
I may not hold, either that they cannot err, or that if I find them to err I
must obey them notwithstanding, do you not herein teach me that Popish and
accursed doctrine, that you invaigh so much against in the Papists, that I must
believe as the learned of the land believes.


A. I do not hold that they cannot err


C. Yes you hold either that they cannot err, or if they do err, I must obey
them, for if I do not obey them you threaten me punishment.


A. Nay, but I hold that they being learned do not err, and therefore you must
obey them.


C. Then this is your argument: The learned do not err, and therefore must be
obeyed. The 2 bs: and the rest of that ra^ck are learned and do not err, and
therefore they must be obeyed: another arg: as vain as this may be collected
from this ground. The learned do not err, and therefore must be obeyed. The
Pope and the rest of that rank are learned, (yea as learned as yours) and do
not err, and therefore they must be obeyed. The one is as true as the other,
but both abominable. If you prove that they that want this learning, must not
meddle with the ways of God, but as these learned men teach them, then indeed
you said some thing, but if you cannot, as most certain it is, you cannot. For
the word of God is against you herein, then for shame to God and Me^, leave of
your cruel persecuting, for why do you persecute Men that cannot of faith
submit to your direction concerning the ways of God, upon which consists
their salvation if they walk in the true way of faith with love thereof, and
their condemnation if they walk in by path.


A. Then I perceive if a man can plead that he has not faith in any thing
which the King commands he need not be obedient.


C. Would God all Men could see your dealing herein, this is your usual
course, when your mouth is stopped by the power of Gods word that you know not
what to answer, then you runn to the Kings comaund, and so make your matters
good, like unto your predecessors the wicked Scribes and Pharisees, who when
our Lord and Master had stopped their months that they had no word of
answer, then they sought to make him a trespasser against Caesar, but I have
learned in some weak measure, that as there is a Caesar unto whom of
conscience I must be obedient, so there is another king, one Jesus, that is
King of Kings, unto whom if you will not be obedient in giveing unto God that
which is Gods, he will te^r^ you in pieces, when there shall be none that can
deliver you, and cast you into the lake that burns with Fire and brimstone
for ever more, where th^re shall be no rest day nor night, and therefore agree
with this your adversary quickly, whilst you are in the way with him.

The power and authority of the King is earthly, and God has commanded me to
submit to all Ordinances off Man. 1. Pet. 2.13.^4. And therefore I have faith
to submit to what ordinance of Man soever the King comaunds, if it be an
humane Ordinance, and not against the manifest word of God, let him require
what he will, I must of conscience obey him, with my body goods and all that I
have: But my soul wherewith I am to worship God, that belongs to another
King, whose kingdom is not off this World Ioh 18.36. Whose people must come
willingly. Psalm. 110.3. Whose weapons are not carnal but Spiritual. 2.
Cor. 10.4. etc.


Ant. Is this all the authority that you will give to the King?


C. What authority can any mortal Man require more, then of body, goods,
life, and all that apperteyneth to the outward Man? The heart God requires.
Pro. 23.26. He commanded to give unto Caesar things that are Cesars, and to
himself the things that are his. Lvk. 20.25. Now if all the outward man be
Cesars, and the inward man too, so that he must be obeyed in his own matters,
and in Gods matters also, then tell us what shall be given to God? If you or
any man will give him more power or authority then I give him, then you give
him more then his Matie. requires, as shall be showed.


A. We do not say that the King can compel the Soul, but only the outward
Man.


C. If he cannot compel my soul, he cannot compel me to worship God, for God
cannot be worshipped without the soul. Ioh. 4 24. jf you say he may compel me
to offer up a worship only with my body, (for the spirit you confess he
cannot compel) to whom is that worship? not to God. Then consider you who
they worship that are thus compelled, (say you by the King.) Let it well be
here observed that you make the King a comaunder of such worship, as is not to
God, contrary to his Maties. own mind manifest in his writings. But this you
do, not to advance Gods glory nor the kings honor, but your own cursed
kingdom of darkness, which you hold by flattery and falsehood. For if this
compelled worship (which is not to God) were taken away then your kingdom
would fall to hell from whence it came, and therefore all Men map here see it is
supported only by wickedness.


A. I confess the Kings authority is earthly, but he is head over the Church
under Christ.


C. God forbid that any mortal Man should so equallize himself with Christ,
who allone is Head of his church, as the Husband is of the Wife. Ephe. 5 23.
And has left no o^e-gecent in that his office, for he is never absent from his
Church. Mat. 18.20. and 28.20. All that any mortal Man can be, is to be a
subject of his Kingdom, for their is but one Lord. 1. Cor. 12.5. and one
lawgiver Iam. 3.12. And that this is so, his Matie. confirms by his own
testimony, in his Apology for the oath of allegiance Page 46.47. But as I well
allow of the Hyrarchie of the church for distjuctio^ of orders, (for so I
understand it) so I utterly deny that there is any earthly Monarch thereof,
whose word must be a law, and who cannot err in his sentence by an
infallibility of spirit^: because earthly kingdoms must have earthly Monarchs,
it does not follow that the church must have a visible Monarch too: For the
World has not one earthly temporal Monarch, Christ is his Churches Monarch,
and the Holy ghost his deputy. The Kings of the gentiles reign over them, but
ye shall not be so. Luke 22.25. Christ did not promise before his assention to
leave Peter with them to direct and instruct them in all things, but he
promissed to send the Holy ghost unto them for that end. These are his highness
own words, whereby it evidently appears his Matie challenges no supremacy
over the Church, but laboreth to overthrowe that abominable exaltacion of that
Man of sin, in the Romish profession, for Christ has given no supremacy in or
over his Church, to any mortal man, but expressly commanded the contrary as
the place of Luk mentioned by his Matie. plainly declares.

His highness is supreme head and gouvernor over all his subjects bodies and
goods, within his dominions, and therein I detest and abhor all foreign
powers whatsoever.

But now for the thing in controversy betwixt you and me, of compelling Men
by persecutions to do service to God (as is pretended) wherein they have not
faith, it shall be manifest not to be of God, in that Christ Jesus himself, the
only Lord and lawgiver to the soul, neither had any such power and
authority, neither taught any such thing to his Disciples, but the contrary.
First Mat. 28.18.19. All power is given me in Heaven and in earth. Go therefore
and teach all Nations and 2. Cor. 10.4. The Weapons of our war fare are not
carnal, but mighty through God to cast down Holds. etc. Here we see Christ
has no Worldly power, nor Worldly Weapons. 2ly. He practiced and taught the
contrary. When the Samaritanes would not receive him goeing to Jerusalem. Luke
9. his disciples would have had fire come down from heaven and devoured them,
Christ rebuked them and said, ye know not of what spirit ye are, the Son off
man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. And the Appostle by
the Spirit of Christ: 2. Tim. 2.24. Comaundeth the servants off the lord not to
strive, but to be gentle toward all men apt to teach, suffering the evil men
patiently, instructing them with meeknes that are contrary minded, proveing if
God at any time vvil give them repentance that they may know the truth, and
come to amendment out of the Devils snare. etc. These Scriptures need no
explanation for this most evident truth.


A. Well yet notvvithstanding all this it is manifest in the Scriptures by the
example of Thappostle Peter smiting Ananias and Saphira to death. Act. 5. and
of Th-appostle Paul striking Flymas the socerer blind. Act. 13 11. And also by
delivering Hemineus and Alexander unto Satan for the destruction of the Flesh:
that punishment upon the body may be used, and the flesh destroyed: For if it
were lawful for them to smite to death, and the like, though by extraordinary
means, then it must be lawful for us by ordinary means, since extraordinary
means now failed, If you say it be not Lawful for us, then you must say it
was not Lawful for them, and that were to accuse them of laying a false
foundation, which none fearing God will affirm.


C. I dare not once admit of such a thought as to disallowe the truth off that
foundation which th-^oposties as skillful master builders have said: But for
your argument of Peter's extraordinary smiting of Ananias and Saphira, he
neither laid hand upon them nor threatened them by word, only declared what
should be san them from God, and therefore serves no thing to your purpose,
also that of Paul to Elimas, he laid no hands upon him, but only declared the
Lords hand upon him, and the judgment that should follow. If you can so
pronounce, and it so come to pass upon any, do it, and then it may be you may
be accounted master builders, and layers of a new foundation or another
gospel. And for Th-appostle Paul his delivering Hymeneus and Alexander unto
Satan. 1. Tim. 1.20. It was not by any temporal sword or power, but even by
the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, in his name, by the sword of the Spirit. 1.
Cor. 5.4. And this was not extraordinary, but ordinarye to continue in all
churches to the end, and not to destroy the outward Man, as you teach and
practice, but to destroy those iustfull affections, which dwell in the flesh,
that so the flesh being mortified, the Spirit may be quickened and the Soul
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. And whereas you say that as they did it by
extra-ordinary means so you may do it by ordinary means, if you would use
only those Weapons which Christ commanded his Disciples to use in this
business, which are not carnal, we would agree with you herein. But if your
ordinary means be such as Christ never had nor any of his Disciples, then it
is a means of your own devisinge, for Christ has al means whatsoever for
bringing Men to the obedience of the truth.


A. Does not Christ in the parrable Teach that he compelled all to come in?


C. I demand of you wherewith does he compel them? he has no carnal weapons,
does he not compel them by his word, Which is his two edged svvord. Heb. 4
12. Revel. 2.12. Does he smite the earth with any other weapons then by the
breath off his lips. Esa. 11.4.


A. Well then you see compulsion may be used.


C. Yes, I confess to you such compulsion as much as you will, if when you
have done you will walk in his steps, who when the Gaderens prayed him to
depart he left them, and taught his Disciples: where they should preach the
word of God, if they would not receive them, that they should shake off the
dust of their feet for a witness against them. Mat. 10.14. Which accordingly
they practiced Act. 13.51. and 18 6. etc. He never taught them to pull the
contrary minded out of their houses and put them in prisons, to the vndoeing of
them, their Wives and Children: This was Saul's course when he was a blasphemer
and persecutor. etc. Act. 9.1. etc. Christ taught his Disciples To wait if at
any time God would give the contrary minded repentance, and not to prevent
their repentance by seeking their blood.

Indifferent man. I have heard you all this while, and by that I have heard, I
see evide^tly that none ought to be compelled by any worldly means to worship
God, neither can any be accepted in such worship, in that it is spiritual
worship that he accepts.


C. Blessed be the Lord, that you see it, I would not you only, but all Men
did see that the sword of the Magistrate and al afflictions proceeding there
from are only upon the outward man and cannot convert a soul from goeing
astray, nor begett faith it comes by hearing the word of God Romans 10.17. And
therefore is no instrument in this work. All that the Magistrate can do, is to
compel me to bring my body for except their be a willing mind which no man
can see, their is no acceptance with God, and therefore it is not Gods glory,
nor my accepta^ce with him they seek by forceing me, but merely their own
obedience to Gods great dishonor; and the destruction of my soul, if I should
so do. But if it would suffice them to bring my body, to that they call their
Church, and require of me no worship: I will go when they will, only not when
their false worship is performed. For I adhor the accursed doctrine off the
Familists herein.


I. It is a lamentable thing to consider how many thousands in this nation
there be, that for fear of trouble submit to things in Religion which they
diseprove off.


C. Oh, whose eyes does not gush out with tears, in the consideration thereoff
seeing in all that, God is highly displeased, and al those under the judgments
of God everlasting if they repent not.


A. If it were as you would have it, that all Religions should be suffered, how
dangerous would it be to the Kings Person and State, what trecheries and
treasons would be plotted?


I. Indead that is a thing greatly to be suspected: but if permission of all
religions should be clered of that there is no question, but it might prevail
with the King and State.


C. If it be not cleared of that then let al me^ abhor it. First: it is the
commandment of him, who is the God not of confusion but off peace and order,
and therefore to be obeyed. Mat. ^3.30. Let the good and bad grow together
unto the end off the world. Suffering the contrary minded patiently proveing
if god at any time will give them repentance that they may acknowledge the
truth. etc. 2. Tim. 2.24. Secondly: if the just laws in that behalf made be
but duly executed, which is, that all his subjects should protest their
faithful alligeance to his Maties. person. Crown and dignity, all that will
not be obedient, let them be disposed of at his Maties. pleasure, and you shall
see no such trecheries and treasons practiced as has been. First for all those
that seek and practice in themselves reformation in Religion, satan himself
cannot tar them with the least jott of treachery: and for the Papists may it
not justly be suspected that one chief cause of al their treasons has been
because of all the compulsions that has been used against their consciences in
compelling them to the worship practiced in public according to the Law of
this Land: Which being taken away, there is no doubt but they would be much
more peaceable, as we see it verified in diverse other Nations, where no such
co^pulsio^ is used, for if they might have freedom in their religion, unto
their faith full alligea^ce to the King, the fear of the kings Laws, and
their own prosperity and peace, would make the^ live more inoffencively in
that respect.


I. Only the Papists are dangerous in that some of them hold, that Kings and
Princes that he excomunicated by the Pope, may be deposed and murdered, by
their subjects or any other.


C. For that damnable and accursed doctrine as we abhor it with our souls, so
we desire al other may. And therefore all the Laws that can be made for the
prevention of such exceecrable practizes are most necessary. But now I disire
all men to see, that the Bishops and we, justly cry out against this accursed
doctrine and practice in the Pope and his associates: That Princes should be
murdered by their subjects for contrary myndednes in Religion, yet they teach
the king to murder his subjects for the self same thing, viz: for being
contrary minded to them in their Religion. So likewise, as that accursed
doctrine, is to be abhorred in the Papists, who teach, subjects not to be
obedient to their princes that are excomunicate by the pope: even so is that
accursed doctrine of the Bbs. to be abhorred, who Teach, Princes not to
protect their subjects that are excomunicate by them, in not affoarding the^
either law or justice nor to bear testimony in any Court. Do not the Bbs:
herein justify this accursed doctrine and practice in the Papists?.


A. There is great difference in the persons, for the one are Princes, the other
subjects, and subjects must be obedient.


C. Most true it is, but is it not also true that Princes must afforde all
their subjects justice and equity, although they be as heathens and Publicans?
For if Princes be freed from doing right and justice and protectinge their
subjects, that be excomunicate, why are not subjects also freed from subjection
and allegiance to their Princes being excomunicate, if, excomunication be
Christ's Law to all alike that will be saved, without respect off persons. And
also, is not that law off Christ herein to be observed. That whatsoever ye
would men should do to you, even so do you to them. Mat. 7.12. And therefore as
Princes would that all their subjects should be faithful and obedient unto
the^: so ought Princes to be just and equal to all their subjects, in
mainteyning them in every just and equal cause between man and man: For, for
his cause (not for Religion) says Thappostle, the saints at Rome paid their
tribute to Caesar their heathen Prince, who was against them in Religion. Shall
they not escape damnation for this accursed doctrine and practice, and think
you you shall? thou that judge another, judge them not thy self? By this it
may appear as also by exceeding many other doctrines and practices how near
you are to that bloody spiritual power, what pretenses to the contrary soever
you make.


A. It were a lamentable thing if that bloody Religion should be practiced
again in this Nation.


C. I acknowledge it a bloody Religion, but God has cast down the power
thereof in this kingdom, blessed be his name but I would you could see your
own cruel bloody religion, but that God of his mercy has restrained it by
the kings Matie. who thirsts not after blood. how many, only for seeking
reformation in religion, has been put to death by your power in the days of
Q. Eliz: and how many, both then and since, have been consumed to death in
prisons? y^a since that cruel spiritual power has been ser ^p that not
hanging, burning, exile, imprisonments and al manner of contempt been used and
al for religion, although some for grevious errors, and yet you see not this to
be a bloody religion: further you cry out of their bloody cruelty, the reason
is because you will not be of their religion, and when you have done, are most
blodie cruel (so far as is in your power) because we and al men will not be
of your religion.


A. If men hold errors and will not obey the truth, do they not sin against
God, and deserve punishment?


C. Yes, such deserve punishment, but God has appointed their punishment, and
the time thereof. Their punishment Romans 2.8.9. To them that are contentious and
disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness shall be indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every one that does evil.
Mark. 16.16. He that will not believe shall be damned. 2. These. 1.8. In flaming
fire rendering vengeance unto them that know no God, and obey not the gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be punished with everlasting perdition
from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power. The time thereof,
the last place recited. verse. 7. When the Lord Jesus shall show himself from
heaven with his mighty Angels: and Romans 2.5. The day of wrath. and verse. 16,
At that day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ* and Mat. ^3
40.41, At the end of this World the son of man shall send forth his Angels
and they shall gather out of his Kingdom al things that offend, and them that
do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of Fire. etc. Here is showed
the punisher the punishment, and the time thereoff. This punisher has
commanded you to wait for their repentance (by his own example) which is in
his hands to give them, and not to cut them of and send them to hell, as you
teach and practice, which is contrary to God, who is patient toward mockers
which walk after there lusts. 2. Pet. 3. Because he would have no man to
perish, but would that all men whatsoever should come to repentance. but you
(contrary to him) use all the means you can to cut Men of, that they might
perish, in that you seek to destroy their bodies whilst they remain in their
errors.


A. I confess that God commands Mat. 13 That the good and bad must grow
together unto the end of the World, but that is in the Church.


C. Well: if that be the true exposition, I pray you why do you then
excomunicate any out off your Church, contrary to your own acknowledge. And
here let all Men take notice that by this exposition you overthrowe your own
excomunication quite, and accuse Christ for giveing a rule. Mat. 18. and
Th-appostle Paul, and the church of Corinth for practizing that rule. ^. Cor 5.
In cas^ing out of the Church. For you say all must grow together to the end in
the Church. But the exposition of the Lawgiver himselff is against you, that
the ^eild is the world. verse. 38. Yet in that you confess that the wicked and
the Godly must be let alone in the Church unto the end much more in the world
unto the end: For if the wicked pollute not the Church, sure it is they pollute
not the world. This then you are commanded unto verse. 29.30. Nay, gather them
not let them grow together unto the end of the world.


A. Let them come to Church, and they shall grovve together unto the end.


C. Indeed I think so, hereby you manifest you regard not how wicked and
ungodly men be, so they come to your Church, you will not destroy the^, though
they remain in their abominable lusts: but if they will not come to your
Chur: let the^ be wheat or tares, you will gather the^, and (as much as in you
is) send them to bur^^n^. Herein al me^ may see, as I said before, that you
seek your own glory and obedience, and not gods, and so exalt your selves
above God. 2. these. 2


I. Well, I bless God, I see this as clearly as the sun shyning in his
brightness, that it is to feight against God to compel any contrary to their
consciences to perform any service unto him, in that there are so many places
of Scripture comaunding the contrary.


C: The whole new Testament throughout in all the doctrines and practices of
Christ and his disciples teach no such thing as co^pelling men by persecutions
and afflictions to obey the go:pel but the direct contrary: viz: to suffer at
the hands of the wicked, when they were persecuted for righteousness sake to
suffer it, when the unbelievers and wicked curse them to bless and pray for
their repentance, and that God would forgive them, and never lay these sins
to their charge, as our Savior Luke 23 34. Stephen Act. 7.60. and the rest
did. And for a conclusion of this point, that your faith may be full herein,
consider that we are to wait for the Jews conversion, and not to destroy the^.


I. It is true, that might give all men satisfaction in these things.


C. Oh yes, if Men had any regard of God or his word, they would never deal
more in this thing: the lord (we see) Ro^. 11. has promised, that when the
fulness of the gentiles is come in, the jews shall be co^verted: now if the
jews who are such fearful blasphemers of Christ and his gospel, that
contemn him and his Testament with all dispyte, if their conversion must be
waited for, and that they may not be destroyed from the face of the Earth, then
who may not see (if they shut not their eyes) that the conversion off all is
to be waited for: and that no man for blaspheming Christ and his gospel map be
destroyed or afflicted by imprisonments, death, or any calamity whatsoever.


I. It is not to be gain-saied with any show of truth. I would God the Kings
Matie would consider of this point, seeing that the cruel Bbs by vseing his
power, commit such sin against God in this thing both in persecuting the^ that
cannot of faith yield, and also in foreeing them that do yield contrary to
their consciences, to sin against God, and to perish, if they repent not.


C. I am persuaded, that if his highness did but once well wey and consider it he
would never suffer such high iniquity to be co^^i^ted against God contrary to
his express commandment, and all to be done by ^he Kings power, for nothing
have they else to bear them out. The Lord persuade the hearts of his Matie and
his posterity unto it, seeing his throne is established by him, that he and his
posterity may sit and reign over these Nations and Kingdoms, till Jesus Christ
the comaunder of these things come in his glory to recompense every Man
according to his works, without respect of persons.


A. If wicked malefactors should be let allone to the end of the world, then
where is the Magistrates svvorde? it is of no force if evil men may not be cut
of.


C. I acknowledge unfeignedly that God has given to Magistrates a sword to cut of
wicked me^, and to reward the weldoers. Romans 13 chap. But this Ministry is a
worldly Ministry, their sword is a worldly sword, their punishments can extend
no further then the outward man, they can but kill the body Luke 12.4. And
therefore this Ministry and sword is appointed only to punish the breach of
worldly ordinances which is all that God has given to any mortal man to punish.
The King may make laws for the safety and good of his person, state and
subjects, against the which whosoever is disloyal or disobedient he may
dispose, of at his pleasure, the Lord has given him this sword and authority,
forseeing in his eternal wisdom, that if this his ordinance of Magistracy
were nor, there would be no liveing for men in the world, and especially for
the Godly, and therefore the Godly have particular cause to glorify God for
this his blessed ordinance of Magistracy, and to regard it with all reverence.

But now the breach of Christ's laws, of the which we all this while speak,
which is the thing only I stand upon, his Kingdom is spiritual, his laws
spiritual, the transgressions spiritual, the punishment spiritual,
everlasting death of soul, his sword spiritual, no carnal or worldly weapon
is given to the supportation of his kingdom, nor to punish the transgressors
of the laws of this kingdom: The lawgiver himself has commanded that the
transgressors of these laws should be set alone until the harvest because he
knows, they that are now tares, may hereafter come to repentance, and b^come
wheat: they that are now blasphemers, persecutors, and oppressors as Paul was,
may, by the power of Gods word become faithful and a faithful witness as he
was: They that are now fornicators etc. as some of the Corin: once were 1 Cor.
6.9. may here after become washed cleansed and sanctified as they were: they
that are now to people nor under mercy as the Saints sometimes were. 1. Pet.
2.10. may hereafter become the people of god and obtain mercy as they did:
all come not at the First hour, some come not till the eleaventh hour, if
those that come not till the last hour should be destroyed: because they come
not at the first hour, then should they never come but be prevented.


A. Were not blasphemers put to death in time of he law? 1 evit. 24.11 etc.


C. Yes, an Isralite blasphemmy the Lord, or doing any thing presumptiously,
which was blasphemy. Number. 15.30. no sacrifice to be offered for him: but would
you from hence have the kings Matie to put al his subjects to death that
conteinne the truth of Christ? If yea, see what will follow. All Papists ought
to be put to death, who are direct blasphemers. Revel. 16 10.11 When the vial
of Gods wrath was powered upon the throne of the Beast: (which all England
confess is meant the Popish power) they blasphemed the God of Heaven. etc. All
the Jews that speak many things blasphemously against Christ, ought to be
put to death: Yea of what profession soever he be doing any thing
presumpteously against Christ, ought to be put to death by your affirmation,
no sacrifice to be offered, no repentance to be admitted, dye he must under
two or three witnesses, but that this is most false, Christ and his Appostles
in his Testament does manifestli declare as is before showed: was no Paul a
blasphemer, yet received to mercy? But this the Holy Ghost teaches from
blasphemy under the law. Heb. 10. He that dispyseth Moses Law, dies without
mercy under two or three witnesses, of how much sorer punishment suppose ye
shall he be worthy that treads under foot the Son of God, and counts
the blood off the Testament as an unholy thing wherewith he was sanctified,
and does dispite the Spirit of grace. Speaking of such as had received and
acknowledged the truth. verse. 26. This is now the due proportion, an Israelite
according to the flesh in the time of the law presumpteously sinninge against
Gods comaundeme^t, by his comaund must dye, by the worldly sword, no sacrifice
to be offered for him: so in the new Testament or time of the gospel a
spiritual Isralite according to the faith contempteously or dispitefully
sinning against Christ's command he has former acknowledged dispi^eing and
contemning them, by his comaund must dye by the spiritual sword, no repentance
to be admitted, seeing he crucifyeth again to himself the son of God, and
makes a mock of him. Heb. 6.6. David and Peter came not within this compass,
though they sinned off knowledge, yet they did it not comtemteously or
dispitefully, but through frailty. If an Isralite under the Law did ought
through ignorance as Number. 15. or through frailty as Levit. 6. There was
sacrifice for him: so under the gospel an Isralit doing ought through
ignorance or through frailty as Peter and Barnabas with the rest of the Jews
mentioned Gal. 2. or the me^steous person. 1. Cor. 5. There is repentance for
him. This is it that co^founds al true religion. That be cause it was so in the
time of the law, therefore it may be so in the time of the gospel, by which
reason, men might set up as truly the whole law as some part, and utterly
abolish Christ. I pray you seriously consider what is here said.


A. Has not the King the same ^ovver that the Kings of Israel had who
compelled me^ to the observation of the law of God?


C. First I answer you: that the kings off Israel had never power from God to
set up any thing in or for the service of God, bur that only which was
commanded by God Dewt. 4.2. No not so much as the manner of any law. Number. 15
16. and 9.14. and therefore this will not serve your purpose, that Kings may
set up within their dominions such spiritual lords and laws for the serveing
of God, no nor the manner there of as may best please themselves under what
pretense soever, thereby making God for his worship subject to their
pleasures. And his Matie. acknowledges that Christ's Church after the
establishing of it by miracles in the primitive time, was ever after to be
governed within the limits of his revealed will. Speech at Parl Anno 1609
Secondly the Kings of Israel might compel men to the sacrifices and
ordinances of the old Testament, all which were carnal and purged not the
conscience Heb. 9.9.10. as circumcision the passover etc: But no mortal Man
whatsoever he be, can compel any man to offer the sacrifices of the new
Testament, which are spiritual, and purge the conscience except he can beget
faith in him, and convert his soul. The ordinances of the old Testament were
to be performed by the posterity of Abra. according to the flesh that thereby
they might be taught Christ: but the ordinances of he new Testament are to be
performed, only by the posterity of Abraham according to the faith, that have
learned Christ, and have put on Christ, and so having him, all things else
apperteyneth to them. But one thing I demand of you, who now is King of
Israel?


A. I confess Christ is King of Israel.


C. Yes, Christ alone is King of Israel, that sits upon David's throne, and
therefore mark the true proportion. In the time of the old Testament the Kings
of Israel had power from God to compel all to the ordinances of God, or to cut
them of by their sword from the earthly Land of Canaan, and the promises
thereof: So in the new Testament the King of Israel Christ Jesus has power
from the Father to compel all, to the ordinances of God, or to cut them of by
his sword, from the Heavenly Land of Canaan and the promises thereof: The
Kings of Israel only had this power under the law, and the King of Israel
only has this power under the gospel: And therefore whosoever will challenge
this power under the gospel, he must be the king of Israel in the time of the
gospel, which is particulier only to Jesus Christ, unto whom all power in
Heaven and in Earth is given.

And let it be here well observed, that by this opinion of yours you make the
Kingdom and ordinances of Israel under the Law, and the Kingdom and
ordinances of Israel under the gospel allone, directly contrary to the whole
Scripture, for the Kingdom and ordinances of Israel under the law were of
this world, but the Kingdom and ordinances of Israel under the gospel are
not of this world, as Christ the King thereof himself testifies John. 28. And
therefore you setting up a worldly King over this Heavenly Kingdom and
ordinances, you and all of your profession declare your selves to be of that
worldly kingdom, and so to look for that Heavenly and spiritual King yet to
come in the flesh, being of the number of those that deny him to be come in the
flesh, anb so are deceivers and Antichrists, whatsoever you say to the
contrary.


A. Well, yet I cannot see, but that as the Kings of Israel has power from God
to compel all their subjects, to the worship then appointed, so the King
being a a Christian King, has power to compel his subjects, to the worship
now appointed.


C. You may see, if you shur not your eyes, that what power the Kings of Israel
had under the law in matters of Religion, Christ Jesus the King of Israel has
under the gospel: but I pray you let me ask you this question. You say the
Kings Matie has this power as he is a Christian King: My question is, whether
it apperteyne unto him, as he is a King, or as he is a Christian?


A. Neither simple as he is a King, nor as he is a Christian, but jointly as
he is complete in them both: for I grant that no heathen King has power to
compel in matters of Religion, but a Christian King has.


C. Then you confess that of a Christian king may be deprived of his
Christianity, (for of his Kingdom or kingly power, or any part thereof I
affirm he may not be deprived) he has lost this power you plead for, in
compelling Men in matters of religion: what say you to this?


A. I confess if he may be deprived of his Christianity, he has not this
power I plead for.


C. Then, I demand this question, whether every Christian without respect of
persons ought not to be subject to Christ's Laws for his salvation?


A. Yes, it cannot be denied.


C. Christ has given his censure Excomunication, for the salvation of every
Christian, that he that will not hear the Church, is to be as a heathen and a
Publicane, that is, has lost all right and title in Christ, and in his Church,
till he repent, now I know it ca^no. be denied, but every Christian
whatsoever, is subject to sin, and so to excomunication to be as a Heathen:
etc: If you say, that Kings either are not subject to sin, and to impenitency
therein, and so to this ce^sure of Christ, of excomunication, for their
impenitent sin, then consider what you make them, and God you make a liar. If
you graut (as you cannot deny) that Kings as well as others, are subject to
impenitent sin, and so to excomunication for the same, then they being deprived
of their Christianity, by your own confession, they are deprived of power to
compel in matters of Religion, the which if it were any part of their Kingly
power, they might be deprived of a part of their Kingly power, by being
excomunicate, consider what a wicked doctrine you teach herein.


A. Does not the Prophet say: that Kings shall be nursing Fathers and Queens
nursing Mothers to the Church? And also it is said that kings shall hate the
whore, make her desolate, eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Where
we see, that kings that have power and authority, shall destroy Antichrists
kingdom, and nurrish and cherish Christ's kingdom.


C. Most true it is, the lord has spoken it, and therefore it ought to be
great comfort to Gods people but what is this to the purpose in hand, namely
that Kings may persecute the contrary minded, the words of the Prophet Esa.
proves that Kings and Queens that have formerly persecuted and destroyed the
church, their hearts shall be turned by the power of Gods word, to be lovers and
preservers of the Church: and the other place Revel. 17.16. proves that Kings
shall make that whore desolate, etc. not by their temporal authority or sword
(as some say that make more show of religion then you do, although themselves
be now persecuted, yet if kings were of their mynds, would be as cruel as you,
for they maintain the same thing) but by the spirit of the lords moves, and
the brightness of his cominge. 2. These. 2.8. For this kingdom of Antichrist
shall be destroyed without hand. Dan. 8.25. only by the everlasting gospel, the
true armor indeed wherewith the witnesses feight against the Antichrist. As the
Kings Matie. acknowledges. Apol. Page 93.


A. You are so stiff against vseing off outvvard weapons in Church matters,
did not our Savior Christ make a vvhipp of small cords, and vvhipp the buyers
and sellers out of the Temple? And why may not we follow his example?


C. In this and many other actions of Christ our Savior, we are to consider
him as the fulfiller and ender of the law, as in the actio^ of the Passover,
and sending him that was cleansed of his Leprosy to offer to the Priest, the
gift that Moses commanded, in which things we are not to ymitate him, for by
him the Ceremonies are fulfilled and abolished, and the everlasting gospel
established, in the which we are to walk: and it were more then foolish to
reason thus. Christ whipped wicked Men out of Gods Temple made with hands, with
whips made of cord, therefore we may whipe wicked Men, out of Gods Temple made
without hands, with whips made of cord. There is a whole some doctrine to be
collected from the Tipe to the Truth as thus. Christ drive out wicked Men out
of the Temple made with hands, by a carnal or worldly whipp, so Christ (by his
people) must drive wicked Men out of the Temple made without hands, by a
Spiritual whipp. eve^ his word, which is called a whip or rode. Revel. 2.27.
and Psalm. 2.9. so is excomunication. 1. Cor. 4.21.


An. If fredome off Religion should be granted, there would be such
devisions as would bread sedition, and inovatio^ in the State.


C. Thus when your shows out of the scriptures are answered, then you run to
conceits and ymaginations, of sedition, innovation and the like, thinkeing
thereby to diswade Princes, and ali t^, at are in authority there from,
knoweing else your kingdom of iniquity would fall But that it may appear to all
that you deal deceitfully herein, let us consider first the scriptures,
secondly behold the success, of suffering of of Religion free in other
Counries. And first. Christ our Savior, ( who is that Prince of peace. Esa.
9.6. not of sedition) has taught. Mat. 10. and Luke 12. That he came not to
send peace on the Earth, but debate, to devide Fyve in one house, two against
three, and three against two, the Father against the Son, etc. And a man's
enemies shallbee they of his own household. And his desire is, that the Fire
of such sedition, should be kindled, where we see, this Prince of peace
puts difference in Religion, by preaching his Gospel, which some receive,
as the savor of life unto them: others refuse it, and so become enemies unto
the truth and witnesses thereoff, as they did to Christ Jesus himself, and his
Disciples, and as you do to me and others. Secondly behold the Nations where
freedom off Religion is permitted, and you may see there are not more
florishinge and prosperous Nations under the heavens then they are.


I. The convocation of Bishops and the rest have made a Cano^, that whosoever
shall affirm that the Kings Matie has not the same power in causes
Eccleciasticall, under the Gospel, that the godly Kings of Israel had under
the law, let him be excomunicate, Ipso facto.


C. Yes they have so. In the beginning off his Maties reign when they had got
him sure unto them, of the which they so much doubted, as with my own ears I
heard some of their chief followers say, when his highness was coming into
England. Now must steples down, and we shall have no more high commission.
(with lamentation they spoke it) then they made this Canon, because their
consciences are convinced, that they stand only by his power, and if his hand
be turned, their Spiritual power of darkness falls to the pit of darkness,
from whence it came, and whether it must go, there being never so much means
used for the supporting off it, for the strong Lord has spoken it. Revel. 18.
As for their sending Men to Hell (as they suppose) with their ipso facto
excomunications, if they had no stronger weapon for the supporting of their
Kingdom, it would stand but a short space. If Israel now were of this world,
as it was under the law, then they said something: but if it be not of this
World, as it is not. Ioh. 17.14. Then the King is not off this world, for when
this King came the worldly Israel knew him not.


I. I see evidently, that al are but cavels, and that no mortal Man can make
any Man offer Sacrifices under the new Testament, until he be a believer, and
converted, for he must be in Christ, before he may offer sacrifices, for in
Chri: only the Father accepts us: but what say you, have they not power to
compel Men to come to the place where the word is publicly taught that they
may be converted?


C. Well: then you see that the example of the kings of Israel (who had power to
compel the^ to sacrifice, or to cut them of) applied to earthly Princes, is
gone as a mere doctrine of man, and not of God. And for compelling me^ to
hear that they be converted, we can learn of no better then of him, who if
we hear not we shall have a dreadful recompense. He had al power in heaven
and in earth for converting souls give^ vnhim, and sent his Disciples, as his
Father sent him. Ioh. 20.21. Charging the^ that when they should come into a
City. etc. if they would not receive them nor their word, to shake of the dust
of their feet for a witness against them, saying it should be easier for Sodom
and Gomorah in the day of judgment then for that City or house: And so
th-Apostles went from City to City accordingly. Here was no Temples made, nor
worldly power to compel al to come unto them to hear the word off the Lord,
but they commanded to go from City to City and from house to house.


I In those days the Magistrates were unbelievers but the question is where
Magistrates be believers.


C. Christ had al power needful for that work if Magistracy were a power
needful for that work* the^ Christ had not al power, magistracy is Gods
blessed ordinance in it right place, but let not us be wiser the^ God to device
him a means for the publishinge of his gospel, which he that had all power
had not, nor has commanded. Magistracy is a power of this world: the
kingdom, power, subjects, and means of publishing the gospel, are not of
this world.


A. A Goodly thing indeed that Men must go about the Country to preach.


C. In your estimation it is base and contemptible, your pomp and pride will
not bear this, it is more ease for you to hunt after promotion, till you come
to the highest in getting to be chief Bishop of Bishops within these
dominions, and then comes your fall, full low, if you repent not, but the
wisdom of God has appointed the chiefest Officers of Christ's Kingdom, even
the Appostles, thus basely to go up and down, to and fro to preach his Gospel,
yea that worthy Apostle Paul preached this gospel night and day with many
tears openly and throughout every house. Act. 20.


I. But if this be thus / as for my own part I am fully persuaded it is /
then I see the high commission cannot stand for as I take it / it is only for
causes Ecclesiastical.


C. So far as it is over Church matters, it is most unlawful, for the
commission for judging and punishing of the transgressors of the laws of
Christ's Church is given to Christ the Monarch thereof, a part whereof he has
left to his Disciples, which is no worldly commission or power, but only the
power of the Lord Jesus, the uttermost of which commission is excomunication. 1.
Cor. 5.


A. The high commission is from the King, and dare you once call it into
question.


C. If I do take any authority from the kings Matie, let me be judged worthy my
desert, but if I defend the authority of Christ Jesus, over men's souls, which
apperteyneth to no mortal Man whatsoever, then know you, that whosoever would
rob him of that honor, which is not of this world, he will tread the^ under
foot: Earthly authority belongs to earthly Kings but spiritual authority
belongs to that one spiritual King who is King of Kings.


A. Well all your pleading will not serve your turn, either you must come to
Church, or else go to prison.


C. I have showed you by the law of Christ that your course is most wicked, to
compel any by persecution to perform any service to God, (as you pretend.)
Now I desire also to show you, that the Statute law of the land requires
only civil obedience, and his Maties writings mainteyning the Oath of
alligience Testifies the same.

The law of the la^d requires that whosoever comes not to Church or receives
not the Sacraments, the Oath of allegiance is to be tendered to them, which
that it may be manifest to (...) that not only I, but all that profess the
faith with me are most willing to subscribe unto it in faithfulness and truth, I
have thought good to ^presse it.

The words of the Oath. Anno 3. Iacobi Regis.
I. A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess and testify, and
declare in my conscience before God and the World, that our Sovereign Lord
king James is lawful King off this Realm, and of al other his Ma: dominions,
and Countries: And that the Pope neither of himself nor by any other
authority of the Chu: or Sea off Rome, or by any other means with any other
has any power or authority to depose the king, or to dispose any off his
Majest: Kingdoms of Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade
or annoy him, or his Countries, or to discharge any off his subjects off their
allegiance, and obedience to his Majest: or to give license or leave to any off
the^ to bear arms, raise tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to this
Ma: Royal person, State or Government, or to any off his Ma: subjects within his
Ma: Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any
declaration or sentence off excommunication, or depravation made or granted, or
to be made or granted by the Pope or his Successors, or by any authority
derived, or pretended to be derived from him or his Sea, against the said
king, his heirs or Successors, or any absolution off the said subjects from
their obedience. I will bear faith and true allegiance to his Majesty, his
heirs and Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost off my
power, against all conspiraces and attempts whatsoever which shall be made
against his or their persons, their Crown and dignity, by reason or cullor off
any such sentence or declaration or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to
disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all
treasons and traitorous conspiraces, which I shall know or hear of, to be
against him, or any of them. And I do further swear, that I do from my heart
abhor, detest, and abivre, as impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine
and position, that Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may
be deposed, or murdered by their subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do
believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope nor any person
whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereoff, which I
acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully ministered unto me, and do
renounce all pardons and dispensations to the contrary. And all these things I
do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, and swear according to these express
words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and
understanding off the same words, without any Aequivocation, or mental evasion,
or secret reservatio^ whatsoever. And I do make this recognition and
acknowledgment heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true faith of a
Christian.

So help me God.

A. This Oath was intended for the Papists and not for you.


C. It is not so. For his Matie at the last Session of Parli: Anno 1609. says
thus. Some doubts have been conceived anent the vseing off the oath off
allegiance, and that part off the Act that ordeynes the taking thereoff is
thought so obscure, that no man can tell who ought to be pressed therevvith.
etc. And therefore if there be any cruple touching the ministering thereof, I
would wish it now to be cleared. etc. And thereupon this statute was made Anno
7. Regni Regis Iacobi. etc. Chap. 6. rowards the latter end.

And if any person or persons whatsoever of and above thage of 18 years do now
stand or at any time hereafter shall stand, and be pretented, indighted, and
convicted, for not coming to church, or receiving the lords supper, according
to the laws and statutes of this realm, before the ordinary, or any other
having power to take such presentiments, or indightme^ts: or if the Minister,
petty Constable, or Churchwarde^s, or any two of them, shall at any time
hereafter complain to any Justice of peace rear adjoining to the place where
any person complained of shall dwell, and the said justice shall find cause of
suspicion, that then any one Justice of peace within whose comissio^ or power
any such person, or persons, shall at any time hereafter be, or to whom
complaint shallbee made, shall upon notice there off require such person or
persons to take the said oath. And that if any person or persons being of thage
of 18. years or above, shall refuse to take the said oath, duly tendered unto
him, or hit according to the true intent and meaning of this statute that the^
the persons authorized by this law to give the said oath, shall and may commit
the said offender to the common jayle etc. where we see that if any take the
said oath at their first apprehension, they are not to be committed, or if they
being committed, take the said oath at the next open Court, they are to be set
at liberty, if they will not take the said oath, to be in praemunire, as is at
large in the statute declared, and as is daily practiced with Papists, and
others.


A. The Kings Majesty requires your allegiance to be testified by your
coming to Church.


C. I pray let me demand this question, does the K: require my coming to C: to
worship and serve God, or to worship and serve the K: if to worship and serve
the K: I am ready to obey: if to worship and serve God, which none can do, but
of conscience, the King himself says he never intended to say any thing to
the charge if any for cause of conscience, and this coming to Church being a
cause of conscience, if not he, why do you lay any thing to my charge, for the
same. And therefore you wrong his Matie in thus affirming: For his highness
requires only my faithful allegiance to be testified by the a fore said
oath, and therefore has ordained it, as I shall show by his highness own
testimony. If I should come to Church, and not of conscience, but for other
respects, as many Papists and other Hipocrits do, to God it were most
abominable and what faithfulness can be hoped for in such, toward his
Majesty's person and state, can any Godly wiseman think that he that plays
the dissembling hipocrite with God, that he will do less with men, and will not
work any villainy if it were i^^^^ power, and therefore herein, you compelling
(...) by tyranny to bring my body, whereunto my spirit cannot be brought, you
co^pel me to hypocrisy with God and man, for if my heart were not faithful in
sincerity to his Majesty's Crown and dignity, as I take God to witness (before
whom I must be condemned or justified) it is, these courses would rather hard
my heart to work villainy then otherwise.

Now for his Majesty's many Testimonys in his wrytings, they are worthy to be
recorded with tha^kefulnes to the highest for guiding his heart and pen to write
such things.

In his Apology for the oath of alegea^ce page 4. he says. Speaking of such
Papists as took the oath of allegiance. And I gave a good proof that I
intended no persecution against them for conscience cause, but only desired
to be secured off them for evil obedience which for conscience cause they were
bound to perform. and page 60. Speaking of Blackwel the Arch-Preist he says. I
never intended to lay any thing to the said Arch Priests charge as I have
never done to any, for cause of conscience. and page 127. he says. First for
the cause of their punishment, I do consta^tly maintain, that which I said in
my Apology: that no man, either in my time, or in the late Queens. ever died
here for his conscience: For let him be never so devout a Papist: nay though he
profess the same never so constantly, his life is in no danger by the law. if
he break not out into some outward act expreslie against the words of the law:
or plot not some dangerous or unlawful practice or attempt. etc. Where we may
(...) short what is the whole some that he req(...).

And in his Majesty's speech at the last Session off Parliament Anno Domini
1609. where he says he shows his subjects his heart. he says thus.

I never found, that blood, and too much severity, did good in matters off
Religion, for besides: It is a sure rule in divinity that God never loves to
plant his Church by violence and bloodshed, natural reason man even persuade
us, and daily experience proves it true. that when Men are severely persecuted
for religion, the gallantnes off many Men's Spirits, and the wilfulnes off their
humors, rather then the justnes of their cause, makes them to take a pride
bouldly to endure any torments, or death it selff, to gain thereby the
reputation off marterdome. though but in a false shadow. A most undoubted
truth, which if it be (as most manifest it is by the Testimony of the Holy
Ghost, throughout Christ's Testament as before is proved) then how cursed are all the rank off you, that continewally break this sure rule off God, thus
confidently acknowledged by his Majesty, planting your Church by violence and
bloodshed forceing many thousa^ds against their consciences to be off our
Church, and to receive your Sacraments, by all the persecutions that would
follow: if they did not yield, and those that fear God more then Men, and
dare not yield, casting them into noisome Prisons: amongst most wicked
Blasphemers off God, to the wounding off their souls: Deviding them from their
Wives. Children and Families, and from their callings some an hundredth miles
and more, utterly consuming that substance they have, which sustaineth the
blood of them their wives and Children: seldom or never affording them
release, but either by yiedling to you against their Consciences, or else by
con^uming their bodies to death, in prison banishment, or the like, leaveing
them and their wives to horrible temptations of adultery, in parting them, and
their wives, and to al manner of evil in taking them from their callings, and
so leaveing them in continual Idleness. Is Gods Church thus planted? or do
Christ's Disciples thus plant?


I. Oh I^ this spiritual power is little inferior in cruelty to the Romish
spiritual power / I pray how or whi was this set up.?


C. Henry the 8. casting of Pope Clement the 7. and so the Popes power Anno
1534. set up this Spiritual power under him: see Act. and Mo: page: 1201. etc.


I. I pray you show the likeness between these two spiritual powers.


C. I will do my best endeavor which is but small.

First, the Romish spiritual power does make laws to the conscience, and
compel al thereunto by excomunication, imprisonment, banishment, death and the
like.

This spiritual power does the like, upon the like pennalties as al know.

The Romish power does give Titles to his Ministers, which are the Titles off
God and Christ, as spiritual lords, great Bishope and many more.

This Spiritual power does the like as all know.

The Romish power does set up Lords over their brethren in spiritual things,
unto whom they comaund honor, and great liveings to be given great Pomp and
Pride.

This power does the like, as all know.

I shall not need to speak of this, in that all books are full and all
consciences (excepe those that are scrared with hot irons) convinced here off.
Let but Master Fox, or any others who have described the spiritual power of
Rome, let but their description thereof be compared with this spiritual power
in all their laws, Courts Titles, Pomp, Pride, and cruelty, and you shall see
them very little differ, except in their cruelties, which (glory be to God)
the kings Matie. who thirsts not after blood has some thing rear a ne^,
although it is most grevious cruelty to lie diverse years in most noisome and
filthy prisons, and continewall temtatione of want, their estates overthrown
and never coming out many of them till death, let it be well weighed, and it
is little inferior to the cruel sudden death in times of the Romish power in
this Nation.


I. It is very apparent it is that image or similitude off that Beast spoken of
Revel 13.


C. Oh yes, for their is no such image of the Popish power under the Heavens as
this: well our comfort is, the strong Lord has said. The Kings of the Earth
(by whose power both the beast and his image is supported) shall take their
power from her, then shall she stand naked and desolate, and to this purpose
his Majesty has a worthy exhortation to all Princes, etc. in his Apology.
Page 103. The words are these.

For as she did fly, but with your feathers, borrowing as well her titles of
greatness, and forms of honoring her, from you, as also enjoying all her
Temporal liveings by your liberalities, so if every man do but take his own
again, she will stand up naked, etc.

Oh that the Words off GGD might be accepted off his Majesty, set down by
the Holy Ghost Romans 2.

Thou that teach another, teach thou not they selff? For if he would
take but his own, their titles of greatness and forms, off honoring them, and
their temporal liveings, this spiritual power would stand very naked and
desolate.


I. Well the hearts off Kings are in the hands of the Lord and he can turn them
as the Rivers off water / but I desire your advice for my own estate: I know
every one must be are their own burden / I have a long time remained subject
to this spiritual power / partly through ignorance / and partly through fear.


C. I will first declare unto you the judgme^ts of God against such as submit
thereunto, that so from an utter abhorring thereof you may come out never to
return thither again. Secondly: I will do the best I can to show you the way
the Lord requires you to walk in, and that only out of his word.

The judgments are so fearful as I tremble to think off them, greater then
which, is not manifested in the whole book off God, Revel. 14 9.10.11. And the
third Anngell followed them, saying with a loud voice, if any man Worship
the Beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or on his hand,
the same shall drinck of the Wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure Wine that
is powered into the Cup of his wrath, he shall be tormented in fire and brimstone,
before the Holy Anngels, and before the Lamb. And the smoke of their torment
shall ascend evermore, and they shall have no rest day nor night, which worship
the Beast and his jmage, and whosoever receives the print of his name.


I. I confess these judgments are to be trembled at / but how do you apply
them properly to such as worship in these assemblies?


C. For the satisfaction of al consciences herein that it may appear plainly,
not to be gainsaid, let us consider the words of wisdom, set down in order
as they lie. And first: what is meant by worship. 2ly: what by the Beast. 3ly.
what his jmage is. 4ly. what his mark is: and lastly what is meant by forehead
or hand.

And first for worship, it is plentifully manifested in the scriptures, that it
is service, subjectio^ or obedience, to such things as are commanded by God,
or others: as Mat. 4.10. Exo 20.5. dewt 13.4. and therefore his servants we
are whom we obey. Romans 6.16. and as the lord says: If I be your master,
where is my fear? if a Father where is mine honor or worship Mal. 1.6 2ly: by
Beast, the scripture speaks sometimes of cruel men in power and authority, as
Dan. 7.17. Luke 13.31.32.2. Tim. 4.17. Sometimes of a blasphemous spiritual
power exercised by men, received off the Dragon exalting it self above God,
making war with the Saints, and overcoming them, and that has power over
every kindred, and tongue, and Nation, so that all that dwell upon the Earth
worship him. etc. And this is the Beast here spoken of, even that spiritual
power or jurisdiction of Rome: which first wrought in a mystery, and by degrees
was exalted, till at the last it was exalted to this cruel Beast discribed.
Revel. 13.1. etc. Which Beast opens his moves to bla^phemy against ^od,
saying and practizing, that the comaundements that God has given for his
service, are not to be regarded, but in steed thereof sets, up comaunds of
his own, unto the which whosoever will not be subject, excommunication and
all cruelty even to death will ensue, yea even with Gunpowder err it fail,
and for this his cruelty he is called a Beast.

Thirdly: by Image is meant any form, shape similitude, or resemblance of the
thing spoken of, as Deuteronomy. 4.15.16. etc. Exo. 20 4 so that where soever such a
spiritual power is, as this above discribed, there is the Beasts Image, as in
England, the like power or Beast to the first, is not to be found under the
Heavens, in exaltation and cruelty.

Fourthly: by mark, is meant profession or practice, whereby we are known
from others as Mat. 7.20. 1. John. 2 2 John. 13.35. As badges or marks do put
difference, betwixt this Man's and that Man's, in Cattle or servants, as by such
a man's mark we know these are his sheep, and by such a Ma^s badg. we know
this man belongs to such a great man: so they are said to have put on Christ,
that have received his baptism. Gal. 3.27. even as a servant is known by
putting on his libery.

Lastly, forehead or hand, the holy Ghost uses that phraise from the Old
Testament, where Gods people were commanded, not only to lay up his Commands
in their hearts and in their souls, but to bind them for a sign upon their
hands. that they might be as frontiers between their eyes. Dewt. 11.18. and
6.6.8. The wisdom of God therein teaching, that the forehead and hand are the
apparantest parts of the body, to the view of all Men: so that to receive the
mark in the forehead or hand, is to make manifest profession of him we obey.
The some of all which is, that whosoever openly professes obedience, and
subjection, to that Spiritual cruel power off Rome, The Beast, or to that
Spiritual cruel power off England, his Image, (wheresoever they or either of
them are exalted) such a one, and such persons shall drink off the wine off
Gods wrath, and be tormented in fire and brimstone, and shall have no rest day
nor night for evermore.


I. Your description of the Beast / the Papists will deny / so will the English
Lord Bbs: and their followers deny your description of his image / but
thousands will grant both: and some will deny both / as the Familists / who say
/ that Religion stands not in outward things / and therefore they will submit
to any outward service / and they that do not so / but suffex persecution (say
they) are justly persecuted.


C. Those enemies to the Cross of Christ are most of them not worth
enformation, because for the most part they are such as do with an high hand
sin, after enlightninge, having forsaken the way wherein they walked, because
they would not bear Christ's Cross, but in that some simple souls may be
seduced by them let us a little in general compare their opinion with the
scriptures.

True it is, that religion stands not only in outward things, for God
requires the heart: and truth in the inward parts, but that God requires not
our subjection (upon fearful punishments) to those outward ordinances which he
requires, is a doctrine of devils as I shall prove.

And first, for the outward ordinances off the old Testament, which were merely
shadows, and now are beggarly rudiments Gal. 4.16. what indignation the lord
had toward them that transgressed. Nadab and Abihu, offering straing fire,
which the Lord has not commanded, a fire went out from the Lord, and devoured
them, Levit. 10.1.2. The men off Bethsh^mosh lokeing into the outward arc
which God had forbidden. Number 4.20. The Lord slevve fifty thousand, and
threescore and ten of them. 1. Sam. 6.19. Ozza, of a good intent leaninge his
shoulder to the same outward arc which God forbad, the Lord slew him. 1.
Chro. 13.7.-10. Ozziah the King offering up outward incense, which God
commanded only the Priest Number. 18.3.7. The Lord smit him with leprosye until
his death. 2. Chro. 26. Corah and his company: what fearful judgments came
upon the^ (though he a Levite) for presuming to meddle with the Priests office,
the earth openinge and swallowing them up. Number. 16. King Saul, likewise
offering up incense (in time off need as he thought) the Lord rent his Kingdom
from him. 1. Sa^. 13. as also for his disobedience afterward touching the fat
of Amelecks cattle. 1. Sa^. 15. How often was the wrath of the Lord powered
down upon the Isralites: because off their transgression of his outward
ordinances, in place, person, and things, for it was a Low. Levit. 17.3.4.
That who so brought not his sacrifice to the place. viz: to the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, but offered it up other where, blood should be
imputed to that man, and he should be cut off from among his people: yea such
sacrifices were esteemed off God, as offered to devils, verse. 7. and the lord
caused them to pronounce. Dewt. 27.26. cursed be he that confirms not all the
words of their law. to do them. and all the people must say so be it: was God
thus jealous of Moses ordinances, and is the less jelous of Christ's? must he
die that dispiseth Moses law, and shall he escape that dispiseth Christ's? upon
what pretense soever. And Christ says. It becomes him and all his to fulfill
all righteousness in outward ordinances as washinge with water. Mat. 3.15. and
whosoever says, he knows God, and keeps not his comaundments (which are
outward, as well as inward) he is a liar. 1. Ioh. 2.4. and whosoever breaks the
least comaundment, and teaches men so, he shall be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven. Mat. 5.19. and whosoever will not hear that Prophet (Chr:
Jesus) in all things that he shall say unto the^, shall be destroyed out off his
people. Act. 3.22.23. the affections of the soul are to be manifested by the
actions of the body, according to Gods word, and al other good inte^ts or
affections are abominable. We may not neither can we, Worship God with our
Spirits, and the Devil with our Bodies: For We are bought With a price, and
therefore must not be the Servants off Men, but must glorify God with our
bodies, and with out spirits, for they are his. 1. Cor. 6.20. and. 7.23. And
this may suffice to satisfy any concerning the over throw off this accursed
conceit, knowing also that Christ and his Apostles, and all his Disciples to
the end of the world, might, and may live peaceably enough from persecution, if
this doctrine might be observed viz: submissio^ with our bodies to any outward
service. The Lord discover such Hipocrites.


I. I bless God I have learned of thApostle 2. Cor. 13.8. To say nothing
against the truth / but for the truth / and therefore when I see things are
evidently manifested by the scriptures disirous to submit and not to cavil. But
you know it is pleaded they have the word and Sacraments in the English
assemblies.


C. I confess they have the scriptures, in the which Gods misceries are
contained, which is locked up from the^, and revealed to his Saints. Col.
1.26. which they woefully pervert to their own destruction: They have also
imitations of Gods ordinances, as water, bread and wine, and other things,
which they use after their own inve^tions, which things makes them boast so
much of their Christianity and of their Church, and which makes them reason
thus.

We are Gods people, for we have the word and Sacraments.

The Philistimes might better have reasoned: 1. Sa^. 5. who had the true ark of God amongst them, these have but a show.

We are Gods people, for we have God's Ark and holy Oracles amongst us. But I
think they had no great cause to rejoice there of in the e^d: No more shall
these have in the end, when God recompenceth all that with hold the truth in
unrighteousness. Gods dealing is not now as it was of old, he now reserveth
punishment to the last day, he is patie^t, and would have men repent: but they
despise his bountifulnes and long suffering, preaching peace when there is no
peace.


I. It cannot be denied / but that the ministers preach many excellent truths /
and do bring people to much reformation in many things.


C. True it cannot be denied. For if the devil should come in his own likeness,
men would resist him, but because he tra^sformeth himself into an Angel of
light, therefore he deceives. So his ministers, if they should teach al lies,
me^ would not be deceived by them, nor plead for them, but because they teach
many truths people receive them. but first: for whatsoever they teach, they
neither could nor should teach publicly, their moueths should be stopped, if
they received not that their power to teach such truths from those the Dragon
sends, and therefore none ca^ receive those truths from the^, but they receive
the devil by whose power they teach for as our Savior says Mat. 10.40. He
that receives you, receives me, and he that receives me, receives him that
sent me. So he that receives those the Beast sends, receives the Beast and he
that receives the Beast, receives him that sent him, that is the devil.
Further did not that Southsayer Balaam, teach excellent truths? Number. 23.24.
Chap. Yea the Southsayers of th Philistines the like. 1. Sam. 6. Yea those in
the Gospel preach in Christ's name. Mat. 7.22, as many we testimonies might be
manifested, and secondly. For their bringing off people to reformation, and
therein doing great works, did not the Southsayers before recited. 1. Sam. 6.
show the Princes their sin, in deteyninge God's Ark and the judgments against
them for the same, exhorting them to send it away, and not to harden their
hearts, as Pharaoh and the Egiptians hardened their hearts? and was not
reformation wrought hereby? and did not they that preached in Christ's name cast
out Devils, and do many and great works? of whom our Savior testifies, he
never acknowledged them. But let us a little consider wherein the reformation
consists, procured by their preachinge, in drunckennes, whoredom, swearing.
etc. Moral duties, which things whosoever is not reformed in, shall never see
Gods Kingdom, yet which things many of the Philosophers (that knew not God)
abounded in, as they that know the stories cannot deny.

But do they teach their hearers to hate vain inventions and love Gods Law? in
a general manner of teathing they may, but if it come to particular practice,
you shall see what they will do: do they teach any to submit to that one law
giver Christ Jesus, for the guydance of his Church, and not to Antichrists
abominations, no they will tell you, you must sigh and groan, till the
Magistrate will reform: for you are a private person, and must be subject:
and if the powerful working off Gods word and Spirit prevail in you, to let
you see, that the Magistrates not reforminge, will not excuse you at the day off
account, but that, that soul that comitteth abomination shall dye, and that
rather then you will Worship the Beast or his Image, you will suffer with
Christ peaceably seperating your self from such open prophanatio^ as neither
can, nor willbe reformed, endeavoring to square your self both in your
entrance, and walking in Christ's way, unto that golden read, which he has left
for direction: then the best off all these preachers and reformers, willbe hot
and bitter, laboring with all the turning of devices to turn you, and with hold
you from reformation: And if they cannot prevail hereby, then publish you in
their previleged pulpits, where none may answer them: You are a schismatique,
Brownist. Annabaptist and what not, to make the multitude abhor your doeings,
and not to follow you therein, and some of them (if not all) under a cullor,
procure your imprisonment, and trouble, by their Canonized lords, or some off
their Heilish Pursevants. And such preachers of Reformation are the best off
them all.


A. Oh how have we been besottes in these things for want of true knowledge and
understanding from the Scriptures / how have I and others satisfied our selves
with these things / in that our estate was happy / persuading our selves
thereoff / when alas our fear toward God was taught by the inventions of men
but the reason thereof was we judged our selves by our own perswations / and
not by Gods word.


C. I pray you let not that seem straing unto you, that people should persuade
themselves of their good estate with God, when it is not so. The Isralites Gods
People thought their estate good, many times, when alas at it was otherwise, as
the Prophets declared unto them yea our Savior Testifies, that they boasted
of God being their Father, when they not so much as knew him. Ioh. 8.19. Yea
when they were of their Father the Devil. verse. 44. The fyve foolish Virgins
though their condition good enough, and that they should have been let in, but
it was otherwise. Luke 20, The wicked thought they did God service that killed
Christ's Disciples. Ioh. 16.2. Man's heart is deceytful. Ier. 17.9. who are more
confide^t of their good estate with God then the Papists, notwithstanding al
their gross abominations? even so have you and I (God pardon us) thought
beyond al, that we were in a good estate, having such zealous teachers, that
teach so many excellent truths under the Title of Christ's ministers, til we
came to examine them, as the Church of Ephesus did Revel, 2. then we found
them to ha^ve no other ministry then that they received from the Beast and his
Image, which the Dragon gave. Revel. 13.


I. Are all without exception in this fearful estate to be cast into the
laike that burns with fire and brimstone?


C. All that submit, obey, or worship the Beast without exception, for their is
no respect of persons with God. So says the Lord: If any Man worship. etc.
These (worshippers under the Beasts Image) may be divided into two sorts.
First, those that ignorantly persuade themselves that all that is practiced is
good and acceptable to God. Secondly: those that see and aknowledg many things
to be evil which they would gladly have removed, but because they cannot
without the Cross of Christ, partly for that, and partly by the perswation of
their Prophets (that the things are not fundamenttall and the like pretenses)
all submit, and teach Men so.


I. Some affirm / there be thousands in England / that never worshipped the
Beast etc. but be careful to keep the comaundements of God, and faith of Jesus.


C. Such are not under these judgme^ts, but if there meaning be of any that
submit to these ordinances appointed for these asse^blies, such teachers preach
peace when there is none, strengthen the wicked, that they cannot return from
their wicked way, by promissing them life, whose reward shall be according to the
reward of such false Prophets. Ezekiel. 13.1. and Chap. 14.10. because they
follow their own spirit, and have not received it from the Lord. For thus
says the lord, Such shall drinck of the wine of the wrath of God.


I. It is also affirmed by some / that in respect of personal ^races / some of
the professors (as they are called) are the Children of God / and may be
communicated with privately / th^ugh in respect of their Church actions they
are members of Antichrists body to whom the judgments of God apperteyneth.


C. This opinion proceeds not from Gods word, but from man's vain heart, by
the suggestion of the devil, which that it my evidently appear, let us a
little consider of it. In truth it is to say, that in one respect they have
Gods promises aperteyning to them: in another respect they have Gods most
fearful torments (pronounced against that Beast, and that false Prophet.
Revell 19.20.) apperteyning to them: In one respect they are Gods people,
serveing him their Master: In another respect the Devils people serveing him
their Master: In one respect, they shall be saved, in another respect they
shall be damned: but what false doctrine this is, Gods holy word does discover.
Our Savior says: No man can serve two masters, ye cannot serve God and
Riches. Mat. 6.25. And can any serve Christ and the Beast, God and the Dragon?
when Christ shall come at the last day to give to every Man according to his
works, will he say to any one, In respect of thy personal graces, I will save
thee, come thou blessed, (as he will say to all his Children) But in respect of
thy being a Member of Antichrists body, I will damn thee, go thou cursed as he
will to all that worship or obey the Beast? will not Christ Jesus pronounce
absolutely either salvation or condemnation to every one? And that according to
this word Ioh. 12 48. so as God in his righteousness will either justify or
condemn, every Man: so has he taught us to know, that no Fountain can make
salt water and sweet Iam. 3.12. And therefore that by men's fruits we should
know and judge the^ to be not both good and evil trees at one time. as this
opinion teaches, but either good or evil: always taking heed, we justify
not the wicked, nor condemn the innocent, both which are abominable to the
lord: and for any comunio^ whatsoever with them, what fellowship has Christ
with Antychrist, the righteous with the wicked: the servant of the lamb, with
the Servants of the beast? but I leave this for further answer to those who
although they are nearer to this man, that has published this opinion, the^ I
am yet has (according to truth) confessed in writing. That there is nothing
to be expected from Christ, by any member of the Church of England, but a
pow^ing out of his eternal wrath, upon them. Mr. De-Cluse. Advertis. Page 9.


I. Well / I praise God / I am much informed in these things yet one thing
more I will desire your answer unto. The case stands thus with me. In these
things I am betwixt faith and doubting / though the rather / I believe these
things you say are true / and that I may never go to these assemblies again
without sin / but I am not so persuaded thereoff / that I dare suffer for it /
what if I should (not having faith to suffer) for fear of persecution / go to
their worship again.


C. It were your most fearful sin, which I prove thus, and I pray you observe
it well you must do it, either as being verily persuaded you do well, and then
all this beginning of light in you should be extinguished, and so your estate
is with the worst, if not worse: or else you must do it, doubting whether you do
well or no: For I hope you will not say you do it knowing you do evil. If you do
it doubting, the Lord says: It is sin. Romans 14.23. Which I hope you will
acknowledge, and not approve your self to do well in syning, and then God is
merciful to forgive your sin, either this or any other. 1. John. 1.9.

But if you say you sin not therein doing it doubtingly, you make God a
liar who says: It is sin, and your sin remains.


I. What if I should many times go through weakness?


C. If you unfeignedly repent, being through weakness, there is mercy with God,
though it should be seaventy times seven times in a day. Mat 18.21.22. But we
had need to take heed of our repentance. Th-apostle says, where there is Godly
sorrow for sin, what care it works in you yea what indignation. etc. 2. Cor.
7. and custom in sin, is dangerous, we had need to take heed, we be not
hardened, through the deceitfulnes of sin. heb 3.13.


I. Then you how / that if any Man approve himself in syninge / his sin
remains.


C. If any man sin, and say he has not sinned. there is no truth in him. 1.
Ioh. 1.8. and God will enter into judgment with him. Ier. 2.35.


I. Then absolutely I see that if any man worship the beast or his image / etc.
as before you have showed / he neither has faith nor fear of God in him what
show of Godliness soever he makes. But what say you, man not a Man that
seperateth from all uncleanness / though he yet / see not the way off Christ /
in his Ordinances may not such a Man be saved.


C. Yes, upon this condition, that he believe in Jesus Christ for his only
righteousness, and be willing and ready, to hear and obey his ordinances,
example hereof we have in Cornelius. Act. 10. But if any will not hear that
Prophet (Chr: Jesus) in all things whatsoever he shall say unto the^ shall be
destroyed out of his people. Act. 3.22.23.


A. What do you mean by will not hear?


C. That when any part of the ways of God is manifest to them they despise,
and contemn it, or carelessly neglect it, otherwise men may not receive some of
Christ's truth, and yet not be said, that they will not receive it.


I. Next / after forsaking the ways of wickedness / and imbraceing Christ for
our righteousness what must we do?


C. Christ's whole Testament teaches this, and no other way, after repentance,
from dead works, and faith toward God, to be baptized with water. Mat. 16.16.
Act. 2.41. and 8.12.38. and 9.18. and a cloud of witnesses, calling these the
beginnings of Christ, and foundation. Heb. 6.1. etc.


I. May none be admitted to the Church / to partake in the ordinances, except
they be baptized?

If any teach otherwise, he presumes above that which is write. 1. Cor. 4.6.
and therefore ought to be held accursed. Gal. 1.8.9. For there was never true
Church, since Christ's manifesting in the flesh, joined together of unbaptized
persons though some have vainly published, the contrary.


I. True / I think that cannot be denied / where the persons were never
baptized / but now the members of the Church off Rome from whence the baptism
of the Church of England comes / are baptized / therefore why need they again
be baptized.


C. If they be baptized with Christ's baptism, I will acknowledge they need not
again be baptized, but that the baptism of the Chur: of Rome. is Christ's
baptism: that can never be proved, for Christ requires that only his
Disciple should baptize his disciple, and into his body. none of which is in
Romes baptism: For Christ's adversaries wash with water, those that are not
Christ's Disciples, into the body, not of Christ, but of Antichrist.


I. I confess that the Church of Rome and members there of are the Church and
members of Antichrist / but they use the water and words in their baptism that
Christ appointed.


C. What the^: is it therefore Chr: baptism? the conjurers used the same words
that thApostles did Act. 19.13. etc. we adjure you by the name off Jesus. etc.
yet abominable was their action: also Psalm. 50. Unto the wicked said God, what
haist thou to do with my ordinances? or to take my word in thy moves, etc.
also the Papists use the same words of their Church, that Christ has appointed
to used of his, as also of their ministry, is it therefore Chri: Church and
ministry? They use also the same washing water, and words in baptizing their
bells, that they use in their baptizing their Infants, is it therefore Christ's
baptism? If a^swere be made, bells are not to be baptized I answer no more
are the seed of wicked persecuters, by our opposites own confession. If this
were any thing you should see what will follow: the baptism of Rome is
Christ's baptism, because they use water and these words: So if any use water
and these words, as the Jews or any other of Christ's adversaries as the
Papists are, there is Christ's baptism, consider this and see what truth there
is in it.


A. Though the baptism of the Chu: of Rome should be ^ought / yet the
baptism of the Church of England may be good / in that there be many
thousands that were never baptized in the Church of Rome.


C. I answer that the first beginning off the Church of Engl: was made of the
members of the Chur: of Rome, as is apparent in the days off King H. the 8.
and afterward in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign, after Q. Marys death
and so contynueth unto this day, and the long contynuance of it, makes it not
aproveable: and the Papists themselves did the Protestants prove if they have
or hold any other baptism Church or ministry, then that they have from them,
and show it, and they will recant. Besides the baptism now practiced in the
Chur: of England, is no better no otherwise then that of Rome: For the Chur: of
Rome baptizeth all the Infants of the most wicked that are in her dominions: and
so the Chu: of England baptizeth all the Infa^ts of the most wicked that are in
the kings Maties dominions, and of this timber are both these Churches buylt,
and therefore we may truly say: as is the Mother, so is the daughter. And as
they are in their first buylding, so are they in the most of their laws, Lords
Lawmakers, Courts, and thousa^ds of their abominations in so much as it is
plain enough, the latter is the very Image of the first, unto which, whosoever
submits or obeys, or maintenieth their baptism, or any other of their
human trash, he shall be tormented in fire and brimstone for evermore, and
shall never have rest day nor night. Revel. 14. and therefore in Gods fear cast
away that cursed actio^ of washing, where was neither Chr: disciple
administering, nor his Disciple upon whom it was administered nor Christ's body
or Church baptized into: and obey Christ's voice, in becomeing his Disciple, and
to his Church, that you may be baptized by his Disciple, and be made a member
of his body or Church. This only is Christ's baptism, and of him acknowledged
and ought to be off al his Disciples, and the contrary to be held accursed, and
in no sort mainteyned or kept.


I. It is objected / that we must cast away that which is man's ordinance / and
retain that which is Gods ordinance / namely / washinge and water and words.


C. I deny that any thing in that action was Gods ordinance or appointment,
what truth is there in this: to say, that because God apointeth water, and
washing, and words in his baptism, therefore howsoever water, and washinge:
and these words are used, that is Christ's ordinance. I confess water and
washinge, and words are Gods ordinance, being used as he has commanded, the
which I acknowledge must be held: but this use of the^, or action forespoken
off being not the use of the^, or action appointed off God (as the adversaries
confess) is to be cast away as execrable.


I Further it is objected they repent of that which is evil and reteyne that
which is good.


C. For the better discovering of this deceit, let us consider what is the evil
then confess, and that they repent of, say they, an unlawful person, performed
an unlawful action upon an unlawful person, this is the evil. Now this is the
question whether this actio^ thus unlawfully performed may be kept, and yet
repented of. The scripture teaches, that not only confessing, but foresakeing
sin, is repentance. Pro. 28.13. Ca^ a theife that has stolen goods, repent
thereof to acceptance with God, and not make restitutio^ to the party wronged?
being in his power, or having ability to restore, I would know how this will
be maintained for the one is a greater theft the^ the other.


I. It is further objected / that Ieroboams followers had no right to
circumcision in their ydolatrous estate / yet such as were circumcised in that
estate / were not afterward circumcised when they came to repentance.


C. It is there foregery so to object, for either they had right to
circu^cisio^, being true Isralits although in transgression, or else none had
right to circumcision in the world, no not Judah: For what ca^ be said, but
that because the ten Tribes were in rebellion against God therefore they had no
right to circumcision: may not the same be said in as high a mesure of Judah?
was Isreal's sin half so great as Iudahs? If it be said that Israel forsook
the place of Gods worship the temple, so did Judah to, worshipping under every
Grene tree, and Grove, and high place: whatsoever ca^ be said of the one, as
much may be said of the other. This is a mere deceitful forgery raised up by
Satan, in the hearts of his false prophets, to deceive themselves, and the^
that shall perish, if they repent not, in that they receive not the love of the
truth, but believe these lies, and have pleasure therein, concluding from this
false ground, that because the Isralites in transgression were circumcised, and
after comeing to repentance were not circumcised again: so Egiptians,
Sodomites and Babilonians, never having been Isralites, baptized in the
Synagogues of satan, are not to be rebaptised, as they call it, there being no
comparison betwixt the persons: the one being true Isralites acording to the
flesh, Gods people, to whom by Gods appointement circumcision aperteyned, and
who should have increased their transgressions if they had not performed it:
and the other true Babilonia^s Gods adversarys, unto whom God threatens his
judgments, for taking his ordinances in their mouethes or hands.


I. I see indeed there is no true proportion betwixt the persons in
circumcision and baptism / for the one were the persons appointed of God to be
circumcised, which circumcision taught them the forsakeing of their wicked
ways / and bound them to the observation of the law. Gal. 5.3. And they had no
cause to repent of that their action: thither are not the persons appointed of
God to be baptized but sinned in that their action and must repent thereof by
your opposites own confession. But if this be granted / this question arises
who shall then baptize after Antichrists exaltation?


C. For answer to this: there are three ways professed in the world, one by
the Papists, and their several successors, professing succession from the Pope
and his ministers: another by the Familists and scattered flock* that none may
inter meddle there with lawfully* til their extraordinary men come: another,
we and others affirm that any disciple of Christ in what part off the World
soever commeing to the Lords way, he by the Word and Spirit off GOD preaching
that way unto others, and converting / he may and ought also to baptize the^:
the two former I shall through the help of God confute / and confirm the
latter by the scriptures.

First to the Papists and all their several successors (some standing for all
by succession from Rome / some for more / some for less / some for nothing but
Baptism / being of our judgment for the appointing of their ministry. To them
all I answer with the words of the lord / Ps. 50.16. what has Antichrists
ministers to do to take Gods word in their mouths, or to declare his
ordinances, seeing they hate to be reformed, and have cast Gods word behind
their backs. If they have nothing to do with his word and ordinances / then
not with ministry and baptism. Besides God has foribidden that the
adversaries of him / his Temple / and them that dwell in heaven should build
according to that of Nehemia. 2.20. The God of heaven he will prosper us, and
we his servants will rise up and build, but as for you, ye have no portion nor
right nor memorial in Jerusalem. 2. to that fantastical sect I answer. It is
their dream and false vision / to look for extraordinary men / for God has
not spoken it. For if an Angel from heaven should come and preach otherwise,
then those extraordinary men the Appostles have preached which none else could
preach / and which is written in Christ's testament / we are to hold them
accursed Gal. 1.8.9. which truth none need go into heaven to seek, but every
one that searches the scriptures may find by the direction of the holy Ghost,
which God has promissed to all that obey him. Act. 5, and ask it. Mat. 6.1.


I Now I pray you let me hear your confirmation of your practice.


C As it was in the second building of the material Temple, after the
captivity of Babylon in Caldea, so according to the true porportion, it is to
be in the second building of the spiritual Temple after the captivity of
spiritual Babylon. Now this is observed in the former that every Israelite,
with whom the lord was, and whose spirit, the Lord stirred up, was commanded
to go and build Ezra. 1.3.5. though some were more excellent in the business
then others. So now every spiritual Israelite with whom the Lord is, and
whose spirit the Lord stirs up are commanded, to go and build, and the Lord
will prosper them in riseing up and building, though some be more excellent in
the business then others, the beginning of which spiritual building, is first to
beget men a new by the immortal seed of Gods word, so making them liveing
stones, and thereupon to couple them together a spiritual house unto God 1.
Pet. 2. upon the confession of their faith / by baptism / as the scriptures of
the new testament every where teach, as before is showed.


I It is confessed of many / that any that has gifts may preach and convert
but not baptize.


C Such our Savior accounts hipocrites, and reproves Mat. 23. that held it
was lawful to swear by the Temple but not by the gold on the Temple, by the
altar, but not by the offering on the altar: to whom he says, whether is
greater the gold or the Temple that sanctifies the gold? the offering, or the
altar that sanctifies the offering? So may I say, whether is greater the water
and washinge, or the word that sanctifies the water?


I. What other example have you in the scriptures, that on unbaptized person
may baptize?


C. If there were no other then that aforementioned, it were sufficent. An
Israelite circumcised in flesh God stirring up his heart was to build, the
Temple made with hands, from the first stone to the last, So an Isralite
circumcised in heart, God stirring him up, is to build the Temple made without
hands from the first stone to the last, beginning with, Go preach, and Baptize,
teaching to observe all that God co^maunds, as Christ teaches his disciples to
the end of the world. But further we have the particular example of John
Baptist, who being unbaptized, preached, converted, and baptized.


I. But John Baptist was an extraordinary man it will be objected / for God spoke
to him extraordinarily.


C. what then / Is not his practice written for our instruction? God has
spoken at several times after sundry manners Heb. 1.1. etc. Yet all to one
end, as for this of John Baptist, the same God that spoke to John Baptist in
the wilderness his word, the same God speaks to us in his scriptures the same
word he spoke to John, and there fore seeing the Lord has spoken who shall not
preach and practice according to his word, seeing now God speaks to no
particular persons, For what soever is written before time is written for every
man's instruction. Romans 15.4.


I. Many famous men as Mr. Perkins and others confess, that if a Turck shoud
come, to the knowledge of the truth in Turkey, he might preach the same to
others, and ^^^erting them baptize them / though unbaptized.


C. True, but this mystery of iniquity so prevails persuading many that
they are Christians, because they had baptism in their infancy when it
apperteined not to them that they think their case is better then the Turckes,
though alas it is much worse, for it shall be easier for the Turks then for them
if Gods word be true. Are not all Jews and Gentiles in one estate by nature,
and is there more then one way of coming to Christ for them both namely to be
the sons of God by faith and to put on Christ by baptism Gal. 3.26.27. who
has set up his new way? Christ or Antichrist?


I. Many of those caled Brownists do confess that they are reasonable
persuaded that Antichristians coming to the truth may be baptized / and they
would not differ with you concerning that / but that you deny infants baptism
/ what say you / may not the infants of the faithful be baptized?


C. No except God have appointed it.


I. You know it is granted that there is neither plain comaund nor example for
it in Christ's Testament, but from the consequence of circumcision, in that
covenant that God made with Abraham and his seed Genesis 17. and other places
agreeing therewith.


C. Let us endeavor to put an end to this if it may be in short. I demand of
you / what covenant the Lord means here. It must be granted he means,
either the covenant of the land of Canaan withal the promises thereof: or the
covenant of Christ's coming of his loins concerning the flesh, or else the
covenant of life and salvation by Christ, one of these three it must needs be,
let me have your answer / or any man's hereto.


I. The first and second cannot be pleaded, therefore it must be the third,
namely life and salvation by Christ.


C. Well, then I demand, has the fleshly childr(...) of the faithful, more
previlege to life and salvation then the faithful themselves?


I. No I think it cannot be said.


C. Well, then I affirm that the faithful have right to this covenant of life
and salvation only upon their repentance and faith, and not otherwise, and so
have their children and not otherwise, except you will say they have greater
previlege the^ the faithful: or else that they shall have life and salvation by
their parents faith: or else that they have right and title to it, whether they
repent and believe or no. If any say they have right and title to it by Gods
promise. I answer God has promised life and salvation by Christ to none that
are under condemnation but only by repentance and faith: let any show the
contrary if they be able. If any say as some foolishly have done, being urged /
that it is the covenant of the visible church: what covenant is that but the
covenant of life and salvation made to the faithful, Christ's body and Church.
And therefore seeing they are so confounded herein, some teaching one thing,
some another: some that infants have neither faith nor repentance, but by
virtue of the covenant made to their Parents: Others teach that repentance and
faith is to be performed of every one that is to be baptized, and that infants
may repent and believe by their suerties till they come to age themselves:
seeing I say they are thus confounded herein, having nothing in Christ's perfect
testament, only some show of a forged consequence, and also that they agree
not among themselves. Let us take heed of profaning the Lords holy ordinance,
administering it where he has not commanded. Many other things might be said,
but this may suffice, seeing much is already written, and more may be ere long:
knowing they have nothing to say but their several conceits.


I. But what do you then hold of infants?


C. That they are innocents as Christ teaches. Mat. 18.3. etc. and 19.14. etc.
1. Cor. 14.20. that they have no knowledge. Deuteronomy. 1.39. Jonah 4.11. that God
speaks not to them, requiring any thing at their hands, Deuteronomy. 11.2. Mat. 13,
9. Romans 7.9. 1. Cor. 10.15. and therefore they have not sinned, seeing sin is
the breach of Gods law. 1. Ioh. 3.4. Romans 4.15.


I. Then you hold they shall be saved.


C. Wherefore should they be condemned?


I. For that original sin, they have received from Adam.


C. Well. It is not my purpose now, time will not serve to answer all the
objections that are made in this matter. In short I trust to cut down that
conceit, that any infant should be condemned as thus. I demand of you, did any
of Adams posterity fall deeper in that tra^sgression then he himself?


I. No I never heard it affirmed, but as deep as he.


C. Well, out of your own ground you shall be convinced. Did God ever purpose or
declare, that Adam for that transgression should go to hell? consider it well
before you answer.


I. No, for from eternity he purposed that Christ should be betwixt that syn,
and condemnation.


C. You say true: then for that sin, God never purposed to condemn Adam to
hell: if not him for that, why any of his posterity for that? Let this be
considered, it is your own ground. Further I say, and that without
contradictio^, it was never Gods purpose that any should go to hell, but for
refusing Christ. This is conde^dation that light (or Christ) is come into the
world / and men love darkness better. Ioh. 3.19. and Christ will condemn the
world of sin, because they believe not in him. Ioh. 16.9.


I. I cannot contradict you in this, I will better consider of it, but I pray
you what hold you then of Predestination?


C. If you conceive the former, you may see what I hold, namely that before all
beginings, it was Gods purpose or predestination that, saltio^ should consist
in the receiving, or believing in Christ, and co^demnatio^ in refusing of
Christ. He that will not believe shall be damned. Mar. 16. 16. and not otherwise.


I. Then you hold that God has predestined some to be saved, and some to be
damned.


C. Yes, as I told you, namely the receivers of Christ to be saved: and the
refusers of Christ to be damned, but that God has predestinate or appointed
some to the means and end, namely to be wicked and to be damned, is the most
blasphemous conceit, that ever Satan foysts into man's heart, or brain.


A. But are men left then to their own free will?


C. What do you mean by free will?


I. Ability of our selves to do good or evil.


C. You say well, that truly is freewill. To do evil, and to resist Gods word
and spirit, we have freewill or power of our selves, Act. 13.46. and 7.51. But
to do good, or to receive Gods word or spirit, we have no power of our selves.
God works the will and the deed hereunto. Phil. 2.13. we are both begotten
again of God by his abundant mercy in Christ, to that heave^ly inheritance
and kept by his power (through faith) unto salvation. 1. Pet. 1.3 4.5. so that
nothing apperteyneth to us but shame, to him only apperteyneth the glory for
our life from death and for our preservation therein.


I. How comes it then that some do believe / and some do not?


C. That any do believe I have showed you the cause, without the which none
could believe, namely Gods mercy in Christ, in quickening us that were dead by
his powerful and lively word spirit: that some do not believe, the cause is,
they having freewill to do evil / and to resist Gods and word and spirit / use
the same / and so do not believe. That any believe it is thus Gods mercy / that
most believe not / the cause is not Gods / but their own wicked resisting will.


I. It is said / that the reason why some believe not / is because God does not
effectually call them / as he does the other: for if he did / they should come.


C. This saying / is partly blasphemous / partly ignorant / blasphemous / in
that it lies the cause of their not believing on God / in that he effectually
calls them not / and makes God a dissembler in his word / who says / as he
lives he would have it otherwise: ignorant it is / in that such persons as so
say / know not Gods work in creating man: for if God had made Ada^ otherwise
then he made him / either vnchangeablie good or evil / he must have made him
either a God or a Devil: for if he could not have resisted God / by his
creation / then what was he / but as God / unchangeable: and if he could not
have resisted the Devil by his creation / what was he but a Devil
unchangeable? or if he could not have resisted God in eating the forbidden
fruit / how could God have manifested his mercy to him in Christ? or if he
could not have resisted the Devil therein / how could God justly pour out
his judgments upon him / for his obedience to Satan / God creating him
thereunto. Now for us Adams posterity / it is granted of all / that we have
the same will or power to evil that Adam had or rather worse / though not the
will to good he had / and therefore men may and do resist God in his effectual
calling of them / as Ada^ did in Gods effectual forbidding him that tree. God
is no respecter of persons / he calls all effectually and in good earnest /
and whosoever holds otherwise he has an evil conceit of God.


I. I praise God you have given me great satisfaction in these things / what
must we do after our baptism?


C. As the Saints our predecessors did. They that gladly received the word were
baptized, and they continued in the Apostles doctrine, fellowship, breaking of
bread and prayers. Act. 2. walking in fear toward God / and in love in word
and deed / one toward another / according to the blessed rules in Christ's
Testament; and also justly and unblameably toward all men / that they may
cause their conversatio^ as well as their doctrine to shine before men / that
men may set their good works, and glorify their father, which is in heaven,
without the which conversation all profession is nothing.


A. It is a great stumbling block to many / that diverse / who profess Religion
walk corruptly in their conversation / it is great cause that the wicked open
their mouths against Gods truth.


C. Alas, it is most lamentable, but Gods people must know, it has been and
will be so unto the end of the world. And therefore has Christ Jesus appointed
means for the redressing thereof in his Church. Mat. 18. and 1. Cor. 5. etc.
And we may not justify or condemn any Religion whatsoever by men's personal
walkings. May we say / the Religion of the Philo^^phers was good because of
their moral ver^es? or that the Religion that Judah and Da^^d professed was
evil, because of Iudahs in^est, and David's adultery / and murder. Genesis ^^.2.
Sam. 11. or the Religion of Christ evil / because that one that professed it,
fell into incest ^. Cor. 5. Gods people had need to take heed assuming /
whereby to cause the adversaries to ^laspheme, for the which God may make them
^xamples to all succeeding ages.


A. I give you hearty thanks for your pains with me in these things / and I
trust I shall not let them slip but remember them all my life / and put them in
practice.


C. The glory and thanks thereof only be(...)ngeth to God, for to him it is
due, but this I desire you to consider / that the knowing of the (...)ll of God
/ without practicing of it / does us (...)there hurt then good / the scripture
says. Not (...)he knowers but the doers are justified Ro^. 2.13. ^am. 1.12.
And he that knows his masters will and does not shall be beaten with many
stripes. May there be in this nation (with grief of soul I speak it) that
acknowledge and confess the truth / but practice it not / for some respects or
other; the Lord persuade all your hearts to the speedy practice thereof / and
that by many examples that are left unto you. David that man of God says, I
made haist, and delayed not to keep thy commandments. Psalm. 119.60. The
Disciples Mat. 4. ymmediately without tarrying followed Christ. The three
thousand the same day ^hey were informed obeyed the Lord and were baptized.
Act. 2. The Samaritanes Act. ^.11 as soon as they believed were baptized both
m^^ and women. The Eunuch likewise ver 38. (...) Iaylor / Lydia, Paul, and a
clowd of witness(...) coming not with flesh and blood, but obey the Lord
as soon as they believed. Here w(...) no staying to hear what this, and that
learn(...) man could say against it, as now a days, but they were confidently
persuaded thereof, th(...) obeyed. And so I am assured it shall be by lit(...)
and little as the kingdom of the Beast diminishes.


I. I hope I shall testify to all / my spedie walking (...) the steps of these
holy men / but one thing there is yet which has much troubled me and others /
and in my judgem^^^ has much hindered the growth of godliness in this kingdom
and that is that many so soon as they see or fear (...) will ensue / they
fly into another Nation who cannot (...) their conversation / and thereby
deprive many poor ig^^rant souls in their own Nation / of their information /
(...) of their conversation amongst them.


C. Oh / that has been the overthrowe (...) Religion in this land / the best
able and great(...) part being gone / and leaving behind them some few / who
by the others departure have ha(...) their afflictions and contempt increased
which has been the cause of many falling back / and o^ the adversaries
exalting / but they will tell us we are not to judge things / by the effects /
therefore we must prove that their flight unlawful or we say nothing.

And first / whereas it is said by some of these fliers / that many of the
people of God fled into foreign countries / and that God gave approbation
thereof / as Moses / David / our Savior Christ in his infancy / and others /
thinking here^y to justify this their flight. I answer / God ^eserved Moses
and the rest in their flight / till ^etime was come that he employed them in
his ^^rvice / then in no case he would suffer them to (...)e / as when Moses
manifested his exceeding ackwardnes to the Lords work in helping his people out
of bondage using many excuses / the Lord was very angry with him Exodus 4.10. --
15. and whither did our Savior fly / when the ^ime came that he was to show
himself to Israel? Luke 1.80. If any of these men can prove the Lord
requires no work at their hands to be (...)e for his glory and the salvation
of thousa^ds of ignorant souls in their own Nation / let the^ ^tay in
foreign countries. But I trust Gods people have learned / not to say the time
is not yet come that Babell should be destroyed / and the Lords house builded /
but that the time is come to build the Lords house / and not to dwell in seiled
houses / Hag 1. or any way to seek our outward promotion; which if it be
granted / that the time is come / not only to come out of Babel but to destroy
her / all these objections are nothing / except they prove that when God called
any of his people to his work / they left it for fear of trouble. This
doctrine was not approved of God when the time came that his adversaries were
to be rooted out / and that his people had gotten some victory. The Rubenites,
and the Gadites could have been content to have remained to their most peace
and commodity. Nu^. 32. But Moses said unto them, Shall your brethren go to
war and ye tarry here? wherefore now discourage ye the hearts of the children
of Israel etc. sharply reproving them as an increase of sinful men risen up in
their fathers steads still to augment the feirce wrath of the Lord / and Moses
would not be satisfied until they had promimised that they would go with
their brethren to the Lords work / and would not return to their houses /
till they had accomplished the same. And the Angel of the Lord does say. Curse
ye Meroz, curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help the
lord, to help the Lord against the Mighty. Judge. 5.23. Also because the men of
Iabesh Gilead / came not up to the Lord / to help their brethren against the
wicked men of Gibeah, all the men were destroyed and all the women that had
lien by men Judge 21. No excuse whatsoever could serve: Did God thus respect his
work and people then / as all must put to their helping hand / and none must
withdraw their shoulder least others were discouraged / and is there no regard
to be had thereof now? but any occasion / as fear of a little imprisonment /
or the like may excuse any / both from the Lords work / and the help of their
brethren that for want of their society and comfort / are exceedingly weakened
/ if no overcome. If answer be made / they perform their duty in both / that
they do the Lords work the Pastor feeding his flock / and the people walking
one toward another. I demand / does the Lord require no more work of them?
does he not require that they should help to cast down Babell? If reply be
made they do it by their books. I answer / that may be done / and their
lights shine by their mouths and conversations also among the wicked / which
is the greatest means of converting them and destroying Antichrists kingdom
/ They overcame (not by flieing away) by the blood of the Lamb, and by the
word of their testimony and they loved not their lives unto the death. Rev.
13.11. Gods people are the lights of the world / a City set on a hill / a
Candle set on the candlestick / giving light to all that come in. Mat. 5. and
therefore must shine by their persons / more then by their ^ookes. And great
help and encouragement would be to Gods people in affliction of imprisonment
and the like / to have their brethre^s presence / to administer to their souls
or bodies / and for which cause / Christ will say / I was in prison / and ye
visited me / in distress and ye comforted me / and unto those that do not so
/ according to their ability / Go ye cursed. Mat. 25. If men had greater love
to Gods co^maunds / or the salvation of thousand of ignorant souls in our
Nation / that for want of instruction perish / then to a little temporal
affliction they would neither publish nor practice as they do in this thing.
Thus have I in short showed you my poor ability in these things. And for all
other things we hold / as the lawfulnes of magistracy Gods blessed ordinance.
Of Christ our Savior taking his flesh of the virgin Mary / vy the wonderful
work of the holy Ghost etc. You may see them in our confession in print
published 4. years ago.


I. Many that he called Annabaptists hold the contrary / and many other
strange things.


C. We cannot but lament for it / so did many in Christ Churches in the
primitive times hold strange opinions / as some of the Corinth^ denied the
resurrection / and in many of the (...) churches were greevous things / which
the L. by his servants warned them of / upon pain of his displeasure / and
removing of his presence from them / nevertheless others professing the same
general cause of Christ / were commended.


A. Well / you will yet be called Annabaptists because you deny baptism to
infants.


C. So were Christians before us called Sects. And so they may John Baptist.
Jesus Christ / himself / and his Apostles Annabaptists / for we profess and
practice no otherwise herein / (...) they / namely / the baptising of such as
confess with the mouth the belief of the heart. And if they be Anabaptists
that deny baptism / where God has appointed it / they / and not we are
Annabaptists. But the Lord give them repentance / that their sins may be put
away / and never laid to their charge / even for his Christ's sake / Amen.

Thus have we in this Dialogue according to our poor ability answered such
objections / as hitherto in our poor and unworthy testimony have been objected
against any of us concerning persecution for religion: as also with good
consciences pointed at the principal things of Mr Robinsons late book till
further time.


FINIS.

