THE Copy of a Letter sent to Monsieur de Beauuoir Lord Ambassador for the
French king. Henry IV

vvherin is showed the late attempt of a Jesuit who would have killed the
kings Majesty with a knife.

printer's device of the brazen serpent, probably passed to Peter Short in
1589-90 (McKerrow 118)

Printed by Peter Short and are to be sold at the great north door of Poules by
John Flasket. 1594

The Copy of a letter sent to Monsieur Beauvoir Lord Ambassador for the French
King.
MY Lord,
these are to give you knowledge, of a sudden and unhappy accident, which had
like to have fallen upon the king, had it not pleased God of his great mercy,
miraculously to preserve his Majesty from it. Your honor shall then
understand, that his Majesty within little more then an hour after his return
into the city of Paris, from out of Picardie, being as yet booted, and having
about him the Lords and Princes of Conty, the Earls of Soissons, and Saint
Paul, and above thirty or forty of the chief Noblemen, and gentlemen of his
court, as his Majesty was busy in receiving the Lords of Ragny, and Montigny,
whith had not before that time done their duty, and allegiance to him, it
happened a young fellow, of very small stature, and not above eighteen, or
nineteen years of age, called Peter Chastel, the son of a Merchant draper
in this city, followed in amongst the prease, into the chamber, where the
king himself was, and thrusting forward as near to the person of the king
as he could, (without being noted or suspected of any there present) he
struck at the king with a knife, whith he had brought to that purpose, thinking
to have thrust him into the belly. But so it fell out through the mighty
providence of God, that the king in that very instant, bowing himself
forward, to take up the said lords of Ragny, and Montagny, (which kneled
before him) the stroke lighted upon his face on the upper lip toward the right
side, and brake one of his teeth, without doing any further harm. The
wretched caytife was presently laid hold on, and denying the fact a while at
the first, afterward he voluntarily confessed it. We can as yet get nothing
out of him, but that he has been brought up for the space of this three years
in the College of the Jesuits, in which place we suppose he received
instructions, to practice this treason. The first thing his Majesty thought
upon was to give god thanks for his special grace, and favor at this time, in
perseruing him from this traitorous attempt, and caused a public thanksgiving
to be song generally throughout the whole city, and the citizens besides made
bonfiers in every street, for joy of the kings deliverance out of so great a
danger. Thanks be to God, the hurt is so small, that the king shall not
need to keep his bed for it: and we hope he shall be able to hold on with his
determination, for the which he hastened his return to Paris, which is to
solemnize the feast and ceremony of the order of the Holyghost. I thought it
best to advertise your honor hereof without any further delaie, for fear least
being prevented by others, not knowing the truth and certainty of the matter,
you and other the kings friends and welwillers, should thereby have cause to
be inwardly grieved. His majesty's chief desire is, that you cause a public
thanksgiving to be offered up to God for it, with earnest prayers that it would
please his divine majesty, al ways to keep him under his merciful
protection, against such bloody and butcherly practices, to which his enemies
having so often recourse, make manifest proof to the world of their malicious
intents, and finding that God has given them over to themselves, they give
themselves over to these most damnable and accursed conspiracies, which God I
hope will bring to confusion, both them and those that are the authors and
deuisers of them.

From Paris the 27. of December, 1594. after their account.
The Copy of the same Letter in French.
VOus aurez icy la nouelle d'un malheureux accident qui a pense arriuer au Roy,
et comme il a pleu a Dieu par sa misericorde miraculeusement l'en preserver Il
ny auoit pas plus d'une heure que sa Majesty estoit arriuee en ceste ville de
retour de son voyage de Picardie, et estoit encore toute bottee, Qu ayant
autour d'elle Messieurs les Princes de Conty, Comte de Soissons et Comte de S.
Paul, et plus de 30. ou 40. des principaux Seigneurs et Gentilzhommes de ceste
court, comme elle receuoit les seigneurs de Ragny and de Montigny qui ne
l'auoyent point encore saluez un Ieune garson nomme Pierre Chastel fort petit
et qui ne peut auoir que dixhuict ou dix neuf ans, fills d un merchant Drapier
de ceste ville lequel s'estoit glisse auec la trouppe dans la chamber s'aduance
sans estre quasi aperceu de person, et pensant luy donner d'un cousteau qu'il
auoit dans le corpse, le coup (par ce que sa Majesty s'estoit baissee pour
releuer les susdits sieurs de Montigny et de Ragny qui la saluoyent) ne porta
que dans la face sur la leure haute du cost droict, and l'a entamee, et
couppee vne dent. A l'instant ce miserable a este prins, and apres auoir vouleu
un peu defaduouer le fait incontinent apres il l'a confess sans aucune force
il ne s'est encore rien peu tirer de luy sinon qu'il a este nourry trois ans
aux Colleges des Jesuits, ou l'on presume qu'il a receu ceste instruction Ce
don't sa Majesty s'est vou leu: premierement souuenir a este de render graces a
dieu de ceste particulieire grace, qu'illuy a faite de le garentir de cest
assassinat, and en a este a l'instant chante un Te Deum en toutes les eglises
de ceste vil le; a quoy les habitans ont adiouste des feux de joy par toutes
les rues. Il y a (dieu mercy) si peu de mal, que pour cela sa Majesty, ne s'en
mettra pas au lict de meilleure heure, et esperons, qu'elle ne perdra point la
bonne occasion, pour laquelle elle a auance son retour, qui est, pour fair la
feste, and ceremony de l'ordre du saint Esprit. Ie n'ay voluu tarder
d'auantage a vous donner cest aduis, affin que vous, and les autres seruiteurs
de sa Majesty estans preuenus de quelque autre, n'en soiez en peine. Mais sa
Majesty desire principalement que vous en faciez render graces publiques a
dieu, and bonnes prieres, qu'il luy plaise la conseruer tousiours en sa saint
protection contre tells assassinats, ausquels puis que les ennemis recourent si
souuent c'est bien vne preuue manifest de leur malheureuse intention, and
comme se sentans abandonnez de Dieu, ils s'abandonnent aux resolutions les plus
execrables, que i'espere, qu'il confondra tousiours a leur ruin, and confusion.

A Paris 27. December. 1594.

