ORDINANCES Set forth by the King, for the rule and government of his
Majesty's men of war.

Read and published at Caen the 30. of March. 1591.

Faithfully translated out of the French Coppie Printed at Caen by E. A.



LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop right
ouer-against the great south door of Paul's. 1591.

Ordinances set forth by the King, for the rule and government of his men of
war.
HEnry by the grace of God king of France and Navarre, to our well-beloved and
trusty, the Governors of our Provinces, our Lieu^enants general in the same,
our Captains and particular Governors of our towns and castles, also to our
Bailifes and Stewards, and other our Justices, Officers and subjects, greeting.
Upon the complaints and lamentations which daily out of sundry parts of our
realm we do receive concerning such excess and violences as are still offered
against our poor subjects of the plain champion by our men of war, and
their bad behauiours, and upon a singular desire that we have to preserve and
warrant them from the same: We with the advice of our princes, officers of our
crown, and other notable persons of our privy counsel about us, have made
and decreede the Ordinances hereunto affixed under the counterseale of our
Chancery, which we intend to cause diligently to be kept and observed. And in
as much as the execution of the same depends wholly upon you, we will and
command, and expressly do enioine every of you whom it may any way concern,
so exactly to execute the said decree, that our said subjects may reap that
relief which we wish unto them, to our own content and the discharge of our
consciences, in freeing them from such oppressions as unjustly are practiced
against them, as also that the care and affection which for your parts you
shall employ, may justify you as vnguiltie of such transgressions as through
toleration are grown so common, and withal so offensive to God, that we are
to believe that the same does most procure his wrath against this estate, which
he will never turn away until they that are possessed of the power and
governments do take into their protection the poor inhabitants of the said
Champion, who in all reason are the most innocent, and to whom we stand most
bound, as being next unto God and chief workmen and ministers of such fruits
as the earth brings forth for the sustenance and norishment of others. Fail
ye not therefore hereof as ye will answer us at your own and particular peril.
We also enjoin our Bailifes and Stewards to cause the said ordinances to be
published and enroled in the seize of our Bailiwikes and Stewardships, and
besides to proclaim them throughout all the parishes in their precincts. As
also we will that to the same effect upon the sight thereof, and of these
presents duly collationed together, they be believed even as these presents
original, for such is our pleasure.

Given at our Camp before Chartres, March 8. 1591. and of our reign the
second. Signed Henry,
and underneath Potier,
and sealed in yellow wax with his Majesty's broad seal upon a single labell.
THe King meaning to take order against such complaints as are usually made
unto him concerning the infinite oppressions wherewith his poor subjects of
the plain Champion are ouerlaid, besides the charges that they bear, by
tallages and other impostes, leuyed among them upon his Majesty's commissions,
through the enterprises of sundry men of war, who of their own authority do
force them to contribute money, meat, and munition, notwithstanding the most of
them have neither charge nor commission from his Majesty to make any leauy of
soldiers: whereby the said poor subjects being thus laid open to the
discretion of every one that list to vex and oppress them, shall be forced to
abandon their habitations, and the tilth of the earth withal, whereof must
ensue a general famine with the curse of God against the whole estate, in case
such wickedness be any longer tolerated: does command, will, and enjoin all
and every the governors of his provinces, and his lientenants general in the
same, exactly to procure the observation of the contents of the articles
ensuing. Whereupon his Maiestis protests to charge their persons in case he
hears any further complaint of their slacking of their duties, in that they
can not enterprise or execute any thing that may more redounde to the discharge
of their consciences and honor, and their duty to his Majesty and the common
wealth.

According to the former prohibitions, that no man leauy any company or troop
of horsemen or footmen without his Majesty's commission, the said governors
and lieutenantes of the said provinces are also enioined to over run and cut
in pieces all such as shall do otherwise: and where they can by any means
apprehend the Captains and leaders of such troops, they shall hang them
without further order or form of process.

If any of the said men of war do seize upon any place, whether Town,
Borough Village, Church, Castle, or private house, to the end, in the same to
keep strength or garrison without commission from his Majesty, the governor
of the province, or the lieutenant general in his absence, he also enioyneth
the said governors and lieutenants general with all speed to beseege and
force them, and all such as they can take alive to hang up without other order
of process.

That it be published in all Parishes, that his Majesty means not that his
subjects be forced to any contribution of coin, victual, hay, straw or other
munition without express commission from his said Majesty under his Letters
patents signed by himself, and one of his secretaries of estate, directed to
the treasurours general of France, and the elected to make division thereof.
Also in case they be forced or compelled thereto by their particular garrisons,
his Majesty wills them to complain to the lieutenant general of the
Province, whom he enioyneth presently to repair unto the place where the
garrison remains that forces the leauy of any such contribution, or to send
strength sufficient to apprehend the Captain that may have feigned any such
decree, whose precesse he wills to be framed and finished according to the
ordinances thereupon made. As also his Majesty commands upon like pain such
inhabitants of the said Villages as may have been forced to the payment of
the said contributions, not to fail but to make their complaint to the said
governors and lieutenants general by petition to them exhibited, to the end,
if it be not remedied, his Majesty may know where the fault is.

If any of the said men of war contrary to the former decrees under pretense
of going to leauy the tallages to them appointed for their pay and maintenance
shall exact of his Majesty's said subjects any more then for his own relief,
during the time of his or their abode in the said village whither he is sent,
his Majesty wills the same to be hanged immediately.

If likewise it be found that any, whether he be of the company of those that
rise without the commission aforesaid, or of such as belong to any garrison
appointed by his Majesty, has taken from the said peasants any horse, mare,
ox, or cow used to labor, his pleasure is that the same be also hanged and
strangled.

His Majesty also declares that his will and meaning is not that any of the
said peasants be denounced a prisoner of war, notwithstanding he has paid
any tallages or contributions to the rebellious towns, unless the same be
taken bearing arms against his Majesty's service, or be found in places holden
by the said rebels, and have been beseeged or taken by force, or carrying of
Letters or messages to such as be in the said rebellious towns, either
conueying of victualles into the same, or being met in the high way within two
leagues thitherward and so found by good and sufficient proof. His Majesty
under pain of death forbids the taking or detaining of them in any other
manner, either the forcing of them to pay any ransom, or stopping of them from
transporting to market towns, boroughs or villages their cattle or other
merchandise to buy or sell. As also under the pains aforesaid he forbids the
taking prisoners of any children under fifteen years of age, or any maidens
or women upon any cause or occasion whatsoever.

He also forbids under pain of death to take prisoners, or to put to
ransom any Priests, religious men, or other ecclesiastical persons, unless
the same he taken bearing arms against his Majesty's service, and the order of
their profession: or that they be found coming out of the said rebellious
towns without pasport from his Majesty, or the governors or lieutenants
general, either carrying of letters or messages to the enemy as is aforesaid.

It is likewise prohibited upon like pain of death, not to rob any Churches,
monasteries, or other places dedicated to the divine service, or therein to
lodge any horse or other cattle, or therein to commit any act contrary unto
the reverence due to the same.

That no judgments of ransomes of such as have been detayned prisoners shall
be assessed but by his Majesty, the Marshals of France, the Governors and
Lieutenants general of the Provinces, or the Marshalles of the Camp of his
armies, all others being prohibited and forbidden to deal in the same.

All men whatsoever, whether soldiers, peasants, or others, are also under
the like pains prohibited from fortefying of the said Churches, to the end to
use them for war, the said places in duty being reserved for prayer and
supplications to God, and therefore exempt from al violence and warlike
exercise.

His Majesty also forbids all governors or Captains of his towns, forts,
or castles, not to convert into coin the labor that the pesants do owe to the
fortifications of the said places, which he wills to be ordered by the elect
or judges of the places, who shall appoint every parish one day at the most in
every month to come to work, yet so as the said Governors shall not force
them without the permission of his Majesty or his Governors for the time
limited in the Commissions which unto them shall be delivered.

Also in as much as his said Majesty means to employ the goods of the
Leaguers upon his affairs, his pleasure is that no man shall take the same
without the especial gift of his Majesty, and that by the hands of his
officers of justice according to the tenure of their gifts, unless it be the
moueables of such as may be found in those towns and places which the said
rebels do detayne at such time as be force the same be recovered out of their
hands.

Given at our Camp before Chartres the 8. day of March. 1591. Signed Henry.
and beneath Potier.
IN the year 1591. upon Saturday the thirtieth day of March in the presence of
us John Vauquelin Esquier, Counselor to the King, and lieutenant general of
my L. the Bayliffe of Caen, the Kings letters patents and ordinances made in
his camp before Chartres the eight day of this month and year, for the rule
and government of his men of war, the audience of the said Bayliwike
sitting, were read and published. And upon the request of the Kings Procurer it
is ordained that they shall be registered upon the roll proclaimed in the corner
ways of this said town, and at the exhortations in the great parochial
masses in the parishes of this vicount, and the sight thereof sent to all other
the vicounties of this Bayliwike that the like may be done, and to that end
they shall be printed.

Given as before. Signed VAVQVELIN de la Serre and Cricquet.

FINIS.

