Three Letters written by the King of Navarre, first Prince of the blood and
chief Peer of France to the States of the Clergy, Nobility and third
estate of France. More: A Letter from the said King to the Governors and
Communaltie of the Town of Paris. All faithfully translated out of the French.



AT LONDON, Imprinted for Edward Aggas. 1586.

To my Masters the Clergy.
MY Masters, unto you do I complain both in body and commune, and yet cannot
believe that you all are led by one self spirit in whatsoever is contrived
against me. You cannot be ignorant what moderation I have evermore used in
your behalfes, even in the rigours of arms, neither are you to seek of those
just necessities whereinto I have sometimes been reduced, and I assure my self
that even in your consciences you are able to lay the fault where it ought. Thus
much I can say, that I never enfringed the peace of any iolitie, but may truly
affirm that I have attributed my just sorrows and discontentme^ts, and that in
diverse sorts, unto the wealth and quiet of this Estate. Those men, my Masters,
if you mark them well, whom with your habilities you do assist to my
destruction, have not taken the like course: of particular ambition they have
made zeal to the Church, and of their private dislikes a public war:
neither have they moreover made any conscience to kindle the fire throughout ye
four quarters of this Realm, so to enjoy the pleasure of putting the King to
trouble, and having by an universal calamity found means to revenge such
disgraces as they imagine themselves to have received at his hands. The Lord
open your eyes and grant you grace to enter into the bottom of their entents.
I fear not (as knows God) the mischief that may befall me, either of your
coin or their weapons: both the one and the other have often enough been
employed in vain: I lament for the poor innocent people, who, almost alone,
do bear these follies: I moan even a great number of you that do contribute
to the ambition of these perturbers, you of your poverty, they hardly of their
haboundance: and principally I be wail the fault that you all do commit, some
upon one affection, others of an other, who one day shall be to answer to this
Realm and your Country for so many miseries and hazardes whereinto (even to
your costs) you do plunge it: you, who by your vocations ought to be the
pillars of public tranquillity, shall answer before God for so much
innocent blood spilled: for such disorders, and vices of that war that you
nourish, which brings in the howlings, cries and languishing, of so many
poor families whom your abundance ought either to nourish or relieve, which
you make instruments of their misery, cause of their hunger and scourges of
the Commonwelth. You may allege zeal of the Church, and I am content to
believe that some of you are driven thereby. What shall the posterity then
say, that you have neclected my proffers? that you have wished rather to bring
all into confusion then to frame your selves to a Counsel, which in my
express declaration I required at the Kings hands? That you had rather
proceed even to blood then quietly to co^ferre upon the sense of the
Scriptures? That you have preferred the means to subvert the Estate, before
the way to convert the souls which you think to be strayed, yea even my
person being therein touched, whom truly you ought rather to enstruct then to
destroy? Those persons that do abuze your zeal do well enough know that it
is impossible for them to perform their promise, I say, by force of arms to
root yt Religion wherein I do live. They seek not the reunion but
destruction of the Realm: and call to mind that heretofore in vain under the
same pretense they caused you to sell your Temporalties: remember also that
your coin was consumed and your devotion to furnish them, quenched, before you
could find even any small success in your deliberations. They proceed
further: some of the Clergy, (I will not believe that many of them have
consented to such a confederatie) have solicited the Pope against me, and at
his hands have obtained a certain declaration whereby I am exhibited for a
pray, and declared unable the succession of this Realm. Think not my
Masters that these Thunderbolts do any whit astonish me, for it is God yt
disposes both of Kings and Kingdoms, and your predecessors, who were both
better Christians and better Frenchmen then the fautors of this Bull, have
sufficiently taught us that Popes have not to deal with this Estate. Only it
grieueth me that contrary to all good manner there should be to be found any so
inconsiderate persons as at Room to procure the consulting upon and deciding
of the succession of a living King and that in the flower of his age: For
whereto may that be good, except to raise us up in this Estate either many
dispersers or one usurper. I am sorry that we should let foreign Nations know
that our Nation heretofore so devout to our Princes, should bring forth in
this age such Monsters, as for either their pleasures or ambition do put
forth the Commonwealth for a pray, and willingly enuite all their neighbors
to the spoil of this Estate. For, as for my interest GOD has preserved me
that my hope penetrate not beyond the life of my Prince. God in his just wrath
confound al such as shall build their greatness upon his Toumbe, even those
that are so provident as to anticipate his death by their cou^sailes. But
leaving these speeches I will account better of you then your actions do will
me, and I had rather judge you by my self then by your dealings. They have
procured me much mischief, I will not impute it generally to all: I will think
it a conspiratie but of some who are otherwise urged thereto, and that
peradventure at the instigation of the Jesuits, the seeds of Spain and
enemies to the wealth of this Estate, and God grant them to be as ready to
abstain from the mischief to come, as I am now willing to forgive them. The
rest that I have to say unto you is that God has caused me to be borne a
Christian Prince, I desire the establishment, increase, and peace of Christian
Religion: we all believe in one God: we all confess one Jesus Christ: we all
receive one Gospel, if upon the interpretation of the self same textes we
fall into controversy, I suppose the short ways that I have propounded might
bring us to agreement: I believe that the War that you so sharply do
prosecute is unworthy all Christians, yea unworthy to be among Christians,
especially those that pretend themselves Doctors of the Gospel. If War do
so much delight you: If you conceive gre^^^r felicity in a battle then in a
disputation: in a ^^oudie conspiratie, then in a Counsel, I wash my hands,
that blood that may be thereby shed be upon your heads. I know the curses
of those that shall suffer cannot light upon me: for my patience, my obedience
and my reasons are well enough known. I will expect the blessing of God upon
my so just defense, whom I beseech to grant unto you the spirit of peace and
union, to the peace of this Estate and union of his Church Amen.

From Montauban this first of January. 1586. Your most affectionate and very
good friend. Henry.

To the Lords of the Nobility.
MY Masters, such is your birth that nere enough you approach unto the
affairs of Estate whereby to attribute the right or wrong where it
apperteyneth, and therefore we shall need no long speech to open your eyes.
You have even in full peace perceived the original of the broils of the
League contrary to the quiet of this Realm: you know my patience,
notwithstanding they took me for their contrary and made me the subject and
pretense of their weapons. You have seen the Leaguers pronounced Rebels by
the King, and for such prosecuted in all Courts of Parliaments: your selves
have you seen commanded, armed and fighting against them by the Kings express
will under the authority of the Princes of his blood with the Peers and
principal Officers of his Crown. I doubt not therefore but unto you it seems
strange to behold, as in a moment, this alteration: to see your selves armed
against the blood of France: commanded by strangers whom you fought against as
perturbers, and which is worse, against those who three days before were for
the service of the King and Realm sent for, and commanded as you, ranged
under the same ancients and of like will as your selves: But withal you can
judge that the first precepts proceeded of the Kings proper motion, and those
that have followed, of the violence of the perturbers. For what have these of
the League since done, even between both, whereby to lose the quality of
Rebels guilty of Treazon, perturbers of the peace, which by so many decrees
have to them been attributed? either what offense have those of the Religion
committed, by living under the benefit of the Edicts, whom his Majesty
indifferently summoned to his service, who also equally opposed them selves
against the common flame, that now they should at the appetite of the said
perturbers be expelled the Realm and on every side pursued to the death? If
it be for matter of Religion, was there not express Edicts therefore? Were not
the same newly reiterated? Can that which is permitted by the laws of the
Realm be accounted an offense? May it be prosecuted with any pain? If it be
(as in troth it is) for contrarying the purposes of the League, are not your
selves accessaries to that offense? be not you subject to the same pain? do
you then seek your own overthrow? For what offense are they burdened with
except that they are and will be no other but Frenchmen? Now I come to my self,
whether you will judge of me by my self, or by comparison with those of the
League: well I know that you can not lay the fault upon me: yea, I know that
even in your consciences you do attribute it to my enemies: They meddle with
talk of my Religion, you that know the preeminence of the blood of France,
that can well say that you owe no duty but to the same, shall it be said
that I must give accoumpt to the stranger? Is it not enough for me to
satisfy the King and all France? Has any one complained that I have
violently entreated him for his Religion? What more could I do either with
reason or Christianlike, the^ to crave a good Counsel? They are also offended
with the government of the estate, and have endeavored to provide for the
succession thereof: They have procured the Pope to decide the same at Room:
you therefore that hold the chief room in this Realm, if necessity had so
required, could you be so careless as to suffer strangers to prevent you in
that office? Have you no regard to your posterity? Could you ouersleepe this
duty? For in all these broils what have appeared but Lorrain? But in troth
either to reform or tra^sforme the estate according to their desires they
needed not your help: to pass over the Estate into a foreign hand was a
work fit for strangers only to enterprise: to expel France out of France,
the process could not be determined in France, she was to much suspected in
such a cause and therefore it must be decided in Italy. They have directly
opposed them selves against me: I have offered the combat: I have stooped
beneath my self: I have not disdained to fight with them: I have done it (God
is my witness) for the preserving of the people from destruction, and the
sparing of your blood: Of yours, I say, which is principally shed in these
miseries. If they had any thing to say against me, had not this been most
honorable for them? If in heart they sought the wealth and benefit of this
Estate, did not I set them in a fair way? There have been such found as have
hazarded their lives for the safegarde of their Country, what judgment then
may you give of those who for saving themselves out of danger can be content
to see the overthrow of a whole estate?

You profess your selves to be men of honor, what wrong then do they to their
honors who will not accept of so good a way? or what injury do you to your
own in accompanying them against me? You that would make a conscience in
assisting a favorite against one of your neighbors. Think not my Masters
that I fear them, I know what strength may do against me: sooner shall they
be weary of assaulting me then I of defending my self: many a year have I
borne their brunt when they were much stronger and my self far weaker then
now. You have experience and judgment, the passed may resolve you of that that
is to come. Truly I bewail your blood shed and spilled in vain which ought
to be spared for the preservation of France: I do lament that that should be
employed against me which ye should keep for me being that which God has made
me in this Realm, for the joining under the authority and good success of
the King, France to France, where now it serves to drive it out of France: I
do also moan it that it shall neither be paid or mourned for almost of any:
for the King, being forced in his will does not hold himself served of those
that force him, on the other side those that do force him will never con you
thank for this service, as knowing that it is the Kings name and not theirs
that you do serve. My masters, GOD grant you well to consider hereof. The
French Princes are chief of the Nobility I love you all, I feel my self
wast and weaken in your blood, a stranger can have no feeling thereof. The
stranger bears no interest in this loss. I might complain of some, I had
rather bewail them, and am ready to embrace you al: My greatest grief is
that those whom in mind I do distinguish, whom also I know to have been
circu^uented, I cannot make any difference of in the hazard of arms: But God
knows my heart: Their blood be upon the authors of these miseries. For my
part, my Masters, I do and incessantly will beseech him that it may please
him to open the way whereby his name may be served and honored, the King
obeyed, the State quieted, and all orders and degrees of this Realm reduced to
their pristinate dignity, prosperity and eminentie Amen.

From Montauban this first of January. 1586. Your most affectionate and very
good friend. Henry.

To my Masters of the third Estate.
MY Masters, I need not many words to open unto you the equity of my cause.
Call to mind that when these broils began we lived in peace and daily went
forward better and better. Remember also that notwithstanding the same tended
directly against me, yet for eight months space I stirred not, my patience
passed all bounds: neither forget that I saw those armies that had been
meetest for me, joined to my enemies and coming against me before I was
resolved to defend my self. And I swear unto you my Masters, that the horror
of a civil war and the sensible apprehension of the misery and calamities
that it brings forth even benumbed me and took away my senses to my own
damage, had I not perceived that my over long patience redounded to the danger
and destruction of this Realm by giving the perturbers leisure violently to
have fulfilled their pleasures. In case Religion was the matter, I submitted my
self to a Counsel: if complaints concerning the estate, to an assembly of the
Estates: yea, I wished to draw upon my own person the whole perrill of France
for saving it out of misery, voluntarily yielding my self equal with those
whom nature has made my inferiors, whereas they of their own interest have
made a common calamity, and of their private quarelles a public confusion. I
might complain that my just offers were not accepted: But to you I do
complain, and yet for you, not for my self: I lament these extremities
whereby the extreme injury to me done has brought me to that pass that I may
not defend my self without the detriment of the innocent people. I bewail my
own condition, that for the warranting of my life you must feel harm and
pain, you, for whose relief and wealth I was ready to shed my blood, if my
enemies had not coueted rather to redeem themselves from the combat, whereto I
challenged them, by a paricide against this Estate and by an uniuersall
combustion. But herein I take comfort, that your selves can consider the nature
of euilles to be such as cannot be healed but by some euilles, the cause
whereof you are not to attribute to the Surgeon whose purpose is to heal, but
rather to him that made the wound, and so consequently in this wound all the
griefs ensuing: That in a short space God will grant me the grace after so
many labors to fee this Estate purged of those that do molest it, also to see
you enjoy so certain and assured quiet as in small time may cause us to
forget all passed travails. Judge by the effects, I beseech you, of the
entents of men to make you rejoice in these troubles. These men would put you
in hope that they reform the abuses of the Treasorie, that they would deminish
taxes and subsidies, that they would reduce all things to the time of (...)
already (if they might have been believed) would have been surnamed fathers of
the people. What is come of it? Their war having strangely devoured on every
side, have been determined by a peace wherein they have had respect only to
their particular profit, without any mention of you: and which is worse, their
peace is as suddenly couerted to a war against those that remained quiet,
whereby the King is forced to double the Impostes, the people exhibited in pray
to the man of war, and France (without the help of God) bound to be
murdered of her self. For what other is that Edict that is wrested out, but a
necessity laid upon the King to destroy his people, and with his own hand to
make away himself? At the least if they me^t not to relieve the people, why
were they not content to abuze them? or what had they done that they must be
overthrown? They cover these mischiefs with zeal to the Church: The heat of
this zeal ought to have appeared in charity, and charity in the union of
both Religions. What charity, which endeuourd only to root out? What heat
of zeal, which has fiered all the Country, and has set a whole estate in
combustion? In the mean time under pretense that the Clergy has paid some
portion aforehand for the encouraging the Soldiour to begin ye wars, ye see
them on the way. The people must cover it with some two hundred thousand
Crowns or therabout, which shall bind them hereafter to millions: and to be
brief, some of the Clergy to the great grief of the King, yea and of their
own members have for their own particular passions concluded upon the
bargain and advanced the earnest penny, then must the poor people fulfill and
furnish the rest whatsoever it cost him that cannot do withal, who only must
bear the loss and can hope for no fruit, bear the whole burden, and endure
all the calamity that may come thereof. My Masters, this do I repeat unto
you: I am a Christian Prince borne: I have sought out and propounded the most
Christian means to make up this Estate and reunite the Church. I am a
Frenchman borne, I bear part of your calamities, I have sought all means to
exempt you from civil miseries, I will never spare my life to abridge you of
them: I know that for the most part you are subject to this violence, I
confess your wills to be thralled, I will not impute to you your actions, you
are Frenchmen, I had rather impute unto you your wills: I desire of you all,
who according to your vocatio^s are more subject to bear the mischief, then to
do it, only your vows, wishes and prayers. Pray unto God, my Masters, that
by his judgments he will distinguish those that seek the felicity or mishap
of this estate, all public prosperity or calamity. For my part I take him
to witness that I desire only ye wealth of this Realm and of you al: I take
him for my Judge whether ambition or particular passion has urged or any whit
stirred up my weapons.

From Montauban this first of January. 1586. Your most affectionate and very
good friend Henry.

To my Masters of Paris.
MY Masters, gladly do I write unto you as accoumpting you the mirror or
abstract of this Realm, and yet not to inform you of the equity of my cause
which I know is sufficiently known unto you: but contrariwise to take you to
witness: even you who through the multitude of your good eyes are able to
behold and penetrate deepest into all that have passed in this Estate. Ye wot
what judgment the King has given of the authors of these miseries, what in
your ears he has declared and pronounced them to be: He required your
assistance against them as against public enemies, and that at such time as
his will was perfect and free, before violence had won any thing at his
hands. Whatsoever alteration has since fallen out I know you will impute, not
to his will, but unto force. And in deed I am not ignorant that sone after
being required to furnish the expenses of this war you could well answer
that these troubles were never begone by your advice, and that they that had
begone them were to bear ye charges, and not you: which was such an answer as
you never make in matter concerning the service of the King or wealth of the
Realm. For in such respect never were subjects more liberal then you? But
undoubtedly when you perceive that your money goes not to the reparations, as
aforetime you have been persuaded, but to the destruction of the Realm: when
you clearly see that they request not your Iewelles to supply the ransom of
King Frances or his children, or of a King John, but rather to extinguish the
blood and posterity of France, and to reduce your King to bondage and prison.
I know very well that the King has liked of you therefore, and all good
Frenchmen are therein bound unto you, and especially my self in respect of ye
degree wherein God has ordained me in this Realm and for being (since it has
so pleased him) of the household children. Judge what need you had of this
war: you know that this Estate daily waxed capable more and more of peace.
If any thing were to be altered in matter of Religion, there needed no more
(without any innovation) but the summons of a good Counsel: If in the
government of the Estate, the King would not have refused the ouerture of an
assembly of the Estates. And for preventing these mischiefs, you know that by
express declaration I have submitted my self even by a co^bat to determine
whatsoever these perturbers could perticulerly pretend against me. Those
therefore that refuse such good means are authors of the war, and of an
unnecessary and therefore an unjust war. I who have desired the same and
voluntarily thereto submitted my self do find my self discharged of
whatsoever calamities may ensue, for from lawful means they have taken
pleasure to drive me into extreme extremities, whereby the arms that I have
taken in hand are natural and necessary and so most just. To be brief,
compare my obedience with their rebellion, my patience with their rash
hastiness, my modest dealings with their immodest passions, and with all this,
way with your selves what they are in this Realm and what I am, so will you
conclude that they do me so extreme injury yt there is no Gentleman in this
Realm but would enforce himself, and to whom it were not lawful to have
revenge. I speak this in truth and do conceive the consequences hereof, I
see the innocent must bear it, but still have in your minds that my enemies
are those that have been declared enemies to the King and the Realm, that they
have troubled the quiet peace, called in strangers, procured the rooting out
of the household servant, borrowed the enemies and employed their means, not
to my destruction only, but to the confusion of the whole Estate. Then will
you, my Masters, impute to their offenses all such inconveniences as a just
defense may bring in: you will con them small thanckes for the ensuing
calamities, like as you confess the^ authors and causers of the first: for my
self I shall be sorry for my own mishap that I shall not be able to put away
the universal mischief without some mischiefs. At the least I shall rejoice
in my own integrity who would have redeemed them even with my life, which
evermore I shall accoumpt well bestowed in the preservation of this Estate and
of you all. Now, my Masters, to conclude, I will say unto you, that of you I
do and still will attend whatsoever may and ought to be looked for of true
Frenchmen, and of the rule and example of the French nation, and of me likewise
expect whatsoever may or ought of a French and Christian Prince be expected
concerning the union of the Church, the King my Sovereigns service, the wealth
of the Realm, the relief of the people, and the contentation of all good men.
I beseech God, my Masters, to take pity and compassion of this Realm, and to
grant unto us all god counsel to his glory and our benefit.

From Montauban this first of January. 1586. Your most affectionate and very
good friend. Henry.


