engraving of Saint George, armoured on horseback, killing the dragon with a
lance

THE CONTINVAL FOLlovving of the French king up on the Duke of Parma, the Duke
of Guise, the Duke of Maine, and their Armies. From the seventeenth of April,
until the 20. of the same month. Together with the Honorable attempts of Sir
Roger Williams and his men.

LONDON. Printed by John Wolf, and Edward White, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Gunne.

The continual following of the French king upon the Duke of Parma, the Duke
of Guise, the duke of Maine, and their Armies, from the 17. of April, until
the 20. of the same.
THe 17. of this month the king departed from Angleca velea: understanding
that the Duke of Parma besieged Caw debeck hoping to enclose him there, but
that morning he was advertised of the yielding of that place, and that the Duke
had encamped himself in the plain field one league from Euetote, where he had
en^^e^ched himself. And the Duke of Guyes and Main, with two thousand horse,
and a thousand and two hundred foot at Euetote: Whereupon the king marched
toward them withal his troops in battle ray, and ten pieces of (...) till
within three quarters of a leagu^ of (...), and there causing his army to
stay. He with 500. horse made forward to discover his ennemies order of
encamping: the Duke de Maine showed himself with a thousand horse, thinking to
drive us to retire: but the king charged his men with two troops, and made
them retire into their quarter with dishonor, and the loss of Monsi^r
Countenaw: who was taken prisoner, and did assure the king, that the Duke de
Parma was but newly advertised of his coming, and that he did not think that
the K. durst abide him: which pleased the king very well.

And further he said that the Duke did resolve to give the King battle,
whereunto also the king prepared himself against the morrow, the said next
day, the king seeing that the Enemy came not forward, resolved to take by
force the village of Euetote, and to lodge there in despite of the enemy, or
else to constrain them to fight.

Whereupon he sent out Curaces and Harquebusses upon horssebacke, to observe
what countenance the enemy kept, who as then were coming on with horse and
foot: but perceiving that the king came, with a resolution to charge them,
they retired, shamefully forsaking their quarter and setting fire on it, and
went away in great disorder, until they were come unto the Duke de Parma his
quarter.

The (...) followed them and killed diverse, and took some Gentlemen
prisoners, and amongst the rest, the Baron de la Chastre, the Duke de Maine
was almost taken, his horse being clean out of breath.

In this conflict there wear of them about four score slain: that day we
lodged at Euetote, and the villages beyond, which we had won of the enemy
within three quarters of a League off the Dukes trenches, whereat the D. was
much astonished, and imagined he was betrayed by the French. The xix. day we
offered them many ski^mishes, but the Duke was very cool and would not stir.

The King as well to come by victual himself by saint Vallarie and Diep, as
also to hinder the coming of any to the enemy, removed from Euetote and came
toward Newhauen. After we were lodged, the enemy laid an ambuscado for us,
and sent some of his horsemen to tole us on. Thereupon the king sent for sir
Roger Williams to come unto him with two hundred Muskets, and an hundred and
fifty Pikes, which were presently charged by five Cornets of Spaniards and
Italians, who were so well received, that two of their Coronets were taken.

Some of the Commanders of those horssemen were killed, and many hurt in the
mean time vi. hundred Musketers and Corslets of the enemy, which were also
backed by other companies maintained a hot skirmish with our men, but in the
end the enemy was forced to retire with shame and loss, there were in this
conflict forty English hurt, and eight slain. The king does greatly exalt the
English, and fir Roger Williams for their valor showed at this service, who
have also gotten therein great good spoil and booties of the enemies.

The Gallion of Roane was lately taken by some ships that lie in the river, and
which does also hinder the coming of victual unto the camp.

There was a letter of the Duke, unto the king of Spain intercepted, wherein
he rehearses the misery that he is in, for want of sufficient strength to
meet the king, and his great want of victuals, and the small means he has to
make a good retreat.

He also complains of the duke de Maine and the other french saying, that
they have in a manner betrayed him, and concludes that he cannot retire without
fighting, and hassarding the loss of his army,

He has received a shot in the arm, and is like as his Physician says, to
lose it: for although the hurt of it self be not dangerous, yette by reason of
distemperature and other accidents which commonly follow upon such hurts
they stand in great doubt of it, he is carried in a ^^tter and cannot yet ride
on horsseback. The king is resolved to assail him in his trenches, if he will
not otherwise accept of battle.

We fear nothing but that he will steal away in the night. The king has at
this time 2600. French Curaces, and 800. Harquebushers on horssebacke, besides
three thousand French footmen which are daily expected: he has also sent for
all his garrisons round about him, and the longer the duke does stay, the
more forces the king will have.

FINIS.

