decorative border

The Kings Declaration, Importing a Reuocation of all such Letters for
Ennoblishment, as have not been verified in the Chamber of accountes of
Normandy.

Also of all such as have been granted to such persons as have or yet do bear
arms against his Majesty, and favor Rebels.

Together with an Arrest or decree of the Court of Parliament of Caen,
concerning the residence of Clergy men upon their Cures, and the warrantise of
their Tithes.

Faithfully translated out of French according to the Coppye printed at Caen.

AT LONDON Printed for Edward White, and are to be sold at the little North
door of S. Paul's Church, at the sign of the (...)

The Kings Declaration, importing a rouocation of all such Letters for
Ennoblishment, as have not been verified in the Chamber of account of Normandy,
also of all such as have been granted to such persons as have or yet do bear
arms against his Majesty, and favor the Rebels.
HEnry by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre,
to our trusty and well-beloved, our Officers of accounts, now transferred to
Caen greeting and goodwill.
Whereas the late our most honorable Lo. and Brother upon the necessity of the
affairs of this kingdom, thought good to advance unto the state of
Nobilitye, sundry pezants, some for money, others in recompense of their
service: the general Edicts whereof were directed to our Chambers of accounts,
to the which especially the verification of the said ennoblishments, also of
the money or desert of the gift thereof does appertain, and without the which
verification which is the proper essence of the said ennoblishments, the same
are of no force or value. Notwithstanding some of our Subjects in the said
Court of Normandy, pretending that they have obtained the said Letters of
ennoblishment, which they have not verified before you, do usurp the quality
and priuilidges of Nobility, and some that were subject to tallages, do cause
themselves to be raced out of the role, to the great prejudice of our
treasurye, and such our Subjects as do bear their taxes contrary to all
equitye and reason.

Also of those that have been ennobled or have verrified their Charters after
the form accustomed, some have very ingratefully reuoulted from our service.

We therefore desiring for the wealth of our estate, or the relief of our poor
people, to provide against the fraud and abuse committed in the obtaining of
the said ennoblishments, as well to the detriment of our treasury, as the
unworthiness of those who by surprise rebellion or otherwise, have purchased
the gift thereof: and having referred the matter to the deliberation of our
Counsel, by the advice thereof we have said, declared, and ordained, and do
say, declare, and ordain by these presents, that all and every the said
ennoblishments heretofore by our said predecessor and us granted throughout
our Cuntry or Dutchye of Normandy, which yet are not verified in our said
Chamber of accounts of Normandy to be void or of none effect. Willing and
charging you most expressly to inhibit and in our name to forbid all
purchasers of the same, never to make any use thereof, neither to take or vsurp
the said qualitye or privilege of Nobility: also all our Judges or Officers,
not to receive or tolerate them, until they have been well and duelye
verified in our said Chamber, under pain of transgression of falsehood and
arbitrary amends albeit there should chance to be some that have not been
directed thereto, which as wrested and not duly verified we have and do revoke.

We do moreover forbid our elect and the Controuler in matter of aid and
tallages, every one in his election, that they shall not suffer or permit any
of the said pretended ennobled Persons, that has heretofore contributed to
our tallages, to be rased out of the rules of the same: also that if any have
been so blotted out and raced, our pleasure is, that they shall be put in
again and taxed as before time, under pain that themselves shall answer for
it in their own private name.

Moreover to the end to understand how they have done their duties herein, we
do command them to present unto you the catalogue and roale of such as
pretend them selves to be ennobled in every election, that at the instance of
our Atourney general they may be assigned in our said Chamber, to bring in
their Letters, which if the case so fall out shall be retained as being
obtained by fraud and contrary to the intent of our predecessor and us, or else
in verrification to tax them as you shall think reasonable.

Futhermore, concerning those that vngratefullye have since these Nobles
revolted from our service: we have and do revoke all and every their charters,
graunts that have been made unto them, and all verifications that thereof may
have ensued: and as men for their rebellion deprived and disgraded from all
honor and degree of nobility, our will is that they be set down and made
contributory to our tallages as other Pezants are, or in case they inhabit in
the free towns, they shall not take or attribute to themselves any further state
or privilege then of Pezants, notwithstanding whatsoever their Letters of
grace, either already or hereafter to be purchased at our hands, before the
same have been verified in our said Chambers of accounts.

We do also will and command you to cause these Letters of declaration to be
read, published, registered, printed and sent to all our Seas, auditories, and
other places convenient: also to cause the contents in the same to be
maintained, kept, and observed by Bailifs, Stewards, elect, and others our
Officers and Subjects, and to proceed against the infringers thereof by all due
and reasonable means. For this end we give you full power and authority: for
such is our pleasure.

Given at our Camp at Mante the 29. of June, the year of grace 1591. and of
our reign the 2.
Signed by the King in his counsel Potier, and sealed with the great seal
upon a single labell of yellow wax.

Moreover upon the said Letters it is written, read, published, and registered
in the Chamber of accounts of Normandy, in the hearing and at the request of
the Kings Attorney General in the same, like as is contained in the register
at Caen the 27. of Iulye in the year 1591.

Signed Richer.

THe Chamber having seen the Letters pattents of the Kings declaration, given
at his Camp at Mante the 29. of June last, containing a reuocation of
ennoblishments granted by the said Lord and the late King, not verified in the
said Chamber, until the said verification in the same, albeit there may be
some whose letters have not been directed thereto. Also that concerning such
as vngratefullye have revolted since the late troubles: his Majesty has
likewise revoked their charters and grauntes, together with all the
verrifications that may have ensued, and that as men deprived and for their
rebellion disgraded from all honor and degree of nobility: he wills them to
be reduced and suborned to the tallages as other the Pezants are, or if they
inhabit in any free Towns, they shall not take upon them any other degree
or priuelidge the^ Pezants, notwithstanding whatsoever Letters of grace they
have, or hereafter may obtain of his said Majesty, unless the first
verified in the said Chamber, as more at large is contained in the said letters
pattents. The Kings Attorney general being heard, who has required the
registring of the same, and the whole considered: The Chamber has ordained and
does ordain, that the said Letters of declaration of the 29. of June last,
shall be read, published and registered in the roules thereof. The Vidimus whereof
shall be sent to the Baylifs and their lieuetenants in every Vicounty, also to
the elect of the election of this Province, that there they may likewise be
read and published in their Sea and auditories, withal enioyning the
substitutes of the said Attorney general in every the said ivrisdictions, to
assist the execution of the said Letters, and the said lieuetenants of Bailifs
and the elect, to send within one month into the said Chamber, a roll and
catalogue of such persons as may have prosecuted their letters of ennoblishment
before them, or that manifestly have taken upon them the said title and degree
of nobility, since the year 1574. Together with a summary of their behauiours,
dealinges and residence: also to send the coppies of their letters and charters
obtained by the said ennobled persons and of the arrests of verification
thereof ensuing.

Given the 27. of july. 1591.
Taken out of the Regester of the Chamber of accounts of Normandy.

Signed Richer.

An Arrest or decree of the Court of Parliament of Caen concerning the
residence of Cu rats and Clergy men, upon their Cures, and the warrantise of
their Tithes.
Upon request exhibited by the Kings Attorney general, showing that he
understands that in diverse places and parishes of this province of Normandy,
there are risen sundry Soldiers and other unknown persons in arms, who by
plain force do endeavor to gather and take up the tithes of the said Parishes
(malgre those to whom by right they do appertain) to the great prejudice of
the Clergy, and contrary to the Kings Edicts and decrees: with all requiring
the said Court to grant him commission to inform against the transgressors of
the said Edictes and decrees, as also that the same may be read again and
published even in the Pulpits of the said parishes: likewise in the mean time
that all men may be inhibited and forbidden not to intrude themselves to
disturb the said Clergy, in the receipt of their said titles, under such
penalties as by the said Court shall be thought convenient, na^ely to answer all
charges, damages and interest of the said Clergy and their farmers.

The Court having seen the said request, and given attendance to the Counselor
that made the report, all thoroughly considered. The said Court ministering
Justice upon the peticion of the said Attorney general, has ordained and
enjoined all Curates and Ecclesiastical persons that have cure of Souls, to
be actually resident upon their Cures and Benefices, there to preach and teach
the word of God, and to instruct their Parishioners in their due obedience to
the King, to pray for his person, with the prosperity of his affairs and
estate, to obey and fulfill his Edicts and the decrees and arrests of the said
Court, upon the penaltyes in the same set down. And in so doing the said
Court inbibiteth and forbids all persons of whatsoever estate or calling,
not to intrude themselves directly or indirectly, to molest or hinder the said
Curates or Ecclesiastical persons in the enjoying of their Cures or benefices,
or in the receipt of their Tithes or revenues of the same, under pain of
confiscation of body and goods. And to the end this present decree may be known
to all men, the said Court has ordained that it shall be sent into all the
Baylywicks of this resort, withal enioyning the Bailifs, their Lieuetenants,
and the said Attorney generals substitutes to cause it to be published by sound
of Trumpet in all the accustomed places depending of their jurisdictions,
namely in the Pulpets at the great parochial masses in every Parrish, upon the
Sunday and other solemn feasts, to the end none may be exercised upon any
pretense of ignorance.

Given at Caen in the said Court of Parliament the 7. of August. 1591. Signed
Donnest.

IN the same year 1591. upon Monday the 12. of August at Caen in the presence
of us John Vauquelin Esquir, Counselor to the King and Lieutenant General to
the L. Bailey of Caen, the contents of the arest above mentioned, was read and
published in the audience of the jurisdiction of the said Bailiwick and
persidiall Sea sitting and by us holden. It was also ordained at the petition
of the kings Attorney general, that the same shall be also read and published
with sound of Trumpet, and common proclamation in all the quarters and places
used for Proclamations in the said Town, also that the copies or Vidimus shall
be sent into all other the Vicountyes of this Bayliwick, there to do the like:
also to all the Curates and Vickers of the parish of this Vicounty, to the end
they may read the^ in the Pulpits of their said parishes upon the Sunday, or
other solemn feasts, that none may pretend cause of ignorance: also that to
the same end the said arrest shall be printed.

Likewise all Sergeants are enjoined each within his precinct, to see to the
fulfilling hereof, under the penalties set down therefore to make such dispatch
as may be requisite or necessary thereto.

Given as aforesaid. Signed, Vauquelin de la Serre. Criquet.

THe same day and year the contents above mentioned were read and published in
the quarters and places accustomed to make proclamations in tnis Town of Caen,
by me Simon Berot Sergeant royal of Caen, in the presence of Florimont le Soef
ordinary Trompet of the same town.

Signed. Berot.

FINIS.

