THE ORATION AND DECLARATION OF THE FRENCH KING, HENRY the fourth of that
name, and by the grace of God King of Navarre.

Uttered out of his own mouth, to the Lords and Gentlemen of his Army, before
the City of Paris, the eight day of this present month of August 1590.

LONDON Printed by Richard Field for John B. and are to be sold by Humfrey
Lownes at the West door of Paul's. 1590.

THE ORATION AND DECLAration of the French king, Henry the fourth of that
name, and by the grace of God, King of Navarre.
Uttered out of his own mouth to the Lords and Gentlemen of his army, before
the City of Paris the 8. day of this present month of August. 1590.
MY Lords, I do not doubt, but the most part of you do well remember the
precepts and solemn oaths which my L. the late king deceased (my predecessor)
caused me to make in the presence of you all, for the tranquillity and peace of
this Realm, that day wherein he was hurt, seeing himself near his end. If
you be remembered, among many other matters, he chiefly charged me with this
one principal point, that I should maintain all my subjects in free liberty
to use their conscience in both religions: that is to say, the reformed
religion, and the Romish religion, until that by a general, or national
Council a better resolution might be made thereupon. Insomuch as his Majesty
saw there was no other means to pacify the troubles and dissentions of this
Realm, but that if God had granted him the grace to have reigned longer, he
would have used this ready and singular remedy aforesaid. Thus I tell you my
Lords, and also I pray you to believe that I have nothing in so great care as
to keep all my oaths and vows, which I have already done and shall do
hereafter: and specially this same, for that it is of great importance.

Now I am informed that some of the Nobility of this army do spread abroad
that they cannot do me service, unless I make profession of the Romish
Religion: and thereupon they will forsake mine army. Meaning thereby to try
whether I should be so impudent as to give over and recant that which is
dearest unto me in this world, that is to say, my religion and mine oath.

Therefore (my Lords) at this present I have caused you to be assembled, to the
end I might declare in your presence that I am resolved (and I pray unto God,
rather to take me out of this world, then it should be otherwise) not to vary
nor change in any wise my religion, neither do any thing contrary unto mine
oath, before I be instructed by a holy Council, the which I will heartily
yield unto, and vow to follow the same: wishing nothing more then that such men
should depart from mine army, choosing rather to have one hundred of faithful
Frenchmen on my side, then two hundred of such fained friends: because I am
sure that God is always with them that be godly.

Two causes there be (as I beleuee) that move these men to sow this Darnell:
the one is the oath which they have made long since unto the enemies of this
realm: the other is the small virtue and assurance which do appear in places
of valor and honor. Therefore let not such men be afraid to demand our license
to depart: for I openly declare unto them that they are not so ready to
request it, as I am willing to grant it unto them. Notwithstanding I am very
sorry, that they be no better Frenchmen only for their own profit, and for no
other cause. For although generally at should forsake me (which thing I cannot
believe) I have friends enough at may commandment for to maintain me to their
shame in mine authority. And if all those means should fail me, yet God is
my sure strength and shield: who has accompanied me with his holy and
myraculous blessings from my birth to this present: whereof all ye are
witness. For David never came better into his kingdom of Israel without all
hope and force of men, nor with more labor and peril, then I am come into
this same my kingdom, in such a sort that I confess in very deed that God
has myraculously brought me into it, and established me therein. Moreover if
all man's help should fail me, for to maintain me therein, yet I know, that
the almighty God will never fail me: assuring my self that he has not begun
such a myraculous work for to leave it imperfect, and not only for my sake,
but also for his holy name, and for so many persons that are afflicted in
diverse sorts in this mine own kingdom, who cry for mercy: whom also I
desire to succor: and I do promise as a king to perform it as soon as God
will give me leave.

Let then this company of evil speakers cease, and let them truly believe
that neither this Crown, nor the Empire of all the whole earth were able to
make me change the Religion wherein I have been brought up and instructed
from my mothers pappes, and the which I uphold to be true: and also that I
acknowledge nothing but the only word of God to be my guide and to reform me
to a holy council as I have said heretofore.

All ye, my Lords, do know, that I am a true and natural Frenchman: and I am
such a one as men need not to doubt of me. For my actions in time past may
testify how I have used my self in the behavior of that which I have done
within these sixteen or seventeen years that I have reigned in my kingdom
of Navarre, being a country under mine obedience. It is easy to be judged
what I am, though I have great occasion to feel my self offended for the
wrong done unto me of the enemies of this crown.

Moreover, my Lords, I leave you to think how hard it is for me, being your
king, and leaving yon in liberty for the exercise of your religion, to
forbear, that there should be some among you, yea of the baser sort, who would
endeavor themselves to rule me according to their vain opinion. For this cause
I pray all good men of this assembly and others of this realm to be judges
thereupon. And forasmuch as none can be perfect, I pray you al my Lords, if I
have forgotten any thing concerning my duty, to pray with me unto the Lord
God continually to conduct and assist me hereafter with his holy spirit, for
the increasing of the kingdom of his son Jesus Christ, and for the
entertainment of mine estate, and also for the comfort of mine own subjects.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Richard Field, for I.B. and are to be sold by Humfrey
Lownes at the West door of Paul's.


