A DISCOVRSE TO THE LORDS OF the PARLIAMENT.

AS TOUCHING THE Murder committed upon the person of HENRY the Great, King
of Fr^^^^.

MANIFESTLY PROOVING (...) I^^^^^ to be (...) and principal (...).

TRANSLATED OVT OF French, and (...).

London, Printed by T. P. for (...), and are to be sold (...) S. (...). ^.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable RICHARD (...) of Dorset; and his Noble and virtuous
Lady the Lady ANNE (...) Honor and all happiness^^ Christ.
Right Honorable.
OF Origin, it was usually said amongst the Anciets: where he did well none did
better; where ill, none worse Vbi been, nemo melius: vbi male, nemo peius.
: And of those good Books he wrote, (which were very many) learned Hierom
says, that as in those Books he excelled all others: so Hieron. in praefat in
Orig. Homel. in Caut: inter oper H^^ron. in Tom. 3.
in his Homilies on the Cantickles, he surpast himself. Accordingly (but in
the evil sense which best be^^ts them) may it be said of the Jesuits: that
as in their tricks they have played, and garboiles they have raisde, and
villainies they have commi^^^ in Christ(...) these last fifty years, they have
gone beyond all men: so in their two last exploytes, namely the powder plotte
of England, and the French Kings murder, they have excelled themseluees the
truth whereof is most apparent, whether we respect their Subtilty in
contriuing, and Malice in performing; or their Craft in concealing, and
Impudency in denying both these actions. For, as to the two first, what Nation
ever received such a blow, and was stricken into such amazement; as France in
the death of their great Henry? And what firm and flourishing state in the
world, was ever upon a sudden, covered with such a desolation, as England had,
if blessed Jesus had not confounded the cursed Jesuits plot?

And for the two latter, who knows not that though all Records have registered
them, and most nations of the world proclaimed them the founders and Fathers of
the powder Treason; yet had they not only* contrived to have cast it upon
others, if it had taken effect: but since it miscarryed, have not blushed to
publishe in print Iac. Gretserus in st^gma^e m^senico pa. 41 4 etc.
: that the Jesuits were no way guilty of it, that Garnet was executed not for
it, but only for being a Priest: That he was rackt almost to death to make him
confess himself guilty, but never did: and that Oven his man was plucked in
pieces on the rack, because he would not accuse his Master: whereas the world
knows, Records testify, and thousands live, whose ears and eyes can
witness, all these particulars that ensue:

1 That Garnet the Provincial (with his six names) and other Jesuits were
found guilty of the powder Treason.

2 That Garnet was arraigned and convicted only for that.

3 That he freely and openly confessed both at his trial and his death, he had
never been on the rack in his life.

4 That he confessed (without torture) he knew of the powder plot in confession.

5 That he first denied and forswore this and diverse other matters which he
afterward confessed, and defended the same by aequiuocation.

6 That Oven confessed he killed himself with his own knife, to avoid the rack,
least it should make him confess such things as he had rather dye than
discover.

All these things are as clear as the Noone day, and yet (forsooth) the good
seely innocent Jesuits must not be held guilty of the powder treason: but
what shall we say to this impudency; if it do appear, that not only Garnet
and his English brethren, but all the great Jesuits in the world, were privy
to that plot? what shall we think, if the very case in terminis, (the powder
treason in the particular circumstances) were propounded, debated, and resolved
amongst the Jesuits before it came to pass? what if Garnet was resolved from
the principal Father of the society, that though he knew the particulars of
such a plotte, yet he ought not by any means to reveal it? I for my part
will be but the reporter, let the wise reader judge.

Delrio a great and famous Jesuit, puts d Mart. Delrio: disquis. magic: Tom.
3. lib. 6. ca. 1. sect. 2: etc.
this case not long before the powder treason: A Priest is made privy in
confession, that in such a vault or under such a house such a quantity of
gunpouder is purposely laid, as if it be not removed there is evident danger,
that not only much people, but even the Prince himself are sure to be
murdered. The Jesuits, mooues what the confessor is to do in this case: and
for answer he cannot but confess, that most Doctors hold, he ought with
wisdom and wariness to discover it: but for conclusion he resolves, that the
safer and better opinion is, he ought to conceal it: Whereby (Right Ho:) your
Lordship and all the world may see, that if Garnet did conceal the powder
treason, he did no more then he had the Jesuits resolution aforehand for his
warrant in that case. If then, Garnet were arraigned and condemned only for
being privy to the plot: If it be known to all, that he was privy to it by
confession, and to some that he knew of it otherwise also then by confession:
If he was never on the rack, and therefore never put to confess all he know:
If ^ven his man chose rather to kill himself, then confess all he knew of the
Jesuits in that matter: If the very case of the powder treason (in terminis
terminantibus as the Lawyers say) was debated and resolved aforehand amongst
the Jesuits: If these particulars I say, be true, may any reasonable man make
question any longer, whether the Jesuits be guilty of that plot?

And no more question is there (if all were known) that they were the forgers,
the Authors, and Abbetors of this late disastrous and fearful french murder:
and let them not doubt; but the Author of truth and revenger of all blood (but
especially of his anointed) will unmask them and discover it to the full: they
plot^^d it in hellish darkness, but God will reveals it, and their shame by
it, in the sight of the son and face of all the world.

This little Book (amongst others, which lately Fr^^^^^ has sent us) has
begun this discovery, and Truth will not rest crying to God, till it be so
perfected, that all the world may see it: And seeing Authority judged it fit
and worthy to pass in English to public view, it was held not unfitting in
few words to let the world know, that this Author (tho a stranger) has
spoken (touching the great English Treason) no more then known truth: and
which, if they dare deny it, or any part of it, shall be more particularly
deciphered and averred to their faces, by evidences undeniable, and beyond all
exception: Let them accept the condition when they please, it will be performed
on our parts.

In the mean time (Right Honorable) accept this, and give it reading, as a
Testimony of the love and special respect my heart does owe you: who as I
will ever pray, that you may still honor GOD and your selves, by zeal against
Poperye, and constancye in the Truth: So shall I rejoice by any service I can
perform, to be an instrument of your Confirmation in the same. Till when,
give me leave to be one of those, who will ever honor your Noble and
Religious virtues, and who in all Christian and hearty affection, does vow to
remain

Your Honors servant in Christ, WILLIAM CRASHAVV^.

A RELATION TO the Lords of the Parliament, concerning the death of their KING.
SHall we then loose our King? the most mighty and puissant King that ever
France fostered, that ever Europe contained, for the space of 500. years. The
heart that gave life to the body of this State, even unto the least Artery:
The natural heat, the force and vigor of so many souls, is pierced, is
slain with the accursed knife of a damned Caytife: and shall he for so strange
and inhumane a fact, receive no greater torture or torment, than this base and
ordinary punishment? Shall this be judged a sacrifice sufficient for so
heinous a trespass? Shall this be delivered unto posterity for our shame, and
suffered of us in these our days to our utter ruin and confusion? And you my
Lords of this Parliament, that owe to him Justice, and ought to do your
selves right, are you at a stand? rest you now amazed? you that through the
height of your wisdoms, are able to unfold the most difficult points of
darkest causes, are you now at a stand, and besides your selves in a matter so
clear and evident? You busily enquire after the Authors of this prodigious
bloody blow; and yet you perfectly understand, that the knife was but the
instrument of Ravailac, of Ravailac; set on, induced, and instructed by other:
It was others that put the knife into his hand, and planted the murder in his
heart.

And is it then such a matter for you that are men of such wisdom, gravity,
and experience, to devine, conjecture, nay absolutely to convince who those
Abettors are?

Seeing that all Christendom by general consent concluded, that since the
creation of the world, there has not any sect or society been found more
capable or more culpable in such villainies, than the Jesuits and their
confederates, and do you make a doubt thereof?

Have not Murderers risen again in our days of Christian kings, the remnants
of Sarazin progeny, and race of the Mores, who have written books, erected
schools, wherein they teach the Method there and manner of murdering Kings?
Have they not reduced this monstrous and mischievous practife into an Art, into
a Caball? have they not these many years framed and fashioned men's minds by
their mysteries and meditations, by their consecrations and execrations, to
this end purpose? are they honored for any other exploytes, or magnified for
any other miracles? Your own laws tell and teach us; that he that has once
been convinced of villainy, is ever after presumed to be a bird of the same
feather.

Sithence then their Emanuell in the institution of Confessors, decrees, that
it is lawful to kill their King; that every Clarke may without offense exempt
himself from the subjection of his natural Prince; and further, averreth and
avouches, that he cannot be justly termed a rebel, whatsoever he does, or
in what matter soever he medleth, what shall we think?

John Mariana is yet more bold and broad in John Mariana de institutione
Regio. l. 1. c. 6. and 7.
these businesses, he is more particular and more methodicall in these
affairs; he strideth a step beyond all the rest of his crewand company. He
maintains flatly and plainly, that whosoever has a charge committed unto him
by the society of Jesuits, or from the hand of their Visitor: or under the
command of a few grave and learned persons of that rank; nay, without fear
or danger, attempt and assail the person of his Prince or King, by policy,
treason, or poison; nay he spares not to repeat the diverse sorts and kinds of
poison: as swift, or slow in working, given in drink, or in meats, by
touching of his sacred and anointed body, under a friendly pretense of offering
him some excellent present: or says he, after the manner of the kings of the
Moors; by rubbing his garments, his Chair, his Linen, his Armor, his
Saddle, Stirrops, or Boots.

And further he warranteth, that whosoever shall loose his life in such an
attempt, shall do a thing acceptable with God, and praiseworthy among men:
he shall be (forsooth) a sweet smelling sacrifice in the nosthrils of the
Lord of hoastes.

These Books passed not their Authors with a straight hand, nor were they
composed or compiled by nouices: for the Emanuell (as he says in his preface)
was a work of 40. years forging. The ordinary Manuell of the Father
Confessors. The Author thereof, was among the^ a man of such fanctimony, as for
his pretended Petrus Ribadeneira in his Catalogue. p. 14
holiness, the Virgin Marie (say they) and their good Father Ignatius appeared
unto him at his death. That of John Martana mentioned in the Catalogue of the
books Idem pa. 3. L. 141.
of their society, published by Father Peter Ribadeneira, in the year 1608.
with singular commendation of the Author and his works, as quallified with an
excellent judgment, with admirable learning, with profound Divinity, that he
taught in Rome, in Sicile, and in Paris it self. Both of them imprinted with
Anthenticke privileges, approbations, and solemnities of their superiors: the
first at Antwerpe, the other at Toledo and Maience; But the latter which should
strike the greater stroke, was mostcuriously and cunningly framed, to carry
the greater authority, besides it bore in the forefront greater recommendation;
as the censure and approbation in Spain by Friar Peter of Onna Provincial.

The sufferance to be imprinted given by Stephen Hoieda visitor of the society
of Jesus in the province of Toledo. And consequently the full power and
authority of passing current, was given and granted to this Book by the
Father General of their society, so highly commended by them, Claudius
Aquauina: after approbation, these are his words: By grave and learned
personages of our order.

Can you any longer doubt (my good Lords) when you so evidently see, out of
what forge, and of what temper this metal is? Especially when it is too well
known to you all, what attempts within these 30. years, this sect or society
have made upon the sacred persons and lives of many Kings and Princes of
Christendom, and pre^ailed over some. When that devilish and damnable
gunpowder devise of England rests so fresh in your memories, so bleeding new,
wherein it was purposed that the King, Queen, Prince, the whole Nobility of the
Land, the whole Clergy, Archbishops, Bishops, and others, the chief and
choice of the Commons, infinite numbers of all sorts and qualities; in brief,
the best of the lands estate, without any exception or acceptance of Religion
or the Religious, albeit there were at that present assembled (as all the world
knows) a number of both sorts in that company, should equally without care
had, or regard, or respect made, been miserably and monstrously (by blowing up
the house wherein they were contained) muthered and massacred.

Father Garnet by name their Provincial in England, with all his
equivocations, convinced by his confederates, nay, by his own confession, to be
the Author, Director, and Executor of that thrice horrible actio^, if God of
his singular grace and goodness had not prevented the same: was yet by their
sect and sort only for attempting so devilish and detestable an enterprise,
as to swallow up and utterly devour so worthy an Estate: in stead of a thousand
tortures and torments due unto his desert, open declared and denounced holy,
Canonized amongst their Martires, imprinted, sold, and in sacred terms set
out with this title: By him that is consecrated to posterity.

And can any man yet doubt, that this murdering Society under their
hipocriticall mask, framed this ^^yne, lodged this powder, and were ready to
put fire to their frame? who or what be they that reward thus these
fire-forgers? what are they that crown thus these mischief making Martyrs?
for so they say they are, and for such they set them to sale.

Now, if these be their Martyrs, what kind of ones (I pray you) are their
Angels? But let us wade yet a little deeper, what say you to this, that
Cardinal Bellarmine the Champion and chiefetaine of that sect, their general
Doctor, in an express Treatise written of purpose, extolleth and with great
commendation exalts, the murder that I ames Clement committed upon the
person of King Henry the third: which Mariana dares avouch, did proceed from
the strong hand of the spirit of God, working in the weakness of his body,
who consecrated (as he speaks) that knife to that intent and purpose, being
rubbed over with venomous herbs.

And Rhibadenira, Bec anus, Vaskes, Bonarsius, with many others after him, unto
the book composed by the Jesuits of Paris; Of the just expulsion of Henry
the third, give this Preface: That in a common cause one may lawfully expel,
depose, yea, and slay if need were Henry the fourth.

Tell me I pray you, in the execution of this monstrous controversy, what
devise, what stratageme, what practice was there among all the attempts made
against the life of our King; wherein some Jesuit or other had not a hand, or
was not chief? yea, even in that namely of John Chastell, that stabde the king
in the mouth where you (my Lords) knew, and evidently found, that he was
instructed and induced by Jesuits to strike that stroke.

As first, by the lessons and confessions of that unholy Father John Gueret;
and next, by those execrable positions of Father John Guignard, both whom, you
did condemn for the same their filthy fact, and with them the whole society by
a most solemn decree.

And do you yet stay for further proof? Do you doubt from the same judgment
seat, to deliver the same sentence, and use the same execution upon those that
be guilty of the same crime, of the same murder?

Why, add then this to therest, that the Jesuits being not contented to have
razed your Pyramides set up to leave a memory to the posterity of so inhumane
and unnatural a fact, and therewithal defaced your decree fixed upon the
same; have besides within these few months at Rome censured your decree
against Chastell, and consequently sought to discredit your Sovereign
authority; why then should they not be held for fellow-offenders? that ought
rather above others detest so bloody a fact, and by detestation thereof, show
their inocencie? But they bolster it up, they allow of it, they maintain it;
and all to weaken your justice, under a pretended power of theirs, to have
superiority over all men.

Now, after all this to make up the mess of their mischief, least any thing
should be wanting to the heap of their hellishnes, they have most gloriously
painted forth a Calendar of their suppo, sed Martirs made at Rome, but set to
the show among us, wherein they have appointed several seats for those
faithless Fathers Gueret, and Guignard, Master, teachers, and confessors of
Chastell, and condemned for the same crime.

And why all these? but to confirm and credit the arm and blow of the
traitorous executioner, by exalting the praise and place, of Garnet, Gueret,
and Guignard? and so to confirm the mind of the murderer with this
imaginary comfort, against the slanderous ignominy of the punishment.

And whereas three months after, our king demanded at Rome the reason of
their so censuring his decree, and restoration of the same: you see the blame
was laid upon our France; and whence (I pray you) shall it be said that this
happens? forsooth by reason of that sacred person, so often attempted and
assailed with one and the same comspiracie, with the selfsame snares and
engines, which has been negligentlie looked unto.

But you seek yet more plain and express proof. I would it were so, not so
much for your consciences, as our knowledge.

Are you ignorant, or will you not know, that these pestilent people do train
up for such devilish practices, the most accursed persons that they can find,
who after they have confessed unto them their filthy and abominable lives, as
incests, the sin of Sodom, conuersing with brute beasts, and the like, (for
other manner of men are not fit for their fingring): they presently show them
hell, with their everlasting pains thereof, ready gapping to swallow the^ up:
afterward they promise unto them (but with promise, if they will murder such,
or such a one) to draw them from this devouring gulf, and plant them in
Paradise, at the least among the Angels; threatening them in the mean space,
that if they did not what was enjoined them, they should have hell with out all
redemption or remission for their inheritance, and double torture if they
discovered their confessors.

By these superstitious impressions, and bewitching charms, they are armed and
emboldned against all torture or tormenr whatsoever, and are utterly left
void of any feeling of a good conscience.

And did not that most monstrous mischiefeworker himself deliver enough unto
you, how he was brought to sermons, especially those of the last Aduent, and
Lent, and whose sermons were they? none but the Jesuits, who filled all our
minds with sedition, to incense all the corners of the City, who praised the
tongues of our Curates, if they would have given ear to their alluring words:
for who saw not, that whatsoever they spoke there, were it of the King
himself, it tended to evil purpose.

Did not the same Monster, the same murderer, (whom you found in all other
things blind and blockish enough) in that he intended and executed, show
himself wary and wise enough, furnished at the full to answer all
objections, with distinctions and exceptions requisite for the present matter?
and whence came all this but from that viperous brood that had instructed and
catechized him at the full?

Was he not a small while before the villainy performed, presented unto Father
Abigny? to him he discovered that he had weighty affairs in hand, and showing
him his knife, that had graven upon it a Heart, with a cross underneath to
prosper his wicked work?

Do you take for good payment, or for a mock, that pretended gift of
forgetting confessions, to frustrate your authority? Why (according to the rule
of Mariana, by the council of these grave and learned Fathers, or at the least
by the advice of the Visitor of the Province, was this murderer from his
youth, nourished and nurtured among the Jesuits?

Need you (my Lords) any other ground, to give out your censure and sentence
against this society, against these conspiratours? what else is it that you
want? Have not the same Acts been ratified and multiplied before to our
costs, and grief, for the person of our King?

Do not they tell you, that these Maxims have passed for Law? has not the
like been determined and judged before? are not those Canons and Rules turned
into an habit, nay, into nature? Of a truth, the case of them that pierced the
heart of our King by the hands of Rauaillac, is all one with theirs that stabde
the king in the mouth by the hands of Chastell, whereof they failed asore by
Barriere. They have in time not enboldned only, but secured the hands and
hearts of such as attempt these enterprises, but always under the same
Masters, in the same Schools, and by the same Doctrine. There is therefore not
a pin to choose in this, whether you will have the Jesuits Rauillacs, or
that Rauailac shall become a Jesuit: whether the Jesuits shall be the spirit
of Rauailac, or Rauailac the hand of the Jesuits.

Here (methinkes) I here some say; If it be done of simplicity, I pardon it
and them* but alas these poor souls, to what purpose should they do this?
The king has always showed them good countenance, he has much graced them,
and more benefited them: Lo, Peter Cotton confesses, that he was their
protector, the second founder and father.

Yea, but for all that know, that these black sowles, the tail of this
society, do them what pleasure you please, they will bite at unawares.

This poison (like the Physicians deletories) keep always their venomous
condition and quality, temper it with what you will, or may. The market that
their society aimed at (under a Spanish founder, attaitour and runagate of
Navarre) was indeed the mihgtines and Monarchy of Spain. With the leaven, is
their whole lump of dowe leauened, with this it is seasoned and sowred, break
and choose where you will or please.

France might be given unto them peecemeale; The king in the mean space has
given unto them his own heart: they will be sure to save their own stake,
whatsoever they compass or come by, they reserve that always for Spain.

Will you have this proved unto you? was there ever a greater flatterer,
favorer, I would say of our late king, than this good Father himself who was
late named?

And yet withal we must not forget to represent unto you under this vizard,
his fained reuerences, his deep dissembled humility, his Sirens smiles, tended
to no other end, but the prejudice of the kings reputation, to the hinderance
of the good of his affairs, and to what not that might work his and our
wrack? what letters wrote he, what advise gave he in Spain*

As for the Jesuits of Bordeaux, what did they with the Captains that levied
supplye to the Regiments for the wars of Gleueland? how handled they them
when they were confessed by them? even the same that Father Gonteir dared to
speak in his sermon: That is, that to go against the Catholics, might not be
done with a safe conscience, that every blow that they should strike upon any
of them, struck our Lord Christ to the heart: because they hold none for
Chatholique, but the Catholic king of Spain.

There is none registered in their Catalogue for a Catholic, but such as have
eaten of that Catholicon, that seeks the ruin of the realm wherein they
inhabit.

Let us step yet one step higher. Did not those two Jesuits that followed so
fast after my Lord Marshall of Chatres, at such time as he departed to conduct
the Army, instruct him in a case of conscience?

Did they not tell him flatly, that he was damned if he went forward in his
journey? And if their accustomed impudency would or should deny this, being
avouched and averred, by so weighty, by so grave a witness, were he not
witless that would believe them? Assuredly, they thought by this detestable
devise, to have cut off, and plucked up the purpose of our late king by the
roots.

Yet they see, that our most dread Sovereign and Queen, pursues the same
chase; and is desirous, that in despite of our heavy mishappe, her woorthye and
warre-like Armies shall survive.

Have recourse further unto their accustomed practices, and you shall then
discern them in their lively colors; you shall find them void of all pity,
and piety; Note with what abominable superstition they fill the ears and
minds of such as listen unto them; see how they have cooled or rather utterly
quenched in them, the true worship and reverence of the name of God; how they
seek to lead and guide us by false fears, and vain doubts.

They would not by their good wills, suffer us to strengthen our frontiers
against the forage and force of an enemy; the ftontiers of firm friendship;
They are unwilling we should maintain and defend the ancient friends and
Allies of this, or rather according to the judgment of Vernin, the common
Allies of two Crowns.

This were (if you will give them credit) to make you fighr against the
Gospel, to wage battle against Heaven; And what can we make of this, but
flat heresy? And of this heretical religion, the King of Spain (forsooth)
could be content to accuse and condemn our late king Henry the third, who
was a better Catholic then himself; and that even in his own Realm;
whereupon he studied to remove his place, stirred up mutinies against him,
caused his greatest and most principal Cities to reuolte; and all this must
needs be called Christianity; this makes the Actors, true Catholics; them
that dye in such a war, Martires and their work, a work of supererogation,
not a single merit.

Will you yet have an other proof? Ask of your Jesuits where their
murdering zeal was, then when our late deceased king, King of Navarre, made
war for his Religion, when the Pope excommunicated him, and they like
themselves openly denounced him for an Heretic, and one fallen into Relaps?

It cannot be found in all this time, for the space of fifteen years, but
that they have attempted the taking away of his life, because they hold him as
a mighty instrument to entertain our Civil wars, hoped that he would in
small time consume our forces, and that he and all our whole Estate, should in
the end be buried in the ashes, consumed and confunded.

Well, now they see he has attained the Crown, that he has changed his
Religion to embrace that whereof they so much vaunt, whereof they call themselves
the Pillars, by that means to enjoy the Kingdom quietly, and as they suppose
to become a fearful eyesore to the King of Spain: Now their zeal shows
it self, now their spirits are moved, now they bestirre their wits and busy
their minds, now the whole swarm of that dark dungeon appear in their
liknesse, and scatter themselves abroad in every corner of our Region and
Country.

In such manner, and after such a sort, as it is absolutely seen and known,
that they have sharpened, tempered, and whet their malice, fortified and
redoubled their accustomed and long continued practices and devises; and why
all this, I pray you?

Is it for Religions cause? Why did they not rather then before this, when our
king was excommunicate? when he was by them denounced heretic? why is this
geere now only set abroach, when he is openly of all men declared, and by
their own selves acknowledged and confessed to be a Catholic? And yet for
all this they are not ashamed to warrant us safety against these vnsaciate
murther-moouers, provided that we will continue good Catholics; by this slye
means seeking to change our justly kindled minds, to turn us from the
execution of that just revenge, which they have too iustlye called upon their
own heads.

They preach unto us the bannishing of the Hugonets, against them they arm
themselves with tooth and nail. But certainly, if these Hugonets were
Spaniards, if they would fashion and frame themselves to their intents and
purposes, if they would be but once registered in their red bloody books; I
know then what they would say of them, and how they would deal with them.

They should soon be purged and purified from this crime and heresy, and
with little a do be made perfect Catholics, nay, they should have both
themselves and their Armor sanctified for so sound a service. Well be that so:
in the mean time they importune us, that there ought to be but one Religion in
France. They find it convenient that the Spaniard should make peace with the
Estates, at the charge of the Mass, of our Church, and of the Pope himself;
if their divinity will allow thereof. For you shall never hear them sing
other song, they themselves are the only denouncers of this decree.

Why have our Kings (for the quiet of their Estate) forbidden preaching,
retayning wholye our Religion, and the Pope his authority? And I pray you, why
should this action which ought rather be taken in the better part, be accounted
Catholics in the Spaniard, and Heresy in our Kings? In the end after this
slander, to please us again; they tell us we have now no more Hugonets left
then will serve for a breakfast; those are their own words; and I would those
few might choke them at the first morcell.

What villainies they have before time committed, you have heard; what
mischiefs they have not devised only, but practiced, you have seen with your
eyes; and will you not believe that this comfort which they pretend, this
strange restoratiue that they offer, comes out of the same Apothecaries shop?

Are you not persuaded, that they would, for the accomplishment of their joy,
that the same knife that has slain our head, should smite us at the heart?

Of a surety, these Hugonets (as they term them) never had any thing of hurt
in them that resembles theirs: Yet the time was that we have burnt them, that
we have prosecuted and persecuted them in so strange manner, as that it has
been an horror to our own consciences: and yet in the midst of all their
miseries and our rigours, it was never heard or known, that they so much as
imagined, much less pretended any thing against the lives of their Princes,
either of King Charles, or of King Henry the third. Who has ever accused
them, suspected them, but he has slaundered them? But on the other side,
howsoever we have oppressed them, iniuried them, imprisoned them, or ever so
much abused them; yet when it came to the vpshot that there was any use to be
made of them, that the enemy assaulted or assailed the Land, that the stranger
offered to wrong the Country, have they not been as forward as the best of us
to defend? have they not drawn their swords with ours? nay, have they not
received wounds with us, and lost their blood with ours? By this means (as
every one knows) our Estate stood in safety.

These kind of people that are most ready, then to kill Princes when they most
commend them; that have vowed to wear no weapon, but for the death of a King;
that teach, that murder is the high and ready way to heaven, if any enquire it
at their hands; dare they now adays speak of banishing? especially our
Countrymen, our Neighbors, our Friends, our Fathers our Brothers, our kindred,
nay, our own flesh and blood, that are so ready to run to relieve us in our
dangers.

Do they hold us for so blunt and blockish, as that we cannot see into their
subtlety, who have already (so without all pity and mercy) opened the
Basilike and Cephalicke veins (that I may use the terms of that good Father
Guignard) under pretense to let us blood for the disease of Heresy; that they
go about to cut in pieces both the sinews and Arteries, yea of the
Catholics themselves? for, is it possible (if this course were taken) but
that blood should be shed on both sides, and both parties perish? And all this
notwithstanding, to the heartbreaking of all good Frenchmen, they must have
our hearts and good wills at their command, To them be the impudency, and to
us the shame. Let them come to ask us Rent, after the accounts are cast up,
and the reckoning full made. How full of mysteries they are in all their
dealings, and doings.

And this among the rest is none of the least mysteries, for they think they
have won the game, they take it that they have gotten the goal, that they
have what they would have. Who doubts but that they will take this for a
Trophie, a Trophie or Triumph of their victory, of their magnanimity, but a
badge and cognizance of our simplicity, or to speak more plain, sottishnes?

What cause then have we to comme^d them? what reason to reward or regard them?
Is it because they have slain him, is it because they have murdered him? for
what Chastell has done, they did.

Is it their funeral Orations that you so honor? in the prime and pride of all
their Rethoricke, of all their eloquence, their was hardly one Latin sentence,
or French phraze, that tended to his good that was dead, and for that I pray
you pardon them.

There was never thing heard so cold, so weak, so witless. They were so
choked with the joy of his death, so over ioyed with the glory of his
murder, as that they had quite and clean forgotten the sorrow due to our
common grief, and the praises due to his worthy life.

Wretched thing that it is, to have procured to them such honor, nay, such
pleasure; and unto France such a perpetual reproach, so immortal shame: shall
I ever forget that thou have a hand in this unhappiness? When they chose thee
in their affairs and businesses, as Protector, and Procurer, did thou not
perceive these Hippocrites, the shadows of sanctimonie, how they curtesied and
courted thee, how they sought and solicited thee, at thine vprising, at thy
downe-lying, to the end, that by thy credit against the decree of a most
sovereign Court, a decree pronounced by the bleeding mouth of thy distressed
Master, they might be recalled into France again.

Think thou, that if the Court had given thee never so little encouragement,
it had been fot good, or for evil? for their praise, or for their dispraise?
had it been convenient that they should so strumpet-like, vildely, and
villanously prostitute their shamefastnes to thy shame?

They, whose pride is well known to have no other purpose, but to broke and
buy our ruin, thongh it be valued at the rate of their highest shame, are
they not worthy to be shunned? And among the rest, thou thy self (since thou
art not borne to die for grief) were it not fit that thou should come to
the Court with an halter about thy neck, creeping on thy belly, clad in
sacke-cloth and ashes, to crave of him pardon and Justice? pardon for thy
brutishness, that art so near in fault to a fault so monstrous, in that thou
have presumed upon a favor most unworthily given thee, in causes belonging to
kings, to do against the laws; ignorant and infamous person that thou art:
Justice against those have blindfolded thee, bewitched thee, made thee the
instrument of thy Masters murder, and of such a Master, as from the dunghill
has raised and enritched thee (without any desert of thine) as against all
reason; so beyond measure, and nature. But (my Lords) it may be Peter Cottons
declaration has satisfied you, blot out his suspicions. Put him over to be
examined by our Abbot, by our Clergy men, that can better handle this matter
than you: and yet it were good to have an eye to the maine, in as much as the
case stood otherwise, before my L. Chancellor, according to his gravity and
wisdom corrected it. They are reproached with that famous book of D. John
Mariana, which breaths out nothing else, but poison and slaughter. They make
us believe it is a very badde book.

In our Jesuits Calapine, might not a man (think you) pick out some one word
or other, that may bring this book into detestation? when his own mouth
speaks so maydenly of his own work, what does he leave us to conjecture of
his heart? Thus himself speaks of himself.

This book of mine (says he) is but the slight passage of an evil cut pen;
Is he to be acquitted, to be cleared, for these gallant Metaphors, for these
glozing far-fetcht, borrowed phrases? whereas this execrable doctrine of his
that has passed current without contradiction these seauenteene years,
sauoureth of nothing else but mischief and murder, and that not against mean
men, but the mightiest, it aymeth at nothing, but Kings and Princes?

But says he, what charity, what justice were this, that for one Mariana, the
whole society should suffer? And why not? for it is the whole society that
speaks and offends in Mariana: for it appears by his own mouth, by his
own assertions and attestations, that the grauest and most learned of that sect
and sort have taken a view thereof, the Provincial and Visitor have allowed of
it, the General taken order that it should be imprinted, to have it
acknowledged for a most Autenticke work of that society: what greater
ceremony would they have then this? what other form of confirmation? But let
us farther say, it is not one Mariana alone, that has written of this matter,
of this subject; The Jesuits of all Nations, of all Climates, have practiced
this Apostleshippe, have published this Gospel.

Emanuell Sa: the Portugal; Gabriell Vasques, and Peter Ribadineira Spaniards;
Martin Becanus, and Nicholas Bonarsius, base Almains; John Guignard, and the
Authors of the Apology of Chastell, Frenchman; Robert Bellarmine Italian;
Joseph Creswell Englishman: and many others have executed the self same
practice with joint consent, upon the persons of Kings and Princes, in France,
in England, in the low Countries, and of late memotie in Transiluania, where
there was but one only; so contagious and corrosiue is this poison whersoeuer
it catches hold, wheresoever it seazeth.

Our doleful mischief was known at Prage, at Madrill, at Brucells, before it
came unto us, as the Ambassors ever truly justified: and all this done, by the
most accursed correspondence of that company.

To conclude, let us all iumpe in this which is a thing more then certain,
that whether it be their best Divines, their most authorized Doctors,
Prouincialls, Generals, Cardinals, pretended Martires, or whosoever else of
that rascally rabble, they have all conspired and knotted themselves together,
to no better intent than is already alleged. For as touching any thing that
they can say for themselves, to clear their accursed cause, it is so weak,
so withered, so dark, so double; so spoken in the teeth, so tumbled out; that
there is no one so simple or so senseless, but that he may with ease judge,
that it is the doctrine of Equiuocants, the doctrine of D. Navarre that is
spoken.

But we (say they) in our congregation Provincial held at Paris, requested of
the General of our company, that whosoever had written to the prejudice of the
crown of France, he should be punished, and his book suppressed.

Now note (my good Lords) what has happened fifteen years after, when this
poison had leisure to run throughout all the veins, and let them preduce but
any one if they can, what has been excommunicate or otherwise censured, for
this book, or for any the like?

Or let us our selves remember what Curate we have known solemnly in the
Church, to have but threatened Hell to such a Devil as these Jesuits are? yea,
say you, but there was one censured, true: but why I pray you? forsooth, for
telling tales out of the school; for too openly and too severely publishing
their secrets abroad. And to what end I pray you was this great piece of
service done? surely to as great purpose as that that Rauailac did: to let fall
the knife after he had struck the fatal blow, burn the book after they
had fired their hearts, by the means of all these hell hound spirits of
Europe. But made he not as good a confession of his faith to the Queen?

It is to be seen (says he) in the Council of Constance, etc. What better
thing could he have spoken? Here begins their inchaunting songs. For before
they can draw to an end, all kind of deceit, both in word and work, is
permitted unto them; fraud is the best part of their Religion, and of their
Rules.

It is not good to buy and sell, not convenient to traffic at all, with
Merchants of this mould and metal: And yet are we so mightily blind, that
we make no conscience voluntarily to thrust our selves into their hands, to be
bought and sold by them. Let us a while hear this Cardinal Cardinal Toledo
in his Sacerdotall institution, bo. 4, chap. 21.
Toledo: the first man that Peter Cotton does produce unto us, in his
Sacerdotall Institution. Mark how he instructs his Priests: being (says
he) after an oath taken, demanded his superior to answer to any questions, he
may lawfully use equivocation, and is not bound to answer according to the
will of the Judge, but after his own mind and discretion: yea, if it be in an
offense known unto him, or else committed by him; he may thus shift it off; I
know not, or I did it not; meaning; what I may say or do hereafter.

In like manner Siluanus: It is lawful to use equivocations and doubtful
words, to deceive Si^uanus in his Phillipik. p. 5.
the hearers; when he that demands the question is not your own Superior or
Judge. And of late, they have set it down for a sure groundwoorke and
foundation; that no Clarke is or need be subject to any secular person, no not
to his own natural Prince.

What confidence, what truth or trust, may a man then repose upon their oaths?
upon the deposition of this good Father so much commended?

Gregory of Valence uses the like speeches, Tome 3. disputa. 5. quest. 13.
commended by that faction for a man of excellent learning; well known in
Spame, Italy, and Germany: he, writing upon a book called the Son, names
this science of Equivocation; A prudent defense, practiced by Garnet Prouincial
in England, with a brazen face, and a most irreligious heart; and reduced into
an Art by Doctor Martin Navarre Ciuilian, in a book composed for that purpose:
in favor (for those be his words) of the most excellent society of the
Jesuits.

But will you hear the bewitching songs of these lewd Sirens, before we part
from this Narration? Our Kings (says he) in France be the eldest Children of
the Church: would you not think he had flattered the Queen well, and given
her good words? And yet the Equivocation that bewrays the villainy is
apparent, in that that he says; our Kings in France, and not of France: If
he should have said of France; he feared the King of Spain, least he should
take exceptions at him for his comparison, wherein he seems to prefer the
King of France before all the kings of Christendom.

But in that he says in France, he excludes the comparison, and does
restrain their prerogative within the bounds and Lymits of their own Realm.
And by this drift in the middle of his own native France, he lodges the
heart of Spain.

Thus wont to speak to our late dread king, in recommendation of their
founder Loyola: that he was his subject, which caused the King to think he
had been a French man: And being taken with the manner in his equivocation,
he put it off thus, that he was of Navarre, as being never without a hole to
creep out at.

But he was wary enough for telling him that he was Traitor, both to the King
and the Country, that he defended Pampelune, against the king his Grandfather,
where he was hurt, and in a madness made himself a Monk: and now at last a
Father among us, and very well worthy, for he is the father of many periuries
and murders.

The question is asked, what shall we then do? And do you doubt, all this
considered, what is to be done?

Truly (my Lords) if my council might prevail, you should use them like
Scorpions, kill them, and lay them to their sting and our wounds; but let us
deal a little more mildely. What less can be done, then to execute your
decree with speed and severity? do you think that to condemn them, is to
condemn you? that to show them justice, is to challenge you of injustice?

Or would you have it said (which God defend) that these Monsters increase both
in offense and impudency; and you that are Guardians of this Estate; as though
you had lost your wits, should fail in virtue, and faint in justice?

All Christian Estates have taken their pattern from you, even to the bounds
and borders of all Europe, the Almaines, Hungarians, Venetians, have banished
them their Lands and Territories, as ignoble, unworthy to live under any
honest Laws, under any Civil government; and by express decree in these
prudent seignories, they have determined not to recall them, whatsoever reasons
Rome can allege, whatsoever instance it brings. And yet Rome is very near
Italy, and therefore the sooner likely to be afraid? And this they have done
by a divine providence, by a lively apprehension of what may happen. Is there
any mischief of greater moment, than what they have already committed? Can
there be any thing more monstrous, then what they have already practiced? Is
it possible to give a more vilde name to a villainous practice, then a general
murder, an universal slaughter? And would it not on the other side be
thought very strange, that you should bear so vneauen a balance, weigh things
with such inequality, that your example should make Laws unto other, and not
be observed of your selves? Your laws stand in stead of wholesome precautions,
and preuentions to your neighbors, to those that dwell a far off, to those
that are not so sick, not so diseased as you are; and will you make no use of
them in so present and pressing a business?

Believe it, and look for no other, that if we do dally and delay to cure
or cut off this dangerons sore that now breeds among us; greater and more
grievous pains will follow a fresh.

Would one sore think you be incarnate, would it be closed, seems it ready
to ciccatrize? It is a strange case in every Country, and in every body, saving
in Spain; they have putrified our humor, they have corrupted our blood,
whereof springs Aposthumation, inflammation, fevers, rupture of the flesh;
which the longer it does last, the harder it will be to heal: but on the other
side, purge it once well, clear the ulcer; flesh and blood that we are one of
another, the lips will grow together again, and the hurt will heal alone.

Yea marry, you say well, but to bannish so great a society, for the offense
of one only, were not strange? You say somewhat; yet I must tell you, the
conclusion of your argument hardly agrees with his promises. It is this
society that struck that lucklesse stroke, not he that held the knife: it
was their Council, their doctrine, their coniuration: It is already known and
convinced, in the arrainment and examination of Chastell.

Did the Jews ever commit the like, to destroy a whole race? Or the Templers,
in seeking to banish all others to establish their order? But says another,
what shall become of good Letters? how shall Learning do, which these worthy
men teach so worshipfully? how shall our youth do? If thou be an Ass or an
Idyot, I pardon thee that ask the question.

When they came first into our France, were our Universities a sleep? So many
great personages, so learned, so grave, as have been there brought up fifty
years ago, which have honored all Europe: not their own Country only; were
they of their instruction? followed they their method? As for their Schools
what has ever come out of them, worthy the talking of? Of a truth, if as the
Scottishmen did long ago, under Charles the Great; they should come and call
and cry about the streets, who would buy learning without any further
meaning, without thrusting their sickles into other men's harvests, or without
meddling with other men's matters, they had been to be borne withal, nay they
should have been welcome, even to the best learned. But are we now to learn,
that under the pretense of this good Latin, they fill our children with very
evil French? that under the show of good letters, and wholesome sciences, they
confound our Spirits, and corrupt our souls? See we not how in the end, they
insensibly transform our affections and our wills in this tender age: to
fashion, us and in us by this means in their Colleges, so many Spanish
Collonies, spredde abroad and founded within the bulk of all our blood, as
thereby they alter (through their vilde and base qualities which they imprint
there) all the body of the Realm. So, as to buy Latin and learning at this
rate, it were better we never knew what latin meant, or ever spoke other then
our own language. Yea but be not so superstitious; what man, banish this good
and godly name of Jesus; can you thus without shame and sin, kick against
the holy Mountain? what a number of good devotions, of holy confessions shall
we loose with them? Nay say rather, how many devils how many deu^tes? Antiquity
called the^ deuotes, that vowed their lives for the death of any one, at any
doleful actio^.

What other devotion is there among these, so worthy the noting, as this? But
not to adventure their own lives, they are too careful and cunning in that:
but to persuade and bring others unto it.

Now Sir, whether call you it loss or gains to loose such deuotes? For, as
for any other special mark of holiness, if you look for in them; they will
send you to the Indians; there are their Martires, there are their miracles.
This wretched west-part of the world, is neither capable nor worthy of them.

Among us they can produce no other Martyrs but Chastells, Rauailaks, Fathers,
Garnets, Guignards, Guerets, murderers of Kings: burners of Realms: for their
miracles, they present unto you; seditions, conspiracies, murders, massacres.

Those that among us feed and fill themselves with nothing else, but slain
bodies, and murdered carkafles, shall we be so foolish as to believe, that in
other places they raise the dead, yea, or so much as heal the diseased? And as
touching confession, the chief sinew of their society, or rather of their
coniuration; who knows not, that it is nothing else but a Caball of that old
Mahumetan of the Mountain, used to confirm and resolve those that are his, to
kill christian Princes in the holy Land. They transport their Nouices (casting
them into a sleep with certain drinks) into a certain place, where they not
only see, but taste all the pleasures of their holy Fathers profane Paradise:
to the end (that waking) they may despise the danger and death that they might
run into by killing of Kings; a death whereof when they have tasted, should
bring unto them joy everlasting.

In their confessions such is their craft, (for Satan always profits by
growing old) they draw from all the horrible offenses that ever they have
committed; And that revealed, they plunge them over the head and shoulders in
the horror of that eternal pain, that is allotted for so heavy sins, and
after in their chamber, give them a feeling of heavenly Meditations.

Afterward, when they have thus broken the heads and hearts of them, when
they have thus astonished the^, they propound the^ for remedy of some one
offense, an ordinary murde; of some other sin, the killing of a King at the
least; and so of the rest: which if they will attempt and accomplish, they will
warrant, that it shall not only free him of justly deserved pain; but
besides, according to the nature of that that he shall practice, as upon a
noble man, a Prince, a King; his reward shall proportioned more, or less in
Heaven; As to be an Angel, or Archangell, etc. And thus they furnish with a
consecrated weapon: saying, take the sword of David, of Judith, of S. Peter:
As Soon as they have delivered it unto him, straight they honor him, they admire
him, they worship him. They persuade him that he is already deified, they find
him transfigured, glorified.

Do you not think that they have well enriched the Sarazines invention? This
Mahumetane used this practice of his, but only against his enemies, as he
took them, infidels; but our mercy more careful a great deal then this
infidel, make use thereof only against Christians; they reserve it by a
special privilege for anointed Kings, those especially whom Christendom
calls most Christian among the Catholics. In brief, the pretended wisdom
tells us (I pray God it be not wickedness) that to deal with so great a
body, so mighty a society, cannot be without much danger: And who supposes
his Holiness will make us fear and feel his power? and yet we must needs be
afraid of some hundred or not many more, that are scattered abroad, here, and
there, in our Country? Such as have no part or portion in our Estate, that have
nothing to do with any of our Provinces, Cities, or Families, such as we can
easily root out, without being seen or perceived Shall these hinder you for
doing justice, justice unto our King, justice for so heinous an act? where (my
good Lords) should your ancient virtue become? whom should it meet withal
in his way, in the way of justice to hinder you? Cerberus with his three heads,
should be constrained to creep on his belly (as our King was wont to say) he
would leave to do the justice of God, for the pleasure of men: of that God
which is always able, to strengthen the weakness of man in his affairs.
Assuredly, my Lords, he promises the same aid to you at this day. Nay, the
present necessity, extreamitie, and just dolor, will confirm and redouble
strength in you. But to give the ancient strength and vigor to his Estate,
requires your helping hand; become you first strong and courageous, and they
will soon follow. Let us know by the speedy execution of your decree, what
feeling, what motiou there is in you, let nothing hinder, let nothing stay
that? And do you not repose your selves (my Lords) upon the quaint devises of
these companions, upon their supposes, upon their supports; this voice of
mine is the voice of all France, nay of all the Catholics of this realm. Our
fields, our Towns, our Arts, do redemand at your hands our King, that caused
them to flourish, to flower to prevail, to profit. They all sigh and sob for
this justice. Our Clergy craneth from you their defender, the Nobles their
guide our people their deliverer, our estate their restorer, the soundest part
of Europe their Protector, our French Princes the honor of their blood,
Strangers the Captain of their Ranckes.

There is nothing that can gainesay, or gainestriue this request. These
trickling tears, these secret murmurings, this astonished silence has no
other wish, nor speaks any other speech. To be short, the earth that has
given entertainment to his sacred blood spilt upon a pauement (as the Prophet
speaks) that will never be dry; cries vengeance of the Heavens; The Heavens
receive their voices, and rebound from thence a command of the same revenge.

You cannot better (my Lords) continue and increase the years of our King,
comfort the tears of the Queen, nor better bewail the death of Henry the
Great, moan his sorrowful death, celebrate his obsequies, nor consecrate his
memory to eternity. By this means you shall best continue and defend your
Nobilities and places, you shall be Fathers of your Country, if you will
truly the voice of your Country, and otherwise not, which long may you do and
happily.

FINIS.

