Baleus prolocutor IF profyght may grow, most Christian audye^ce.
By knowledge of things, which are (...),
And here for a time. Of much more (...)
Aduau^tage might spring, by the ser(...)ses heavenly.
As those matters are, that the Gospel specyfye.
Without whose knowledge, no man to the truth (...)
Nor ever atteyne, to the life perpetual.
For he that knows not, the living God eter(...)
The father, the son, and also the holy Ghost,
And what Christ suffered, for redempcyon of us all*
What he commanded, and taught in every coost.
And what he forbode. That man must needs be lost.
And clean secluded, from the faithful chosen sort.
In the heavens above, to his most high dysconfo(...)
You therefore (good fryndes) I louyngel(...) (...)
To way soche matters, as will be uttered h(...)
Of whom ye may love, to have no tryfelin(...)
In fantasyes feigned, nor soche life gaudying,
But the things that shall, your inward stoma(...)
To rejoice in God, for your iustyfycacyon,
And alone in Christ, to hope for your salvation.
Yea, first ye shall have, the eternal generacyon.
Of Christ like as Johan, in his first chapt^^ wryght*
And consequentlye, of man the first creacyon,
The abuse and fall, through his first ouersyght,
And the raise again, through Gods high grace and myg(...)
By promyses first, which shall be declared all,
Then by his own son, the worker pryncypall.
After that Adam, bywayleth here his fall,
God will show mercy, to every generacyon.
And to his kyngedome, of his great goodness call,
His elected spouse, or faithful congregacyon,
(...) shall apere, by open protestacyon,
(...) from Christ's birthe, shall to his death conclude.
(...)ne that thereof, will show the certytude,

Pater coelestis. IN the beginning, before the heavens were create,
In me and of me, was my son se^mpyternall.
With the holy Ghost, in one degree or estate,
Of the high Godhed, to me the father coequall.
(...)his my son was, with me one God essencyall,
^^^hout separacyon, at any time from me.
(...) God he is, of equal dignyte.
(...) the beginning, my son has ever be,
(...)s father, in one essencyall being.
(...)e create, by him in yche degree,
(...) and earth, and have their diverse workynge.
(...) power, was never made any thing,
(...) wrought. But through his ordinance,
(...)e his strength, and whole contynuaunce.
(...) him is the life, and the just recoueraunce,
(...) Adam and his, which naught but death deserved.
And this life to men, is an high perseueraunce,
Or a light of faith, whereby they shall be saved.
And this light shall shine, among the people darkened,
With unfaithfulness: Yet shall they not with him take.
^ut of wyllfull heart, his lyberall grace forsa^e.
Which will compel me, against man for to make,
In my dyspleasure. And send plages of coreccyon,
Most greuouse and sharp, his wanton lusts to slake,
By water and fire, by syckenesse and infeccyon.
Of pestylent sores, molestynge his compleccyon
By troublouse war, by derthe and peynefull fearsenesse,
And after this life, by an extreme heaviness,
I well first begin, with Adam for his lewdenesse,
Which for an apple, neglected my commandment.
He shall continue, in labor for his rashenesse,
His only sweat shall, provide his food and raiment.
Yea, yet must he have, a greatter ponnyshment.
Most terryble death, shall bring him to his end.
To teach him how he, his lord God. shall offend.

Hic praeceps in terram cadit Adamus, ac post quartum uersum denuo resurgit.
Adam primus homo. Merciful father, thy pytiefull grace extend,
To me careful wretch, which have me sore abused.
Thy precept breaking. O lord, I mind to amend,
If thy great goodness, would now have me excused,
Most heavenly maker, let me not be refused,
Nor taste from thy sight, for one pore synnefull cr(...)
Alas I am frail, my whole kind is but slyme*

Pater coelestis. I wott it is so, yet art thu no less faultye,
Tha^ thu haddyst been made, of matter much more worthy,
I gave the reason, and wit to understand,
The good from the evil. And not to take on hand,
Of a braynelesse mind, the thing which I forbad the.

Adam primus homo. Soch heavy fortune, has chefelye chanced me,
For that I was left, to mine own lyberte.

Pater coelestis. Then thu art blameless, and the fault thu layest to me?


Adam primus homo. Nay, all I ascribe, to my own imbecyllyte.
No fault in the lord, but in my infirmyte,
And want of respect, in soche gifts as thu gave me.

Pater coelestis. For that I put the, at thine own lyberte,
Thu ought my goodness, to have in more regard.

Adam primus homo. Avoid it I can not, thu layest it to me so hard.
Lord now I perceive, what power is in man,
And strength of himself, when thy sweet grace is absent.
He must needs but fall, do he the best he can,
And danger himself, as ap^reth euydent.
For I sinned not, so long as thu were present.
But when thu were gone, I fell to sin by and by,
And the dyspleased. Good lord I axe the mercy.

Pater coelestis. Thu shall dye for it, with all thy posteryte.


Adam primus homo. (...) fault good lord, avenge not thy self on me.
(...) but a worm, or a fleshelye vanyte.

Pater coelestis: I say thu shall dye, with thy whole posteryte.


Adam primus homo: Yet mercy sweet lord, if any mercy may be.


Pater coelestis I am immutable, I may change no decre.
Thu shall dye (I say) without any remedy.

Adam primus homo. Yet gracious father, extend to me thy mercy,
And throw not away, the work which thu have create,
To thine own Image, But auert from me thy hate.

Pater coelestis But art thu sorye, from bottom of thy heart?


Adam primus homo. Thy dyspleasure is, to me most heavy smart.


Pater coelestit Than will I tell the, what thu shall stycke unto,
Life to recover, and my good fauer also.

Adam primus homo. Tell it me sweet lord, that I may thereafter go.


Pater coelestis This is my covenant, to the and all thy ofsprynge.
For that thu have been, deceived by the serpent,
I will put hatred, betwixt him for his doing,
And the woman kind. They shall herafter dyssent.
His sede with her sede, shall never have agreement*
Her sede shall press down, his head unto the ground,
Slay his suggestyons, and his whole power confound,
Cleave to this promise, with all thy inward power,
Fyrmelye enclose it, in thy remembrance fast.
Fold it in thy faith, with full hope day and hour,
And thy salvation, it will be at the last.
That sede shall clear the, of all thy wickedness past,
And procure thy peace, with most high grace in my syghe,
Se thu trust to it, and hold not the matter light.

Adam primus homo. Sweet lord the promise, that thy self here has made me,
Of thy mere goodness, and not of my deseruynge,
In my faith I trust, shall so establyshed be,
By help of thy grace, that it shall be remaining,
So long as I shall, have here contynuynge,
And show it I will, to my posteryte,
That they in like case, have thereby felycyte,

Pater coelestis. For a closing up, take yet one sentence with the.


Adam primus homo. At thy pleasure lord, all things might ever be,


Pater coelestis For that my promise, may have the deper effect,
In the faith of the, and all thy generacyon.
Take this sign with it, as a seal thereto connect,
Crepe shall the Serpent, for his abhomynacyon.
The woman shall sorrow, in paynefull propagacyon.
Like as thu shall find, this true in outward workynge.
So think the other, though it be an hydden thing.

Adam primus homo. Incessaunt praysynge, to the most heavenly lord,
For this thy socoure, and vnderserued kyndenesse.
Thu byndest me in heart, thy gracious gifts to record,
And to bear in mind, now after my heaviness,
The brute of thy name, with inward joy and gladness,
Thu dysdaynest not, as well apereth this day,
To fatche to thy fold, thy first sheep going a straye.
Most mighty maker, thu castest not yet away,
Thy synnefull feruaunt, which has done most offense.
It is not thy mind, for ever I should decay,
But thu reseruest me, of thy benyuolence,
And have provided, for me a recompense,
By thy appointment, like as I have received,
In thy strong promise, here openly pronounced,
This goodness dear lord, of me is undeserved,
I so declynynge, from thy first instytucyon,
At so light mocyons. To one that thus has swerued,
What a lord art thu, to give soche retrybucyon?
I damnable wretch, deserved execucyon,
Of terryble death, without all remedy,
And to be put out, of all good memory.
I am enforced, to rejoice here inwardelye,
An ympe though I be, of hell, death, and dampnacyon,
Through my own workynge. For I consydre thy mercy.
And pytiefull mind, for my whole generacyon.
It is thu sweet lord, that workest my salvation,
And my recover. Therefore of a congruence,
From hens thu must have, my heart and obedyence.
Thought I be mortal, by reason of my offense,
And shall dye the death, like as God has appointed.
Of this am I sure, through his high influence,
At a serten day, again to be reuyued.
From ground of my heart, this shall not be removed.
I have it in faith, and therefore I will sing,
This Antheme to him, that my salvation shall bring.

Tunc sonora uoce, prouolutis genibus Antiphonam incipit, O Sapientia, Quam
prosequetur chorus cum organis, eo interim exeunte. Vel sub eodem tono poterit
sic Anglice cantari. Oeternal Sapyence, that procedest from the mouth of
highest, reachynge fourth with a great power from the beg(...)nynge to the
end, with heavenly swetnesse dysposynge a^^ creatures, come now and enstruct
us the true way of thy godly prudence.

Finit Actus primus.
Actus secundus.
Pater coelestis I have been moved, to stryke man dyuerselye,
Sens I left Adam, in this same earthly mansyon.
For whyc he has done, to me dyspleasures many,
And will not amend, his life in any condycyon.
No respect has he, to my word nor monycyon.
But does what him lust, without dyscrete aduysement,
And will in no wise, take mine aduertysement.
Cain has slain Abel, his brother an innocent,
Whose blood from the earth, does call to me for vengeance
My children with mennis, so carnallye consent,
That their vain workynge, is unto me much greuaunce.
Mankind is but flesh, in his whole dallyaunce.
All vice increases, in him contynuallye,
Nothing he regards, to walk unto my glory.
My heart abhors, his wylfull myserye,
His cankred malice, his cursed couetousenesse,
His (...) lecherouse, his vengeable tyranny,
(...) ^^rcyfull mourther, and other ungodliness.
^yll destroy him, for his outragyousnesse.
and not him only, but all that on earth do stere,
^or it repents me, that ever I made them here.

Iustus Noah. Most gentle maker, with his fraylenesse sumwhat bear
Man is thy creature, thy self can not say nay.
Though thu ponnysh him, to put him sumwhat in fear,
His fault to knowledge, yet seek not his decay.
Thu may reclayme him, though he goes now astraye,
And bring him again, of thy abundaunt grace,
To the fold of faith, he acknowlegynge his trespace.

Pater coelestis. Thu know I have given, to him conuenyent space.
With laufull warnynges, yet he amendeth in no place.
The natural law, which I wrote in his heart,
He has outraced, all goodness putting a part,
Of health the covenant, which I to Adam made,
He regards not, but walks a damnable trade,

Iustus Noah. All this is true lord, I can not thy words reprove,
Let his weakness yet, thy merciful goodness move.

Pater coelestis. No weakness is it, but wylfull workynge all,
That reigns in man, through mind dyabolycall.
He shall have therefore, like as he has deserved.

Iustus Noah Lose him not yet lord, though he has depelye swerued,
I know thy mercy, is far above his rudeness,
Being infynyte, as all other things are in the.
His folly therefore, now pardone of thy goodness,
And measure it not, beyond thy godly pytie.
Esteem not his fault, farther than help may be,
But grant him thy grace, as he offends so depelye,
The to remember, and abhorrre his myserye.
Of all goodness lord, remember thy great mercy,
To Adam and Eve, breaking thy first commandment.
Them thu releuedest, with thy sweet promise heavenly,
Synnefull though they were, and their lives neglygent.
I know that mercy, with the is permanent,
And will be ever, so long as the world endure,
Than close not thy hand, from man which is thy creature.
Being thy subject, he is vndreneth thy cure,
Correct him thu may, and so bring him to grace.
All lies in thy hands, to leave or to allure,
Bitter death to give, or grant most suffren solace.
Utterly from man, auerte not then thy face,
But let him sauer, thy sweet benyuolence,
Sumwhat though he feel, thy hand for his offense.

Pater coelestis. My true servant Noah, thy ryghtousnesse does move me,
Sumwhat to reserve, for mannys posteryte.
Though I drown the world, yet will I save the lives,
Of the and thy wife, thy iij. sons and their wives,
And of yche kind two, to maynteyne you herafter.

Iustus Noah. Blessed be thy name, most mighty merciful maker.
With the to dyspute, it were vnconuenyent.

Pater coelestis. Why do thu say so: Be bold to speak thy intent.


Iustus Noah. Shall the other dye, without any remedy?


Pater coelestis. I will drown them all, for their wylfull wicked folly,
That man herafter, thereby may know my power,
And fear to offend, my goodness day and hour.

Iustus Noah. As thy pleasure is, so might it always be,
For my health thu art, and sowles felycyte.

Pater coelestis. After that this floude, have had his ragynge passage,
This shall be to the, my covenant everlasting.
The sees and waters, so far neuermore shall rage,
As all flesh to drown, I will so tempre their workynge.
This sign will I add, also to confirm the thing.
In the clouds above, as a seal or token clear,
For sauegarde of man, my raynebowe shall apere.
Take thu this covenant for an ernest confirmacyon,
Of my former promise, to Adams generacyon.

Iustus Noah. I will blessed lord, with my whole heart and mind.


Pater coelestis. Farewele than just Noah, here leave I the behind.


Iustus Noah. Most mighty maker, ere I from hens depart,
I must give the praise, from the bottom of my heart.
Whom may we thank lord, for our health and salvation?
But thy great mercy and goodness undeserved.
Thy promise in faith, is our iustyfycacyon,
As it was Adams, when his heart therein rested,
And as it was theirs, which therein also trusted.
This faith was grounded, in Adams memory,
And clerelye declared, in Abels innocencye.
Faith in that promise, Old Adam ded iustyfye,
In that promise faith, made Eua to prophecye.
Faith in that promise, proved Abel innocent,
In that promise faith, made Seth full obedyent.
That faith taught Enos, on Gods name first to call,
And made Mathusalah, the oldest man of all.
That faith brought Enoch, to so high exercise,
That God took him up, with him into paradyse,
Of that faith the want, made Cain to hate the good,
And all his ofsprynge, to peryshe in the flood.
Faith in that promise, preserved both me and mine,
So will it all them, which follow the same line.
Not only this gift, thu have given me sweet lord,
But with it also, thine everlasting covenant,
Of truse for ever, thy raynebowe bearing record,
Neuermore to drown, the world by floude inconstaunt,
Making the waters, more peaceable and plesaunt.
Alac I can not, to the give praise condygne,
Yet will I sing here, with heart meke and benygne.

Magna tunc uoce Antiphonam incipit, O oriens splendour, etc, in genua cadens,
Quam chorus prosequetur cum organis, ut supra. Vel Anglice sub eodem tono. O
most orient clerenesse, and light shynynge of the sempiternall bryghtnesse. O
clear sun of justice and heavenly ryghtousnesse, come hither and illumyne
the prisoner, sitting now in the dark prison and shaddowe of eternal death.

Finit actus secundus.
Incipit actus tertius.
Pater coelestis. Mine high dyspleasure, must needs return to man,
Considering the sin, that he does day by day:
For neither kyndenesse, nor extreme handelynge can,
Make him to know me, by any faithful way.
But still in myschefe, he walks to his decay.
If he do not sone, his wickedness consydre,
^t is like doubtless, to perysh all togydre.
In my sight he is, more venym than the spyder
Through soch abuses, as he has exercysed,
From the time of Noah, to this same season hyder.
An uncomely act, without shame Cham commysed,
When he of his father, the secret parts reveled.
In like case Nemrod, against me wrought abusyon
As he raised up, the castle of confusyon,
Ninus has also, and all by the deuyls illusyon,
Through image making, up raised Idolatrye,
Me to dyshonoure. And now in the conclusyon,
The vile Sodomytes, live so unnaturally
That their sin vengeance, axeth contynuallye*
For my couenauntes sake, I will not drown with water.
Yet shall I vysyte, their sins with other matter.

Abraham fidelis. Yet merciful lord, thy gracyousnesse remember,
To Adam and Noah, both in thy word and promise.
And lose not the sowles, of men in so great nombre,
But save thine own work, of thy most dyscrete goodness.
I wore thy mercyes, are plentyfull and endless.
Never can they dye, nor fail, thy self endurynge,
This has faith fixed, fast in my understanding.

Pater coelestis. Abraham my servant, for thy most faithful meaning.
Both thu and thy stock, shall have my plentouse blessing.
Where the unfaithful, under my curse evermore,
For their vain workynge, shall rewe their wickedness sore.

Abraham fidelis. Tell me blessed lord, where will thy great malice light,
My hope is, all flesh, shall not perysh in thy sight?

Pater coelestis. No truly Abraham, thu chauncest upon the right.
The thing I shall do, I will not hyde from the,
Whom I have blessed, for thy true fydelyte.
For I know thu wylt, cause both thy children and servants.
In my ways to walk, and trust unto my couenauntes,
That I may perform, with the my ernest promise.

Abraham fidelis. All that will I do, by assystence of thy goodness.


Pater coelestis. From Sodom and Gomor, the abhomynacyons call,
For my great vengeance, which will upon them fall.
Wild fire and brymstone, shall light upon them all.

Abraham fidelis. Pytiefull maker, though they have kyndled thy furye,
Cast not away yet, the just sort with the ungodly.
Parauenture there may, be fiftye ryghteouse persons,
Within those cities, wylt thu lose them all at ones?
And not spare the place, for those fyftye ryghteouse sake?
Be it far from the, soch rygoure to undertake.
I hope there is not, in the so cruel hardenesse,
As to cast away, the just men with the rechelesse,
And so to destroy, the good with the ungodly.
In the judge of all, be never soche a furye.

Pater coelestis. At Sodom if I, may find just persons fiftye,
The place will I spare, for their sakes verelye.

Abraham fidelis. I take upon me, to speak here in thy presence,
More then become me, lord pardon my negligence.
I am but ashes, and were loathe the to offend.

Pater coelestis. Say fourth good Abraham, for ill do thu non intend.


Abraham fidelis. Happlye there may be, five less in the same nombre.
For their sakes I trust, thu wylt not the rest accombre?

Pater coelestis If I among them, might find but five and fortye
Them would I not lose, for that just cumpanye.

Abraham fidelis. What if the city, may fortye ryghteouse make?


Pater coelestis Then will I pardone it, for those same fortyes sake.


Abraham fidelis. Be not angrye lord, though I speak vndyscretelye.


Pater coelestis Utter thy whole mind, and spare me not hardelye.


Abraham fidelis. Parauenture there may, be thirty found among them.


Pater coelestis May I find thirty, I will nothing do unto them*


Abraham fidelis. I take upon me, to much lord in thy sight?


Pater coelestis. No, no, good Abraham, for I know thy faith is right.


Abraham fidelis. No less I suppose, than twenty can it have?


Pater coelestis. Could I find twenty, that city would I save.


Abraham fidelis. Ones yet will I speak, my mind, and than no more,


Pater coelestis. Spare not to utter, so much as thu have in store.


Abraham fidelis. And what if there might, be x. good creatures found?


Pater coelestis. The rest for their sakes, might so be safe and sound,
And not destroyed, for their abhomynacyon,

Abraham fidelis. O merciful maker, much is thy tolleracyon,
And sufferaunce of sin. I se it now in deed,
Wit save yet of fauer, out of those cities to lead,
Those that be faithful, though their flock be but small.

Pater coelestis. Loath and his howsholde, I will deliver all,
For righteousness sake which is of me and not them.

Abraham fidelis. Great are thy graces, in the generacyon of Sem.


Pater coelestis. Well Abraham well, for thy true faythfulnes,
Now will I give the, my covenant or third promise.
Look thu believe it, as thu couetyst ryghtuousnesse,

Abraham fidelis. Lord so regard me, as I receive it with gladness.


Pater coelestis Of many peoples, the father I will make the,
All generacyons, in thy sede shall be blessed.
As the stars of heaven, so shall thy kynered be,
And by the same sede, the world shall be redressed.
In cyrcumcysyon, shall this thing be expressed,
As in a sure seal, to prove my promise true,
Prynt this in thy faith, and it shall thy soul renew,

Abraham fidelis. I will not one Jot, Lord from thy will dyssent,
But to thy pleasure, be always obedyent,
Thy laws to fullfyll, and most precyouse commandment.

Pater coelestis Farwele Abraham, for hear in place I leave the.


Abraham fidelis. Thanks will I render, like as it shall behoue me.
Everlasting praise, to thy most gloryouse name.
Which sauedyst Ada^, through faith in thy sweet promise,
Of the womannys sede. And now confirmest the same,
In the sede of me. Fosoth great is thy goodness
I can not perceive, but that thy mercy is endless.
To soch as fear the, in every generacyon,
For it endures, without abreuyacyon.
This have I prynted in deep consyderacyon,
No worldly matter, can race it out of mind.
For ones it will be, the fynall restauracyon,
Of Adam and Eve, with other that has synde.
Yea, the sure health, and raise of all mankind.
Help have the faithful, thereof, though they be infect,
They condempnacyon, where as it is reject.
Merciful maker, my crabbed voice dyrect,
That it may break out, in some sweet praise to the,
And suffer me not, thy due lawdes to neglect,
But let me show forth, thy commendacyons fre.
Stop not my wind pypes, but give them lyberte,
To sound to thy name, which is most gracious,
And in it rejoice, with heart melodyouse.

Tunc alta uoce canit Antiphonam, O rex gentium, choro candem prosequente cum
organis, ut prius, Vel Anglice hoc modo, O most mighty governor, of thy
people, and in heart most desired, the hard rock and true corner stone, that
of two makes one, vnynge the Jews with the gentyles in one church, come now
and releue mankind whom thu have fourmed of the vile earth.

Finit actus tertius.
Incipit actus Quartus.
Pater coelestis. Still so increases, the wickedness of man,
That I am moved, with plages him to confound*
His weakness to aid, I do the best I can,
Yet he regards me, no more than does an hounde.
My word and promise, in his faith takes no ground,
He will so long walk, in his own lusts at large,
That naught he shall find, his folly to dyscharge.
Sens Abraham's time, which was my true elect,
Ismael have I found, both wicked, fearce, and cruel,
And Esau in mind, with hateful muther infect,
The sons of Jacob, to lusts unnatural fell,
And into Egypt, ded they their brother sell.
Laban to ydolles, gave faithful reverence,
Dina was corrupt, through Sichems vyolence.
Ruben abused his fathers concubyne,
Judas gate children, of his own daughter in law.
Yea, her in my sight, went after a wicked line,
His sede Onanspylte, his brothers name to withdraw.
Achan lived here, without all godly awe.
And now the children, of Israel abuse my power,
In so vile manner, that they move me every hour.

Moses sanctus. Pacyfye thy wrath, sweet lord I the desire,
As thu art gentle, benygne and pacyent.
Lose not that people, in fearcenesse of thine ire,
For whom thu have showed, soche tokens euydent,
Converting this rod, into a lyuelye serpent,
And the same serpent, into this rod again,
Thy wonderful power, declarynge very plain.
For their sakes also, put Pharao to pain,
By ten diverse plages, as I shall here declare.
By blood, frogs, and lyce, by flies, death, botche, and blayne.
By hayle, by grassoppers, by darkness, and by care.
By a Soden plage, all their first gotten ware,
Thu flewest in one night, for his fearce cruelnesse.
From that thy people, witholde not now thy goodness.

Pater coelestis. I certyfye the, my chosen servant Moses.
That people of mine is full of vnthankefuln(...)

Moses sanctus. Dear lord, I know it, alas yet way their weaken(...)
And bear with their faults, of thy great bounteousnesse.
In a flamynge bushe, having to them respect,
Thu appoyntedest me, their passage to direct.
And through the read see, thy right hand ded us led.
Where Pharaoes host, the floude overwhelmed in deed.
Thu wentest before them, in a shynynge cloud all day,
And in the dark night, in fire thu shewedest their way,
Thu sentest them Manna, from heaven to be their food,
Out of the hard stone, thu gave them water good.
Thu appoyntedest them, a land of milk and honye,
Let them not perysh, for want of thy great mercy,

Pater coelestis. Content they are not, with foul nor yet with fair,
But murmour and grudge, as people in dyspayre,
As I sent Manna, they had it in dysdayne,
Thus of their welfare, they many times complain.
Over Amalech, I gave them the vyctorye.

Moses sanctus. Most gloryouse maker, all that is to thy glory.
Thu sentest them also, a law from heaven above,
And daily shewedest them, many tokens of great love.
The brazen serpent, thu gave them for their healynge,
And Balaams curse, thu turnedest into a blessing.
I hope thu wylt not, dysdayne to help them still,

Pater coelestis I gave them precepts, which they will not fulfill.
Nor yet knowledge me, for their God and good lord,
So do their vile deeds, with their wicked hearts accord,
Whyls thu have talked, with me famylyarlye.
(...) mountain, the space but of days fortye,
(...)ghtes all, they have forgotten clerelye,
(...) are turned, to shameful ydolatrye.
For their God they have, set up a golden calfe.

Moses sanctus. Let me say sumwhat, sweet father in their behalf.


Pater coelestis. I will first conclude, and then say on thy mind,
For that I have found, that people so unkind,
Nor one of them shall, enjoy the promise of me,
For entering the land, but Caleb and Iosue.

Moses sanctus. Thy eternal will, evermore fulfilled be.
For dysobedyence, thu show the sons of Aaron,
The earth swellowed in, both Dathan and Abiron.
The adders ded stynge, other wicked persons else,
In wonderful nombre. Thus have thu ponnyshed rebels.

Pater coelestis. Never will I spare, the cursed inyquyte,
Of ydolatrye, for no cause, thu may trust me.

Moses sanctus. Forgive them yet lord, for this time if it may be.


Pater coelestis. Thynkest thu that I will, so sone change my decre?
No, No, frynde Moses so light thu shall not find me.
I will ponnysh them, all Israel shall it se.

Moses sanctus. I wot, thy people, has wrought abhomynacyon,
Worshyppynge false gods, to thy honors derogacyon,
Yet mercyfullye, thu may upon them look.
And if thu wylt not, thrust me out of thy book.

Pater coelestis. Those great blasphemers, shall out of my book clean,
But thu shall not so, for I know what thu do mean.
Conduct my people, mine Angel shall assyst the,
That sin a^ a day, will not uncorrected be.
And for the true zele, that thu to my people have,
I add this covenant, unto my promyses past.
Raise them up I will, a prophet from among them,
Not onlyke to the, to speak my words unto them,
Who so hears not, that he shall speak in my name,
I will revenge it, to his perpetual shame.
The pass over lamb, will be a token just,
Of this strong covenant. This have I clerelye dyscust,
In my appointment, this hour for your delyueraunce.

Moses sanctus. Never shall this thing, depart from my remembrance.
Laud be for ever, to the most merciful lord,
Which never with drawest, from man thy heavenly comfort.
But from age to age, thy benefytes does record,
What thy goodness is, and has been to his sort.
As we find thy grace, so ought we to report.
And doubtless it is, to us most bounteouse,
Yea, for all our sins, most ripe and plenteouse.
Abraham our father, found the benyuolouse,
So ded good Isaac, in his dystresse among.
To Jacob thu were, a gyde most gracious,
Joseph thu sauedest, from daungerouse deadlye wrong.
Melchisedech and Job, felt thy great goodness strong,
So ded good Sara, rebecca, and fair Rachel,
With Sephora my wife, the daughter of Raguel.
To praise the sweet lord my faith does me compel,
For thy couenauntes sake, wherein rest our salvation.
The sede of promise, all other seeds excel,
For therein remains, our full iustyfycacyon,
From Adam and Noah, in Abraham's generacyon.
That sede procures, Gods mighty grace and power,
For the same seeds sake, I will sing now this hour.

Clara tunc uoce Antiphonam incipit, O Emanuel, quam chorus (ut prius)
prosequetur cum organis, Vel Anglice canat. O high king Emanuel, and our liege lord, the long expectacyon of Gentyles, and the mighty sauer of their
multitude, the health and consolacyon of sinners, come now for to save us, as
our lord and our redemer.

Finit actus Quartus.
Incipit actus quintus.
Pater coelestis. FOr all the fauer, I have showed Israel,
Delyuerynge her, from Pharaoes tyranny,
And geuynge the land fluentem lac and mel,
Yet will she not leave, her old ydolatrye,
Nor know me for God. I abhor her myserye.
Vexed her I have, with battayles and decays,
Still must I plage her, I se non other ways.

David rex pius. Remember yet lord, thy worthy servant Moses,
Walking in thy sight, without rebuke of the.
Both Aaron, Ietro, Eleazar, and Phinees.
Evermore feared, to offend thy mageste.
Much thu acceptedest, thy servant Iosue,
Caleb and Othoniel, sought the with all their heart,
Aioth end Sangar, for thy folk ded their part.
Gedeon and Thola, thy enemies put to smart,
Iayr and Iephte, gave praises to thy name.
These to leave ydolles, thy people ded coart,
Samson the strongest, for his part ded the same.
Samuel and Nathan, thy messages ded proclaim,
What though fearce Pharao, wrough myschef in thy sight?
He was a pagane, lay not that in our sight.
I wot the Beniamytes, abused the ways of right,
So ded Helyes sons, and the sons of Samuel.
Saul in his office, was slothful day and night,
Wicked was Semei, so was Achirophel.
Measure not by them, the faults of Israel,
Whom thu have loved, of long time so inteyrlye,
But of thy great grace, remyt her wicked folly,

Pater coelestis. I can not abide, the vice of ydolatrye*
Though I should suffer, all other vyllanye.
When Iosue was dead, that sort from me ded fall,
To the worshyppynge of Asteroth and Baal,
Full unclean ydolles, and monsters bestyall.

David rex pius. For it they have had, thy ryghteouse ponnyshment.
And for as much as they, ded wyckedly consent,
To the Palestynes, and Chananytes ungodly,
Idolaters taking, to them in matrymonye,
Thu threwest them under, the king of Mesopotamye.
After thu subduedest them, for their Idolatrye.
Eyghtene years to Eglon, the king of Moabytes,
And xx. years to Iabin, the king of Chananytes.
Oppressed they were, vij. years of the Madyanytes,
And xviij. years vexed, of the cruel Ammonytes.
In iii. great battayles, of iij. score thousand and five,
Of this thy people, not one was left alive.
Have mercy now lord, and call them to repentance.

Pater coelestis. So long as they sin, so long shall they have greuau^ce.
David my servant, sumwhat must I say to the,
For that thu latelye, have wrought soch vanyte.

David rex pius. Spare not blessed lord, but say thy pleasure to me.


Pater coelestis. Of late days thu have, mysused Bersabe,
The wife of Vrye, and slain him in the fyelde.

David rex pius. Mercy lord mercy, for doubtless I am defyelde:


Pater coelestis I constytute the, a king over Israel,
And the preserved, from Saul which was thy enemy.
Yea, in my fauer, so much thu dedyst excel.
That of thy enemies, I gave the vyctorye.
Palestynes and Syryanes, to the came trybutarye.
Why have thu then wrought, soch folly in my sight?
Despysynge my word, against all godly right.

David rex pius. I have sinned lord, I besyche the, pardon me.


Pater coelestis. Thu shall not dye David, for this inyquyte,
For thy repentance, But thy son by Bersabe,
Shall dye, for as much, as my name is blasphemed.
Among my enemies, and thu the worse esteemed.
From thy house for this, the sword shall not depart,

David rex pius. I am sorye lord, from the bottom of my heart.


Pater coelestis. To further anger, thu do me yet compel.


David rex pius. For what matter lord? I besyche thy goodness tell.


Pater coelestis. Why dedest thu number, the people of Israel?
Supposest in thy mind, therein thu have done well?

David rex pius. I can not say nay, but I have done vndyscretelye,
To forget thy grace, for a humayne pollycye.

Pater coelestis. Thu shall of these iij. chose which plage thu wylt have,
For that synnefull act, that I thy soul may save.
A scarsenesse vij. years, or else iij. months exyle,
Either for iij. days, the pestylence most vile.
For one thu must have, there is no remedy,

David rex pius. Lord at thy pleasure, for thu art full of mercy,


Pater coelestis. Of a pestylence, then iij. score thousand and ten,
In iij. days shall dye of thy most puysaunt men.

David rex pius. Oh lord, it is I, which have offended thy grace,
Spare them and not me, for I have done the trespace.

Pater coelestis. Though thy sins be great, thy inward hearts co^trycyon.
Does move my stomach, in wonderful condycyon.
I find the a man, according to my heart,
Wherefore this promise, I make the ere I depart.
A fruit there shall come, forth yssuynge from thy body,
Whom I will advance, upon thy seat for ever.
His trone shall become, a seat of heavenly glory,
His worthy scepture, from right will not dysseuer,
His happy kyngedome, of faith, shall perysh never,
Of heaven and of earth, he was author pryncypall,
And will continue, though they do perysh all.
This sign shall thu have, for a token special,
That thu may believe, my words unfeignedly.
Where thu have minded, for my memoryall,
To build a temple, thu shall not fynysh it truly.
But Solomon thy son, shall do that accyon worthy,
In token that Christ, must fynysh every thing,
That I have begun, to my praise everlasting.

David rex pius. Immortal glory, to the, most heavenly king,
For that thu have given, contynuall vyctorye,
To me thy servant, ever sens my anoyntynge,
And also before, by many conquestes worthy,
A bear and lion, I slew through thy strength only,
I slew Golias, which was vj. cubits long.
Against thy enemies, thu made me ever strong.
My fleshlye fraylenesse, made me do deadlye wrong,
And clean to forget, thy laws of righteousness.
And thouh thu vysytedest, my synnefulnesse among,
With pestylent plages, and other unquietness.
Yet never tokest thu, from me the plenteousnesse,
Of thy godly sprete, which thu in me dedyst plant,
I having remorce, thy grace could never want.
For in conclusyon, thy everlasting covenant.
Thu gave unto me, for all my wicked sin.
And have promised here, by protestacyon constaunt,
That one of my sede, shall soch high fortune win,
As never ded man, sens this world ded begin.
By his power he shall, put Satan from his hold,
In rejoice whereof, to sing will I be bold.

Canora uoce tunc incipit Antiphonam, O Adonai, Quam (ut prius) prosequetur
chorus cum organis, Velsic Anglice. O lord God Adonai, and gyde of the
faylhfull house of Israel, which sumtyme aperedest in the flamynge bushe to
Moses, and to him dedest give a law in mount Syna, come now forto redeem us
in the strength of thy right hand.

Finit actus Quintus.
Incipit actus sextus.
Pater coelestis. I Brought up children, from their first infancye,
Which now despyseth, my godly instytucyons.
An ox knows his lord, an ass his masters duty,
But Israel will not, know me nor my condycyons,
Oh froward people, given all to superstycyons.
Unnatural children, expert in blasphemies,
Provoke me to bate, by their ydolatryes.
Take heed to my words, ye tyrauntes of Sodoma,
In vain ye offer, your sacryfyce to me.
Dyscontent I am, with you beasts of Gomorra,
And have no pleasure, when I your offerynges se.
I abhor your fastes, and your solempnyte.
For your tradycyons, my ways ye set a part,
Your works are in vain, I hate them from the heart.

Esaias propheta. Thy city sweet lord, is now become unfaithful,
And her condycyons, are turned up so down.
Her life is unchaste, her acts be very hurtefull,
Her murder and theft, has darkened her renown.
Couetouse rewards, does so their conscience drown,
That the fatherless, they will not help to right,
The poor wydowes cause, come not before their sight,
Thy peceable paths, seek they neither day nor night,
But walk wicked ways, after their fantasye.
Convert their hearts lord, and give them thy true light.
That they may perceive, their customable folly.
Leave them not helpelesse, in so deep myserye,
But call them from it, of thy most special grace,
By thy true prophets, to their sowles health and solace.

Pater coelestis First they had fathers, than had they patryarkes,
Than dukes, than judges, to their gydes and monarkes,
Now have they stowte kings, yet are they wicked still,
And will in no wise, my plesaunt laws fulfill.
Always they apply, to ydolles worshyppynge,
From the vile beggar, to the anointed king.

Esaias Propheta. For that cause thu have, in two divided them,
In Samaria the one, the other in Jerusalem.
The king of Judah, in Jerusalem ded dwell,
And in Samaria, the king of Israel.
Ten of the twelve trybes, bycame Samarytanes,
And the other two, were Hierosolymytanes.
In both these cuntreyes, according to their doings,
Thu permyttedest them, to have most cruel kings.
The first of Judah, was wicked king Roboam,
Of Israel the first, was that cruel Hieroboam.
Abia than followed, and in the other Nadab,
Then Basa, then Hela, then Zambri, Ioram and Achab.
Then Ochosias, then Athalia, then Ioas,
On the other part, was Ioathan and Achas.
To rehearce them all, that have done wretchydlye,
In the sight of the, it were long verelye.

Pater coelestis. For the wicked sin, of filthy ydolatrye,
Which the x, trybes ded, in the land of Samarye,
In space of one day, fifty thousand men I slew,
Three of their cities, also I ouerthrewe.
And left the people, in soch captyuyte,
That in all the world, they wist not whyther tefle.
The other ij. trybes, when they from me went back,
To ydolatrye, I left in the hand of Sesack.
The king of Egypt, which took away their treasure,
Conuayed their cattle, and slew them without measure.
In time of Achas, an hundred thousand and twentye,
Were slain at one time, for their ydolatrye.
Two hundred thousand, from thens were captyue led.
Their goods dyspersed, and they with penurye fed.
Seldom they fail it, but either the Egipcyanes,
Have them in bondage, or else the Assyreanes.
And alone they may, thank their ydolatrye.

Esaias Propheta. Well, yet blessed lord, releue them with thy mercy.
Though they have been ill, by other princes days*
Yet good Ezechias, has taugh them godly ways.
When the prince is good, the people are the better.
And as he is naught, their vices are the greatter.
Heavenly lord therefore, send them the consolacyon,
Which thu have couenaunted, with every generacyon.
Open thu the heavens, and let the lamb come hither,
Which will deliver, thy people all together.
Ye planetes and clouds, cast down your dewes and rain,
That the earth may bear, out helthfull sauer plain.

Pater coelestis May the wife forget, the child of her own body?


Esaias Propheta. Nay that she can not, in any wise verelye.


Pater coelestis No more can I them, which will do my commandments,
But must preserve them, from all inconuenyentes.

Esaias Propheta. Blessed art thu lord, in all thy acts and judgments.


Pater coelestis. Well, Esaias, for this thy fydelyte,
A covenant of health, thu shall have also of me.
For Syons sake now, I will not hold my peace,
And for Jerusalem, to speak will I not cease.
Till that ryghteouse lord, be come as a su^ne beam bright,
And their just sauer, as a lamp extend his light.
A rod shall shut fourth, from the old stock of Iesse,
And a bright blossom, from that rote will arise.
Upon whom always, the sprete of the lord shall be,
The sprete of wisdom, the sprete of heavenly practyse,
And the sprete that will, all godliness deuyse,
Take this for a sign, A maid of Israel,
Shall conceive and bear, that lord Emanuel.

Esaias Propheta. Thy praises condygne, no mortal tunge can tell,
Most worthy maker, and king of heavenly glory.
For all capacytees, thy goodness does excel,
Thy plenteouse graces, no brain can cumpas truly,
No wit can conceive, the greatness of thy mercy,
Declared of late, in David thy true servant,
And now confirmed, in this thy latter covenant.
Of goodness thu made, Solomon of wit most pregnau^t,
Asa and Iosaphat, with good king Ezechias,
In thy sight to do, that was to the right plesaunt.
To quench ydolatrye, thu raysedest up Helias,
Iehu, Hellseus, Micheas, and Abdias.
And Naaman Syrus, thu pourgedest of a leprye,
Thy works wonderful, who can but magnyfye?
Arise Jerusalem, and take faith by and bye,
For the very light, that shall save the, is coming.
The son of the lord, apere will euydentlye,
When he shall resort, se that no Joy be wantynge,
He is thy sauer, and thy life everlasting,
Thy release from sin, and thy whole righteousness.
Help me in this song, to knowledge his great goodness*

Concinna tunc uoce Antiphonam inchoat, O radix less, Quam chorus prosequetur
cum organis. Vel Anglice hoc modo canet. O fruitful rote of Iesse, that shall
be set as a sign among people, against the worldly rulers shall fearcely open
their mouths. Whom the Gentyles shall worshypp as their heavenly lord, come
now for to deliver us, and delay the time no longar.

Finit actus Sextus.
Actus Septimus.
Pater coelestis I Have with fearcenesse, mankind often times corrected.
And again I have, allured him by sweet promise.
I have sent sore plages, when he has me neglected.
And then by and by, most comfortable swetnes.
To win him to grace, both mercy and ryghteousnes.
I have exercysed, yet will he not amend.
Shall I now lose him, or shall I him defend?
In his most myschefe, most high grace will I send.
To overcome him, by favor, if it may be.
With his abusyons, no longar will I contend.
But now accomplysh, my first will and decre.
My word being flesh, from hens shall set him fre.
Him reachynge a way, of perfyght righteousness.
That he shall not need, to perysh in his weakness.

Ioannes baptista. Manasses (lord) is past, which turned from the his heart,
Achas and Amon, have now no more a do.
Iechonias with other, which ded themselves auarte.
From the to ydolles, may now no farther go.
The two false judges, and Bells wicked prestes also.
Phassur and Semeias, with Nabuchodonosore,
Antiochus and Triphon shall the dysplease no more.
Three score years and ten, thy people into Babylon,
Were captyue and thrall, for ydolles worshyppynge.
Jerusalem was lost, and left void of domynyon,
Brent was their temple, so was their other building,
There high prestes were slain, there treasure came to nothing
The strength and bewtye, of thine own heretage,
Thus dedest thu leave then, in miserable bondage.
Often had they warnynges, sumtyme by Ezechiel,
And other prophets, as Esaye and Hieremye,
Sumtyme by Daniel, sumtyme by Ose and Iohel,
By Amos and Abdias, by Jonas and by Sophonye,
By Nahum and Micheas, by Agge and by Zacharye,
By Malachias, and also by Abacuch,
By Olda the wydowe, and by the prophet Baruch.
Remember Josias, which took the abhomynacyon.
From the people then, restorynge thy laws again.
Of Rechab consydre, the faithful generacyon,
Who^ to wine drinking, no fryndshyppe night co^strayne.
Remember Abdemelech, the frynde of truth certain,
Zorobabel the prince, which ded repare the temple,
And Jesus Iosedech, of virtue the exemple,
Consydre Nehemias, and Esdras the good scrybe,
Merciful Tobias and constaunt Mardocheus.
Judith and queen Hester, of the same godly trybe,
Devout Mathathias, and Judas Machabeus.
Have mind of Eleazar, and then Ioannes Hircanus,
Way the ernest faith, of this godly cumpanye,
Though the other clean, fall from thy memory.

Pater coelestis. I will Johan I will, for as I said before,
Rygour and hardenesse, I have now set a part,
Minding from hens fourth, to win man evermore,
By wonderful kyndenesse, to break his stubberne heart,
And change it from sin. For Christ shall suffres make,
In mannys frail nature, for his inyquyte,
This to make open, my massenger shall thu be.

Ioannes baptista. As thy pleasure is, so blessed lord appoint me,
For my health thu art, and my sowles felycyte.

Pater coelestis. Long ere I made the, I the predestynate.
Before thu were borne, I the endued with grace.
In thy mothers womb, were thu sanctyfycate,
By my godly gift, and so confirmed in place,
A Prophet to show, a way before the face,
Of my most dear son, which will come the until,
Apply the apace, thine office to fulfill.
Preach to the people, rebukynge their negligence,
Doppe them in water, they knowledgynge their offense.
And say unto them. The kyngedome of God does cum.

Ioannes Baptista. Unmeet lord I am, Quia puer ego sum.
An other than that, Alac I have no science,
Fyt for that office, neither yet clean eloquence.

Pater coelestis. Thu shall not say so, for I have given the grace,
Eloquence and age, to speak in the desert place,
Thu must do therefore, as I shall the advise,
My appointed pleasure, fourth utter in any wise.
My strong mighty words, put I into thy mouth,
Spare not by speak them, to east, west, north and southe.
Hic extendens dominus manum, labia Ioannis digito tan get, ac ori imponet
auream linguam. Go now thy way fourth, I shall the never fail.
The sprete of Helias, have I given the alredye.
Persuade the people, that they their sins bywayle.
And if they repent, their customable folly,
Long shall it not be, ere they have remedy.
Open thu their hearts, tell them their health is coming.
As a voice in desert, se thu declare the thing.
I promise the sure, thu shall was he him among them,
In Iordane a floude, not far from Jerusalem.

Ioannes Baptista. Show me yet good lord, whereby shall I know that man.
In the multitude, which will resort to Jordan?

Pater coelestis. In thy mothers womb, of him had thu cognycyon.


Ioannes Baptista. Yea, that was in sprete, I would now know his person.


Pater coelestis. Have thu no fear Johan, him shall thu know full well.
And one special token, before will I the tell.
Super quem uideris spiritum descendentem and manentem
Super eum, hic est qui baptizat spiritu sancto
Among all other, whom thu shall baptyse there.
Upon whom thu seyst, the holy Ghost descend,
In shappe of a dove, resting upon his shuldere.
Hold him for the same, that shall the world amend.
By baptym of sprete, and also to man extend,
Most special grace. For he must repare his fall,
Restorynge again, the justice orygynall.
Take now thy iournaye, and do as I the advise,
First preach repentance, and than the people baptyse.

Ioannes baptista. High honor, worshypp, and glory be unto the.
My God eternal, and patron of all puryte.
Repent good people, for sins that now are past,
The kyngedome of heaven, is at hand very nigh.
The promised light, to you approaches fast,
Have faith, and apply, now to receive him boldelye.
I am not the light, but to bear testymonye,
Of him, am I sent, that all men may believe,
That his blood he will, for their redemptyon give.
He is soch a light, as all men does illumyne,
That ever were here, or shall be after this.
All the world he made, by his mighty power deuyne,
And yet that rude world, will not know what he is.
His own he entering, is not regarded of his.
They that receive him, are Gods true children plain,
In sprete regenerate and all grace shall attain.
Many do reckon, that I Johan Baptyst am he.
Deceived are they, and that will apere in space.
Though he come after, yet was he long before me,
We are weak vessels, he is the well of grace,
Of his great goodness, all that we have we purchase.
By him are we like, to have a better increes,
Than ever we had, by the law of Moses.
In Moses hard law, we had not else but darkness,
Figure and shaddowe. All was not else but night,
Ponnyshment for sin, much rygour, pain and roughnes,
An high change is there, where all is turned to light,
Grace and remyssyon, anon will shine full bright.
Never man lived, that ever se God before,
Which now in our kind, mannys ruin will restore.
Help me to give thanks, to that lord evermore,
Which am unto Christ, a cryars voice in the desert,
To prepare the paths, and high ways him before,
For his delyght is, on the poor simple heart.
That innocent lamb, from soch will never depart,
As will faythfullye, receive him with good mind.
Let our voice then sound, in some sweet musycall kind.

Resona tunc uoce Antiphonam incipit, O clauis David, Quam prosequetur chorus
cum organis, ut prius. Vel in Anglico sermon sic. O perfyght keye of David,
and high scepture of the kyndred of Jacob, which openest and no man speareth,
thu spearest and no man opens, come and deliver thy servant (...) kind
bound, in prison sitting in the darkness of (...) and bitter dampnacyon.

Baleus Prolocutor.
THe matters are soch, that we have uttered here,
As ought not to slide, from your memoryall.
For they have opened, soch confortable gere,
As is to the health, of this kind universal,
Graces of the lord, and promyses lyberall,
Which he has given, to man for every age,
To knytt him to Christ, and so clear him of bondage.
As Saint Paul does write, unto the Corinthes plain,
Our fore fathers were, under the cloud of darkness,
And unto Christ's days, ded in the shaddowe remain.
Yet were they not left, for of him they had promise,
All they received, one spirytuall fedynge doubtless,
They drunk of the rock, which them to life refreshed,
For one saving health, in Christ, all they confessed.
In the woman's sede, was Adam first iustyfyed,
So was faytfull Noah, so was just Abraham.
The faith in that sede, in Moses fourth multyplyed,
Like wise in David, and Esaye, that after came.
And in Johan Baptyst, which showed the very lame.
Though they se a far, yet all they had one justice,
One Mass (as they call it) and in Christ one sacryfyce,
A man can not here, to Good do better service,
Than on this to ground, his faith and understanding.
For all the worlds sin, alone Christ paid the price,
In his only death, was mannys life always resting,
And not in will wor^^, nor yet in mennys deseruynge.
The light of our faith, make this thyng^ euydent,
And not the practyse of other experiment.
Where is now fre will, whom the hypocryte a comment.
Whereby they report, they may at their own pleasure,
Do good of themselves, though grace and faith be absent.
And have good intentes their madness with to measure.
The will of the flesh, is proved here small treasure,
And so is mannys will, for the grace of God does all.
More of this matter, conclude herafter we shall
Thus ends this Tragedy or interlude manyfestynge the chief promyses of God
unto Man by all ages in the old law, from the fall of Adam, to the
incarnacyon of the lord Jesus Christ. Compyled by Johan Bale. Anno domini, M.
D. XXXVIII.


