AN ABSTRACT of the proceedings of the French King.

The defeating of the Duke of Parmas Forces.

The preparation of his Majesty for the reducing of his towns in Normandy.

The request of the Leaguers of Roane to the Governor of Diep. And the woeful
estate of the City of PARIS.

Written by a French Gentleman to his friend.



LONDON Printed for VV. Wright. 1590.

A BRIEF Abstract of the late particular proceedings of the French King in
France.
THe care of affairs in absence (my most assured friend) binds me to
remember with no fmal thanks your great kindness. Your Letters dated the 11. of
Nou^mber I receued, whereby I am as fully satisfied of those doubts, which for
a time kept me (as it were) from my native home* as if my self in presence had
taken all pains for their dispatch, being in all things comforted, were it
not I want your comfortable presence. But to be brief, I will, as you earnestly
request in few words express the present estate of the arraires of our (...)
Christian King ^^ere (...) (...) sundry espials as by many other (...) that the
greatest part ^^ the Duke of (...)are by the Kings power defeated, and all his
baggage or the greater part thereof lost: whereby the Leaguers, who ^ep^^ed on
them on ^^ the pillar of their weal, are dismayed with the weary expectation
of their vain hope, which is now turned to despair, the Duke himself being
withdrawn to Bruxils.

Also it is most certain, that the Kings majesty's forces do forthwith come
down into Normandy, to reduce those places which stand for the disloiall
Leaguers. His Majesty meaning to begin at those little Towns which stand
between Roane and New-hauen, from whence no succor can come unto Roane, as
they have expected.

Also, those of Roane since the defeat of the Duke of Parmaes forces, have
been at Diep, and required to have liberty for all those women and children
that are under the age of sixteen yeexes, whose parents and husbands were
withdrawn into places of force, leaving their dwellinges desolate, to return
to their pos(...) (...), to manure their ground, repair their houseswhich
they have been compelled to dispearse abroad among their friends where they
have thought good, for the safeguard thereof* (...) which the Governor will not
make answare, until the Kings majesty's pleasure be therein f^^ther known.

Lastly and briefly, there is great lykelyhood that the kings Majesty will
shortly chase and drive away all his enemies, and not seek, as they have
presumptuouslie boasted, to conclude any peace with them. But when we do
consider the assured resolution of the kings majesty, builded upon a firm
perseverance in undoubted faith, his right, and the never changing promise of
Almighty God, who has promised to race out the remembrance of such as lay
violent hands on his anointed. We have no doubt, but dare boldly affirm,
and will hourly expect the dounfall of those degenerate monsters, who having
builded on the weak sand of man's power and invention, shall not be able to
endure the breath of the Lords wrath, but be swallowed with Corah in the
swelling surges of their own abominations, and their Arch-counsellers the
reward of Achitophell: their ringleader the end of Absalom: which the Lord
at his good will and pleasure will bring to pass.

It is also most certain that Paris is become abandoned; her beauteous
habitations being either ^ ^

Thus have I truly satisfied you concerning the French Kings proceedings, and
the success of his emies, I have sent you that whereof I am assured, and you
may boldly affirm^.

FINI^.

