THE COPY OF THE Pblication of the trewse made between the most Cristien King
Henry second of that name The Emperor: and the King of Ingland his son
published at roan on thursday the xx. day of Februarry.
Translated out of French into inglishe.

DIEV ET MON DROIT

To the readers.
Sythens these wars so heard and durats
Is now ceased between princes and Kings
Let us pray to our lord Immaculate
To grant us peace in eternal things.
That we may taste of his blessed well springes
which is free for them that does it crave.
For he says ask, and gratis ye shall have.
IT is to be understand that all good sewer: treue and loyal trewse
communicatiue and merchant estat: abstinence of war and cessation of arms is
established: accorded: agreed and paste: between the most excellent and puissant
Princes: the King our sovereign Lord: the Emperor Charles the fyfte of that
name: and Philip his son King of England their heris: successors: Royalmes:
countries: lands and seigneuries what so ever they be: as well on this side the
mounteynes as be yonde: for the term and space of five years next ensuyng: to
begin on the fyfte day of February: the which trewse our said sovereign
King wills and commands this to be inuiolatly observed and kept: and that
al contradictours and geyne sayers to be chastised and examplairely punyshed as
infractors and brekers of the treuse and peace: and also the subjects on the one
side and of the other: to go: comme: seiourne traffic: by and sell in all
places as well from the Occident as Orient: by sea: land: and fresh waters:
saufly and franckly: payinge always the duties and subsydes dew and
accoustomed: as in time of good and entier peace: with out co^tradiction or
empechement.

Made at Bloyes the xiii. day of February in the year of our Lord. M. D. L.
V. Signed by Henry the French King.

PVblished at Roan (folowinge the kings letters and commandments) by the
ordounance of that noble man Maistre Iacques Breuedent one of the Kings
counsel and Lieutenant general Civil at the Bailliage of Roan: by Master
william Fautrell Greffier to the said Bailly: accompagned with the Cinquantaine
of the said town: and with a great nombre of Sergentes of the same all being
on horsbacke: the said publicatio^ was made in all streets of the same Town and
places accoustumed to make semblable proclamations: and likewise on all the
Keys and warfes of the same: with.xii. trompettes: and xii. drommes and
phiffres. Also it was commanded that fyers of joy should be made: which has been don with great joy and gladness of all the enhabitants of the same. On
thursdaye the.xx. day of Februarye. M. D. L. V.

God save the King and Queen.

