A Postill, or Exposition of the Gospels that are usually re^ in the churches
of God, upon the, Sundays and Feast days of Sai^^s. Written by Nicholas
Heming^^ Dane, a (...) the ^^spell, in the University of Ha^nie. And
translated into English by Arthur Golding.

(...) of the same (...) the Ministers of (...) the continual agreement of
(...) the doctrine and true worshipping of God* least any being offended at the
variety of opinion^ (...) of sects, might either forsake their profession, or
do their duty more slouth^^^ly.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Lucas Harrison and George Bishop.

TO THE RIGHT honorable Sr. Walter Myldmay Knight, Chau^celour of the Queens
Majesty's Court of Eschequer, and one of her highness most honorable privy
Counsel, Arthur Golding wishes health and prosperity, with full perfection of
all Chrystian knowledge and Godliness.
IT is, and always has bin the custom of godly and well disposed Writers,
too employ their time and travail too the maintenance of virtue and
Godliness, and too the furtherance of such as are willing for too learn.
Which thing appears by the manyfolde works of such as in times paste, too
their own great pains and our ease, have searched out, not only the grounds
of those things that natural reason is able too reach unto, but also the
mysteries of such matters as have need of the light and secret woorking of a
higher and more divine power, than reason is. Whereby they have left unto us,
a plain and pleasant pathway, unto all knoweledge and understanding: and the
nearer that every of them approaches unto the truth, the greater commendation
doothe he deserve too have and the greater profit yields he too his Reader.
But neither is there any certeintie in mortal men's works, so long as they
speak but of their own. Neither is there any assured truth too be found,
elsewhere than in the word of GOD. Wherefore like as Gods word is the
fountain of truth, the keye of knoweledge, and the lantern of light, or
rather the very truth, knoweledge, and light it self: So is chief (or rather
only) account too be made of their authority and doctrine, which
understanding the same arighte, do set it forth purely and sincerely,
either by preaching or writing, too the behoof and commodity of others, For
the scripture accounted him a leude servant, that hid his Talent in the
ground, and occupied it not. And certain it is, that he has the true
understanding and sense of the Scripture, whose interpretation being always
one without varyablenesse, agrees with the grounds of our faith, with the
meaning of the holy Ghost uttered in the whole body of the Bible, and with
the uniform judgment and opinion of the Primative Church. Of such teachers
has GOD at all times raised up some, and in these days has given many too
his Church: which laboring like good woorkemen in the Lords Vineyarde,
endeuer for too cut up the Brambles and Briars of Ignorance, Error,
Hypocrisy, and Superstition, now long time rooted in the hearts of
Christians, and in stead of them too plant ageine true knoweledge, fear of
GOD, holiness, and religion, unto the advancement of Gods glory and
enlarging of Christ's kingdom, and too the utter overthrow of Antichryste,
and Satan's tyranny. Such a one is the author of this present work,
Nicholas Heminge a Mynister of Gods word in the University of Hafnia in
Denmark, who wrate this Postill in Latin, for the help and furtheraunce of
his fellow Mynisters. Wherein he opening the Gospelles after the manner of our
Prophecyings, sets forth a Confirmation of the Articles of our belief:
and confuteth the chief errors, heresies, and abuses wherewith the Church is
troubled. Ageine, he teaches the right use of Christ's Gospel and
Sacraments, and shows the fruit of the miracles and examples of Christ, and
of all holy men.

Moreover he touches the duties of all Estates, from the Magistrate, too the
poor afflicted outcast among men, and declares the right use of things
indifferent. Finally he instructs the minister, and comprehends the whole
sum of Christian life and doctrine. And these things does he, both breefly,
plainly, distinctly and orderly, which are great helps of remembrance: And
also aptly, fully, pithely and learnedly, which are great furtherances too
instruction. As for the Doctrine that he teaches, it is sound and wholesome: in
which respect he deserves credit and estimation. Besides this, he applies
himself too the capacity and edifying of the simple and weaker sort, whom
he rather dieteth with sweet milk, than combereth with strong meats. And in
this respect, he does (as it were) glaunce over certain points of deep
mystery, leaving them too the consideration of such as are more profounde in
knowledge and understanding, and grown too more perfection and ripeness in
Christ. Yet wants he not whereby the wyser and stronger sort also may be
furthered. For he has diverse words that carry the effect of whole sentences:
and sentences that contain large matters. By both which, he oftentimes gives
incling of more too be gathered, than is openly expressed: and so does he
both sharpen the wit, and open the understanding. Therefore at such time as
Lucas Harison and George Bishop Stacioners, men well minded toward godliness
and true Religion, taking upon them too Imprint this woork at their proper
charges, requested me too put the same intoo English, I willingly agreed too
their godly desire: both for that I hoped it might be a furtherance and help
too the simple and unlearned sort of our ministers in England, (of whom would
God the knowledge were as great as is their number): And also for that I
thought it a meet occasion whereby I might testify my duetyfull good will
toward your honor, for your great goodness extended unto me at the
commendation of your dear freende and my special well willer Sir Thomas
Smith. To whom I think my self in many respects greatly beholding: and yet
in no one respect more, than for procuring me an entrance intoo your
honorable favor. The continuance whereof (God willing) I shall not cease too
seek by all ways and means of duty: of which I beseech you too accept
this Book as a first hansel, and to suffer this my travel so necessary and
behooffull, too pass forth under your favorable protection, to the profit of
our common country, and the glory of GOD.

Written at London, the.xij. of October. ANNO. 1569.
Too all the servant of God, and Ministers of Jesus Christ, his dear beloved
brethren in Christ, within the famous Realms of Denmark and Norvvey, Nicholas
Heminge Minister of the Gospel in the university of Hafnie, wishes grace,
mercy and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
IT is very behooueful (right dear beloved brethren) too mark the continual
consent of Christ's Catholic Church, in the doctrine and true service of God:
specially in this most great variety of opinions, which makes many, (and
those not of the woorst sort) too be troubled in their minds, douting with
what company they may ioyn themselves in fellowship. For while some boast of one
master and some of another, glorying of his wisdom and godliness, not without
contempt of others, whom they outface with their lofty looks: it comes to
pass that according as they perceive any man affectioned toward them to hold
with them or against them, so they with blind judgment commend or discommende
his doctrine and Religion. Heereuppon grow hartburnings, froward suspicions,
hatred, fallings out, and desire of revenge: wherthrough all things are turned
vpsidedowne. And from hence (to pass over other things with silence) springs
a double pleasure. For both the enemies of the Gospel are boldned in their
stubbornness and ungodliness: and also the weaker and vnskilfuller sort, which
erst were more forward in embracing of the truth, are not a little trobled,
wavering and uncertain, too whether part they were best too join themselves*
Among whom, not a few (as though nothing certain could be taught or determined
of all the whole Religion) begin too dout, not only of all the parts of it, but
also of all manner of Religions. In this case it is our duty (my dear
brethren) too succor the weak both with our Prayers and aduertisements, that
they stumble not at this huge heap and dunghill of opinions, and so fall
headlong intoo certain destruction. The best remedy for this mischief, is to
mark the continual consent of the Catholic church, in Doctrine and in the
true service of God. For as there is but one God: so is there also but one
everlasting, steadfast, and infallible truth of God, one true religion, one
faith: one rule whereby to live well, and one Church of Christ, which only
knows the true manner how too serve God aright. He that is not a Citizen of
this Church, is fallen from grace and salvation, though he boast himself too
have never so great masters. Contrariwise he that in this Church woorshippeth
God in spirit and truth* is the heir of grace and salvation, though he had but
a Cowherd too his master or teacher. For this matter hangs not upon the
worthiness or unworthiness of man, but upon the mastership of Christ's
spirit, whose will is, that his pure and vncorrupt word should be our rule of
life and salvation. In the which word and woorshipping taught in the word,
there has bin a most sound and perfect consent of all the holy Patriarchs
before the flud and after the flud: of the Prophets and Apostles: yea and of al
godly men. Whose doctrine and manner of worshipping if we hold aright, we may
lawfully glory in Christ, that we are Citizens of the Church of Jesus
Christ, although the whole world hated us, and abhorred us as Heretics. I
meene therefore (brethren) too say somewhat concerning this contynuall
agreement, too the intent we may be assured in our selves, whither we be in
that consent of the Catholic Church, or not, or whither our adversaries be
in it, who making great^ braggs of their masters (whom they call fathers)
endeuer with sword and fire too stop the course of the doctrine of the Prophets
and Apostles. In the handling of this matter, many things surely do meet,
which all ame as it were at this one mark. For of necessity it must come
here in question, from whence true religion has his beginning, and what
assurance is thereof: how great has bin the consent of the church in the same
doctrine through all ages: by what sleights Satan is wont too assault the
true religion: and finally what aduisednesse the Godly ought too use against
the treasons and crafts of Satan: least (as our first parents did) we suffer
our selves too be led with fair words, from the fountains of salvation, too
the Devils puddles, that is, too men's traditions and wilworshippings.

We should not need to show from whence true religion has his beginning, but
that the rage of men and feends, both has bin in old time, and is at this
day so great, that they durst set up new religions, after the blind
imagination of their own brayn, maynteyning them with swoorde and fire, and
persecuting that Religion, which is only of God: that they may fulfill the
prophecy which was spoken of the serpents seed that should byte the heel of
the womans seed. But much more rightly than these, judged that heathen man
Socrates, who being demanded in Xenophon, which was the true religion:
answered: It was that which God himself had appointed* For in as much as the
Lord says plainly by his Prophet, that he abhors the doctrines and
worshippings of men: Let us be out of all doubt, that the true and continual
abiding Religion, has his beginning from the everlasting God himself. Apollo
Pithius being asked of the Atheniens what religions they should chiefly
follow, answered, those that their auncetors had used. When they objected ageyn,
that the custom of their auncetours had oftentimes bin changed: he said
that the best was too be followed. For (as Hesiodus says) the ancient
custom is ever best: After the same manner, our adversaries in these days
boast of antiquity, utterly suppressyng the name of the author of true
Religion, where as they ought rather too answer as Socrates did, than as the
wicked feend did. For like as Satan abused the authority of antiquity, to
stablish errors, so do they. True it is in deed, yt the auncientest religion
is best: so as it have his beginning from God who is best, and not from the
old serpent, who from the first beginning brought into the world his
Religion, fighting full but against the religion of God. Wherefore there is a
distinction too be made between the two Antiquities. For the one antiquity
is referred too God, and the other too Satan. The first of these antiquities
is the auncientest of all antiquities, as which has neither beginning, nor
shall have ending. Out of this most ancient antiquity sprang the truth of God,
whereby is taught which is the true Religion, for the confirmation whereof,
God has added wonderful records, which should be as it were certain
everlasting and authorized seals of his heavenly truth. The later antiquity
is such a one as both had beginning and shall have end, out of which issued
all superstition, and ungodliness. Either of these religions has his
furtherers, and as it were certain Patriarks whom the men of late years have
termed fathers, of whom they glory not a little. The Papists have always in
their mouth, the Fathers, the Fathers: And in all controversies concerning the
doctrine and service of GOD, they flee to them as too their last Anchorholde.
We also acknowledge the Fathers, howebeeit far after another manner than
they do. For we admit those for Fathers, who having received their Religion
at Gods hand, have also delivered the same faithfully too posterity, as are
the Patriaks, holy Kings, Prophets, Christ himself, and the Apostles. These
only do we reverence as fathers, and too vary from them in opinion we judge
it a falling away from salvation. Of the fathers that followed the times of the
apostles, we deem according too the rule of Ambrose. We justly condemn al
new things which Christ has not taught, because Christ is the way too the
faithful. Therefore if we teach any other thing than Christ has taught, let
us judge it detestable. And according too this rule of Paul's: If any man teach
any other gospel, accursed be he. But the Papists to bleare the eyes of the
simpler sort, do tell them they must enquire of the ancient ways, and that
they must not pass the old bounds which our fathers and anceters have
stablished: which thing if it be scarce lawful too do in the bounds and
buttels of fields; how much less shall it be deemed lawful to be done in the
bounds of Religion? Surely we pass not the bounds which God the first
founder of religion has pitched: which the holy Patriarchs and Apostles
receiving by heavenly inspiration, maynteined: from which the holy Martyrs
(among whom holy Abel holds the first place) with invincible courage of mind
drove back the Bores and Wolves: and finally which the son of God has
stablished with his own precious blud: but we abide within the^ constantly. As
for ye bounds which the old serpent with his brood has pitched, within which
is enclosed nothing but mere damnation, we make no conscience too pass them.
Therefore we father ye true religion upon God, who is called of Daniell, the
ancient of days. Whereby it will appear, both that the same is the
auncientest, and that it represents the nature and disposition of the first
founder of it. Wherefore as it is most steadfast evermore: so it always
continues like it self.

But which is that Religion continually steadfast in it self? What is the
effect of it? Which are the parts? Gods word, and the sign added to the
word appoynteth the true rule of Religion and service of God, for God has
always bin wont too utter his will too men by his word, and by some outward
sign. For look what the word puts into men's ears too be conveyed unto the
mind, the same thing does the sign set before the eyes too be seen, to the
intent that by them as it were with windows, a certain light might be conveyed
in unto the soul, so as the word and the sign might be a double warrant,
audible and visible, the end and drift of which is all one: Howbeeit, so as the
interpretation of the sign is to be fetched always out of the word alone.
What manner of things these be, the five times in which GOD uttered his word,
and gave signs, will show most openly: as are the state of man before his
fall: the time wherein he was promised recovery: the time of renewing the
promise: the time of Moses public weal: and finally the time of the
performaunce of the promise, by exhibiting Jesus Christ our Lord. It is too
be showed by Gods word and heavenly signs, that in these five times the
religion was one selfsame, and always agreeable with it self in all points.

Before man's fall when Adam was garnished with Gods image, God had delivered too
man both the word and the sign. The word required the knowledge of God and
obedience toward him: It forbad man too attempt any thing against Gods
prohibition, under a threat of punishment: and it had a promise of
immortality, which promise Adam embraced by faith. And the tree of life as a
visible warrant conveyed the same by the eyes intoo the mind. All which
things tended too this end, that Adam representing Gods Image as it were in a
glass, should continually serve and praise God. Whereby it is manifest, that the
true religion before man's fall, was the pure woorshipping of God according too
Gods word, the rule whereof was the word and the sign. The parts thereof were
the acknowledging of God, belief of the immortality that was promised, and
obedience toward God both inward and outward. And the end thereof was to
represent gods image, and too praise and magnify him. And in that estate was
the service of God most perfect, such as it shall be after the resurrection,
saving that as then it shall be much fuller, not in substance, but in degrees.
This manner of serving God in such sort as was enjoined too the first man, is
required of us also after his fall. Neither is there any alteration made in the
manner of woorshipping: but there followed an horrible mayme in all mankind
after the fall of our first Parents, insomuche as no man is able too perform
this service too the full, no nor too begin it, unless he have access too the
tree of life, which is Jesus Christ.

Ageine, after that mankind was fallen in our first Parents, God eftsoone
vttred his will by word and sign: whereby is learned with what service God
would be woorshipped after the fall. By the word he rebukes the
transgression of his commandment: by the word he made promise of the
Messiah, who becoming man, should pay the ransom for Adams giltinesse, and
restore too man the image of God, which he had lost by sinning. And he added a
sign too ye word which was as it were a certain visible sermon concerning the
Messiah. The sign was the killing and offering up of beasts and fruits of the
earth. Heerevpon it follows, that God requires the self same manner of
woorshipping after the fall, which was before the fall, although it have not
the same perfection, in his degrees, which it had before the fall. For God
requires here an acknowledging of him: he requires an acknowledging of our
own sin: he requires an acknowledging of Christ, who is in stead of the
tree of life that was in Paradise: he requires faith in the Messiah: he
requires obedience through Faith, too the intent that by little and little
Gods Image may be more and more repaired in man by Christ, that is too say,
that in the mind may shine assured knowledge of God: in the soul, holiness:
and in all the powers, obedience too be performed according too the
preciseness of the word. These things are breefly showed by word and sign
in the beginning of Genesis. For (that I may use Platoes words) the ancient
fathers being better than we, and dwelling nearer unto GOD: were better and
more substancially taught by short grounds and outward signs, than we be
taught by long Sermons. For in old time this manner of teaching was common
and familiar, as well unto Divines as Philosophers, that what soever they
had uttered in short grounds, the same thing they avouched with certain
outward signs. As soon as man was fallen, GOD uttered this ground with his
own voice. The woman's seed shall break the head of the Serpent. The
outward sign (which in a certain Image purported the same thing) was the
offering of Sacryfises commanded too the Fathers by GOD. Therefore when Abell
offered his Sacryfises, he had an eye always too the first ground that
had bin uttered, and in offering, he thought of these things. First by
beholding the death of the Sacrifise, he was put in mind of the death
whereintoo all mankind was fallen through sin: Whereby no doubt but his
mind was moved too right great grief. Ageine, by looking upon the blood of
the Sacryfise, he was put in remembrance of the promise concerning the
Messiah, by whose merit and intercession he assured himself, that Gods wrath
was pacifyed according unto the promise: whereby there grew both comfort in
his heart and also Faith, by which he was accepted intoo Gods favor through
Jesus Christ. Being justified by this Faith only, he minded true holiness
according too Gods word praising and magnifying God for his ryghtuousnesse and
mercy. And so Abell, having after a sort repaired Gods Image in himself,
performed true service unto God: which service he afterward confirmed with
his death. For when his brother Cain being an Hipocrite, went about too
withdraw him from acknoweledging the promised seed, and from the true service
of GOD, he chose too die rather than too consent unto his brothers wicked
purpose, giving us too understand by this his steadfastness, that he only
woorshippeth God aright, which prefers his obedience toward God and the
profession of Christ, before all things in the world, yea and before life it
self, than which nothing is woonte too be deerer unto man. By this word
and sign delivered too our first parents, after their fall, it appears, that
the Religion after the fall, was all one with that which was before the fall.
And although certain outward circumstaunces were added in respect of the
corruption of Nature, and the promise of the repayrement of it ageine: Yet the
substance or ground of Gods service continued all one, and tended too the
self same end, though much more imperfectlye. This pure woorship of GOD
endured in the Church (which was very small) until the flood, that is too
wit, a thousand six hunnred and six and fifty years. For Cains offspring
understanding the promise after a fleshly manner, persecuted the true Church:
usurped too themselves the title of the Church: and changed the true
woorshipping of GOD intoo Heathenish Hypocrisy and Superstition. Moreover,
after God had punished this Hypocrisy and superstition and other horrible
crimes, with the flood, he delivered the true Religion again by word and
outward sign unto Noe: not a new religion, but even the very selfsame that
he had appointed from the beginning. Howebeeit, when Iaphet by Hypocrisy and
Superstition, and Cayn by cruelty had put this true Religion too flight: It
remained only in the house of the Patriarch Sem. For he understanding the
promise and the sign thereof aright, woorshipped GOD through faith, and
obeyed him after the same manner that Abell and Noe did. And although that Noe
and Sem hilde still the same word and outward sign that was delivered too
our first fathers: Yet notwithstanding, by reason of a new occasion there was
added another new sign. For when God destroyed the wicked world by the flud,
for their falling from the true and pure worshipping of God: he promised Noe
and his offspring, that he would no more destroy the world by water: Untoo this
promis he added a token namely the Raynbow, which was a certain remembrance of
the promise. Therefore God printed a mark of his word in the Raynbow which is
wont too appear in the clouds, too the intent he might (as it were with a
seal) warrante that promise of his too be ratified: whereby he gave assurance
not only that he would be the God of Noe and his posterity, who had put them
selves in his tuition, and service: but also that he would never destroy the
world any more with water. Noe and Sem therefore beholding this sign, did
after the example of holy Abell* perform true and spiritual service unto
God.

Now follows Abraham's age unto the time of Moses, in which age the same
religion is betaken too the Patriarks, both by Gods own voice, and by a new
sign. For in as much as the wisdom that had bin in the forefathers was now
decreased: as there was need of more evident word: so was there need also of
a more apparent token. Therefore was this word uttered unto Abraham: In thy
seed shall all kinreds of the earth be blissed. And the sign or token that
was added, was the circumcision of the member of generation in the male
children. Then like as by the word he taught and required the true
woorshipping: so did he likewise by the sign, which was the seal of the
doctrine and religion. For when he says, shall be blessed in thy seed, he
conueieth therein three things most evidently. Whereof the first is a
rehersall of the accusation of all mankind for sin, and falling away from
GOD. For in that he promises blissing, he gives too understand that all men
stick in curse, which curse soked into al mankind with (...). The second is
a rehearsal of the promis of the seed and of his benefits, which was spoken too
Adam in this form of words: the woman's seed shall break the serpents head.
Which self same thing is expressed here by a more pithie term of blissing.
For by the term of blissing is meant Gods favor, atonement, forgiveness of
sins, and righteousness for Christ's sake, according as Paul the
interpreter of Moses expounds it. The third thing is a bewraying of our
weakness, that we can not attain blissing by our own power: but that we
must obtain it by faith in the promised seed. Too this faith of his, Abraham
added obedience in his whole life, according too the commandment: Walk thou
before me, and be perfect: which obedience the holy Patriarch showed by the
offering up of his own son. For heerby it appears how much he regarded
his obedience toward God, that he would rather at Gods commandment offer
in sacrifise his only begotten son Isaac, whom he had begotten in his old
age, and too whom so royal promises were made: than too step back from his
obedience toward God. Now must the sign that is added too the word, borow
his interpretation of the word. For the sign is nothing else but the visible
word. This sign therefore sets three things before our eyes: Namely that
our fleshly birth is corrupted: agein that there is a seed promised, whereby
nature shall be repaired: and also that by the circumcision of the flesh is
signified the circumcision of the heart, whereby is cut of ignorance of God, the
filthiness of affections, and the stubbornness of heart: that a man may be
borne a new, bearing the image of God in true holiness and righteousness.
Behold, how fitly these things match with the former things. The form of
words is altered: but the meening abides still. This variety of the word
and sign, serves man's weakness, and remedieth our ignorance: but it
appoynteth not any new fashion of serving God as the fleshly seed of Abraham
has surmised. For like as Cains brood embrasing hipocriste, and rejecting the
pure understanding of the word and sign, persecuted Abel and the folowers of
his faith: So the Ismaelites sticking in the letter of the circumcision, and
neglecting the spiritual meening of it, persecuted the true children of
Abraham: whereby it came too pass, that the true woorshipping remains with
very few. For while the Fathers soiourned in Egipte, only the house of Joseph
did after the death of the Patriark Jacob, hold still the true Religion,
which being after the decease of Joseph, little better than quite quenched,
then was Moses borne: In the fourthscorth year of whose age, being the three
hundred and fortith year after the promise was made unto Abraham, God renewed
again the word of promise, adding thereunto many signs: and too the intent
the true Religion might be preserved, he set up a kingdom and a presthood.
And although he betook the same word and the same sign too Moses, which he
had betaken before too the Patriarks: yet notwithstanding he adds longer
sermons and mo signs besides, according as the state of that age required. All
which things did level at one mark, and delivered unto men one self same
manner of spiritual woorshipping God. For in the wilderness (to pass over the
burning bushe, and the pillars of fire and cloud) the Manna, the Rock, and the
brazen serpent were set forth as signs or sacraments of ye doctrine and
worshipping of God: which three things signified Christ yt was promised long
ago. For ye Manna, according to ye interpretation of Paul, signified ye
spiritual food whereby men being made new by Christ are sed in Chrysts kingdom.
The Rock betokened ye spiritual drink wherewith the beleuers ar refreshed. The
serpent being hanged up, did foreshadowe Christ, that should be hanged up
upon the alter of the cross for the sins of the world according as Christ
himself interprets this sign. The looking upon ye brazen: serpent was a
figure of faith, whereby me^ being justified and quickened, do walk before God,
and seek after righteousness. But after that the people was brought intoo the
land of promise, which was a figure of the heavenly dwelling place: there were
yet mo signs, as it were visible sermons delivered too them: of which I will
touch a few, for my purposed breefnesse will not suffer me for too go through
with them all. All their whole common weal betokened the Church: the
Preesthood and Princehood did figure Christ: who with his Preesthood pacified
his fathers wrath according too the first promise, and with his soueraintie
desstroyeth the Deuilles kingdom, sin and death: and with his Preesthood and
soueraintie toogither, repayreth Gods Image in man, according unto which, man
was created: that being so garnished agein with Gods Imag^, he might serve
him in true obedience, and set forth his praises.

Many ceremonies were added, of which the ghostly meaning opens the first
promise, and sets out the spiritual woorshipping of God. Howbeeit
forasmuch as they be many, I will pick out a few of them (and those of the
notablest) which I will expound in few words. The furniture of the Preeste,
the yearly oblation of the high Priest, the Arc of Covenant, the Paschall
Lamb, the sprinkling of the blood, the washings, and the daily offerings,
had a singular signification of spiritual things, all which do sweetly
put us in mind of the conditions of our mediator, and the duty of the
godly. The high Preeste ware a plate on his foreheade, and clean garments.
The plate of Gold betokened Christ's Godhead, and his clean garmente
betokened his manhood, howbeeit pure and clean from all sin. The going in of
the Priest once every year, intoo the holy place, was a figure of Christ the
high priest, who with one oblation should make perfect all that were too be
sanctified. This is showed plainly in the.38. of Exo. where the Lord says,
that the Lord may be well pleased with him. Ageine, the Priests raiment
betokens holiness, wherewith the Lord will have his Priests too be
garnished, according as David the interpreter of Moses expounds when he
says: Let thy Priests be clothed with Righteousness, and let thy Saints
leap for joy. The Arc of couenaunte betokens Gods people with whom the
Lord has made a covenant by express words. In this Arc were the tables of
the law, which were covered in the Arc with plate of Gold. Whereby was none
other thing signified, than is contained in the first promise. The woman's
seed shall tread down the Serpents head, saving that the outward sign
expresses the thing more pleasauntly. For the Table of the ten commandments
is covered in the Ark with a plate of Gold, which is called the propiciatorie.
That is too say, Christ, who is the propitiation for our sins, does in his
church hide the sins of men, against the wrath and horrible judgment of GOD.
I pray you what is this else, than that the woman's seed shall tread down the
Serpents head? Thus does Paul the interpreter of Moses, expound this figure
in the third unto the Romans: We are justified freely by his grace through
redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth too be a
propitiation thorough Faith in his blood. For as the high Preeste of the
Hebrews was wont every year once too embrew the propiciatorie with blood,
when he entered intoo the holy of all holyes. So our high Priest Jesus Christ
offered himself once up too his father for the sins of the world, and found
everlasting redemption. The paschall Lamb had also a secret meaning, wherein
the first promise was peinted out as it were in lively colors: The figure
whereof, Paul opens, when he says: And Christ was offered up our
Passover. And whereas this Lamb was taken out of the flock, it signified
that Christ took our flesh upon him and bare the infirmities of our flesh,
and that he was tempted as we are in all respects, sin excepted, too the
intent he might make us also heavenly that are earthly, and spiritual which
are carnal. And whereas it is said of the Lamb: And all the multitude of the
Children of Israel, shall offer him up: it is meant that Christ dyed not for
one or two, but for the whole Church, that is too say, for the whole
corporation of those that are registered in the book of life. The sprinkling of
the blood has a manifest signification. For it was a token of Christ's blood
shed upon the alter of the Cross, wherewith our consciences being sprinkled,
are cleansed from dead woorks, according as the author of the Epistle unto the
Hebrews expounds this figure after a godly manner. Too the same purpose
perteine their washings and daily offerings. For these things in general, did
betoken as well that clenzing, wherewith Christ washes and purges us clean
from all iniquity, as also the true holiness, wherewith the believers are
garnished: so as from henceforth they may begin too represente Gods Image too
his glory and praise. These shadows of the Law were covert interpretations
of the first promise: which who so understood with Adam, Abel, Seth, Enoch,
Noe, Abraham. etc. Those yielded true and ghostely service unto GOD, not
unlike (as in the respect of the substance of the service) but altoogither
like and the very self same. But what is done here? Like as Caines brood
understood the promise carnally, and of the sign that was added, did make a
service or woorshipping by it self: Even so here the most part of the Jews,
leaving the spirit, gazed upon the letter, and determined Gods service in
these outward ceremonies without faith: which error the Lord reproves most
sharply in the Prophet, where he says: What pass I for the multitude of
your Sacrifices (says the Lord?) And anon after: Offer me no more Sacryfises
in vain, your incense is abomination unto me. And straight after, he adds
the cause of this matter, when he says: Your assemblies are wicked, my soul
hates your new Moons and solemn feasts. By these words GOD does us too
understand that he has not so ordained Ceremonies, as though he required
them as a ghostly woorship, but that the people should enure themselves in them
unto godliness, and strengthen their faith by them, and keep themselves more
and more in the pure woorshipping of God. Howbeeit, according too man's
superstitious nature, the most part are led away by Hypocrisy from the true
use of Ceremonies, and have grounded the whole weight of their salvation upon
the observation of them. Whose error when the Prophets that were sent did
reprove, they were drawn too punishment as blasphemous folk against Gods
law.

By these things it is manifest, that those godly persons which lived in
Moses common weal, agreed fully both in Doctrine and Relygion, with the holy
Fathers before the flud and after the flud, unto the calling of Moses, and
from Moses even unto Christ. For what is required here but acknoweledgement
of sin, belief in Christ, invocation, holiness, obedience, and other
virtues, which are required as parts, too the reparation of Gods Image in us?
Now remains the last age, wherein the eternal word according too the
prophesies, took upon him the woman's seed, that is too say, man's nature,
that he might tread down the serpents head, that is too say (as John
expounds it) that he might destroy the works of the Devil.

This Christ being interpreter and fulfiller of Moses and the Prophets, did
by word and outward signs raise up ageine the same service of GOD well near
fallen too the ground: commanding repentance and forgiveness of sins too be
preached: garnishing the^ that believe in him with his own righteousness:
enduing them with his holy spirit: stirring up in them new motions agreeable
unto the Law and will of GOD: and too be short, repayring Gods Image,
according too which, the first man was created, bidding us let our light
shine so before men, that our father may be glorified in Heaven. This self
same service commends he too his Disciples, which they both taught by
word and expressed in their life. Notwithstanding, too the intent the
Church might keep this service continually, he delivered them his assured
word, and put as it were two outward seals too the word, namely Baptim, and
the Lords Supper. The word interprets the first promise more clearly. The
sacraments are as it were certain visible sermons, which proffer the same
thing too the senses, which the word teaches. But what is done in this case?
Like as in old time Cains brood, Chams brood, and the false Israelites
corrupted the word, and by their fleshly foolishness patched men's dreams
upon it: So the hipocrites fleeting from the word in this last age of the
world, have defiled the service of GOD, so long till through the outrage of
heretics and the tyranny of Antichryst, the sacraments were partly
distayned with men's traditions, and partly mangled, and the doctrine with the
true Religion welneere again overwhelmed. Notwithstanding, about a forty
years ago, God raised up a prophet that blissed Luther, who brought agein the
ancient doctrine and religion, which both our first fathers received of God,
and Christ delivered too his disciples. And that this service of God which our
Church holds at this day, is the true and continual service of GOD, he shall
most clearly understand, which tries it by the rule of the Patriarks and of
the Apostolic Church. But what happens unto us? Ueryly the same that happened
too our first fathers, too the folowers of Abraham, and too the Apostolic
Church. For the devil rusheth in with all his force, too destroy the Gospel,
and too abolish the true service of GOD. And this does he the more
outragiously in these our days, because he knows he has but a small time
too execute his cruelty against Christ's Church. Now what sleightes, this
adversary of Christ's uses too wype out the sincere doctrine and true
woorshipping of GOD: the matter it self at this day openly declares. For
first he has set up a kingdom, and that a right large one, namely of the
Turks, which openly blasphemeth the name of Christ. Ageine he has planted
another kingdom, which men call the Popedom: which though it profess not
it self openly too be against Christ, does nevertheless with singular
wylynesse and craft, step intoo Chrysts kingdom, marring the doctrine, defiling
the sacraments: and finally overthrowing the true service of god. For the Pope
having gotten the primacie under color of the ministry, has brought all
kind of superstition and Idolatry intoo the world, so that since man was
created, there was never yet a more vyolent and intolerable tyranny herd of,
neither was there ever any kind of Idol-seruice, whereby was wrought more
spytefull derogation too Gods majesty, or wherewith Chrystian men's minds
have bin more monstrously bewitched. And now that Satan perceyueth his
sleyghtes too be found out in this behalf, he takes no truce, but calls
toogither the masters of mischief, such as are the Lybertines. Anabaptists,
Seruetians, Antynomians, and other: wh^^ with their foul snoutes endeuer too
beerays again the purged doctrine and Sacraments. And when he sees he can not
by these his practices hinder the course of the Gospel and the pure
woorshipping of GOD, he goes too it another way, drawing asunder by inward
debates, and setting toogither by the ears among themselves like enymies,
those whom he perceived too mind earnestly above others, the restorement of
the Church, and of true Religion: Uerely least by joining in endeuer and
counsel toogither, they should with one mind go through with this so
excellent a work. Besides this, from time too time he chaseth some out of
Christ's camp, who becoming forsakers of their order, do exceeding great
harm too the Church: among whom there are that invent new deuyses whereby too
bring the pure doctrine in hatred with the weak and unskillful. For they
gather toogither the contraryeties in the sayings of those, whose travel GOD
has vzed too the clenzing of his Church in this last old age of the world:
when as notwithstanding, they are not able too show any true contrariety in
no part of the foundation of the doctrine and woorshipping of God, howsoever
these Protheuses transform themselves intoo a thousand shapes. By these
practices of Satan we see it brought too pass, that the wilful sort are
made more stout in their superstition: and the weaker and vnstedier sort do
for the most part give over, too the great greef of all the godly: and unless
Christ make have of his coming, it is too be feared least many will be
wrapped ageine in their former darkness. What is too be done in this case my
brethren I beseech you? We must beware of Satan's wyles: We must have an
eye back too the examples of our aunceters, Abel, Abraham, the Prophets,
Christ, and his Apostles. Let us accompany our selves with them in doctrine,
woorshipping, and Invocation. Let us not be disquyeted at the multitude of our
enemies. Let us not be moved at the number of the runnagates. Let us not be
dismayed in heart at the persecution and miseries, which the godly are feign
too suffer in this world. Let us not only have an eye too the lowlynesse of
the church, which in this world lies upon the ground despised: but also let us
have an eye too Christ tryumphing, who will in time to come reward those with
the glory of blissed immortality, whom he makes like unto him self in
this life, so they continue steadfast too the end. Let us bear in mind this
most weighty saying of Christ's: Watch and pray, that ye enter not intoo
temptation. That which I say too you (says he) I say too all. The world
tempts: the flesh provoke: the armies of Heretics trouble: the stumbling
blocks of doctrine and manners offend: the fond quarellings of proud
persons vex: ageinste all these things the surest remedy is too call upon
GOD. For it is not for naught, that Solomon says: The name of the Lord is a
most strong Tower: the ryghtuous man shall flee unto it, and be saved. In
our calling upon God, let us have an eye too the Prophetical and Apostolic
church, and let us arm our minds against the Idol gaddings of Mahomet and
the Papists, and ageynste the wranglyngs of the Heretics. Let us oftentimes
bethink us, upon how sure and immovable foundations the continual doctrine
of the Church, and the steadfast religion of the Catholic Church is
grounded. Let us bethink us of the heavenly Revelations, whereby GOD himself
reveled his will unto men, when he spoke too the holy Patriarchs and
Prophets: which will of his, he has confirmed by many woonderful miracles,
both in the old and new testament. Let us behold the most sweet consent of
Moses, the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles in doctrine and religion. Let us
be stirred up too the acknowledging of GOD, by the example of many Martirs,
who (with Abell the first Martyr) confirmed the heavenly doctrine with their
own blood. Let us absteyne from fond disputyng, by which the bond of peace
(which is charity) is broken: and let us rather apply our selves too godly
life, than too subtle and unprofitable disputations, by means of which, what
evil has risen in the Church, it greeueth me right sore at the heart too
think. For although in these realms (GOD be thanked) there be a very great
calm and a godly agreement in all our churches: yet notwithstanding godliness
would we should be sorry for the miseries of those, which at this day are
afflicted through the vnsesonable strife of certain persons, wherewith ye minds
of many princes and diverse others are wounded. How beeit since we are not able
too remedy these evils, let us flee too him, who alonly is able too do al
things. Pray ye therefore with the whole church of Christ, unto ye eternal God
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, yt he will gather to himself a church in
this world, and that he will in ye same church maintain ye pureness of
doctrine, and the true worshipping of him: so as we may woorship him aright,
and for evermore magnify and praise him. Pray him too govern with his spirit
our most meek sovereign Lord king Frederike the second of ye name, who as he
has succeeded his most holy father in ye kingdom: so also is he ye very right
heir of his fathers virtues: and is not only a prince yt bears special love
too justice and equity: but also a singular fauorer and patron, or rather a
most faithful foster father of the churches and schools. Pray too Christ that
he will with his spirit rule the counselors and nobility of the realm, and
the gouerners of churches, civil offices, schools, and housholdes, giving
them courage too mainteyne Gods glory, true doctrine, and honest discipline,
so as we may lead a peaceable and quiet life, with all godliness and
honesty. Pray for all the states of this realm, yt all may knit them selves
toogither in sweet concord, and one relieve an other, so as the superiors may
think that their inferiors shall be coheires with them of Gods kingdom: and the
inferiors obey their superiors in the Lord, as Paul wills them: so yt all the
degrees of this realm being settled in a most sweet tunablenesse, we may
live peaceably and quietly. Pray against the enemies of the king and this
realm. Pray Christ too repress the rage of Satan, and too grant unto his
church teachers and shepherds agreeing in true doctrine and godliness, which
may set foor^h gods glory by teaching aright, and by example of godly life:
too the intent that at the length all of us fully beholding the glory of the
Lord with open face, as it were in a glass, may be transformed intoo the same
likeness, as it were from glory too glory, by the spirit of the Lord. So
be it.

Now remains that I should say somewhat concerning mine own purpose, namely
wherefore I have published these expositions of the gospels upon ye Sundays.
About a fourten years ago, I vttred privately certain short notes upon ye
sundays Gospels too my scholars at home at my house, to ye intent I might by
this my small travel, further their studies, not thinking at all too have put
them forth. But what followed? The things that were end^^ed too a few scholars,
were communicated too many. And when I perceived, that diverse sought earnestly
after them: I enlarged them somewhat a six years ago. And n^^at length the
entreatance of certain godly Shepherds, compelled me too publish them and put
them forth in print. Wherefore seeing that this work is wholly ordained for
the godly ministers of the Gospel, I thought it good (right dear brethren)
too put forth this my travail under your name. If ye shall reap any thing
thereby, give GOD the thanks, and commend me too God with your Prayers. This
one thing have I earnestly regarded, namely too set forth purely the doctrine
of the Catholic Church, which both the university of Wirtemberge*
maynteyned a forty years agon, and yet still mainteineth: And also which those
most excellent men the students of this University, D. John Machabeus of the
Alps: D. Peter Palladie, D. John Seming, and D. Olaus Chrisostomus, (all which
do now rest in the Lord, looking for full deliverance by the coming of the
Son of God) have taught. In this consent stand we also, who have succeeded
them in office in this School: and we pray God heartily, that we may live and
die in this consent. For we do not dout but that this is the continual
consent of Gods Church, as we have sufficiently showed before. I beseech God
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, too knit us toogither with his spirit,
that we may be at unity in him. Fare ye well, and God send ye good luck
in Christ.

At Hafnie the.xxx. of March. The year since Christ was borne. 1561.
The first Sunday in Aduent. The Gospel. Math. xxj.
AND WHEN THEY drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come unto Bethphage
unto mount Oliuete, then sent JESUS two of his disciples, saying unto them:
Go intoo the town that lies over against you, and anon ye shall find an
Ass bound, and her colte with her, loose them and bring them unto me. And
if any man say avvght unto you, say ye the Lord has need of them, and
straight way he will let them go. All this was done, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, saying: Tell ye the daughter of
Sion: behold thy King comes unto thee meek, sitting upon an Ass and a
colte, the foale of an Ass used unto the yoke. The disciples went and did as
Jesus commanded them, and brought the Ass and the colte, and put on their
clothes, and set him thereon. And many of the people spread their garments in
the way. Other cut down branches from the trees, and stravved them in the
way. Moreover the people that went before, and they also that came after,
cried, saying: Hosanna too the son of David: Blissed is he that comes in
the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest.

The exposition of the Text.
FORASMVCH AS this feast (of Aduent or) of the coming of our Lord, is the
first of all in order, which is solemnized in the church: It is necessary that
we be put in mind what things are too be considered in every several
feast, least either with the wicked and Heathenish world we abuse them too the
dishonor of God: or else solemnize them with less devotion than it beecommeth
us, not without the offense of many. In general, there are three things too
be considered in every feast. The story, which is the foundation of the
feast: the benefit, whereof the story makes mention: and the true and
lawful use of the feast. For as the story instructs the mind: So the
benefit of God, (the remembrance whereof the story stablisheth) does nourish
and strengthen Faith. Out of which Faith issues thankfulness, which praises
God for the benefit received, with mind, with voice, with confession and with
behauior: In which thankfulness the true use of the Feast is too be seen.
These three things are too be applied unto all feasts. Wherefore inasmuch as
this feast is instituted concerning the coming of our Lord, the story of his
coming, which pertains too the Conception, birth, doctrine, and doings of
Christ, (which are the cheef Articles of our belief,) is too be learned. The
benefit of God, (which is to save the lost sheep by the sacrifise
propiciatorie,) is too be recorded in remembrance. With the first the mind is
too be instructed, and with this latter, Faith is too be cherrished and
strengthened: too thentent that theruppon may spring thankfulness of mind,
whereby we both with mind, voice, confession and behauior* set out the glory of
God whoo has voutchsaued to give his son for us. Now too the intent this
present feast may become the more behoouefull, both too the glory of God, and
too the instruction of our selves: I will entreat of three places in order,
which are these.

1 Of the coming of the Lord. 2 The description of Christ our king, and of his
kingdom. 3 Of the Citizens of this king, of their duty, and in conclusion of
the true use, and healthful meditation of the Lords coming.
Of the first.
TO the intent we may the better and certeinlier be instructed of the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, too the praise of God and the helthful edifiyng of
our selves: Let us with S. Bernard propound six circumstances to be weyed in
it, which are these. Whoo he is that comes: from whence: whither: too what
purpose: when: and what way.

1 He that comes is (according to the testimony of Gabriel) the son of the
highest, equal too the most high Father in true Godhead. Hereby we may
learn how great is his majesty, dignity and power. He that comes is the
seed of the woman, very man of the seed of Abraham and David, according too
the oracles of the Prophets, and the testimonies of the Apostles: less than ye
father as touching his very ma^hood. Whereby we may learn, with what society
of nature he is alyed unto us, so as we need not too be afraid too come
unto him. It is Christ then that comes: whoo is both very God and very man:
being one person in two natures: whoo is both able too save, because he is
God: and will save, because he has taken our nature upon him, that he might
be made a sacrifice for us.

2 From whence comes he? he comes from heaven: he comes out of the
bosom of the father, whoo fills all things, and is invisible every where.
Also, he comes in the virgins womb, conceived by the woorking of the holy
ghost. He is nourished with the virgins blood: he is borne: he is brought
up: he is circumcised.

3 Whither comes he? He comes intoo the world, which was made by him. He
comes intoo his own, and his own received him not. He came intoo the lower
parts of the earth. And out of all dout, this is that great mystery whereof
the Apostle speaks. 1. Tim. 3. God was showed openly in the flesh, justified
in the spirit, beholden of the Angels, preached of unto the Gentiles, believed
upon in the world, and received up intoo glory.

4 Too what purpose came he? The causes of the Lords coming intoo the world,
the voice of God foretells: the Types prefigurate: the sayings of the
Prophets proclaim: the words and works of the Lord being come, do prove:
the writyngs and Preachings of the Apostles witness: and the joyful
congregation of all Saints confesses.

God said too the Serpent Genesis 3. The seed of the woman shall tread down thy
head. Which text the Apostle expounding says: Christ appeered too destroy ye
woorks of the devil. The same god did oftentimes beat the meening of this
saying intoo the holy Fathers heads, and specially intoo Abraham's, saying: In
thy seed shall all nations be blissed. By these things then it is too be
understand, that Christ came for two causes. The first is to destroy the works
of the devil: and the other, too bring the blissyng upon the children of
Abraham, yt is too say, upon all that shall receive Christ by faith, as Abraham
did. For when Adam had by his fall yielded him self and all his offspring
bondslaues under the Tirannie of Satan, and cast them intoo deserved curse:
the righteousness of God required, that either we should suffer due deserved
punishment, or else that some of mankind should satisfy Gods justice. Now
forasmuch as no mean power was able too vanquish the devil and pacify Gods
wrath: the son of God comes forth of his secret dwelling place: he comes
intoo ye world: he becomes man: he takes our case upon him: he overthrows
the kingdom of the devil, and pacifieth his Fathers wrath being made unto us
both our sacrifice and our priest.

This self same thing do many types figurate: as the sacrifices of the
Fathers, the pascall Lamb, the sprinklyng of the red cowes blood upon the
people and moreover the Arc of covenant, and all the Aaronical sacrifice with
all the rites and ceremonies thereof.

Innumerable sayings of the Prophets do declare these self same causes of
the Lords coming with agreeable consent: as Esaias. 53. He suffered our
diseases, and bare our sorrows in deed, he was wounded for our transgressio^s
and was torn for our iniquities. The Lord did take upon him the iniquities of
us al. Many such testimonies as these, are in the Prophets, which for
breefnesse sake I omit.

The words and works of Christ at his coming, do prove the same thing:
Come unto me (says he) all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
refresh you. Also, he that believes in me shall not perish, but have life
everlasting. Also: For these do I sanctify my self, that is to say, I offer my
self a sacrifice too God the father for the purging of their sins. Which
thing, not only the great number of miracles that he did, and by which he
destroyed the works of the devil, do assuredly prove: but also his very
death, and his glorious victory ensuing the same.

The testimonies of the Apostles, who is able to number? Paul says, He dyed
for our sins, and rose ageine for our justification. The same man writes
thus: Him that knew no sin, he made sin, too the intent that we might
be made the righteousness of god in him. John Baptist cries out: Behold the
Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. John the Apostle: Jesus
Christ cleanses us from al our iniquity. The same apostle making a brief
sum of Christ's benefits, writes: Christ appeered too destroy the devils
works.

Finally, the whole Church of Christ joyfully through Christ's spirit
confesses these self same causes of Christ's coming, singing thus: Thou
taking upon thee to deliver man did not abhor the virgins womb. Thou when
thou had overcome the sharpnes of death, did set open the kingdom of
heaven to all believers.

Now if ye demand the time of his coming, the Apostle Paul answers: After
that the fullness of time was come, God sent out his son borne of woman,
bound under ye law, too the intent he should redeem them that were guilty of
the law, that we might receive the adoption of children. He came therefore
neither later nor slowlyer than he ought too come. Concerning this time of the
Lords coming, the Prophets Jacob and Daniell spoke before. Of which thing more
shall be spoken in the day of the Lords birth.

One thing more is yet behind: namely the way by which he comes. This also
is too be sought out diligently, that we may meet him rightly. Therefore like
as too our salvation he came once in the flesh visible, so too save each man's
soul, wheresoever his word is thought upon, red, or preached, he comes
daily in spirit and invisible: yea rather he is there always present
according too his promise: I will be with you unto the end of the world. And
then again shall he appear visible too judge the quick and the dead, too the
intent that they which heertofore held scorn too take him for their physician
and savior, shall then feel him a most just judge and punisher of their
wickedness. Of which coming we shall here more the next Sunday. And thus
much breefly concerning the coming of the Lord.

Of the second.
THe second place which the text of the Gospel contains, imports the
description of Christ our king, and of his kingdom. Which description is
confirmed by the testimony of Zachary: which the Evangelist alleges that
we may understand, how this pomp was not instituted rashly, but foreshewed
long before, according too the will of God and the secret counsel of the
Trinity. For this pomp teaches us many things, of the state of Christ our
king and of his kingdom. First this pomp of Christ's riding intoo Jerusalem,
makes a difference between Christ our king and the kings of the world, and
shows the diversity of their kingdoms. For this base pomp does
sufficiently argue, that neither Christ is a worldly king, nor the
administration of his kingdom worldly. For worldly kings (to the intent they
may be counted honorable of their people,) are gorgeously apparelled. In
likewise the administration of worldly kingdoms requires gorgeousness, and
sumptuous furniture. Secondly this story teaches yt under this base pomp,
lies hid a certain almightinesse and godhead. For when he says, loose ye
and bring unto me: and ageine, the Lord has need of them: and also, he shall
by and by let them go: Christ our king gives us too understand, that by his
heavenly power he is able too bring too pass what he lists: yea and that
he has the hearts and wills of men in his hand.

Therefore although the kingdom of Christ seem dispisable in this world: yet
notwithstanding if a man look upon ye power and divinity of ye king, nothing
is more stately: nothing is more mighty: nothing finally is more glorious,
than it.

Moreover the prophecy of the Prophet conteyneth three things. First an
exhortation too the church, at that time cast down and utterly under foot. Be
glad (says he) and leap for joy thou daughter of Sion. Hereby we are taught
that the Gospel perteyneth too them that are cast down and under foot, and
altoogither broken in spirit. Secondly this prophecy coteyneth a commandment
from God, that we should do homage too this king, like as ye second Psalm
exhorts where it says, kiss the son. Thirdly this prophecy contains a
description of the person of Christ: namely that he is ye king that was
promised too the church. Behold (says it) thy king comes. As if he should
have said, here is at length that king that was promised thee, of whom are
written so many testimonies, which shall restore the kingdom of God, that the
devil has invaded and destroyed through sin. He says, that this king is
gentle and meek, too the intent we should not shu^ him as a cruel Tirant, but
rather come unto him with full confidence, and demand of him the salvation
promised. And whereas he sets him forth poor, that is too be referred too
the state of this present life. Whoose will it was too be poor for this
purpose, that he might with his spirit enrich us that are poor, and make us
blissed for ever.

Of the third.
THe Citizens of this King are described under the persons of Christ's
disciples, and of the people, whoose example we must follow, if we will be
reckened among the Citizens of Christ's kingdom. First therefore, let us with
Christ's disciples bring the Ass unto him. That is to say, let us too whom
the ministration of the word is committed, do all things that are appointed
us, too the glory of Christ, and the enlarging of his kingdom.

Secondly let us lay our clothes upon the Ass: which thing we shall then
rightly do, when we employ all our power and abilities too the preservation
of the Ministry. Also we must cut down bows from the trees, and cast them
before Christ, that is too say, we must preach Christ, and acknowledge him
too be the eternal king, whose kingdom we shall wish too flourish for ever
like the Palm tree, that it may not sinck down under the burdens of the
miseries of this world. We must cry Hosanna, that is too say, we must call
upon him with faith, and confess him too be our King, assuring our selves
that his kingdom is blissed in the highest. And heerevpon we may breefly
gather, what is the right use and helthfull meditation of this feast,
concerning the helthful coming of Christ. The first use therefore is, to
endeavor that this king may come unto us. And how shall that be brought too
pass? He is called too us by true repentance, kept by substanciall faith, and
delighted by pure worshipping. The second is too put us in mind of
thankfulness, that we glorify him with heart, voice, confession and behavior.
Whoo for our sakes came unto us: who being made man, gave him self for our
sins, too deliver us out of this present evil world, according too the will of
God our father, too whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

The ij. Sunday in Aduent. The Gospel. Luke. xxj.
THere shall be signs in the Sun and in the Moon, and in the Stars: and
in the earth the people shall be at their wits end, thorovv despair. The
Sea and the water shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail them for fear,
and for looking after those things which shall come on the earth: For the
powers of Heaven shall move: And then shall they see the Son of man come in a
Cloud, with power and great glory. When these things begin to come to
pass, then look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemtion draws
nie. And he shevved them a similitude: Behold the Fig tree, and all other
trees: when they shoot forth their buddes, ye see and know of your own
selves, that Summer then is nigh at hand. So likewise ye also (when ye see
these things come too pass) be sure that the kingdom of GOD is nie. Verily I
say unto you: this generation shall not pass, til all be fulfilled. Heaven
and earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass. Take heed unto your
selves therefore, least at any time your hearts be overcome with surfeiting
and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that that day come on you
vnvvares. For as a snare shall it come on all them that sit on the face of the
whole earth. Watch therefore continually and pray, that ye may obtain
grace too flee all this that shall come, and that ye may stand before the
son of man.

The exposition of the text.
LIke as the last Sunday the church celebrated the remembrance of Christ's
coming in the flesh: so this lesson of the Gospel entreats of his second
coming, and belongs too that Article of our faith, wherein we confess with
heart and mouth, that the same Lord which came heeretoofore too be a mediator
and Savior of them that believe in him, shall come hereafter too judge the
quick and the dead: that they which in this life have received Christ, and
acknowledged him too be their savior, should be raised ageine in their
bodies, and be rewarded with everlasting life: and that those which have
despised him, in following their own affections too the dishonor of God,
should be punished everlastingly with deserved torments. Of this Euangelical
lesson, let there be made three places.

1 Of Christ's coming too judgment. 2 The use and fruit of the forewarning of
ye same coming 3 Christ's exhortation too his Disciples, that they should be
ready without let.
Of the first.
OCcasion of this sermon concerning Christ's coming, arose upon the talk
between Christ and his disciples in the Temple of Jerusalem. For when the
disciples woondred at the sumptuousness of the Temple: the Lord him self
answered, that the time would come, it should be so wasted one day, that one
stone should not be left upon another. His disciples hearing this, demanded
him of the time. Too whom he answering, declared the tokens that should go
before the destruction of Jerusalem, strengthening them least they should be
discouraged in their minds, for the evils that were at hand. Heerevpon taking
occasion, he passes on too the universal and last judgment, and reckeneth
up the signs that shall go before it.

Howbeeit, too the intent al things may become the cleerer unto us, first we
will examine five circumstaunces which the text comprehends. And afterward
we will describe the judgment it self according to the Scriptures.

The first of the circumstances therefore, is concerning the time* For he
shows the time by signs, and confirms ye same by comparison. And there are
many kinds of signs which go before the coming of the Lord unto judgment.

The first sign is seen in the Sun and the Moon, and the stars: which
what manner of one it shall be, Mark in his.xiij. chapter utters in these
words. The Sun shall be darkened, yt is too say, there shall be many Eclipses of
ye sun. And ye moon shall not yield forth her light, namely while she also
suffers eclipse. And ye stars shall fall from heaven, yt is too wit, shall
seem too fall. That many of this kind of signs are already past, our present
age bears witness. For there never happened so many eclipses, either of the
sun or of ye Moon.

The second sign of the judgment at hand, is the perplexity of people
through despair: the meening whereof is (as Matthew and Mark interpret it:)
that nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and no
place shall be free from wars. And does not these days testify the world
too be full of such signs?

The third kind of signs, are of the sea, of floods, of the air, of
tempests, of horrible tumultes, and of certain unaccustomed and vehement
winds. And has not our age seen very many signs of this sort?

The fourth kind of signs issues out of the second and third, which is a
pining away for fear, and for looking after those things that shall come upon
the whole world.

The fifth sort is: that the powers of heaven shall be moved, that is too say,
there shall be unwonted sights in heaven, and earthquakes in the earth. Too be
short, both heaven and earth shall (after a sort) resemble the countenance of
the angry judge, that sinners being moved by these tokens of Gods wrath,
should repent and turn unto the Lord.

These signs does the Lord apply in this wise too the last judgment. Behold
the Figtree, and all other trees: when they have shot forth their buddes, ye
seeing it, do know of your selves, that summer is nigh at hand. So likewise
when ye see these things come too pass, understand ye that the kingdom of
god is nigh. For these signs out of all creatures which are carried up and
down, shall be as it were messengers, by whose mouth such men shall be
summoned to appear at yt dreadful judgment seat, as running at riot here in
this world have neglected their own salvation, and like dronken men have
despised Christ, the author of salvation.

Besides these five sorts of signs, whereof the text makes mention, there
are others also. Math. 24. Mark. 13. 2. These. 2. Daniel. 2. and. 7. Apoc. 17.
all which are as it were certain visible sermons of repentance, by which god
forewarneth men too flee too his son our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom only is
salvation.

The second circumstance is, that he which is the son of God, and man, Jesus
Christ, shall be a judge. Wherein both the godly and ungodly have to learn. The
godly, too know that he shall be their judge, who had promised eternal life
too all that believe in him, adding an oath: Uerely I say unto you, all that
believe in me, shall not perish, but have life everlasting. This promis
confirmed with an oath, cannot by any means fail. And the ungodly have too
learn, either too repent and forsake the rabble of the wicked, and so too enjoy
their salvation purchased by Christ: or else too remember that he whom they
have refused too be their Sauyoure, shall adiudge them to endless pains: that
then at least wise, they may (too their great misery) learn, how horrible a
thing it is, too fall intoo the hands of the living God.

The third circumstance is, that he shall come in the clouds, glorious and
terrible, not a servant as before, but a Lord: not too be judged, but too
judge: not now too allure men too repentance, but too punish unrepentant
persons with eternal pains: and that as a righteous judge.

The fourth circumstance is, that he shall come mighty, with power and great
glory: whereby it is too be learned, that he can both damn the rebellious,
and is able too reward the believers with eternal life.

The fifth circumstance expresses the cause of Christ's coming unto
judgment, so far forth as it pertains too the godly. Your redemption is at
hand. By which saying, like as Christ shows that his Church shall not be
well at ease in this world (for before that day, it can not be delivered from
the vanity of the world) so he does too understand, that the accomplishment
of Christ's benefits toward his Church, is the full deliverance from all
evils: wherewith is joined the perfect fruition of the eternal God, with
everlasting joy. These things therefore perteine too the comfort of the godly.
But as touching the ungodly, this day of the Lords coming, shall be a day of
wrath and sorrow and not of deliverance: a day of mist and darkness and not
of light: a day of moorning, and not of mirth: a day of destruction, and not of
salvation.

And the manner of the judgment is described in the.25. of Matthew by these
words. When the son of man shall come in his majesty and all the Angels with
him: then shall he sit upon the throne of majesty, and all nations shall be
gathered toogither before him, and he shall separate them a sunder, as a
shepeherd puts his sheep a side from the Gotes, and shall set the sheep on
his right hand, and the Gotes on his left. Then shall the king say too them on
his right hand: come ye blissed of my Father, and possess you the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. For I was hungry and ye gave
me too eat. etc. And unto them on his left hand he shall say: Away from me
ye cursed intoo everlasting fire which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. For I was hungry and ye gave me no meat. etc. And so the ungodly
shall go intoo everlasting punishment, but the rightuous intoo everlasting
life. And in the Apocalipse. 20. chapt. He shall sit upon a great white
throne, at whose look the heaven and earth shall flee away, and the dead both
great and small shall stand in the sight of his throne: and then shall be opened
the book of life and the books of consciences, and they shall be judged by
those things that are written in those books, according too their woorks. They
that have done good, shall go intoo everlasting life: and they that have done
evil, intoo everlasting fire.

Now in the sentence of judgment, two things are too be considered. On Gods
behalf, blissing: on men's behalf, good woorks. When he says, come ye
blissed of my Father, he meeneth that they are freely saved through Jesus
Christ, whom they have received by Faith. For in Christ only are men blissed,
received intoo Gods favor, and freely justified. But when he calls forth too
good woorks, the Lord does it, not for that they are causes of salvation, but
for other respects. Namely, for that they are witnesses of true faith and the
fear of God: and moreover, that by setting before them a recompense of the
miseries which they abide in this life, he may the more stir them up too
godly and holy conversation.

Of the second.
WHy Christ forewarned his disciples of his coming too judgment, he
declares, when he says: When these things begin too come too pass, look up
and lift up your heads. etc. All these things will put us in mind of a
certain continual repentance in this life. But what do we? we see the
last day ready too light in our necks, and yet nevertheless we delay too
repent, and feed our own fancies. What do noble men? What do princes? what
do learned men? what do unlearned men? what do towns men? what do country
folk? and too be short, what do (in manner) al men? What is he that
earnestly myndeth this forewarnyng of Christ's? We make more account of a
ferme in the country, than of the kingdom of GOD. Yea rather who is he that
prefers not the commodities of this life (be they never so slender) before
the health of his soul?

Of the third.
Because Christ foresaw with what evils the world should ouerflow about the
time of his coming, he framed an exhortation, partly to the intent they should
eschew the things which at that time should exclude the greatest part of the
world from the promised salvation: and chiefly too the intent they should show
them selves stout soldiers, too fight with watching and Prayer against this
world, under the standarde of only Jesus Christ. And too the intent they may
be the readyer unto both, he alleges reasons too persuade them. For he
both tells them that that day shall come upon the sudden: and also declares
plainly, that by this means they shall be quite rid from all evils, and be
set in the presence of the son of God.

Therefore he says: Take heed too your selves that your hearts be not at any
time ouerloden with surfettyng and droonkennesse, and the cares of this world.
These then are the things that are too be eschued, that is too say:
surfeiting, drunkenness, and the care of this world: namely ungodly and
Heathenish care, which quenches the faith of Christ. In as much as it is most
manifest, that all estates of the world are wrapped and snarled in these
evils: so much the more ought this exhortation of Christ's too be in our
sight, least we perish being deceived with the evil trades of this world.

Furthermore, where as the Lord adds: Watch ye continually in Prayer, he
teaches with what things it beehoueth those too be occupied, ye covet too
escape the evils that are too come. In that sum he requires, the shunning of
evil things, and the earnest following of good things. Both these the Apostle
joins toogither in his Epistle unto Titus, writing: Renouncing all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, let us live sobrely, uprightly, and godlily in
this world, looking for the blissed hope, and the coming of the glory of the
great GOD, too whom be praise, soueraintie and glory world without end. Amen.

The third Sunday in Aduent. The Gospel. Luke. xj.
WHen John being in prison heard the works of Christ, he sent two of his
disciples, and said unto him: Art thou he that shall come, or do we look
for an other? Jesus ansvvered and said unto them: Go and show John ageine
what ye have heard and seen. The blind receive their sight, the lame
walk, the leapres are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up,
and the poor receive the glad tidings of the Gospel, and happy is he that is
not offended by me. And as they departed, Jesus began too say unto the people
concerning John: What went ye out intoo the wilderness too see? A reed
that is shaken with the vvind? or what went ye out for to see? A man
clothed in soft raiment? behold, they that wear soft clothing, are in kings
houses. But what went ye out for to see, a Prophet? verily I say unto you
more than a Prophet. For this is he of whom it is written: Behold, I send
my messanger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

The exposition of the text.
THis gospel describes unto us the kingdom of Christ, and peinteth it out in
his proper colors: so much at least wise as perteyneth too the outward
appeerance thereof, which is seen with outward eyes. For if ye regard his
secret power with the eyes of faith, it is a most bright and a most glorious
thing. In this place therefore is entreated only of his outward shape. The
foreru^ner lies in prison. Whereby we are warned y^ Christ's kingdom is put
under the cross. The disciples being in doubt, are sent forth: howbeit unto
Christ only. Christ the king himself is conversant among the poor, the blind,
the deaf, and the leapres. These are healed and receive the glad tidings of
salvation, which things the mighty, noble and wise men of the world despise. In
few words, as this Gospel peynteth out the Kingdom of Christ: so it
confirms the mynistery of John, and by assured arguments proves, that Christ
is the true Messiah, that was promised to the fathers. Notwithstanding, for
more plentiful doctrines sake, let this Gospel be distributed intoo four
parts which are these.

1 Is showed both the lot and office of the ministers of the word. 2 The
question of John. 3 The answer of Christ. 4 The commendation and praise of
John.
Of the first.
ANd when John being in prison, heard the works of Christ, he sent two of
his Disciples unto him. John being bound in gyues, teaches by his own
example what is the lot of the ministers of the word. And the same John by
sending his disciples unto Christ, shows the true duty of the ministers of
the word. I will therefore speak of either of them in order, and first of
their state in this life.

John exhorts men to repentance, and finds fault with their wickedness.
And what happens to him for it? that does the story tell Math. 14. for there
it is showed, that because John reproved Herod, and told him it was not
lawful for him to have his brothers wife, he was cast in prison, and at
length lost his head. This reward received the holy Baptist at the ungodly
tyrants hand. For as a Surgion if he touch the wound of a mad man, and go
about too cure it, can look for none other thing, but that the mad man should
fall upon him, and render evil for good: even so if the minister of Gods word
reprove the sin of any ungodly man (and especially of any tyra^t) to the
intent he should repent and he heled of the wound of sin: let him look for
none other than threats, reuilyngs, and death. How true this is, not only John's
example techeth, but also the story of the whole Church, and the story both
of the old and new Testament. For this have so many been famous through
martyrdom: For this have so many Prophets been put to death: for this were the
apostles persecuted: for this was Paul murdered, Peter crucified, and diverse
others diversely tormented: which things do put us in mind of the lot of the
sain^tes in this life. But happy is ye Cross which Christ avouches too be
noble. Blissed is the Cross, which is the way too true and everlasting
victory by Christ Jesus.

And therefore the mynisters of the Gospel must not be slack in their duty
because of persecution: but being stirred up by the example of John, they must
do their duty manfully, which consists chiefly in these points: First, let
them preach Christ, and show the Lamb that takes away the sins of the
world. Then let them rebuke sin. For they are the instruments of the holy
Ghost, who by them reproves the world of sin, as we see in John. Thirdly let
them beautify their mynisterie by their holy and godly life. Fourthly let them
despise the threatenings of the world as John did, putting them selves in a
redynesse too suffer any torments rather tha^ to seem slack in their office.
Fifthly, if it happen them too be cast intoo prison, and too be put too
torture for performing their duty accordingly, what shall they then do? Shall
they deny Christ? in no wise. But they shall send their Disciples unto
Christ: not fearing them that an do no more but kill the body: but him rather,
who as he can destroy both body and soul, so also can he save them both.
Thus much is spoken breefly concerning the first place.

Of the second.
ARt thou he that shall come, or do we look for an other? The error of
John's disciples con^erning ye Messiah, gave occasion of this message and
demand. For they being partly offended at the outward appeerance of Christ
(as it appears by the Lords answer) and partly being begiled through
affection too their master, mystooke John too have been the Messiah. John too
the intent too rid his disciples of this errrour, sends them too Christ, too
enquire of him whether he were the very Messiah, or whether some other were
still too be looked for: that by this means they might both by words and
deeds of Christ himself, be more fully instructed concerning Christ, that
he was the true Messiah and not John. John then sends not his disciples to
Christ, for that he himself douted of Christ: but too procure the salvation of
his douting disciples. Let us therefore learn of John, too have a lowly
opinion of our selves, that we take not any thing upon us arrogantly. And let
us learn of his disciples, to perform obedience too our superiors: and
specially too them that by word and life do send us the right way to Christ.

Of the third.
BUt what answers Christ? Go and bear John word what ye hear and see.
The blind see, the lame walk, the lepres are cleansed, the deaf hear, the
dead rise again, the poor receive the glad tidings of the Gospel, and
blissed is he that is not offended at me.

This answer contains four things: signs undoubtedly showing the true
Messiah: the image of the Church in this life: to whom the Gospel
perteyneth: and an admonition that no man should be offended at the outward
appeerance of Christ and his Church.

The proof that Jesus himself is the very Messiah is this. Whosoever by his
own power, gives sight too the blind: to the criples, ableness too go
upright: to the lepres, health: too the deaf, hearing: to the dead, life: and
preaches the glad tidings of the gospel too the poor, (that is to say) too
the consciences that are broken and sorrowful with the feeling of sin:) He
out of all doubt is the true Messiah. For Esaias prophesies of the Messiah in
these: Ye weak hearted be of good comfort, fear not: Behold your God shall
bring a discharge of vengeance. God himself shall come, and save us: Whereby
shall we know him? the Prophet answers: Then shall the eyes of the blind be
opened: and the ears of the deaf shall hear: and the lame shall leap as a
heart: and the toongs of many shall be loosened. And the same prophet says: The
spirit of ye Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad
tidings to the poor, that I should remedy them that are broken in heart, and
preach liberty too prisoners, and let them out that are shut up. In as much
then as ye see me (according too the foresayings of the Prophets) too
perform these things by mine own power: why do ye not acknowledge me to be
the Messiah? And so Christ by this demonstration proves himself to be the
true Messiah, and teaches that it is his office too give aid too the
miserable and afflicted.

Furthermore, ye image of the church and kingdom of Christ is seen here to be
despised before the world. The hearers of Christ, are, the poor, the sick, and
the despised in the sight of the world: unto these does Christ preach ye way of
salvation, and heals their diseases. And like as he did then heal the
diseases of the body: even so at this day heals he the consciences of sinners
wounded with sin, and brings spiritual gladness to their hearts: which
thing they feel in very deed which in true invocation do hear the voice of
the Gospel.

Where he says that the poor receive the glad tidings of the Gospel, he
shows to whom the Gospel belongs: namely to the poor, that is to say, to
the broken in heart for the filthynesse of their sins. Whereupon it is said in
the psalm. A sacrifice too god is a troubled spirit: a contrite and humbled
heart, O God, shall thou not despise. And an other Psalm: Which heals them
that be of a broken heart. And Esaye the.57. GOD dwells with the broken and
lowly spirit, too quicken the spirit of the lowly, and too quicken the heart
of the broken. The Gospel then pertains only too such as feeling their own
sins, are sorry for them, and are afraid of Gods judgment, and cast away
purpose of sinning any more. The Gospel therefore is a joyful tidings of the
forgiveness of sins, and a comfort in the heart through the word and the
holy ghost, which belongs unto them only that repent and believe the
Gospel, receive remission of their sins, are endued with the righteousness
of Christ (which being imputed too them for their own, they appear as
ryghtuous in the sight of God) are endued with the holy Ghost, and being now
made a new creature in Christ, begin too obey Christ through Faith, and
endeuer daily too abound in all knowledge and understanding. Philip. j.

The Lords admonishment, Blissed is he that is not offended at me, gives an
inckling here, first that John's Disciples were offended at the person of
Christ: secondly it warns all men in general, not too be offended at the
outward appeerance of Christ's kingdom: so as they should either not receive
the Gospel at all, or else having received it, should reject it: after which
sort many are in all times offended, Cicero in his time was so offended at the
bondage of Gods people, that he would not receive the Doctrine of the Church.
Every city (says he too Laelius) has his peculiar religion, and we have
ours. Though Jerusalem were in prosperity, and that the Jews were in
quietness: yet notwithstanding should we for the glory of our Empire, the
majesty of our name, and the traditions and customs of our auncetors, hold
scorn of the superstitions of their religion: and now much more, because that
nation has showed what good will it bears to our empire, by wars, and how
dear it is too the Gods immortal, in that it is subdued and let out too
ferme. etc.

These four things do the Papists also boast of at this day, Glory,
majesty of name, traditions of elders, and Lordship. But Christ in this place
bids us take heed, that we suffer not our selves too be deceived with such
ghosts: but rather that we should join our selves with the little and despised
flock, which hears the voice of the shepherd Christ. For it is more wisdom
too enter intoo the Arc with Noe and a few other, and too be saved from the
danger of the flood, than with the greatest and most flourishing part of the
world to perish. It is better too rejoice with Lazarus full of biles in
Abraham's bosom, than with the rich glutton too be punished with the torments
of hell.

Of the fourth.
AS they departed, Jesus began too speak to the people concerning John. What
went ye out intoo the wilderness too see? etc. This commendation of John
serves too this end, yt the people should highly esteem the ministry of John
and believe his voice, as that which was heavenly. And Christ in this
commendation, joins toogither all the things that beecome a right Apostle, and
he praises him for four virtues: first for constancy, for he compares him
too an immovable rock, which is not shaken of the winds as a reed. Went ye
out too see a reed shaken with the vvind? as if he should have said, John is
no such man: but rather like a firm rock, which yields too no tempests nor
waves. The true preacher of the Gospel therefore must neither for fear of men,
nor for favor, swerve from the truth: Which thing (alas for sorrow) too many
do now adays.

Secondly, he commends John for his kind of life, that is too wit, for that
he lived not a nice life, as the flattering courtiers: nor sought estimation,
as they that hunt for the favor of men: but led a life meet for his office and
calling, such as neither hindered the service of God, nor made him slouthful in
executing his duty. This generally pertains also too all the ministers of
Gods word: Namely that they should live in such wise, as neither niceness
may be seen in their behavior, nor they them selves be by other vain things
hindered too do their duty.

Thirdly he commends John for the excellentnesse of his Prophecy, for he
prefers him before all other Prophets. Fourthly he commends him for the
message that he comes of. For this is he of whom it is said: Behold I
send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.
Therefore is John the ambassador of Messiah, and the foreru^ner that makes way
for the king coming after, by preaching of repentance. This man's example must
the ministers of the Gospel (after a certain manner of theirs) follow. They
must prepare the way unto Christ: they must bring men unto Christ. They
must show the only way unto salvation, Christ Jesus: Too whom be honor and
glory for ever. So be it.

The fourth Sunday in Aduent. The Gospel. John. j.
THis is the record of John: when the Jews sent Priests and Levites from
Jerusalem, too ask him: what art thou? And he confessed and denied not, and
said plainly: I am not Christ. And they asked him: what then, art thou
Helias? and he says: I am not art thou the Prophet? and he ansvvered, no.
Then said they unto him: What art thou that we may give an answer unto
them that sent us? what say thou of thy self? he said: I am the voice of a
crier in the wilderness: make straight the way of the Lord, as said the
Prophet Esaias. And they which were sent, were of the Phariseys: and they
asked him, and said unto him: why baptisest thou then, if thou be not
Christ, nor Helias, neither that Prophet? John answered them, saying: I do
Baptize with water, but there stands one among you, whom you know not, he
it is, which though he came after me, was before me, vvhoose shoo la^^het I
am not worthy too unloose. These things were done at Bethabara, beyond
Jordan where John did baptize.

The exposition of the text.
THe occasion of this Gospel was this: The Phariseys had heard how that John
set up a new manner of doctrine, and brought in new ceremonies: and that
without authority from the Bishops: As how he ^ad men prepare the way of the
Lord: how he received all Iewrie unto baptism: how he cried yt the promised
king and Messiah was at hand. The Phariseis being moved at the report of these
things, sent messengers too him intoo the wilderness too demand of him by
what authority he did those things. This they did, not for that they were
desirous to give ear too his doctrine: but rather that they might destroy
both Christ and him: that they might keep still their own gainful
ceremonies: and that (without any regard had too the welfare of the people
committed too their charge) they might maintain their own authority. The
example of whom our Papists do lay before them selves and follow it stoutly
enough.

The sum thereof is this: that they enquire of John whether he be Christ:
and that John (as a true servant of Christ) bears record unto Christ, and
bids them make straight the way of the Lord: covertly confirming his own
vocation too be heavenly. For instruction sake let this Gospel be divided
intoo three places.

1 John's record concerning Christ. 2 The description of John: and in him of
all godly ministers of Gods word. 3 What it is too prepare the way of the
Lord.
Of the first.
IN the record of John, six things are too be considered. First whoo are sent,
and why they are sent. Those that are sent, are Pharisees, and they are sent
from Pharisees: most holy men (too outward appeerance) from most holy men:
which seemed too them selves the pillars of Gods church which had prerogative
of succession: which challenged too them selves alone the title of the church.
But behold, they that seemed too be the heads of the church, are enemies of
Christ. Whereby we may learn, that credit is too be given neither to titles nor
too successions, but only unto Gods word. Also we may mark the craft of
Satan, which these Pharisees had learned of their master Satan. For they
enquire here, not because they favored either Christ or John (as they would
seem to have done): but too the intent too have destroyed them both, as did
the Serpent in Paradise.

2 Too whom is record borne? unto Christ. Whoo bears record? John. By
this, learn two things. First, that the ministry of the word must shoot
at the mark, that is, too bear record unto Christ. Secondly, that it is the
art of a Christian, too stay him self upon the pure confession of Christ,
against the crafts of Satan.

3 Before whom is record borne? Before the world and Christ's enemies. Whereby
it is too be learned: that the godly man must confess Christ before all the
whole world, with the peril of his estimation, his goods, and his life,
whereuntoo, partly the promise, and partly the threatening will provoke us. The
promise is this: whoosoeuer shall confess me before men, him also will I
confess before my heavenly father. The threatening is this: whoosoeuer shall
be ashamed of me before men, of him also will I be ashamed before my
heavenly father.

4 The sum of John's record concerning Christ, is this. That Christ is very
man, very God, the true Messiah, and the forgiuer of sins. For when he
says, he it is that was too come after me he shows his true manhood: and
where he adds, and yet was before me, he confesses his godhead. But whereas
he says, and he stands among you, whom you know not, he answers too
their question, and pronounces Jesus too be the Messiah. The lauer of baptism
does openly declare, yt it is thoffice of the Messiah to forgive sins.

5 The use and fruit of this record is, that we ought too believe the
witness of John, and embrace Christ the true forgiuer of sins, whoo has
washed us from all our sins with his own blood: whereof he has delivered
unto us an effectual sign, namely Baptism, of which we will entreat else
where.

6 The Phariseis are an Image of disguised Christians, (that is too say,
hipocrites) which cannot away with the doctrine of true godliness: but feine
them selves godly in outward behauior, and pretend too be most holy, whereas
they bear another person inwardlye: and thereupon it is, that such are called
hypocrites. For like as they are hypocrites in Enterludes, which in apparel and
outward gesture represe^t persons absent: Even so the Pharisees set forth as
it were but only a visor of godliness which is far from them, for men to
look upon: where upon they are called Hypocrites, as whoo (although in very
deed they be ungodly in their hearts: yet) do seem outwardly most holy.

Of the second.
I Am the voice of a crier in the desert. First John defines all Prophets,
Apostles, and ministers of Gods word that they are a voice. Secondly that they
are not a vain voice, but ye voice of a crier, that is to say of a preacher.
Thirdly, in the desert, that is too say in the whole world. Fourthly the
hearers are done to understand of the worthiness of the voice, for it is not
the voice of man, but of God, that cries. etc. Fifthly, that John alleges the
testimony of Esaias. For the godly preacher must avouch nothing without the
testimony of the holy scriptures. This present testimony is taken out of
the.40. Chapter. Sixthly, the preachers also are warned, that they father not
another man's voice upon God, than his own. For such as do so, are not the
ministers of God, but the bellows of the Devil, which kind of men we ought to
flee no less than woolues.

Of the third.
TOo make way too the lord, is (by the witness of the same John Baptist,) too
work repentance. And not without great cause did John use this figure of
speech, which properly pertains unto worldly kingdoms. For the ways where
kings shall pass, are wont too be prepared or made leuel against their
coming, too the intent they may go without peril and stumbling. This does
Esaias expound, when he says. Every valley shall be raised, and every mountain
and hill shall be made leuel, and the crooked ways shall be made straight, and
the rough places shall be made smoothe. These things are too be understood
spiritually, concerning all impedimentes both inward and outward, which may
hinder the coming of Christ our king unto us. Inward impediments are lack of
the knowledge of God, lusts, lewdness, foolish boldness and such like.
Outward impediments are, all stumbling blocks which Satan casts in our
ways, in doctrine, in the Sacraments, and in conversation. And (too speak the
matter in few words,) the mountains (that is to say, whatsoever is high in ye
world) are to be cast down by ye preaching of the law. The valleys, (that is
too say, such as are broken in spirit) are ^o be raised up by preching of ye
gospel. Breers (yt is to say, evil life and lewd affections,) are too be
stubbed up by new obedience, and with an earnest desire too frame the life
according to gods word. And too thentent that that may be done, it is
required first, yt there be criers in ye desert. Secondly there is need of
wholesome doctrine, which is ye la^pe of them yt prepare ye way. Thirdly it is
requisite, that when the Lord comes, (that is too say, when the grace of God
shyneth in our hearts) we yield our selves obedient through true repentance,
and show our selves too be gods people, by doing homage unto Christ our Lord.
Lastly it behooves us too offer unto him gifts and the sacrifice of our lips,
that is too say, too acknowledge him, both with mind, voice, confession, and
conversation.

Howbeeit in as much as these things cannot be understood without applying of
examples: We will breefly declare the meening of John and of the Prophet by
examples. The sum of John's sermon was this: Do penance, and believe the
Gospel: which is all one with that which he says out of Esaias, prepare the
way of the Lord. How did he that? He did beat down the hills: For when he
saw many of the Pharisees and Saduces come unto his Baptim, he said unto
them. Ye generation of Uipers, whoo taught you to flee from the wrath that is
too come? Say not within your selves we have Abraham too our Father. For I say
unto you, that god is able, even out of these stones, too raise up children
unto Abraham, for now is the axe laid too the root of the tree. Every tree
that yields not good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast intoo the fire. See
here, how John makes the mountains low. First when he calls them the
generation of Uipers, he finds fault with their lewd heart, which was desirous
of blood, and unthankful. Secondly he takes away the cause of their chief
boasting. For they had a pride in themselves, because they were the children of
Abraham. But he tells them, that this avails them nothing. For GOD is not
an accepter of persons. Neither are those by and by the children of Abraham,
which are borne of the fleshly seed of Abraham: but those are Abraham's
children, which follow Abraham in faith and obedience, like as Christ bears
witness in the Gospel of S. John, calling them the children of the Devil,
which boasted themselves too be the children of Abraham. Thirdly he adds a
threatening, unless they amend, The ax (says he) is laid too the root of the
tree. That is to say, Gods vengeance is not far of, that every evil tree may
be cut down, and cast into the fire. In likewise must other ministers of Gods
word dig down the mountains, by telling men their faults, by taking away the
cause of boasting, and by laying before them the punishments, which rest upon
all them that amend not. Then shall they also raise up the valleys: and how?
Even as John did in showing Christ, when he said: behold the Lamb of god that
takes away the sins of the world. When he says, behold, he allureth them to
faith. When he adds, the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world, he expresses the ground of reconciliation. Thirdly he cutteth up the
breers, when he says: bring ye forth fruts worthy of repentance.

A like example have we in the Prophet Nathan. First he did cast down the
mountain, that is to say, the hypocrisy in David: who having co^mmmitted
aduoutry and murder, lived careless as though he had done very well. And this
did he by propounding a parable of two men, of whom the one was poor and the
other rich. The rich man had many Oxen and sheep, and the poor man had
nothing but only one sheep, which he had bought and nourished, and which had
grown up in his house among his own children, eating with him of his bread,
and drinking of his cup, and sleeping in his bosom, and was to him as his
daughter. But when a stranger came to the rich man's, the rich man took this
poor man's sheep, and set it on the table for his guest, sparing his own.
When David heard this, he was sore displeased, saying: he is the child of death
that has done this deed. Nathan answered, thou art the same man. Thou have
slain Urias the Hethite with the sword, and have taken his wife too be thy
wife. Behold (says the Lord) I will raise up mischief against thee. See how
Nathan charge David with his sin, takes away the matter of boasting, least
he should think he ought not too be punished because he was a king: and he
threatens punishment unto him. Here is that great mountain and hypocrisy
beaten down. But when Nathan saw David cast down and under foot, in so much
that he said with a great outcry, I have sinned against the Lord: he raises
up this vallie, saying: the Lord has taken away thy sin, thou shall not dye.
Afterward also he cutteth up the Breers, when by prophesying the death of his
son for a punishment, he keeps him in his duty.

After the same sort, Peter in the Acts of the Apostles, first by preaching
the law, cutteth the combs of the Jews, and makes low their mountains. He
charge them with their sins: he tells them it boots them nothing at all
too be of the posterity of Abraham, and he lays before them the threatenings
of punishments unless they amend. By and by after, when he heereth how they
are stricken too the heart, and cast down with consideration of their sin, he
rayseth them up, by offering Christ unto them. He bids them repent and be
baptized in the name of Christ. And finally he takes heed that no Breers grow
up, by promising them the holy Ghost.

These examples are notable, and agree to the conversion of the first man. Adam
by following his new schoolmaster the Devil, wexed proud. Him does God first
cast down too the ground by rebuking him, in setting before his eyes the
greatness of his sin. Anon after, he raises him up ageine, by giving him a
promis of the seed that should tread down the Serpents head.

Likewise the Lord abaseth the proud Pharisees, and raises up the troubled
Mary Magdalene, whom he encourages too godly and holy life, saying: Thy faith
has made thee whole, go in peace.

But as for those ministers of the word, which after this sort do neither
beat down the mountains, nor raise up the valleys, nor cut up the brambles:
they de^e not like the servants of God, but like the bondslaues of the Devil,
and of their own bellye. Many make outcries in general terms against
whordome, incest, usury, and other vices: but there are few that will chardge a
man with his faults too his face, as John did Herod, the Pharisees and
hypocrites: as Christ did to his heerers: as Ambrose did to Theodosius. And why
do they not so? Partly because they wey not earnestly whose room they supply:
and partly because they fear hazard of their life and goods. But let them
against this blindness and fearfulness, set the commandment of their
calling, and the promis whereby Christ has assured his servant that he will
be present with them, and that he imputes done unto himself whatsoever is
done unto his ministers. Furthermore they must confirm themselves by the
steadfastness and example of John and of other holy ministers, and they must
from time to time pray unto god, to give them courage, that they may be bold
too do those things which may make too the furtherance of his glory, too whom
be honor world without end. Amen.

The feast of Christ's birth. The Gospel. Luke. ij.
THere went out a commandment from Augustus the Emperor that all the
world should be taxed. And this first taxing was made, when Cyrenius was
liuetenannt in Syria. And every* man went unto his own City too be taxed.
And Joseph also ascended from Galylie, out of a City called Nazareth intoo
Ievvrye unto the City of David which is called Bethleem, because he was of
the house and lineage of David, too be taxed with Mary his spoused wife,
which was with child. And it fortuned while they were there, her time was
come that she should be delivered, and she brought forth her first begotten
son, and vvrapped him in svvadling clothes and laid him in a maunger, because
there was no room for them within the Inn. And there were in the same
region shepherds abiding in the feeld, and watching their flock by night. And
lo, the Angel of the Lord stood hard by them, and the brightness of the
Lord shone round about them, and they were sore afraid. But the Angel said
unto them, Be not afraid. For behold I bring you tidings of great joy, that
shall come too all people. For unto you is borne this day in the City of
David a savior, which is Christ the Lord. And take this for a sign: ye shall
find the child svvadled and laid in a maunger. And straight way there was
with the Angel a multitude of heavenly soldiers lauding God and saying.
Glory too God on high, and peace on the earth, and unto men good vvil.

The exposition of the text.
THIS Story is a confirmation of the Article of our belief, Which was borne
of the Uirgin Marie. Which Article sets forth unto us his new birth,
which sanctifies the old, Adamish and corrupt birth, in all them that take
hold upon this CHRIST by Faith: And albeit that this Article of Christ's
birth ought too be thoroughly known, even unto the children of the
Chrystians: yet notwithstanding, the Church for great causes has appointed a
certain Feast thereuntoo: verily that the Story thereof, with his
circumstaunces, may be set forth and learned: not only that we might be
delighted with the declaration of this most goodly story: but rather much
more that the use and profit of this most high Article, may be seen in
strengthening and raising up of men's consciences. For the holy stories are not
too be red as the stories of men, but too the intent we should continually
think upon them, and exercise our selves in them, for our teaching,
instruction, and comfort, and too the intent that by reading the scriptures,
we may have hope. Hereof we will make but two places, wherein lie hid many
other as shall appear: and these they be.

1 The story of Christ's birth with his circumstances and members. 2 The use
and practice of this story.
Of the first.
IN the Story let us consider nine members: whereof the first is concerning
the time. Christ was borne after the building of Rome, the 751. year: after
the creation of ye world the.3963. year. the 42. year of the reign of the
Emperor Augustus. From the birth of Christ unto this present day, are
fulfilled.1560. years. But why does the Evangelist make mention so evidently
of the time, of the Emperoures commandment, and of the leeuetenant Cyrenius?
There are three causes. The first is, the foresayings of the Prophets. The
Prophecies of Christ's coming, are of two sorts. For some do simply declare
that Messiah should come, with out foreappoynting any certain time: Of which
sort are these: The seed of the woman shall tread down the Serpents head.
Also, in thy seed shall all nations be blissed. And Esaias. 7. Behold a maid
shall conceive. etc. Also David: The Lord said unto my Lord. etc. And Balaam,
there shall rise a Star out of Jacob. Other Prophecies foretell the time and
year of Christ's passion, and of his reign. Jacob: The Scepter shall not be
taken from Judah, until Zilo come, that is too say, her son, namely the son
of the woman. As if he had said, the seed of the woman that is promised, too
destroy the works of the Devil, shall then come, when the Scepter shall be
taken from Judah. Therefore when as Luke makes mention of Augustus, of the
tribute, and of the foreine governor, he means that even then the time was
come, wherein it behooved Christ to be borne, according to the Prophecy of
Jacob. Danyell also expressed in his ninthe Chapter the year of Christ's
crucifying and resurrection, in this wise. Know thou and understand, that from
the end of this talk of the leading back of the people, and building ageine
of Jerusalem, unto Christ the Captain, there shall be seven weeks, and
three score and two weeks. And after three score and two weeks Christ
shall be slain. And in one week shall he stablish his covenant with many, and
in half a week shall he make the Sacrifise too cease.

Here does Daniell foretell plainly the time of Christ's death. But three
things are too be marked here. What a week is: when the account is to be
begone: and why he disposes the three score and ten weeks intoo three
sorts.

A week in this place is not too be taken for a week of days, but of
years, as in Leuit. 25. so that a week may contain seven years, and
seventy weeks, four hundred, four score and ten years.

But from what time must we begin too account them? from the end of the talk.
This end of the talk, diverse men understand diversely. Some refer it to the
decree of Cyrus, who after the accomplishment of the three score and ten years
of the Captivity, granted the Jews leave too return and build the temple of
Jerusalem. How be it for as much as the building of it was let by their
neighbors the space of forty and two years, until Artaxerxes with the long
hands, granted new license ageine, at which time Haggeus and Zacharias also
prophesied of the building of the Temple, that it should go foreward: there
are that begin too reckon from the second year of Longhand. If we follow the
first reckening, there sha^^ be three score and ten weeks of years unto the
birth of Christ.

If we follow the latter, there shall be three score and ten weeks of years,
unto the baptim of Christ, saving half a week, that is too say, three
years and a half, in which time Christ stablished his Testament, according
to the saying of Daniell. If ye confer these things with the stories, ye
shall find that Luke noted the time of Christ's birth according to this
reckening.

The second cause, is that the Jews may be confuted which look still for a
Messiah, now after that the common weal of Moses has been utterly
extinguished many hundred years ago.

The third cause is that we should be assured, that Christ is borne and given
unto us in very deed already, whom God long ago promised too be the deliverer
of mankind out of the chappes of the serpent.

The second is of the place. He is borne in Bethleem, and in wayfaring. In
Bethleem, for too fulfill the Prophecy of Micheas which Matthew alleges in
his second Chapter, out of the fifth of Micheas: And in wayfaring, too give us
too understand, that Christ's Church shall in this world continue in
wayfarings, and that not without contempt and persecution. The same thing does
John declare, by his thryce repeating of one sentence. The darkness
comprehended him not: the world knew him not: his own received him not. And
these things do argue that Christ's kingdom is not worldly.

The third is of his parents. According too his manhood, he is borne in
wedlock truly: but of a maiden: of which thing there are right weighty
causes. The first is, promise. The seed of the woman shall tread down the
Serpents head. Also: Behold a maid shall breed child and bring forth a
son. The second is necessity: for no man that is borne according too the
course of nature, is without spot and sin. Therefore was it of necessity,
that the Messiah should by the holy Ghost be conceived of the seed of a maid,
without the seed of man, too the intent he might be clean from all spot of
sin, as it became the true Emanuell God and man too be.

The fourth for that Christ is very God and very man, I must out of the first
Chapter of John speak of the Godhead of Christ, and declare the
circumstances of time, manner, matter, place, deed, and cause. Therefore if
thou demand when Christ was as touching his Godhead? John answers. In the
beginning was the word, that is to say, the word was before the beginning of
all things that were created. Christ then is no creature. If thou ask how he
was? John answers, and the word was with God: Ergo he is another person
than God the father. If thou enquire what he was? He answers and the word
was God: by which saying is mente, that the substance of the Godhead is all
one. If thou demand what he did? He answers, all things were made by
him. If thou ask what he does? He answers, he lightneth every man that
comes intoo this world. If thou ask whether he came? He answers, intoo
this world he came, intoo his own he came. If thou ask in what manner he
came? He answers, the word became flesh. If thou demand wherefore he
came? He answers that he might give power too as many as believe in him, too
be made the sons of GOD. If thou ask when he came? He answers, there was
a man sent from GOD whoose name was John. etc. These things I thought good too
touch breeflye concerning the Godhead of Christ.

The fifth is of the Cradle of Christ, which signifies nothing else than
contempt of the world and utter poverty, which poverty it was Christ's will
too taste of, too the intent he might make us rich. Let proud folks look
intoo this Cradle, and lay down their loftiness. Let poor men look into it,
and cease to despair, as though they were despised for their poverty.

Here is too be noted the abuse of all things created by God. Bethleem
serves for lucre, and the Inn for guests: and Christ the King and Lord of
all things is thrust out intoo a stable. So also at this day, the Church is
despised, while the ungodly flow in riches, honor and power.

The sixth is of the appeering of the angels, whoo first testify that the Lord
is come: and secondly show by their very brightness, what manner of king the
new born Christ should be: and thirdly they declare by their himne, what manner
of benefits he shall bestow, and what manner of glory is yielded thereby unto
God.

The seventh is of the preaching of the Angels unto the shepeherds. Fear not:
for behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy that shall be among all
people, because there is borne unto you this day a Savior (which is Christ
the Lord) in the City of David. And this shall be a sign unto you: you shall
find the child vvrapped in svvadling clothes, and laid in a maunger.

This Sermon is the excellentest of all Sermons that ever were made in the
world before, whereof there are many parts.

First the Angels forbid the shepherds too be afraid: whereby they show that
Christ came too take away the curse of the law, and sin, for which the curse
came upon men.

The second is the preaching of glad tidings: I bring you tidings of great
gladness. When he says great, he puts a difference between it, and the
joy of the world, which la^teth but a short time, and is grounded upon a
weak foundation. But this joy which the Angels bring tidings of, is called
great for four causes. First for the matter or substance of it, which is
great: namely the reconciling of us unto GOD. Secondly for the continuance and
steadfastness of it, for it endures for ever, and it abides constant. Thirdly
for that it does not perteine too a few only, but unto all men that by faith
receive this tidings of the gladness. Fourthly for that it is spiritual,
perteyning too the salvation of the whole man.

The third point is: the cause and ground of this gladness. Because (says
he) this day is borne unto you a Savior which is Christ the Lord.

The fourth: he shows the place. In the City of David (says he) that is
too weete, Bethleem.

The fifth: a sign is added too the word. For he says: this shall be a
sign unto you. Ye shall find the child lapped up in clothes, and laid in
a maunger. This sign does two things. First it leads them the right way
unto the Child, least in seeking him they should mistake him. For albeeit
that all moothers do wrappe their children in swaddling cloutes, yet they lay
them not in maungers. Secondly it puts a difference between the kingdom of
this child, and the kingdoms of this world. For the worldly kingdoms have
outward gloriousness. And these are the parts of the Angels sermon.

The eight is of Christ's birth. First he is revealed unto the Shepeheardes.
Whereby two things are too be learned. One, that Christ's kingdom is not
worldely. Another, that Christ's kingdom belongs too the poor: according
too this saying, the poor receive the glad tidinges of the Gospel.

The ninthe is of the song of the Angels: which is: Glory unto God on
high, in earth peace, and too men good will? This song does in a marvelous
breefnesse, comprehend the fruit of the Lords birth, which consists in three
things. For first, glory is attributed unto God. Secondly peace is made unto
men. And thirdly is showed the good will of God toward men.

First therefore when the Angels say, Glory unto God on high. Their meaning
is, that no man can yield true glory unto GOD, without the true knoweledge
of Christ. Uerely man was created unto this end, that he should glorify
his creator. But through the fall of our first parents it came too pass, that
neither he knew GOD aryght, nor glorified him aright. If thou demand what it
is too give glory unto God? too give glory unto any body: is nothing else
but too attribute true virtue unto him. As when some king deals justly,
wisely, valiantly, and mercifully, his subjects yield him glory: that is too
say, his subjects like well of his doings, and with singular good will do
blaze them abroad. And in like wise is glory given unto God, when his virtues
are rightly acknowledged and felt, as his wisdom, his righteousness, his
puissance, his mercifulness, his truth, and such others.

The wisdom of God is seen in this, that he repaireth ageine man whom he had
created too his glory: so as he might by his son borne of a virgin, recover
ageine the Image of God which he had lost through sin, and so give glory too
the wisdom of God.

His rightuousenesse is seen by this, that he would not receive intoo favor
man that had sinned, without amends made for the wrong that he had done. For
whereas it was of necessity, that either man must have perished everlastingly
for his sin, or else that some one of mankind must have made satisfaction
unto God, by abiding punishment for all mankind, God gave his own son, whoo
taking manhood upon him, has in the same satisfied the rightuousenesse of
God: and therefore is the praise of righteousness worthily too be attributed
too God, for the birthe of Christ our Lord.

His puissance is commended, in that he has through Christ overcome the
Serpent and his seed, yea and rooted out his kingdom, so far forth as
pertayneth unto all them that take hold by faith upon this Jesus that is
borne.

His mercyfulnesse shines in this, that by his son and for his Sons sake,
he takes again intoo favor Mankind forlorn and oppressed by the tyranny
of the Devil, and overwhelmed with exceedyng great myseries, calamities,
death, hell, and damnation. This mercyfulnesse of God exceeds all the works
of God, which both the good Angels and the elect men shall set out
everlastingly, yea and the very Deuyls shall acknowledge, though against their
wills.

His truth is made manifest in this, that bearing in mind his promises of old
time, he performs that which he had promised long ago. For at such time as
our first parents fell intoo sin, he promised them the seed of the woman,
which should tread down the head of the Serpent: and this promise he
fulfilleth now in giving us his son.

For these virtues therefore, glory is too be given too God, and that
specially by those that feel his benefits. This glory is then rightly
yielded unto him, first as soon as we acknowledge this woonderful benefit of
God: Secondly, when we embrace his son by faith: Thirdly, when we praise God
with mind, with voice, with confession, and with behavior: And fourthly when
we allure as many as we can too the knowledging of him.

Afterward, when the Angels say, Peace on earth, there is noted the chief
benefit of Christ, for which he came intoo the world, namely that peace
might be made between GOD and man. This peace is the mutual consent of God
and men. Of GOD receiving men intoo his favor for his sons sake: And of men
receiving through faith the benefit offered, with rendryng of thanks and
continual thankfulness of mind. Most sweet are the fruits of this peace:
that is to say, access unto God, ioyfulnesse of spirit, a good conscience,
and gladsome passage out of this life. The things that break this peace, are
sins done against conscience, carelessenesse, and neglecting of the word.
And therefore they are too be shunned no less than plagues.

In the last place they add: And too men good will. That is too weet: As
soon as God is reconciled unto men through Christ, he favors and embraces
them with a true and fatherly affection, as most dearly beloved children,
whom he holds right dear, as adopted in Christ. Of this good will speaks
David also in his fifth Psalm. Because thou shall bliss the righteous, O
Lord, thou defendest him with thy good will as with a sheelde.

When as David in this place compares Gods good will too a sheeld, he shows
the true use and fruit thereof. For he means, that Gods favor is too us in
steed of a buckler, wherewith we are defended against the weapons of them
that assault us. The devil brandisheth his fiery darts at us: but this sheeld
keeps us safe. And so of all others.

Of the second.
THe use of it is double. General, which is derived of the whole history: and
Special, which is derived of the several parts. The general use therefore,
is that we should learn to receive and embrace our true Savior God and man
borne of the virgin, by setting him against all our miseries, sin, death,
curse, Gods wrath, and hell: assuring our selves that this son of God and
Mary (is according unto the prophecy of Esaias) borne too us, and given too us:
yea and that, too the intent he should be righteousness and salvation too
all that believe in him. The special use of it is manifold: First that we
should learn of Christ's parents, too be obedient too magistrates. Secondly,
that we should learn of the shepherds, to give credit to ye testimonies
concerning Christ: too seek Christ: and too return too the woorks of our
vocation. Thirdly that we should learn of the Angels, first too preach Christ
too them that are unknown: whereby all the godly ministers of Gods word may
comfort them selves in their ministry, for that they teach the same thing
that was delivered before by so princely spirits. Moreover, we may learn of
the Angels and shepherds together, too confess this Christ. Finally we may
learn too glorify God, and too sing with the angels, Glory be to God on high,
too whom be honor and praise world without end. Amen.

The second holyday in Christmas called S. Stephens day. The Gospel. Math.
xxiij.
Behold, I send unto you Prophets and wise men and Scribes, and some of
them ye shall kill and crucify: and some of them shall ye scourge in your
Synagoges, and persecute them from city too city: that upon you may come all
the rightuous blood which has been shed upon the earth, from the blood of
righteous Abell, unto the blood of Zacharias, the son of Barachias, whom
ye slew betvveene the Temple and the aultare. Verily I say unto you: all
these things shall come upon this generation. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou
that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how
often vvoulde I have gathered thy children toogither, even as the hen
gathers her chickens under her vvings, and ye would not? Behold, your house
is left unto you desolate. For I say unto you: Ye shall not see me
henceforth, til that ye say: Blissed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord.

The exposition of the Text.
BEFORE we go in hand with the Exposition of the Text, because this day is
dedicated to Saint Steven, I will declare why the feasts of saints are wont
too be hallowed in the church of God; and what we ought too mark in the
example of Saint Stephen.

Days are kept holy in the Church of GOD, not after the manner of the heathen,
as is wont too be among the Papists, that we should call upon the saints as
patrons and intercessors: which thing cannot be done without horrible sacrilege
and contempt of ye son of god: but there are many right weighty causes why it
is profitable that the feasts of certain saints, should be retained in our
Churches, and they be chiefly six.

The first cause is, yt the continual history of ye church may be always
before our eyes, which must be unto us both a rule to live by, and a mean to
put us in mind of gods providence For if it be a pleasure too read the
histories of heathen men, in who^ apeered a visor of some virtue: undoubtedly it
will be much more pleasure to read ye histories of those in who^ shoon bright
ye lively images of true virtues, as in Paul, Peeter, Mary, Stephen, Magdalen,
the thief, and many others.

The second is, that the testimonies of the doctrine, of the ministry of
teaching, and of the Church, might be considered. For there were miracles
done, there were wonderful callings too the ministry of the Church, and
the doctrine was set open through the whole Church. In these testimonies it
is a most beautiful sight, too behold the continual consent of the true
Church, in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and in the grounds or
chief articles of the faith, and too discern the true doctrine of the Church
from the corruptions, lies, and deceits of all ages.

The third is, that GOD should be glorified, and thanks yielded unto him, for
opening him self unto us, for delyuering us his doctrine, for showing his
presence in the church, and for making us free Denizens of that company,
which is witnessed too be his true Church, and true woorshippers of him.

The fourth is, that the examples may strengthen our faith when we read that
their prayers were heard, and that they were helped from heaven, as it is
said in the.xxxiij. psalm: This poor man cried unto the Lord, and the Lord
heard him: we conceive assured hope, that he will likewise help us when we
call upon him. Let every one of us therefore determine and reason with him self
in this wise: God received Magdalene, the Thief, and Paul intoo favor upon
repentance, notwithstanding their exceeding great sins, wherewith they had
offended God before. Therefore will I flee unto the same Lord God, that he may
take me intoo favor also. He vouchsafed to pardon Peeter after his horrible
fall: and therefore though I be fallen, I will not despair: for he is always
stable in him self, and evermore like him self, and there is no respect of
persons with him.

The fifth is, that every one of us should follow the example of the Saints in
our vocation. Paul was not quayled with the hugeness of persecutions, but
taught the Gospel constantly. His example let the ministers of Gods word
follow. John feared not the threats of Herod: therefore let the godly preacher
learn by his example, too set light hy the woodnesse of the world. Abraham
through faith trained up his house holylie in the true fear of God, and in
calling upon him. Therefore let all godly householders lern at his hand, and so
let all other examples be applied.

The sixth is, that the memorial of Saints may be pleasant unto us, and
their virtue be commended, for that they used well the gifts of GOD, for that
they are Gods houses and witnesses of him, for that they are garnished with
great virtues, and for that they are unto us, lively examples of conversion,
faith, repentance, steadfastness, patience, and other virtues.

These six causes are the weightiest, for which both the memorial of the
Saints (according too the example of the ancient Church) is retained, and
their feasts hallowed: which points being rightly observed, all things turn too
the glory of God, and too the welfare of our selves.

Now must I speak a little concerning Stephen, in whose story let us consider
these circumstances: his religion, his office in the Church, the defense of his
religion, his constancy in confessing it, his calling upon Christ, his
comfort, and the end of his life.

The religion of Stephen. Stephen was a christian, a man full of faith and the
holy ghost, full of grace and manliness. For where as is true faith there is
the holy Ghost. The greater encreasment that faith takes so much the more
does the holy Ghost witness him self too be present, kindling motions in
men's hearts agreeable with the law of God. Contrariwise, where the holy
Ghost is not felt effectual, there also it is manifest that true faith is
away. We have here therefore that which we may follow in Stephen, that is too
weete, an effectual faith, whervntoo the holy ghost bears witness. Those
men follow not Stephens faith, which have it in their mouth, and yet
therewithal wallowe in wicked lusts, and run headlong whither soever their
blind affections lead them.

Stephens office in the church, was too minister too ye poor and too keep the
treasure of the church too the use of the poor saints: in which office no
dout but he was diligent. For he had the holy ghost his gouerner, and true
faith and charity as a rule too work by. Let masters of Hospitalles and
Deacons then set this man before their faces. First let them bring faith with
them, without which no charge nor office can be executed as it ought for to
be. Secondly in the execution, let them show them selves too be governed by
the holy ghost, that they do not either deal too hardly with the poor, or
lay out the goods at other men's pleasure, or be slack in their duty, or
purloyne it away them selves, or else bestow that upon others which of right
belongs unto the poor: but let them perform all faithfulness in their
office, bearing in mind, that God is a looker upon their dealing: assuring
them selves, that those of whom they have the chardge, are the members of
Christ: and believing verily, that they over whom they are set, are the
temples of God, how much soever they be brought under foot with poverty,
diseases, and store of biles and botches.

How Stephen defended the religion that he professed, he shows in the sixth
and seventh chapters of the Acts. He does not in danger forsake his
profession: he cloketh it not, as many do. But he is a constant and manfull
defender of his religion. The multitude of sects which at that time swarmed,
hindered him not at all. He was not abashed at the authority of the Phariseys
and great men in Iewry. But setting him self manfully against sects, he
susteyneth the brunt of the people alone, and defends his religion with a
long oration: which example let us follow also.

His constancy in his confession appears hereby, that he is not feared from
his confession, neither by threatenings, nor by excommunication, nor by stoning:
but as (an invincible Soldier) holds fast his Confession, even in the
mids of peryls. This also is set forth as an example too us.

His calling upon Christ, at such time as he lay overwhelmed with stones,
both shows his faith, and also bears record of the charity of this man.
For he made intercession for them that put him too death, and he made not
intercession for them in vain. For Paul whoo was the keeper of their garments
that stoned Stephen, was afterward converted.

Comfort is found in this invocation. For he saw the son of God (for whose
sake he suffered these things) standing at the right hand of GOD, and making
intercession for him, through which consolation the bitterness of his
punishment, was not a little assuaged. If we therefore follow the example of
this man in our Cross or persecution, we shall assuredly feel the present
help of GOD, comforting us with his holy spirit.

The end of his life was most joyful. For in this prayer Lord Jesus receive
my soul, he yielded up his ghost, and fell a sleep in the Lord. And so he
both finished his race, and kept his faith, and also (as a stout conqueror)
obtained a garland with glory. Let us therefore at the time of our death also,
set him for an example before our eyes.

Now let us look upon the text of the Gospel, the sum whereof is this: Christ
foretells the dangers of the ministers of Gods word, and threatens
punishment too their persecuters. We for instruction sake, will entreat of
four places which are these.

1 The foretelling of the persecutions of the ministers of Gods word. 2 The
aggravating of the sin of the persecuters. 3 The threatening of punishment. 4
The vpbraiding of the unthankfulness of them that refuse Christ, when he
allureth them too repentance.
Of the first.
BEhold I send unto you prophets and wise men, and scribes, and of them some
ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them you shall whip in your
synagoges, and ye shall persecute them from City too City. This speaks
Christ too the Jews, who seemed at that time too be the very church of GOD,
and does them too understand with how great outrage they should in time too
come, persecute his Ambassadors the Prophets and Apostles. Uerily God sends
his word, too the intent that such as receive his word and believe it, might
be saved. Now that some by means thereof become worser, it is not too be
imputed unto God, but too the malice of men, which will not follow God that
draws the^ by his word. Why the ungodly shall persecute the apostles, the
Lord shows plainly in the tenth of Matthew, where he says: And ye shall be
hated of all man for my names sake. John the.xvj. And the hour comes, that
whosoever sleaeth you, shall think he does God hye service. And these things
shall they do too you, because they know not the father nor me. Here he
alleges the cause, why the ungodly are so mad upon the godly, that is to
say: because they know not God: which want of knowing God brings too pass,
that the murderers them selves do think they offer holy sacrifices unto God,
when they put the faithful too death. Yea and they that know not God, run
hedlong into hypocrisy, and out of hypocrisy intoo murder, until they have
filled up the measure of their wickedness.

What then does Christ? He comes too the sick. But they as folk out of
their wits, set them selves against Christ, whom they covet too dispatch out
of the world. He by his ministers shows them their disease. They on the other
side, will be known of no disease: and therefore they both despise the
Physician and persecute his messengers.

Of the second.
THat upon you may come all the righteous blood that is shed upon the earth,
from the blood of righteous Abel. etc. How sore the persecuters of the church
do sin, he shows here. For he says that they shall be guilty of all
the blood of the Saints that ever was shed, no less than if they with their
own hands had slain all the godly men and saints, yea and Christ him self.
For amongst all the ungodly, there is a certain alyance of ungodliness,
which makes their punishementes a like grievous, and their giltinesse a like
equal.

Of the third.
Verily I say unto you, all these things shall come upon this generation.
Although these things are peculiarlye spoken of the Jews being persecuters:
yet generally they perteine to all persecuters of the Church. The oath that the
Lord adds, teaches us two things. First that the ungodly shall one day in
deed be carried too punishment, how long so ever he seem too delay their
judgment. And secondly, that the godly which suffer persecution, shall one day
be gloriously delivered, and their ennimies be put too everlasting torments.
Whereby the godly may learn, not too grudge at the ungodly persecuters, but
rather too be moved with compassion for their assured damnation, and too make
intercession for them, that the Lord will turn them, that they be not al
damned, according as Stephan did, as we have heard before.

Of the fourth.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which sleaest the Prophets. etc. These words of
Christ calling upon Jerusalem by name, contain first an vpbraiding.
Secondly, they declare Christ's affection toward them. Thirdly, they do us
too understand, that they perish through their own default: and lastly they
threaten punishment.

For when he says, how often would I have gathered thee toogither: he
vpbraideth them with unthankfulness, for that they would neither receive the
benefit that was offered them, nor had any regard of their own welfare, and
much less would acknowledge the liberality of their benefactor, or be
thankful too him for it. Would God that a number of them that hear the Gospel
at this day were not like them, which thing verily they show by their fruits.

The Lord declares his affection toward them, when he compares himself too a
hen, which loves her chickens most entierly, and does all that she is able too
do, too the intent she may keep them from the fowls that are ennimies too
them. God forbid that it should enter intoo any godly heart, too think that
Christ determined otherwise with him self concerning the Jews by some secret
will, than he pretended by his tears and by his speech. For it is a horrible
thing too think, that there are contrary wills in Christ, who himself
condemns a double heart. Therefore he willed their salvation in deed,
according too the saying of the Prophet: I will not the death of a sinner: but
that he should convert and live.

In the third place, when the Lord says, And thou would not* he openly
testifies, that the Jews peryshed through their own default, and that of
their own malice they striued against Christ, who offered them salvation. He
says not, And God would not receive thee intoo favor but, thou would
not. Wherefore we may learn two things hereby: One is, that being made
warer by the harm of the Jews, we give ear too Gods word, and yield our
selves obedient too Christ, when he allureth us, and that we strive not
against the holy Ghost, who stirs up the wits of al men, that here the
Gospel. An other is, that whosoever here the word and obey it not, do
perish through their own fault. Whose destruction and damnation is not too
be ascribed too any destiny or secret will of God, as though there were
some whom he would not have saved.

Fourthly when he adds, And your house shall be left desolate unto you:
Although this threatening of punishment perteine in special too the Jews that
were persecuters, too whom he threatens the utter overthrow of their religion,
common weal, and private state: yet in general, it perteyneth too al
persecuters of the gospel. And he thretneth them, that at least wise some of
them should amend. For all the thretnings of the prophets have a covert
condition, namely unless ye repent: like as we see in the Ninevites, and as
we here Christ witnessing in these words: Unless ye repent, ye shall
perish all toogither. Luke. xiij.

Let us then be warned by this threatening (if we mind too escape the wrath of
God) too repent us in good earnest, and too call upon Christ our savior with
true gronings, that he may keep us in true faith and invocation: Too whom with
GOD the father and the holy Ghost be praise, honor, and glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

The third holiday in Christmas, commonly called S. John the Evangelists day.
The Gospel. John. xxj.
Jesus said unto Peter: Follow thou me. Peter turned about, and savv the
Disciple whom Jesus loved following (which also leaned on his breast at
Supper) and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee? When Peter
therefore savv him, he said unto Jesus: Lord, what shall he here do?
Jesus said unto him: If I will have him too tarry till I come, what is
that too thee? Follovv thou me. Then went this saying abroad among the
brethren, that that Disciple should not die. Yet Jesus said not too him, he
shall not die: but if I will that he tarry til I come, what is that too thee?
The same Disciple is he which testifies of these things: and vvrote of these
things: and we know that his testimony is true. There are also many other
things which Jesus did, the which if they should be written every one, I
suppose the world could nor contain the books that should be written.

The exposition of the text.
THe sum of the Gospel. After that Christ had asked Peter thrice, whether
he looued him, he commanded him too follow him: meaning thereby, that he
should glorify him by his death. Furthermore, by correcting Peter's error, the
Evangelist corrects the opinion of the other disciples: who misunderstanding
the Lords words, were in a wrong opinion, that John should not die. Last of
al he avouches, that the Gospel which John wrate concerning Christ is true.
And of this Gospel let us make four places: which are these.

1 The talk between Christ and Peter, and Christ's commandment that he
should follow him. 2 As every man's vocation is commended too him: so is
curiousness condemned. 3 The correcting of the error of Christ's disciples
risen of the mistaking of the Lords words. 4 A commendation of the Gospel
written by John.
Of the first.
ANd when he had said so, he said unto Peter, follow me. Because Peter had
denied Christ thrice, it was the Lords will to restore him too his former
estate and Apostleship, by his thrice confessing him. For it was meet that he
which had so often denied his Lord and master, should by this mean (and as
it were by this discipline) be chastised and tried, and that his conversion
should be made known.

There are three things which Christ does here with Peter. First, he asks
him three times whither he looueth him: Too whom Peeter answers thrice also,
that by this three times confessing, he might wash away his thrice denying of
him, and so be restored into his place again. Secondlye he commends unto
him the office of Apostleship thrice, saying: Feed my sheep, that is too say,
be my Apostle too gather my sheep unto me, by the doctrine of the Gospel,
by my sacraments, and by holy life. Here it is given us too understand, that
the duty of the Apostleship (yea and of all ministers of Gods word) is too
feed Christ's sheep. Besides this, by the metaphor of Sheep, is signified
what manner a company of men that shall be, which is figured under the name
of sheep. First therefore somewhat must be said here of the manner of
feeding, and secondlye of the Sheep.

Christ feeds, and the apostles and other ministers of the word, feed: but
the manner of them all is not alike. For Christ feeds as owner and shepherde
of the sheep: the apostles feed as his servants. Christ inwardly by his
spirit: the Apostles, by their outward ministry. For such as in cruelty
of co^ditio^s were Bears or Lions: they make tame through the Lords woorking
inwardly by his holy spirit. And so they bring them intoo the sheepfolde of
Christ, that is too say, Christ's kingdom: and this they do by putting too
the keys of Christ's church, given them of Christ the true shepeheard. Nothing
else are these keys than the word and Faith. The minister applies the word
outwardely, and the spirit of Christ inwardly joins faith too the
preaching. For the preaching of Gods word concerning the forgiveness of
sins too be obtained through Christ, is the only key too open the kingdom
of heaven. Now, if he that hears, joins also thereunto true faith, and do
verily agree unto the Gospel: then comes also the other key. With these two
keis is the kingdom of heaven opened, and forgiveness of sins obtained. That
is too say, the Embassage of Christ shows, wherein that which is spoken
figuratively under the name of keys, is expressed in clear and plain meaning
words. When he says: Go and preach the gospel too all creatures: Behold,
here have you the first key. And when he adds, he that believes, shall
be saved. He shows the other key. The word and faith therefore are the two
keys wherewith the kingdom of heaven is opened. The word is applied
outwardly by the Minister, which being received by the virtue of the spirit,
engenders Faith, wherethrough men enter intoo the sheepefolde of Christ.

And when the shepherds have let in the sheep into Christ's sheepfolde, they
must feed them with the word, and with his Sacraments. When any stray from
the sheepfold, they must fetch them back again with their sheepehookes: that
is too say, with rebuking them. If any be weak and sickely, they must refresh
them with cheerful comfort. And they must always keep watch about their
flock, least wolves come and break up the fold, and scatter the sheep. All
these things the Lord committed too Peter, and the other Apostles, or rather
too all the ministers of the Gospel, when he said too Peter: feed my sheep.

But why calls he them sheep whom the apostles bring unto Christ? I find
specially three causes. Whereof the first is, for that it behooves them too be
meek which profess Christ, or will be named Christians. For it becomes
not them that will be registered intoo Christ's household, too be cruel like
Lions, ravening like Wolves, wily like foxes lecherous like Goats, filthy like
swine, or too show them selves in affections like too other wild beasts.

The second cause is, for that like as sheep do know the voice of their own
shepeherde, and flee from a stranger: so the godly acknowledge Christ only
for their teacher, and will here those only that utter his word, and not any
other: how greatly renoumed so ever they be: no though they were Angels from
heaven.

The third cause is, for that like as sheep follow their own shepherde
whither so ever he goes: so must the godly follow Christ in life, in
persecution, and in glory: beholding his life as a rule too lead their life
by, bearing his Cross through patience, as often as need shall require, and
afterward becoming partakers of his glory, whose companions they had been in
persecution: according as Paul says: If we suffer with him, we shall also
be glorified with him. Hereby therefore may the godly ministers of ye word
learn too feed Christ's flock. And let the sheep be meek, let them here
the voice of their shepherd only: and let them follow him in life, in cross,
and in glory.

The third thing that Christ does here, is that he doothe Peter too
understand with what kind of death, he should glorify God, when he says:
When thou were young, thou did girde thy self, and vventest vvhither thou
vvoldest: but when thou art old, thou shalt stretche out thy hand, and an
other shall girde thee and lead thee vvhither thou vvoldest not. It is meant by
these words, that Peter for confessing Christ, should one day be crucified:
which thing Irenaeus and diverse of the ancient writers testify too have been
done at Rome, in the reign of Nero.

Herevntoo Christ adds his commandment unto Peter, and bids him follow him,
and not deny him any more, as he had heretofore done: but too show him self
stoutly an invincible soldier of Christ even unto death. And let every one of
us think the same too be spoken too him self.

Of the second.
PEter turning about, savve the disciple whom Jesus loved, following, who
also leaned upon his breast at the Supper: and when he savv him. Peter said
unto Jesus: Lord, and what shall he do? too whom Jesus ansvvered: If I
vvil have him tarry till I come, what is that too thee? follow thou me. Peter
hearing of the Lord that he should one day suffer sharp punishment for
Christ's sake, considers not so much what was too be done on his own
part, as he is careful what shall become of others. He is ready too bear
the cross for Christ's sake: but by the way through weakness of the flesh
there comes upon him a certain curiousness which makes him inquisitiue of
those things that belong not unto him self. For, so great is the frailty of
man, yt always in our own adversities, we have an eye too the happiness of
others: whereby we make our cross more bitter and harder too our selves. We
would with a good will that none should be happier than ourselves. For according
too the common proverb. It does a man good too have company in shipwreck. But
when as the Lord rebukes this curiousness in Peter, we ought too know, that
this reproof perteyneth too us also.

And too the intent too correct this fault in the Apostle, he says, What is
that too thee? follow thou me. As if he had said. Look not thou upon the
happiness of other men, but rather see too this, that thou do thine own
duty, and that thou bear what so ever the Lord shall lay upon thee too
bear. So is it the Lords will that we should take heed too our own
vocation, in the fear of GOD. He will not that we should think our selves
the more unhappy, though other seem too be in better case. For every
vocation has his cross annexed thervntoo, which is to be born with a quiet
mind. All (says Paul) that will live godlily in Christ, shall suffer
persecution. No man therefore (so he be godly) shall be exempted from the
Cross. Wherefore casting away heathenishe curiosity, let every man abide in
the vocation that he is called unto. Let him be quiet, and meddle with his
own matters, according too Paul's counsel. He wills us too be quiet, that
we be not busied in other men's matters as wicked men be: and as many be now
a days. He will have us too meddle with our own matters, that is too say, he
will have every one of us too look too the things that pertain too his own
calling. And too the intent that may be done, there are five things too be
regarded in every vocation. First the calling or vocation must be lawful.
Secondly faith and charity must be the rulers too direct our doings by in
our vocation. Thirdly, if any thing chance amiss in our vocation, a man must
comfort him self in that his conscience assures him that his vocation is
lawful. Fourthly, a man must employ his vocation too the glory of God and the
profit of Christ's church. Lastly forasmuch as nothing has luckie success
in a man's vocation, without Gods blissing: he must pray too God too put too
his helping hand. If a man do this in the true fear of God, verelye he
shall find, that his vocation shall not be unprofitable unto the Church of
God.

Of the third.
THere went a saying among the brethern; that that Disciple should not die.
See how easily men slip intoo error, Christ says, if I will have him tarry,
what is that too thee? and his disciples took it as though he said, I will
that he shall tarry and not die til I come. Here therefore we are admonished
too take good heed in the reading of holy scripture, that we build not
therevppon any other things than are spoken. Then let us embrace those things
that are clear and evident: Such things as are spoken with condition or darkly,
let us confer with playner places: and let us call upon God too give us the key
of true knoweledge, that we may understand without error, such things as
perteine too our salvation. From unprofitable questions, (such as make nothing
too edification,) let us abstain: knowing that God likes well this
simplicity, according too this saying: Seek not for things that are above thy
reach.

Of the fourth.
THe Evangelist him self closes up his Gospel, saying: This is the same
disciple which bears witness of these things and vvrate them. And we
know that his witness is true. This is as it were a sealing up of the
Gospel yt John wrate. When he says we know, he means that the Gospel is
certain, true, and infallible. This Gospel he calls a witness, because it
bears witness of Christ and his benefits. Too what end John wrate his
Gospel, he him self declares in the end of the xx. chapter, where he says:
And these things are written, that ye may believe that Jesus is Christ the
son of God, and that by believing ye may have life through his name. There
are therefore two ends of the Gospel: namely, the knowledge of Jesus Christ:
and salvation through trust in him, too whom be glory for evermore. Amen.

The Sunday within Crristmas week. The Gospel. Luke. ij.
ANd his Father and Mother marueyled at those things that were spoken of him.
And Simeon blissed them, and said unto Mary his Moother. Behold he is set
for many too fall upon, and too raise up many in Israel, and for a sign that
is spoken against. Moreover the svvoord shall pass through thy soul, that the
thoughts may be discovered out of many hearts. And there was Anne a
Prophe^isse the daughter of Phanuell of the tribe of Aser. She was grown
very old, and had lived with a husband seven years from her virginity. And
this widow being almost four score years of age, departed not out of the
Temple, but served in fasting and prayer day and night. And she coming in
the same hour, in likewise confessed unto the Lord, and spoke of him unto
all that looked for redemption at Jerusalem. And after that they had made an
end of all things according too the law of the Lord, they returned intoo
Galilee intoo their own City Nazareth. And the Child grevv up and vvexed
strong in spirit, and he was filled with vvisdome, and the grace of GOD was
upon him.

The exposition of the text.
THis Gospel is a part of the things that were done in the temple upon the day
of the purifying of the blissed virgin, after that the Parents of Jesus,
according too the law of Moses, had offered up and set the Child before the
Lord. The sum of this part is, that Simeon and Anne give witness unto
Christ, and acknowledge him too be their king and Messiah that was promised,
against whom the wicked world shall set it self too his own destruction:
but the godly shall embrace him too them selves too their resurrection and
salvation. Let us make hereof three places, which are these.

1 The maruelling of Christ's parents. 2 The witness of Simeon and Anne,
concerning Christ. 3 The proof of Christ's manhood.
Of the first.
THe maruelling of Christ's parents, shows that reason perceives nothing of
heavenly matters. We must therefore believe the voice of God, and marvel at it
rather than deny it, or renounce it. They wonder that God (now according too
his eternal and secret purpose,) has sent the Messiah, whom so many Prophets,
Patriarchs and kings looked for. They wonder at the testimony of the angel.
They wonder at old Simeons saying, whereby they are also confirmed the more
substancially in the faith.

This woonderment is a certain holy bethinking of themselves, wherethrough they
reverently consider and embrace the prophecy of the holy Ghost, whereby they
profit more and more in the knowledge of Christ. This also is too be set
before our eyes for an example. For we will by and by shake of those things that
reason comprehe^deth not. But we must with holy woonderment embrace the
heavenly Oracles: and too the intent our Faith may take new encreasement, we
must gather toogither all the helps that may be out of the prophecies, out of
miracles, out of examples, and finally out of all things, too our greater
admiration. For he is like too profit best in Christ's school, which with the
encreasement of his faith, woondereth daily more and more.

Furthermore, Joseph is here called the father of Christ, because Marie was
married unto him, and because Joseph by Gods commandment, had the charge of
the child and his moother, and because he was commonly thought too be the
father of Christ. Paul says too the Hebrews that Christ is fatherless and
motherlesse. Fatherless in respect of his fleshly birth: and motherlesse in
respect of that wonderful and eternal birth of his, whereby he is borne the
son of God, begotten of the father without moother from everlasting: Of which
birth the beginning of S. John's Gospel preaches, as we have heard of late.

Of the second.
IN the testimony of Simeon four things are too be considered. First he
blisseth them. By which doing Simeon declares his affection toward Christ
and his kingdom: namely that he wishes well too the new kingdom of this
new king: and this did Simeon according to the custom of the holy Patriarchs,
which being old were wont too wish well too the younger. For, too bliss, is
in the Hebrew manner of speech, nothing else but too wish one happy success,
and to desire good things for him. Heerby every one of us may lern, first too
confess Christ, and then too wish well too his kingdom: which thing pertains
too the second commandment, and too the second petition.

One thing that is too be considered in Simeons testimony, is his prophecy:
which comprehends two things. First that Christ shall be unto many an
occasion of falling, that many dashing against him, may stomble and not perish:
not through his fault, but through their own, for that they will not embrace
this Christ. But some man will demand how Christ is put too be a fall too the
unbelievers, which are already cast away. The ungodly perish twice. First they
are lost through their own unbelief: and secondly for that they wilfully
deprive themselves of the salvation that is offered them. For they deal in
like wise, as if a man being once already condemned too death for theft, should
afterward spit at the kings son that sueth for his pardon, and despise the
deliverance offered by him. Such a one may woorthily be called twice cast
away: partly for his own theft, but more because he holds skorne of his
deliverer, too his greater punishment. Therefore although that all the ungodly
which have not heard of Christ's name, are assured of perdition for their
unbelief: yet notwithstanding, those that wittingly and willingly refuse
Christ, shall feel the second fall, and receive greeuouser punishment. For the
servant that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes. Therefore the Turks and heathen men shall be more gently dealt
withal in the last day, than they: unless they repent. An other thing is, that
the same Christ shall be the rising ageine of many in Israel: that is too say,
their deliverance from sin, their reward of righteousness, their
resurrection from death, and their heritage of all good things.

The third thing that is too be considered in Simeons testimony, is the
turning of his talk unto the virgin Christ's moother, too who^ he prophecieth
cross and persecution, saying: And through thy soul shall the svvoord pass.
Although these words pertain properly to Mary: yet they are too be referred
too the whole church, whereof Mary bare a figure. Mary needed this admonishment
in two respects. First that being warned by this Oracle of the holy ghost,
she should settle her self too bear the sorrowful adventures that were too
come, when she should see her son evil entreated of his own country folk,
and at the length hanged upon the cross. And secondly that being so fensed
against the assaults that were too come, she should nevertheless rejoice
through assured confidence, for yt in the end her son should become conqueror
of his enemies. Therefore being stablished with this confidence, she stood by
his cross, looking for his triumph with a stout courage. Also these words
perteine too the whole Church. For by this Prophecy is showed, that the
church it self in this world shall be under the cross, which after the
example of ye virgin, must raise up it self with hope of the glory too come.

The fourth thing that is too be considered in this testimony of Simeons, is
that Simeon says that the thoughts shall be disclosed out of ye hearts of
many. By which speech he signifies, there shall be many that shall show
them selves openly too be Christ's enemies, and many ageine that shall
confess Christ, yea and that even with utter peril and sheding of their
blood. The one serves too comfort us against the offense or stumbling block
of the cross, the other to nourishe our trust or faith.

In the testimony of Anne, two things are too be considered. First the
description of the person of Anne, whom he commends for the spirit of
Prophecy, that is too say, for her knowledge of spiritual things, or of the
kingdom of Christ: for her parents: for her age: for her chastity: and for her
earnestness in praying.

These things tend too the end too purchase greater credit too that most holy
matrone, too the intent we should more believe one holy matrone, than all the
pack of the Pharisees and priests, which acknowledge not this Christ.

Let us therefore rather follow the example of a few godly, tha^ an innumerable
multitude of the ungodly which persecute the Gospel. Also we may here behold
the Image of Christ's Church, which is a small flock, and shows no
countenance of glistering too the world, but the Cresset of Gods heavenly
word.

The other is Annes confession, which conteyneth three things. One is, that
with Simeon she confessed Christ, and jointly toogither with him did set
forth Christ with some kind of melody: whereby the godly may learn too
encourage one another, too set forth and too utter the praise of God.

Another is, that she teaches the people. For when as the Scribes and
Pharisees ceased, a holy woman comes forth and speaks of him unto all ye
looked for redemption in Jerusalem.

The third is, that she openly acknowledges Christ too be the Savior and
redeemer. For she understood that this babe was the promised seed, that
should tread down the serpents head, and so deliver man that was lost, out of
the Devils tyranny.

Of the third.
ANd the Child did grovve, and was strengthened in spirit, and was filled
with vvisdome, and the grace of God was with him. This is as much too say,
as, according as the child Jesus grew in age, so the divine nature uttered it
self in him, and he profited from day too day more and more in wisdom, and
toogither with his age increased also the gifts of mind in him. How be it in
as much as the Godhead can by no means be increased, it is manifest that
these things perteine too his manhood. For as he grew up by little and little
in his body: so (in respect of his soul,) the gifts of the mind increased
daily more and more. Neither is this a strange thing in Christ, whoo for our
sakes took upon him the shape of a servant, wherein he was also abased. For
like as he was abased for our sake: so also grew he ageine by little and
little, until that by his resurrection he entered ageine intoo his glory.
Neither was this done without a lesson and warning unto us. For we are
taught that the cause why he grew, was for that we should out of his fullness
receive grace for grace. We also are admonished by the example of the son of
God, too endeuer our selves continually too increase, that we may daily more
and more abound in the true knowledge of God, and all understanding: and that
we should with an upright judgment and affection, try what things are godly,
holy, and honest, and daily bring forth the true fruits of faith: and that in
such wise that the day following may surmount the day that went before. For he
that goes not still forward in the knowledge of GOD, and understanding of
godliness: goes backward. For by little and little, faith is quenched in
him, and Christ is buried ageine in his heart, whereby it comes too pass,
that he falls again intoo sin against his conscience. Hereof we have
example in David. For he had profited in Ghostly wisdom, above all the men of
his time, and the grace of God was with him. But what came too pass? By sitting
still in his Princely throne, he became somewhat faint. That glowing zeal of
Gods glory which was in him, when he fought against Golias and overcame him,
and which was in him when he was in peril through the daily persecution of
Saul, was by little and little alayed. And what ensued theruppon? There came
in his sight a fair and beautiful woman, and his lusts were stirred up
without any let. For the heat of the spirit was then become stark cold. Will
gives place too affection: and by and by he falls into sin against
conscience, by committing aduoutrie: wheruntoo within a while after, he adds
the murder of one of his best subjects: which wickednesses he afterward
recovered with hypocrisy, by ye space of a whole year: although in the mean
while, he pretended godliness, which notwithstanding was banished from him, as
long as Gods spirit was not with him.

There are many other such examples, which admonish us too follow herein the
example of the child Jesus, that we fall not from the state of grace.
Therefore like as he grew in wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him: so let
us also grow in wholesome wisdom, and let us pray too Jesus the fountain of
wisdom, that he will give unto us abundantly of his fullness. Which thing if
we do, it will come too pass that the grace of God which we obtain by
Christ, and for Christ's sake, shall abide upon us. For as the only grace of
God is the cause of our daily proceeding and furtherance in spiritual gifts:
so grace is retained and abides, when we are not drowsy, but work lustely,
so as we may not seem too have received grace in vain. Too this purpose
makes ye saying of ye Apostle. Ye are made partakers of Christ: if we hold
steadfast unto the end, the faith that is begone in us.

Too this purpose also makes this sentence of Paul. Quench not the spirit.
Gods gifts therefore must be cheered up with continual exercise, that we may
profit daily more and more, too the glory of God the father, the son, and the
holy Ghost. Too which only God be honor and glory for evermore. Amen.

The day of the Circumcision of the Lord, commonly called Newyeeres day. The
Gospel. Luke. ij.
ANd after that eight days were finished, that the child should be
circumcised, his name was called Jesus, according as he was named by the
Angel, before he was conceived in his moothets womb.

The exposition of the Text.
THis feast of the Circumcision of the Lord, is solemnized in the Church for
three causes. Of which the first is, that the story may be known. The second
is, that the benefit of God toward mankind (which the story sets out) may
be understood. The third is, yt we may use the benefit of God aright, both
too the glory of god, and also too our own salvation and the edifying of
others.

The story is, that our Lord Christ the eyghte day after his carnal birth,
was circumcised according too the Law of Moses, that the name was given him,
which was foretold by the Angel, and he was called Jesus.

The benefit which the story sets out, is that that was done for our sake,
according as Paul teaches: He was made subject too the Law, too the intent
he might redeem them that were under the Law.

Lastly, the use consists in these things: that knowing the benefit, we may
be thanckfull too God, confirming our faith by this deed, and (after the
example of God the father and his Son Jesus Christ) endeuer too deserve well
toward al men. And too the intent these things may serve the more effectually
too inform us of this benefit, I will handle two places, which are.

1 Of the Circumcision. 2 Of the most sweet name Jesus.
Of the first.
TOo the intent we may the more distinctly understand this doctrine of the
circumcision: these are the things that seem meet too be expounded in order.
How God is wont too instruct man of his will: what manner a thing that
Circumcision of the flesh was, and what things are too be marked in it:
whereupon shall be grounded the order of the Sacraments, both of the old
Testament and of the new: Why Christ was circumcised: and which is the
spiritual circumcision, without which, salvation never falls too any man.

God, both before man's fall, and after his fall, before the law and under
the law, and after Christ is sent unto us, is always wont too certify man
of his will, by two things. The one is by a perceiving mind, the other by
perceiving sense: that that thing which is offered too the mind too understand,
may after a sort be perceived by the outward senses. For so liked it God
(whoo is most merciful,) too provide for man's weakness.

Untoo the mind he offers his word, whereby he discloseth his will unto
man. Untoo the senses he offers visible signs, which teach the same things
visibly, that the words sound and offer to the mind. When God had created
man, he put him in Paradise, and gave him his word as a witness of his will.
Unto the word he added a double outward sign: namely the tree of life, and
the tree of knowledge of good and il. After man's fall, he gave him a promise
of the seed: whereunto he added outward signs, which were sacrifices. When ye
fl^^d was ouerpast, he made a promise by word of mouth, and made the Rainbow a
sign of the same. Untoo Abraham is made a promise of the seed, and unto the
same promise he added the sign of circumcision, in perpetual remembrance of
the thing. He promised deliverance from the bondage of Egypt, which he
performed also: but he sealed this promise with the paschal Lamb. He betook a
promise to Moses: but he did as it were sign it and seal it with the blood
of a red Cow. At length God gives his own son, and by him promises
everlasting life too them that believe: which promise he confirms with the
two most royal sacraments of Baptim and of the Lords supper. Too be short, the
Lord is wont always to add some outward testimony or other, too his word,
too the intent that both with mind and with sense we may as it were feel what
his will is toward us. For whatsoever is perceived by man, that is done
either with mind, or with sense, or with both toogither. Now God (too the
intent we may be assured of our salvation) sets his word before the
mind, and an outward sign before the sense, and leaves nothing undone which
he thinks may turn too our salua^io^. And after this sort is God wont too
instruct man of his will.

This foundation being laid, it is easy too be understood what manner a
sign that carnal and visible circumcision is: so that we set before us the
word wherevntoo this sign is added. For the sign is nothing else than a
certain effectual assurance and lawful sealing up of the promise.

What then is the word wheruntoo circumcision is added? The Lord in the.9. of
Genesis promises that he will be the God of Abraham, and of his seed: he
requires of Abraham, that he should believe this promis. He commands him to
walk before him, and too be perfect: that is too say, too prefer the obedience
of him before all things, and too keep faith and a good conscience. Untoo
this promis and covenant betwixt them, God him self added outward circumcision,
too the intent that there should be in Abraham's flesh, a witness of the
covenant between God and Abraham. For the Lord says: This is the covenant
that thou shall observe between me and thee, and thy seed after thee. Every
male child among you shall be Circumcised, and ye shall cut of the foreskin of
your priuities, that it may be a sign betwixt me and you. etc.

We see here how the promis goes before, and the commandment of the sign
follows after: how the sign is prescribed, and the belief of the promise
exacted, according too the form of the covenant. Wheruppon it is gathered,
that there are four things in circumcision. That is to wit, the promis, the
commandment of God, the visible sign, and the belief of the promis, which
the promis requires of necessity. And these four things are too be looked
unto in Circumcision, which must be included in the definition thereof in this
wise. The circumcision of the flesh commanded by god, is a cutting off of the
foreskin of a man's priuities, whereby God confirms his covenant made with
man, and man on the other side being warra^ted by this record of gods favor,
raises up him self with lively faith. Therefore does Paul in the iiij. too
the Romans call circumcision, the seal of the righteousness that is by faith.
For it is (as it were) an outward sealing up of ye promise of Gods free favor.
For the same cause Stephen in the acts of the Apostles terms Circumcision by
the name of a Testament. Then for as much as the promise goes of necessity
before, and faith follows after which has an eye too the promise: the
covenant runs indifferently on both sides. Circumcision is on the party of
God that promises, and on the party of man that receives the promised grace
by faith: which faith of the promise is confirmed by an outward sign. And this
is the true meaning of Circumcision. Now are two other things of necessity
too be added. The one is, why the Lords will was to have that sign in the
member of generation. The other is, why the same continues not now also,
seeing the promise is everlasting.

The cutting of the foreskin of that member which is the instrument of
generation, signifies first, that our whole nature, (as it issues from Adam,)
is altoogither corrupted. Secondly it signifies, that the same is too be
shredded and cut of. For flesh and blood cannot enter intoo the kingdom of
heaven. Thirdly it signifies, that the promised seed should come which should
bring a new birthe, wherein men should be borne the children of God. And so if
ye look upon the general reason of Circumcision: it is a testimony and
sealing up of grace. If ye look upon the meaning: it is a mark whereby we are
put in mind of our nature, which is corrupted and too be cleansed. If ye
look upon the outward society or fellowship of men: it is a badge or
cognizance, whereby the Church is discerned from heathenish assemblies.

But why continues not Circumcision still now also, since the promise is not yet
ceased? Because that by Circumcision was signified that one thing was too be
performed which is now performed, namely the seed of the woman, which is
Christ our Lord borne of the most pure blood of the virgin. Wherefore albeit
that the thing it self which was promised do continue: yet Circumcision the
sign thereof is changed intoo Baptim: that like as Circumcision was a figure
of Christ too come: so Baptim is a witness that he is come. He therefore that
will still be circumcised, looks for Christ too come, and believes not that
he is come already.

By these things which I have now spoken of Circumcision, it is easy too
judge what is the meening of the Sacraments, as well of the new Testament as
of the old. For like as in Circumcision there meet four things, viz. promis,
commandment of the sign, the use of the sign, and the belief of the
promis: So in the meening of every sacrament, the same things must of
necessity meet: namely that a godly Sacrament be a visible sign commanded
and ordained by God: whereby like as God hears record of his promis unto men:
so man accepting the sign, does on the other side profess his faith toward
GOD, and confirms the same with the use of the sign and by thinking upon it.
How be it in every sign, the singular likelinesse of the signs unto the
thing signified by them, is too be considered. For example: the likelinesse of
water in Baptim unto the thing signified thereby, is this. Like as water
washes a man outwardly from outward filth: so the blood of Christ washes our
consciences inwardly from deadly woorks. And so of all other sacraments.

But why was Christ circumcised, seeing he is exempted from the number of
sinners? This does Paul expound too the Galathians, when he says: when the
fullness of time was come, God sent his son borne of a woman made subject too
the Law, that he might redeem those that were under the Law. Wherefore as he
was borne for us, so also was he circumcised for us. Neither was it his will too
abolish circumcision, before he had made his perfect sacrifice upon the altar
of the Cross: by which doing, he bare witness that Circumcision was a
sacrament ordained by God.

Now are a few things too be added concerning spiritual Circumcision, which
in the scripture is called the Circumcision of the heart, made in spirit and not
by hand, which is signified by the outward Circumcision, as a thing invisible
by a thing visible. Of this the Lord gives commandment in the tenth of
Deuteronomy. Cut of the forskin of your hearts, and harden not your necks any
more. But in the third to the Phillippians Paul most plainly of al defines
this spiritual Circumcision, where he says: we are the Circumcision which
woorship God in spirit and bost of Christ, and put not our trust in flesh. In
these words of Paul, two things are too be considered. The cause and the
effect, or the active Circumcision, and the passive Circumcision. The cause is
Christ himself: and consequently the active Circumcision, is that whereby the
son of God cutteth of, whatsoever sin and cursednesse is in us: which
Circumcision is felt in all the godly sort of all ages. The effect or passive
circumcision, is that whereby the regenerate sort do daily more and more
cut of the relikes of sin, and give themselves too newness of life,
shredding of all vices as much as may be. But Paul in most goodly order
distributeth the effects, and makes three sorts of them. One is that we
worship God in spirit: another is that we boast in Christ: The third is that
we cast away the trust in flesh, by denying our selves. The effect that is
set last in place, is the first in order of consequence, next which follows
the second, and lastly that which was set in the first place.

Therefore we must circumcise all our members as well inward as outward.
Inward, as the mind, the heart, the will. The mind is too be circumcised by
casting away of error, and by getting the true knowledge of God. From the
heart must all sinful thoughts be cut of. The will must be circumcised, by
converting unto God. The outward, such as are the ears, the eyes, the lips,
the nose. etc. So as now they may no more yield obedience unto corrupted
nature, but obey the spirit of regeneration.

Of the second.
CHildren were wont to have their names given them in their Circumcision, as
they have them now given them in their baptism. Then too the intent they might
be witnesses of their circumcision, and now too the intent they may be signs
of the baptism bestowed upon them. And therefore as often as we hear our selves
named, we must call too mind the covenant that we have made with God in our
baptism. And so after the manner of other children, Christ's name was given him
in his baptism, and he was called Jesus.

Names were wont to be given too children, either at the pleasure of men: and
that was sometimes by means of kindred and aliance, sometime for the virtue of
noble men, sometime upon chance, sometime upon affection: or at the
commandment of God: and that not without some representation of a thing
either past or too come. For God whoo cannot be deceived, does not give names
too things without cause why.

Why then was the Son of the virgin named Jesus? For the office sake which he
should have in the world. For thus says the Angel by the commandment of God
in the first of Matthew. Thou shall call his name Jesus, because he shall
deliver his people from their sins. For Jesus is as much too say, as,
Savior. The Angel added the kind of salvation, namely from sin: and so
consequentlye from death, damnation, Gods wrath and hell. Whereupon it must
needs follow that he pacifieth the Father, restores the Image of God, and
rewards the believers with eternal life. For all these things are joined with
forgiveness of sin. How be it too the intent we may more certainlye keep
in mind the use of this name Jesus, I will reduce it intoo four respects.

The first is, that it puts us in mind, that we are forlorn if it were
not for this Jesus, that is too say, this Savior. And therefore it puts us
in mind of our sin, and of repentance.

The second is, that it points us too the fountain of salvation. For he
that will be saved, must needs draw out of this well. And so we are admonished
thereby too believe upon this Savior.

The third is, that it is our comfort against despair, against the greatness
of sin, against repining, against particularitie, and against the power and
strength of the Devil. And hereupon grows the ground or establishment of
faith.

The fourth is, that it puts us in mind of obedience and thankfulness, that
through our own default we fall not from the salvation purchased for us by
Christ, too whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

The Gospel on the day of Epiphanie. commonly called Twelfth day. The Gospel.
Math. ij.
WHen Jesus was borne in Bethleem a City of Ievvrye, in the time of Herod
the King: Behold there came wise men from the East too Jerusalem, saying:
where is he that is borne King of the Jews? For we have seen his Star
in the East, and are come too vvoorship him. When Herod the King had heard
these things, he was troubled and all the City of Jerusalem with him. And
when he had gathered all the chief Preests and Scribes of the people
toogether, he demanded of them where Christ should be borne. And they
said unto him: at Bethleem in Ievvrie* For thus it is written by the
Prophet. And thou Bethleem in the land of Ievvry, art not the least among the
Princes of Judah: for out of thee shall come too me the Captain that shall
govern my people Israel. Then Herod (when he had privily called the wise
men) enquired of them diligently what time the Star appeered: and he bad
them go to Bethleem, and said: Go your way thither, and search diligently for
the child. And when ye have found him, bring me word ageyn, that I may come
and worship him also. When they had heard the King, they departed: and lo,
the Star which they savv in the East, went before them til it came and
stood over the place wherein the Child was. When they savv the Star,
they were exceeding glad, and went intoo the house, and found the Child
with Mary his moother, and fell down flat, and vvoorshipped him, and opened
their treasures, and offered unto him gifts: Gold Frankincense, and Mirre.
And after they were warned of God in sleep (that they should not go ageyn too
Herod) they returned intoo their own country another way.

The exposition of the text.
THis feast is called in the Church, the Epiphanie of the Lord, that is too
say, the appeering of the Lord. For after that the feasts of the coming and
birth of the Lord were celebrated by the Church, it seemed good unto the
holy Fathers, too put too this feast also, that they might instruct the Church
of the sundry sorts of the Lords appeering in the flesh. And they allege
four reasons why they call this feast Epiphanie. Whereof the first is, that as
this day Christ appeered too the wise men that sought him by the leading of a
Star. The second is, for that as upon this day nine and twenty years
after his birth, his glory appeered in Baptism by the witness of the father
speaking from heaven in this wise: This is my beloved son: and by the visible
appeering of the holy Ghost upon him. The third is, for that the same day
twelve month after his baptism, his glory appeered at the marriage, by
turning water intoo wine. The fourth is, for that in the.xxxj. year of his
age, his glory appeered again in feeding five thousand men with seven loves
of bread. All these appeerings make too this end, both too prove Christ too be
the true Messiah and savior of them that believe in him, and too stablish
assured faith in us, that we should certainly assure our selves too obtain
salvation through him. And thus much concerning the cause of the feast. Now
let us go in hand with the Gospel it self, which conteyneth the story of
the first kind of Christ's appeerings: namely how he appeered too the wise
men, that is too say, too the Heathen, too the intent we may know that Christ
with his benefits belongs also too the Heathen. The sum of the exposition
of this Gospel, is that the wise men came too Jerusalem too seek the newborn King: and that when they found him not there, they kept on their way,
following the guidance of the Star which went before them, til they came in
Bethleem, where they finding the Child, honored him, and offered him gifts.
After the doing whereof, at the warning of God they returned intoo their
cuntrie by another way. In this Gospel we will entreat of two places: which
are.

1 The story with his circumstances and lessons which are many. 2 The use of
the story, and the spiritual signification of the wise men's offerings.
Of the first.
MAny are the circumstances of this present story of which every one conteyneth
peculiar doctrines and instructions. When Christ was borne in Bethleem in the
time of Herod, the wise men came from the East too woorship the newborn
king. Here come three things too be weyed. The time, the state of the wise
men, and the end for which they came.

The time is expressed, when it is said, in the time of Herod. For the
Scepter had ceased from Iud^, (and according too the Prophesies) Christ was
too be borne. This conferring of the prophesies concerning the birth of Christ
and the time wherein he was borne, as it confuteth the Jews which look for
him still too come: so it confirms the Faith of the godly, that they may
assure them selves, that this same whom the wise men seek, is the very
Messiah. The second is, the state of the wise men, that they were not of the
Jews, but of the Gentiles. Whereby we learn that this new king borne in
Bethleem, pertains also too the Gentiles, who by the example of the wise men,
are admonished too seek and too woorship Christ.

Moreover, these wise men were called Magi: by which term is signified the
excellency of their dignity and office. For Magus is an Hebrew word, and
takes his name of considering and teaching: Which two things perteined
chiefly too Kings and Priests: whereupon the Persians called their Kings and
Priests, Magi. What are we taught hereby? Christ lies in the maunger
despised of his own people: and the Magies being Heathen men borne, come too
worship him. Whereby is signified, that although Christ's kingdom be not of
the world: yet is it a mighty and glorious kingdom, or rather a heavenly
kingdom, which many shall acknowledge, and not be offended at the base
countenance thereof too the outward show in the world.

The second circumstaunce is, that the wise men come too Jerusalem, and there
seek for Christ that was newly borne. The Jews which had the books of the
Prophets in their hands, and unto whom the word of God was committed,
stood still careless and never sought for Christ. And in ye mean while* those
sought him who (by their judgment) perteined not too the Church. But where
sought they him? In the princely city Jerusalem. Whither when they came and
heard nothing of this king, their faith was not a little shaken: but yet
nevertheless they raised up them selves by the sign. For they said: We have
seen his star. Doutlesse they had learned out of the Relickes of Daniels
school, that when Christ should be borne, then should such a star show the
time that he was borne.

The third circumstance is too be considered with heed: for it shows what
manner a King Christ is. For as the maunger in which he lay, argues that his
kingdom is not of this world: so the star appearyng from heaven, declares
him too be a heavenly King. And like as the Maunger shows him too be base
in the sight of the world: even so the Star sets out the majesty of his
kingdom for us too behold, to the furtherance of our faith, least he should
become despisable unto us through the lewd and malicious disdain of his own
country folk, which continuing still in their ignorance, do persecute Christ
unto this day.

Some men demand here what manner a Star that was? And diverse men deem
diversely. But this is manifest: that it differs in three propreties from
other continuing stars: that is to say, in place, in mouyng, and in
brightness. In place, for that it was the lowest part of the air: for
otherwise it could not have showed the direct way too them that travailed by
it. In mouyng: for that it moved not circlewise, but went right forward, as a
guide of the way, none otherwise than the cloud and pillar of fire went
before the people of Israel at their going out of Egypt. The brightness of
it makes a difference also, because other stars shine only by night: but
this gave light even in the broad day. It was not therefore a natural and
continuyng star, such as are in the sky. What then? Was it a Comet or
blazing star? It appears that it was like a comet: but out of dout it was
an Angel of God, as Epiphanius testifies. For he appeered in the shape of a
star, both too show that Christ's kingdom is heavenly, and too open Christ
the true star and cresset, who alonly brings man out of the kingdom of
darkness intoo his own glorious kingdom by holding out before him the cresset
of his word, and by lightning men's hearts with his spirit. In consideration
whereof Zachary calls christ ye riser from on high, and the lightner of such
as sit in the shadow of death. And John: He was ye true light that lightneth
every man which comes intoo this world.

The fourth circumstance is of Herod, and all the city of Jerusalem. Herod
was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. Herod feared lest the kingdom
should be transferred from him unto the newborn king. For he understood
not that Christ's kingdom should be heavenly, and not of this world: in
which respect the church sings: O enemy Herod, wherefore fear thou? the
King that gives power too reign in heaven, of worldly kingdom doothe not men
beereeue. The vnthanklesnesse and sluggishnesse of the people of Jerusalem is
noted, who being broken with werinesse of evils, had cast of the hope of the
redemption and salvation that was promised them. They had lever too live in
bondage with wicked Herod, than too receive their new King, that brought them
everlasting freedom. But such is the corrupted nature of men, that they judge
it better for to keep still some quietness of the flesh, than with any peril
too receive Christ the author of salvation.

The fifth contains the counsel of Herod and the Preests together, with the
prophecy of Micheas the prophet. Herod being otherwise a despiser of religion
and of the prophecies, is new troubled, and makes inquisition where Christ
should be borne. For as soon as he heard the demand of the wise men, by and
by he coniectureth, that that king of whom they enquire, was the Messiah
promised in old time by God. But what do the Priests? Although they answer
sincerely out of the scripture, bringing abroad the testimony of Micheas: yet
notwithstanding they ^fterward like mad men bend themselves with might and
maine against the Scripture. For the ungodly make much of the Scripture, as
long as it seems not too be against their affections. But when it accuses
them of sin, when it cutteth their combs, when it sets death and
dampnation before their eyes, and finally when it attempteth any thing against
enured manners, doctrine, and traditions: then by and by the ungodly fret at
it: then is Christ no more acknowledged: then is he called a rayler. Our
Papists now a days do with us confess, that Christ the only begotten son
of GOD took upon him the nature of man, and that he is one entier person
consisting of two distinct natures. But if we come once too Christ's office,
and avouch him too be the only Jesus, and the only Christ, the only Savior,
the only high Priest and intercessor, and that no man can be saved, but he yt
is justified through only faith in him: Then they chafe, because their
manners, doctrine and traditions, can not stand with this office of Christ.
And therefore they partly corrupt the scriptures, and partly reject them, and
persecute with fire and sword such as teach Christ sincerely and purely, like
the Scribes and Priests, whoo here at the first with Simeon and Anne, have
answered sincerely: and afterward like mad folks have cast of the faith of
Christ, and persecuted him by their ministers. And so it is not enough, that
the Papists agree with the pure Doctors in the first principles: but they
ought too have a constant agreement with them in the whole foundation, and in
all the articles of the Faith. Let us not then search the Scripture too our
destruction, like as Herod did: neither let us look upon it negligently, as
the Scribes and Phariseys did, whoo do in deed show a way, howbeeit such a
way as they them selves walk not in: wherein they are like too the
shipwrightes that made the Ark of Noah, and yet perished them selves when they
had done. But Noe and his household was saved, as the wise men are saved here,
where as the Scribes and Preests do perish. But let us search the Scripture
with Simeon and Anne, Mary, and others, whoo thereby atteyned salvation.

Now let us in few words peruse the prophecy of Micheas. For thus he says:
And thou Bethleem of the land of Judah, art not the least among the princes of
Judah. For out of thee shall come the captain that shall feed my people
Israel, and the forth commyngs of him are from the beginning from the days of
euerlastyngnesse. This testimony of Micheas teaches many things concerning
Christ. First, it poynteth out the place of his birth. Secondly, it shows
his office, which is too play the gouerner in Israel, too feed his people.
Thirdly, it shows his incarnation, whereby he was borne a very man. For when
he says from the beginning: he shows Christ's incarnation, who was promised
from the beginning of the world, that in his time he should be borne after
the flesh. Fourthly, when he says from the days of Euerlastingnesse: he
signifies the nature of his Godhead, whereby he was before the creation of the
world. Fifthly he shows, that he is one person, consisting of two natures.
For when he says, his foorthcommings: this word of the plural number
pertains too the natures both of his Godhead and of his manhood. And the
word (him) being of the singular number, does covertly declare the unity of
the person. And so we see how the prophet has joined together the chief
Articles of our faith, which are uttered by others more at large.

The sixthe circumstaunce is of Herodes wylynesse: who when he thought he had
dealt most wisely, played most the fool. For there is no wisdom, there is no
wiliness, there is no counsel against the lord. He calls the wise men unto
him privily, as though he had loved the new borne king as they did: he
enquireth the time of the appeering of the star, as though he had went too
be more assured of the Messiah thereby: he wylteth them that when they had
found the child, they should bring him word as though he had bin
minded too woorshyp him as well as they. See how sore the Fox Herod sweateth
here. But as for the counsel which was chief in this behalf, neither he
nor the Jews followed. If for honor sake he had sent some of his servant
with the wise men too wayt upon them thither, it had been a very easy matter
too have found the child. But God sotted them in their own devises. At this
day (yea many years toogither) the Papists have sought to destroy the true
religion. But God made them such fools in their own devises, that they have
not been able too destroy so much as that one man Luther. Hereby we may
learn, that God is the keeper of his church, and confounds the devises of
the ungodly, according too the first Psalm.

The.vij. circumstance is of the offerings of the wise men, who having found
Christ, offered gifts too him as king of the Jews, Gold, Frankincence, and
Mirre: which surely were such gifts as that land had great store of. Hereby
we may learn two things. The one is, that we which do homage unto Christ,
ought too beestow somewhat of our substance too the maintenance of the
ministry. The other is of Gods providence: who by this gift (as it were with
conduct money,) provided before hand for the newborn babe and his parents,
against they should flee the Country: whereby we may learn, that God will
not forsake his Church.

The.viij. circumstance is, that the wise men being warned in their sleep,
returned intoo their country by an other way. By which deed both Herod was
beguiled, and also God declares, that he has care of his people, even when
they be a sleep.

Of the second.
Every one of the circumstances of this story, do minister some kind of
Doctrine too the Church, as we have seen. And now as appertainyng too the
general use thereof, we may learn two things of the wise men. Whereof the
first is too seek Christ by the guidyng of the star. The other is too offer
gifts unto Christ when we have found him. We follow the guidance of the
star with them, when we set before us the only word of God, too be a
lantern too our feet, and seek him in his word: And when we have found
Christ, we offer presents too him, as the wisemen did: Gold Frankincense and
Myrrh. When we yield unto him gold, that is to say, a pure faith and a chaste
life: Frankincense, that is to say, Confession, Invocation, and thanksgiuyng:
Mirrhe, that is too say, patience under the Cross, and in affliction.
Furthermore unto Mary (that is to say, the Church of Christ and the
ministry of the word: and unto Joseph, that is too say, unto those that
be the chief rulers of the Church) we must offer gifts, that is to wit, we
must further the ministry with all our power and abilities, that the church
may be in as good state as may be in this world, through Christ Jesus our
Lord, to whom be glory for ever. So be it.

The first Sunday after Epiphany. The Gospel. Luke. ij.
AND when Jesus was twelve year old, they went up too Jerusalem, after
the custom of the feast. And when they had fulfilled the days: as they
returned home, the child Jesus aboade still in Jerusalem, vnknovvyng too his
father and mother, for they supposed he had bin in their company, and therefore
came a days journey and sought him among their kynsfolke and acquaintance.
And when they found him not, they went back ageyn too Jerusalem and
sought him. And it fortuned after three days, that they found him in the
temple, sitting in in the mids of the Doctors, both heering them, and
posing them. And all that herd him, marvelled at his understanding and
answers. And when they savve him, they were astonished: And his mother said
unto him: Son, why have thou thus dealt with us: Behold, thy father and I
have sought thee sorovving. And he said unto the^: How is it that ye
sought me? wist ye not that I must go about my fathers business? And they
understood not that saying that he spoke too them. And he went with them and
came too Nazareth, and was obedient too them. But his moother kept all this
saying in her heart. And Jesus increased in vvisdome and age: and in favor
with God and men.

The exposition of the text.
THis text is part of the story of Christ's doings, and it conteyneth what he
did the.xij. year of his age: that is, that he gave as it were a certain taste
of his vocation, by disputing and reasoning with the Doctors of the law. But
what ye Lord did from the time that he was offered in the temple, unto
the.xij. year of his age: and what he did from the said.xij. year unto
almost the.xxx. year of his age: the holy scriptures make no mention at all.
And therefore it behooves us not too know it. For it is enough for us too know
these things which it was Gods will too utter, as the which do instruct us in
the knowledge of God, and in true godliness. Wherefore leaving those things
which idle monks have written, concerning the infancy and childhoode of
Christ, we will expound this present gospel, according to the grace which
the Lord shall give me.

Now the sum of this story is this. Christ being twelve years old, goth
with his parents too Jerusalem at the feast of Easter. Who being lost in
returning homward, is sought for and found among the doctors: and being
blamed by his parents, he defends himself by the commandment of their
superior, namely of god, that it behooved him too go about his business: and so
he went away with them, was obedient too them, profited in wisdom, and grew in
age and favor with God and men. Hereof are four points.

1 The example of Mary, Joseph, and Christ going too Jerusalem is set before
us. 2 The trial of Mary and Joseph by ye loss of the child Jesus. 3 The rare
and duty of parents toward their children, the obedience of children on the
other side toward their parents. 4 The growing of Christ in wisdom, age, and
favor.
Of the first.
ANd when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem, after the
custom of the feast. Here first of all I must warn you of certain things
concerning the feasts of the Jews, And afterward, the example of Joseph,
Mary, and the child, is to be looked upon. God in the old Testament ordained
many and sundry feasts, too put his people in mind of his benefits bestowed
upon them, too instruct the rude, and too keep them all in the true
worshipping of God. Yet were not al feasts a like solemn. Daily were
sacrifices made both morning and evening. Every week they seventh day was kept
holy. Every month had his peculiar feast. Moreover three solemn feasts were
kept every year.

Day by day morning and evening were oblations made, in remembrance of the
everlasting woorshippe due unto God. The godly added prayers thervntoo,
calling too mind ye promise of the seed of which they fastened their eyes by
faith in all their oblations. In place hereof, the church has substituted
morning prayer and evening prayer.

Also every seventh day of the week, was celebrated the memorial of ye
creation of things, with sacrifices and thanksgyuyng added therevntoo. In place
whereof, the Church has substituted the first day of the week in memorial of
the second creation, that is too say, of regeneration, which is made by the
Lords resurrection that happened the first day of the week: and therefore of the
Apostolic Church, this day is called the Lords day.

Every month in the beginning of the month, that is, in the new Moon, a
feast was kept in memorial of preservation. For it was Gods will, that as
often as they saw the moon keep her accustomed motions in gyuyng light, they
should render thanks unto God for the whole benefit of his government: And
therefore ordained he this feast of New Moons. Although the Christians be
not bound too this feast: yet notwithstanding it behooves us too be no less
thankful too God, than the godly Jews were.

Every year they had three solemn feasts, which are the Passover, the
Pentecost, and the feast of Tabernacles. The feast of the Passover or Easter,
was instituted in remembrance of the deliverance from bondage of the
Egyptians. Pentecost, which we call Whitsontide, in remembrance of the law
given in mount Zina. The feast of the Tabernacles in remembrance of the
dwelling of the Israelites in the wilderness forty years in Tents: that by
this ceremony they might call too mind the whole benefit of their delyuerance
out of Egypt. In steed of these three Jewish feasts, ye Church has
substituted Easter, in remembrance of the Lords Resurrection: who has
delivered us from the bondage of the devil. Whitsontyde, in remembrance of the
confirmation of the Gospel, by sendyng the Holy Ghost in a visible shape, and
by the wonderful gifts of Tungs, and the Birth of the Lord (commonly
called Christmas) in remembrance of Christ, given and delivered unto us.

Besides this, in those three solemn and yearly feasts, all that were of male
kind, were bound by the law of Moses too come too Jerusalem. Untoo which
law Joseph, and the child Jesus do here submit themselves, as well too
satisfy the law, as also (by their example) too stir us up, too reverence
the ministry and godly ceremonies, which it becomes the godly too observe,
because they are a certain schoolemaystershyp and Disciplyne profitable too
preserve Religion.

Howebeeit there is a difference too be put between the Ceremonies instituted
by the authority of God, and those that are instituted but for gravity and
orders sake. Too the keeping of the one, we are bound by gods law. For Christ
requires of us, that we should be every one of us once baptized, that we
should oftentimes be partakers of his holy Supper: and that we continually
here his word. But men's Ceremonies bind not in such wise: so as
stubbornness, contempt, and offense be away.

Therefore like as in this place we here, that Mary, Joseph, and the child
Jesus did with singular reverence observe the feasts and Ceremonies of the
Jews: so let us learn to set much by by our ceremonies, and too be at them
with a good will, and by our good example too allure others to obedience and
godliness.

Of the second.
AND when they had fulfilled the days: as they returned home, the child
tarried behind at Jerusalem. etc. Here the Euangilist begins too describe
the trial of Mary and Joseph. In which trial there be.iiij. circumstances
too be weyed. The first recites certain occasions of this trial. The second
describes the trial it self, and the cross of Joseph and Marie. The third
declares the doing of them in this trial. The fourth contains comfort.

The first occasion is showed in these words. The child Jesus tarried behind
in Jerusalem. Wherefore (will thou say) did he not make his parents privy too
it? First that he might do them too understand, how he was not the son
of Marie only, but of GOD also, which is more: and therefore he had not so great
regard of the parent his moother as of his everlasting Father. Secondely, that
by his own example he might teach children, that the advice of their parents
is not too be waited for, where obedience too be performed to God is in hand.
For there is more due unto God, than too father and moother. Thirdly, he
might admonish his parents of greater diligence: yea and all that have children
too be more diligent and heedefull in keeping ye pawn or gage that is put
intoo their hand by God. Fourthly, that Mary and Joseph themselves being
warned by this chastising discipline, should earnestly beethinke themselves,
what manner of ones they were of their own nature: that is too say, that they
were slothful and negligent, and not discharging their duty in all points.

The second occasion is showed when it is said: And his parents knevv not
thereof. Here the negligence of Jesus parents is blamed openly, which
negligence was no light sin, and therefore it became no small cross in the
Uirgins heart. For she felt her heart touched with a piece of the swoorde,
whereof saint Simeon made mention the twelfth year before. She thought in her
self that so great a treasure was committed too her of God too the intent
she should look well too it: and she compared her misery too the misery of
Eve. For like as she being seduced by the Devil, did cast away mankind: so
the virgin thought, that she by her negligence, had lost the Savior that was
promised too the world.

The third occasion of this trial and cross is showed, where it is said:
thinking he had bin among the company: For of negligence springs error.

Yet follows there an other harder trial and Cross. They seek for Jesus
whole three days, and find him not. He is lost and not found ageine among
his kinsfolk: surely a grievous cross. He is lost, and not found among their
acquaintance: this is a greeuouser cross. He is sought three days, and not
found at all: this is the greeuousest Cross of all.

But what does that most pensive creature Joseph, and that most sorrowful
virgin Mary in this most bitter cross? They come back agein to Jerusalem, and
entryng in intoo the temple, they find him whom they had lost, sitting among
the Doctors in disputing. Here again they conceive comfort, and are
delivered as it were out of the darkness of hell, as soon as they saw the
child Jesus.

These things are written for our learning and comfort. For even in likewise
happens it unto us in our trial and cross: we lose our most precious
treasure Christ. By what occasion? by negligence. We here not his word, we
call not upon him, we seldom use the sacrament of his supper, and finally, we
occupy our selves in no exercises of godliness. Upon this negligence ensues
error. For we flippe out of one sin intoo another, and out of one heresy
intoo another. Out of these at length springs an evil conscience, which
brings forth despair. What is too be done in these miseries? Christ is too
be sought. He alone is able too remedy these mischeeues. But where I pray
you is he to be sought? among our kindred and aquaintaunce? No, not so. Where
then? In the holy city Jerusalem, that is too say, in the church. Among
whom? among them that have the word. When thou have here found Christ whom
thou had lost, thou must keep him by faith, by calling upon him, and by holy
conversation, least he forsake thee again, and so thou perish by the loss of
Christ, as Judas did.

Of the third.
Because the doing of Joseph and Marie, puts us in mind of the care and
dutifulness of parents toward their children: and in likewise the doing of
the child Jesus, admonishes us of the duty of children, and of their
obedience toward their parents: I will therefore speak of them both, howbeeit
somewhat briefly, because ye same thing is wont too be taught more exactly in
the Catechism.

Therefore on the parents beehalfe, I think these admonishments ensuing too be
necessary.

First let parents bear in mind, that the cause why they bring forth
children, is yt their children should be Citizens of the Church, and that they
should toogyther with them woorshyp God, and that whensoever themselves shall
fall a sleep in the Lord, they may leave woorshyppers of God in their rooms.
I would God there were many that would think this earnestly.

Besides this, let them persuade themselves, that al their labor is lost,
but if they bring-vp their children in the fear of God, and oftentimes call
upon Gods help, against so many snares which the devil lays for the tender
age. We here many complain of the disobedience of their children: but they
mark not that they are punished by God, for that they would make their
children good without the blissing of the Lord, which they seldom call for in
good earnest.

Thirdly let them consider how noble a thing a child is, whom God himself
has shaped in his moothers womb, nourished, brought forth intoo the light,
and endued with body and soul, to the intent he should (as it were in a
table) represent God his first pattern.

Fourthly, let them know, that these things are too be dealt withal in order.
Untoo the body, nourishment, bringing up, apparel, and sometime correction,
that they may keep their children in awe. Untoo the soul they owe doctrine:
and that of two sorts, namely of Godliness and of civility. By the one they
shall keep a good conscience before God: by the other they shall obtain a
good report among men. For these are the two things that we must chiefly seek
after in this life. Paul comprehends them both, when he says: Ye parents
bring up your children in nurture and awe of the Lord. Which is confirmed by
the deed of Tobias, who instructing his son says: All the days of thy life
bear GOD in thy mind, and beware that thou consent not unto sin. Here
first he commends unto his son the study of godliness: and secondly he
charge him that he consent not too sin: that is, that he give not ear too
such as entice him to sin. And so he requires of his son, a certain holy
civility.

Last of all, let parents consider how many sins they commit and heap one
upon an other, which do not their duty in bringing up their children as they
ought too do. First they tra^gresse ye law of nature, which tells al men yt
their duty is to bring up their children godlily and honestly. Secondly they
sin against God: For they despise the commandment and authority of God.
For he commands that children should be brought up godlily and honestly: and
he is a despiser of GOD, that refuses too do as he is commanded. Thirdly he
offends against his own estimation. For gods will is, that parents should
(after a sort) be in his sted, so far forth as perteyneth to outward
discipline. But they make small account of this dignity, who neglect their
duty.

Upon these sins ensue many punishments both ghostly and bodily, as well in
the parents as in the children, yea and in all the posterity.

Now, what manner of duty children owe to their parents the example of the
child Jesus shows evidently: so that it needs not greatly to seek precepts
from elsewhere.

First he went up too Jerusalem with his parents: whereby good children may
learn too worship god with their parents, and to love holy meetings, and
reverently too be present at the Ceremonies of the Church.

Secondly he disputes, demands and heereth. Hereby may our children learn
too demand the things yt they know not, to dispute of things doutfull, and to
harken to such as teach aright. For although Christ disputed not of any thing
because he was in dout of it, nor demanded any thing because he was ignorant of
it, ne herkned to the^ because they could teach him more rightly: Yet the
example profits us. Therefore must godly children, at their coming home,
dispute with their parents if they stand in dout of ought that they have heard.
etc.

Furthermore Christ loses his parents, his kinsfolk, and his acquaintance, for
the word of God. Heerby may our children also learn, too set more by God, than
by their carnal parents, and too have the word of God in greater regard, than
the hestes of their parents.

Lastly, Christ returns with his parents, and is obedyent unto them. Heerby
our children may learn too stand in awe of their parents, and to obey them in all things that are godly and honest. These virtues of children, as they have
very large promises of good success in this life: so the vices in children
which fight against these virtues, have threatenings of most grievous
punishments, which also extend themselves even unto their posterity. For the
offspring (for the most part) receives the vices of the auncitrie, as it were
by inheritance.

Of the fourth.
Because I have spoken somewhat already of this.iiij. place the.viij. day ago,
I will now speak not past a word or two. Christ in respect of his Godhead,
did not grow in age, wisdom, and favor: but in respect of his manhod, and
because he took upon him the very nature of man in deed: in it he grew in
age, wisdom and favor. Whose example would God we could follow, yt as we
grow in years, so we might grow in wisdom and favor, both with God and men.
And that this may befall unto us, Christ grant us, too whom be glory world
without end. Amen.

The.ij. Sunday after Epiphany. The Gospel. John. ij.
ANd the third day there was a marriage in Cana, a city of Galilee, and the
moother of Jesus was there. And Jesus was called (and his Disciples) unto
the marriage. And when the wine failed, the mother of Jesus said unto him:
they have no wine. Jesus said unto her: woman, what have I too do with
thee? Mine hour is not yet come. His Moother said unto the ministers:
whatsoever he says unto you, do it. And there were standing there.vj.
vvaterpo^s of stone, after the manner of purifying of the Jews, co^teyning ij.
or.iij. firkins a piece. Jesus said unto them: fill the vvaterpots with water.
And they filled them up too the brim. And he said unto them: dravv out now,
and bear unto the governor of the feast: and they bare it. When the ruler
of the feast had tasted the water turned into wine, and knevv not whence it
was (but the ministers which drevv the water knevv) he called the
Bridegroom, and said unto him: Every man at the beginning does set forth good
wine, and when men be droonk, then that which is vvorsse: but thou have kept
the good wine until now. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of
Galilee, and shevved his glory: and his disciples believed on him.

The exposition of the text.
THis Gospel is a part of the story of Christ, wherein he manifests his
glory at a Marriage. For by the miracle of wine, he both utters his own
divine nature, and gives an incling of his office, and signeth up the truth of
his doctrine as it were with some heavenly Seal. His own divine nature he
declares in this, that he changes the natures of things by his word: for at
his commandment the water beeco^meth wine. His office he shows, in that
he helps the needy when he is sought unto. The certeintie of his doctrine
he does as it were seal with this miracle. For least any man should doubt of
the certeintie of his doctrine which is heavenly, he woorketh a heauen-woork,
which bears witness with his doctrine, whereby his Disciples are confirmed in
his faith.

Now the places that we will entreat of in this Sermon, are these four.

1 Of the solemnity of the Marriage. 2 Of the Marriage it self then finished
and confirmed. 3 Of the present miracle, with the circumstances thereof. 4 Of
the examples of life that may be derived fro ye same.
Of the first.
Since I entreat of marriage, I will speak of these things in order. First
between what persons nature and godliness allows marriage. Secondly what way
those that will be man and wife must attempt marriage. Thirdly what manner of
consent, and of whom it ought too be. Fourthly why it is meet that the
assurance should be made in the open assembly of the Church. And fifthly what
manner of feast ought too be at a marriage.

In the persons of folks that contract marriage, four things are too be looked
unto: namely kindred, aliance, religion, and natural strength, which are
requisite in marriage. As touching kynred and alya^ce, they are to be kept from
matching in wedlock, which are within the degrees of kindred and alyance that is
prohibited in Leuiticus. Moreover, it is in no wise lawful too stayne the
degrees prohibited by the civil magistrate. And with what reverence marriages
ought too be made: the deed of Abraham and of other holy men, the prohibition
of Paul, and the perils (or rather the dreadful falls) of many do declare.
At such time as Abraham was about too choose a wife for his son Isaac, he
gave commandment too Eleezer the Steward of his house, that he should not take
unto his son, a wife of the daughters of the Cananites: but that he should
go too his own kindred, and from thence take a wife too his son Isaac. For
Abraham knew how great mischief, diversity of religion breeds in a
household. For hereupon spring strife, blasphemies, and hinderance of
woorshipping, and calling upon God.

The prohibition of Paul is, that we draw not the yoke with the unbelieving.
Which thing is too be understood, not only of doctrine: but of all trade of
life. He that touches pitch (says Solomon) shall be defiled therewith. For
it can not be but that he which keeps company with the ungodly, must needs
himself gather some infection thereby.

Perilles and many horrible falls ensue upon unmeet matches, witness thereof
is Solomon, who by keeping company with Heathen women, became an Idolater.
Witness Achab, whoo through the counsel of wicked Iezabell becam so mad, that
he feared not too slay Gods Prophets, and at length fell headlong intoo eternal
destruction: so much is a wicked woman able too do.

Add herevntoo the bringing up of children, which cannot be as it ought to
be, when the parents are of sundry religions. For then shall the children become
either altogether heathenishe and despisers of all religion: or else hypocrites,
when they shall not dare be acknown what they think, for fear either of the
father or mother.

Fourthly it is required in persons that shall contract marriage, that the one
beguile not the other, as when either by sickness or by coldness, the
strength of any of the parties is forespent: or else that there be a default
in nature, so as a man be not meet or sufficient to yield the benevolence of
marriage.

As for the way that such as meene too be couples ought too take in making
their marriage: Examples, godliness, and honesty do teach. For these three
things toogither teach, that matches are not too be made upon lightness, (as
oftentims they be) nor among cups, nor for lustful liking. Abraham seeks a
wife for his son: the parents of Rebecca consent: Afterward the consent of
the maid is sought: and so Isaac marieth her to his wife. Jacob serves Laban
a long time: he breaks with the friends of the maid for marriage: and when he
had gotten their good will he wan the chaste consent of the maid. Godliness
counsels the same thing also. For as the fourth precept commands the
parents too be honored: so meeneth it also, that this honor should be yielded
unto parents, that they make the marriages of their children, and that the
children should in this behalf attempt nothing with contempt of their parents.
This also does nature tell al men, too the intent the match may be honest,
which cannot be ended or broken, but by death.

Now after that all things are in this wise lawfullye attempted, then it
behooves too go nearer too the matter: and mutual consent of the^ that
contract, is too be heard, which must in no wise be constreyned, but must be
free: that neither part may justly say he was compelled. For although it be
according too right, too begin with the parents: yet it is not lawful for the
parents too compel them whither they will or no. For besides that constreyned
marriage is no marriage, this mischief ensues thereupon, that in such matches
the matter seldom takes good success.

Why it is convenient that the assurance should be made openly in the assembly
of the church, there be four causes. First, that those which are knit in
wedlock, may know themselves too have place in the Church. Secondly, that they
which shall be man and wife, may be instructed by the voice of the minister, in
this entrance of theirs intoo wedlock.

Thirdly, that the Church may be a witness of the assurance made between
them, lest they might live with offense unto others, as if they were Lemans
rather than married folks. Fourthly that they may be openly helped with the
Prayers of the Church, so as the marriage begoon, may turn too Gods glory,
their own commodity, and finallye too the edifiyng of the whole Church, by
their godly conversation in holy marriage.

Now remains somewhat too be spoken breefly concerning the marriage feast:
wherein it is too be considered what behooves too be there, and what too be
away. In any wise there must be utterly excluded from Christian marriages:
first Surfeiting: secondly, Pride: thirdly, too much sumptuousness: fourthly,
filthy and unmannerly talk, such as the talk of ribauldlie minstrels is
wont too be: and fifthly forslowing of godliness: namely that they follow
not their feasting at such time as divine service should be done in the
Church, whereby God is displeased, the neighbor offended, and occasion of
falling is given too many. On the contrary part there must be present: first
godliness: secondly, honest mirth: thirdly, holy talk: and fourthly, often
wishing ye God may prosper this his state with his blissing. For as we reed,
these things were customably used too be done in the marriages of the saints:
and therefore God also has with his goodness furthered such marriages.

Of the second.
Now that we have noted certain things concerning marriage, I will hereafter
add a few things of marriage finished and confirmed, and I will do but two
things. First I will recite the final causes of marriage. And afterward I will
show by what virtues, the society of married folks is made sweet and amiable.

All godly folk know that the final causes of marriage are four. Whereof the
first is, mutual help: for when Solomon says, woe is him that is alone, he
meeneth that mutual help and society is needful, that we may the better and
more quietly endure the miseries of this life. For this cause may old men
marye, whose bodies are so withered that they can beget no children.

The second cause is procreation of children: for it is Gods will that mankind
should be maintained by this means. And therefore he said to our first
parents: Increase and multiply and fulfill the earth.

The third cause is, that every household might be as a church, in which the
parents (as it were Prophets) are adorned with prophetical dignity, too the
intent they may instruct their children concerning God and religion: and that
their children (as it were certain young impes) might be watered with
continual doctrine and exhortations, so as at length they may grow too be
trees, and bring forth the most sweet fruit of faith.

The.iij. cause is the avoiding of whoredom in this corrupted and depraved
nature. For thus says Paul: for avoiding of fornication, let every man have
a wife of his own. For wedlock is the remedy against that most filthy sin
of fornication and aduoutrie: wherein do meet together many and horrible
sins. For first it is a wilful breaking of Gods law. 2. a perverting of the
law of nature. 3. a shameful and foul transgression of civil laws. 4. a
miry puddle of regeneration. 5. a horrible treason: for we are not at our own
liberty, but his who has redeemed us with his precious blood. 6. a
dishonoring of the Resurrection. For what is more filthy, than with most
shameful wickedness too defile the body, which in time too come shall rise
ageine to eternal glory? 7. a horrible defiling of the temple of GOD.
Corinth. 6. Now seeing that so many sins meet here toogither, there is no
cause why any man should think that God will not punish it with his own
hands.

But the company of man and wife is made amiable and sweet by these five
means, by godliness, virtue, mutual forbearing, mutual love, and by
dutifulness performed busily and godlily on both sides.

Godliness of right holds the cheef place. For there is no stable and
steadfast friendship, unless it have his beginning from God: and therefore must
godliness needs shine before the rest. For when couples have determined to
obey God, al things afterward become more easy.

Virtue and honest conditions breed mutual delight between man and wife. For
when virtue is exercised, it makes conversation of living more amiable.

Mutual forbearing, whereby we take in good worth one another conditions and
faults, is very needful. For in this weakness of nature, there happen many
scapes, which will breed strife, if they be not covered by mutual forbearing.

Mutual love having his beginning of godliness and true virtue, makes us not
too be too sharp sighted in looking intoo one another faults. But that many
things either we mark not, or if we mark them, we cover them with love.
For charity covers the multitude of sins.

Duty performed godlily and busily on both sides, makes the yoke light and
sweet. For when man and wife mark one another, and find like heedfulnesse in
their duty: both their company is made more pleasant, and they are the more
stirred up on both sides too render duetifulnesse, that the one may requite the
other alike.

Where these five things be not, the company of their life is most bitter, or
rather more sharp than death. Therefore let the godly couples do their
endeuer, yt these virtues may be seen in their life continually.

Of the third.
Having expounded those places that gave occasion too this miracle, now let us
look upon the miracle it self with the circumstances thereof. The
circumstances are many: as time, occasion, the request of Christ's moother and
his answer, the preparature of the miracle, the miracle it self, the
confirmation of the miracle, and the use and fruit of the same.

The time is noted, both in that it was done the third day after his coming
intoo Galilee, and in that it was the first of all the miracles that the Lord
wrought. The time therefore admonishes us too way this miracle with singular
heed.

Four occasions of this miracle may be gathered of the text. First, the
marriage it self that was kept in Cana. Secondly the bidding of Christ's
moother too the wedding. Thirdly the want of wine. And fourthly, the virgins
heart most ready too help.

Therefore when wine failed, the moother of Jesus said too her son. They
have no wine. Too whom Jesus ansvvered: woman, what have I too do with
thee? Mine hour is not yet come. His mother truly, speaks this either for
pity sake, or else too the intent her son should by some means or other
help the present necessity. But Christ answers his moother somewhat hardly,
and that for right great causes. In this behalf he voutsaueth her not the
title of moother, but calls her simply by the name of woman. And moreover he
says: what have I too do with thee? mine hour is not yet come. The Lord
had here a further sight. For he foresaw what superstitions should in time too
come rise upon Invocation of the virgin Marye. He saw that hypocrites should
wickedly yield unto her, the things that were proper too God and too the
mediator. And therefore in this somewhat hard answer, he delivers too all
ages a perpetual and grave Doctrine, least the unmeasurable reuerencing of
Saints, should deface the honor of his office: and in this respect he
abased his own moother too the vulgar degree of women. Then was it no light
cause, that he spoke too his moother in this wise: what have I too do with
thee: but too make a difference between his own office, and his moother, and
so consequently of all Saints. He will not part his office which is
peculiarly his own, and give part of it too his mother. But he chalengeth too
himself alone the office of a Savior. Wickedly therefore do the
superstitious call the virgin, Queen of heaven, advocate, life, sweetness,
moother of grace, and consequently the salvation of the world. For no part of
our redemption is too be ascribed unto Marye. And whereas he adds: Mine
hour is not yet come: he implies two things: Namely that he ceased not for
any manner of heedlessenesse or ^louth and also that he would have a care of the
matter, as soon as opportunity should offer it self.

What did the moother of Jesus in this case? Whatsoever he bids you do
(says she too the wayters) that do ye. This pertains too the preparature
of the miracle. The moother does only conceive good hope, that her son will
succoure the present need. And where as she says too the wayters, whatsoever
he bids you do, do it: she ministers unto us a general doctrine in
the Church, whereof the blissed virgin is both a tipe and a member.

What then learneth the Church hereby? Forsooth it lerneth, with the blissed
virgin, too command all ministers (yea and all Christians) too obey Christ,
in doing whatsoever he bids them, how little so ever it seem agreeable
too reason.

Anon the Lord when opportunity served, willed the wayters too fill the six
water pottes that were set there too serve for the superstitious purging of the
Jews, of which pottes every one did hold a two or three Firkins a piece, so
that altoogither did hold about an Amer of Wine.

These water pottes (I say) did the Lord bid them fill up too the brimmes:
which being done, he badde give thereof too the master of the feast. For
by the secreat power of Christ, it was now become wine, which was even now
water. Which when the master of the feast had tasted, he said too the
bridegroom. All men are wont too set good Wine upon the table first, and
when the guests are well laden with Wine, then too give them that which is
vvoorser. But thou haste kept the best Wine too the last. This is added for
the confirmation of the miracle. For the master of the feast witnesses, that
this wine was much more excellent than that which they had drunk before.

Now ensues the use and fruit of the miracle: and he manifested his glory
(says the Evangelist) and his disciples believed upon him. This miracle
therefore was appointed for two things: Namely too manifest Christ's glory,
and too strengthen the faith of the Disciples. For look how many miracles
Christ showed in the world, so many witnesses were there of the glory of his
Godhead, and so many sealings were there of his doctrine, and of faith in the
hearers.

This then is the right use of Christ's miracles, that his glory being blazed
abroad, and his doctrine being confirmed by them as it were by authentical
seals, we should lean unto him by lively faith* But as for such miracles as
either darken the glory of Christ, or quench faith, they are sleights of the
Devil, of which the Lord gives us warning too beeware in the.24. of Matthew.
There shall (says he) arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall
show great signs and vvoonders: in so much that the very elect (if it were
possible) should be deceived: behold I have told you of it before hand.
Therefore let no man give credit too any miracles, save such as set forth
Christ's glory, and norish and confirm the true faith too him ward.

Of the fourth.
FOr as much as in this Gospel, there is mention made of many persons, I will
now show breefly what doctrine and instruction is too be taken at each of them.

First therefore let us at all these guests learn an example of thriftie making
cheer, from which be banished riot and unadvisedness, of which things more
is spoken in the first place.

At the Bridegroom and Bride let us learn too receive Christ too our feasts:
which thing truly is then done, when in the fear of God and with
thanksgiving, we use Gods gifts to honest mirth, and leave them at home that
are not bidden.

By the miracle let the bridegroom and bride learn that if they bid Christ too
their feast, he will change the water intoo wine: that is too say, he will
turn all bitter things intoo sweet, and bliss the parties with his blissing,
so as they shall want nothing.

At Christ let us learn, according unto our ability too help the
Brydegrome and the Bryd^: that is too say, too beautify the Church by what
means so ever we can be able.

At Christ let us learn too transfer again unto a good and godly use,
the, things that were abused and put too superstition, so as they may serve too
Gods glory, and too the building of the Church. The waterpots here served too
Iewishe superstition: but Christ uses them too the setting forth of his
own glory, and too the edifying of his Church. So the Church goods which
heertofore have been abused, ought now too be converted too a better use.

At Mary we may learn too be touched with pity for the need of other
folks, and too pray too God too further the poor with his blessing.

At the master of the feast we may learn, too like well of Christ's doings,
with cleansed minds.

At the wayters we may learn, to employ our labor at Christ's commandment,
and not so much too look what he bids, as too do that he bids.

Of Christ, Mary, and the Disciples toogither, we may learn too keep fellowship
with men, and too take their slenderness in good worth. Also we may learn
to honor the honest marriages of poor folks with our presence, and too help
them with our purse when cause requires.

These things have I spoken the largelier of this Gospel, because this matter
whereof it entreats, is not wont too be entreated of but once in the year.
I have spoken of the manner of marriage, and of matrimony. Also I have showed
how great a sin it is too break the sixth commandment. I have expounded
the miracle with his circumstances, and what doctrine and instruction, the
examples of the persons in this Gospel yield unto us. Now God the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ grant us his grace, that being confirmed by this
miracle, we may in the true fear of God and in faith, yield true glory too
God the father, Christ, and the holy Ghost, too whom being only the immortal
and living God, be honor glory, and dominion for ever world without end. Amen.

The third Sunday after Epiphany. The Gospel. Math. viij.
WHen he was come down from the Mountain, much people follovved him. And
behold there came a Lepre and worshipped him, saying: Master, if thou vvilte,
thou can make me clean. And Jesus put forth his hand and touched him,
saying: I vvil be thou clean: and immediately his Leprosy was cleansed. And
Jesus said unto him: tell no man, but go and shevy thy self too the priest
and offer the gift (that Moses commanded too be offered) for a witness
unto them. And when Jesus was entered intoo Capernaum, there came unto him a
Centurion, and besought him, saying: Master, my servant lies at home sick of
the Palsy, and is grievously peyned. And Jesus said: when I come unto him,
I will heal him. The Centurion answered, and said: Sir I am not vvorthie
that thou should come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my
servant shall be healed. For I also am a man subject too the authority of an
other, and have soldiers under me: and I say too this man go, and he goes:
and too another man come, and he comes: and too my servant do this, and he
does it. When Jesus heard these words, he marvelled, and said too them
that follovved him: Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith in
Israel. I say unto you, that many shall come from the East and VVeast, and
shall rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of Heaven: but the
children of the kingdom shall be cast out intoo utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. And Jesus said unto the Centurion: Go thy
way, as thou beleeuest, so be it unto thee. And his servant was healed in
the self same hour.

The exposition of the text.
THis gospel sets before our eyes the affection of Christ toward mankind,
and especially toward them that flee too him in heaviness and affliction: for
look what he promised in words, saying: Come unto me all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will refresh you, and ye shall find rest unto your
souls: the same thing does he show here by his deed. For after that he had
taught his fathers word on the mountain, he came down and fulfilled the
thing in woork, which he had taught in word: confirming his doctrine with
miracles. For he woorketh here two miracles. With his word he heals the
Lepre, and by his commandment he heals the son of the Centurion absent.
The use of these miracles is, both too prove Christ too be the true Messiah,
and too witness that the self same Christ will help the afflicted that call
upon him, as well as he helped the Lepre and the Centurion that called upon
him. Howbeeit, too the intent the present miracles may serve too our better
instruction, I will entreat of.iiij. places, which are these.

1 A general doctrine of all Christ's miracles. 2 Of the Lepre, and of his
healing, and of the circumstances thereof. 3 Of the heathen Centurion, of his
faith, and of his care for his servant. 4 The praise of this heathen man's
faith.
Of the first.
Because the Euangelical story conteyneth many of Christ's miracles wherewith
he manifests his glory, confirms his doctrine, and increases faith in the
hearers: I will breefly set forth a general doctrine, the use whereof shall serve
in all particular miracles of Christ. Why the Lord adds miracles too his
word, it is told in the last Sunday, and even here a little before I have
repeated it in the beginning. How be it too the intent we may have the full
doctrine of miracles, mo things are too be serched out: which too enclose
within number certain, I will put all under these.v. questions. What the persons
be: what the ends be: what is the manner: what is the use: and why miracles
are not wrought at this day.

The persons are of three sorts: first such as are oppressed with diseases
and with the Devils tirannie. Then the beholders of the miracles. And lastly
Christ that woorketh the miracles.

The ends are many. One is that Christ might show forth his own glory:
Another, that he might seal up his doctrine the third, that the faith of them
that beheld the miracles, might be confirmed: the fourth that God might be
glorified by the sight of his wonderful works: the fifth, that by little
and little, the Devils kingdom might be destroyed. What miracles so ever are
done for any other end than these, are condemned as sleights of the Devil.
Math. 24.

The manner is diverse: for sometime he woorketh a miracle by his word alone,
as in this place. Another time too the intent too show the preciousnesse of his
body, he lays to his hand. One while he turns him self to GOD with giving
of thanks before hand: and another while he woorketh by his only power
without his word, as when he turned the water intoo wine. Too the manner also
perteyneth the faith of him that is healed by the miracle, as is read in this
Gospel.

Miracles serve too three uses. That he that is healed by miracle should sin
no more: that the beholders should put their trust in the healer: and that we
which read of the miracles of the Lord, should be confirmed in the glory,
and doctrine of Christ, and therewithal conceive faith in him, that he is
none otherwise affected toward us, than he was toward them.

But why are no miracles wroughte now a days? He is stark blind that sees
no miracles at these days. The church of Christ is a little flock, which
the Devil the King of darkness, and Antichriste the Pope do persecute, and
bend all their force too this end, that they may extinguish the true religion
of Christ: and yet they can not.

All the whole world persecuted that one poor man Luther, and yet they
touched not one hear of his head. And why? God miraculously defended both him
and also his little flock. This presence of God in his church is miraculous
enough, so that we need not too seek other miracles. Moreover miracles, and
the power of healing men's bodies, and the visible giuings of the holy ghost,
were bestowed only upon the primitive church, too the intent they might
confirm Christ's glory, his doctrine, and our faith for evermore in all that
should come after. The use of which too us ward, is that we may know they were
certain seals of full authority, wherewith God would have his doctrine
confirmed and sealed for ever.

Of the second.
IN the Lepre that is healed* let six things be considered: his infirmity, the
state of his person, his faith, his invocation, his patience, and his
confession.

The infirmity of the Lepre is a punishment of sin: and therefore it puts
him in mind of Gods wrath and of his just judgment. For all crosses, all
calamities, and what so ever adversity befalls us in this life, are as it
were a sermon from heaven, wherein God accuses of sin, and shows his wrath:
which most just wrath of GOD, when a man thinks earnestly upon, without the
knoweledge of Christ, he falls intoo despair. Whereby it often falls out,
that a man either kills him self, or else pyneth away by peecemeale for
sorrow. For the conscience of sin suffers him never too rest, no not one
minute of an hour. Let us declare this thing by one example. Oedipus king of
Thebes, because there fell a great plague in his Realm, thought that some
heinous wickedness was committed by him self, or some of his. Heervpon he
called the Priest Tyresias and bad him show by his art of Birdspell, whoo was
the author of so great wickedness, for which all the common weal was
atteinted with so grievous a plague. In the end Oedipus found it too be him
self and none other that had committed this heinous offense. For he had
begotten children of his own moother, whom he had unwittingly taken too his
wife. For being but a Babe he was cast away by his parents, that he might
have bin killed. But the shepherd too whom the commandment was given, spared
him because he was a trim boy. Afterward growing too man's estate, he fought
certain battles for the Thebanes luckely: and for his well doing, they both
gave him the kingdom and the Queen Iocasta too be his wife. By means
whereof, not knowing whoo she was, he married his own moother. Now as soon as
Oedipus had knowledge of this his sin by the priest, and saw the whole realm
too be atteinted with a most grievous plague for his offense, he fell intoo
consideration of Gods wrath. And by thinking thereupon, he was driven too
despair. In this despair, (...) he pulled out his own eyes, least he might
beeholde the sun. Secondly, being martired with the conscience of his
wickedness, with a great outcrye he bad those that stood about him get them
away, least he should hurt the good even with his shadow. Afterward fleeing
his Realm, he lived blind and a begg^r, until he perrished being swalowed
up in despair. His moother Iocasta being unable too abide the grief of
mind for remorse of her sin, as soon as she knew of her fault, hung her
self. So horrible and foul a thing is sin, when a man beholds it rightly
with the eyes of his heart.

The state of the Leprous person was very hard: for it beehooued him too live
severally alone from the company of Gods people. For great sorrow whereof, no
dout but many pyned away. For not only were they excluded from the fellowship
of men, but also they were left destitute of the comfort which they might
have had by the preaching of Gods word. Moreover, they were distinguished
from other men by five marks, which thing encresed their sorrow not a little.
The first mark was a loose garment cut in two: the second a head uncovered:
the third a face muffled: the.iiij. a dwelling set from the company of men:
the fifth, a public Proclamation, whereby he was proclaimed unclean, as a
person unworthy too be conversant among the Israelites with the people of
God. And this was the case or state of this Lepre. If he had not had faith in
Christ in these evils, he must have bin utterly forlorn for sorrow.

But he came unto Christ, and conceived faith. And although he felt
himself too have deserved damnation: yet lifts he himself up at the
liberal promise of Christ. Doutlesse he had herd this saying of Christ's:
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden. Doutlesse he herd
John say of Christ: Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world. This Lepre therefore knowing his Physician, conceyueth hope of health,
leaning upon Christ with assured confidence.

Through this faith he calls upon Christ. For invocation is the natural
fruit of faith, as the which can not be made without faith, according too
this sentence: How shall they call upon him on whom they have not believed?

Howbeit in this invocation is propounded a singular example of patience. For
the Lepre says unto Christ: Lord if thou vvilt, thou can make me clean.
Like as David when he was put from his kingdom, desired with condition to be
restored ageine, if it so seemed good unto God, So here this Lepre leaves
this corporal benefit in the hand of the Lord, whoo knows better than our
selves what is expedient and meet for us.

Besides that, this prayer has a singular example of his confessing of Christ.
The Scribes and Phariseyes did persecute those that confessed Christ. But this
poor man, this despised person, this Lepre, (let the Princes and preests fret
as much as they would at it) confesses Christ, and acknowlegeth him to be
almighty, yea and the very Messiah: whose constant confession it becomes us
too follow.

Now is the healing of this Lepre too be looked upon: wherein are many
circumstances too be examined, of which every one conteines a peculiar lesson.
With his hand Christ touches the Lepre: he grants cheerfully that which
the lepre desires: he bids him be clean by word: the effect, that is too
say, clensing from the leprosy, follows out of hand: When he has cleansed
him, he gives him three commandments: that he should tell no man, that he
should show him self too the priest, and that he should offer his gift
according too the law.

The stretching out of Christ's hand, and his touching of the Lepres body was
a token of his unmeasurable grace and goodness, by which deed he woonderfully
increased the lepres faith. For when he saw the son of God, not only not
loathe too talk with him, after the manner of other men: but also too have
touched his uncleanness with his hand: he was replenished with singular
ioyfulnesse of spirit.

With this touching is joined the grant: I vvil: The lepre says, if thou
vvilt: Christ answers, I will. Heerevpon the Lepre concludes with himself,
that he should be made whole by and by.

Upon the grant he adds, Be thou clean. By which saying, he declares his
heavenly power, confirms his doctrine, and increases faith, both in the
beholders and in the readers of the story. For too will in Christ, is as much
as too do. He has done whatsoever was his will, both in heaven and in earth.
This power of Christ's comfort against the power of the devil.

And by and by his leprosy was clenzed. This deed is both a miracle in it
self, and a benefit too the people: by which benefit (as it were by a
warrant) he gives us too understand that he is ready too cleanse all men from
their spiritual leprosy, which come unto him by Faith.

Now follow the commandments: First that the lepre tell no body of it. Untoo
this commandment, the Lepre through a certain zeal of publishyng Christ's
benefits, obeys not. In which case he is not a little offended. For he
ought not too have rendered thanks too his benefactor according too his own
devise, but by obedience rather: than the which there is no sacrifice more
acceptable too Christ.

The second and third commandment follow. Go thy ways, and show thy self
unto the Priest, and offer thy gift for a witness too them. This did Christ,
that by this means the law of Moses might be satisfied, in which the
judgment of Leprosy is committed too the Priests, too cast the infected out
of company, and too receive ageine the healed, by their open testimony. As
for that the healed are bidden too offer, it was done for this purpose, yt
this oblation should be a pledge of their thankfulness toward God, that had
received health.

The Papists which upon this place do build auricular confession, with
reckening up of men's sins, are fools, and do fowly deprave the Scripture,
wresting it amiss unto a wrong sense. As for the confession which we retain
in our churches, I must speak of that elsewhere.

Of the third.
THe story that conteyneth the benefit bestowed upon the Centurion, has very
many lessons, which I will distinguishe in numbres, too the intent they may the
better be borne away.

First is too be observed the Image of the two peoples, of the Jews, and of
the Heathen. First the Jew is healed, and then the Heathen man. Whereby we are
taught, that Christ's benefits belong indifferently unto all men, and that
there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek. For like as all have
sinned and want the glory of God: so Christ offers his benefits too all men,
too be received by faith.

2 The sundry states of the Jew and the Gentile, is not void of a lesson. The
Jew was poor, the Heathen man rich. Christ therefore has no respect of the
present estate: he despises not the poor man, he rejects not the rich
man. The Jew was a commoner, the Centurion a gentleman. In the kingdom of
Christ therefore, the pedegrees of auncetours have no reputation, but faith in
Christ, through which all men (be they gentlemen or yeomen) are born the
sons of God. The Jew was despised in the world, the Centurion a Courtier,
and a man of honor, but the Lord esteems him most honorable, that has
most faith.

3 Now let us examine by the circumstances, what manner of faith the Centurions
faith was. That he was an Ethnic and none of the peculiar people of God, it
abaseth him sufficiently. He might among men vaunt him self of honor of his
Captenship, but his vaunting avails nothing with God. For as the Lord says
in Hieremie: He that boasts, let him boaste in me, which do work mercy,
judgment, and justice. The Centurion then preaceth not unto Christ without
repentance. But acknowledging his own wretchedness, he calls upon Christ
too help his servant, yea and that through unfeigned faith, whereby his love
toward his neighbor is also declared. And where as he says: I am not worthy
that thou should enter under my ro^e. And also, Only say the word, and my
lad shall be whole. He both confesses him self a sinner, and acknoweledgeth
Christ too be endowed with the Godhead, upon whom also he believes. And
whereas he adds. For I also am a man subject under the power etc. He gives
too understand, how easy a matter it is too Christ, through his heavenly
power, too help even them that be absent by his only word and will, seeing
that he being a man subject under an other man's power is able too appoint his
servants what they shall do, and that they do what is commanded them.

4 Here rises a question concerning an other man's faith. The Centurion
believes, and his servant is healed. Whereupon we gather this certain lesson,
that the godly by their faith may obtain corporal benefits for other
folks: but whither any man can be saved with eternal salvation by an other
man's faith, it is no question among Christians. For they know that no man is
saved without his own faith which may in deed be purchased, when the godly
pray for others that God will grant them faith.

Of the fourth.
IN this commendation of ye heathen ma^s faith, many things are too be
considered. First Christ's admonishme^t, which is referred too his manhood. For
it pretends humane affections, howbeeit without sin. 2 He swears, he has
not found so great faith in all Israel. For the Jews required not only the
word, but also a sign. But this Heathen man, where as he had but a little
taste of Doctrine, was contented with the word only. The faith of Marie was
more perfect: but it was by reason of more perfect instruction, and of more
certain and more signs in number. Greater therefore is the Centurions faith
according too some part, but not according too the absolute and full meaning of
Faith. 3 We are taught by this place, that faith ought too grow, and too take
daily increase. 4 Here Christ teaches of the calling of the Gentyles, that
they with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, may be gathered intoo one Church by faith
in Christ. 5 A foretellyng of the reiectyng of the Jews for their unbelief,
with a threatening of punishment. 6 When he says too the Centurion: Go thy
way, be it done unto thee as thou have believed. He signifies, that all
things are possible too him that believes, according as Christ himself
witnesses in an other place, too whom be honor and glory for ever and
ever. So be it.

The fourth Sunday after Epiphanie. The Gospel. Math. viij.
AND when he entered intoo a ship, his Disciples follovved him. And behold,
there arose a great tempest in the Sea, in so much that the ship was covered
with waves, but he was asleep. And his Disciples came too him and avvoke
him, saying: Master save us we perish. And he said unto them, why are ye
fearful o ye of little faith? Then he arose and rebuked the winds and sea,
and there followed a great calm. But the men marvelled saying: What manner a
man is this that both sea and vvindes obey him?

The exposition of the text.
THis Gospel sets again before our eyes the disposition of Christ, which
is, too be at hand too his servants in perils, and too help them
according too the saying of the Psalm. I am with thee in tribulations. Also:
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will here thee, and thou shall
honor me. After the same manner, the example of the Apostles teaches us
here what is too be done in peril, that is too say, that with the Apostles
we awake Christ by our faith, too aid us when we crave it at his hand. And
this is the sum of this gospel, that Christ when his disciples were in
danger in the ship through a tempest that arose suddenly, being awaked,
rebukes the sea and the wind, whereupon ensued a great calm, and woonderment
too them that beheld it. The places that we will entreat of, are these three.

1 The variety of the temptations of the godly in this world. 2 The exposition
of the present story with the circumstances thereof. 3 A most goodly Image of
Christ's Church in this world.
Of the first.
Because this Gospel makes mention of the temptation in the ship, I will
breefly set forth the kinds of temptations, wherewith men are troubled: and
that to the intent that knowing the dangers which inuiron us round about, we
may become the more watchefull, least being vanquished with temptations, we
abandon our confession and fall from grace. For like as Christ's disciples were
tempted among the waves of the sea with loss of their life: so all christians
ought (almost every hour) too be afraid of the shipwrecke of their faith.

Of temptations there be many kinds. For either God is the author of the
temptation (in which respect it is proprely a trial or proof, and not a
temptation) or else it proceeds from the devil, or else it comes of men, or
else the cause of it is in the party himself that is tempted, or else they
be things circumstant that trouble him.

God proves us to the intent we may be made more tried too our selves. For
he tries not too the intent too know: for nothing is hidden from him: but to
make us know how much we have profited in Godliness. And God tries men in
their manners, in doctrine, and in the signs of his wrath. In manners he tried
Abraham when he commanded him too sley his only begotten son Isaac, and too
offer him up too him for a sacrifice. And Abraham by obeying God in so hard and
difficult a thing, became more tried too him selfewarde, and saw the true
fruit of his own faith, which is too prefer obedience toward God, before
all things in the world. So at this day, the godly are tried by GOD, when (by
setting before their eyes the commandments of God, which are the most
certain rules of all virtue and good manners) they are made more tried too
them selves, through willing obedience. But on the contrary part, those that
wyttingly and wyllyngly run headlong intoo sin, and yield unto
temptation: become guilty of Gods wrath, until they repent and amend.

Besides this, God tries us in doctrine, when he suffers false Prophets too
come and too teach diverse erroneous opinions. Of which kind of trial, Moises
speaks in the.xiij. of Deuteron. If there rise up among you a Prophet, or one
that says he has seen a dream, and tells you a sign or wonder
beeforehande, and the thing that he has spoken, comes too pass: and he
say unto thee: Let us go and follow strange Gods, and let us serve them (that
is too say, if he set up a new manner of woorshipping God) thou shall not
harken too the words of that Prophet and dreamer, because the Lord your GOD
tries you, and that it may be openly known whither you love him with all
your heart and al your soul, or ^o. This temptation is ascribed unto God, in
consideration that it is a trial and not a seducing. After the same manner he
gives us his word at this day: but he permits many heresies (...) spring
up, to the intent he may by that (...) whither we love him in deed by true
and sincere faith. Sometime the Lord tries us in signs, when his sets
forth the dreadful tokens of his wrath, in heaven, in earth, and in the sea:
which signs do woonderfully shake the minds of the godly. Of this kind of
trial speaks Moises Exodus xx. Be not afraid, for the Lord is come too try
you, and that the fear of him might be in you, that ye might not sin.

The Devil tempts by falling from the doctrine by presumption in office, by
Idolatrous woorshippings, and many otherwise, of which I must speak the^.
Sunday in Lent.

Men, as well our enemies as friends, do tempt us diverse ways: as by doctrine,
hypocrisy, example, counsel, promis, and threatening.

Also man ^^ndeth in himself whereby too be tempted, as original sin, and
secondly many affections springing out of the same, which egg unto attempt
somewhat against god. Sometime a man is tempted of the gifts of the mind or of
the body, such as beauty, strength, wit, woorkmanship, and such other
like, are. He that will not be overcome by this kind of temptation, let him
think that all things are bestowed upon him from heaven, for the advancement
of Gods glory, and the commodity of other men.

Things circumstant do also oftentimes tempt and trouble the minds of the
godly: of which some things are before us, as the things that hang over us:
some are after or behind as the things that are past: some are at our right
hands, as the things that are pleasant: and some at our left hands, as the
things that are sorrowful. Before us death threatens, the dreadful judgment of
God vexes, and hell gapeth with open mouth upon us. After us, or behind us at
our backs, are our sins past, which disquiet the conscience of man. At our
right hands are riches, honor, and power: which things have thrown many men
headlong intoo endless destruction. At our left hands, are poverty, reproach,
contempt, slander, and perils, on sea, on land, at home, and abroad. These
kinds of temptations are most grievous: which are overcome by faith,
invocation, often lifting up of the heart unto God for help, giltlesnesse of
manners: and too be brief, by continual and earnest repentance. Thus much I
thought good too speak of temptation in this place, that we might be stirred
up too watchfulness and praying, lest we enter intoo temptation.

Of the second.
IN the story of this miracle, these circumstances following are too be
considered.

1 The trial of faith. The disciples have ye Lord with them in the ship, and by
reason thereof they sail with the more carelessenesse. How be it, this
carelessenesse was not of very long continuance. For by means of a storm
that arose, the ship was overwhelmed with waves. Whereby it came too pass,
that they which a little before, were too careless, are now abandoned too the
waves of the sea, in a manner ready too despair. Wherefore let no man trust too
much too prosperity, but in prosperity let him be afraid.

2 In this most grievous peril Christ slept, partly with steep too recreate
and refreshe his powers that were weried with labors, and partly to try his
Disciples faith: not because that he being the searcher of hearts was
ignorant of any thing, but too the intent the Disciples might be better known
too them selves. Moreover it is too be believed, that the Lord sleeped for
this purpose also, that greater Faith might be stirred up in his Disciples,
and that his Disciples being stricken with the greater fear, should call upon
him the more earnestly, and set the more by his present aid in the extremity
of peril. For if Christ had bin awake, he had of his own accord helped them
at the pinche as in so great a danger, though his disciples had not prayed
him. And albeit that of his goodness and fatherly affection toward us, he be
ready too give us all things that be necessary to our welfare: yet is h^e not
(...) give them but at our entreta^ce. For prayer is the ordinary instrument
too atteyn all things that are needful for us of God: which thing is done for
this cause, that we should reverence him the true God, creator and fountain
of all goodness, and acknowledge our selves weak creatures, as what (without
GOD) neither have, ought, nor ought are able too do.

3 The woorking of faith is here seen. For faith is not an idle assent or
thought, but it is a stout Giant which overcomes the world as John says:
This is the victory that overcomes the world, even your faith, verily faith
overcomes: but yet through the conqueror Christ, whom it possesses Thus
faith has (...) his enemy the world: that is too weete, sin, Death, the
Devil, dangers, and the flesh. On sins side, stands the Law, conscience,
and despair. On faiths side, stands the Gospel, Christ's sacrifice, and
(...). Therefore when the Law assayleth thee with his lightening, smoke, fire,
vapoures, and thunder: Let faith take the Gospel unto him, and set that
between him and the Law. And when the Law says: Cursed is every one that
does not all the things that are written in the book of the Law: set the
Gospel against it, saying: Every one that believes on the Son, has life
everlasting.

When Death threatens death, set thou against him the ouercommer of Death,
Jesus Christ, who casting Death in the teeth, says: Death where is thy sting?
Hell where is thy victory? The same in the Gospel of John says: He that
believes in me, shall not taste of Death for evermore, but shall pass from
Death unto Life. Then is Death profitable too the godly person: for it is only
a passage unto the better life, so little cause is there that the godly should
be afraid of it.

The Devil in deed accuses and packs up a great beadroll of sins
toogither. But set thou against him the sentence of Christ, which says: The
Prince of this world is judged already: and this saying of Paul. It is God
that justifies, who then can condemn? If he lay our own unrighteousness
too our charge, Let us answer with Paul: Him who knew no sin, made he a
sacrifice for sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

In likewise the dangers of sin reprove us: for they are as it were a
sermon of God concerning sin. But answer thou, that judgment begins at
Gods house, and that the Lord chastises every child whom he receives
unto him, yea and that too the childs behoof.

The flesh moves too despair, But make thou the flesh subject too the
spirit, and say that fleshelie judgment has no place in this behalf. And
so do a thousand things meet us, that will hinder our salvation.

Could Nero then have gainsayde sin, the Law, Death, and the flesh in manner
aforesaid? No verily. For the only children of God have that privilege. The
rest are hilde in bondage under sin, because they are the servants of sin,
as which commit sin by mainteining it against the spirit, or rather utterly
quench the spirit with it. Whosoever therefore will geinsay sin, the law, death,
the devil, the flesh. etc. let him look whither he feel true repentance,
let him look whither he have faith and a good conscience, and finally let him
look whither he be so framed, that he can prefer the obedience of God,
before all the commodities of this life, utterly casting away all purpose of
sinning.

4 Christ finds fault with two things in his Disciples. First with their
fainthartednesse, because they ought not too have bin afraid as long as he was
with them: for in as much as they had seen so many miracles of his, they might
easily have learned, that it is not possible for him too perish, with whoom
Christ is present. And secondely with the smalnesse of their faith: because
they believed not that he could do as much sleeping as waking: or as much
upon the sea as upon the land, being the maker both of sea and land.

5 And as in sleeping he showed himself too be man: So here in commanding
the winds, he proves himself too be GOD: both which things do serve the
slenderness of our Faith. For his manhood shows his good will toward us,
and his godhed shows his ableness, which two things are requisite in every
free act.

6 Too be short, Christ by this story shows, that he willed in deed the
salvation of men, and especially of them that call upon him. For as it is his
will that we should call upon him in our perils: so also is it his will too
utter his fatherly affection toward us, in delivering us from danger.

Of the third.
THis is a most pleasant Allegory. For here is painted out the state and image
of the Church. The sea is the world: the ship is the Church: the wind is the
Devil: the Disciples are the godly company of the believers: Christ is the
truth, and the Gospel is faith.

First mark here, that before Christ with his Disciples entered intoo the
ship, the Sea was calm: that is too say, the world slept soundly in his own
sins. But as soon as Christ entered into the ship, there arose a mighty
tempest, in so much as the ship seemed too be overwhelmed. But what ensued?
Christ the Lord was there present, who could command the sea and the winds.
Hereby therefore we may learn, that out of this little ship (that is too say
the Church) there is no safeguard. Howbeeit we must look well about us here,
that we take not our enemies ship for the true ship. The enemies ship is both
better decked outwardely, and of greater receipt within. But the true ship has
her decking inwardly, and it has a much more stately master, namely the
holy Ghost. All the mariners that it has, are godly: It has the word of
God and the sacraments in right use and obedience too the ministry. And with
these treasures this ship holds it self contented in so great waves.

2 It is too be observed, that this ship sayleth not in the calm sea, but
is tossed in the waves which drives it hither and thither: which thing too
be most true, the story of the world shows. When GOD had made the world,
he put this ship in the mids of it. And by and by the devil, the enemy of
Gods son, tossed it with storms: and from thence forth it was miserably
turmoyled, unto the time of Noe, and after Noe, too Abraham's time: from
Abraham too Moses time: and from thence, until Christ's time, who too the
intent too save this ship, came intoo the world. Yet ceased not the waves
thereof as then. But what is the cause that the world cannot abide this little
ship? for that the Church reprooueth the works of the world, that is too
say, blames the worldly wise men of folly: condemns the rightuous men as
guilty of sin: and aduaunceth not the rich men: but pronounces them
unhappy and wretched, unless true godliness be the gouernoure and ruler of
their riches.

And this is it that Christ promised, when he said: The holy Ghost shall
reprove the world of sin, of righteousness and of judgment. What had Abel
offended against Caine, who horribly murdered him? John answers. Abels
works were good, and his brothers were evil. What did Noe? What did Hieremie?
What did Esaias? What did Christ? and too be short, what did so many martyrs
from the beginning of the world unto this day? They would have brought the
world back from darkness unto light, that men renouncing worldy lusts,
might live godlily, honestly, and uprightly in the world. This is the thank
that the world is wont too requite his benefactours withal. For it would
drown them in his waves. Howbeeit all things fall not out as he would wish:
he cannot destroy this little ship utterly: for out of the blood of the martyrs
spring up other new martyrs ageine.

We may therefore learn hereby a holy art against the stumbling block of
persecution and fewenesse. If the tossing of the ship trouble thee: have an eye
unto Christ, whoo is present at hand in the ship. If the fewenesse trouble
thee: have an eye too the Ark of Noah, too the Sodomites, and too the rest of
the whole world. Those things that are best, did never like but the fewest. The
Church at the beginnning was very small: in the mids it was biggest: and in
the end it shall be so small again, that what with the malice of the Devil,
and what with the leude doctrine of Devils, and what with wicked manners, it may
seem overwhelmed with waves.

In these waves therefore let us learn too waken Christ with our calling
upon him, whoo is never away from his ship, but guydeth it with his holy
spirit, his word, his sacraments and his discipline. Too whom with the Father
and the holy Ghost, be honor and glory world without end. Amen.

The.v. Sunday after Epiphany. The Gospel. Math. xiij.
HE put forth another parable unto them, saying. The kingdom of Heaven is
like unto a man which sowed good seed in his feeld: but while men slept,
his enemy came, and sowed tares among wheat, and went his way. But, when
the blade was sprung up, and had brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares
also. So the servants of the householder came, and said unto him: Sir did not
thou sovve god seed in thy feeld? from whence the^ has it tares? He said
unto them the envious man has done this. The servants said unto him, vvilt
thou the^ that we go and vveede them up? But he said, nay: least while ye
gather up the tares, ye pluck up also the wheat with them: let both grow
together until the harvest, and in the time of harvest, I will say too the
reapers: gather ye first the tares, and bind them together in sheaues too be
brent: but gather the wheat intoo my barn.

The exposition of the text.
OCcasion of this Gospel, was given by Christ's hearers, of whom some were
Hipocrites, who notwithstanding liked very well of them selves, that they were
accounted of Christ's flock: and other some were sincere and good: How be it
because they saw a confused mixture of the good and evil toogither, their
minds were not a little troubled. Too the intent therefore that the Lord might
both warn the one of their hypocrisy, and of the punishment that should one
day ensue for it, and raise up the other too steadfastness and vnvanquishable
confidence, by laying before them the separation and reward that was too come:
he propounded this parable unto them. Whereof the meaning is this: that the
evil must be mixed with the good in the church, as long as this world stands,
which in the end of the world shall be separated one from another: so as unto
the godly may be rendered reward, and unto the wicked deserved punishment.
This Gospel therefore serves too this purpose, too put the hipocrites in
fear, and by setting forth their punishment too provoke them too repentance,
and too comfort the godly, arming them too the sufferance of evils. And the
places of this Gospel are four.

1 What manner of kingdom Christ's kingdom in this world is. 2 Of the enemies
of this kingdom. 3 The prayer of Christ's disciples against the enemies, and
why God suffers enemies in his Church. 4 Of the punishment of Christ's
enemies, and of the reward of the godly.
Of the first.
THe kingdom of heaven is taken diversely in scripture. For first when John
says: Repent and amend, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand: the kingdom
of heaven is none other thing than the newness of life, whereby GOD sets us
up ageine intoo the hope of blissed immortality. For delivering us out of the
bondage of sin and death, he takes us too him self: that wandering as
Pilgrims upon the earth, we may before hand possess the heavenly life through
faith. Therefore where as he says, the kingdom of heaven is at hand: he
means that the restoring of us unto blissed life, yea and the very true and
everlasting felicity is offered too us in Christ. Besides this, it signifies
the Gospel of Christ it self, whereby the Citizens are gathered toogither
intoo the kingdom of heaven, as when the Lord says: the kingdom of heaven is
within you. Thirdly it signifies the fruit of the Gospel preached in the
hearts of the godly: and then it is (as Paul defines in the xiiij. too the
Romans:) righteousness, joy, spirit, and peace of conscience. Fourthly it
signifies the felicity too come, in everlasting life after the judgment: as
when Christ promises it should come too pass, that many shall come from the
East and from the Weast, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
kingdom of heaven. Fifthly it signifies the very visible Church it self in
this world, wherein are good and evil mingled toogither until harvest time: that
is too say, til the end of this world. In this signification is the kingdom of
heaven taken in this Gospel: of which kingdom I will now speak a few things
out of this present parable. The kingdom of Heaven is like a man that sowed
good seed in his feeld. etc. The man that sows, is Christ, very God and
very man. The feeld is the world. The seed are the children of the kingdom.
Each of these three do teach many things.

For first when Christ is called a sower, these things are meant thereby. First
how great the dignity of the Church is, which has the son of God too her
founder. Secondly, that the wise of the world do not sow the church (for that
belongs alonely unto Christ) and therefore that it is not preseued by the
wisdom of the world. Thirdely, that it is the office of Christ too sow, that
is too say, too teach righteousness and eternal salvation. Fourthly, that no
man can become good seed, (that is too say, be justified and renewed too
eternal life) without Christ the sower.

Secondly in as much as the world is called Christ's feeld, many things are
offered us too think upon. First, that no any one kingdom of the world, not
Italy, not Greece, not Iewrie, no nor any other nation under the sun, can
claim too it self alone too be the Lords feeld. For all ye whole world is
that feelde, wherein Christ the sower sows this seed. Wherefore, like as no
nation, no nor any may justly co^plain that he is shut out of the kingdom of
heaven: so no people ca^ (as I said) challenge this glory too it self alone.
Secondly, here it is seen that Gods mercy is infinite, whoo offers
Christ's benefits (that is too wit, wisdom, justification, sanctification,
and redemption) too all men throughoute the wide world.

Thirdly. It is to be observed, why the world is called a feld. For under this
Metaphor is signified that manuring is needful. For as this feeld is too be
tilled by the preaching of repentance: so is it also too be watered with the
blood and spirit of Christ: otherwise the seed is choked, and so perishes.

The seed in this place signifies, both that which is sown, and that which
grows. What is sown? Chrysts Gospel: which as it offreth free remission of
sins: so it requires a continual repentance. This seed (that is too say,
Christ's Gospel) the feeld receives by faith. But it is cherished and
preserved by the holy Ghost, that it be not drowned by the storms of the
flesh, and of persecution, and so die and come too naught. Again, that which
comes of the seed is called seed also: namely the Wheat it self, that is
too say, the children of God. For the word of God or the Gospel, is that
incorruptible seed, whereof we grow again the children of God.

This therefore is the description of the kingdom of Heaven, that is too say of
Gods Church in this world. Whereby we are taught, first that the Church is not
the woork of any other man, than of the Son of God. And therefore right fond
is the Pope, when he braggeth himself too be the sower of this Church. And
secondly, that this Church is not builded by man's doctrine, but only by the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, which whosoever do teach purely, are the woorkfelowes
of Christ the sower.

Of the second.
THis Parable teaches that Christ's kingdom shall always have enemies, in
like wise as the first promis also tells in the third of Genesis. The seed
of the serpent shall lie in wait for the seed of the woman. How true this is,
the story of the Church from thenceforth that the seed was promised, unto
this present day, teaches us. Whersoeuer is an Abell, there is also some a
Cain. Wheresoever is an Isaac, there is also an Ismaell. Where as is a Jacob,
there is also some Esau or other. Whereas is a David, there is also a Saul.
Whereas is a Christ, there is also a Judas. Whereas is Paul, there is also some
Nero. And we must not look too have it otherwise. For Satan lies always in
wait for Christ's church, which he endeuoreth either utterly too abolishe,
or else too defile it with wicked doctrine and manners.

But when come the enemies? When men sleep then comes the enemy and sows
Darnell. By this sleep are noted both the ministers of the word, and also the
heerers thereof. The ministers of the word are said too sleep when they do
not their duty faithfully in teaching things that are wholesome: in admonishing
those that seem too be slouthful: in rebuking those whom they see not too
walk the right way too the truth of the Gospel: in comforting the fearful
consciences: and in confuting erroneous opinions which fight with the
foundation, that is too say: the articles of our faith. The hearers also are
said ^oo sleep, when they either hear the word negligently, or else were
cold and by little and little fallaway, as we see many do now a days.

When men sleep so, then comes the enemy, and that because he is the enemy
of Christ, whose kingdom (that is too say, the Church) he desires too
wast, and too enlarge his own kingdom by lying and murder.

What does the ennimie? He sows in the Lords feelde. What? First, false
and heretical doctrine fighting against the Articles of our faith. And this
practice he beegan in Paradise, continuing it on still in all ages. For
whersoeuer the true and sincere doctrine of the gospel is preched, there also
is the enemy at hand, too poison the fountains of our Savior with his own
venim, least men should draw salvation out of the pure fountains of our
Savior. Secondly he sows contempt of the word in many. Of these seeds
spring up Darnel, that is too say naughty children, as are first Hipocrites:
secondly Sophisters: thirdly Tirants: fourthly blasphemers: and fifthly wicked
men. And all these knitting their powers toogither, assault the church, that is
too say, that little seely flock of Christ's.

But what means it that he says, that the envious man having cast his seed
of Darnel in the Lords feelde, went his way? Does the Devil depart from
Hipocrites, Sophi^ters* and Tirants? In no wise. But he is therefore said too
go his way, for that he puts on another face. He will not seem an enemy,
but the spirit of God and an Angel of light, as it is (...) be seen in the
Anabaptists, whoo make great boast of Gods spirit, and of secret Revelations,
when as notwithstanding, they be deceived by the sleights of Satan.

And so this second place teaches, (...) that the church has her enemies even
in the mids of the feelde, that is too say in the outward society of the
church. Secondly it admonishes us that we consent not to our enemies.
Thirdely, that we may learn too descerne the enemies from the true Citizens
of the Church. Fourthly it warns us, that after the example of many, we
should not either altoogither fall utterly (...) the Church, or be offended at
the calamity of the Church, which in this life is set open too the injuries
of so many enemies.

Of the third.
THe servants come too the master of the household, and say: Did thou not
sovve good seed in thy (...)? By this (...) of the servants too the ^aister of
the house, (...) the prayer of the godly for the Church, against sects and
stumbling blocks in the Church. For as the godly do continually pray for the
prosperity and welfare of the Church: so do they pray^ that no evil or
hurteful things may befall it: which thing is too ^pan^ every where in David's
Psalms. Ask those things (says he) which are for the (...): so might they
prosper that peace of Jerusalem: wise. Let mine enemies (...) confounded
(says he) and let them be destroyed that would me evil. Also in the
seventh Psalm: Let his work turn upon his own head, and let his
wickedness light upon his own croune.

But how can this stand with Chrysts commandment, who bids us too pray for
them that curse us and do us wrong? The prayer of the Church against her
enemies has always a condition of Repentance and Conversion annexed unto it.
For the meening thereof is, either that they may be converted unto repentance,
or else that they may be confounded and perish, that they may not always crake
blasphemies against God, and be troublesome too Gods saints. We must
therefore pray for our enemies, that they may be converted, we must pray
against them, that they may be confounded and disappointed of their devises,
whereby they practice myscheefe against Christ's Church.

VVilt thou (said his servants) that we go and pluck them up by the root?
too whom he said, No: but let them both grovve together least in gathering
the Da^nell ye pluck up the Wheat therewith* (...)

^

Of the fourth.
ANd in the time of harvest, I will say too the harvest folk: first gather
ye toogither the darnell, and bind it toogither in bundels too be burnt, but
gather the wheat intoo my barn. Here he preaches of the separating of the
godly from (...) curse of al creatures: which punishment how horrible it is, no
tongue is able too express. Besides this, they shall be punished with double
fire: namely with the fire of evil conscience, the torment whereof shall never
have end: and with fire burning the body and not consuming it: for the body
being adjudged too eternal torture, shall feel everlasting fire. If we
thought upon these things earnestly, we would not be so cold in matters of
our salvation.

In the sentence given upon the godly, is set forth a double reward: namely
the blissing of the father, and his inheritance of Gods kingdom. The one is
set as contrary against cursing, and the other is set against eternal
punishment. We may therefore gather a double argument hereof. One of the
punishment of the ungodly, and the other of the reward of the godly. And
either of them both (if it be thought upon as it ought too be) is effectual
too work in us the fear of God and true and continual repentance.

By this means therefore all the whole Parable ameth at this mark: that the
ungodly should leave his own way, whereby he sins: that the unrighteous
should leave his thought, whereby he dispaireth of the forgiveness of his
sins, and (according too the saying of the Prophet) be converted too the
Lord, because he is ready too forgive. In this readiness nothing wants:
but there is in it almighty mercifulness, and merciful almightinesse, too
whom be glory for ever. Amen.

The Sunday called Septuagesima. The Gospel. Math. xx.
THe kingdom of Heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which went
out early in the morning too hire laborers intoo his vineyarde. And when the
agreement was made with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them into his
vineyard. And he went out about the third hour, and savv other standing idle
in the market place, and said unto them: Go ye also into the vineyard, and
whatsoever is right, I vvil give you. And they went their way. Ageine, he
went out about the.vj. and.ix. hour, and did likewise. And about the.xj.
hour he went out, and found other standing idle, and said unto them: Why
stand ye here all the day idle? They said unto him: Because no man has hired
us. He says unto them: Go ye also into the vineyarde, and whatsoever is
right, that shall ye receive. So when even was come, the Lord of the vineyard
said unto his Stevvarde: Call the Laborers, and give them their hire, beginning
at the last until the first. And when they did come that came about the
eleauenth hour, they received every man a penny: But when the first came
also, they supposed that they should have received more, and they likewise
received every man a penny. And when they had received it, they murmured
against the good man of the house, saying: These last have wrought but one
hour, and thou have made them equal with us which have born the burden and
heat of the day. But he answered unto one of them, and said: Freende I do
thee no vvrong: did thou not agree with me for a penny? Take that thine
is, and go thy way: I vvil give to this last even as unto thee. Is it not
lavvful for me to do as me lists with mine own goods? Is thine eye evil
because I am good? So the last shall be first, and the first shall be last. For
many be called, but fevv be chosen.

The exposition of the text.
THis Parable sets before our eyes the image of the Church. For therein is
showed how the Church (which is likened too a Uineyarde) is dealte wythall.
For as the woorkemen are in respect of a Uineyarde: so are men in respect of
the Church. The workmen are called intoo the vineyard, some sooner, and some
later. Some labor much and long time, and some labor little and short time. So
of men, some sooner, some later, are gathered intoo the Church by the
preaching of the Gospel: and they work some more, some less. Moreover, as the
householder gives too some their days wages upon covenant, and unto other
some as much of his own good will: so in likewise our heavenly Father is a
like bountiful too all that labor in his Church. Ageine as the householder
bids the proud and stubborn go their ways, and makes much of those that
take his liberality in good worth. So God the father rejects those that
seek reward of works, whereas he bestows eternal life upon those that
depend upon his free and frank good will. And so the meaning of this Gospel is,
that no man either trust in his own works, if they be many: or despair if
they be none: but only depend upon the goodness of God, walking in the fear
of the Lord. And hereof may three places be made.

1 That every Christian is hired intoo the Lords vineyard too work. 2 A
general doctrine concerning good works, and the reward of good works. 3 Of
Christ's saying: So shall the last be first, and the first be last: many are
called and few chosen.
Of the first.
THe Church of God is in the scriptures oftentimes called the Lords vineyard:
and that, first because the Lord has chosen it, and vouchsaued too make a
covenant of grace and everlasting salvation with it, and bestowed innumerable
benefits upon it, and has planted and furnished it. All the whole Church is
a vineyard: and all Christians are the vine branches, which in an other
respect are also called workmen. Secondly this naming of it, shows how much
the Lord esteems his Church: for no possession is more precious than a
vineyarde. Neither does any require greater or more continual labor.

Thirdly when as the Lord calls his church a vineyarde, he commends his
own care and earnestness toward us. Fourthly this name signifies, yt we have
need of continual looking too, and of continual care and that the Lord had
need too put too his hand, if he mind too have true and fruteful vine
branches. Fifthly that they which are received intoo the church, are bound
too bring forth good fruit. For as the vine branches do bring forth good
grapes, and not wild grapes: so Christians must do the woorks of the spirit,
and not of ye flesh.

Now is too be seen, how every Christian must behave himself in the Lords
vineyard. For as there be sundry duties in a vineyard, for one pla^teth,
another waters, another shreddeth, another binds, another vnderproppeth,
another diggeth, and another dungeth the earth: So are there sundry vocations
and offices in the Church, according too the diversity whereof, men must labor
in the Church. The Lord appoints unto every man his task, according too
his own will. For like as in a vineyard, the householder gives to one man a
shreddinghook, too another a spade, and too another a knife or a hatchet: So in
the church one is appointed of God too be a preacher, another too be a
magistrate, the third too be a householder, the fourth a teacher in a school,
another to be a scholar, and another too be a craftsman, and so forth.

But here every man in his labor must consider three things. First whither his
labor be profitable in the vineyarde, and commanded him by the householder.
Secondly what is too be avoided of him in his laboring. Thirdly what, and how
it is too be done.

Whither thy labor be profitable, and commanded thee by the householder, thou
may know by two things: namely by the commandment, and by thy calling.
Every labor that makes too the planting, watering, cherishing, and preserving
of this vineyard, has a commandment: that is too wit: the labor yt serves
too the glory of God, the edifying of the church, and the harbroughs of the
church, that is too say, commonweals and housholdes: is commanded by God in
the first table and in the fourth commandment. Besides this, it is not enough
that thou art commanded too labor, unless thou be enabled too labor in
lawful vocation. For he that takes upon him too labor in the vineyard
without calling, is rash and brings forth no fruit.

In laboring thou must beeware, first that thou be not proud if thou seem
too thy self too labor more, or also better than another man. Secondely, that
thou have not an eye too the reward of thy labor performed, but too the
commandment of the householder, whoo has set thee in the vineyard, too the
intent thou should woork. Thirdely, that thou despise not such as woork
less than thy self. And fourthly, that thou grudge not against ye master of
the house, though he apeer liberal too them that seem too have wrought less
than thou.

What is to be looked unto, and continually too be thought upon while thou
art woorking? First it behooves every man too think he is brought intoo the
Lords vineyarde, not too be idle, but too woork. For in the Lords vineyarde
there is no room for sloth and sluggishnesse. No man can (without displeasing
the master of the house) put over his task too another man. Therefore
whoosoeuer is brought intoo this vineyarde, let him labor lustily without
deceyt. For cursed is he that does the Lords woork deceitfully. Secondly in
laboring let him think he stands in his masters sight, whoo not only
beholds the outward doings: but also feeth the secrets of the heart, and
esteems the work by the meening of the heart, rather than by the effect of the
work. Thirdly this looking on of the master, shall stir up the laborer too
woork heedfully, that he may with a cheerful mind bear out the heat and
burden of the day. Fourthly an eye is too be had too nothing else, than too
the goodness of the householder God which commands too labor: and that one
thing alone will encorage a man too go through with his task lustily. Fifthly
when thou have done all that thou can do, thou shall say, thou art an
unprofitable servant. For if thou either be proud because thou came sooner
intoo the Lords vinyard, or despise others that may seem too have wrought less
than thou, or murmur against the goodman of the house whoo is alike liberal
too others as too thee: thou shall here. Friend I do thee no vvrong, did
thou not covenant with me for a penny? take that is thine own, and go thy
way: Is it not lavvfull for me too do with mine own what I list? Is
thine eye evil because I am good? Three things are here found fault with in
the murmurer. First that he presumes upon the worthiness of his woork.
Secondly that he does not commend and set forth the liberality of the
householder, but rather blames him for it. Thirdly that he enuieth other men
for the bountifulness of the liberal householder toward them. Such are all
they that seek too justify themselves by works, being utterly void of
faith.

Of the second.
TO the intent we may the more distinctly understand the doctrine of good
works, three things are to be thoroughly weyed. First what things are requisite
to the account of good woorks. Then what are the causes of good woorks: and
thirdly why God has added so many and so notable promises unto good woorks,
and why he voutsaueth rewards unto them.

As perteining too the first five things are requisite, that a woork done by
man may woorthyly be called good. One is commandment. Another is Christ's
spirit. The third is faith. The fourth is a right end. And the fifth is grace,
wherthrough the default is taken in good worth.

Now that too the ratifying of a good work, commandment is required, it is
manifest by these four things: by our own state, by the commandment, by the
forbidding, and by the manner of worshipping God.

Our state is that we should be the servants of God, and he be our Lord
God. Wherefore as it is his prerogative, too command us what we shall do: so
is it our duty, too follow his will as the most certain rule of our duty.

The same thing teaches the commandment. Ezech. 20. Walk ye in my
precepts, and keep my judgments, and do them* Esaias. 48. I am the Lord thy God
that teaches thee profitable things, and makes thee walk in the way that
thou walk. Hierem. 33. I have made thee a watch man over the house of
Israel, thou shall hear the word out of my mouth, and thou shall do my
message too them from me.

The forbidding is manifest. Deuteronomy. 12. Ye shall not do every one of you what
seems right too him self. Ezechiel. 20. Walk not in the commandments of
your fathers.

The manner of worshipping God, requires that the work that should please him,
should be commanded by him: and thereupon the Lord tells us plainly, it is
too no purpose too woorship him with the commandments and doctrines of men.
And Esaias. 29. It is named one of the wickednesses for which the Lord
threatens evils unto his people, that they worshipped him with the
commandments of men, wherefore Paul Col. 2. does manifestly condemn all
wilworshipping.

Hereby therefore it is evident, that too the ratifying of a good work, the
commandment of God is requisite. Therefore let the word of God be our
lamp too shine before us in all our doings.

Secondly, unto the ratifying of a good work, is required Christ's spirit.
For whosoever be led by the spirit of God, they be the sons of GOD. The
spirit of the flesh defiles the work, in so much that they which are in the
flesh, cannot please God. Then have we need of the spirit that regenerateth
us intoo new men, without the which neither we nor our woorks do please.

Thirdly is faith required. For by faith the person is reconciled too God, and
made rightuous. Through faith then are our woorks also acceptable. For without
faith it is impossible too please God. For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Fourthly is required a right end, too the goodness of the work, according as
these words of Augustine testify. Know thou (says he) that virtues are too
be discerned from vices, not in working, but in end. The working is that which
is to be done, and the end is that for which it is too be done. Therefore when
a man does any thing wherein he seems not too sin, if he do it not too
that end for which he ought too do it, he is convinced too sin. And it is
meet that the vttermoste end of all our doings, be the glory of God, under
which many other are often times ordained.

Fifthly too the accomplishment of a good woork, is required grace, whereb^ the
default is taken in good worth. For although he that is justified by faith,
does not fulfill the law of God, but rather finds many blemishes in all his
works: yet do his woorks please God in deed, and what fault so ever is in
them, that does grace cover.

These are the five things therefore that are requisite too the ratifying of a
good woork, without which the woork can in no wise be called good before God.
Now, which I promised in the second place, I will recite the causes that may
move thoroughly too do good: and they are in all, three: necessity, dignity,
and reward.

Necessity is of five sorts: that is too wit, of commandment, of det, of
keeping faith, of eschuing punishment, and of conversion. The first necessity
is Gods commandment, wheruntoo al reasonable creatures ought too obey. And
Paul says. This is Gods will, that you should be made holy. The second
necessity is debt, whereof Romans 8. we are detters too GOD and not too the
flesh. For we are not masters of our selves, but we are his who has redeemed
us with his precious blood. The third necessity is faith, which cannot be
kept as long as we follow sin against conscience. Whervppon Paul says. If
any man have not a care of those that are his, and chiefly of those that are of
his own household, he has renounced the faith, and is worse than an Infidel.
Fight thou an honest fight, having faith and a good conscience. The fourth
necessity is the eschuing of punishment. For their iniquities (says David)
thou punishest the children of men. The fifth necessity is conversion. As
truly as I live (says the Lord) I will not the death of a sinner, but that he
should convert and live. For when a man turns too amendment, he is quickened
ageine, and regenerated intoo a new man, that he may from thenceforthe
mortify the deeds of the flesh, by the spirit. Romans 8.

The second cause of good works is dignity. For those that be justified, are
the children of God: they are gods holy temple, they are kings and preests,
anointed of the holy Ghost. Who being endued with righteousness, ought too
set forth God with mind, voice, confession, and conversation.

The third cause is reward, that is too say, the recompensing of the patience
and obedience of the believers toward God. For God promises reward: which
we must look for by faith, not having any respect too the woorks that we
have done, but too the free promises. So in the eleventh too the Hebrews,
Moses is read to have had respect to the reco^pensing. Therefore when GOD
promises recompense, we must do two things. First we must acknoweledge the
unworthiness and imperfection of our own work. And secondly we must steadfastly
believe, that God the promiser is true of his promises, trusting wholly too the
goodness of him that promises, and not too the worthiness of the work.

In the third place, I propounded it as a thing to be thoroughly weyed, why
God added promises too good works, and why he vouchsaueth too reward them.
The causes of this matter are chiefly five.

The first is, that they might be testimonies of Gods providence. For GOD will
have it known, both that bodily goods are things by him created, and also
that they are not scattered by chance, but that they are given by him, and
preserved by him for the church, according too this saying: He filled the
hungry with good things, and the rich he sent empty away. The second is, that
they should be witnessings that God will preserve his church even in this life.
Whereupon 1. Tim. 4. Godliness has promises both of this present life, and of
the life too come. The third is, that God will, that both bodily necessity
shall be a putting of us in mind of Faith, Prayer, Hope, and thanksgiving:
and also that these good things should be craved by Faith, and waited for by
patience. The fourth is, that they might put us in remembrance of the promise
of grace. For corporal benefits are unto the faithful a sealing up of grace.
The fifth is, that God will have both these things done: namely his Church too
be subject too the cross, and also too be preserved even in the mids of
peril in this life. Both these things are showed in the.37. of Esaias: O Lord
our GOD save us from the hand of Sennacherib, that all kingdoms of the earth
may know, that thou only art the Lord.

Of the third.
THis sentence wherewith the Lord closes up this parable, is too be marked
with heed. So shall the last be first, and the first be last. Why so? For many
are called, and few be chosen.

The proposition of this sentence, which is an a^ke thing too reason, as it
rayseth up the weak hearted that acknoweledge their infirmity: So it casts
down the proud Hypocrites swelling in opinion of their own righteousness
and holiness, and beats them flat unto the ground, as it were a
thunderbolte from Heaven. But who are those first? and who are the last? Those
that are first with them selves in their own opinion, and in the estimation of
their own works, shall be last with God: that is too say, of no value, yea
rather men damned by the just judgment of God. They be last with them selves,
which in good earnest acknowledge their own vileness and infirmity, as
which feel them selves too have no desert; and these shall be first with
God, that is too say, accepted with God, so that they lean unto Christ the
Mediator, by steadfast faith.

The meaning of this sentence, Many are called, and fevve chosen, teaches two
things: the one is, how great is the goodness and mercy of God, that calls
all men too the knowledge of his son, by his gospel. The other is, how great
is the unthankfulness of men, of whom so few are found that are chosen, that
is too say, godly, sincere, and practicing earnest repentance. For there are
few that renounce their own works (yea and themselves) altoogither, and
that trust only too God, and glorify him in mind, talk, confession, and
conversation. This sentence therefore admonishes us, first too acknowledge the
benefit of God that calls us by the Gospel: secondely too detest the
unthankfulness of the world, which accepts not the benefits offered: and
thirdly too join our selves too those few in repentance, faith and true
invocation, which receive the Gospel sincerely too the glory of God, too whom
be honor for ever. Amen.

The Sunday called Sexagesima* The Gospel. Luke. viij.
WHen much people were gathered together, and were come too him out of all
Cities, he spoke by a similitude. The sour went out too sovv his seed: and
as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and it was trodden down, and the
fowls of the air devoured it up. And some fell on stones, and as soon as it
was sprung up, it withered away, because it lacked moystnesse. And some fell
among thorns, and the thorns sprang up with it and choked it. And some fell
on good ground, and spra^g up and bare fruit an hundredth fold. And as he said
these things: he cried: he that has ears to here, let him here. And his
disciples asked him saying: What manner of similitude is this? And he said:
Unto you it is given too know the secrets of the kingdom of God, but too
other, by Parables: that when they see they should not see, and when they
here they should not understand. The Parable is this: The seed is the word of
God: those that are beside the way, are they that here: then comes the
devil, and takes away the word out of their hearts, least they should
believe and be saved. They on the stones are they, which when they here,
receive the word with joy, and these have no roots, which for a while
believe, and in time of temptation go away. And that which fell among thorns
are they, which when they have herd, go forth, and are choked with cares
and riches, and voluptuous living, and bring forth no fruit. That which fell
in the good ground are they, which with a pure and good heart, here the
word and keep it, and bring forth fruit through patience.

The exposition of the text.
This Gospel contains a goodly image of the church militant in this world,
and springing of the incorruptible seed of Gods word, in the visible
company whereof, how many and how sundry sorts of heerers there be, he
peinteth out by the similitude of the natural seed. For he bears witness
that it happens alike too the heavenly seed, as is wont too happen too the
natural seed, cast intoo the ground. For like as all brings not forth
fruit that the husbandman casts intoo the ground, no nor scarce the fourth
part of it: Even so the word of God has sundry heerers, in very few of whom
it brings forth wholesome fruit. Heerof are three places.

1 The exposition of the Parable. 2 The diverse sorts of the heerers of Gods
word. 3 As concerning the Lords saying: He that has ears too here, let
him here.
Of the first.
THe causes why the Lord spoke unto the people in parables, are many. The
first may be the foretelling of the Prophets. For the Prophets had foretold,
that when Christ came, he should teach the people in parables. And it was a
very ancient manner of teaching, too teach in parables and similitudes.
Secondly, for that this kind of teaching does wonderfully enter intoo the
eyes and minds of men. Thirdly, because the things that are taught by such
kinds of images and tokens, do help the memory, that the doctrine by them
(as it were by tokens of remembrance) may be sent out too all that shall come
after. Fourthly also, Parables do assuage the over hard rebukes, and as it
were hide the^ with a certain veyle, that they may the less offend. And yet
afterward being conceived and understood in the mind, they teach and do as
much as plain doctrine, and yet they touch no man openly. Finally the parts
of this parable, are the sower, the seed, the fruit, and the ground.

The sower is God: who although he cast his seed into the ground by men: yet
notwithstanding he is present with them him self, and works with them. By
reason whereof the ministers of the word are termed Gods helpfelowes: by which
name, both things are meant, that is too wit, that both GOD does work after
his own manner, and that men as workfellowes do bestow their labor in Gods
behalf. Here we may learn two things. First that the seed is precious and
noble. For we see in the world, that the excellenter the seed is, so much
more cunning and skillful persons are set too lay it intoo the ground. If the
kings of the world toogither with the wise men of the world, were said too
be the layers of this seed into the ground, al men would wonder at it, and all
men would be very desirous too know this seed. But now is God become the
sower here: and the stewards of Gods mysteries are here present. And
therefore it must needs be, that this sowing is both an earnest and a noble
sowing above all others. The other thing that we may learn heerby, is that it
is a great fault, and worthy too be punished with most grievous punishment,
either to receive the seed of the sower God, intoo a ground (that is too say a
heart) not tilled before with the plough of the law: or when it is received,
not to cherishe it with all the attendance, carfulness, and diligence that
may be, so as it may grow and bring forth most acceptable fruit too the
sower.

The seed is the very word of God, and not of man: which seed the only
begotten son of God has brought out of the bosom of his father. This seed
is lively: wherefore if it seem at any time not too bring forth fruit, it is
not the fault of the seed, but of the ground. They that either corrupt this
seed as heretics do: or choke it, as hipocrites do: or keep it down by force,
as tirants do: or thrust in other in steed of it, as the papists do: shall
one day feel the just wrath of God, who as he has given pure seed, so also
will he have the same kept pure, and in no wise corrupted. And this seed has he
left with his Church too keep, laid up in the treasures of the Prophets and
Apostles.

The fruit that this seed brings forth, follows the nature of the seed
when it is grown up. For first after it is laid intoo the ground, there
springs of it repentance, that is too say, an amendment of the former wicked
life. For like as some excellent seed being conceived in the bowels of the
earth, does by his own power kill the weeds that ouergrew the ground before:
so this seed doothe by true remorse, kill the shreud weeds, (that is too say
sins) which the Devil has sowed in man's heart, so as they may not hear
deadly fruit unto damnation, as they did before. Ageine, this seed toogither
with helthful repentance, brings forth faith, the fruit whereof is most
acceptable too GOD. Out of this faith, as out of the ear of the corn, come
forth seeds, that is too say, children of GOD, according too this saying: To
as many as believed, he gave them power too become the children of God. These
(as says saint Peter) are borne ageine, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible seed, by the word of the living God that continues for ever.
The children of God being so borne of Gods incorruptible seed, do bring forth
their fruit, that is too wit, good works and patience, wherewith the Lords
fruteful feeld flourishes even until harvest.

Of the second.
BY the manner of the seed laid intoo the ground, a man may gather four
kinds of hearers of Gods word. For the seed that is laid intoo the ground,
either is not conceived in the bowels of the earth, or else is conceived with
fruit, howbeeit such fruit as out of hand withers and perishes: or else
with fruit that endures too the harvest. And this variety happens by reason
of the nature of the soil. For if the seed light intoo the way, it takes no
root, but is either trodden down with feet, or devoured by the birds. If it
light upon stony ground, because it takes no deep root, it perishes as
soon as it comes up. If it light among thorns, the thorns choke it, and it
dies without profit. If it light upon good ground, it bears fruit, and that
plentuously. Heervpon our Lord concludes manifestly, that there be four
sorts of heerers, of which I must now speak in order.

The first kind of heerers is set forth in this wise in the Parable, Some
fell in the high way, and was trodden with feet. The Parable is thus
expounded by the Lord. Those that are by the high way, are those that here
the word, and anon comes the Devil, and takes the word out of their
hearts, least they should believe and be saved.

In this exposition many things do meet toogither, worthy too be
considered. First, what is the cause that it bears not fruit, namely because
the ground is hard and dry, that is too say, the hearts of the heerers are
stony and hard, so as they give no place too the word. Men's hearts wex
hard by accustoming themselves too sin, by hope of scaping without
punishment, by Epicurishe thoughts, by innumerable examples of such as sin,
and by the crafts of the Devil. And whereas the Lord says, that the ^eede
was sowed in their hearts, it is as much as if he had said, that the vice and
lewdness of men is the cause why it is taken out of their hearts. Therefore
they do God wrong, that ascribe their damnation unto him. For he being
merciful unto al men, casts his seed intoo the ground, that is too say,
sends preachers too teach his gospel: but through men's default it comes too
pass that it is trodden under foot without fruit. Secondly it is too be
marked advisedly, that the devil is said too come and take away the word out
of their hearts. Whereby we gather, that this enemy of our salvation
(according as hungry birds are woonte too do in seed time) as soon as the
doctrine comes abroad, is at hand* and steps in, to catch it up before
it can conceive moisture and shoot forth. That this is the continual endeuer
of Satan, the story of all times teaches us, and Peter testifies when he
says: that the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. For in like wise as he set himself against our first parents, and
that by taking Gods word out of their hearts: so employeth he himself wholly
with like endeuer at this day, that the word which is preached, may abide
frutelesse with the heerers. Thirdly, it is to be observed, that the Gospel is
the preching of salvation. For when he says that the Devil takes the word
out of the hearts of the heerers, least any should be saved: he declares
sufficiently, that the word of God is appointed too our salvation. Fourthly
here is too be observed, the great praise of faith, in as much as Christ in
express words calls it the cause of our salvation, least through
believing (says he) they might be saved. For as salvation is offered unto
men by the ministration of the Gospel: so by faith only is the offered
salvation received and retained: whereupon the Apostle says, the Gospel is
the power of God, unto salvation, too every one that believes. Fifthly as our
great unthankfulness is noted, wherethrough we despise the salvation that is
offered us by the word: so is their error too be detested, which go about
too deprive the word spoken, of his power: whoo doubtless are the devils
instruments too hinder the salvation of men.

The second sort of heerers are noted in this parable: Other some fell upon
stones, and as soon as it came up, it withered, because it had no moisture.
The Parable is expounded by the Lord in these words. For that which fell upon
the stones, are those which when they have heard the word, do receive it
with joy, but yet they have no root, but believe for a time, but go back in
the time of trial. As long as the Cross and persecution troubles them not,
they hold not the meanest place in the Church: but as soon as persecution
ryseth for the Gospel, they give over, and faith dies utterly in them without
fruit: and of this sort of heerers (alas for sorrow) there are too many.
As Soon as the doctrine of the Gospel was purged in this Realm, very many
seemed too embrace the Gospel earnestely. But when they saw their friends
displeased with them for it: when they perceived that no small piece of their
estimation among the Papists was abated by it: and that the cross touched
them somewhat nearly: then they forgot the sweetness of the Gospel, which
they had heretofore received with ioyfulnesse, and shamefully like wretches
slipped from it too their utter reproach, and the horrible destruction of their
souls: for whom it had been much better never too have tasted the goodness of
the Gospel, than with so much shame too fall away agein from grace and
salvation.

The third sort of heerers is painted out in this Parable, thus: And other
some fell among thorns, and the thorns growing up with it, choked it. The
Lord interpreting this parable, says: That which fell among thorns are
those which have herd the word, and going their vvays are choked with the
cares, and the riches and pleasures of this life, so that they bring forth no
fruit. In this exposition of the Lords, many things are too be considered.
First that this sort of men is meet to cherishe the seed within, that is
too say, that they turn unto the Lord with true repentance, and that they
believe and love the word of god. Secondly, that the corruption of the seed,
(that is too say, of Gods word sown in the heart of man) comes from
elsewhere, namely of the thorns. For as good seed being conceived in good
ground and grown up, is often so marred with the thorns that wind about it,
that it perishes before the harvest: Even so many being at the first well
disposed and woorshippers of God, are before the end of their life choked with
thorns, I say with the thorns of carfulness, of riches and of pleasures.
Thirdly it is too be observed in this place, that the Lord puts here.iij.
kinds of thorns, which do choke the heavenly seed after that it is grown up
and spindled: as are thoughtfulness or cares of this world, and riches,
according as Matthew has: or (as Matthew and Mark have) the deceitfulness of
riches, and the pleasures of this life.

Seeing then, that these be the thorns wherewith Gods word is choked, and
that there is none of all which is not ouergrowen with great store, and as it
were with a thick queach of thorns: we must do our indeuer, that if we cannot
utterly pluck up all the thorns themselves, we may (at least wise) break off
their pricks, that they perce not thorough Gods crop and destroy it.

As concerning the first kind of thorns, this is the way too blunt them: if we
wholly renounce this world with his lusts, and use this world as though we
used it not, according as Paul admonishes us too do.

The second kind shall do no harm, if we follow Salomo^s counsel, who says: If
riches abound, set not thy heart upon them: And also Paul's counsel, which
says: warn the rich men in this world, that they be not proud, nor trust
too the uncertainty of their riches, but in the living God which gives us all
things ple^tifully too our use: but that they do well and endeavor too be
rich in good woorks, and be liberal toward others.

The.iij. kind of thorns are the pleasures of this life, which consist in
delights, pomp, worldly honor, dainty meats, fine apparel, and chamberwoork:
which all toogither and severally do choke the seed of God, so as it cannot
bring forth the fruit of eternal life. Let them therefore that have regard of
everlasting salvation, take good heed of these thorns.

The fourth sort of heerers is noted in this part of the parable. And some
seed fell upon good ground, and sprang up and bare fruit, and brought forth,
some thirty fold, some sixty fold, and some a hundred fold. This parable
is expounded of the Lord in these words. And that vviche fell upon good ground,
are those that with a pure and good heart do hear the word, and keep it,
and bring forth fruit through patience. In this exposition five things are too
be observed, which do define ye good ground wherinto ye lords seed was cast.
The first is too receive the seed and hear the word with a pure and good
heart. The second is too keep the seed, that is too say, not too forget ye word
that is herd, but too think upon it continually. The third is too bring forth
fruit in true godliness, holiness, charity, and the duty of a man's
vocation. The fourth is that this fruit must be brought forth in patience:
verily that we suffer not our selves too be pulled by any means from faith,
and from bringing forth fruit. The fifth is, that all bring not forth alike
much fruit: For the Lord says: Some thirty fold, another sixty fold, and
another a hundred fold: that is too say, they which believe the gospel, bring
forth fruit according too the measure of their faith, some more and some less.
This odds in bringing forth fruit, does both teach us and comfort us. It
teaches us, that the seed of God must not be frutelesse, if at leastwise we
covet too have it too our welfare: and it comfort them that be of a gentle
and good heart, and desirous too bring forth much fruit into Gods barn, who
notwithstanding do feel them selves destitute of power, and that they cannot
yield increase of three score fold, or of a hundred fold. These need not too
discourage them selves: for the goodman of the house vouchsafes, even the
baser sort their honor, and the commendation of goodness. Therefore who
soever is a lover of his own salvation, let him endeuer too bring forth fruit
according too the estate of his calling. And when he perceyueth him self too
bring forth but a little, let him crave help of the goodman of the house, and
trust too his goodness which rejects not even him that brings never so
little fruit.

Of the third.
AS he had spoken these things (says the Evangelist) he cried out with a
loud voice, and said: He that has ears too here, let him here. Now in that
the Lord cries out, thereby is showed both his affection toward men, that he
is desirous too have them saved: and also the deafness of men too hear the
things that perteine too their salvation. Ageine, when he says. He that has
ears too here, let him here, he gives us plainly too understand, yt he
has two kind of hearers: of whom some be deaf, not for that they are not able
too hear with their outward ears, but for that they bestow not the things
they have heerd, in the intrails of their hearts. How great store of this kind
of heerers there is, it is well seen by the lewd behavior of many, which
have the faith in their mouth, without any fruit at all in their life and
manners. And other some are well eared, who bestow in the closets of their
hearts, that which they conceive by their outward heering, and bring forth
fruit of the seed, according too the measure of their Faith. But this is too
be known, that no man by his own cunnyng can make him himself to here
Gods word frutefully: but that his ears must be opened by the Lord. For when
the word sounds outwardly in his ears, the holy Ghost is present woorking in
the word, who opens the ears of the heart to here and receive the word, so
that we through our own malice, strive not against the spirit when he
opens. For although that God alonly can open men's ears, and that he offers
himself redily too al men: yet does he open the ears of none but such as
resist not the Lord through their own stubbornness. Wherefore it is our duty
to cry unto the Lord with continual gronings, that he may open our ears,
prepare our hearts, and cleanse our affections, so as we may here his word
to our own salvation and the glory of God, to whom be honor and glory for
ever. Amen.

The Sunday called Quinquagesima, or Shroue Sunday. The Gospel. Gath. iij.
THen came Jesus from Galilee too Jordan, unto John, too be baptized of him.
But John forbad him, saying: I have need too be baptized of thee, and come
thou too be baptized of me? And Jesus aunsvvering, said unto him: Let be
now, for so it becomes us, that we may fulfill all righteousness. Then
he let him alone. And Jesus being baptized, came by and by out of the water,
and behold, the heavens were opened unto him, and he savve the spirit of
God coming down like a dove, and lighting upon him. And behold, a voice from
heaven, saying: This is my well beeloued son, in whom I am well pleased.

The exposition of the text.
THis feast is solemnized in our Churches for the story of Christ's baptim,
which story contains the cheifest deed that ever happened in the world,
neither shall any greater ever happen, until we see Christ coming in the
clouds with his angels, and with great power. If then we be delighted in
stories of great and mighty princes: we have here the story of the greatest
Prince: which not only with the pleasantness thereof delights the minds of
the readers, but also it self alone brings more commodities, than all the
stories of the world can bring. But before we go too the exposition of this
story, we must discuss two questions. Of which the first is, for what cause
this feast is instituted in the Ecclesiastical ordinance of our Churches: and
the other is, why it is appointed at this time of the year rather than at any
other. Too the former question I answer: The story of Christ is framed for
our salvation, and therefore we Danes in our Ecclesiastical ordinances,
would not omit this cheifest part of the story: but set it forth at a time
certain in the year.

Untoo the later question, I say, that this time was most convenient for this
story too be entreated off, and that for two causes. First for the order and
continuance of the story: For hythertoo we have herd in order, first of the
birth of the Lord. Secondly of his circumcision. Thirdly of his appeering.
Fourthly of the offering up of him in the temple. Fifthly of his disputing in
the temple when he was a twelve years of age. What he did from the said
twelfth year, unto his nine and twentieth year, there is nothing written, but
that he was at the commandment of his parents. Sixthly of his baptim, which
is very well recited in this time of the year. Seventhly follows of his
fasting. Eyghtly of his temptation. Nynthly of his doctrine and miracles.
Tenthly of his passion. Eleuenthly of his resurrection. Twelfthly of his
ascension intoo heaven. Thirteenthly of the sending of the holy Ghost, whereby
Chrysts doctrine was confirmed. Fourteenthly follow in the rest of the year,
sundry sermons wherein the benefits of Christ are commended to his Church,
examples of godliness are set forth, and men are exhorted too godly and holy
life. And fifteenthly is entreated of the last judgment, and of the rewards of
the godly, and the punishment of the ungodly. These are the chief members of
the story of Christ, which in very good order (according as the things were
done are every year handled in our Churches. There is (besides these) another
cause, why our Churches entreats of Christ's Baptim this time of the year:
namely that men may be taught what manner of garment becomes Chrystians too
were, against that deuilish and heathenish fury and manner of belly cheer,
that hithertoo has bin practiced in many places of Christendom, not without
great offense toward God. And let these things suffice too be spoken
concerning this present feast. The places thereof are three.

1 The story of Christ's baptim, with the circumstances thereof. 2 The use of
this story in the Church. 3 The manner and use of our Baptim.
Of the first.
IN the Baptim of our Lord many circumstances are too be weyed, and specially
these five. First, what persons are the dooers in this case. 2. The place. 3.
The talk between Christ and John. 4. The baptising of Christ. 5. The sequel,
that is too wit, the thing that happened too Christ when he was baptized. Of
these five circumstances I will speak in order.

The first. Then came Jesus from Galilee unto John. Here we have two
persons, John who was sent in the spirit of Elias too prepare the way of the
Lord: In respect whereof his father Zachary by the spirit of prophecy said of
him, being yet but a babe: And thou child shall be called the prophet of the
highest, for thou shall go before ye face of the Lord too prepare his ways.
And for the same cause Christ himself avouches John too be more than a
Prophet, as than which there was not a greater borne of a woman. Ageine, we
have here an other person, namely Christ him self, God and man. Here
therefore are two persons, than the which the whole world has not any thing
more excellent. John was the most high Prophet of God: and Christ was the
everlasting son of the everlasting God. Of both whom, in as much as the
dignity and authority is most excellent, we have thereby an inkling given
unto us, how great the worthiness and authority of Baptim is, which
proceeding from God, is solemnized by them that are the most excellent of all
the world.

The second. He came too Jordan. Here is showed where the baptim was celebrated.
It is not for nothing that the Evangelist makes mention of Jordan. For his
meaning is, that we should have an eye too the former miracles that were done
long ago in Jordan: that thereby we may gather how great force and effect
spiritual baptim is of.

The first miracle therefore that comes too mind, is that which happened when
the people (under the conduct of Joshua) entered intoo the land of promise. For
the river of Jordan (contrary too the nature of water) stood at one side like a
wall, and gave way too Gods people too pass through, so as they passed dry
shod, following the Ark of the Lord which the Priests of GOD carried before the
people. By this tipe is signified that we are conveyed out of the kingdom of
Satan, intoo the kingdom of God by baptism, Christ going before us, who is
the true Arc of propiciation.

Helias divided Jordan with his cloak, and passing the river was lifted up
intoo heaven. Naaman the lepre of Syria washing him self in Jordan at the
commandment of the Prophet, was made whole and sound. Now as the deed of
Helias did in a shadow signify that our passage intoo heaven should be made
by baptism: so the clensing of Naaman the Syrian, did prefigurate the
spiritual clensing from sins too be made by baptism. For look what baptism
figureth outwardly, yt does ye lord work inwardly by his own power. Therefore
when we here me^cio^ made of Iorda^, let us call too mind, what it signifies
spiritually concerning our baptim

The third. But John forbade him, saying: I have need too be baptized of
thee, and come thou too me? And Jesus answering, said unto him. Let be
now, for so it becomes us, too the intent we may fulfill all
righteousness. Then he let him alone. In this communication are many points
too be considered. First concerning John's forbidding, wherein he put Christ
of, both by intreatance and with his hand. Uerely, John weyed two things
heedfully in this case: but the third he neglected. He weyed him self too be
unworthy too loose the latchet of Christ's shoes, and therefore much more too
wash his naked body. And secondly he weyed that Christ is free from sin, and
therefore he thinks him too have no need of baptism, that he should be
washed therewith in token of repentance. The third thing (as I said) he
neglected: namely, what belonged both too his own office, and too Christ's
office. For he ought too have looked upon his office, and not upon the
worthynesse of his person. He ought too have bin resolved, that Christ could
not attempt any thing that perteyned not too the office of a mediator. And
therefore he heard Christ say: Let be now, for so it becomes us, to fulfill
all righteousness. Thou art sent too baptize: and I come too give salvation
too those that are baptized: therefore let each of us do that which becomes
him.

These three things therefore we may learn of John. First too acknowledge our
selves unworthy too have any ministry committed unto us in the church.
Secondly too acknowledge that Christ is he, who alone is able too wash us
from the spots of sin. And thirdly too obey Christ's commandment in our
vocation, notwithstanding our own unworthiness, but having an eye too the
Lords commandment, which urges us too do our duty.

The fourth is: And Jesus being baptized. Here the eternal son of God,
holy, without spot, clear from sin, and higher than the heavens, is
baptized. But why is he baptized? there may be mo causes than one alleged.
For first it was his will too enter intoo the ministry of God by baptim, and
as it were by this covenant too show that he is the minister of God. Secondly
that outward Baptim should be a figure of his death, burial, and
resurrection, in which respect he termed his passion by the name of baptim,
when he answered ye children of Zebedie. Mark. 10. saying. Can ye be baptized
with the Baptim that I am baptized withal? Thirdly too leave the waters
hallowed for all them that were too be baptized afterward. For the sacraments
of the church are not hallowed by the office of the priest, as it were by
magical inchauntment: but the halowing of the Sacraments is made by the
foundaton, deed, and promises of Christ, and by our obedience toward him.
Fourthly it was his pleasure too be baptized as we are, as a most assured
witness and pledge of the union and society which he vouchsaued too have with
us. Whereupon Paul proves us too be the sons of God, who have put on
Christ. As many of you (says he) as are baptized, have put on Christ.
Fifthly it was his will too do that which he commanded all others too do,
according as Augustine says. He is best too teach and command, which is an
example of his own doctrine, and ye first yt does the things that he
commands. Fifthly, the sequel is too be considered. For the things that
happened as Christ was baptized and praying, are the greatest miracles of all that ever happened at any time. First the heaven opened: whereby is signified
both that the only way intoo heaven is Christ, whom we put on in Baptim, and
that heaven abides shut up unto all men that acknowledge not Christ the only
way unto heaven. Secondly he saw the spirit of God coming down in the
likeness of a Dooue, and sitting upon him. This is a most sweet image of
Christ's benefits. All we were overwhelmed in the flood of sin: but Christ
came as an Ark too us, and took us in too him self, and saved us from the
flood: in witness whereof, came the Dooue and rested upon him. A figure heerof
was the Ark of Noe and the Dooue that he sent forth, which returning brought
an Olife branch in her mouth, in token that the flood was dried up. Even so
the holy ghost appeering here in the shape of a dove, is a witness that the
flood of sins is swalowed up. But sauegard is only in the Ark, that is too
say, Christ's church, where the holy ghost dwells. Thirdly a voice was herd
from heaven, this is my beloved son, by whom I am pacified. Lo, here we
here the father of heaven a preacher of the Gospel. I pray you what can be
more wonderful? What is more too be amazed at? O lamentable blindness of men,
O detestable deafness. The heavenly Father sounds his Gospel from heaven,
and we blind wretches see not heaven: we deaf wretches here not the voice
of the teacher. But what teaches he, I beseech you? This (says he) is my
beloved son. Behold the fathers testimony of his son: give credit too it
if thou regard thy salvation. He is his son by nature, and we by adoption
and grace. Therefore calls he him beloved, not for that we are not beloved:
but for that we are beloved in his beloved, in whom only he makes account of
us. He loves him for his own sake, and us for his sake. For by nature we are
the children of wrath. Ephesians. 2. but by Christ we are adopted his children.
Whereon it follows in the Sermon of God: In whom I am well pleased, that is
too say, by whom I am pacified toward mankind, and made at one with him
again.

Here are three things too be deeply weyed in mind. First that without
Christ God is angry with us, and that is for the sin wherewith we offend
God. Secondly that Christ is the only reconciliatio^ of us. For he is the
propitiation for sin. For ye blood of christ purges us from al iniquity.
Thirdly that his fatherly good will and atonement, is to be received by
faith, and to be sealed up by baptim. Upon this faith must follow a new
obedience and thankfulness toward god. Behold thou have here the sum of all the gospel, whereunto we must have an eye all our lifetime, and in the hour of
death. For there cannot from elsewhere be taken any substantial comfort of
conscience. And thus much breefly concerning the declaration of the Gospel.

Of the second.
ALthough the use may easly be gathered, by those things that are said
before: yet will I repete certain points here. First therefore let us know,
that our Baptim is here hallowed, and that the water of Baptim is made holy by
Christ, who vouchsaued too be baptized with water. Agein, the whole sight of
the thing that was don, peinteth out Christ's church before our eyes, as it
were in a table. Here is to be seen, John a teacher in the Church. For
whereas is not the word of God, and whereas the voice of the teacher is not
herd, there the Church cannot be showed. Moreover Christ is baptized. For the
Church that is well ordered, cannot be without the use of Sacraments. Thirdly
Christ being baptized, prays: whose example his members follow, and exhibit
true worship unto God through faith. Fourthly the son stands in the mids:
the fathers voice sounds from heaven: and the holy ghost rests upon him
that was baptized. The same thing is done in very deed at this day in our
church. For the father, the son, and the holy ghost is present with his
church, and by the voice of the preachers, witnesses his good will toward
Christ's church. By the presence of his son, he testifies that he has
adopted us too be his children: and by the holy ghost he witnesses that he
governs his church. Whereupon we may conceive this assured confidence, that
hell gates shall not prevail against it.

Of the third.
THe more part of those things that perteine to our Baptim, are declared in
the places above mentioned. Wherefore I will breefly touch certain things,
which it is exceeding needful to know. The things that I will tell, are two:
What manner of sign baptim is, and which is the true consideration of the same.

What manner a sign then is Baptism? First it is a testimony of grace, as well
exhibited as also applied too the party that is baptized: Namely that God is
pacified toward him through Christ: which testimony verily requires too be
apprehended by faith. Agein, this Sacrament is a sign that teaches by a
certain comparison. For it is a sign of Christ's spiritual virtue: namely that
Christ by his own death, burial, and resurrection, is the deliverance of us
from death and burial, and the giver of everlasting life. Moreover it is a
representation of our new life before God, as Paul teaches Romans 6. by these
words. As many of us as are baptized in Jesus Christ, are baptized intoo his
death. We are therefore buried together with him unto death that like as Christ
is raised from the dead, so we also should walk in newness of life.

Furthermore before men it is a certain badge of our profession, whereby we
testify our selves too be Christ's members, and the Devils enemies.

The godly consideration of baptism consists in these things. First, we
must be fully resolved, that our baptism is a certain most sure ensealement
and Sacrament of our atonement with God.

Secondly, baptism must be a certain continual warning unto us, that this
atonement is made by the blood, death, burial, and resurrection of Christ.

Thirdly it must put us in mind of the mortifying of the flesh, and of the
quickening of the spirit, and so consequently of a continual repentance in this
world, and of the glorifying that shall be hereafter by Christ.

Fourthly it must put us in mind, that the benefit of regeneration, is the
gift and work of the whole Trinity in whose name we are baptized, too the
intent we should stick thereuntoo, and woorship it all our life long, too whom
be honor and glory for evermore. So be it.

The first Sunday in Lent. The Gospel. Math. iiij.
THen was Jesus led away of the spirit into wilderness, too be tempted of
the Devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was at
the last an hungered. And when the tempter came too him, he said: if thou be
the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he ansvvered
and said: it is written, man shall not live by bread only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Then the Devil takes him up intoo the
holy City, and sets him on a pinnacle of the temple, and says unto him: if
thou be the son of GOD, cast thy self down hedlong. For it is written, he
shall give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands they shall hold
thee up, least at any time thou dashe thy foot against a stone. And Jesus said
unto him: it is written again: Thou shall not te^pt the Lord thy God. Ageine
the Devil takes him up intoo an exceeding high mou^tain, and shevved him all
the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and says unto him: all
these vvil I give thee, if thou vvilt fall down and worship me. Then says
Jesus unto him: Avoid Satan, for it is vvritte^: Thou shall worship the Lord
thy GOD, and him only shall thou serve: Then the Devil leaves him: and
behold, the Angels came and ministered unto him.

The exposition of the text.
LIke as the last Sunday we heerd the story of Christ's baptim, wherein very
great things are contained: So this Gospel also conteyneth part of Christ's
doings, that is too wit his fasting and temrtation, by which things God of his
singular wisdom would his son should be humbled, and also would show how true
it was that he had forespoke^ long ago: namely that like as the serpent should
lie in wait for the heel of the woman's seed, that is too say, that Satan
should practice mischief against the person and kingdom of Christ, (which
thing this story shows too be most true:) so also would the same seed crush
the head of the serpent, with his heel: whereof we see a certain proof in
this story. Al these things are to be applied in such wise, that we may both
learn Christ's obedience under the cross, and know what sheeld it beehoueth
us to set before us against the temptations and darts of the devil. The places
are two.

1 Of Fasting. 2 Of Temptation.
Of the first.
IN this place are two things to be considered. First what is the manner of
fasting in general: and secondly what is too be thought of Christ's fast in
special.

Fasting is an utter forbearing of meat and drink for a time, whereby the body
is kept low, and as it were mortified. And it is of three sorts. Indifferent,
Godly, and ungodly.

Indifferent fast, is when a man absteineth from meat and drink, either for
poverty, or for healthes sake, or for some great sorrow of mind. This of it
self neither pleases nor displeases God, but is too be thought to please or
displease, according as faith and patience go with it.

The fast that is godly, Christian, and acceptable too God, is an abstinence,
not only from meat and drink, whereby the body is pinched and mortified: but
also from all other things that may in any wise delight the flesh: tending too
this purpose, that the spirit may have full souereintie through true patience,
godly prayer, and earnest renouncing of all wrongs whereby our neighbor may be
hurt. For the punishing of the body by fasting, is a token of the sorowfulnesse
of the heart for sin, and a testimony of true repentance. The ends hereof
(for which also it is accepted of GOD) are three. Mortification of the flesh,
quickening of the spirit, and a more earnest endeuer toward all godliness.
Such manner a one was Paul's fast, whereof he makes mention. 2. Cor. 6. And
surely godly men ought oftentimes too quicken up the spirit with holy fasting,
lest they should yield too the lusts of the flesh.

And this holy and Christian fast, is of two sorts: private and solemn.
Private fast, is that which every man enioyneth too himself of his own accord,
either too stir himself up unto godliness (which manner of fast as I would
wish every Christian whose flesh has need of such chastisement, too use often
at other times: so would. I wish him chiefly to use it before he shall come to
the communion) or for some new office sake which he shall take upon him, that
thereby a man may prepare him self to consider his duty the more deeply and
advisedly, and pray to God that he of his mercy will send him a luckie entrance
into his charge. Such manner of one was the fast of Moses in old time in the
mountain, and of Helias in the wilderness, and the fast of Christ also in
the wilderness, whereof mention is made here.

The solemn fast godly and Christian, is that which the godly Magistrate or
the gouerners of the Churches enioine, either too the intent that some present
evil (as plages, sword, sects, seditions, and such like) may by true
repentance and calling upon God, be taken away or mitigated: or else that the
evils which seem too hang over men's heads for sins reigning over sore may
be prevented and eschued. Such kinds of fastes as this is, have oftentimes bin
enioined by holy Kings and Prophets, which fastes were acceptable to God for
their repentance, faith, prayer, charity, minding of blissed life, and such
other things, which are wont to be and must in any wise be in a christian
fast. As concerning this dooble fast of private and solemn, this rule is too
be held, that as the private fast is set freely in every man's choice: so
the solemn fast binds men by the commandment of the Magistrate, by the
law of Charity, and by the necessity of the common profit, and therefore it
is very great sin to break it wilfully.

The ungodly and Pharisaicall fast: is an abstinence from some certain kind
of meat, which of it self is thought too be a worshipping of God, and a
thing acceptable to God for the works sake, and therefore also meritorious. As
whoo would say, that God passes for outward works, whereas the conscience is
vnpure: and that fasting were of that kind of works, which are allowed simply
and without mean by God, according as those works are which he apointeth in
his own law, that is to wit in the ten commandments: and that it were
not rather a certain outward exercise, and a certain bodily business tending
too another end, namely serving to repentance, prayer, taming of the flesh,
too charity, and mindfulnesse of the blessed life. Woorthely therefore do the
Prophets condemn such hipocriticall fastinges, in which do meet together
many horrible wickednesses: as an opinion of Gods service, a trust in the
work, necessity, constraint, a needful choice of meats, such a manner of
fasting, as even swine might be fatted with it, and a minding of deceit and
wrong toward their neighbors.

And this Pharisaicall fast may be divided intoo two kinds that the one may be
called standing, and the other voluntary. The standing fast is that which is
ordinary and tied too certain times of the year, such as was the Lentfast (as
they term it,) among the Papists, and the Imberdayes at four seasons of the
year, and the Saints euens, whereby they would purchase the intercessions of
the saints, and many such other, wherein was nothing else than mere
superstition and manifest wickedness.

Uoluntarie fast, is that which any man at his own appointment chooses to
himself, too the intent he may make God his detter. Of which sort was his
fast, that boasting his prayer to the Lord, said: I fast twice a week: where
he vaunteth of his fast as a holy and meritorious work, and puts God in
mind of it, least he should forget it.

Let this suffice concerning fasting in general: now will I add a few things
concerning Christ's fast. Of this, the Evangelist speaks thus. Then Jesus
was led away intoo the wilderness by the spirit, that he might be tempted
of the devil. And when he had fasted.xl. days and.xl. nights, he was
afterward a hungered. Here first is noted the time, namely that by and by
after his Baptim, he fasted. Secondly is noted ye place namely the wilderness.
Thirdly the manner of his fast, that is too wit, that he lived.xl. days and.xl.
nights without any manner of sustenance. Fourthly the woonderfulnesse, that he
could both live so long a time without sustinance, and also was not a hungered
of all that while. For he felt no hunger until the.xl. days, and as many
nights were quite passed.

But why did Christ this thing? First that by this heavenly miracle he might
testify his own divine power. Secondly to fulfill the figure. For Moses being
a Type of Christ, fasted on the mountain.xl. days and as many nights. Thirdly
to make amends for the glutony of our first parents and of us. Fourthly for
vocation sake. For it is the custom of GOD (when he will have any man set in
his office,) as it were too prepare him and make him fit for it by fasting and
affliction: as we see in Moses and Helias. Fifthly that he might be an example
to us, how we should continually live in soberness, and in the fear of God.

We must therefore learn too know the use of Christ's fast, which is manifold.
First to think with our selves how much the son of God was abased. Secondly
too give our selves soberly unto prayer, after the example of the son of
God. And thirdly too yield him thanks, for susteining so great a fast in our
behalf.

Agein on the other side, we must shun the abuse, that we abuse not this holy
fast of Christ's. Which thing comes too pass, if we either make an
universal precept of this doing of Christ's: or think our selves too beecome
partakers of Christ's fast, by our counterfeit fast: or surmise that our fast
deserves forgiveness of sins by the work wrought, as Thomas Aquinas like
a caytife teaches: or deem with Ambrose, that this Lenton fast enjoined by
the bishops of the Church, is a matter of necessity, so as no man may be
accounted godly unless he keep this fast. All these opinions fight full but
against the very foundation of our faith, which is that the believers are
saved by the merit of Christ alone.

But they say: every deed of Christ is our instruction, and he fasted.xl.
days. Ergo, we must follow the example of this deed of Christ. Surely it is
true yt they say. Every deed of Christ is our instruction: but it is not true
that we must counterfeit every deed of Christ's, which thing is manifest by the
sundry differences of Christ's doings. For of Christ's doings some be moral,
some be marvelous, and other some be peculiar. His moral doings do instruct
our life and manners. For he is a most perfect pattern of virtues. His
marvelous doings, (among which I recke^ up this fast) do inform and confirm
our minds of ye truth of Christ's doctrine. His peculiar doings or deeds of
reconciliation, are those which perteine too the benefit of our redemption
and purging from sin. These will foster and cherish in us a confidence of
salvation. And so every deed of Christ's, is in deed our instruction, yet is
not every of them too be counterfaited, but only so many of them as perteine
too life and manners, according too the tenor of the.x. commandments. Is it
lawful then too fast the lenton fast? It is lawful, so that the conditions be
kept in doing it, which (as I have said before) are too be observed in the
holy and Christian fast. And I openly confess, yt at this time of Lent is
requisite a singular soberness, in minding and musing upon the benefit of
our redemption, which at that season is wont too be set forth daily in
our churches in the rehersall of the Lords passion: but compulsion and
necessity must in any wise be away.

Of the second.
THe tempter coming. etc. In these temptations of Christ, a man may see,
first how great the boldness of Satan is, and his desire to destroy the
kingdom of Christ. For he spares not even the son of God, but approaches
unto him, and as he invaded Gods kingdom in Paradise, and gate the upper hand:
so practices he too destroy the new Paradise the kingdom of Christ, and
assayleth the king thereof, with the darts of temptations. And secondly a man
may see here, how much the son of God was abased, in that he was not only
afflicted with fasting: but also assaulted with the temptations of Satan.

How be it, too the intent we may receive wholesome instruction thereby: first
I will speak of Christ's temptations. Then wherefore he was tempted. And last of
all, what doctrine and comfort is for us too pick out of Christ's temptations.
In every of Christ's temptations (which in this place are three in number) we
may behold four things. First what is the occasion: secondly what is the
manner of the temptation: thirdly what is the end of it: fourthly the manner of
ye victory.

Therefore as touching the first temptation, the occasion thereof is showed in
these words of the Euangeliste: and when he had fasted.xl. days and.xl.
nights, afterward he was a hungered. Behold what an occasion the adversary
had gotten. Christ had fasted, and prepared him self too execute his office,
but Satan practices another thing, and of Christ's good deed he seeks
opportunity too destroy him. This has been the continual endeavor of Satan,
too wrest both the well doings and the sins of the Saints too their
destruction. But God knows who be his, and is able too deliver them out of
temptation.

The manner of the temptation ensues: for the tempter says: If thou be the
son of GOD, command these stones too become bread. The end of this
te^ptatio^, was too persuade Christ to make a trial whither God would by miracle
co^firm his Godhed or no: yt if he did not, then ye Lord might surmise yt God
cared not for him. This temptation therefore fights against gods providence,
where through he provides all things for his children, which are necessary too
salvation, and this present life.

The manner of the victory follows: Too whom Jesus answering, said: It is
written, man lives not only by bread, but by every word that proceeds out
of the mouth of God. Here we see how the victory against Satan consists
in the word of God. Satan would persuade Christ that he should perish if he
made not bread of the stones. But Christ denies that man lives only with
bread or bodily food. For meat nourishes not, unless there come with it the
blissing of God, from whence bread takes his strength. For it is written, they
shall eat and not be suffised. This scripture alleged here by Christ too this
purpose, thou have in the xij. of Deuter. In which place Moises comfort the
people in the desert, where was no bread, but God gave them Manna from heaven,
and water out of the rock. This promis, Christ applies to himself and to all the godly, signifying that it should come to pass, that even in the mids of
famine, God would succor his people and give them things needful. Of this
promis we have examples in the Israelites, in Helias, in Helizeus, in Moses,
and here in Christ. Heereunto makes that saying of the Prophet: They shall
not be confounded in the evil time, and in the days of famine they shall be
suffised. This promis when it perteyneth too us, is too be caught hold on by
faith: and too be set against Satan that he overthrow us not with temptation
of hunger. And thus much breefly concerning Chrysts first temptation, and the
use thereof. Now follows the second.

The occasion of the second temptation is described in these words. Then the
Diuill took him up intoo the holy City, and set him upon a pinnacle of the
Temple: See the occasion, see the craft of Satan: whoo of every thing seeks
means of destruction.

The manner of the temptation is added: If thou be the son of God cast thy
self down, For it is written that he has given his angels charge of thee, to
take thee up in their hands, least perhaps thou should dashe thy foot
against a stone. The end of this temptation is, that Christ should attempt
somewhat contrary to his own vocation, and so provoke Gods wrath against
himself, as our first parents did. For after that this malicious feend saw that
Christ stayed himself upon the scripture, he goes about to entangle the
scripture with his lies. The same Psalm which Satan cites, entreats of
Gods providence, that God will preserve every godly person in his own ways,
that is too say, in his trade of living and lawful vocation: and does not
command us to do aany thing rashly contrary to our vocation. But how has
christ quenched this fiery dart of Satan? by his word. For he says: Ageine it
is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. We have these words in
the.6. of Deu. where too tempt god signifies too enterprise any thing through
distrust, whither it be in prosperity or adversity. Wherefore such a
temptation is clean against faith and the fear of God. For he that in
prosperity lives careless, and lays aside the fear of God, surely he
tempts God contrary to the first commandment. Ageine he that in adversity
gives over, as though God had no care at all of us, he also tempts God by
doubting of his promises. The church at this day is vexed with persecution,
and feels outwardly battle, and inwardly fearfulness: yet certainly is not
god to be tempted in this case. We must not say, if we be his people: if
this which we profess be his very gospel, why does he not help us at this
time? Why suffers he all things too fall out so luckely with our enemies.
But let us in this case say boldly with christ. Thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy god. Now ensues the third temptation.

The occasion of the third temptation, is showed in these words. Ageine the
Devil took him up intoo an exceeding high mountain, and shows unto him
all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them. See: in this first
temptation he abuses chrysts affliction to tempt him with. Now he sets out
too him the kingdoms of the world, that he might be dazeled with the glory of
them, and so fall against God. His temptation is this. All these things will I
give thee, if thou vvilt fall down and worship me. The end of this
temptation, was that Christ should become an Idolatrer. How be it against
this temptation the Lord preuayleth: first by driving Satan away, that durst
challenge godly honor too him self: and secondly by striking him through with
the sword of God, saying: It is written thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve. This scripture is had in the.6. of Deuteronomy. in
which scripture are two things: a commandment, and a prohibition. For it
commands us too worship the one God, and too serve him with godly reverence,
according too the first table. And it forbids us too attribute this honor
too any creatures, whither they be Devils, or men, or Angels. Let this rule
be continually in our sight against all the wiles of the Papists.

But wherfoore was Christ tempted? First that when we are tempted, we may know
we have a high Bishop yt was tried in all things. Secondly that his example
may teach us not to suffer the Devil to withdraw us by any means from the true
fear of God. Therefore if he go about to persuade us that we are not regarded
of God, when we be distressed with the Cross and with many miseries: let us
have an eye to the son of God, and let us repress our enemy with the same
sword that he used. When he provoke us to do any thing contrary too our
vocation, whereby we may be brought in danger of our salvation and life: let us
set the sword of God against him. When he enticeth by great rewards unto
Idolatry: let us beware that he draw us not with these bayted hooks intoo the
net of damnation* Too be short, in all our whole life, let us endeuer too grow
still in ye true knowledge of God, and too be armed against Satan with the
presence of Gods son, too whom our victorious Champion, toogither with the
father and the holy Ghost, be glory for ever. So be it.

The second Sunday in Lent. The Gospel. Math. xv.
JESUS went thence, and departed intoo the coasts of Tire and Sydon: and
behold a woman of Canaan (which came out of the same coasts) cried unto
him, saying: have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David. My daughter is
piteously vexed with a Devil. But he ansvvered her nothing at all. And his
Disciples came and besought him, saying: send her away, for she cries after
us. But he ansvvered and said: I am not sent but too the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. Then came she and worshipped him, saying: Lord help me.
He ansvvered and said: It is not meet too take the Childrens bread and cast
it too Dogs. She ansvvered and said: truth Lord, for the Dogs eat of the
crummes which fall from their masters table. Then Jesus ansvvered and said
unto her: O woman great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou vvilt.
And her daughter was made whole, even the same time.

The exposition of the text.
THe Gospel perteyneth specially too us that be Gentiles. For the example of
this heathen woman, teaches that the Gentiles are received. For as he received
and helped her when she did call upon him: so will he also receive us. For
there is no accepting of persons before GOD, according as Peter says: Of a
truth I perceive that God is no accepter of persons, but in every nation
whosoever fears the Lord, and woorketh righteousness, he is accepted with
him. And this is the unchangeable decree of God, that as he casts away and
damneth all impenitent persons: so as many as repent and by faith call upon
God, are received through the only mediator Jesus Christ, and saved by the
only goodness of God. Of which decree we see an example in this woman, who
being under the cross calls upon Christ and is herd, and being justified
by faith is saved according too this saying of Ioell: Every one that calls
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. The places are three.

1 What is true and wholesome repentance. 2 Why Christ put back this woman. 3 A
lively image of the Church.
Of the first.
IT is in any wise necessary, that men be taught rightly concerning true
repentance. For unless true repentance be in place, no man can be saved.
Therefore will I tell clearly and distinctly what helthful repentance is: how it
is made: and of what parts it is made perfect.

Christian and helthfull repentance is out of all dout the turning of man
unto God, that he may become a new creature, too live according too his will,
as much as may be in this infirmity. Or (too speak more plainly) helthful
repentance is a true sorynesse for displeasing GOD, with a desire and hope of
forgiveness, for the sacrifice of Gods son, and with singular will and
endeuer too eschew sin from thencefoorth, and too make his whole life
afterward allowable before God.

That this is the true definition of helthful repentance, it may be showed by
the only testimony of Ezechiell. For this Prophet in his.xviij. chapter says
thus. Turn and repent ye of all your iniquities, and your iniquities shall
not be too your decay. Cast from you all your ungodliness, and make unto
your selves a new heart and a new spirit. In this testimony are contained
three things. The first is, a calling too repentance: No man shall come unto
me (says the Lord) but he whom my Father draws. The second thing is the
promise: Your iniquity shall not be your decay. The third is, the
description of repentance: Do ye penance, or repent ye (says he.) His
meening is therefore that we should be sorry for Gods displeasure. Cast from
you all your ungodliness: by this he requires a shu^ning and hatred of sin.
When he says: Turn ye unto God, he requires faith, without the which no
man can turn unto God. For by faith (as says Paul) we have access unto
God. Moreover where as is added, make too your selves a new heart, and a new
spirit, he requires that we should become a new creature, living according
too Gods will. Hereupon it is gathered that the true and helthful repentance,
is a hearty sorinesse for Gods displeasure with a desire and hope of
forgiveness and an earnest endeuer too eschew all sin, and too make the whole
life from thencefoorth allowable before God. This thing we may see plainlier in
this notable example. David after his horrible fall intoo aduoutrie and
murder, repented him according too the fashion expressed in the Psalm. First
he says Have mercy upon me O God, according too thy great mercy. Here he
both soroweth for his own misery, that he had so lewdly offended God, and
also acknowledges God too be merciful. Whereby there was in him desire and
hope and lively trust of the Messiah. Now how great his sorrow was, and how
great his faith was, whereby he overcame the sorrow, the same Psalm declares
in many words. And where as he adds in the same Psalm: Create a new
spirit in my bowels: he desires too become a new creature. Such examples as
this, there be many: as of Adam, Manasses, Peter, the thief, and Mary
Magdalene, and others: which things it behooves us too think upon, that by
their example we may both be taught what true repentance is, and also
repent us earnestly as they did.

Although that by the things which we have said, it may be meetly well
understood, how true repentance is done: yet will I show it more distinctly.
For nothing is more necessary too man, than by true repentance too be
reconciled too God, and too be saved. Too the intent therefore that we may
know how true repentance is done, seven points are too be observed.

First the knowledge of God, who requires obedience. This is fetched out of
the table of the ten commandments: I am the Lord thy god that brought thee
out of the land of Egypt. etc. Here god requires an acknowledging of him
self. Secondly follows what manner of obedience he requires: Thou shall have
no strange gods before me. Thirdly the threatenings that are added, do testify
that he condempneth disobedience. Uisiting (says he) the iniquities of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation. Lastly also it
is too be known concerning God, that he is merciful, according to the voice
of the gospel. Therefore before the entry be set open too true repentauuce,
there is required the knowledge of god, who looks for obedience, judging and
condemning disobedience in good earnest, and agein, pitying and receiving
sinners intoo his favor, for the mediators sake.

2 After this knowledge, must follow an examination of our doings by ye law of
god: and every precept is to be considered severally by himself. First
therefore in this examination, see whether thou make such account of God, that
thou trust too him only: see whither thou fear him, love him, worship him with
all thy powers: see whither thou halowest his name: whither thou extol him,
praise him, and call upon him, according as the precepts of the first table
command thee. After the same manner must thou make thine examination in the
second table concerning thy neibor. etc. By this examination thou shall come to
the knowledge of thine own filthiness and just damnation for offending God.
And such an examination demands God at our hands, as often as the Scripture
exhorts us too repentance.

3 This examination being made by ye knowledge of sin, and ye judgment of
god, there arises a great fearfulness in ye conscience, which fearfulnes is
augme^ted by ye circu^sta^ces of Gods judgment, which are these present
calamities, the tyranny of the devil, the pains of hell, eternal death and
damnation.

4 In this great terror infinite persons should perish, if Faith rescued them
not. For in this terror, by the beholdings of Gods mercy promised for Christ's
sake, is conceived trust of remission of sins. And so man wresteth himself as
it were out of hell, and takes hold on the hand of Gods son, who haleth him
out of hell. Here the mind thinks upon Gods promises, looks upon the
son of God hanging on the cross for thy sins and mine, heereth the voice
of Joel most full of comfort, saying: turn too the Lord your God, because he
is gracious and merciful, slow to wrath, and swifte too pity, and one that
bears with your naughtiness. Let the examples of these promises be
considered, that we may be strengthened by them.

5 The sinner knowing this mercy of GOD, conceyueth hope of forgiveness, and
begins openly too bewail his sin: he confesses his lewdness unto God,
and with earnest prayer and a fervent heart, flees unto Gods mercy.

6 He that in this wise ascends by these degrees, first acknowledging Gods
judgment and mercy according as is already set forth, he by this confidence
is assoyled of his sin, and justified before God, not through his own
righteousness, but through Chrysts, which is imputed to every one that
believes. For our true justification is the absolution from sin, of the
person that believes in Christ, the imputation of Christ's righteousness
unto him, and the accepting of him freely unto life everlasting, for Chrysts
sake.

7 He that is justified by faith, and adopted the Son of God, and regenerate,
yields thanks too God, extolleth god, and amendeth his whole life from that
time forward. Howbeeit too the intent these things may be the cleerelier
understood of us, I will propounde an example of helthful repentance, whereof
you have heard: and that shall be Manasses king of Judah: in whose helthful
repentance, all these things are too be seen, according as it appears in
his Prayer.

For first when he says: O Lord almighty, the God of our fathers Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, whom all men fear, and tremble at the countenance of thy
majesty. Importable is the wrath of thine indignation upon sinners, but
unmeasurable and unsearchable is the mercy of thy promise: for thou art the
most high Lord, gracious, merciful, and full of compassion, and sorry for the
naughtiness of men.

In these words of Manasses, is first an acknowledging of God. 2. A
testification of due obedience. 3. A confession of gods judgment against
sinners. 4. An acknowledging and setting forth of his mercy.

Then follows the second thing, that is too wit, the examination of Manasses
his doings by the rule of the law: For thus he says: I have sinned above the
number of the sand of the sea, my sins are multiplied O Lord.

Thirdly, how great terror was in his heart, he shows when he says: And I
am not worthy too behold and look upon the high heaven, for the multitude
of mine iniquities.

Fourthly, in these terrors he rayseth him self with thinking upon Gods
mercy, and says: And now I bow the knees of my heart, praying unto thee O
Lord, who haste promised repentance and forgiveness of sins too them that
have sinned against thee.

Fifthly follows entreatance of forgiveness: Wherefore I pray and beseech
thee, forgive me Lord, forgive me, and destroy me not toogither with my
sins, neither be thou angry with me for ever for my evil doings: For thou
art GOD, I say the God of the repentant: show all thy goodness upon me.

Sixthly having prayed in this wise, he firmly believes him self too be
heard and justified. Wherefore he adds. For thou shall save me unworthy
person, according too thy great mercy. Here Manasses being justified by
faith, becomes a new creature.

Seventhly, after this free justification, ensues amendme^t in his whole life.
Whereupon it follows in his prayer. And I will evermore praise thee all the
days of my life: because all the powers of heaven praise thee, and unto thee
be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

This manner of repenting have all the saints ever followed* David acknowledges
God: he acknowledges gods judgment: he acknowledges his mercy: he examineth
his own doing: he is afraid for sin: he lifts up him self with
confidence of mercy: he prays forgiveness: he is justified by faith: and
being justified, he prayseth God. These things are too be seen in the.51.
Psalm.

We have herd what repentance is, and how it is done. Now is too be learned,
which are the cheef parts of it. They are counted three: which are sorinesse,
faith, and newness of life.

Untoo sorinesse are required the first three things: which are the
knowledging of God, the examining of the deed, and the terror of conscience
for sin.

Untoo faith are required the three next, that is: thinking upon mercy,
desiring of forgiveness, and justification.

Untoo newness of life is required the last thing, which consists in
framing the heart, the tung and the life according too the law of God.

Of the second.
IT is written in this gospel, that Christ put back this woman. Why did he so?
Why said he that he was not sent but too the lost sheep of the house of
Israel? Is not he the same Lord that says: Come unto me all ye that labor,
and are heavy laden. etc. I answer: The Lord did not this without great causes.
First he did it, that the woman's faith might by this delay be exercised and
increased. Secondly, that she might be an example of godliness, against
the stiffnecked Jews which despised Christ. Thirdly that the Lord might show
how he would be overcome of us by the importunatenesse of our prayers.
Fourthly that by this example, he might teach the present beholders, a true
experiment of godliness. But the Lord assigns an other cause why he put back
this woman. For he says: I am not sent but too the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. I answer: Christ says not this as though he denied the Gentiles
access unto his grace: For that same woman was an Ethnicke: But there are
other causes. First he meeneth here, too note the obstinate malice and
unthankfulness of the Jews, who acknowledged not Christ that was sent
peculiarly too them. The second is, for that the self same Christ should
preach Gods word to the Jews before his death, who after his death should
give commandment to preach it too the Gentiles. For the Lord had forbidden
his Gospel too be preached too the Gentiles, before his death. But afterward
when he was risen from death, he gave this commandment too the apostles: Go
ye intoo the whole world, and preach the gospel to all creatures. This
commandment does manifestlye declare, that Chrysts benefits beelong both to
the Jews and Gentiles* that is too say, that all as well of the Jews as of
the Gentiles that receive Christ, and truly repent, are partakers of Chrysts
benefits, so that by his blood all their sins are washed away, and finally
at the last day all shall rise ageine too blissed immortality and everlasting
life. But they that refuse too receive christ, living without repentance: they
without mercy shall be punished in everlasting pains with the devil. For as
the Lord has bin, is, and will be merciful too all that repent, without any
respect of persons: So has he bin, is, and will be an untreatable judge too
them that repent not, not passing whither we be Kings, noble men, Citizens,
or country folk.

Of the third.
A Most goodly image of Chrysts Church, and of every member of the same, is
described in this woman of Cananie. For first as this woman of Cananie is
overwhelmed with misery: so also is the Church and every member thereof.
Heerevpon Paul says: All that will live godlyly in Christ must suffer this
persecution. This doothe Christ teach, when he bids us take his yoke upon
us. For God will have us now become like unto his son in afflictions and
miseries, as well as we shall become like unto him in time to come in glory
Romans 8. Secondly the church in these calamities prays for help. For the
church has none other refuge than prayer unto God, whereby help is obtained.
Thirdly christ seems too turn away his ear, when we do not out of hand
obtain that we would have. Fourthly the church (after the example of this
woman) ceasseth not too pray, but continues in prayer until it have obtained
that which it desires.

Moreover, every several member of the church has here too learn by.
First, let every one of us acknowledge himself too be a Cananite, that is to
say ungodly, and unworthy of Gods grace. Secondly, let him cry out with this
woman: Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me. Thirdly, if thou be tried,
yet continue thou after the example of this woman. If he here thee not to day
or to morrow, yet shall not thy prayers be in vain, but they shall be herd in
deed for chrysts sake, if thou pray with faith as this woman, did. Fourthly
acknowledge thy self with this woman too be a Dog: but yet such a dog as is
fed with the crummes that fall from his masters table, and therefore continue
in prayer. Fifthly, it will befall too thee, as it did too this woman, which
erewhile was called Dog, and anon was acknowledged for a daughter. So great is
the mercy of God, to whom be honor and glory world without end. Amen.

The third Sunday in Lent. The Gospel. Luke. xj.
ANd he was casting out a diuil, and the same was du^me: And when he had
cast out the diuil, the dumme spoke, and the people wondered. But some of them
said: he casts out devils through Beelzebub the chief of the devils. And
other tempted him, and required of him a sign from heaven. But he knovving
their thoughts, said unto them: Every kingdom divided against it self, is
desolate: and one house does fall upon another. If Satan also be divided
against him self, how shall his kingdom endure? Because ye say I cast out
devils through Beelzebub: If I by the help of Beelzebub cast out devils, by
whose help do your children cast them out? Therefore shall they be your
judges. But if I with the finger of God cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom
of God is come upon you. When a strong man armed watches his house, the
things that he possesses are in peace. But when a stronger than he comes
upon him, and overcomes him, he takes from him all his harness (vvherin he
trusted) and divides his goods. He that is not with me, is against me, and
he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad. When the unclean spirit
is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places seeking rest. And when
he finds none, he says: I will return ageine intoo my house whence I came
out. And when he comes, he finds it svvept and garnished. Then goth he and
takes too him self seven other spirits worse than him self, and they enter
in and dvvell there. And the end of that man is worse than the beginning. And
it fortuned that as he spoke these things, a certain woman of the company lift
up her voice, and said unto him: happy is the womb that bare thee, and the
paps which gave thee suck. But he said: yea, happy are they that here the
word of God and keep it.

The exposition of the text.
THis Gospel (dear beloved) shows plainly the cause why Christ came into
the world and took man's nature upon him: that is too wit, both too begin a
new kingdom, and also too abolish the kingdom of the devil. And this is it
that God speaks of in the third of Genesis: The seed of the woman shall
tread down the serpents head. Which words John interprets when he says:
Christ appeered to destroy the works of the devil, that is too say, the
devils kingdom, which begins with sin, is builded upon sin, and
finished with endless damnation. Of this kingdom of Satan Christ in his
Gospel shows himself too be the destroyer, by delivering a man that was
possessed of a devil. For in as much as he drives out the devil: First he
gives us too understand, that he is stronger than the devil, and secondly
that he is his enemy. Also by this miracle he shows him self too be the
savior of mankind. Moreover here is showed the unthankfulness of the world
toward their savior, when the wicked Jews ascribe Gods woorks unto Satan.
Lastly in the end of this Gospel, the woman by her outcrie ministers occasion
unto Christ, too show the true blessedness For where as the woman cries out:
Blissed is the womb that bare thee: he answers: Nay rather, Blissed are they
that here the word of God, and keep it. The points hereof are four.

1 The difference between the kingdom of Satan, and the kingdom of Christ.
2 The strife between the Jews and Christ, wherein the Jews find fault with
Chrysts doing, and he defends the same. 3 What shall become of those which
having received Christ, shake him off again, and serve Satan. 4 What is true
blissednesse and felicity.
Of the first
Christ was casting out a devil. These words do openly testify, that the
kingdom of Christ, and the kingdom of Satan are two sundry kingdoms, and
that there is between these two sundry kingdoms, the greatest difference that
may be, in so much as it is not possible for them too agree together. Thou
seeing that Christ and the devil are two most puissant kings, of two most
diverse kingdoms, we will speak of both, that men may understand how much evil
is in the kingdom of Satan, and how much goodness and felicity is in the
helthful kingdom of Christ.

As concerning the Devil, these four points are too be considered. First, who
he is. 2. What he does. 3. Why he does. 4. Why God suffers him too do it.

Who is he then? As in respect of his nature, he is the creature of God, as
are the Angels of God. As in respect of his inclination and of his
frowardness (which he has of him self) he is a liar, a murderer, and a
thief, delighting evermore in manslaughter, and lying: and coveting nothing so
much as the everlasting destruction of mankind. That the Devil is such a
one, we are taught by his craftiness, with which he deceived Adam and Eve.

What does the Devil? We see in this Gospel, that he makes this wretched
man blind and dumb. Consider here (I pray you) the cruel tirannie of the
Devil against this miserable soul. First he stops up his ears. Why? least
he should hear the word of God. And why desires he that? because he
knows that the first step too Heaven is too hear Gods word. For never man
yet (being of years of discretion) atteyned too salvation, without heering
the word of God. For the Gospel (says Paul) is the power of God too
salvation, too every one that believes. Secondly he besieges his heart, that
the word may have no place in it. And why does he so? Because he knows
that without faith (which comes by heering the word) no man is justified.
For as Christ faith: He that believes not, the wrath of God abides upon him.
Thirdly he makes him dumb: Wherefore? that he should not confess Christ his
savior. For he knows that no man is saved without confession of the mouth.
For thus says Paul in the tenth unto the Romans: With the heart we
believe unto righteousness, and with the mouth we make confession too
salvation. Fourthly he makes this miserable creature blind, that he should
not see. And why so? Because he should not see Gods woorks which show forth
Gods glory, as David witnesses when he says: The Heavens declare the glory
of God, and the firmament shows his handy woorks. Behold, Satan closes up
all the ways of salvation from this wretched man.

Wherefore does this spiteful creature so? First because he him self is
damned, and has no hope of salvation. Secondly he bears such a hatred too
Christ, that he cannot away with his kingdom. Thirdly, he is inflamed with
unappeasable hatred toward mankind, in so much as he coueteth too have them
al damned everlastingly, as well as him self. And therefore is it that Peter
says. Pet. 5. The Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour.

But why does GOD give Satan this leave, too trouble men in such wife?
First we have merited this punishment for our own sin. For what evil so
ever happens unto us, we must ascribe it unto our selves, and seek the
cause of it in oureselues. Secondly God suffers it too the intent we may
learn how great Christ's benefits are toward his church. For no man better
understands the commodities of liberty and health, than he that has
sometimes felt the hardness of imprisonment, and the pains of sickness.
Thirdly that against the Devil we should call upon Christ, who only is able
too overcome him. Fourthly, that we should fear our selves against him with
faith, according too this saying: Whom withstand you strong in faith. For Faith
is the ouercommer of the world, as John says: This is your victory that
ouercometh the world, even your faith. Fifthly that being delivered from the
tirannie of Satan by Christ's presence, we may both acknowledge ye Christ
dwells in us, according too that which is written in the 2. Reg. 17. that
all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel, that is too say, in the
Church: and also that we may magnify God which delivers us.

Of the Devil we have heard, who he is, what he does, why he labors the
destruction of the Church, and wherefore God permits him so too do. Now
let us here of our king Christ, of whom I will speak, who he is, what he
does, and why he does.

Who is Christ? God and man, borne of the father before all worlds,
everlasting God, with the everlasting Father and the holy ghost, according as
we confess in our Creed, who came down from heaven for our salvation, and
took man's nature upon him, too the intent he might by his death, deliver us
from endless death and punishment.

What does he? That does this present Gospel teach us. First he opens
this deaf man's ears: Secondly, he casts the devil out of him: Besides
that, he loozeth his tongue that he may speak. And also he opens his ears.
The self same thing does he daily in his church. First he opens our ears
that we may here Goods word. Therefore who soever hears Gods word
willingly, let him know that his ears are opened: and contrariwise, he that
heereth not the word willingly, let him know that his ears are stopped still
by Satan. Wherefore who so has not yet ears to here, let him flee to
Christ, who only can open them. Secondly he delivers the heart from the
devil, that we may believe. For in the sixth of John, Christ teaches that
faith is the work of God: for thus he says: This is the work of God that
we believe in him whom he has sent. Then if thou believe not, the devil still
possesses thy heart. Wherefore thou must go too Christ, who only can overcome
him. Thirdly he loozeth thy tongue that now from henceforth thou may with thy
mouth confess him, magnify him, and call upon him.

And wherefore does Christ so? First, because he is a lover of men, whose
nature he took upon him, at such time as he was conceived man, and borne of
the virgin Mary. Secondly, because he is the enemy of the Devil. Thirdly,
because it is his office or charge too invade the kingdom of his enemy the
devil, too put his said enemy to the spoil, and too reward all that believe
in him with everlasting life.

Now by these things it appears how great difference there is between the
kingdom of the devil and the kingdom of Christ. In the devils kingdom is sin
and death: In Chrysts kingdom is righteousness and life. In Satan's kingdom
is damnation: in Chrysts kingdom is salvation, and acquitall from damnation.
In Satan's kingdom is darkness: In Chrysts kingdom is perpetual light. In
Satan's kingdom is torment: In Chrysts kingdom is joy. In Satan's kingdom is
too be seen the devil with all damned souls: In Chrysts kingdom the
saints enjoy the sight of God, and the glory of immortality, through Jesus
Christ. Heerby therefore we may be admonished, both with how great heed the
kingdom of Satan is too be shunned, and with how great diligence we must
indeuer too be made citizens of the blissed kingdom of Christ.

Of the second.
THe Jews seeing this deed of Christ (as the ministers of Satan) do set
themselves with might and main against Christ, and say: he casts out devils
by Beelzebub prince of the devils. See how great the malice of the world is.
Too the intent it may die in his own sins, it ascribes the work of God
too the devil. What living creature would rise up with so great madness
against Christ, if he were not styrred theretoo by the spirit of Satan.
Howebeit Christ in no wise bears that reproach of GOD at their hand, but
with most strong arguments confuteth this diuelishe blasphemy.

The first Argument is: No man can by one devil drive out an other: Ergo you
do lewdely too affirm that I cast out devils in the name of Beelzebub. For
if one Devil should woork against an other, and cast out one another, the
Devils kingdom should not be steadfast. But now we see the kingdom of Satan
too be most stable and strong. For every kingdom divided within it self,
shall be made desolate. For whersoeuer is discord, there is assured
destruction too be looked for.

The second argument is: If I cast out devils in the name of Beelzebub, your
sons do also cast out devils in the same name. But this by your own
judgment is false. For you affirm them too cast out Devils by the power of
God: wherefore you do wickedly too say, that I cast out Diuelles in the name of
Beelzebub.

The third argument is: I cast out Devils by the finger of God, that is too
say, by the power of God: Ergo, you do falsely ascribe my work too the Devil.

The fourth argument is: A strong person is not overcome but of his stronger.
The Devil is overcome by me: for I cast him out and spoil him: Ergo I am
stronger than he. When a strong person armed keeps his house, the things
that he possesses, are in peace. Who is that same strong armed person? the
old serpent. He keeps his house as long as he dwells in the vnbeeleuers,
and while he blinds men's senses that they acknoweledge not Christ. And
then are all things in peace which he possesses, when the word of God is
put to silence, and men's traditions sound abroad. But as soon as the sword
is drawn, which is the word of God, by and by the Devil is compelled too
give place: For Christ (who is in the word) is stronger than Satan.

The fifth argument is: He that is not with me, is against me, and he that
gathers not with me, scatters. That is too say: The Devil scatters the
church, and I gather the church toogither: Ergo there is no agreement between
me and the Devil. And that the Devil scatters the church, he proves by a
most goodly similitude.

Of the third.
WHen an unclean spirit is gone out of a man, that is, when the Devil (who
of him self is unclean, and wont by many means too defile the minds of men)
is gone out of a man, like as he is now by my power cast out of this wretched
man that was possessed: What does he then? He walks by dry places,
seeking rest: and finding none, he says: I will return intoo my house from
whence I came. He walks by dry places, that is too say, by hearts that are
not watered with the river of the holy Ghost. What is meant by his seeking
rest, and finding none? By this phrase of speaking is signified his endeuer:
for it is not enough for him too have done harm, unless he may do more
harm. So great a desire has he too destroy men. He is not contented too
possess many hearts, but he must also return ageine too those from which
he was expulsed before. Whereupon he says: I will return intoo my house,
from whence I came. By these words is given us too understand, yt he ceasseth
not too tempt those that are purged by Faith, but labors too enter intoo the
hearts of them again, too the intent too carry them away from the kingdom of
Christ: and if he bring that too pass, the end of that manne beecommeth
worse than the beginning, because he becomes a new the enemy of Christ, and
expulseth the holy Ghost: And he shall suffer sorer punishment, if he cast
not out the Devil agein by true repentance. Let us mark then how perilous a
thing it is for them that have once professed them selves Chrystians, too put
their necks ageine under the Devils yoke. For as such men do most grievously
sin against the holy Ghost: so must they also stand in fear of most
grievous punishment. Therefore they that are touched with any care of their
Salvation, let them speedely amend, and fight stoutely against Satan, that he
cast them not again hedlong intoo the gulf of sin.

Of the fourth.
IT came too pass that as he spoke these things, a certain woman in the
company, lifting up her voice, said unto him. Blissed is the womb that. etc.
But he said: yea rather blissed are they that hear the word of God and
keep it. Here first we may mark the diversity of men's judgments
concerning Gods word. Some wonder at the word, and love it, as this woman
did. Some speak evil of it, as they did against whom Christ deals here. For
there have bin always such heerers of the word, from the beginning of the
world. Caine despised the word, and Abel loved it. Noe loved it, and all the
whole world beside despised it. In the time of Jeremy, few or none received
the word of the Prophets with fruit: but the most part chose rather too
return too their old Idolatry. Heerupon they say too Hieremie: When we made
sacrifice too the Queen of Heaven, (that is too say, too the Sun) all things
went well with us. We had abundance of Corn. etc. After the same manner say
the men of our time. When we heard Mass, and gave too Moonkes, all things
were better cheap, the fear of GOD was greater, and there was more love
between man and man. This is the thank that the world yields too God for
his well doing. He gives us the word of salvation; and we had leauer have
men's dreams. He offreth it too us freely: and we will earne it with the
geugawes of the Moonkes. But let us leave these things, and harken unto
Christ. Blissed are they (says he) that here the word of God and keep it.
These words are few, and have a great promise annexed too them.

What manner of word is that word of GOD? It can be none other, than that
which the prophets have delivered us: Christ has confirmed with his own
blood: and the Apostles have taught. What manner of word is that? The su^me
thereof is contained in the instruction of our children, called the Cathechisme:
and these are they: The ten commaundeme^ts, the Articles of our belief, the
doctrine of the Sacraments, and the doctrine which ye here every Sunday out of
the Gospel: that is too wit (in one word) the same doctrine that the Prophets,
Christ, and the Apostles taught. This word will he have herd: Ergo, he will
also that there be ministers and pastors that are able too teach this word.
For seeing that he gives his word, and offreth soul health which is
received by faith through hearing: it is needful that there be persons that
can teach this word. How be it, for as much as it is not enough that the
word be taught and herd, unless it be also kept: the Lord adds, and
keeps it. What is too keep the word? It is too learn the word that is herd,
too hold it, too believe it, and too perform true obedience unto God through
faith. So did our father Abraham. He herd the word, he held it, he believed it,
yea and yielded such obedience too it by faith, that he would at Gods
appointment rather ^^ea his only begotten Son, than break Gods
commandments. But who is he amongst us, that yields this obedience unto
God? we will be called Abraham's children, but we will not tread in our
fathers footsteps. What promises he too them that hear it and obey it?
Blissed are they says he. etc. They are blissed, that is too say, set free
from al wretchedness, from sin, and from damnation. Blissed, that is too
say, infeoffed in everlasting life and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord,
who with the father and the holy Ghost lives one God, world without end.
Amen.

The fourth Sunday in Lent commonly called Midlent Sunday. The Gospel. John.
vj.
AFter these things Jesus went his way over the Sea of Galilee, which is
the Sea of Tyberias, and much people follovved him, because they savve his
miracles which he did on them that were diseased. And Jesus went up into a
mountain, and there he sat with his Disciples. And Easter, a feast of the
Jews was nie. When Jesus then lift up his eyes, and savv a great company
come unto him, he said unto Phillip: whence shall we buy bread that
these may eat? This he said too prove him: for he him self knevve what he
would do. Philip answered him: Two hundred penyvvorth of bread are not
sufficient for them, that every man may take a little. One of his disciples
(Andrew Simon Peter's brother) says unto him: There is a lad which has
five barley loves, and two fishes: but what are they among so many? And Jesus
said: Make the people sit down. There was much grass in the place: So the
men sat down, in number about five thousand. And Jesus took the bread,
and when he had given thanks, he gave too the Disciples, and the Disciples to
them that were set down, and likewise of the fishes as much as they
would. When they had eaten enough, he said unto his disciples: Gather up the
broken meat which remains, that nothing be lost. And they gathered it
together, and filled.xij. baskets with the broken meat of the five barley
loaves: which broken meat remained unto them that had eaten. Then those men
(when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did) said: This is of a truth the
same prophet that should come intoo the world. Therefore when Jesus
perceived that they would come and take him too make him king, he departed
agein intoo a mountain him self alone.

The exposition of the text.
THe sum of this Gospel is, that Christ does here by his deed and example
confirm the doctrine which he taught, in the.vj. of Mathewe: First seek ye
the kingdom of God, and the righteousness of him (that is to say of God) and
all things else shall be cast unto you: to ye intent that we being instructed
by Chrysts word and miracle, should cast off the care of the belly, and
follow Christ intoo the desert, leaving all care for our selves unto him,
according too his commandment: cast thy care upon the Lord, and he shall
nourishe thee. The meening therefore of all this whole Gospel, is too teach,
that they which here, love, and keep the word, shall not perish for want of
food, because Christ takes upon him too care for them. The places are these.

1 That God has care for them that follow him. 2 The circumstances of this
present miracle, and the use thereof to us wards. 3 The deed of this people
that would have made Christ king, and of Chrysts fleeing.
Of the second.
IN this first Doctrine many things offer themselves too be weyed: of which
every one does minister some Doctrine and admonition. As are Chrysts
iourneying and woorking: the earnestness of the people to here him: what
moved the people so to do: what profit redoundeth thereby to the people, and
what we ought too learn by the example of the people, and the deed of Christ.

Christ iourneying is showed in these words: Jesus went his way over the Sea
of Galilee, which is the Sea of Tyberias. This Tyberias was a City builded by
Herod near unto Jordan in the honor of the Emperor Tyberias. In this journey
of Chrysts there is too be marked the end and the example thereof. The end of
it was to spread abroad his Gospel by teaching and miracles. The example is,
that we would follow Christ, every man in his vocation, not sparing our selves,
but night and day by land and by sea endeuer to answer our calling. And this
example is not too be followed by the ministers of the word only, but of all
men, according too the manner of each man's vocation.

What does Christ in this journey? Mark in his.6. chapter says, that Christ
had pity upon them, because they were as sheep that had no shepherd, and that
he began to teach them many things* Matthew adds that he was occupied al day
in healing the diseased. Here do four things offer themselves too be weyed.
First, Christ's love. Secondly the cause of this love. Thirdly, what we be
without the ministration of the word. Fourthly, what is the end of the
ministry.

When Christ takes pity of the people, we are admonished too think how like
a father he is minded toward us, as who is sorry for our miseries. This is it
that the Apostle says too the Hebrews: we have a high preeste that can suffer
with us in our infirmities. The cause why he pitied the people, is showed by
Mark. Because (says he) they were as sheep that have no shepherd. But what
are sheep without a shepherd? Wretched and ready too take harm by thieves and
woolues. Now when the Lord said these things, the people was by false teachers
led away from the true service of GOD unto sundry superstitions, the fruit
whereof is the loss of their souls, like as we erewhile tasted under ye
Popedom, where in sted of the true service of GOD, there were brought intoo the
church most horrible superstitions: Praying unto Saints, heathenishe
abusing of the Sacraments, Purgatory and other bables, which would GOD did
not stick still in many men's minds at this day. Hereby therefore we may
lern, what men be without the ministry of the word: namely yt they be as
sheep straying in a wilderness, where they are every moment in very great
danger of thieves and woolues: or rather (too tell all at one word) whereas is
not the word of God, there is no salvation. Also we may learn here the end
of the ministry of the word. Men without the word are as sheep that go
astray without a shepherd. Ergo, the word is too them as the shepherds
staff, wherewith men are gathered toogither out of the wilderness too their
own shepherd. Also it is fodder wherewith they are refreshed and nourished.
And it is the salve wherewith our souls are healed. Too be short, it is the
immortal seed by which we grow up new ageine too eternal life, when we
believe the word that is preached. It is easy then too understand hereby,
how needful a thing the word of God is.

The earnestness of ye people too hear Christ, is also declared here. A great
company (says the Evangelist) followed him, yea and that far intoo a desert
place from the Cities, where was neither meat nor drink. Behold the exceeding
great earnestness where through the people were so joyful to here Christ,
that they seemed too have no care at all of their body. The day was far spent
says Mark.

Why the people followed Christ in this wise, John declares in this days
Gospel, when he says: because they saw the miracles that he wrought. And his
miracles were partly a witness of the power of the Godhed in Christ, and
partly as it were certain seals of his doctrine, and tokens of his exceeding
great good will toward men. For the people came too the thinking upon these
three things by the signs and miracles which the Lord wrought.

The people then by this their following after Christ reaped this profit, that
they came too the knowledge of their salvation. For when he had by woonderful
miracles confirmed the doctrine that he had taught them by mouth: they gave
credit too his word, by which faith all those were saved that continued in it
unto their end. Besides this, many received corporal benefits at his hand.
For he healed such as were diseased according as the other Evangelists make
report.

How now, is this example of the people too be followed of us? First we follow
the example of this people, if we here Gods word diligently, and believe the
same, as overcome by Christ's miracles wherewith he has confirmed the truth of
his doctrine. Secondly we shall follow the example of the people in this,
that they obey the rule which Christ gives in the.6. of Math: for thus says
Christ. First seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all the
(...) shall be cast unto you. This order is too be observed diligently of all
the godly. The first care must be for the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness of God. And then also they must labor according too the state
of their calling. For thus says the Scripture. In the swet of thy brows
shall thou eat thy bread. And in the Psalm it is said: Thou shall eat of the
labors of thy hands. Also Paul says: He that labors let him eat. So is
labor appointed to all men, how be it according too every man's estate. For
the labor of a shepherd is one: of a plowman, another: of a king, another:
and of a Chauncelor and Senator, another. But all men must beware that they
woork not arsiuersie, which thing they do, that care first for the belly, and
last of all for the soul. Therefore let him that bears an office, think
thus: My Lord Christ says: First seek the kingdom of God and the
righteousness of God, and afterward seek the rest of things necessary too
live by. I will obey this commandment of my Lord, assuring my self that he
will verily perform that which he has promised, how much so ever reason and
the whole world grudge against it, and endeuer too ouerturne this order
appointed by Christ. God feeds the birds: and why should he not feed me
that am obedient to him? He gives me a body: and why should he not give me
raiment? He gives me life: and why not food? He gives everlasting things:
and why not temporal things? Whosoever therefore is godly, must follow this
rule of Christ: First seek Gods kingdom and his righteousness, and all things
else shall be cast unto you. But (alas for sorrow) many offend against this
rule. For first they offend, which not only here not the word of God them
selves, but also are a let unto others, that they should not here it. Like as
ungodly husbands do, which withholde their wives from heering Gods word,
for covetousness of their own gain. Thus by their rash boldness they rush
intoo Gods office, and maliciously despise Christ's commandment: whereby it
comes too pass, that whatsoever they go about has ill success. First they
meene too provide for the body, and afterward (if they can find any leisure)
they have a little regard too the soul. I gather (will some say) for my Wife
and my Children. Thou do well, and I allow thy meening: for Nature teaches
and reason persuades, that the husband should care for his wife and children.
And Paul says: He that neglects his own, is worse than an infidel. But
gather thou according too Chrysts rule, and the example of this people. First
seek the kingdom of God: and next be diligent in thy vocation. If thou do
otherwise, thy children shall have small joy of thy labors. For thy labor is
cursed, and cursed is the fruit of thy labors, and it shall not profit thy
children. For this is a most true saying: The third descent enjoys not the
goods that evil means have got. Experience teaches, that the goods which
are evil gotten by the parents, are for the most part wastfully and shamefully
spent by their children among harlottes in brothelhouses, in tauerning, in
quarelling and brauling. Wherefore if we have any liking of goodlinesse, let us
follow Chrysts rule, and the example of this multitude. Which thing if we do,
we shall feel Gods hand too be bountiful toward us.

Of the second.
NOw let us look upon the circumstances of this present miracle, which are
many. First the Lord says to Philip: From whence might we buy bread that these
may eat? Why is this p^t (...) by the E^angelist? And he said this too try
him, that is too say, to prove what faith he had, who erewhyle had seen the
water turned intoo wine at Cana in Galilee.

But what answer makes Philip? Two hundredth penyvvoorth of bread would not
suffice them; that every one might take a little. Here Philip being
forgetful of the miracles that he had seen before, calls his own reason to
counsel, as if he should say. It is a great company, and it requires a great
sum of money to suffice them, and we have in manner nothing. For it is too no
purpose to make questions of bying bread, it is to us purpose to stand debating
this or that, where impossibility lets.

But there (...) another Disciple named Andrew, and says, Here is a boy that
has five barley loves and two fishes: But these are nothing for so great a
company. This disciple is past hope as well as his fellow.

But what says Christ too this geere? He says too them, make the folk sit
down: as if he had said, for as much as it seems a thing impossible too your
judgment, that so great a company should here be saved from perishing for
hunger: I whoo have said unto them and you, seek first the kingdom of God
and his righteousness, and all things else shabe cast unto you, will show by
deed, that my promis is not vain: do you no more but bid the people sit down
too eat.

Here the disciples obey their master: and to the number as it were of five
thousand men do settle them selves to their repast, looking too be fed by
miracle.

When they were set down, Jesus took those five barley loves and two fishes,
and first blissing them, and giving thanks, distributed as much as he listed to
his guestes. And after that they were suffised, he said too his disciples.
Gather up the broken meat that remains, that nothing be lost. And they
obeying him, gathered up twelve baskets full of broken meat. Ye see the miracle
whereby Christ confirms his divine power, his promis, and his office. What
must we learn hereby? Many wholesome doctrines may be gathered hereof.

First here is confirmed that which we have heard in the first place: namely
that they which follow Christ, shall not perish for want of food, according as
you have herd already. Secondly by this miracle is confirmed Christ's love
toward them that follow him. Of which thing also we have herd in the first
doctrine. Furthermore, by this miracle we are assured, that Christ (contrary
too the judgment of reason) can help when he will. For like as the kingdom
of Christ and the kingdom of the world are diverse: so may other things be
done in Christ's kingdom, than can be done in the kingdom of the world. For
he that is chief in Christ's kingdom is almighty, whose will is a deed. For
(as David says) he has done all things whatsoever he would, both in heaven
and earth. Therefore when the Gospel sets before us the wonderful works
of God concerning the resurrection of the dead, the life everlasting, the
eternal punishment of the wicked, and such other things: we must not call our
own reason too counsel, to demand of it what can be done: but we must ask
the question at Gods word only. For if God say ought too us, by and by we
must call too mind his mightynesse and his truth. In as much as he is mighty,
nothing is too him impossible: And because he is true, whatsoever he says, is
assured and stedy. For he says: Heaven and earth shall pass, but my words
shall not pass.

We are taught also by this miracle and deed of Christ's, that God will with
his blissing increase the small things of the godly. For suffisance consists
not in the great abundance of things, but in the Lords blissing which only
makes men rich. Whereupon Christ in the.xij. of Luke says: Man's life
consists not in the abundance of things that he possesses. And David in the
hundred and one and twentieth Psalm says: and there is abundance too them
that love thee. Oftentimes it falls out, that some poor man fearyng God, is
better fed with bread and potage, than a wicked rich man with his dainty
dishes and sweet wines. The poor Lazarus was better fed with the crummes
which he could scarce come by, than the rich Glutton with his delycate fare.
Let every one of us think upon these things advisedly, and wayt patiently for
the Lords promise, that he may bliss our labors, and increase our bread.
For he commanded us too pray and say: Give us this day our daily bread.

Ouermore Christ's deed teaches us too give God thanks for his gifts when
we go about too use his heavenly benefits, and too desire him that he will
halow his gifts with his blissing. For the creature of GOD is made holy by the
word, and by prayer, according as Paul teaches in the first too Timothy and
the fourth Chapter. But it comes too pass, that many, because they
knowledge not Gods benefits, and much less yield thanks too the gyuer, are
either needy, even in great plenty of things, or else are pressed with great
poverty. Wherefore I exhort you to follow this example of Christ, as often as
you meene too use Gods good gifts. And let this suffice for this present
miracle. Now ensues the third place.

Of the third.
WHen they had seen (says the Evangelist) the miracle that he had wrought,
they said: Of a truth this is that Prophet that should come intoo the world.
Therefore Jesus knovving that they would come and take him up too make him
king, fled ageyn intoo a Mountain by himself alone.

Here are two examples propounded: one of the multitude, and another of
Christ. In the multitude we see two things: The one is that by the miracle
they acknowledge the Messiah. Which thing is well done of the people. For the
Prophet Esaias foretold it should come to pass that when the Messiah came into
the world, he should work great miracles, by the which he should be known.
Thus far therefore the people judged aright. The other that we see in the
people, is the error of the people in judgment. Who perceiving by the miracle
that Jesus was the Messiah, would have made him king. But Christ's kingdom is
not worldly, according as he himself said unto Pylate: My kingdom is not of
this world. The people would feign have bin thankful to Christ, but they showed
not their thankfulness according too knowledge. Whereby we may learn of this
multitude too be tha^kful too God: how beit in as much as they were euershot
in their doing, let us embrace Gods word for a rule of thankfulness.

But when Christ understood the unskillful zeal of the people that were minded
too make him their King, he fled intoo a mountain, and suffered not himself
too be made king by the people. What may we learn heerby? First that which I
spoke of even now, that Chrysts kingdom is not worldly. Next, that we must
covet no honor contrary to our vocation. Let every man content himself with
that degree of estimation that he is called unto, and not take upon him an
other man's office, for desire of estimation. But let every one of us in his own
vocation look unto these three things. First let us labor lustily in the
fear of God. Secondly, let us not seek the praise of ye multitude, if we shall
have done any good. Thirdly, let this be our purpose, to serve God and his
church in the fear of God. They that do otherwise, do nothing aright, but
offend God, and utter their own pride, whom God suffers often to slide, that
their folly may be known, and so may suffer punishment for their presumption.
That the which thing happen not unto us let us pray God to govern us with his
spirit, too whom the only and everlasting god, be honor, praise and glory for
ever and ever Sobeit.

The fifth Sunday in Lent commonly called Passion Sunday. The Gospel. John.
viij.
Which of you can rebuke me of sin? If I say the truth, why do ye not
believe me? He that is God, heereth Gods words: ye therefore here them not,
because ye are not of god. Then answered the Jews, and said unto him: Say
we not well, that thou art a Samaritane, and have the Devil? Jesus ansvvered,
I have not the devil: but I honor my father, and ye have dishonored me. I
seek not mine own praise, there is one that seeks and judges. Verily,
verily I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never see death. Then
said the Jews unto him: Now know we that thou have the devil. Abraham
is dead, and the Prophets, and thou say: If a man keep my saying, he shall
never taste of death. Art thou greater than our father Abraham which is dead?
And the prophets are dead: whom make thou thy self? Jesus answered: If I
honor my self, mine honor is nothing: it is my father that honoreth me,
which you say is your God, and yet ye have not known him, but I know him.
And if I say I know him not, I shall be a liar, like unto you. But I know
him, and keep his saying. Your father Abraham was glad to see my day: and he
savv it, and reioysed. Then said the Jews unto him. Thou art not yet fifty
year old, and have thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them: Verily, verily,
I say unto you: Ere Abraham was borne, I am. Then took they up stones to
cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the Temple.

The exposition of the text.
This Gospel conteyneth a singular Doctrine concerning Christ, and a
gaynsaying of the same doctrine by Chrysts enemies. For like as Christ
defends his own person, office, and doctrine, and points out the true
fountayn of salvation: so the Jews Christ's enemies set them selves against
the person, office and doctrine of Christ, and plead against him with three
arguments which Satan has used from the beginning of the world forth. And
those three weapons are these: Hypocrisy, Sophistry, and Tyranny. This
Gospel therefore conteyneth the description of two Kingdoms, that is to say,
of Christ's, and of Satan's. For as Christ here mainteineth his own kingdom:
So the champions of Satan maynteyne their masters quarrel. But because it is
for our behoof too harken what Christ says, rather than what Satan thinks
against it: I will propou^d two lessons out of this gospel grounded upon
Chrysts words, and show what his enemies answered and did against either of
them. The places are two.

1 That like as Christ is the true Messiah: so every one that heereth him not,
is not of God. 2 That he which keeps Christ's words, is set free from
eternal death. And in these two chief lessons of this Gospel, I will set
forth the strife between Christ and the Jews, in declaration whereof, many
particular lessons do offer themselves.
Of the first.
OF the first lesson there be two parts. One, that Christ is the true
Messiah: the other, that he which heereth not Christ, is not of God. Concerning
the first part, the text has thus. Which of you can rebuke me of sin? If
I speak the truth why do not you believe me? The Jews had found fault
with Christ's doctrine, because Satan and his servants hate the truth. Christ
confirmed his doctrine, by innocence of life, the record of the Prophets, and
sundry miracles, so as the Jews might have known him too be the true
Messiah, and also have believed in him too their salvation. Therefore when as
they through the instinct of Satan, for hatred to Christ ward, and of love too
their own false doctrine, which they had received of their forefather, did
with all their power set themselves against Christ: Christ on the other side
thirsting man's salvation, defended his own innocentnesse, doctrine, and
office, too the intent he might at least wise, yet win some of his foes unto
God, and call them back from falling headlong intoo damnation. First therefore
he asks if any man can find fault with his conversation. Which of you
(says he) can reprove me of sin? As if he had said: I have lived openly
among you without fault from my cradle, so as none of you is able too reprove
me of any sin. Now seeing that so to do is the property of the Messiah,
why do you not acknowledge me too be the Messiah that was promised long ago?
For none is clear without Sin, but the Messiah only. In as much then as
none of you is able too conuicte me of sin, ye do foolishely: not only for
that ye acknowledge me not too be the Messiah, but also for that you
condemn me of sin. Heerevntoo he adds concerning his doctrine. If I
speak the truth unto you, why believe you me not? As if he had said, In
as much as I do by innocence of life, by record of the Prophets, and by many
miracles confirm my doctrine too be so true, that whither you will or nil ye
confess it to be true: why believe you me not? He is worse than mad that
persecuteth that thing as false, which he knows to be true. But this is the
nature of men. He that is noozeled in naughtynesse of a child, is hardly
reclaimed from his error. So great a matter it is too be enured too a thing
from the shell. But what may we learn here of Christ and the Jews? Of Christ,
all ministers of the word may learn, so too frame their life and doctrine,
that no man may have aught too reprove, either in their life or in their
doctrine. For albeit that only Christ was pure from all sin: yet
notwithstanding those that will teach his gospel with fruit must be clear from
open crimes. For the Poet says aright: It turns too the teachers shame,
When he himself is found too blame. For how (I pray you) can a tippling
Priest find fault with tiplers? How dare a whoorehunter chasten whooremongers
and aduoutrers? How shall a covetous person condemn covetousness? or an
usurer, usury? or a quareller, quarrels? or a proud man pride? In fine, he that
will rebuke others, must be fautlesse himself. As for those that say, do as I
teach, but do not as I do: they are not the ministers of Christ, but of
satan. For no man is too be accounted too teach, unless he express the
same thing in his life, that he teaches in his words. For so doothe Paul
teach Timothye: Be thou (says he) a pattern too the flock: That is to
say, express the thing in life, that thou teach in word, that the heerers
may behold in thee a lively example of thy doctrine. Whereupon Paul says of
himself: Be ye folowers of me, like as I am of Christ. Moreover, they that
here the Gospel, must learn somewhat of these Jews. Not too set them selves
ageynste Christ and their teachers as they did: but to take warning at their
damnation, and so too repent, that they may be saved by the benefit of Christ.

On the other part of the first lesson, the text speaks in this wise: He that
is of God, heereth the vvooord of God, and the cause why you here not, is for
that ye are not of God. He assigns the cause why the Jews so maliciously
despised Christ's doctrine: that is to wit, for that they were not of God but
of Satan. He speaks not here of man's nature which in very deed is of God,
but of men's maliciousness, which is of the devil. For this maliciousness
makes men unwilling to here Gods word. Here let every man examine himself,
and deem of himself, whither he be of God, or of the Devil. For he that
with a good will heereth Gods word, has Christ's record that he is of God.
Contrariwise, he that despises the word and persecuteth it, is undoubtedly of
the Devil: though the ungodly are not willing too here of this. But in like
manner as the Jews do here persecute and slander Christ that told them this:
so in likewise are the ministers of the Gospel persecuted at this day by those
whom in their sermons they declare to be of the Devil. What then say the
Jews here? They answered and said unto him: Say we not well that thou art
a Samaritane, and have a Devil? This is the craft of Satan: when he can not
deny the truth, he falls to flat railing. So also stands the case at this
day: when men are not able too deny, but that it is Gods word whereby their
wickedness is reproved: by and by they fall too railing, and seek for
somewhat too carye at in the ministers of the Gospel. But what does Christ
here? He answered: I have no devil but I honor my father, and you dishonor
me. And I seek not mine own glory, but there is one that seeks and
judges. In this answer Christ first denies himself to have a devil, which
thing the Lord confirms hereby, that he seeks Gods glory, which they do
not that have made a covenant with the devil. Afterward he turns the
slander upon the Jews, when he says: And you have dishonored me that honor
God. For those that rail upon them that honor God, must of necessity be led
by the Devil. Further more when he adds: I seek not mine own glory, but
there is one that seeks and judges: He remoueth from himself the desire of
vainglorie, and in his dutifulness commends himself to his father. By this
answer of Christ's, the ministers of the word may learn three things. First
(as much as may be) too defend themselves from the slanders wherewith they are
charged, least their ministry should be abased, when they themselves are
brought in contempt. Secondly, to cast those railers in the teeth with their
own sins, because they make war, not so much against men, as against God
him self. And thirdely, not to seek their own glory, but the glory of God,
and to persuade themselves assuredly, that God defends their innocence.

Of the second.
OF the second lesson the Lords words speak in this wise: Verily I say
unto you, if any man keep my sayings, he shall not see death for ever. These
words are too he thoroughly well weyd, as which contain the highest benefit
of Christ toward men, that is to wit, that he which keeps Christ's sayings
shall not see death for ever. Howebeeit too the intent we may the better
understand these things, I will show forth in order what they conteyn. For the
first thing too be observed here, is Chrysts oath. The second what manner a
ones we be without Christ. The third, what we obteyn by him. The fourth how
we may be able too beecome partakers of Christ's benefits.

His oath is to this end, too assure us of Gods truth against all the doctrines
of men and devils, against the reason of the flesh, yea and against the whole
kingdom of the Devil, which consists of Sophistry, Hypocrisy and Tyranny.
For it is not possible that the son of God should deceive, whoo has
warranted his doctrine by so great an oath.

What manner a folk be we without Christ? By Christ it comes too pass that
we see not everlasting death. Wherefore without Christ we are guilty of
everlasting Death. Now as there are four kinds of Life, so are there four
kinds of death also.

The first is the life of nature, whereby we naturally live in this world. This
life simply in respect of it self is good, because it is the gift of God, which
he promises in the fourth commandment: but it varieth according too the
state of men. Untoo Abraham it was good because he used it too Gods glory.
But unto Nero it was evil, because he abused it, both too the reproach of God
that gave it, and also to his own damnation. Against this natural life is set
natural death: which of it self is evil, because it is the punishment of
sin. Notwtstanding, it varieth according to the states of men. For like as
unto Abraham, this death was a passage unto a better life, and therefore was
good unto him: so unto Nero it was the gate of Hell, and therefore too him it
was evil.

The second life is of sin, namely whereby sin lives in man, and reigns
through his lusts, as it does in all the ungodly. This is always evil,
because it tends too damnation. Against this is set the death of sin,
whereby sin is mortified in us: which thing comes then too pass, when we
live in true repentance and the fear of God. This death of sin, is evermore
good, because it is the passage too eternal life.

The third life is of grace, whereby Christ lives in us through grace. This
is evermore good, because it is Gods gift, and the way too glory. Against this
is set the death of grace, that is too say, the privation of grace: which
thing comes too pass when we slide back again intoo sin, and cast away
faith. This is always evil, because it is the way intoo hell.

The fourth life is the everlasting life, by which the godly shall live with
God and his Angels in endless bliss. This life is most excellent good.
Against this is set everlasting death, which is endless damnation. Unto this
endless death are all men subject without Christ. For unless we be
delivered from this death by the benefit of Christ, it shall be our
perpetual reward for sin: as Paul says too the Romans the.6. chapter. Such
are we without Christ: that is, wretched, damned, and guilty of eternal death.

But what do we become through Christ? That doothe Christ assure us of by his
oath, namely that being delivered from everlasting death, we are rewarded with
eternal life, in which shall be joy without end.

How are we made partakers of Christ's benefits? This Gospel answers.
Verily verily I say unto, if any man keep my saying, he shall not see death for
ever. Then is this great treasure in Christ's words: which who so keeps,
has Christ, whoo only is the way too life What is too keep the word of
Christ? It is too here it, too learn it, and to believe it according to this
saying: He that believes in the son has life everlasting. Why so? because
he that believes is justified by his own faith, that is to say, is set free
from sin, endued with the righteousness of Christ, and accepted too
eternal life for Christ's sake. He therefore that coueteth eternal life, let
him mark well the things aforesaid, let him live in continual repentance, let
him here Christ's word, let him believe it, and let him continue in the faith,
even unto death. So shall it fall out, that this natural death shall be unto
him a passage unto eternal life

But what say the Jews too this healthful Doctrine of Christ's? Christ says:
He that keeps my word, shall not se death. The Jews answer, now we know
well thou have a Devil, Abraham and the Prophets are dead, and thou say if a
man keep my word, he shall not taste of death for ever. Art thou greater than
our father Abraham, who is dead? etc. Whom make thou thy self? As if they had
said: If thy word be of such power, that they which here thee shall not taste
of everlasting death, surely thou art greater than the prophets and our
patriark Abraham, which are dead, but this is false: for thou art not greater
than Abraham. Ergo, it is false that thou say, he that keeps my saying,
shall not taste of death for ever? Therefore thou art a blasphemer of God and
have a Devil. Christ answers, and says: If I glorify my self, my glory is
nothing, that is too wit, by your judgment. It is the father that glorifyeth
me. The meening of these words is this: The only begotten son of God is
greater than the servants of God, or than the adopted son of God. I am the
only begotten son of God, according as the father himself witnesses by his
own voice and woorks. But the Prophets and Abraham are Gods servants and Gods
children by adoption: wherefore I am greater than Abraham and the Prophets:
Ergo, it is no marvel though my word be of greater power than theirs. Then
used they a point of Sophistry. For, that which Christ spoke of the
everlasting death, they construed of the natural death, howbeit maliciously
Wherefore Christ proceeds too reprove them, saying: If I say I know him
not, I shall be a liar as you are. For you say you know him whom you know not.
But what is it to know god? First it is to know whoo he is, that is to wit,
the father, the son, and the holy Ghost. Secondly to believe in him. And
thirdly too order a man's life according to his will.

Howbeit, because the Jews gloried of their father Abraham, Christ proceeds
too show how vain this boasting is and says: Your father Abraham was glad to
see my day, and rejoiced. In these words Christ teaches three things. The
one, that he was before he took ma^s nature upon him, that is to say, from
everlasting, God everlasting. The other, that Abraham believed in him. For too
believe in Christ is spiritually too see him. And Christ is seen three ways:
in body only, as the Jews saw him that talked here with him: in spirit only,
as Abraham and we yt believe in him, do see him at this day: both bodily and
ghostly at once, as the saints yt were co^uersant with Christ upon the earth,
and as we that believe in him, shall behold him with our bodily eyes, after
the Resurrection of the dead. The middle seeing and the last seeing are
healthful: but the first is not healthful. Thirdly Christ in these words
teaches, that the Jews do not tread in the steps of their father Abraham, of
whom they make so great braggs. For Abraham acknowledged Christ, and believed
in him, and was glad of it. But the Jews do neither believe in Christ, nor
are glad of him, but rather condemn Christ. And therefore they make a false
brag of Abraham. But what answer make the Jews to this? Thou art not yet
fifty year old, and have thou seen Abraham? As much too say, as Abraham
died two thousand year ago and more, therefore thou could not see him,
because thou were not as then. Christ answers: Verily, verily I say unto
you, before Abraham was, I am. These words teach three things manifestly
concerning Christ. First that he is very God. Secondly that he is very man.
And thirdly that God and man Christ are not two persons, but one only divine
person, which took man's nature upon it, too the intent he might become a
sacrifice for the sins of the world. But what did the Jews in this case?
They took up stones too throvve at him. Here is described the last refuge of
Satan, which is Uiolence and Tyranny. Hythertoo they dealt against Christ
with railing, hypocrisy, and sophistry: and now in the end they take them too
their weapons. But Christ hides himself, and gets him out of the Temple. In
which deed he teaches two things. One is, that the church is preserved by
the power of God, against the tirannie of the world and the devil. Another is,
that he will not have his word nor himself in his word, too be among those
that persecute him openly: but only among them that receive and love him. To
this mediator with the father and the holy ghost, be honor, praise and glory
world without end. Amen.

Upon Palm Sunday. The Gospel. Math. xxj.
ANd when they drevv nigh too Jerusalem, and were come too Bethphage unto
mount Oliuete, then sent Jesus two of his disciples, saying unto them: go
intoo the town that lies over against you, and anon you shall find an Ass
bound, and a colte with her: loose them and bring them unto me. And if any
man say aught unto you, say ye the Lord has need of them: and straight way
he vvil let them go. All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the Prophet, saying: Tell ye the daughter of Sion: behold, thy king
comes unto thee meek sitting upon an Ass and a colte, the foale of an Ass
used too the yoke. The disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them, and
brought the Ass and the colte, and put on their clothes, and set him thereon.
And many of the people spread their garments in the way. Other cut down
branches from the trees, and strevved them in the way. Moreover, the people
that went before, and they that came after cried, saying: Hosanna too the son
of David: Blissed is he that comes in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the
highest. And when he was come too Jerusalem, all the City was moved,
saying: who is this? And the people said, This is Jesus the Prophet of
Nazareth, a City of Galilee. And Jesus went intoo the Temple of God, and cast
out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and ouerthrevve the tables of
the money chaungers, and the seats of them that sold Doves, and said unto them.
It is written: My house shall be called the house of prayer, but ye have made
it a den of thieves.

The exposition of the text.
THis gospel is red twice a year, that is to say the first Sunday in Aduent,
and upon Palmsunday, but not for one selfsame cause. For upon the first
Sunday in Aduent it is red, because the Prophecy of Zachary precheth in it of
the Lords coming intoo the world, whoo should be the king and Savior of them
that trusted in him. And this day, it is red for the Story, which was done
this day, namely the sixth day before he suffered.

The sum of this Gospel is, that Christ sitting upon the Ass and her colte
which the Disciples had brought unto him, rode toward Jerusalem, about whom
the people went crying. Hosanna to the son of David, strewing boughs, and
spreding their garments in the way. And also that when he was come intoo the
Temple, he drove out the biers and sellers. etc. The places are three.

1 The description of Christ the king and of his kingdom. 2 Of the citizens of
this kingdom, and of their duty. 3 Of the things that were done in the
Temple, after that Christ was entered into it.
Of the first.
OF this read in the first sunday in Aduent, which is there the second place.

Of the second.
THis was the third place in the first Sunday of Aduent: from whence you shall
fetch the exposition unto the title concerning the use of the Lords coming.

Of the third.
THe third place is the story of those things that happened in the temple after
that Christ was entered intoo it. This story may be divided intoo four parts,
which are these.

1 The driving of the buyers and sellers out of the temple, and the reason
thereof. 2 The healing of the lame and the blind in the temple. 3 The defenee
of the children that cried Hosanna, too the son of David. 4 The fretting of
the Princes, the Preests, and Scribes against Christ.
Of the first part.
THe Evangelist declares, that the Lord entered intoo the Temple, and drove
out the buyers and sellers: and moreover, that he adds the cause of his so
doings, when he says: My house shall be called a house of Prayer, but you
have made it a den of thieves. In this deed are three things too be weyed.
First the occasion of the deed: Secondly the deed it self: and thirdly, the
signification of the deed. The occasion of the deed was the insatiable
covetousness of the priests, who ordained these things for this cause, that
they which would offer, should for money have at hand what soever they would
wish for. For as much as the covetousness of these men is too be condemned,
the ministers of the Gospel must take heed to themselves, that they seek no
fetches too pill the people, as it fell out in the popery, where they had
Masses, pardons, and other trumperie too sell, to the damnation of themselves,
and of others. Secondly, Christ's deed is to be weyed. For in this deed he
testifies himself foo be a king and high Priest, and a looker to the religion
of God. Otherwise he had not of his own private authority put too his hand,
but had uttered the greef of his mind by words only. This deed of Christ's
must as well the godly magistrate, as the overseers of Gods religion follow,
that there be no defiling of Gods religion in the churches of christians. Other
that have not this authority, must be sorry and testify it in words that they
disallow the corruption of gods service. Thirdly the signification of this
deed is too be weyed. For as the temple was defiled: so he meant that there
should be a spiritual purging of the temple by his own death and glorious
resurrection.

Moreover in the cause of this deed (which is expressed by these words, my
house shall be called a house of prayer, etc.) we may learn two things. First
that the temple is the visible seat of Gods service. For all be it that every
place be a temple too the godly, in as much as it is lawful for them to call
upon God every where: yet notwithstanding, the temple or church, is the common
place wherein we must assemble to pray, and too do other things that perteine
to the outward discipline of godliness. Another is that we should reverence
the churches that are appointed too Gods service, and keep them clean from
Idols and Idol service. But (alas for sorrow) the Popish superstition sticks
so fast too the ribs of a number, that they cannot abide that an Idol should
be pulled out of their church. But heerof shall more be spoken at an other time.

Of the second.
THe second part of the things done by Christ in the temple, is, that he
healed the lame and blind that came unto him. By which deed he testifies,
first that he is the true Messiah. For the Prophet Esaias foretold, that when
Messiah was come, he should work such miracles. Secondly this deed shows
that the office of the Messiah is to destroy ye works of Satan. For when
Christ takes away the disease he remoueth the cause also: and the cause of all
diseases in sin. Thirdly he shows by an outward token, how men should use
ye church: for the healing of bodily diseases, is a representation of the
clensing of men's souls from spiritual filthiness. Therefore the church must
be appointed too this purpose, yt we may be purged there from our spiritual
diseases: which thing is then done, when we believe the word that is there
preached, and by believing are washed from our sins with the blood of Christ,
according as John says: The blue of Jesus Christ clen^eth us from all
iniquity.

Of the third part.
WHen the children tried in the temple, Hosanna too the Son of David, and
that the Pharisyes chid them: Christ took upon him to stand in defense of the
children and justifies their doing by record of the Scripture. Have ye not
red (says he) Out of the mouth of babes and suckelings have thou made perfect
thy praise.

Here we have to learn of both: that is to wit, of the children, and of
Christ. Of the children first, let our children learn too know Christ, and to
set forth his praise. For seeing that Christ says, that the kingdom of
heaven belongs too children: undoubtedly his will is, too be praised and
magnified by the faith and by the voice of children. But alas, there be many
children which not only are Ignorant of Christ, but also are so leudly brought
up, that they learn nothing, but too swear, too lie, too talk ribaudry, and
too practice other naughtiness: who shall not only be punished themselves
one day for their lewdness, but also their parents shall be punished of God,
for that they have so wickedly neglected the children that God has given them
to bring up in nurture and godliness. Ageine, we may learn of the children, to
confess Christ in the mids of his enemies: Here were present the Pharisees
and Scribes the cheef Governors of this common weal, who persecuted Christ,
and were angrye with all those that yielded any honor unto Christ. Yet could not
this cruelnesse so abashe the children, but that the more they were forbidden,
the more they cried out. For such is the strength of faith, that whersoeuer
it be, it can not be hidden, but always bursteth out intoo the praise of GOD.
This dutifulness is required at all men's hands, according too that saying
of Paul in the.x. to the Romans: with the heart we believe unto
righteousness, and with the mouth is confession made unto salvation.

By the doing of Christ we may learn, first that he will defend those that
believe him. And secondly, that after the example of Christ according too the
state of our vocation, we are bound to defend the innocence of others, and
specially too succor and maynteyne the godly; that they be not oppressed and
trodden down by the wicked.

Of the fourth part.
THe fretting of the Princes, the Preests, and the Scribes against Christ, was
foretold long ago by the voice of god and the Prophets. For where as God in the
third of Genesis told before hand that it should come to pass, that the seed
of the woman should tread down the serpents head: he meeneth that Satan
and his members heathenish and ungodly men, should persecute Christ and his
Church. And David in the second Psalm, not only foresawe in Spirit this
fretting of the Jews against Christ, when he says, why did the Heathen
frette, and why did the people imagine vain things? But also by the said place
of Genesis, he promises it should come to pass, that the woman's seed, (that
is to say, Christ and all that believe in him) should overcome Satan and his
members. Now in what thing this victory consists, David in the ^ame Psalm
declares, saying: Blissed are all they that put their trust in him. Wherefore
let us renounce Satan and his members, and with strong faith lean upon Christ
the vanquisher of Satan, and giver of eternal life, to whom be honor and
glory for evermore*

Of the Lords supper, the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and the xj.
Chapter.
THat which I delivered unto you, I received of the Lord. For the Lord
JESUS the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread and when he
had given thanks, he brake it, and said: take ye and eat ye, this is my
body which is broken for you. This do ye in remembrance of me. After the
same manner also he took the cup when Supper was done, saying: this Cup is
the new testament in my blud. This do as often as ye drink of it in
remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink of this
cup, ye shall shevve the Lords death til he come. Wherefore, who so ever
shall eat of this bread and drink of this cup vnvvorthely, shall be guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord. Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let
him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. For he that eats or drinks
vnvvorthely, eats and drinks his own damnation because he makes no
difference of the Lords body.

The exposition of the text.
THe cause why this feast is instituted ^s that the storye of the celebration
of the Lords Supper, should (as this day) be handled in the church, too the
intent the true use of this holy Supper may be understood. For when Christ
the day before he should suffer, instituted this supper, he gave commandment
to his disciples, that they should keep this supper in remembrance of him.
Wherefore it must needs be, that there are great ^ (...) causes why it should
be nedfull to make great account of the institution of this supper. For unless
we thoroughly and with good heed wey ^he causes of the institution of this
supper, we cannot sufficiently extol the goodness of our savior, who although
he were in most grievous sorrow for his death which was at hand, would
notwtsta^ding institute this supper, and leave it too his church, for a most
assured pledge of our salvation purchased by him, wherein the memorial of the
covenant established between God and man by the blud of Christ, might be
preserved for ever. Howbeit, to ye intent we may be the more distinctly
instructed concerning this supper, I will propounde three places, which by Gods
grace I will expound at this time. The three places.

1 The circumstaunces of the institution of this Supper, and the signification
thereof, wheruppon shall be gathered the full description of the same. 2 The
true and lawful trial of such persons as meene too use this Supper to their
profit. 3 The right use and lawful meditation of this Supper.
Of the first.
THere be many circumstances in the story of the Institution of this Supper,
which I will set forth in order, according too the text.

The first is of the time. For thus lie the words of the text. Our Lord Jesus
Christ in the same night that he was betrayed. For he instituted this Supper,
upon the Thursday late, before the next friday following that he should be
crucified. Wheruppon we may gather two things. First how great it must needs
be that Christ's love was toward us, whoo although he knew he should die the
next day, would notwithstanding institute this perpetual remembrance of his
benefits. Another is, that the celebration of this Supper must be kept by us
in true repentance, according as shall be said ageine afterward.

The second circumstaunce is of the guestes that were at this Supper. The
master of the feast was Christ: they that were at it, were his disciples good
and bad. The good surely were very weak: and the bad was but only Judas the
traitor. Hereby we are taught, that Christ will always be present at this
Supper, and that this Supper perteyneth too Christ's disciples. And although
the wicked do also mingle themselves in among the reast: yet notwithstanding
this Supper turns to their judgment and damnation, as shall be said ageine
hereafter.

The third circumstance is of blissiing. For he took bread and gave thanks. If
the son of God gave thanks before he used things: what becomes it us too
do.

The fourth circumstance is of the elements. For he used bread and wine in the
institution of this supper. For as the outward man is nourished with bread and
wine: so the inward man is spiritually fed with the body and blud of Christ.

The fifth circumstaunce is of the things that are present invisible at this
supper, as are the very body and the very blud of our lord Jesus Christ.

The sixth circumstance is the commandment: for he commands his Church to
keep continually the same manner of celebrating his supper. Do this says he.

The seventh circumstance is of the new covenant. This Cup (says he) is the
new testament in my blud. Why this Supper is called the new Testament, it
shall be told you afterward.

The eight circumstance is the end for which the Supper was instituted, which
end is expressed in these words. Do ye this (says he) in remembrance of
me. That is too say, As often as ye use this supper renew ye the remembrance
of my benefits, that is to wit, of my death and resurrection: and show ye
forth my death till I come.

The ninth circumstance follows upon the eight, namely that the celebration of
this supper belongs only too them that be of years of discretion, that may
be instructed of the Lords death, and that are able too give thanks openly
too the Lord for his benefits.

These are the circumstances of this supper that are too be weyed diligently.
Now will I show what things are meant by this Supper. For as the Pascall Lamb
had many significations in the old Testament: So also has this holy Supper of
Chrysts, which is succeeded in the place of the paschall Lamb. Therefore as the
Paschall Lamb, first did put the people in mind of the benefit done in old
time, that is too wit, of their deliverance from the bondage of Egypt: And
secondly confirmed the faith of them that used it: and thirdly shadowed the
sacrificing of Christ that was to come: and fourthly was a figure of the
everlasting covenant between God and man: So also has this supper sundry
significations: and that partly in respect of the time past, partly of the time
present and partly of the time too come, and partly of the euerlastingnesse.
Which significations I will declare as plainly as I can, God further both me
in teaching, and you in heering, that it may turn too Gods glory, and too the
healthful instruction of our selves.

What is the signification of the supper in respect of the time past? If we
look back too the time past, this holy supper is a certain calling too mind
of the Story of our Lords passion, according too Christ's commandment: Do
ye this in remembrance of me. As often then as we come too the Supper, or
other wise be present at the celebration of the supper, we must be mindful
of the death, buryall, and resurection of our Lord.

What is the meening of the supper in respect of the time present? First it
signifies that we are united and incorporated intoo Christ, and that
spiritually. For so teaches Paul when he says, The Cup of Blissing which
we bliss, is it not the communion of Christ's blud? The bread than we
break, is it not the communion of Christ's body? That is too say, the
partaking of the body and blud of Christ, makes us to have a certain
communion with Christ. Agein, it signifies that we also are united among our
selves by ye spirit of Christ, as many of us as are partakers too gither of
this supper. Of which communion, the one lofe is a token, as Paul testifyeth
when he says: because as there is one lofe: so we being many are one body.
For as the lofe is made of many corns: so as many as communicate toogyther,
do grow together intoo one body spiritually, the head whereof is Christ: and
this is the cause that Paul calls the Supper a communion.

Hereupon one of the holy fathers says. The supper is called a Communion:
first, for that by it we communicate with Christ: secondly, for that we be
made partakers of his flesh and of his Godhead: and thirdely, for that by it we
communicate and are united together one with another.

Moreover by this supper is meant, that we are spiritually nourished, and
sustained or fed with the body and blud of Christ. For like as bread and wine
do nourish, encrese, preserve, and comfort men's bodies: So does Christ's body
and blud nourish, increase, preserve, and comfort our souls unto everlasting
life, if so be that true fath be found in us.

What is the signification of this Supper in respect of the time to come? This
holy supper signifies, that by the power of Chrysts body raised from the dead,
our bodies also shall one day rise ageyn, that they may be made like unto the
glorious body of Christ. Whereupon Paul says: If Christ be risen agein, we
also shall rise ageine, that we may enjoy the continual presence of Chrysts body
for evermore. Whervppon certain of the holy fathers have termed this Supper
conduct money, because it puts them that receive it before their death, in
mind, that Christ is unto them the passage from these troubles, to eternal
bliss.

What is the signification of the Lords Supper in respect of the
euerlastingnesie? It is a perpetual warrant of Gods favor toward men, at no
time subject unto change, and therefore the Lord himself calls this his
supper the new Testament, as which shall never become old at any time. How be
it too the intent this thing may be understood more clearly, I will (as breefly
as may be) declare what things are most meet in every Testament, and how all
those things which ought to meet in every last will or testament do meet
here: and moreover what the new testament is.

In every testament or last will, there be five things. First the Testator that
makes the will. Secondly the goods which the Testator bequeatheth. Thirdly the
heirs that are made, Fourthly the death of the testatour. And fifthly the
conditions that are to be kept of them that are made heirs by the will. In
this new Testament the testator is Christ. The heritage is the possession of
eternal life. The heirs are the children of God, that is to say, all that
believe in Christ. The death of Christ the testator followed presently after.
For he died, was buried, and rose ageine the third day. The conditions too be
observed of the heirs that are named, are, that they should believe in Christ,
and obey him, and continue in innocence of life unto the end: And if they fall
intoo sin, that they earnestly repent them before their death. Heerevppon we
may now in this wise conclude what the new Testament is. The new Testament is
is an everlasting covenant, stablished by the death of the Testator Jesus
Christ, concerning the grace of God, the forgiveness of sins, and the free
gift of eternal life promised too all nations and people that believe in
Christ crucified.

Of the second.
WHen Paul says: Let a man examine himself, and so eat of that bread and
drink of that cup: for he that eats vnvvorthely, and drinks
vnvvorthely, eats and drinks his own damnation. These words of Paul
confirm four things. First that the use of the Supper ought too be in the
church. Secondly that it is necessary for men to try themselves before they
use this Supper. Thirdly that he which receives this Supper unworthily, does
sin most grievously. And fourthly, that this supper is too be ministered
only unto those that are able too examine themselves. I will speak of the
second only; that is to say: how every man ought to examine himself, that
minds too use this Supper too his behoof.

How then must he prove himself, that will use this supper? That does Paul
teach, the second Epistle too the Corinthians and ye.xiij. Chapter in these
words: Examine your selves whither you be in faith: examine your selves. Know
ye not your selves that Christ is in you? By which words is understood,
that rightful trial consists in this, that true Faith and the presence of
Christ be felt in us, that is to say, (too use plainer words:) He is tried
and comes woorthely too Christ's holy Supper, that comes too it reverently
in the fear of God, in true repentance, in true faith, and with a Godly
purpose. And on the contrary part, he that preaseth to it irreverently without
the fear of god, without true repentance, without true faith, and with purpose
to sin: comes unworthily, not making difference of the body and blud of the
Lord, and he eats his own damnation. Therefore whosoever approaches too
this supper: and has a purpose to continue in his sins, he is a blasphemer
and receives the sacrament with Judas.

But too the intent rude people should not rashly presume to come to this
supper, the discipline of confession and absolution is instituted in our
churches, too very good purpose. For this discipline avails greatly to this,
that a man may orderly examine himself.

Howbeit too ye intent we may judge aright, concerning confession and
absolution: first it is too be known, that as there be two sorts of
confession, so there be two sorts of absolution also. One kind of confession,
is to God only: that is too wit, when a man confesses his sin before God,
acknowledges himself to be a sinner, and desires forgiveness for Christ's
sake, and without such confession, none (of full years) is saved. In this wise
did David confess himself when he said: Have mercy on me O God, for I have
sinned against thee. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for no man
living shall be justified in thy sight. So confesses Daniel himself, when he
says: We have sinned and done amiss with our fathers. So did ye publican
when he durst not lift up his face unto heaven: but struck his breast, saying: O
God be merciful too me ^ sinner. Unto this confession answers the
absolution that is given by only God. And this is done when a man believes his
free promise. For whosoever believes, is justified from sin, that is to say,
set free from sin. For since that sin is a falling away from the law and
will of God, with a binding unto everlasting death and damnation: undoubtedly
absolution must be the releasing of the believing man, from that bond whereby
he is bound to everlasting death and damnation. So was Manasses assoyled, so
was David, so was the thief upon the cross, so was Mary Magdalene. So are we
assoyled daily, when we say with a true heart, I believe the remission of
sins: and when we pray with faith, forgive us our trespasses. Let this
suffize concerning the first kind of confession, and the absolution of the same.

An other Confession is of Discipline, when a man for counsel, instruction,
and confirmation of his Faith, comes to the minister of the Church,
acknowledges himself a sinner, craves comfort, and desires too be
instructed with Gods word, too the intent his conscience may be made quiet. In
this case the minister of the word must instruct him that so confesses him
self. And if he know him, he must lay before him the sins that he has
perceived by him. He must show him the greatenesse of Gods wrath toward
unrepentant persons. And on the other side, if in confessing himself, he be
sorry for his sin, and promise amendment: he must comfort him with the
promises of the Gospel. And if he say he believes the promises, the minister
must in Christ's name assure him that GOD is at one with him, and denounce
unto him the forgiveness of his sins, in the name of the Father and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost: warnyng him earnestly too shun sin hereafter,
that the end of him become not worse than the beginning. And thus much
concerning the second kind of confession, and the absolution that answers
the same. As concerning the public confession and absolutio^, I must entreat
thereof at another time: and also of the Confession yt is made to the brethren
whom we have offended.

Of the third.
NOw remains that we tell which is the right use and lawful meditation of
this holy Supper. Then since this holy Supper of Christ, is the Sacrament of our
redemption by the sacrifice of Christ: these things are orderly too be
considered, and earnestly weyed in the receiving of this holy Supper.

First, the Communicants must call too mind the cause of Christ's death,
namely the sin of mankind. Romans 4. He died for our sins. Esaias. 43. He smote
him for our iniquities.

The second thing that is too be thought upon, is the end of Christ's
sacrifice, which is: the redeemyng of us from the bondage of sin and death. 2. Corinthians. 5. For he has made him too be sin, which knew no sin, that we by
his means should be that righteousness which is allowed before God. 1.
John. 1. The blud of Jesus Christ clenzeth us from all iniquity. John the
first: Christ is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world.

Thirdly, by the excellency of this sacrifice, we must consider how great the
wrath of GOD must needs have bin against Sin, which could not be appeased
by any other sacrifices, than the one sacrifice of the only begotten son of
God.

Fourthly the exceeding great mercy of GOD is too be thought upon, who would
receive us wretched sinners intoo favor, for the satisfaction of his son.

Fifthly, the great love of the son of GOD is too be thought upon, who
taking man's nature upon him, was content to become a sacrifice for us, and too
remove gods wrath unto himself, and satisfy Gods justice with the punishment
of the cross. All these things will the son of God have us too think upon,
when he bids this supper too be made in remembrance of him.

When we thus muse upon these things, beholdying Gods wrath, there rises up a
sorowfulnesse: and by thinking vpvon Gods mercy and the propiciatorie
sacrifice, there springs up faith: out of both which, there issues
thankfulness, confession, patience and other virtues, of which this supper
puts us in mind.

Too be short, as the Son of God makes a covenant with us too receive us
mercifully: so let us on the other side make a covenant with him too believe
him, and to receive his benefits thankfully. Which thing that we may
unfeignedly do, Jesus Christ the maker of this supper grant unto us. And
unto him, with the father, and the holy ghost, be honor and glory for ever.
Amen.

The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ according too the order of the story,
compiled by laying the four Evangelists toogither.
ANd when they had sung an hymn, Jesus going out, vve^t as he was vvo^t over
the broke Cedron intoo mount Oliuet, and his Disciples followed him. Then said
he unto them: All you shall suffer offense by me this night. For it is
written, I vvil strike the shepperd, and the sheep of the flock shall be
scattered. But when I am risen ageyn, I vvil go before you Intoo Galilee. And
Peter answering, said unto him. Though al be offended by thee, yet will I
never be offended. Jesus said unto him: verily I say unto thee, that this
night before the Cock crovve twice, thou shall deny me thryce. But he said
more earnestly: No though I should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee.
In likewise also said all his other Disciples. Then came Jesus with them
intoo a town that is called Gethsemany, where was a garden, intoo which he
entered and his disciples with him. And Judas the traitor knew the place,
because Jesus had oftentimes resorted thither with his Disciples. Then Jesus
said unto them: Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. And taking with him
Peter, James, and John the two sons of Zebedee, he began too be abashed and
too be heavy, and too be grievously vexed. And he said too them: my soul
is heavy even unto death. Tarry ye here and watch with me, and pray that
ye fall not into temptation. And he went from them as it were a stones cast,
and kneeling down fell flat too the ground upon his face, and prayed that if
it were possible that hour might pass from him: saying: Abba father, All
things are possible too thee. Let this cup pass from me. Nevertheless not as
I will, but as thou will. And he came to his Disciples, and findyng them a
sleep, said unto Peter: Simon art thou a sleep? Could thou not do so much
as watch one hour with me: Awake ye and pray, that ye enter not intoo
temptation: Verily the spirit is ready, but the flesh is weak. Ageine he
went away the second time, and prayed saying: Father, if this cup can not pass
from me, but that I must needs drink of it, thy will be done. And
returning, he found them ageine asleep. For their eyes were heavy, and they
wist not what to answer. Then leaving them, he went his way ageine, and
prayed the third time the same words, saying: If thou will, thou can remove
this cup from me: Nevertheless, thy will be done, and not mine.

And there appeered to him an Angel from heaven that comforted him. And being
stricken with sorrow, he prayed very long: and his swet was as drops of blud,
tricklyng down upon the ground. And when he was risen up from his prayers,
and was come again too his Disciples, he found them a sleep for very
pensiveness: And he said unto the: Sleep ye from henceforth, and take your
rest. Why sleep ye? it is enough: Behold, the hour is at hand, and the
Son of man is delivered intoo the hands of sinners. Up let us go: he is at
hand that betrayeth me. But pray ye least ye enter intoo temptation.

And by and by, while he was yet speaking, Behold, Judas one of the twelve,
having taken a band of men, and officers of the high Preests, and the
Phariseys, and the elders, and the Scribes, with a great company following him
came thither with lanternes and torches, with svvoords and clubs. Now this
traitor had given them a common watch word, saying: VVhomsoeuer I kiss, he
it is: Lay hands upon him, and carry him away warely. Jesus therefore knowing al
things that should happen unto himself, went forth, and said. Whom seek ye?
They answered unto him, Jesus of Nazareth: Jesus said unto them: I am he. And
Judas that betrayed him stood among them. As soon therefore as he had said to
them, I am he, they went back, and fell down too the ground. Then asked he
them ageyn, whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered, I
have told you that I am he. Therefore if ye seek me, let these men go
their ways, that the word might be fulfilled which he had spoken: Of them
whom thou have given me, I have lost none. And Judas stepped out unto Jesus too
kiss him: and coming forthwith unto him, said: Hail master, and kissed
him. And Jesus said unto him: Friend, wherefore co^mest thou? Judas, betrayest
thou the son of man with a kiss? The^ came they too Jesus, and laid hands upon
him, and took him. And they that were about him seeing what was toward, said
unto him: Sir, shall we strike with the sword? Simon Peter therefore having a
sword, drew it and smote the servant of the high priest, and cut off his right
ear. And the servants name was Malchus. And Jesus answering, said: Give me
leave thus far forth. And he said unto Peter: Put up thy sword intoo the
scaberd. For all that take the sword in hand, shall perish with the sword. Do
thou not think that I can now pray too my father, and he will give me mo than
twelve legio^s of angels? Shall I not drink of the cup, which my father
has given me? How then shall the scriptures be fulfilled? for so it must
needs come too pass. And as soon as he had touched the servant ear, he
made him whole. And in the same hour Jesus said unto them that were come too
take him, namely too the cheef preests and the officers of the temple, and the
elders: Ye come out unto me with swords and clubbes, as it were too take
some thief. I sat daily among you, teaching in the temple, and ye stretched
out no hand against me. But this is your very hour, and the power of
darkness, that the scripturs may be fulfilled. And all this was done that
the writings of the Prophets might be fulfilled. Then all his disciples
forsaking him, fled. And a certain young man followed him being naked, saving a
sheet cast about him, and the young men caught hold of him. But he leaving his
sheet behind him, fled away naked from them.

The band of men therefore, and the petycaptaine, and the officers of the Jews
took Jesus, and bound him, and led him away too Annas first. Annas was father
in law too Cayphas, who was high priest for that year. And Cayphas was he that
gave the counsel too the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die
for the people. And they led him too Cayphas the high priest, where all the
high Preests, the Scribes, and the elders were assembled. And Simon Peter and
that other disciple followed Jesus aloof unto the Bishops palace. And that
other disciple was known too the high priest, and entered with Jesus intoo the
Bishops palace. But Peter stood without at the gate. That other disciple
therefore which was known too the high priest, went out and spoke too the wench
that kept the door, and brought-in Peter. And the servants and officers stood
warming themselves at a fire of coals beneath in the mids of the hall, for it
was cold. And Peter also was standing with them, and warming himself too see
the end. The wench therefore of the high priest, which was the dorekeper,
beholding Peter warming himself by the fire, looked earnestly upon him, and
said: Thou also wart with Jesus, for thou art art also one of this man's
Disciples. But he utterly denied it before them all, saying: Woman I am not,
I know him not, nor I wot not what thou say.

Then the high Priest examined Jesus of his disciples and of his doctrine.
Jesus answered him: I have spoken openly unto the world. I have always
taught in the Temple and in the Synagoge whereas all the Jews resort, and in
secret have I spoken nothing. Why ask thou me? Ask them that herd me what
I have spoken too them. Behold they know what I have said unto them. When
he had said these words, one of the officers standing by, gave Jesus a blow,
saying: Answerest thou the high Priest so? Jesus answered: If I have spoken
evil, bear witness of the evil, but if I have spoken well, why do thou
smite me? Annas was he that had sent him bound to Cayphas the hye priest.

And Simon Peter stood warming him in the porche. And anon after his first
denial, as he went out intoo the porche, the Cock crew. And an other wenche
saw him, and began ageine too say too them that stood by, this man also was
with Jesus of Nazareth, and hereupon they said unto him: Art not thou also one
of his disciples? and another said: Thou also art one of them. And he denied it
ageine with an oath, saying: Man, I am not, neither do I know the man. And a
while after, about the space almost of an hour, a certain other man avouched
with them that stood by, saying: Verily thou also art one of them. For thou art
both a Galilean, and thy speech bewrays thee. One of the high Preests
servant, (the Kinsman of him whose ear Peter smote of) said unto him: Did
not I see thee in the gardein with him? Then began he too curse and forswear,
I know not this man of whom you talk. And immediately as he was yet speaking,
the Cock crewe ageine. And the Lord turning him self about looked upon
Peter. And Peter remembered the words of the Lord Jesus, whoo had said unto
him, before the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thryce. And he went out
of the gate and wept bitterly.

And the chief preests and elders, and the whole counsel sought false
witness against Jesus, that they might put him too death, and they could not
bring it too pass, no not when many false witnesses came in, for their
allegations were not sufficient. At the last there came two false witnesses,
and bare false witness against him, saying. We have heard him say, I can and
will destroy this temple of God that is made with hands, and in three days
will build up another made without hands. And yet were not their witnesses
sufficient so. And the cheef priest rising up in the mids, examined Jesus,
saying: Answerest thou nothing? Why do these men bear witness against thee?
But Jesus held his peace, and answered nothing at all. Ageine, the high priest
asked him and said. Art thou that Christ the son of the blissed? I adjure
thee by the living God, to tell us whither thou art Christ the son of the
living God: Jesus said unto him: Thou have said, I am. Nevertheless I say
unto you, hereafter ye shall see the son of man sitting on the right hand
of power, and coming in the clouds of the air. Then the chief priest rent
his garments, saying: he has blasphemed, what need we witnesses any more?
Behold now, ye have herd his blasphemy, what think you by it? And they all
condemned him, saying. He is worthy of death. Then the men that held Jesus,
mocking him did spit in his face, and buffeted him with their fistes. And other
some covering his face, (specially the servants) clapped him on the face with
their hands, saying: Reed unto us Christ, who is it that struck thee. And many
other things said they in scorn against him.

And as soon as morning came, all the high Preests and Scribes, and elders of
the people, and the whole counsel assembled, and laid their heads toogither
against Jesus, that they might put him too death. And they led him intoo the
consistory, saying. Art thou the same Christ? tell us. And he said too them:
If I shall tell you, ye believe me not. And ageine, if I shall ask you any
question, you will not answer me, nor let me go. From this time shall the
son of man be sitting at the right hand of the power of God. And they all
said unto him: art thou then the son of God? who said: you say that I am.
And they said: why seek we for any further witness? For we have heard it of
his own month. And the whole company of them rising up, led Jesus bound from
Cayphas intoo the common hall, and delivered him unto Pontius Pilate the
President. And it was early days.

Then Judas that had betrayed him, seeing that he was condemned, repented him,
and brought back the thirty pieces of silver too the chief Preests and the
elders, saying: I have sinned in betraying the giltlesse blood. And they
answered, what is that too us? Look thou too that. And casting down the silver
pieces in the Temple, he went his way and hung him self with a halter: and as
he hung, he burst a sunder in the mids and all his bowels fell out. And the
chief of the Preests taking up the money, said: it is not lawful too put them
intoo the common Treasure, because it is the price of blood. Wherefore taking
counsel upon the matter, they bought with those pieces of silver, (which were
the reward of iniquity) a potters feeld too bury strangers in. And it was
known too all that dwelt in Jerusalem, in so much as that feelde was called
in their moother tung Akeldama, that is too say, the feelde of blood, even
unto this day. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the
Prophet, saying: And they took thirty pieces of silver, the price of him
that was sold, whom they bought of the sons of Israel, and gave the money
for a potters feelde, as the Lord has appointed me. How be it the Jews
entered not intoo the common Hall, lest they might be de^iled, but that they
might eat the Passover. Pilate therefore went out unto them, and said: what
accusation bring you against this man? They answered and said unto him. If
this man were not an offender, we would not have delivered him unto thee.
Then said Pilate unto them: Take him you your selves, and judge him according
unto your own Law. Then said the Jews unto him: It is not lawful for us
too put any man too death. Too the intent the word of Jesus might be
fulfilled, which he had spoken, signifying what death he should die.

And the chief Priests and elders began too accuse him grievously, and too
lay many things unto his charge, saying: We have taken this man perverting
our nation, and forbidding too pay Tribute unto Caesar, and affirming him
self to be an anointed King. Then Pilate went ageine intoo the common Hall,
and calling Jesus examined him, saying: Art thou that King of the Jews? Jesus
standing before him, answered. Speak thou this of thy self, or have others
told it thee of me? Pilate answered: Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and thy
chief Preests have delivered thee too me, what have thou done?

Jesus answered. My kingdom: is not of this world. If my kingdom were of
this world, verily my servants would fight for me, that I should not be
delivered too the Jews. But now is not my kingdom from hence. Pilate therefore
said unto him. Art thou then a King? Jesus answered: Thou say, I am a King.
Too this intent was I borne, and for this purpose came I intoo the world, that
I may bear witness unto the truth. Pilate said unto him: what is truth?
And when he had said this, he came forth ageine too the Jews, and said
unto them: I find no fault at all in this man. And when the chief Priests
and elders accused him, he answered nothing. And Pilate examining him ageine,
said: Answerest thou nothing? Behold, How many matters they lay unto thy
charge, heerest thou not? And he answered him not too any word, in so much
a^ the Presidente woondered very sore. But they became more fierce against
him, saying: He has stirred the people, teaching through all Iewrie,
beginning at Galilee even unto this place. When Pilate herd speaking of
Galilee, he demanded of him whither he were a man of Galilee. And as soon
as he knew that he perteyned too Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him unto Herod,
who also was at that time at Jerusalem.

When Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad: for he had bin desirous of a
long time too see him, because he had hard much of him, and he hoped he should
have seen some miracle wrought by him. And he asked him many questions. But he
made him none answer. Also the chief Preests and Scribes stood laying sharply
to his charge. And Herod with his men of war despised him. And when he had
mocked him, he put a white garment upon him, and sent him back again to Pilate.
And Pilate and Herod were made friends among themselves the same day: for before
that time there was grudge betwixt the^.

Then Pilate calling together the chief Preests and the Magistrates and the
people, said unto them. Ye have brought this man unto me as a peruerter of
the people, and behold in examining him before you, I find no fault in this
man concerning those things that you accuse him of, no nor Herod. For I sent
you over too him, and behold nothing worthy of death is done unto him. I will
therefore chastise him, and let him go.

Now at that feast it was of custom, that the president must let loose to the
people, some one prisoner, whom soever they would demand. Now he had at that
time in prison a notorious fellow, namely a murderer, that was called
Barrabas, who with other fellows of his faction, was cast into prison, for
committing murder in a tumult which he had raised in a certain city. And the
people crying out with one voice whollye together, began to ask importunately
that he should do as he had always done unto them. Therefore as they were
clustered together, Pylate answered unto them. Ye have a custom that I should
let one loose unto you at Easter: therefore whither will you that I let go unto
you Barrabas, or Jesus that king of the Jews which is called Christ? For he
knew that the chief Priests had delivered him for envy. Now as he was
sitting in the place of judgment, his wife sent unto him, saying: Have thou
nothing too do with that rightuous man, for I have suffered many things for
him this night in my sleep. But the chief of the preests and the elders
stirred the people, persuading them too desire too have Barrabas let loose to
them, and too have Jesus put too death. The president answering, said unto
them: which of the two will ye that I let loose unto you? And all the whole
multitude cried out toogither, saying: Away with this man and let looce too us
Barrabas. And Pilate spoke too them agein, and being desirous too have let go
Jesus, said: What will ye then that I do unto Jesus whom you call King of
the Jews? And they all cried ageine: crucify him, crucify him. The^ said he
too them the third time. What evil has he done? I find no fault in him
worthy death. I will therefore chastise him and let him go. But they cried out
the more, saying: Let him be crucified. And they cried importunately upon him,
requiring that he might be crucified. And the noise of them and of the high
Preests prevailed.

Then Pilate took Jesus and whipped him. And the presidentes men of war
carried him away intoo the Palace, which is the Counsel house, and called unto
him all their band, and vnclothing him, put upon him a purple garment: and
platting a crown of thorn, set it upon his head, and gave him a reed in his
right hand, and bowing their knees before him, began to salute him in mockage,
saying: Hayle king of the jews. And they buffetted him. And when they had
beespitted him, they took the Reed and smote him on the head, and kneeling
down woorshipped him.

Pilate therefore went forth ageine, and said unto them. Behold I bring him
out unto you, that you may know I find no cause in him. Jesus therefore went
forth wearing a crown of thorn and a robe of purple. And Pylate said too
the^: Behold the man. When the high preests and officers saw him, they cried
out, saying: crucify him, crucify him. Pilate said unto them. Take you him,
and crucify him. For I find no cause in him. The Jews answered him: we have
a law, and according too our law he ought too die, because he has made him
self the son of God. When Pilate had heard this saying, he was more afraid.
And he entered again intoo the common Hall, and said unto Jesus. From whence
art thou? But Jesus made him none answer. Then said Pilate too him: speak
thou not too me? Know thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and
that I have power too let thee go. Jesus ansvvered: Thou should not have any
power against me, unless it were given thee from above. Therefore he that
delivered me unto thee has the greater sin. From that time forth, sought
Pilate to acquit him. But the Jews cried out, saying: If thou quit him, thou
art not Caesar's friend. For vvhoo so ever makes him self a King, is against
Caesar.

When Pilate herd that word, he brought Jesus forth and sat down too give
judgment in a place which is called Lithostrotos, and in Hebrew Gabbata. And
it was about the sixth hour of the day of the preparation of the passover And
he said to the Jews: Behold your king. And they cried away with him, away with
him, crucify him. Pilate said unto them. Shall I crucify your King? The high
Priests answered, we have no King but Caesar. Then Pilate seeing he auayled
nothing, but that the noise increased more, willing too satisfy the people,
adjudged him too be dealt with according too their demand. And taking water
he washed his hands before the people, saying: I am giltlesse of the blud of
this righteous person. Look you too it. And all the people answering, said:
his blood be upon us and upon our children.

And he let loose Barrabas unto them, whoo for insurrection and murder had bin
cast in prison according to their demand. And having whipped and mocked Jesus,
he delivered him intoo their hands too be crucified.

The souldyers taking Jesus, put of his purple garment, and put upon him his
own garments, and led him away bearing his own cross to be crucified. And as
they were going out, they found one passing by, a man of Cyrene, named Simon,
coming from his ground, the father of Rufus and Alexander. Him they laid
hold upon, and compelled him to take up his cross. And they laid the cross
upon him, that he might carye it after Jesus. And there followed him a great
multitude of people, and women, that wept and bewailed him. Jesus turning him
to the women, said unto them. Ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me,
but weep for your selves, and for your children. For behold, the days shall
come, in which they shall say: blessed be the barreyn, and the wombes that have
borne no children, and the breasts that have not given suck. Then shall they
begin too say too the mountayns fall upon us: and to the hills, cover us. For
if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the
withered? And there were two other also led with him, that were offenders, to
be put to death.

And they led him to a place which in Hebrewe is called Golgatha, which is by
interpretation a place of dead men's skulles. And there they gave him eyzle or
mirrhe wine mixed with gall, too drink. And when he had tasted of it he would
not drink.

And they crucified him in Golgatha, and with him two thieves: one on his
right hand, and another on his left, and Jesus in the midst. And the scripture
was fulfilled which says, and he was acounted among the wicked. And it was
the third hour when they crucified him. And Jesus said: Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do.

Moreover, Pylate wrate a title co^teyning the cause of his death, and they set
it upon the cross over the head of Jesus: the writing was this: Jesus of
Nazareth king of the Jews. This title did many of the Jews read, because the
place where Jesus was crucified was near unto the City. And it was written in
Hebrew, Greek and Latin letters. Then said the high Preests of the Jews unto
Pylate: write not king of the Jews but that he said: I am king of the Jews.
Pylate answered: That which I have written, I have written.

Then when the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they took his garments, and made
four pieces, unto every soldier a piece, and his cote also. But this cote of
his was without seam, woue^ from the top throughout. Therefore they said among
them selves: Let us not cut it, but let us cast lots for it whose it shall be:
that the scripture might be fulfilled which was written by the Prophet,
saying. They parted my raymente among the^, and upon my cote did they cast lots
And they sat down and watched him there. And the soldiers verelye did these
things, and the people stood looking on.

Also near unto the Cross stood the mother of Jesus, and his mothers sister,
Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. Therefore when Jesus saw his
mother, and the disciple whom he loved standing by, he said to his mother,
woman heholde thy son. And afterward he said to his disciple, behold thy
mother. And from that hour the disciple took her for his own.

And those that passed by, rayled upon him, wagging their heads, and saying:
VVo be to thee that destroyest the temple, and buyldest it up again in three
days. Save thy self. If thou be the son of God come down from the cross.
Likewise the high Priests jesting among them selves, with the Scribes and the
elders, and the people said: he has saved others but him self he cannot
save. If this be Christ King of Israel, the beloved of God, let him save him
self, and let him come down from the cross out of hand, that we may see and
believe him. He trusted in GOD, let him deliver him now if he will have him:
for he said, I am the son of God. The same thing also did the thieves that
were crucified with him cast him in the teeth with, railing upon him. The
Soldiers also coming unto him, mocked him: and offering him vinegar, said
unto him: If thou be that King of the Jews, save thy self. And one of the
offe^ders that hung by him railed upon him, saying. If thou be Christ, save
thy self and us. The other aunswering, rebuked him, saying: Do not thou
fear God neither, seeing that thou art condemned as well as we? And we surely
are condemned justly, for we receive according too our deeds, but this man
has done none evil. And he said too Jesus. Lord remember me when thou come
intoo thy kingdom. And Jesus said to him: Verily I say unto thee, this day
shall thou be with me in Paradise.

From the sixth hour there fell darkness upon the whole earth, unto the
ninthe hour, and the Sun was darkened. And about the ninthe hour Jesus
cried with a loud voice, saying: Eli, Eli, Lamazabathani: which if a man
interpret it, is. O God my God why have thou forsaken me? Some of the standers
by, when they hard him say so, said: Behold he calls for Elias. And Jesus
knowing that as the^ all things were finished, too the intent the scripture
might be fulfilled, said, I thirst. There was set by a vessel full of vinegar,
and by and by one of them running too it, took a spundge, and filling it with
vinegar and Hysope, put it upon a Reed, and put it to his mouth that he should
drink, and with the rest said. Let him alone, let us see if Helias will come
and take him down. Therefore when Jesus had taken the vinegar, he said: it is
finished. And he cried ageine with a loud voice, saying: Father, intoo thy
hands I commit my spirit. And as soon as he had spoken these words, he
bowed down his head and gave up the ghost.

And behold, the veil of the Temple rent a sunder in the mids from the top
too the ground, and the earth shook, and the stones claue a sunder, and the
graves opened, and many bodies of the Saints that had slept arose, and going
out of their graves, after his resurrection came into the holy City, and
appeered unto many.

And the Captain that stood over against him, and those that were with him
watching Jesus, seeing that he had given up the ghost with such a cry, and
seeing the earthquake, and the things that had bin done, were sore afraid, and
glorified God, saying. Of a truth this was a righteous man and the son of
God. And all the company of the^ that were come toogither too behold these
things, and had seen what happened, returned knocking them selves on the
breasts.

There stood all his acquaintance a far of and many women that had followed
him from Galilee, beholding these things. Among whom was Mary Magdalene, and
Mary the moother of James the less and of Ioses, and Salome the mother of
Zebedies sons, which women had followed him all the while he was in Galilee,
and had ministered unto him, and many other more, that had come up with him from
Galilee too Jerusalem.

The Jews therefore because it was the preparation of the passover, too the
intent the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the Saboth day (for
that Saboth was a hie day) desired Pilate that their legs might be broken,
and they taken down. The Soldiers therefore came, and brake the legs of the
first, and of the other that was crucified with him. But when they came to
Jesus, and saw him already dead, they brake not his legs, but one of the
Soldiers thrust him intoo the side with a spear, and by and by issued out
blood and water. And he that saw it bare witness of it, and his witness is
true. And he knows that he says truth, to the intent that you also may
believe. For these things were done that the Scripture might be fulfilled,
ye shall not break a bone of him. And ageine another Scripture says: They
shall see him whom they have perced.

After this, when evening came, because it was the Easter even which goes
before the Saboth, there came one Joseph of Arimathaea, borne in Arimathaea a
City of the Jews, a rich man, and a Counselloure, and a good and just man,
who had not consented to the devise and deed of them. For he also was one of
them that looked for the kingdom of god. For he was also a disciple of Jesus,
but privily for fear of the Jews. He taking courage to him, went in unto
Pylate, and be sought him that he might take down the body of Jesus. And Pylate
wondered that he was already dead, and sending for the Captain, enquired of
him whither he were already dead or no. And when he knew the matter by the
Centurion, he gave the body of Jesus unto Joseph, commanding it to be
delivered unto him. And Joseph bought a sheet. Thither came also Nichodemus
that had come before unto Jesus by night, bringing with him of Myrrh and
Aloes mingled together about an hundred pound weight. So they took down the
body of Jesus, and lapped it in a clean sheet, and wrapped him in linen
with spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury. There was in the same place
where he was crucified, a gardine, and in the gardine a new Tumbe of Joseph's,
which he had hewn out of a stone, wherein as yet had never man bin laid.
Therefore because it was the Easter even of the Jews, and that the saboth day
drew nere, they laid Jesus in it, because the tumb was nere at hand, and
rolling a great stone to the mouth of the grave, they went their ways. And
there were present Mary Magdalene, and Mary Ioses, sitting against the tumbe,
and other women, which also were come with Jesus from Galilee, beholding where
and how his body was bestowed. And when they came home, they prepared spices
and ointments, and rested the Saboth day according to the commandment. But
the next day that follows the preparation of the pass over, the high Preests
and Phariseys came together unto Pylate, saying: Sir, we remember that this
deceyuer while he was alive, said: After three days I will rise again:
Therefore command the Tumbe to be guarded until the third day, least
peradventure his Disciples do come and steal him away, and say unto the
people, He is risen from the dead, and the last error shall be worse than
the first. Pylate said unto them: Ye have a watch, go and make it as sure
as ye can. Then they went their ways, and guarded the Tumbe, sealing the
stone, and setting watchmen about it, too keep it.

The exposition of the text.
Forasmuch as no work is more woonderful than the work of our redemption,
which is the passion and death of our Lord Jesus Christ, according too that
saying of Peter in the first chapter of his first Epistle: Ye are not
redeemed with transitory things, as Gold and silver: but with the precious blud
of the unspotted and undefiled Lamb, namely of Jesus Christ: It becomes us,
right deer beloved brethren and sistern, to endeuer by all means possible to
know the story of this woonderful woork, specially seeing it is betaken unto
us in the Articles of our faith, where we profess our selves too believe in
the son of GOD our Lord Jesus Christ, that suffered under Ponce Pilate, was
crucified, dead and buried. etc. And that too the end, that by the knowledge of
this story, faith might be stirred up in us hy the holy ghost, whereby it may
come too pass, that the fruit of this woonderful woork may extend unto us.

How be it, too the intent I may the more distinctly and plainly speak of
this wonderful work, I will divide the whole doctrine of the Lords passion
intoo three places or articles: which are these.

1 How many sundry ways our Lord suffered. 2 The estimation and fruit of our
Lords passion. 3 The godly and helthful meditation of our Lords passion.
Of the first.
Because we have sinned both in body and soul, and that satisfaction must
needs have bin made for both: our Lord Jesus Christ suffered both in soul
and body. Therefore I will speak of his suffering in both, namely of the soul
and body of our Lord.

That he suffered in soul, he himself witnesses both in speech and in
outward appearance. In speech, when he says: My soul is heavy even unto
death: and upon the Cross: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Heerunto also does pertein the prophecy of David concerning Christ: The
sorrows of Hell have compassed me about: that is too say, I was stricken with
exceeding great sorrows. He testifies his sorrow in outward appeerance at
the grave of Lazarus. John the xj. and in the garden. At the grave, when he
thought upon the Deuilles tirannie over mankind, and the misery of mankind.
For all the sorrows of mind, that Christ endured by the space of three and
thirty years unto his death, are part of the passion which the son of God
suffered. In the garden he shows, that the heaviness of his mind was
exceeding great, when for the bitterness of sorrow he sweat drops of
blood. It is a natural thing for a man too weep, and sometime too sweat in
excess of sorrow at the hearing of some sudden evil: but never was any man
found yet, that sweat blood for sorrow: for no man is able too sustain so
great sorrow.

If ye demand the causes of this exceeding great sorrow: ye shall understand
that it is not one cause, but many: whereof the chief are these.

First the thinking upon the tirannie over mankind, and the exceeding great
misery wherewith all men were oppressed for falling from God.

Secondly, the thinking upon Gods wrath, which it behooued him too sustain
for our sins which he took upon him self. For all be it that he were
clear from all sin: yet took he upon him the gylte of the sins of all
the whole world. Whereupon John says: The Lamb of GOD takes away (that is
too say, bears in his body) the sins of the world. The son of God
therefore did in very deed feel the wrath of his father. Which feeling stirred
up so great sorrow in his most holy soul, that he swet blud.

Thirdly, ye thinking upon the punshment which he forsaw he should shortly the
next day following suffer in his most holy body, and the reprochfulnesse that he
should be put unto.

Fourthly, the thinking upon ye unthankfulness of yt most part of the world.
For he forsaw it should come to pass, that many wise men, many me^ of power,
and diverse others, should take scorn of this his punishment which he should
sustein too redeem them, yea and that they should persecute him and his. He
foresaw also, yt the gretest part of the^ yt bear ye name of christians,
should through their own wickedness, ungraciously deprive themselves of this
his benefit. Which four causes procured most bitter sorrow in ye heart of christ.
Upon this our lords sorrow must we also think, yt we may be stirred up too
faith and godliness, least we perish with ye thanklesse world.

Let this suffice breefly too be spoken concerning the vexation of Chrysts
soul. Now will I speak of the punishment of his body. For although that the
vexation of his body began in the Ox stall, when there was no room for our
lords mother in the Inn: and afterward when at the eight day of his birth, he
was let blud in circumcising: and so forth unto the time that he was made a
sacrifice for us upon the alter of ye cross: yet notwithstanding I will at
this time entreat but of that punishment which he endured last of all. And
although that by the story which I have already recited, a man may easily
understand how sundry ways our Lord was afflicted in his most holy body:
nevertheless I will gather intoo a short su^me, that which is dispersed at
large in the story, and divide it according too the state of the places, in
which he was punished. The places are these: The gardin, the house of Caiphas,
the consistory of the preests, the house of Herod, the common hall, and
Galgata, that is too say, the place without the City, where offenders were
wont too be put too execution.

What suffered he in the Gardin? He was betrayed with a a kiss: the soldiers
laid hands upon him: he was apprehended and piniond: he was led away like a
thief and a murderer: and there also all his disciples forsook him.

What suffered he in the house of Cayphas? He was mocked with false witnesses:
he was rayled upon beyond measure: and he catched a blow of the preests
servant.

What suffered he in the consistory of the Preests? He was charged with false
witnesses, he was scoffed at, he was spit in the face, he was buffetted, he was
stricken blindfeeld, and bidden guess who struck him.

What suffered he in Herod's house? He was scorned by the tyrant and all his
whole court: and in token of utter contempt, Herod clothed Jesus in a fair
garment, and sent him back agein unto Pylate.

What suffered he in the common hall? There is he accused: false witnesses are
brought in against him: he is demanded too be crucified: for more despite,
Pylates men of war put a purple garment upon him: A crown of thorn is set
upon his head: a reed is given him in his right hand: and in crouching and
kneeling unto him, he is scoffed at with this taunt. Hayle king of Jews: they
spit in his face: they buffetted him: his most holy head was strike^ with
cudgels: and in ye end (at the request of the priest and the whole people) he
was condemned too the cross, a most vile kind of death.

What suffered he after his condemnation? There is laid upon his shoulders,
the timber of the cross whereupon he should be nailed: he is crucified
between two thieves, too the intent he should be deenied the wickeddest of
them al: as he hangs on the cross there is given him vinegar and gall too
drink: and at length in these most grievous torments, he dies. Hereby it
appears how bitter punishment the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ endured.

But of what things shall the greeuousnesse of his punishment put us in mind?
Sure of many things, and specially of four.

For first is seen the greatness of Gods wrath against sin. For our sin
had so provoked the wrath of God, that it would not be pacified but by the
son of god, who taking man's nature upon him, supplyeth our room, and
satisfies Gods justice.

Secondly here is seen the filthiness of sin. For according too the
quality of the misdeede, do the punishments also vary. A traitor is
punished upon the wheel: a thief on the galowes, a murderer with the swoorde:
and a child offending, with a rod. But the son of God suffered a most
shameful death, and a death that was accursed in Gods law. By which thing is
signified, how abominable sin is in the sight of God.

Thirdly is seen the humbling of Gods son, who was abased beneath all
creatures: by which humbling of himself he testifies his love toward
mankind, for the redeeming of whom he abode so great things.

Fourthly, is seen the horrible and unappeasable hatred of the Jews against
the Savior that was sent unto them. And although nothing is here done more
than God had determined should be done: (For Chrysts Passion was long time
before prefigured and foretold by the holy Prophets of God, as Peter says in
ye first Chapter of the first Epistle) yet notwithstanding the Jews did not
this thing too the intent too obey or accomplish the purpose of God, but too
satisfy their own hatred. For the nature of the woorld is such, that if any
man rebuke the wickedness thereof any thing sharply, it seeks too rid them
out of the way, too the intent it may sin the more licentiously. Let this
brief saying suffize for the first part.

Of the second.
WE have seen of what sort Chrysts passion was: now concerning that which I
have promised in the second place, I will show what estimation Chrysts passion
is of before God, and what fruit grows thereof.

What estimation then is it of before God? The passion of our Lord Jesus Christ
is the sacrifice propiciatorie, wherein the everlasting son of God becoming
man, and being appointed by God too be the everlasting priest, offered
himself by the everlasting spirit too the everlasting father, that by this
his oblation, he might pacify Gods wrath, and make amends for the fault and
punishment of mankind, too the intent that all which believe or shall believe
in him, might by him be sanctified unto eternal life, according too that
saying of John in his.xvij. chapter: for these do I sanctify my self. Heerby
is manifested how great is the estimation of our Lords passion, and what fruit
redoundeth thereof too us men, upon condition that we rest upon Christ by
lively Faith. Christ being ordained mediator between us and God, does by his
sacrifice (that is too say, by his death and passion) pacify Gods wrath, and
he himself being the priest, offreth himself up too God: and that is too the
intent too deliver us from deserved damnation* We see therefore that there be
five things in this sacrifice. First the priest is Christ himself 2. The
sacrifice or thing that is offered up, is the Pressed himself. 3. God is he to
whom this sacrifice is offered up. 4. The world is it for which this oblation is
made. 5. The bargain and covenant is, that this oblatio^ turns too the
welfare of the faithful only.

But how can it come too pass, that the death of Christ alone should make
sufficient and full amends for the sins of the whole world? Behold the
Lamb of God (says John) which takes away the sins of the world. For of the
vndiuidable and unspeakable union of the Godhead and ma^hood in one person,
grows the worthiness, estimation, and endless merit of all the works
and passions of Christ. Therefore when it is said, The son of man has
redeemed us by the desert of his passion: a woork of inestimable price and
incomparable value is named, because the same son of man that has suffered,
is also God.

Also the death of the Son of man is a satisfaction, because it is the death
of such a man as is God. The obedience of the Son of man is our
righteousness, because it is the obedience of a man that is GOD. So the son
of man forgiueth sins because he is God. The flesh of Christ is the food
of life, because it is the flesh of a man that is God. And although the Godhead
in Christ suffered not, but his manhood only as says Peter: Christ suffered in
the flesh: yet his passion extends too his whole person. In so much, that
what so ever reproach is done too Christ's manhod, the same redoundeth too the
reproach of his whole person, according too this sentence: they have crucified
the Lord of glory. In consideration whereof, the Church confesses the son
of God too have suffered, because he suffered in the manhod which he had taken
upon him.

Of what estimation our Lords passion is before God, it is already said, and
also what is the fruit thereof in general: Howbeeit now to the intent the fruit
of our Lords passion may be seen the better, I will divide it intoo parts.
These therefore are the fruits.

The first is, yt obedience is performed. Phi. 2. He humbled himself, and
became obedient even unto the death of ye cross.

The second is, that the Devil is overcome. For this purpose (says John)
appeered Christ, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, according too
the first promise. The woman's seed shall tread down the Serpents head.

The third is, that man is saved from sin and justified. Behold (says John)
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Also Romans 4. He dyed
for our sins. 2. Cor. 5. Him that knew no sin he made sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of GOD in him: that is too say, he made Christ a
sacrifice for sin, that through his righteousness we might be made rightuous
before God.

The fourth is, that the Jews and Gentiles are made equal, according too that
saying. Ephesians. 2. For he is our peace which made both one and has broken
down the wall that was a stop between us, and has also put away through his
flesh, the cause of hatred (that is too say, the law of commandments
contained in the law written) too make of twain one new man in himself, so
making peace that he might reconcile both unto God in one body, through his
cross.

The fifth is, that death is abolished. Osee. 13. O Death, I will be thy death.
Too be brief, Christ's sacrifice is our redemption. For it is the price paid
for us, wherewith God is pacified, man redeemed, the Devil overcome: yea and
all things in heaven and earth put under one head, which is Christ. Ephesians. 1.

Of the third.
THe godly and helthfull minding of our Lords passion may be brought intoo
six parts, which Christen folk ought too think upon, not only at this time,
but all the time of their whole life. For the godly minding and weying of these
parts, does not only confute those which in the Papacy think them selves
too have discharged their duty, if they say over so many Pater nosters and Aue
mary's, kneeling before Idols, set up for a supersticious service of God: but
also woonderfully strengthens and comfort the godly. I will therefore set
out the six parts of this minding.

The first is, that thereby will come too our mind how great the wrath of GOD
must needs have bin for the sins of men, which could not be appeased by the
woork of any creature, but that of necessity the only begotten Son of God
must die too pacify Gods wrath, by making this rightful satisfaction for sin.

The second is, that thereby will come too our remembrance how unmeasurable and
unsearchable has bin the mercy of God the Father, who rather would that his
only begotten Son should suffer most bitter death, than that mankind whom
he had created should perish. Peradventure thou (...) ^urmise that God
could have delivered mankind by some other means. What art thou that wilt
teach God what he might have done: Think thou upon Gods Justice and mercy
together. For as his mercy moved him too save: so his justice moved him too
look for rightful amends of the wrong. Man sinned: and for so doing he must
either perish, or make amends. Now, man being no more but man, could not
satisfy Gods Justice: and other than man, none ought too do it. Gods wisdom
therefore found through mercy a remedy in this case, which was, that the
eternal son of God should become man, by means whereof he both was able too
satisfy Gods justice, because he was God: and ought too do it, because he had
taken man's nature upon him. Thus in Chrysts Passion appears mercy too be
mixte with justice, and wisdom has tempered them both.

The third is, that thereby will come too mind the most excellent and
unspeakable love of the Son of God toward mankind, who vouchsaued too turn
the wrath of his Father too him self, and too abide so slanderous a Death:
and that for his enemies, as Paul bears witness. Romans 5.

The fourth is, that thereby will come too mind the true mean whereby the
fruit of our Lords Passion may be applied too thee, so as it may be for thy
soul health. This applying of it is brought too pass three ways: by the
word, by faith, and by the Sacrament. By the word, as it were by the hand
of GOD, is the benefit of the Lords passion offered unto thee, where and as
often as the Gospel of Jesus Christ is preached: and the ministers of the
word do in Gods steed show the fruit of our Lords Passion too all that
here the Gospel. Again, when the benefit of the Lords Passion is thus
offered as it were by the hand of God: it must be received by Faith, as it
were a certain hand of man, the which Faith the holy Ghost woorketh in men
that here the Gospel, and obey it. Furthermore, it is sealed up with either
Sacrament, of Baptim, and of the Lords supper, and the strength and use
thereof is painted out as it were in tables, like as we heard yesterday.
Therefore when thou rehersest the Article of thy belief concerning the Passion
of the Lord, persuade thy self firmly, and believe most assuredly, that the
son of GOD suffered death for thee. Which thing if thou do, thou art
partaker of the Lords death, in so much that all the whole obedience of Christ
is thy acquitall from sin, and thy righteousness. But there is a double
obedience too be marked in Christ: his obedience of the Cross, and his
obedience of the law, which was his perfect fulfilling of the same. Like as
his obedience too the cross, is our clensing from sin: so his obedience of
the law, is imputed to us for our righteousness. Romans 5.

The fifth is, that when we be thus made partakers of the Lords passion
through faith: it will come too our remembrance, what is the lotte of the godly
in this life. For like as Christ has suffered, so will he have the rest of the
godly too suffer, that they may be comformable too the image of the son of
God. Whereupon Paul in the sixth too the Romans says: For therefore do we
suffer with him, that we may be glorified together with him.

The sixth is, that we shall call too mind what thing Christ (who has redeemed
us with his own blud) requires at our hands. For now since we are redeemed by
him, we must obey him. What wills he? First that we should renounce his
enemy the diuil. Secondly yt we should flee sin, that we offend not God ageine
wittingly and willingly with our sins. Thirdly that we give our selves too
holiness and godliness, and that we serve him in true fear all the days of
our life. Which thing if we do, we shall obtain the end of our faith, that
is, the everlasting salvation of our souls. Which God the Father grant unto
us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Easter day. The Story of the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, compiled
by laying toogither with the four Eaangelists.
AS soon as the Sabbath day was paste, Mary Maudelin, and the other Mary,
which is called Iacobie, and Salome, and Ioanne, and the other women that were
with them, which came with Jesus out of Galilee, brought and made ready
sweet odours, that they might come and anoint Jesus. For they had rested the
Sabbath day according too the commandment.

At euentide of the Saboth which dawneth toward one of the Sabbothes, that is
too say, very early in the morning before the break of the day, while it was
yet dark, the first day of the week, they went forth and came too the
Tumbe by the Sun rising, bringing with them the odours which they had
prepared. And behold there was a great earthquake: For an Angel of the Lord
came down from Heaven, and coming too the Tumbe, rolled the stone from the
mouth of it, and satte down upon it. And his countenance was like
lyghtening, and his raymente as white as Snow. And the watchemen for fear of
him were astonnied, and became as dead men.

And the women said among them selves: Who shall roll us the stone from the
mouth of the grave? For it was an exceeding great one. And when they had
looked back, they saw the stone was rolled from the grave. And entering intoo
the grave, they found not the body of the Lord Jesus Mary Magdalene therefore
ran too carry tidyngs of these things. And it came too pass, that while the
women were amazed in their mind at the matter, because they had not found
the body of Jesus: Behold, two men stood by them in bright raiment, and when
the women were afraid, and cast down their countenance too the ground, they
said unto them: Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here:
but is risen. Remember what he told you while he was yet in Galilee, saying:
That it behooved the Son of man too be betrayed intoo the hands of sinners,
and too be crucified, and too rise again the third day. And they remembered
his words, and departing back from the Tumbe, they afterward reported all
these things too the eleven, and too all the rest. And when they told these
things too the Apostles, their words seemed too them too be doting fools,
and they believed them not. When Mary Magdalen ran away (as it is said) she
came too Simon Peter, and too that other Disciple whom Jesus loved, and said
unto them: They have taken away our Lord out of his grave, and we know not
where they have bestowed him. Peter therefore rose up, and that other Disciple,
and went too the grave. And they ran both toogither, and that other Disciple
outran Peter, and came first too the grave, and when he had bowed him self
down, he saw the linen clothes lapped up, yet went he not in. Then came
Simon Peter following him, and entered intoo the grave, and saw the lynnen
clothes lie, and the napkin that was about his head, not lying with the
lynnen clothes, but wrapped toogither in a place by it self. Then went in
also that other Disciple which came first too the Sepulcher, and he saw and
believed. For as yet they knew not the Scripture that he should rise again
from the dead. The Disciples therefore went again too their own home. And
Peter maruayled at that which had happened,

Mary stood without the Sepulcher weeping. And as she wept, she bowed her
self intoo the Sepulcher, and saw two Angels in white, sitting the one at
the head, and the other at the feet, where they had laid the body of Jesus.
And they said unto her: woman, why weepest thou? She said unto them: For
they have taken away my Lord, and I wotte not where they have laid him.
When she had thus said, she turned her self back, and saw Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus. Jesus said unto her. Woman why
weepest thou? whom seek thou? She supposing he had bin the Gardener, said
unto him: Sir if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid him,
that I may fet him. Jesus said unto her: Mary: She turned her self and
said unto him: Rabboni, which is too say, master Jesus said unto her: touch
me not, for I am not yet ascended too my Father. But go too my brethren, and
say unto them: I ascend too my Father and your Father, too my GOD and your God.
This is that Mary Magdalene out of whom Jesus had cast seven Devils, to who^
when he was risen, he showed him self first, in the morning the first day of
the week. She going her way, told the Disciples that had bin with him
mourning and weeping that she had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken
such things unto her. And when they heard that he was alive, and was seen of
her, they believed it not. And the women entering into the Sepulcre, saw a young
man at their right hand clothed in a long white garment, and they were
afraid. For it was an Angel of the Lord. And he said unto them: Be not
afraid, for I know that ye seek Jesus that was crucified: he is not here:
he is risen as he said: come and see the place where the Lord was put, and go
quickly and tell his Disciples that he is risen from death. And behold he
will go before you intoo Galilee, there ye shall see him. Lo I have told you.
And they departing quicklye from the Tumbe, went their ways with fear and
great joy, and ran to bring his Disciples word. And they trembled and were
amazed, and told no body any whit of it, for they were afraid. And as they
went too bear word of it too his Disciples, behold Jesus met them, saying:
All hail. And they came and hilde him by the feet and woorshipped him. Then
said Jesus unto them, be not afraid. Go and tell my brethren, that they go
intoo Galilee, and there they shall see me. When they were gone, behold, some
of the keepers came intoo the City, and showed unto the high Priests all
the things that were happened. And they gathered them toogither with the
Elders, and took counsel, and gave large money too the Souldyours, saying: say
ye that his Disciples came by night, and stole him away while ye slept. And
if this come unto the Presidents ears, we will appease him and save you
harmless. And they took the money and did as they were taught. And this
saying is noysed among the Jews unto this day.

The exposition of the text.
THis feast is the highest of al feasts, wherein is set forth unto us the
Article of our Lords resurrection from the dead, and that the third day
(according too the Scriptures) whoo by his glorious resurrection, as he was
conqueror of death, sin, and the Devil: so became he the redeemer of al
them that shall not refuse too believe in him. It is a custom in this feast
too entreat (out of the story of the resurrection) concerning the benefit or
fruit of the same, and of the use thereof: all which things this present
Gospel conteyneth. It is told by the Angel that Christ is risen. This is the
sum of the story. The women are willed not too be afraid. This is the fruit
of this benefit: and the women seek Christ raised from death. By the example
of whom is commended unto us, the helthful use of our Lords resurrection.
Wherefore not without cause, Paul writing too Timothy, says: Remember that
Jesus Christ is risen from death. For as the same Apostle says in the.10. too
the Romans. If thou believe in thy heart that God has raised him from death,
thou shall be saved. How be it too the intent this Article of our faith may
be the better confirmed unto us, I will handle three places in this sermon,
which are.

1 How many ways there are too prove the Lord resurrection. 2 Why he arose
the third day. 3 What is the fruit of Christ's resurrection.
Of the first.
BY three kinds of Testimonies is the Lords Resurrection confirmed. For there
are Testimonies that go before, and that go with it, and that come after it: Of
which I will speak in order. Christ admonishes us in the.xxiiij. of Luke,
that we should advisedly wey the testimonies that went before the Lords
Resurrection, where he says: So is it written, and so ought Christ too have
suffered and risen agein the third day, and repentance and remission of sins
to be preached in his name unto all nations. But where is this written? He
himself answers and says: In Moises and the prophets and the Psalms it is
written of me. Therefore in Moses, in the Prophets and in the Psalms, must
we seek for the Testimonies that go before our Lords resurrection.

In Moses there is a double kind of Testimony concerning the Lords
Resurrection. For it is both foretold in express words, and shadowed with
many figures. The express words are these: The woman's seed shall break the
Serpents head: that is too say, Christ shall overcome the Devil, which thing
could not be done but by Chrysts rising ageyn from death* For if Christ had
tarried still in his grave, the devil had had the upper hand of Christ. For as
long as Christ lay in his grave, Christ had no victory, that is, he had no
triumph. But as soon as our Lord opened his grave, and came out of it alive:
he showed him self conqueror and triumpher over Satan. Hereunto also
perteyneth this saying. In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blissed. Now as in death is the curse: so is blissing too be seen in ye life
of Christ. Also it is shadowed with figures in Moses. Adam dying and afterward
being raised again, was a figure of Christ dying and rising ageine. For thus
says Augustine, Christ's resurrection was prefigurate in our first father
Adam, because like as Adam rising after sleep, knew Eve shaped out of his
seed: So Christ rising agein from the dead builded the church out of the wound
of his side. Isaac also being laid upon the altar too be sacrificed, and yet
being delivered by the Angel, was a figure of Christ offered up upon the
Cross, and afterward raised from death by the power of God. Joseph being cast
into prison, and afterward brought forth unto high honor, did betoken the
death and resurrection of the Lord.

In the Prophets also are both sayings and figures of this Resurrection. Esai.
53. chapter. If he give his soul for sin, he shall see long lasting seed,
and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. Daniell tells openly that
Christ shall be put too death, and that he shall reign for ever. Oseas also
says, the third day he shall quicken us. Among many other figures are these.
Sampson is shut within the City and the gates fast locked: And our Lord is
closed in the grave fast sealed. Sampson breaking the locks, and bearing away
the gates, escapes without harm. And Christ breaking the powers of hell
goes out free. Like as the ship should have perished if Jonas had not bin
cast out: so should the woorld perish if Christ had not suffered. And like as
Jonas was in the belly of the Fish three days, and afterward was cast out on
land. So Christ was three days in the earth, and afterward came forth alive
out of his grave.

In the Psalms also are Testimonies and Figures of Christ's resurrection. The
second Psalm entreats altoogither of the kingdom and preesthood of Christ.
The fiftene Psalm: Thou shall not suffer thy holy one too see corruption.
The.xxij. Psalm preaches the Lords Passion and resurrection. The.Cx. Psalm.
He shall drink of the brook by the ways side: therefore shall he lift up his
head. The same David does shadow the death and resurrection of the Lord. David
fleeing so oftentimes, and at length being advanced too the kingdom, was a
figure of Chrysts abaceme^t by death, and of his glorificatio^ by rising agein.
Such manner of proofs of ye lords death and resurrection, there are many in
Moises and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms: but I have recited but few for
shortness of time. To the furtherance heerof comes it also ye Christ
oftentimes forewarned his Disciples of his death and resurrection.

Of testimonies that go with it, there be two sorts: namely, express words,
and signs. In this Gospel the Angel says: He is risen, he is not here. The
sign was seen, the grave was empty, there was an Earthquake: the Lord showed
him self first too Mary Magdalene: afterward too the more part of the
Apostles: and then too five hundred breethren: he is conversant with his
Disciples forty days: and at the end (in the sight of a great number) he
ascended visibly intoo heaven, from whence (the.x. day after his ascencion) he
sends the holy Ghost according too his promise, which holy Ghost conuinceth,
Christ too have ascended intoo heaven in deed, as triumpher over death and hell.

The testimonies that follow, are of two sorts also. The preaching of the
Apostles which is confirmed with sundry miracles, and afterward the record of
the whole Church confessing Christ their Lord and mediator* Besides these,
there be other signs also. The inward sign, is Chrysts spirit in the heart
of the believers, which testifies unto them, that Christ lives. The
outward signs are Baptime, and the Lords supper. For by Baptim is figured
Chrysts death, burial, and resurrection, as Paul teaches the.vij. too the
Romans. The Lords Supper does also represente unto us Christ's
resurrection. He that believes not these testimonies, going before it, with
it, and coming after it, shall one day see him coming in the Clouds too be
his judge, whom he acknowledged not too be his Savior here on earth.

Of the second.
WHy arose he ageine the third day? Why did he not put it of till the last day,
that we might have risen toogyther with him? He rose ageine the third day,
first too fulfill the Prophecies. For it was told before by the Prophet Oseas,
and prefigured in Jonas, that he should rise ageine the third day. Secondly too
make good his own promises. For he promised his Disciples, that after he had
bin delivered too the Gentiles, and mocked of them, he should be put too death
and rise ageine the third day. And he prevented not the third day, because all
men might certainly know, that he was dead in deed. Therefore by lying forty
hours in his grave, he showed himself too have bin dead in very deed. And
why he delayed not his resurrection til the last day, there are right weighty
causes ready too be showed.

The first is, because it was written: Thou shall not suffer thy holy one too
see corruption. For Christ's body might not rot in the grave. First for that it
was made of the blood of the most chaste virgin by the woorking of the holy
ghost. Secondly, for that as long as he lived in this world, he kept it pure
and undefiled. Therefore had it bin unmeet that such a body should have become
woormes meat.

The second cause why he delayed not his resurrection, is our hope. For thus
says Peter. Blissed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for
begetting us ageine too a lively hope, through the resurrection of Christ
from the dead.

The third cause is, that he should be the first of them that rise ageine. For
like as Adam was the first that appeered in mortal body by reason of sin:
so ought Christ too be the first that should appeer in immortal body,
justifying us, and healing our bodies from eternal death.

And although we shall all rise ageine, and that others besides Christ have
risen ageine: Yet is there exceeding great difference between the resurrection
of Christ, and of other men. For first, Christ rose ageine by his own power,
which thing no man could ever do, save only he. Secondly the other that
were raised (as the widows son, the ruler of the Sinagogs daughter, and
Lazarus, and others) rose too die ageine. But Christ rose too live for
evermore.

Besides this, Chrysts Resurrection differs from the Resurrection of other
men, in fruit and efficacy. For Christ by his own power rayseth up others,
which thing was showed in the Garden where he was buried, and rose ageine at
the rising of the Sun. Lastly Chrysts rising ageine differs from ours in
time also. For as it is already showed, and as we knowledge in our Creed,
Christ rose again the third day: but our Resurrection shall be delayed till
the last day. For then shall appear the everlasting life and endless
righteousness, which he shall give too all his, that is too say, too all them
that believe in him. Thus much concerning the second place, why Christ rose
ageine the third day, and how his resurrection differs from ours, that by
the Resurrection of Christ, we may conceive lively hope of the everlasting and
incorruptible heritage in heaven.

Of the third.
NOw remains the third place concerning the fruit of Chrysts Resurrection,
which is more plentiful and abundaunt, than that it may be expressed by
man's tung: Paul says, that by Christ all things are restored in heaven
and in earth. For first, Christ by coming out of his grave, shows himself
conqueror and triumpher over Death, Hell, and Satan, and so makes good the
promise uttered concerning him in times past: The seed of the woman, shall
tread down the Serpents head: which Prophecy John expounding, says: Christ
appeered too destroy the works of the Devil. How be it, as too us ward
that are men, for whose salvation he came down from heaven, was made manne,
dyed and rose again, there are four sundry kinds of fruits of Christ's
Resurrection too be considered. For Chrysts Resurrection is first our
Justification. Secondly, the power whereby sin is subdued in us: thirdly, an
example of newness of life, and the cause thereof: and fourthly, the cause of
our resurrection, and a most assured warrant of the same. Of these four manner
of fruits I will speak in order.

Therefore the first fruit of our Lords resurrection, is the justification of
us, of which fruit Paul speaks in ye fourth too the Romans, He died for
our sins, and rose ageine for our justification. And Daniell in his.ix.
Chapter, Iniquity shall be taken away, and everlasting righteousness shall be
brought in. To the intent this fruit may be the sweeter, we must consider of
how great value it is. We are borne in sin, and subject too Gods wrath. Ephesians.
1. We are all by nature the children of wrath: The reward of sin is death.
To. 6. from this death are we delivered by the resurrection of Christ. For by
Christ we are quit from the gilt of sin, and so consequently from eternal
death. Heervpon comes that saying in the Apocalips: Blissed and holy is he
that has his part in the first resurrection: for upon them has the second
death no power, but they shall be preests of God and of Christ, and they shall
reign with him. For as the first death is by Adam: so the first Resurrection
is by Christ. Heervntoo also pertains this saying: Blissed are they that wash
their garments in the Lambs blud, that they may have power in the tree of
life, and may enter in at the gates of the City.

The second fruit of our Lords Resurrection, is, that it is the power which is
shed intoo the believers, which makes them able too rise from vices unto
virtue. This power is bestowed upon us in Baptim, and confirmed in the Lords
Supper, so that we be not behind hand with our parts. And yet this power
is felt in those only, that are borne agein of immortal seed. 1. Peter. 1.

The third fruit is the example. For as Paul says: Christ rose ageine too
the intent we might walk in newness of life. Those therefore that follow
their own vices, living wickedly and uncleanly, do testify by their own
doing, yt they despise Christ, whose Resurrection is set before us, as a
glass to see how we ought too lead our life. For they think that Christ was
scourged, crowned with thorns, and shed his blud upon the altar of the
cross, too the intent that they may give over themselves too all
outragiousnesse, tyranny, pride, and lusts: and after this manner (as much as in
them lies) they crucify the son God of new agein. We therefore (who covet
not only to be called, but also to be the same that we are called, that is to
say, Christians,) must think upon the matter as it is in deed: namely, that
Christ dyed for the clensing of such men's sins, as receive Faith with him
and live in true repentance, by mortifying the old man and quickening the new
man. There be four evils wherewith men are burdened: ignorance, giltinesse
of sin, vices, and fear of endless damnation. Against ignorance, Christ is
unto us wisdom: while he by his Gospel instructs us of his will toward us.
For if we were not instructed concerning his will, by the word of god: our
mind should be wrapped in continual darkness, which darkness is put away by
the light of the Gospel.

Against the giltinesse of sin, Christ is unto us righteousness. For his
obedience is imputed too us that believe, so as now we may appear in Gods
sight, not as sinners, but as righteous persons.

Against the vices and lusts naturally bred in our flesh, Christ is unto us
sanctification, while by the virtue of the Resurrection, he sanctifies us
through the holy ghost.

Against the fear of endless damnation, Christ is unto us redemption. These
four benefits of Christ, does Paul join together in the first Epistle too
the Corynthians and the first Chapter, in these words: God has made Christ
unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. He therefore
that desires this highest and utmost benefit, must speedely pass forth
unto it by the former, as by steps. For as soon as any man has learned
Christ, he must believe in him: when he believes in him, he must be sanctified
with his spirit: that is to say, he must (after the example of Christ risen
again,) lead a new life. After this new life, shall at length follow full
deliverance in the last judgment, when he shall render unto every man according
too his deeds. Let this therefore whereof I have now spoken, be the third frut
of our Lords Resurrection, namely that we live a new life after his example.
Heerevntoo tends that saying of Paul: If ye be risen ageyn with Christ,
savor the things that are above.

The fourth fruit of the Lords Resurrection is, that it is both the cause, and
the warrant of our Resurrection, by which the souls of the dead shall be
joined again too their bodies at the second coming of Christ, when he shall
come too judge the quick and the dead. Heerevppon Paul. 1. Cor. 1^. chapter
disputes at large, and handles this point: Christ is risen from the dead,
Ergo, we shall rise ageyn also. 1. These. 4. For if we believe that Christ
Jesus died and is risen ageine, so shall God also reise up with him, those that
are fallen a sleep through him: And John in the.v. Chapter. The hour shall come
in which all that are in their graves shall here his voice and come forth:
They that have done good, too the Resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil, to the Resurrection of judgment. Here is mention made of a double
resurrection, that is to wit, of life and of judgment. The Resurrection of
life, is that which he promised too them that have done well. The Resurrection
of judgment is that which he threatens to those that have done evil.
Heereunto also perteyneth that saying of Paul in the tenthe too the Romans.
This is the word of faith which we preach. If thou shall acknowledge the Lord
Jesus with thy mouth, and believe in thy heart, that God has raised him from
the dead, thou shall be saved: that is to say, thou shall rise ageine to the
Resurrection of life and everlasting salvation.

And these things are breefly spoken concerning the Resurrection of our Lord,
whereby first of all is to be confirmed our faith, concerning the Article of
the Resurrection. Secondly is to be confuted the error of the Jews which
deny Christ's Resurrection. And so shall we be put in mind of the fruit of
his Resurrection, that by the same we also may in this life rise from sin,
and at length in the last day, rise to the Resurrection of life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom with the father and the holy ghost be honor, praise
and glory for evermore. Amen.

The second Holyday in Easter week. The Gospel. Luke. xxiiij.
ANd behold, two of his disciples went that same day too a town called
Emaus, which was from Jerusalem, about.lx. furlonges: and they talked
together of all the things that had happened. And it chanced while they
commoned together and reasoned, Jesus himself drevv near, and went with
them. But their eyes were holde^ that they should not know him. And he said
unto them: what manner of communications are these that ye have one too an
other as ye walk and are sad? And the one of them (whose name was
Cleophas) answered and said unto him: art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem,
and have not known the things which have chanced there in these days? he
said unto them: what things? And they said unto him of Jesus of Nazareth,
which was a Prophet, mighty in deed and word before God and all the
people: and how the high preests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned
to death, and have crucified him. But we trusted that it had bin he, which
should have redeemed Israel. And as touching all these things, too day is even
the third day that they were done. Yea and certain women also of our
company made us astonished, which came early unto the Sepulcher and found not
his body: and came saying, that they had seen a vision of Angels, which said
that he was alive. And certain of them which were with us, went too the
Sepulcher, and found it even so as the women had said, but him they savv not.
And he said unto them: O fools and slow of heart too believe all that the
Prophettes have spoken. Ought not Christ too have suffered these things, and
too enter intoo his glory? And he began at Moses and all the Prophets, and
interpreted unto them in all Scriptures which were written of him. And they
drew nigh unto the town, which they went unto. And he made as though
he would have gone further. And they constrained him, saying: Abide with us,
for it draws toward night, and the day is far passed: And he went in to
tarry with them. And it came to pass as he sat at meat with them, he took
bread and blissed it, and brake, and gave to them. And their eyes were opened,
and they knevv him, and he vanished out of their sight. And they said betvveene
themselves: did not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us by the
way, and opened too us the Scriptures? And they rose up the same hour and
returned too Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered to gether, and them that
were with them, saying: the Lord is risen in deed, and has appeared to
Simon. And they told what things were done in the way, and how they knevve
him in breaking of bread: and they believed them not. And it was tovvard
euentide the same day which was one of the Saboth, and the doors were shut
where the disciples were gathered together for fear of the Jews.

The exposition of the text.
THe sum of this story is, that Christ ye same day yt he arose, appeered to
two of his disciples as they were going to Emaus (now this Emaus was a town
almost.ij. miles of from Jerusalem, and commoned with them concerning the
Messiah. Whom when he had instructed, and made himself known too them in
breaking of bread, he vanished out of their sight. And they being certified of
his resurrection, returned by and by too Jerusalem, and told all that had
happened unto the eleven disciples. Now to the intent we may the eassier
understand this story, I will distribute it into four parts, which are: 1 What
these two Disciples did before Christ came unto them in their journey. 2 The
talk between Christ and his Disciples in the way. 3 What happened in the
house. 4 What those Disciples did after the Lord had instructed them.


These parts have every of them their peculiar doctrines and admonishments,
which we will declare in the exposition of each of them by themselves.

Of the first part.
Two of them the self same day yt the Lord rose, went too a town which was
about three score furlongs of, which make seven thousand and four hundred
paces, that is to wit, about two miles, somewhat under or over. This was the
cause of their talk. And as they were going, they talked of Christ. Heerby we
may learn two things. First that occasion of exercising godliness is not to be
neglected. Secondly when we have gotten this occasion, that we must not
break it of, for matter impertinent and trifles. In these disciples we see
three things. First a token of godliness. Secondly weakness of Faith. And
thirdly a woonderment at those things that had happened.

That they talked reverently concerning Christ and his doings, it is heerby
too be presumed, that by this their communication, they allure Christ unto
them. The weakness of their faith appeered, in that albeit they had herd
before of the Prophecies concerning Christ: yet were they somewhat slow to
believe perfectly. So the Christen faith has his conception and his
tenderness, which is to be cherished with communication of Christ, until it
may grow too some strength. Also they marvelled at those things that had
happened. For nothing is more wonderful, than for a dead man to come out of
his grave alive. This wonderment was mixed with hope and fear, or with belief
and douting. For like as the fleshly understanding and judgment of reason
provoked them too dout: so the spark of Faith that was in them, resisted their
douting, although very faintly. So comes it often too pass in christen
folks. On the one side the flesh assaileth and strives too draw a man intoo
wanhope. On the other side the spirit sets himself against the flesh,
sometime more faintly, and sometime more stoutly. How be it to the intent the
spirit yield not too the flesh, it is to be quickened up with talking of
Christ, that is too say by minding and heering the Gospel and other godly
exercises. By this example then is confirmed the saying of the Prophet Esaias in
his forty and two Chapter: whoo speaks thus of Christ. A bruised Reed
shall he not break, nor quench smoking flax, but he shall utter judgment in
truth. These two similitudes teach, how Christ deals with those that be
his, in whom he finds any spark of godliness. By the similitude of the
bruised Reed, he meeneth that he will not altoogither break and crush in
pieces, those that are half broken already: but rather ease them, and bear
with them, that he may preserve and increase whatsoever good is in them. These
two Disciples were half broken and not far from a fall, so sore were they
tossed with the wind of the flesh. But to the intent they should not fall,
Christ bears them up with his grace. Ageine the metaphor of the smoking
flax, is taken of matches, which by reason of the smoke that they send forth,
do not lightly go out, so there be any body by too put to^ his hand. Eue^ so
where so ever there peereth any spark of godliness, Christ is straight at
hand, and cherishes and kindles it, that they may burn more clearly,
according as we see in these two Disciples. Here from may we draw most
excellent comfort. Although we weak men do stagger and halt, although we be
already bruised and disioynted: yet does not he by and by cast us away as
utterly unprofitable: but bears with us a long time, until he have made us
more strong and stedie, so that we follow the example of these Disciples.

Of the second part.
ANd it came to pass that as they were talking and questioning one with
another, Jesus falling intoo their company went with them. This deed of
Christ's, first confirms Christ's promise, which is: wheresoever two or
three be gathered toogither in my name, there am I in the mids of them.
Although this be not done always bodyly: yet is it done in deed
spiritually, which thing the Lord meeneth too show unto us by this bodyly
presence. Hereby therefore we may learn that which I warned you of in the
former part of this story, that what soever they be that seek reverently
after Christ, they set open the gate unto Christ to help them, and by their
godly exercises, procure him to be their teacher, like as on the contrary part
heathenish men by their unclean communication, foreclose the gate that he can
not come at them. This thing is avouched, not only by this example, but also by
the saying of the Prophet Esaias. 66. Unto whom shall I have respect, but too the
poor and broken in spirit, and him that stands in awe of my words?

But what meeneth the Evangelist by that he says: Their eyes were hild least
they should know him. Hereby we are put in mind of our weakness. For
neither our eyes nor our ears do execute their duetye, unless the mercy of
GOD do grant them the power so too do. And if the case stand so with the
eyes of the body, much more true is it in the eyes of the mind. Heerby we may
learn three things. One is that the powers of our senses or of our mind are
none at all, but if they be enabled from heaven. Another is, that we abuse
not our mind and our senses too the dishonor of our creator. For if we do, it
is too be feared, least for a punishment he bereeue us both of mind and
sense. The third is, that we desire of him both the lightening and preservation
of our wits too his glory.

And he said unto them. What manner of talk is this that you have one to
another as ye walk, and are sad? These words do sufficiently show that
which I said before, namely that they wauered between hope and fear, and had
not yet overcome fear. Howbeit the Lord does here strengthen these wauerers,
according to that saying of Paul: The Lord shall not suffer you to be tempted
above your power, but shall with the temptation make a way for you to get out,
that you may be able to endure it. Here had those two Disciples yielded, and
their faith had bin quenched by temptation, (which thing their heaviness
wi^nesseth) if Christ had not out of hand stepped in, and vndershored their
downfall. Let us also by these men's example, and by Christ's deed, comfort
and raise up our selves.

And one of them whose name was Cleophas aunsvvering, said: Art thou alone a
stranger in Jerusalem, and haste not known what has bin done in these
days? Cleophas maruelleth, that he alone knew not that which was known too
the whole city, and to all the strangers that were resorted thither to the
feast of Passover.

To whom he said: what things? as concerning Jesus of Nazareth. etc. The
answer of Cleophas has.iiij. things in it. First it is an acknowledging of
Christ, and a witnessebearing of his innocence: who (says he) was a
Prophet, mighty in deed and in word, before God and all the people.

This description conteines three things touching Christ. First and formoste,
that Christ is a Prophet, that is too say, a teacher of Gods will sent from
God. Secondely, that he is not a Prophet of the baser sort, but mighty in
woork and word, that is to say, excellent in holiness of life, and ableness
of teaching. Thirdly is added (before GOD and men,) whereby is meant, that
Christ in such wise executed the office of a Prophet, that he behaved
himself holyly in all things, as in the eyesight of God. This acknowledgyng of
Christ was great, although it were not full and perfect. The Phariseys, the high
Priests, Pilate, and Herod, did put Christ to death as a blasphemer. These
disciples bear witness that he was sent of God. Whereupon we may derive this
doctrine, that in religion, not the judgment of the great men, but the rule of
Gods word is to be followed. They were offended at the outward appeerance of
Christ: and these following the truth of God, did (as much as they could) set
themselves against these blasphemers.

The second thing that is the in answer of Cleophas, is the publishing of the
Lords passion: wherein he declares, both by whom he was condemned, and of what
kind of death he suffered. Our high Priests and Elders (says he) condemned
him and delivered him to death. He openly avouches that the high preests and
elders are the enemies of Christ. Whereby we also are admonished to accuse them
openly, that persecute the Gospel, as the Pope does, and many tyrants in the
world. Also he shows what kind of death, he was put unto, when he says: And
they crucified him: Tha^ the which kind of death, although there was none more
reprochefull in the world: yet was not Cleophas therefore afraid to count him a
holy man.

The third thing that is in the answer of Cleophas, is the confession of his
belief in Christ: We hoped (says he) that he should have redeemed Israel.
Cleophas confesses openly that he believes upon Christ, whom the high
Preests had put to death. And this is the nature of true Faith* For he that
believes unto righteousness, confesses with his mouth too salvation.

The fourth thing that is in the answer of Cleophas, is the strengthening of
his weak faith by the promise of Christ, and the witness of the women, by the
vision of the Angels, and the record bearing of certain of the Apostles. For
when Cleophas names the third day, he does it for that the Lord had promised
too rise ageyn the third day. This promise believes he too be fulfilled,
notwithstanding that he be tossed between hope and fear. But against fear,
he takes unto him the nourishment of Faith, lest it should be utterly
quenched. And where as he tells, that the body was not found by the women,
and that there appeered unto them a vision of Angels, and that the report
which the women had made of the empty Tumbe, was avouched by the witness of
men: these things tend all too this end, too persuade him self fully, that
Christ was risen again. So the godly man being doutfull between faith and
fear, vnderproppeth his faith, and to the uttermost of his power wrestleth
against fear.

But what says the Lord too this gear? O fools (says he) and slovve of
heart too believe the things that are spoken by the Prophets. Here first has
our Faith somewhat too learn at Christ's hand. Christ verily finds fault
with those disciples for their slownesse, as well in lerning, as in believing,
yet does he not cast them off for their weakness. But rather (according too
his own custom) he chastises them after a fatherly sort, and helps their
weakness: least being overcome with fear, they should quench ye little fire of
their faith. For he came too be a physician of the weak, and not to fordoo
the weak with fear. Heerby we may learn, that Christ will not cast off any
man that has a small and weak faith, so he suffer it too be strengthened and
increased by the word of God. But what thing finds he fault with in these
two Disciples? with two things. Ignorance or dullness in lerning and
slownesse in beleeuyng the Prophets. Dullness hyndered their vnerstanding and
slownesse hyndred their Faith. For although they had a very little Faith, yet
ought they too have made greater furtherance in it, for that they had not only
herd from their childhod the foresayings of the Prophets concerning Christ,
but also Christ himself foretellyng them what kind of death he should be
put too, and that he should (the third day after come out of his grave again
alive. Here is our dullness also reproved, who have herd the Gospel so many
years together, and yet many are too be found amongst us, that have not yet
learned the Apostles Creed: of whom I am sore afraid, unless they amend
betimes.

After that Christ has found fault with them, he beeginneth to teach:
Which is the point of a good schoolmaster. And therefore he says: Ought not
Christ too have suffered these things, and so too enter intoo his glory? This
is the ground that the Lord teaches upon: the meenyng whereof is this. Christ
according too the foresaying of the prophets, ought too suffer death upon the
Cross, and afterward too rise from death, and to enter intoo his glory. He
ought to suffer verily for our sins, and to rise again for our
justification. Romans 4. Then seeing ye confess me too be Christ, ye must
also know out of the Prophets that it beehooued me too dye, and rise again
from the dead. This thing shows he also out of Moses, and the Prophets: but
the Evangelist tells not by what places of Scripture he did it
Notwithstanding, it is not too be douted, but that he first of all expounded
the promis concerning Christ set forth unto Adam: which is this: The seed of
the woman shall tread down the serpents head, and many such other, as you have
herd yesterday. Moses (by the commandment of God) did set up a brazen serpent
in ye wilderness, and as many as looked thereon, were healed of their wounds.
Which figure Christ expounding in the third of John, says: Like as Moses
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness: so it behooves the son of man to be
lift up, to the intent that all that believe in him, should not perish, but
have life everlasting. Howbeit as he was recityng these things out of Moses
and the prophets, they drew near the town that they were going too, and he
made as though he would have gone further, but they constrained and entreated
him too tarry with them. Hereby we may learn what account we ought to make of
them that rebuke us, when we do amiss, and call us back intoo the way of
sound doctrine. They do not here give Christ taunt for taunt, and call him
fool ageyn, but they acknowledge their own folly, and yield themselves too him
easy too be taught, too the intent they may be delivered from their error
and folly. Thus do all the godly. On the contrary part, the ungodly freat and
wex mad against those that go about to call the^ back intoo the way by showing
them their error, as we have herd even now that the Jews did.

Of the third part.
NOw follows what was done within the house. And it came to pass (says the
Evangelist) that as he sat at meat with them, he took bread and blissed,
brake it, and reached it too them, and their eyes were opened and they knevv
him. Here the Evangelist declares, that the disciples knew the Lord by
breaking of bread. For as often as the Lord took meat, he had both a
peculiar manner of praying, and a singular gesture in reaching forth the bread.
Which things because they had often marked in Christ, they knew him thereby, for
that being now raised from the dead, he kept the same manner that he had done
before. Therefore like as the disciples knew Christ by his gesture: so let us
as often as we eat bread, learn by his example to offer thanks to him the
author of life, which mark will make us known from heathenish men.

Moreover as soon as Christ was known, he vanished out of their sight: and
they henceforth talked of him with more sweetness than before. Did not our
heart (said they) burn within us by the way, while he spoke unto us, and
opened the scriptures unto us? Here we may mark the fruits of Gods word in
men. And albeit that Christ now a days appear not unto us bodyly, and speak
unto us mouth to mouth: yet notwithstanding he speaks unto us by the
ministers of his word, according as he says: He that heereth you, heereth
me. What is that fruit? Whosoever heereth Gods word with his ears, and with
his heart, in him there is kindled a certain fire, and his heart begins to
glowe. Then like as he that feels not this glowing in his heart when he
heereth Gods word has ears, but not too here: and a heart, but not too
understand: and that through his own default, because he understands the
holy ghost: So he that feels this glowing in his heart, has a witness of
Christ's spirit speaking in him, and that he has a lively and true faith.
Wherefore we are warned too here Gods word in the fear of GOD, with great
reverence and earnestness.

Of the fourth part.
ANd they rising up the same hour, returned to Jerusalem, and found the
eleven gathered together. etc. These things teach, that that heat which is
kindled in us by the preaching of the word, is not idle, but shows it self
abroad out of hand. For he that knows Christ aright, coueteth also that
others should know him likewise, too the intent that many may glorify him
toogither. That such a heat may be kindled in us, our Savior Jesus Christ
grant, to whom with the father and the holy ghost be honor for evermore. So
be it.

The third Holyday in Easter Week. The Gospel. Luke..xxiiij.
AND as they thus spoke Jesus himself came as they were set down, and stood
in the mids of them, and said: Peace be unto you: and he vpbraided them
with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not those
that had told them how they had seen him risen from death. And they being
amazed, and afraid, thought they savv a ghost. And he said unto them: Why are
ye afraid, and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? See my hands and feet,
that it is I. Feel me, and see, for a spirit has no flesh and bones as ye
see me have. And when he had said thus, he shevved them his hands and his
feet and his side. Then were the disciples glad when they savv it was the
Lord. And while they yet believed not for joy, and vvoondered, he said to
them: Have you any meat here? And they offered him a piece of broyled fish, and
a piece of a honey co^be. And he took it, and ate it in the sight of of them,
and said unto them: These are the words that I spoke unto you, while I was
yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled which are written of me
in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms. The opened he
their mind that they might understand the scripturs, and said unto them: Thus
is it written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise agein from
death the third day, and that repentance and forgiveness of sins should be
preached to all people in his name, beginning at Jerusalem. And you are
vvitnesses of these things. And he said unto them again: Peace be to you. As
my father sent me, so send I you also. When he had said so, he breathed upon
them, and said unto them: Take ye the holy ghost. Whose sins soever ye
release they are released unto them: and whose sins soever ye vvithhold,
they are vvithholden.

The exposition of the text.
THis is the fifth appeering of the Lord upon the very day of Easter, in which
he appeered too the Disciples that were talking of him. For first he appeered
too Mary Magdalene, out of whom he cast seven devils. Secondly, he appeered to
the women as they were returning from his grave. Thirdly he appeered unto
Peter. Fourthly unto Cleophas, and his companion. And fifthly (as this text
shows) unto the.xj. Disciples as they were talking toogither of him. The
places are two.

1 Christ's greeting, and the testimonies whereby his Resurrection is proved. 2
The necessity of Chrysts death and Resurrection, and ye use of the same,
namely that repentance and forgiveness of sins must be preched to al nations in
his name.
Of the first.
Jesus stood in the mids of them, and said unto them: Peace be to you. The
disciples being sorrowful, talked of Christ, who is present with them, according
to his promis: whersoeuer two or three are gathered toogither in my name, I
will be in the mids of them. For although this be not done always in his
bodyly presence, yet is it done, in very deed: For he will never do against
his promis. Now what he brings with his presence, his greeting shows,
wherewith he here comfort his sorrowful Disciples. For in as much as Christ
is given too be a comfort too the sorrowful, here he offreth peace, saying:
Peace be unto you. This peace which the Lord wishes to his disciples, is not
common, but heavenly: not of the world, but of the kingdom of Heaven: not
between man and man, but between God and man. Howbeit too ye intent we may
understand how great a good thing this peace is, which Christ offreth to
those that be his, I will expound more at large the things that come too hand
in consideration of this peace, whereby we may gather a full description of
this peace.

Because peace is stablished between such as were at ods: first we must
consider who are the parties that are at ods. These are two: God and man. God
is happy and blissed without man: Man is miserable, and damned without God.
The^ had God no need to seek peace with man: but man without peace with God
is in extreme misery, and therefore has need^ of nothing so much as of peace
with God.

Secondely, when parties are at variance, it must needs be, that there went
some offense before. This offense takes his beginning not of God, but of man.
What is this offense? Sin. This sin was a certain falling away from God
to the devil, unto whom Man made himself subject. Now how sore an offense
this was, it is easy to deem, by ye greatness, by the manyfoldnesse, by the
shamefulnesse, and by the penalty thereof. The greatness of it is, that the
Creature offended and despised his Creator, who was the sovereign goodness of
man. The manyfoldnesse thereof is too be seen by the fruits. The sha^fulnesse
appears by the horrible defilement of all mankind, which followed his
offense. The penalty was curse and damnation, besides innumerable calamities
and miseries, wherewith mankind lies overwhelmed in this life.

The offense being known which has made us gods enemies, in the third place,
is too be considered the mediator, who verily ought to be such a one, as
both could appease Gods displeasure and also make full amends for the wrong,
that was done. Too pacify the displeasure of GOD no creature was able: and too
make amends for the wrong, God ought not. Therefore such a mediator was too be
sought, as both could by reason of his power, and ought by reason of nature*
When such a one was not to be had: the second person in trinity, came intoo
the world, and took man's nature upon him, and became man Jesus Christ. This
Jesus Christ is joined too God the father in Godhead, and too man by his
manhood. Wherefore he both could as God, and ought as man, because he took
our case upon him.

The mediator has made amends for the wrong. For he has taken upon him our
gyltinesse, for which he has suffered punishment upon the alter of the cross,
and has satisfied Gods Justice. Howbeit forasmuch as we abide yet still
defiled with sin: Christ during all his whole life in this world, did
continually obey Gods law fully and perfectly, which Righteousness of his, he
imputes too all believers, that they may be righteous in Gods sight: And so
with his oblation he pacifieth Gods wrath, and clotheth us with obedience, that
we may appear righteous in Gods sight.

Amends being made, atonement is begone between God and man. For the
father is appeased through the obedience of his son.

Howbeit, forasmuch as in all attonements, there must needs pass some
covenant between those that are reconciled: the same thing is seen also in
this place stablished between us and God. For as on the behalf of GOD, there
is a frank and fatherly promise of mercy, according too this text, I will be
thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee. Also, This is my beloved son,
in whom I am well pleased: and agein: As truly as I live, I will not the death
of a sinner, but that he should turn and live: so on man's behalf there is
faith, whereby the fatherly promise is taken, and whereby we are adopted too be
the children of God, through his only begotten son Jesus Christ.

And forasmuch as in couenaunts, seals are wont too be set too: these also
are not omitted in this most high covenant. For there be three seals. The
first is Chrysts oath: Uerely, verily, I say unto you, he that believes in
me, has life everlasting. The second sealing is by the Sacraments of Baptim,
and the Lords supper, which are the most assured seals of the covenant
between God and man, and shall never be cancelled, unless man through his
own default, do cast away Faith. The third^ seal is the earnestpeny of the
holy ghost, who bears witness too our spirit, that we are the sons of
God. Hereunto also perteyneth that saying 2. Cor. 1. He has sealed us up, and
has given us the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. These are the signs
and seals wherewith the peace that is agreed upon between God and man is
sealed and confirmed, that it may stand steadfast.

Furthermore, least any man may surmise, that this peace: perteyneth but too a
certain few, the publishing thereof is too be marked, which is universal.
For Christ at his going up intoo heaven, gave commandment too his Disciples,
that they should proclayme this peace over all the woorld: For thus says he:
Goo intoo the whole world, and preach the Gospel too all creatures. This
peace therefore belongs too all that receive the voice of the Gospel, and
believe in Christ, continuing so too the end. For thus says the Lord:
Blissed is he that continues too the end. For it is not enough for a man too
have begoon well, unless he proceed forward from day too day.

If ye enquire after the fruits of this most amiable peace: ye shall find
them too be many, both in this life, and after the resurrection. In this life
by the benefit of this peace, thou have access too God as too a most meek
father, through Jesus Christ. For thus says Paul: We being justified by
faith, have peace with God through Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access
too this grace in which we stand. The second fruit of this peace is a good
conscience. For before, the conscience of sin vexes us: but after we feel
this peace, our conscience is made good and chereful, as was the thieves upon
the cross, when he herd: This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. After
the same manner, when we here in the Gospel, that remission of sins is
denounced too them that believe: the conscience of the believers becomes
quiet. With this good conscience is joined the joy of the Spirit, whereby it
comes too pass, that we glory even in the mids of afflictions, as Paul
says. Howbeit this glorying and this joy of Spirit is increased by thinking
upon the word, by prayer, by use of the Sacraments, and by other godly
exercises. After this fruit follows also a fourth, namely brotherly love.
For when we perceive and feel by faith, that God our common father is
reconciled too us by our common mediator: we begin too love one another, as
coparteners of this common treasure. With this fourth fruit, there goes also a
fifth, which is a glad departure out of this life, according as Simeon (when
he had seen Christ the author of this peace) said: Now let thy servant depart
in peace: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

The fruit of this peace after the Resurrection, shall be everlasting
ioyfulnesse, everlasting gladness, and everlasting fruition of the sight of
GOD, and of all the Saints that have lived from the beginning of the world
too that day. This fruit is no man able too conceive sufficientely in this life.

Now that I have somewhat largely spoken of those things that meet toogither in
this peace, I will draw intoo a brief sum or description, what this peace
is. The peace beetweene GOD and man therefore, is a mutual agreemente of GOD
and man. Of GOD accepting man intoo favor for Christ's sake; and of man,
receiving (by faith) the grace that is offered him, and promising earnestly his
obedience unto GOD. Let this suffize concerning the peace which Christ offreth
here, not only too the eleven disciples, which were then present: but also
unto us, and too all that will receive this peace when it is offered them by
the preaching of the gospel* After this peaceable greeting, it follows in the
text, by what means Christ proved him self too be rise^ agein from death in
deed. And he shows that the same thing was so foretold in Moses, in the
prophets, and in the Psalms. But for as much as you have herd of these things
upon Easter day, and yesterday: I will speak only of the necessity and use of
Christ's death and resurrection.

Of the second.
SO is it written, and so ought Christ too suffer and rise agein from death
the third day, and repentance and forgiveness of sins too be preached in
his name too all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

First therefore when he says, so is it written: His will is, that not reason,
but Scripture should wey with us, as often as the kingdom of God comes in
question: Where this is written, he adds: saying: It must needs be, yt all
things be fulfilled in the law of Moses, in the Prophets, and in ye Psalms.
Therefore when any question is put forth concerning salvation, Moses must be
called too counsel, the Prophets must be read, and the Psalms must be
perused: and consequently the wrytings of the Evangelists and Apostles
Whatsoever is repugnant too these wrytings, must be rejected, as proceeding
from Satan.

What is written? that Christ ought so too suffer and rise from death the third
day. When he says, So ought, it imports a necessity of Christ's death and
resurrection.

Why then ought he? First that the scriptures which can not lie, might be
fulfilled. For like as GOD endures for ever: so his word endures for ever.
And Christ says: Heaven and Earth shall pass, but my words shall not
pass. Secondely, this thing must needs be done, because God has so
determined. For it ca^ by no means be avoided. but that that thing which God
has certainly determined, must needs take effect. Thirdly, it was of
necessity, that Christ must suffer for the redemption of man from endless
punishementes, which they had deserved by their sins. For had not Christ
suffered, we had abidden in our sins under the wrath of GOD. Fourthly it was
of necessity that Christ should suffer, for the glory wherewith he was too
be crowned afterward. Fifthly, it behooued Christ too suffer for our
instruction and comfort. Forasmuch as he is our head, it behooued him to lead
us the way, as well in persecution as in glory. Sixthly, it behooued Christ to
suffer, too the intent ye truth might answer the figures. For many figures of
the old Testament, did represent Chrysts death and Resurrection, of which is
spoken upon Easter day. Breefly (too conclude in one word) Christ suffered,
dyed, and rose ageyn, that Gods displeasure might be pacified, mankind saved,
and the devils kingdom destroyed.

Thus have we, of how great necessity it was, that Christ should dye and
rise agein. Now let us here what is the fruit and use of this wonderful
work* Which thing the Lord declares in these words. And repentance and
forgiveness of sins too be preached too all nations in his name, By these
words is gathered, first what the Gospel is, and what is the effect of it.
The Gospel is a preaching of repentance and forgiveness of sins for Chrysts
sake. The effect of the Gospel is, that deliverance from sin and salvation
happen through Jesus Christ only. Howebeit too the intent it may appear the
more plainly unto us, how great benefits are offered us by the Gospel (all
which lie hid under these words of Christ:) I will bring a somewhat more large
description out of the Scriptures.

The Gospel is a general preaching, wherein is uttered the deliverance from
the curse of the law, and Gods wrath: and wherein forgiveness of sins,
Salvation and Eternal life is proclaimed too them that believe in the Son of
GOD, for the Sacrifice of him, according too the promyses made in old time too
the Fathers: that the glory of Gods goodness, might continually be
published: and that moreover men being delivered by Christ, might bring forth
fruits meet for the Gospel, and at length enjoy everlasting life.

In this description is first set forth, from what evils we be set free by
means of the Gospel: that is too wit, from the curse of the law, according
too that sentence. Galath. 3. Christ became accursed for us, that is too say,
he took upon him the curse that we deserved for our sins, too the intent
we might become heirs of righteousness and blissyng. This thing also
avouches Paul. 2. Cor. 5. where he says thus: Him that knew no sin, he
made sin, that we might be made the righteousness of GOD in him. This is
as much too say, as Christ which was free from all sin, became guilty for
us. Therefore is it well said, that deliverance from the curse of the law,
is preached unto us by the Gospel. Moreover because Gods wrath was joined
with the curse of the law, we are also delivered from Gods wrath when we
believe the Gospel. He that believes not (says the truth) the wrath of God
abides upon him. Therefore he that believes, is no longer under wrath, but
under grace. Now where as grace reigns, there the devils tyranny has no
power, there is no sting of everlasting death, there is no fear of hell, from
these evils therefore does the Gospel preach deliverance.

But what are the good things that it brings word of? It brings tidings of
forgiveness of sins, of salvation, and of eternal life. We being guilty
of sin, are by nature cursed and damned to everlasting death. But now does
Christ in his Gospel, offer us Forgyuenesse of sins, Salvation, and
everlasting life. Which good things he has purchased for us, by his death
and glorious Resurrection.

We have heard by what evils we are set free by means of the Gospel, and
what good things are offered us by the same. Now follows too whom these good
things happen, namely too them that believe in the Son. This is proved by
many textes of Scripture. He that believes (says Christ) has life
everlasting. Like as before this ^ayeth goes forgiveness of sins: so goes
there with it soul health. And Peter says, that the end of our Faith is
the health of our souls. The same thing is mente here, when it is said.
There must repentance be preached, wherthroughe we sorrow for our sins,
and flee unto Christ, who says: I came not too call the rightuous, but
sinners too repentance. After these things it follows, by whose benefit we
atteyne so great good things, namely for the sacrifice of Christ, that is too
wit, for Christ's death and resurrection. Whereupon Paul in the fourth too
the Romans. He dyed for our sins, and was raised ageine for our
justification.

And lest any man should think the Gospel too be a new learning, I added in
the definition, according unto the promise made by the fathers in old time.
For both unto Adam after his fall was the promise made in the third of
Genesis, and it was often times after repeated and beaten intoo the Fathers
heads, by the space of four thousand years, til Christ came in the flesh.
In the conclusion are added the ends for which Christ came: first too deliver
us from the judgment of the law: secondly that they which are delivered,
should bring forth fruits worthy of the Gospel: thirdly that they should
blaze abroad this so great a benefit: and fourthly, that at the last they
should obtein full redemption in eternal life, through our Lord Jesus Christ,
too whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be praise, honor, and glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

The first Sunday after Easter. The Gospel. John. xx.
THE SAME day at night, which was the first day of the Sabbothes, when
the doors were shut (where the Dysciples were gathered toogyther for
fear of the Jews) came Jesus and stood in the midst, and said unto
them: Peace be unto you. And when he had so said, he shevved unto them
his hands and his side. Then were the Disciples glad when they savve the
Lord. Then said Jesus unto them ageine: Peace be unto you: As my Fathet
sent me, even so send I you also. And when he had said these words, he
breathed on them, and said unto them: receive ye the holy Ghost. VVhosoeuers
sins ye remitte, they are remitted unto them. And vvhosoeuers sins ye
retain, they are retained.

The exposition of the text.
THis Gospel conteyneth part of the story, that John the Evangelist wrate
concerning the resurrection of the Lord, in which part the Lord testifies by
his visible and fleshely presence, by word, deed, and miracles, that he is
risen from the dead. And beetaking unto his Disciples the ministry of his
word, he avouches them too be blissed that shall believe in him. In the
end of the text, is added the final cause of all the holy Scripture. For
thus says he: These things are written that ye may believe, and that by
believing, ye may have life in his name. Howbeeit for as much as inoughe is
spoken already the last week concerning the Lords resurrection, I will not
make any more process about it at this time: but will entreat of three other
places which are contained in this Gospel. The places.

1 Of the ministry of the word and of the power of the Church. 2 Of the
confession of Thomas. 3 Of the end of holy Scripture.
Of the first.
THe words of the text concerning the ministry of the word and the power
of the Church, are these: Peace be unto you, as my Father sent me, so send I
you. When he had said this he breathed upon them, and said unto them:
Take ye the holy Ghost: whose sins so ever you release, they are released
unto them, and whose so ever you with hold, they are with holden. Here
have we few words, but they be pithie and contain a plentiful doctrine,
which all christians ought too know. Wherefore I exhort you too give good
ear, that you may understand this doctrine. And too the intent that may be
done the more commodiously, I will divide these words whereby the ministry is
ordained, into four parts. The first part: peace be unto you. The second
part: as my father sent me, so send I you also. The third part: he breathed
upon them and said, take ye the holy ghost. The fourth part: whose sins so
ever you release, they are released unto the^, and whose so ever you with
hold, they are withholden. Of these four parts will I speak in order.

The first part, namely the greeting, Peace be unto you, does not only
comfort the Disciples that were then present, but also gives courage too all
that be and shall be ministers of the word in the Church. He that takes upon
him the ministry of the word, has by and by the Devil his enemy, who
continually lies in wait for his doctrine and life. If he cannot corrupt his
doctrine, he endeuoreth too stain his life, that a man might deny the thing in
his works, which he teaches in his words. If the Devil cannot defile his life,
he lays a snare for the doctrine, that men might be deceived with erroneous
doctrine, and so be damned. In many he defiles both life and doctrine.
Besides that, the minister of the word has also the world against him, which
assaileth him eft with Tirannie, eft with Hypocrisy, and eft with Sophistry,
that he might not execute his duty aright.

What should the minister of the word do in so great disstresse? He shall
comfort him self with this saying of Christ: peace be unto you: and
therwithall he shall pray unto God, that he will keep him in this peace, so
as he hinder not the course of the Gospel either by his doctrine or by his
conversation. He shall set more by the peace of Christ, than by all the
delights and fre^dships of the world. Let this then be the comfort of the
ministers of the Gospel, which must fight aageinst the crafts of the Devil,
the tirannie of the world, hypocrisy, and sophistry.

The second part is: As my father sent me, so send I you. How did the father
send the son? The father sent the son to destroy the kingdom of the devil,
according too that saying The woman's seed shall tread down the serpents head:
Also, Christ appeered too destroy the devils words. What? does it not belong
only too Christ too tread down the serpents head? Does it not belong only too
Christ too destroy the woorks of the devil? Yes surely, only unto Christ. But
in this so great a work, there need two engines: Sacrifice and Doctrine.
Christ was sent, that he alone by sacrifice should appease his fathers wrath,
and vanquishe the Devil. Afterward, because this benefit is offered too men by
Doctrine, he destroyed the woork of the Devil by doctrine also. Therefore was
Christ sent for two purposes: too pacify God by sacrifice, and too teach.
For the first purpose, Christ only was meet too be sent: for the latter
purpose, (that is too wit, too teach) were sent in old time all the Prophets,
and afterward the Apostles, and all men that are lawfully called to the office
of preaching. Therefore as in respect of teaching, Christ sends his disciples
as he was sent by the Father? Hereby we may gather two things. First the
difference between the kingdoms of the world, and the administration of the
church: or between the gouerners of the world, and the gouerners of churches.
For the ministers of the word are not sent too be Lords on the earth. For
Christ took no Lordship upon him: neither are they sent too the pomps of this
world which Christ despised: but too teach the Gospel: too set up the kingdom
of God: and too preach salvation unto men. Secondly heerby is too be gathered
what authority ye word is of, which they preach that are called to the
ministry. As my father has sent me (says he) so send I you, that you may
speak, not in your own name but in mine. Here unto perteyneth that saying of
the Lord unto his disciples. Math. 10. He that heereth you, heereth me: and
he that despises you, despises me. Here have they that teach the word, a
comfort, and they that here it a weighty admonition. For when those that
teach the word godlily in lawful vocation, do suffer any thing at the
thanklesse world: they have a comfort in this, that they bear the room of
Christ, and that Christ suffers wrong with them, who will in time revenge
himself. And they that here the word, are admonished first of the
authority of the word, for they are bound too here the word none
otherwise, than if they herd Christ himself speaking Next, they are warned
too make account of the godly ministers of Gods word, as of Chrysts
ambassadors. Besides that, they are put in mind of the penalty which they
incur by the just judgment of God, as many as despise either the word
preached, or the ministers themselves. Also the ministers of the word must
consider too what degree of worship they are exalted, that they do not either
infect the pureness of the doctrine, or estraunge their heerers from them by
their evil conversation.

The third part. And when he had said: he breathed upon them, and said unto
them. Take ye the holy Ghost. These words co^tein a singular doctrine. For
Christ by these words shows from whence the word which is preached by the
voice of the ministers, has his power and woorking, which undoubtedly is not
enclosed in the voice of ye minister, nor ha^geth upon the holiness and
worthiness of man: but all the power and woorking of the word proceeds of
the virtue of Christ's spirit. For when as Christ here breaths upon the
disicples, and bids them take the holy ghost, he gives too understand, yt
the holy ghost shall always be present at ye ministry of the word: as if he had
said: behold ye shall be the ministers of the new testament, which shall build me
a church in ye woorld by preaching the gospel, and I know how weak you are too
go through with so great a woork, specially seeing the devil, the world, and
all man's reason shall set themselves against you. Wherefore I will that the holy
ghost shall be present in this your ministry, by who^ your labor shall become
effectual. For he by his power shall bring too pass, that my word which you
shall preach, shall not return to you in vain. Here we may gather a profitable
doctrine and admonition. The doctrine is, that the holy ghost is tied too the
word, and will be effectual by it. The admonishment or comfort is, that thereby
as well the techers as the heerers may raise up themselves at the presence of
the holy ghost, against the enemies of their salvation.

The fourth part. Whose sins so ever ye shall release, they are released
unto them: and whose so ever ye shall vvithholde, they are vvithholden. In
these words he ordeineth and establishes that spiritual power of the church,
which we call the power of the keys, and the key is showed wherewith the kingdom
of heaven is opened and shut.

Notwithstanding, too the intent this most profitable doctrine may be
evidently understood of al men, I will divide it intoo certain points, which
are these: From whence is the power of the church: what it is, in whom it
rests, and wherein it consists. These points being well understood, there
is no man but he shall handsomely perceive, what and what manner of thing the
Ecclesiastical power is.

From whence then is this power? From God, by Jesus Christ. For if ye have an
eye no further than on man, it is but a single ministry. But if ye have an
eye too Christ, it is an high power, than the which there is none upon earth,
either greater, or profitabler, or of more woorship. For Christ sitting at the
right hand of the father in the throne of his majesty, orders and directs
this power. He therefore that dispiseth this power, both is bereft of the fruit
thereof, and also dishonors the son of God.

What is the power of the Church? It is the power of releasing and withholding
sins that is too say, of preaching the Gospel, which who so believes, too
him is the kingdom of heaven opened: and he that believes not, too him it is
showed that the kingdom of heaven is shut up.

In whom rests this power? In the Church. For when our Lord gave the keys
too Peter and the other Apostles, he bestowed these keys upon the very
Church, at the which the ministers fetch the keys, as the handmayde has
the keys of her mistress.

In what thing consists the power of the keys? In the effectual woorking of
the holy Ghost, who in the word and by the word is mighty of operation,
and woorketh faith in the heerers of ye word. So the word is as it were one
key which the minister of the word occupyeth, and faith is another key which
the holy ghost puts too: and when these keys are put too both toogither:
then is the kingdom of heaven opened.

Now that we have in this wise expounded these things, let us wey the words
of this text somewhat deeplyer. First therefore when he says (whose so
ever:) stay thy self and consider of this word (whose so ever.) First that
the promise of grace is universal. Set thou this universal promising against
the temptation of particularitie, and include thy self within the general
promise. Next, set this word, (whose so ever) against the multitud of sins.
And when thou art tempted, too despair for the multitude of thy sins, let
this promise of the Lord come too thy mind: whose so ever. etc. He says
not, if a man commit a few sins, or many: neither says he, if he be a Jew,
a Greek, a gentleman, a commoner, a rich man, or a poor man: but he says,
whose so ever. Moreover this place do^th us too understand, that absolution
may be given both publicly and privately. So Peter assoiled three thousand men
openly, and also Cornelius privately, in which sort the Prophet Natha^ also
assoyled David. The ministers of the word may use that general kind of
absolution, as often as they preach the Gospel: And they may use the special
kind, when reason requires it: that is too wit, when any man desires too have
private conference with the minister of the word, for the strengthening of his
faith.

2 It is put in the text Sins, without any addition. Wherefore all kinds of
sins are too be understood here, which are four. First corruption of
nature: secondly the boughs that spring out of the evil root: thirdly the
sins committed by error: and fourthly wilful sins. There is no sin at al
but it is forgiven, if forgiveness be desired for Christ's sake.

The word Release, is too be marked, for which Matthew has Loose. Christ
commands his Disciples too release and loose sins. Too release them as
det: and too loose them as a pinching burden. For sins are dets, because
that like as dets do bind too payment: so sins bind men too satisfaction,
unless the penalty be released. Sins also are burdens, because that as a
heavy burden weyeth him down that bears it: so sins wey men down with
the burden of curse, and the sentence of the law, until Christ come and take
up the burden upon him self. But what? Can man unbind and release sins? God
faith in.43. of Esaias: I am he, I am he that wipeth out thine iniquities, and
will not bear thy sins in mind. This text conuinceth that only God
releaseth sin. Ageine, whereas the Lord says here, whose sins so ever ye
shall release, they shall be released in heaven? I answer* Chrysts saying shows
manifestly, that there is a double releasing: one upon earth by the ministers
of the word, and another in heaven which is done by God alone. Of this latter
speaks Esayas Too be brief, God releaseth as Lord and owner, and the
ministers of the word release as servants and messengers that declare the will
of their master: which release is made by telling the will of God. This is
proved. Number. 6. where the Lord says in this wise: The preests shall put the name
of the Lord upon the children of Israel, but I will bliss them. Too unbind
therefore (which is the duty of the priest,) is too declare that God has
released the fault.

But how do they withhold sins? by the word, and according too the word:
that is too wit, what sins soever ye shall declare too be withhild by the
word of god, they shall be withholden in heaven also. I have spoken more heerof
in the feast of the Lords supper: and therefore now I pass to the second
place, whereof I will entreat very breefly.

Of the second.
COncerning Thomas, we have two things in this story, that is to wit,
unbelief and confession. His unbelief he shows in these words: unless I
see the gash of the nails in his hands, I will not believe. He herd the other
Disciples telling how they had seen the Lord, and yet he being utterly
unmindful of all the foretellings of the prophets, and of Christ, believes not.
So sore does man's reason set it self against God and his word in matters of
salvation. Hithertoo concerning his unbelief: Now follows concerning his
faith and confession. An eight days after, the Disciples were together ageine
in one house, and Thomas with them: And Jesus came when the gates were shut,
and stood in the mids of them, and said, peace be unto you: and he said too
Thomas, bring thy finger hither, and see my hands, etc. And be not
unbelieving, but believe. When he had herd the Lords voice, and was co^uicted
by the manifest sign, he conceived faith, out of which he vttred this
confession, my lord and my God. At Thomas therefore we may lern.ij. things: from
whence faith is, and what is the true confession. Faith is of the word and of
the sign, according whereunto we have the gospel ye most true word of Christ,
and two most stately signs, Baptim and the Lords supper. This faith conceived
by the word and confirmed by sign, will utter a true confession, such as
this is of Thomas, who cries out here, my Lord and my god. This confession of
Thomas, if it be well sifted, contains four things. For first it
acknowledges Christ too be the same man that was slain a three days before
by the Jews. Secondly whereas he calls him God, he acknowledges his Godhead.

Moreover whereas he says not two Lords or two Gods, but one Lord and one
God: he acknowledges the unity of his person. Lastly whereas he says, my
Lord and my God, he confesses his office of redemption, upon whom he also
stayed himself by lively faith.

Of the third.
BLissed are they that have not seen and have believed. This universal
doctrine concerning believers is too be observed. For here Christ by express
words pronounces them blissed that believe, although they see not Christ with
their bodily eyes. Hereunto pertains all the whole Scripture, as he says.
But these things are written, that you might believe that Jesus is the son
of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name. The end therefore
of the Scripture, is, that we may believe. The end of faith, is, that the
believers should have everlasting life: to which bring us Jesus Christ the
author of life, too whom with the father and the holy ghost be honor for
evermore. Amen.

The second Sunday after Easter. The Gospel. John. x.
Christ said unto his Disciples: I am the good shepherd: a good shepherd
gives his life for the sheep. An hired servant, and he which is not the
shepherd (neither the sheep are his own) sees the wolf coming, and
leaves the sheep and flees, and the wolf catches and scatters the
shepe^. The hired servant flees because he is an hired servant, and cares not
for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of
mine. As my father knovveth me, even so know I also my father. And I give my
life for the sheep: and other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: Them
also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold
and one shepherd.

The exposition of the text.
THe occasion why this Gospel is set forth in the church at this season, is
this. We herd in ye first holy day after Easter, to what end it be hooued
Christ too suffer and rise ageine from death: that is to wit, that in his name,
repentance and forgiveness of sins might be preached too all nations:
through which preaching the kingdom of Satan might be destroyed, and the
kingdom of Christ set up. Now in as much as this thing cannot otherwise be
brought to pass, than by faithful ministers of the word: (who^ the scripture
terms shepherds:) It liked the church, as on this day to set forth the gospel
concerning the cheef shepherd Jesus Christ, and his care toward his sheep, and
that to this intent, that the faithful ministers of the word might in their
doctrine, life, and charge, follow the example of this shepherd. Hithertoo
concerning the occasion why this present Gospel is red as this day. The sum
of the Gospel is, that like as Christ professes himself too be the true
shepherd, and to have a care of his sheep: So on the contrary part, he
testifies that there be woolues that lie in wait for his flock, whom the
hirelings seeing, do flee away, and leave the sheep too be torn in pieces by
the wolves: against the falsenesse of whom, the Lord promises that he himself
will look to his sheep, and he declares that he has yet other sheep which
he will bring together, that there may be made one fold and one shepherd. The
places are three.

1 Of Christ the shepherd, and other true shepherds. 2 Of the Woolfe, the
hireling and the fleeing of the hireling. 3 Of Christ's sheep, of their mark,
and of the unity of the sheepfold.
Of the first.
IN the first place, concerning the shepherd Christ, we have two things. The
one is, what is his towardness: the other what are his benefits toward his
church. Now as touching Christ the shepherd, we must alwais bear in mind the
confession of Thomas which we herd an eight days ago. For whereas he says my
Lord and my God, first he confesses him whom he speaks too, too be the same
man that had bin crucified and dead, whom he now acknowledges too be risen
agein from the dead in deed. Secondly he confesses also the same man to be
very God: for he says, and my God. Thirdly he confesses this man and God to
be one person. For he says, not my Lords, but my Lord. Fourthly he confesses
this God and man, one person which is both God and man, too be his savior. For
he is my Lord and has charge of me: and he is my God that has taken me
intoo his tut^on and favor. Therefore he confesses Christ to be the true
Messiah and Savior of the world, and consequently that true shepherd that was
promised of old time, of whom Zach, 10. I will raise up a shepherde upon the
earth. Him does Peter call the shepherd and Bishop of our souls. This have I
spoken breefly of Thomas confession concerning Christ the shepherd, too the
intent we may understand what is the towardness or inclination of this our
shepherd: Now let us here our Lords words. I (says he) am the good shepherd,
but what does the good shepherd? The good shepherd gives his life for his
sheep. That is to say, he is a good shepherd, which loves his sheep so well,
that he will rather suffer death, than leave his sheep to be a pray too
thieves, and to be torn of the wolves. This promis he confirmed also by his
deed: for he suffered a most shameful death for his sheep.

We have herd how great Christ's love is toward his sheep. Now that we may
behold his benefits, which he bestows of his mere goodness, we will apply
the similitude of a shepherd of sheep, to Christ our shepherd. What then does
a good shepherd? First he gathers his sheep together: secondly he goes
before them: thirdly he leads them forth intoo pastures: fourthly he feeds
them: fifthly he watches them: sixthly he rules them: seventhly he defends
them: eighthly he heals them that be hurt: ninthly he fetches in the^ that
stray, with his shepherds hook: and tenthly he brings them home when he has
fed them. All these benefits does Christ perform spiritually too his church.

First therefore Christ our shepherd gathers his sheep together. But how? by
the preaching of the Gospel. This began he too do by and by after the fall of
our first parents. For in spirit he was present with the Prophets, and gathered
many sheep unto him. Afterward he came himself, to seek the lost sheep: And
at this day he gives preachers too gather sheep in his name.

Secondly he goes before his sheep. How? In persecution and in glory. In
persecution when he suffered diverse miseries in this life, which the saints
also must needs taste of. And in glory, when by rising ageine from death, he
entered intoo the glory of heaven, whom in their time all shall follow, as many
as be his true sheep.

Thirdly he leads them forth too feed into most pleasant and fine meadows,
as David says in the.23. Psalm: he made me sit down in well grown pastures,
to the waters of refreshment shall he lead me.

Fourthly, when he has led them intoo the meadows, he feeds them with his
word and with his spirit. With his spirit, when he comfort them and
strengthens them within: and with his word, when his gospel is preached,
whereby faith is conceived too believe upon this shepherd.

Fifthly he watches them, and sits as it were in a watch-toure too foresee
that no body fall upon his sheep vnbewares. And this does he by his Angels, by
the faithful ministers of his word, by the godly Magistrate, and too be
short, by good governors in families* commonweals, and housholdes*

Sixthly, he rules them, namely with his spirit, his word, and his discipline.
Whereupon David says: The Lord rules me, and nothing shall be wanting to
me. In a place of pasture has he settled me.

Seventhly, he defends them. Whereupon Paul says: if God be on our side who
can be against us? And David: Although I walk in the valey of the shadow of
death, I will not fear any harm, because thou art with me. Thy rod and thy
staff, they have comforted me.

Eighthly, he heals them that be hurt: for as sheep are oftentimes atteinted
with thorns and venims, which are healed by the skilful shepherd: so Christ
our shepherd does cure and heal his sheep that are hurt with the thorns of
evil conditions, and the venim of poisoned doctrine. Whereupon the.146 Psalm
says: which heals the wounded in heart and binds up their sores. Ezech. 34.
I will feed my sheep, and I will make the^ sit down: I will seek that which was
lost, and I will bring ageine that which was cast away: I will bind toogither
that which was broken, and I will strengthen yt which was weak.

Ninthly he fetches in them that stray with his sheephook, while he lodeth
them with the cross, and as it were casts a sna^^le upon their heads. If
that good shepherd should not do so, many sheep would through the delights
and prosperities of this world, be led away from Christ's flock, and cast
them selves intoo the mouths of the woolues. Whereupon David says of himself:
It is good for me o Lord that thou have brought me low, that I might learn
thy Iustifications.

Lastly when he has fed them, he leads them home. Christ gathers,
feeds, defends, and cures his sheep in this world as in a wilderness of
a foreign realm. But at the last day he shall convey his sheep home that is to
say intoo their own country, where the Godly shall enjoy continual peace, and
quietness with Christ.

I have spoken of Christ the shepherd, of his towardness, care and benefits
toward his sheep, that is to wit, all that believe in him. Now will I add
(...) at concerning the shepherds that are ordained under him too have the
charge of the Lords flock. And it were too be wished that all had like
Doctrine, conversation, and regard toward their sheep, as had that true
shepherd. But because that is not so, there are four differences and kinds of
shepherds to be noted.

One kind is of them, that teach well and live well, following the example of the
cheef shepherd. Such were Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel and the other Prophets.
Such were Paul and Peter: Such at this day are all godly parish preests and
Bishops which shine before others in doctrine, conversation, and profession.
These are by David and Daniel compared to stars shining in heaven, where they
be lightened with the everlasting brightness of Christ. These (as Paul says)
are worthy of double honor. These build the City of God with both their hands.

The second sort is of them, that teach evil and live evil. These are the
worst, for they pull down the temple of God with both hands. Of which sort
Peter and Jude the Apostles have told us that there should be many in these
latter times.

The third kind is of them, that teach well, but live evil. Look what these
men build in the church with their right hand, they pull it down again with
their left, and they are altoogither like the shipwrights that builded the Ark of Noah: for they preparing the Arc for others too save them from the flud
perished themselves in the mids of the waves. Such one was Judas in times
past, and many such are found at this day. They say do as we teach, but follow
not our works. Of these spoke Christ, saying: when the Scribes and Pharisees
sit in Moses Chair, do as they bid, but not as they do. The damnation of
these men is just. For they know and teach the things that are to be done, and
yet they do them not themselves, whereas it is a shame for the teacher to be
taken tardie with the fault that he rebukes in others. Therefore says Barnard
well. Shepherds must fat their sheep with their own examples, rather than
with the examples of other men.

The fourth kind is of them that teach evil, but live well, so as they be not
subject too open crimes. These be hipocrits and do most harm of al. For
whereas men gaze at the outward appeera^ce of conversation, they are easly drawn
too embrace their doctrine also. Like as many of you in the papacy have seen
Monks, that not only have seemed holy to themselves but also have sold their
good works unto others: so lie they in wait both for the souls of men and for
their goods. Thus I have spoken concerning the four kinds of shepherds or
teachers in the church, of whom the first only is praise worthy, and builds
Christ's church too the soul health of many, and that according to the doctrine
and commandment of our cheef shepherd Jesus Christ.

Of the second.
NOw follows the second place concerning the wolf and the hireling. Of which
ye wolf teareth and destroys Christ's sheep, and the other leaves the sheep
in danger, and gives them over into the woolues mouth. For thus says the
text. But the hireling and he that is not the shepherd, vvhoo is not owner of
the sheep, sees the wolf coming and forsakes the sheep and runs his
way, and the vvoolf catches the sheep and scatters them. Here it behooves
us to know, whoo is that woolf of whom the Lord speaks, and after what manner
he enters upon the sheep, and when the hireling is to be thought to flee.

Who is then this woolf that the Lord speaks of here? It is the devil. For
as soon as man was created, he set upon him by and by, assailed him, and threw
him too the ground. So goes he about hungry at this day, seeking who^ he may
devour, neither will he cease as long as this world stands.

By what means (I pray you) sets he upon Chrysts sheep? He sets not
upon them one way, but he has four ways too set upon them. For he is wont
to rush in among Christ's sheep, either by sophistry, or Tirannie, or
wickedness, or Hypocrisy.

He sets upon them with Sophistry, either when he disguiseth vices with the
titles of virtues, or when in stead of Gods truth he foysteth in errors, to the
intent he may destroy Christ's seely sheep. Too call upon Saints, and to erne
everlasting life by our woorks, are most grievous sins: and yet he defe^deth
them as good deeds: and so of many other things.

He inuadeth Christ's sheep by Tirannie, when he brings too pass that they
be destitute of food and other helps of this present life, or else when he
assaulteth them with open war, too the intent he may either trouble the
pureness of the Gospel, or else quite abolish it.

He inuadeth Christ's flock with wickedness and stumbling-blockes, when he
draws many unto naughtiness, where: through the holy ghost is shaken of,
and me^ agein brought in bondage unto satan. How many in these days are by
this policy ouerthrown, there is no man yt sees not. In what village reigns
not envy, backbiting, bibbing, whoorhunting, and such oath horrible
wickednesses? In as much as we see these things we have an assured proof yt
satan inuadeth christ's sheepfold.

Also he inuadeth Christ's sheepfold by hypocrisy, as often as he covers
most heinous offenses with his outward pretense of holiness: like as was wo^t
too be in old time among the Moonks, is yet still at this day among them that
have not yet laid away their Pharisaicall fashions.

We have already by what ways the woolfe, (which is the Devil) inuadeth
Christ's sheepfold. Now will we speak of the fleeing of the hireling. For the
hireling is he that is no owner of the sheep, and therefore he runs away
when he sees the woolf make toward them.

But did not Christ now and then flee? Did he not command his disciples that
when they were persecuted in one city, they should flee into another? Did not
Paul himself flee when he was let down from the wall in a basket? Now in as much
as it is certain yt neither Christ was a woolf, nor the rest of ye Apostles, it
must needs follow yt this fleeing whereof ye Lord speaks here, is not to be
understood of every kind of fleeing. But it is to be known, yt there is a
fleeing of the body, and a fleeing of the mind. The fleeing of the body is
sometimes lawful, but the other is not. But what is the fleeing of the mind?
It is when one flees from doing his duty. And this fleeing is of four
sorts, according to the woolues four manners of inuading Christ's sheepfold.
For what minister of the word so ever for any cause forbeareth to set himself
against Sophistry, tirannie, wickedness and hypocrisy: the same is a
hireling, and not a true shepherd. For the good shepherd first sets himself
against Sophistry, by defending the true doctrine, and by rebuking and
confuting the false. But the hireling at this invasion of the wolf is afraid,
and dares not defend ye true doctrine, least he should lose some of his earthly
commodities. Therefore either he winketh at ye false doctrine, or at least wise
he reproves it not as he ought to do: and in so doing he is said to flee, not
in body but in mind, because he forsloweth his duty, secondly the good
shepherd will set himself against tyranny. Howbeeit because there be two kinds
of shepherds, the one Civil, the other Ecclesiastical, as the Civil shepherd
must set himself against Tirannie of woolues by the sword: so the
Eclesiasticall shepherd must set himself against it by prayer. He that does
not this, is a hireling and not a shepherd. Thirdly ye good shepherd shall set
himself against wickedness by rebuking and excommunication them that give
offense too the church with their misbehauior: like as John rebuked Herod,
Christ the pharisees, and all the Prophets did set themselves against the vices
of their times. The devil has egged a faithful person too aduoutry, too
incest, too covetousness, too unlawful lusts, or to bibbing. In this case the
good shepherd stands not in fear of me^, but ^f God: and rebukes men's vices
according to his duty. Contrariwise the hireling being careful of his own
ease, dares not open his mouth. If he rebuke, he does it in general terms,
but he dares not charge ye offe^ders to their face, as did ye Prophets and
other true shepherds. But some such hireling might object: behold I am here, I
fled not. Augustine answers him: because you have hild thy peace, thou have
f^ed: and thou hildest thy peace because thou art afraid. Fourthly the good
shepherd sets himself against hipocrisy, when he plucketh of the visor of
outward hypocrites, and bewrays how foul the face of sin is. But the
hireling runs away from this wolf, and dares not displease any man, least
men should hate him.

Now remains a question too be discussed, whither bodily fleeing be lawful
at all times or no? Whereunto I answer. Any shepherd that gaddeth from place
to place, either too increase his living, or for werynesse, or for the unkind
dealing of men, is surely an hireling and no shepherd. Notwithstanding, if
tyrants persecute a man, or lay wait for his life, it is lawful for a godly
shepherde too flee the hands of the Tyrant, that afterward (if it may be)
returning agein, he may do more good by his life, than he could have done by
his death. How be it in this case Godliness must be their rule.

Of the third.
THe third place is of Christ's sheep, and of their mark, and that there is
but one sheepfold and one shepherd. The sheep of Christ are all they that here
Christ, and like sheep do follow him in true simplicity, innocence,
meekness, and obedience. Neither are there any other marks too know Christ's
sheep by, than devotion toward God, charity toward our neighbor, pureness
of conversation, and a certain holy carfulness and forwardness in our
vocation. And where as he says he has other sheep, that must be brought
in too the same fold, he meeneth that there is one holy catholic Church of
the Jews and Gentyles toogyther. And therwithal he expresses the manner how
the sheep shall be brought together when he says: And they shall here my
voice. The preaching of the gospel therefore, and the believing of the Gospel
when it is preached, causes us too be gathered into Christ's sheepfold. They
that upon this place do gather, that before Doomesday there shall be so
great agreement in true Religion, that there shall be no heeresies nor
schisms: are far wide. For all the foresayings of the prophets teach the
contrary. And Christ, when, he said: Think ye that when the son of man
comes, he shall find Faith upon the earth? meant it should come to pass
through persecution, that the most part should fall from the faith. And the
nearer that the day of the Lord approaches, so much the feercer is the devil,
too trouble the little flock of Christ with his sophistry, tyranny,
wickedness, and hypocrisy. Wherefore let us pray too Christ the Shepherd of
our souls, that he will defend us in so great perils, too the glory of his
name. Too whom with the father and the holy ghost, be honor praise and glory
for ever. Amen.

The third Sunday after Easter. The Gospel. John. x^j.
JESUS said unto his Disciples: After a while ye shall not see me: and again
after a while ye shall see me, for I go too the father. Then said some of
his disciples between themselves: what is this that he says unto us?
after a while ye shall not see me, and again after a while ye shall see
me, and that I go to the father? They said therefore: what is this that he
says: after a while? we cannot tell what he says. Jesus perceived that
they would ask him, and said unto them: ye enquire of this betvveene your
selves, because I said: after a while ye shall not see me, and again, after
a while ye shall see me. Verily, verily, I say unto you ye shall weep and
lament, but contrariwise, the world shall rejoice. Ye shall sorrow, but your
sorrow shall be turned too joy. A woman when she trauaileth has sorrow,
because her hour is come. But as soon as she is delivered of the child, she
remembers no more the anguishe, for Joy that a man is borne intoo the world.
And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your
hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you.

The exposition of the text.
A His gospel is part of that sermon that Christ made too his disciples at his
Supper, the day before he suffered, in which sermon he taught them many things.
For he made mention of his own office, death, torments, resurrection, and
glorification. Moreover, he reasoned concerning the Church what it is, and what
should be the state of it in this world: as that it should have adversaries
which should assault it, and that it should at length by Faith overcome all her
troubles: and unto this part pertains also this present Gospel. For he
comfort his Disciples, whom he perceyueth too be sad for his foretelling
them of his Cross. He shows them before, that he would visit them agein^,
as soon as he were risen from death. And he adds a very goodly similitude of
a woman traveling of child, with whom the church shall taste the like fortune.
For like as the sorrowful great belyed woman, takes exceedyng great comfort of
the birth of her child: Even so the Church having wrestled out of the miseries
of this present life, shall in the end enjoy full glory with Christ, so she
continue steadfast in his faith unto the end. The places are three.

1 Chrysts forewarning concerning his own death and Resurrection. 2 The
weakness of the apostles: and so consequently of all mortal men, 3 The Cross
of the Church in this world, and the glorious and joyful deliverance of the
same.
Of the first.
COncerning the death and resurrection of Christ, I will speak somewhat
breefly, because we have herd all things alate more plenteously. After a
while ye shall not see me, and ageine, after a while ye shall see me: for
I go too the father: Here does Christ somewhat darkly foreshew them his death
and resurrection: But his meening is this. After a while (says he) ye shall
not see me, that is too say, I shall lie dead a three days in my grave, so
that you shall not see me. And again after a while ye shall see me, that
is too say, I shall be raised ageine from death, and you shall see me forty
days before I ascend visibly into heaven, and be taken away out of your sight
by a cloud. And this is it that he says because I go to the Father, that is
too say, after my death, I shall pass from persecution to the glory of
heaven. What? is he not present with his church after his ascension? Yes, he
is present according too his promise, even unto the end of the world.
Howbeeit not after a bodyly manner, but after a divine and spiritual manner. For
Gods word and the holy Ghost are the glass* wherein Christ will be holden: and
this beholding is sufficient, wherewith we must be contented, until he
himself come to judgment: for afterward we shall enjoy the sight of him for
evermore.

But why did he put his Disciples in mind of his death and resurrection?
Surely there be many causes, of which the chief is this, which he alleges in
these words. I have told you of these things before hand, that when they be
come to pass, you may believe. For men's minds are greatly strengthened, when
they see things fall out* according too that which was told them before.
Neither did any thing more raise the Apostles, than that they saw all things
aunswerable too Christ's foresayings: whereby they might both understand his
Godhead, and thoroughly perceive his office. Moreover the Lords will was, by
the often forewarnings too provide for the infirmity of his disciples. For
this is the point of a faithful master, to have a consideration of their
capacity whom he takes upon him to teach, and too remedy their rawnesse
by often beating the self same things intoo their heads. Besides this also, he
therefore foretold his death and resurrection, too the intent his disciples
should know that he knew before of his own death and resurrection, and that
he willingly obeyed the father, even unto death, too the intent he might
deliver us from death. This sermon of Christ's, is too be applied unto us
also: for not much unlike happens unto us. He seems too be a while from
us, when he leaves us comfortless wrestling under the cross. And afterward
again he is seen of us, when he comfort us by the Gospel, and
manifests the presence of his spirit in our prayers.

Of the second.
THe rawnesse of Christ's disciples in matters of salvation is described in
these words. What is it (say they) that he says, After a while ye shall
not see me, and again after a while ye shall see me, and that I go to the
father, we know not what he speaks. It is a greater wonder, that they
being so often warned of the Lords death and Resurrection, not only by types,
figures and riddles: but also by express words, could never the more
understand him. What is the cause heerof? Surely, there are two causes. One
is, for that an opinion once conceived in the mind, is not easly pulled out,
specially if it have taken deep root. The Jews, yea and the Lords Disciples
themselves dreamed that Chrysts government should have bin civil, so as
Christ himself being made chief Emperor, should subdue the whole world and
reign over it, and that his disciples should have bin next about him: which
thing the moother of Zebedies children declared sufficiently, when she made
request that the one of her sons might sit at Christ's right hand, and the
other at his left. An other cause, is the dimnesse that is in all mankind,
whereby it comes to pass, that no man is able too perceive the things that
pertein too God, unless he have the holy Ghost too be his teacher. Heerby we
may leene, first too bewail this our blindness. Secondly too here Gods word
more often, whereby we may be delivered f^rom this dimnesse of ignorance: and
thirdly to crave of God that he him self will teach us according too that
place of the.xxv. Psalm: Lead me forth in thy truth, and teach me, because
thou art the God of my salvation. Good and rightful is the Lord, therefore
shall he teach sinners in the way. But we must take heed that when the Lord
teaches, we shut not the ears of our heart against his voice, like as all they
do that here Gods word without fruit. As for those that so stop their ears
against Gods voice, they may at length deserve too be left up in their
blindness and ignorance for ever. God preserve us that we incur not this
penalty of unthankfulness, wherewith we see many to be horribly punished.
For there are many too be found, that if a man ask them after the heering of
a Sermon what they have brought away, have not a word to answer. But if ye
question with them of talk had at a feast, or in game, they can rehearse you
every thing, so as they will not miss ye a word. What is the reason? In some
folk, the cause of it is man's natural dullness in matters of Salvation. In
other some, the cause of it is the punishment of sin also: that heering, they
here not, and understanding they understand not. Wherefore right dear
beloved, let us fall too amendment of life, let us call upon God for help, and
when we feel in our selves a weariness of heering and learning the word of
God. Let us by and by think that the devil lays a snare for us, and let us
forthwith flee unto Prayer, beseeching GOD that he will both teach us, and
also by his spirit make room for his word in us.

Of the third.
Verily verily I say unto you, that you shall moorne and weep, but the
world shall rejoice. And you shall be sad, but your sadness shall be
turned intoo joy, He repeteth the same thing that he had spoken a little before,
concerning his death and Resurrection. For by three signs which were set
forth, he gave an inklyng what should come after, although somewhat darkly. By
the moorning of his Disciples, is signified the death and burial of Christ.
By the gladness of the world is signified the triumph of the Jews kylling
Christ. For when they had put him too death, they thought themselves and their
common weal too be out of all hazard. And when he adds, Your sorrow shall
be turned intoo joy. He signifies that he will rise again from death, whereby
his disciples shall conceive joy. This self same thing declares he by the
similitude of the woman trauaylyng with child, whoo as long as she is in her
labor feels grievous throws: but as soon as she seeeth the child borne,
she takes so great joy, that she utterly forgets the pain that she felt
a little before. After the same manner the disciples of the Lord felt great sorrow
of mind, when the Lord was dead and buried: but anon after, when the Lord was
raised again from death, for joy they forgate the sorrow past. And this is it
that he says: And I will see you agein, and your heart shall rejoice, because
you shall see me raised from death, and no man shall take your joy from you:
that is to say, I shall die no more, that ye should be cast into heaviness
for my death: but I shall live for ever, and so instruct you by my spirit
concerning the knowledge of God, that you shall have no more need too ask me
any more questions. Thus have we plainly seen the meenyng of the Text. And
now are all these things too be applied too the church of all times, which
in this world shall be under the cross, while the ungodly rejoice: Howebeeit
at length when Christ appears, it shall obtain full and perfect joy, whereof
shall be none end. For these threedays wherein our Lord suffered and rose ageyn,
are an image of ye cross of the church, and of the joy of the world, that is
to say, of the ungodly persecuting Christ, and killing him in his members: and
of the glorious deliverance of the church, which shall at yt time be full, when
our Lord shall ^ome in the cloud^ with glory and great power, and shall take
up those that be his, intoo everlasting joy, and deliver the ungodly too the
devil, too be tormented with eternal pains.

For as much then as this place admonishes us of the Cross of the Church,
and of the glorious deliverance of the same, I will first show what the Cross
is, and how diverse: next what are the causes of the Cross: Then the difference
between the cross of the Godly, and the punishments of the ungodly: Also with
what mind the Godly may bear the cross: and lastly from whence comfort is
too be sought under the Cross.

What is the Cross? It is any affliction whereunto the members of Chrysts
Church are subject in this world, whereof there seem to be four differences.
For the cross of a godly person, is first either a grief of mind and
affliction of body, and that for sundry causes: as for the receiving of some
loss, for the sorrowful mischaunce of some friend, for thirst, nakedness,
imprisonment, or torture, as holy Jacob had exceeding grief of mind for the
loss of his son Joseph: Joseph suffered affliction of body in ye prison:
Lazarus felt hunger and the pain of his byles at the richmans gate: and many
are exercised at this day with sundry troubles and greefes both of mind and
body.

2 Or i^ is a most sharp fight between the flesh and spirit in the Godly.
For the flesh lusts always against the spirit, and now and then gets the
upper hand, seeming to give the spirit an utter overthrow: as we see in
David, who being overcome with the concupiscences of the flesh, felt intoo the
most heinous offenses of murder and aduoutrie, and had perished for ever, had
he not bin called back too repentance, and the flesh subdued agein under
obedience of the spirit. Heervpon Paul cries out, whoo shall deliver me from
the body of this death? The grace of God, through Jesus Christ.

3 Or it is a hardness and distress of vocation in household state, civil
state, or ecclesiastical state, that is too say, of private, publik, and
ecclesiastical state. How great a cross even the godly husbands and wives
feel, in bringing up their children, and in seeking needful things whereby
too live, they know that have had the trial of it. Such as bear office, as
kings, noble men, counselors, and presidents, are not free from the cross: at
least wise if they be godly. So also godly bishops, parish preests, and the
other ministers of the Churches, do oftentimes feel a cross, by reason of
the difficulty of their office.

4 Or else the cross is a punishment for some certain fault. Like as there
be many causes of the troubles of the Church, of which causes I will now
entreat.

What then are the causes of the cross of the church: Certain causes of the
cross are within us, and certain without us. Within us are three causes of the
cross: whereof the first is sin inhabiting in us, that is too say, original
sin. If this sin were not brydled, it would bring forth damnable fruits.
The second is, Concupiscence shooting out of the same, as a flame out of fire:
which flame unless it were quenched with the water of the Cross, would
kindle the fire of hell. The third cause is, that there be in us daily
backslydings, which original sin procures by his concupiscences. Seven
times in a day (says Solomon) does the righteous man fall, and rises ageine.
These daily fallings does the cross stay that is laid upon us by God too the
intent we should not be damned with the world in our sins.

Besides these, there are also causes of the cross without us, but of an other
nature. For God of his fatherly goodness visits us with his rod. For
whomsoever he receives, him he chastises, with none other affection than
the good father. Agein, the diuil lies in wait for the church, as we see in
Job, but God appoints him bounds, beyond which he is not able too raunge.
Moreover the limbs of the devil, that is too say, tyrants and evil men in
this world, which trouble the Church in this life. Also there be other causes
of the cross, which I will let pass, and speak of the difference between
the cross of the godly, and the punishment of the ungodly.

What is the difference then between the Cross of the godly, and the
punishment of the ungodly, since we see as well the godly as ungodly stricken
with grievous miseries in this world? surely there be many differences.

The first difference is taken of the efficient causes. For as the affection of
the godly proceeds of the fatherly love of the heavenly father toward his
children: so the punishments of the wicked proceed of the wrath and sore
displeasure of the just judge god, who punishes the wicked as his enemies and
adversaries.

The second difference is taken of the final causes, for the godly are
exercised with the cross too their good: but the ungodly are stricken with
punishementes too their undoing, unless they amend.

The third difference is taken of the effects. For the godly do bliss God,
and call upon him in their cross, as Job did. But the ungodly freat at God,
and are angry with him. The godly are nurtured: the ungodly are confounded. The
godly are tried: the ungodly are distroubled. The godly under the cross do
hope: the ungodly do despair.

The fourth difference is taken of the time. The godly are afflicted for a
short time, that afterward they may be glorified with Christ their head: but
the ungodly are wrapped in mischief for ever. Whose present affliction is as
it were a handful of their endless pains in hell.

The fifth difference is taken of the place. The godly are chastized in this
world only: but the fire of the ungodly shall never be quenched. For here they
are tormented with an evil conscience, and in the woorld too come they shall
be overwhelmed with Gods everlasting wrath, and suffer punishment that never
shall have end. So have we the differences of the crosses of the godly, and
the punishments of the ungodly. Now will I add a few things concerning the
comfort, wherewith the godly must raise up them selves under the Cross.

From whence then is comfort too be sought? First the godly that is pressed
under the cross, shall consider two things in his affliction: namely
judgment, and mercy. Judgment, that he is punished for his sins.
Therefore says Christ: Sin not, least some woorser thing happen unto
thee. And mercy, that he is punished too the intent he should turn and
repent, according too this text. 1. Cor. 11. When we are judged of the Lord,
we are chastized, that we be not damned with this world. Therefore when the
faithful is exercised with the cross, let him seek comfort at the fatherly
mercy of God.

Secondly, the godly in his cross, shall take comfort by examples, whereof
many are recited in the.xj. too the Hebrews. And Paul does oftentimes lay
before us the example of Christ, too which it behooves us too become
conformable under the Cross, that we may be gloryfied with him in time too
come. For the godly suffers with Christ, as it were a member of his. For
like as Christ suffered, first that he might obey the Father, and secondly,
that he might vanquishe and condemn our sin: so must we also obey GOD
under the cross, both too vanquishe and too condemn our own sin: not by
making satisfaction for it as he did, but by mortifying it.

Thirdly, the godly shall fetch comfort at the ends of the Cross. For the
godly is not chastized with the Cross, too the end he should perrish: but too
the end he may be holden in, and as it were reyned with a certain bridle
from falling away from God.

Fourthly, the godly shall comfort him self with the presence of God: for thus
says God: I am with thee in tribulation. For if God defended us not with his
presence in our cross, our hearts would utterly fail, and we should renounce
our profession. Fifthly the godly shall take comfort at the promise of
deliverance, asuagement of pains, and at Gods help. Our fathers cried unto
thee (says the Psalm) and thou heardest them.

Sixthly, the godly shall seek comfort by comparing the present affliction with
the glory too come. The one lasts but a moment, the other is eternal. Let
this suffice concerning the cross of the godly. GOD grant us grace too
glorify him with true patience under the Cross, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, too whom be honor and glory world without end. Amen.

The iiij. Sunday after Easter. The Gospel. John. xvj.
Jesus ^ayed unto his Disciples: Now I go my way unto him that sent me,
and none of you asks me vvhyther I go. But because I have said such things
unto you, your hearts are full of sorrow. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it
is expedient for you that I go away, For if I go not away, that comforter
will not come unto you. But if I depart, I vvil send him unto you. And when
he is come, he will rebuke the world of sin, and of ryghtuousnesse, and of
judgment. Of sin, because they believe not on me. Of righteousness,
because I go too my Father, and ye shall see me no more. Of judgment, because
the Prince of this world is judged already. I have yet many things too say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them away now: how be it when he is come
(which is the spirit of truth) he vvil lead you intoo all truth. He shall
not speak of him self, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak:
and he vvil show you things too come. He shall glorify me for he shall
receive of mine, and shall show unto you. All things that the Father has,
are mine: therefore said I unto you, that he shall take of mine, and show
unto you.

The exposition of the text.
THis gospel is a piece of that sermon that Christ made after Supper, the night
before he suffered, wherein (as I told you this day seuennight) he warned his
Disciples aforehande of his Passion, Death, and Resurrection: and disputed of
the persecution and comfort of the Church, and the state of his kingdom, of
what sort it should be unto the end of the world: and that too this end,
that his Disciples should be confirmed in the faith, and not renounce their
profession, for the cross and stumbling blocks thereupon risen among many.
This also was the cause of this Sermon that I have rehearsed: the effect whereof
is, that Christ promises to his church an advocate, teacher, and gouerner, the
holy Ghost. Whereby is showed the difference between the administration of the
civil government, and the kingdom of Christ. For that has need of outward
sinues, as laws, decrees of magistrates, open punishments. etc. But this is
governed by the word, by the spirit, by fatherly discipline, and by
sacraments. The places are three.

1 The profit and needefulnesse of Chrysts departure too the Father, wherein
the kingdom of Christ is described. 2 What the holy Ghost does in the world.
3 Of the saying: I have many things too say unto you, but you are not able too
bear them away at this time.
Of the first.
I Go too him that sent me, and none of you asks me vvhither go thou?
that is too say: Now is my death at hand, and my victory over death, which
when I have obtained, I will ascend too my father. That the Lord speaks so
darklye, he does it too this purpose, too stir up his Disciples too make
more diligent inquiry of his Death and resurrection. But they for all that
thought nothing less than that he whom they had acknowledged too be the
Messiah, should be delivered too so reprochful a death: so blind is reason in
matters perteyning to God. It creeps here upon ground, it can not deem
aright of heavenly things, and of Chrysts kingdom.

Because (says he) I have told you these things, your hearts are filled with
sorrow, that is too say, because ye have herd me make mention of my death and
crucifying, ye are stricken with sorrow. For ye understand not what good my
death and Resurrection shall bring you. But I tell you truth: it is expedient
for you that I go, as if he had said: Ye shall not think of my death, as of
the death of an other man: but know ye this, that my death, my resurrection,
and my gooing too the father, shall bring singular profit unto you. The
profit in effect is this. Like as Christ was borne, circumcised, offered in
sacrifice, and a teacher unto us: so also was he put too death, and raised
agein from death for our salvation, conditionally, that we lean upon him by
steadfast faith. Whereupon is that saying the.x. too the Romans. If thou believe
in thy heart that God has raised up Jesus Christ from death, thou shall be
safe. This profit of Chrysts gooing away, his disciples understood not: but
only dreamed of a worldly kingdom, wherein Christ as the highest Monarche
should hold the souerayntie.

For if I go not away, that comforter shall not come unto you, as if he had
said, I shall suffer for your sakes, I shall rise agein for your sakes, I
shall go too the father for your sakes: that from thence I may send you a
sanctifier, a comforter, and an advocate. In these words he gives us too
understand two things: the one is, that the Church shall have enemies in this
world, and that it shall be exercised with the cross. The other is, that in the
cross and in persecution, it shall have the holy Ghost a comforter and
advocate, whom he shall give unto it. For thus he says: And when I am gone I
vvil send him unto you. All these things tend too this purpose, that when the
Disciples should see Christ betrayed by Judas, caught too be punished, and
condemned to most shameful death, they should by some means take heart too
them, upon trust of these promises of Christ. From hence also let us seek
comfort, as often as we be afflicted in the kingdom of the world, and let
us think upon the difference between Christ's kingdom and the kingdom of
the world. In that, is the holy Ghost an advocate and comforter, whom the
Father shall give too them that ask, according too Christ's promise: and he
shall give the holy Ghost too them that ask: but in this there is affliction
and misery.

Of the second.
IN the second part, the text tells what the holy Ghost shall do in the
world. When he comes (says he) he shall reprove the world of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment. Of sin, because they have not believed in
me: of righteousness, because I go too my Father, and now ye shall not see
me: and of judgment, because the Prince of this world is judged already.
These words of Christ are too be referred unto two times, namely unto
that time that followed immediately after the Lords Ascension, and too the
rest of the whole time unto the end of the world: First therefore will I show
how these words are too be understood in respect of the time that followed
immediately after the Ascension of the Lord, when the holy Ghost was given
visibly too the Apostles upon Whitson Sunday. First he says: the holy Ghost
shall reprove the world of sin, that is too say, The holy ghost shall
manifestly convince that too be sin, which the world thinks too be no
sin. For the world (that is too say, mine enemies of whom I am rejected,
despised and nailed too the cross) being convicted by the manifest witness
of the holy Ghost and their own conscience, shall confess it self too have
done amiss, and also too have sinned very grievously in that it has not
believed on me, which thing heertofore it took too be no sin at all. How
true this is, they bear witness, whom Peter reproves of murder in the
second of the Acts. For they being convicted of their sin, say: Men and
brethren what shall we do? Thus are these men compelled too confess their
murder: and too acknowledge them selves too have sinned grievously, in killing
him on whom they ought rather too have believed.

Secondly he shall reprove the world of righteousness, that is too say, the
Holy Ghost shall clearly convince, that that is righteousness which the
world thinks too be no righteousness. For the holy Ghost shall prove
openly before the world, that Christ was rightuous in deed, which thing
the proud Pharisees and the world thought not, but Christ confirmed his
righteousness by his deed. That it is so, it appears by the reason added:
For (says he) I go unto my Father and you shall see me no more: that is
too say, When the world shall see openly in the Church that I have sheaded the
holy Ghost intoo you, it shall be compelled too confess that I was
rightuous in very deed, and not an ungodly and blasphemous person, in that I
said, I was the son of GOD, for the holy Ghost shall bear witness of mine
innocence.

Furthermore, the holy Ghost shall reprove the world of judgment, that is
too say, the holy Ghost shall clearly convince, that that judgment is
already given, which the world thinks not: for he shall bear witnesie
that the Prince of this world is judged. What is that? The world which
called me Christ in mockage, and did bid me come down from the Cross, shall
be convinced by the holy Ghost (whom I shall pour out upon you on
Whitsonday) that it has judged amiss. For the holy Ghost shall bring too
pass, that they shall in very deed understand and know, how that I having
vanquished the Devil by my resurrection, do bear the whole swaye in the
world, when no man shall be able too withstand you. This is the meaning of
these words, if we refer them unto the woorking of the holy Ghost upon
Whitson Sunday, which thing we must needs do. And yet they belong not so
precisely too that time, but that they both may and must also be referred too
the whole time following, even unto the end of the world, according as I will
show by and by.

First therefore, the holy Ghost shall reprove the world of sin, that is
too say, shall show it too be guilty of sin. Of what sin? For that (says
he) they believed not in me. And are there none other sins that the holy
Ghost shall reprove than unbelief, or not too believe on Christ? Yes surely
there are infinite and horrible sins against the first and second table.
Why then did he put this alone? Because as long as this remains, the rest
also are retained with it: and when this goes away, the rest are released.
Therefore like as all other sins are where unbelief is: so where as is faith
in Christ, all sins are forgiven. For everlasting life is promised too him
that believes, which should not be done unless the sins were forgiven.

Here then we see how needeful a thing it is too believe in Christ. But what
is too believe in Christ? It is too persuade a man's self that Christ is the
high Preeste and King, who by his death has made satisfaction for sin, and
by his glorious resurrection has brought righteousness, or that by his
blood, he who is both GOD and man, has purchased a Church unto him self.
Acts. 20. This faith is not the work of man, but of God. It springs not of
reason, but of Gods word. Moreover the word of GOD is of two sorts: Law and
Gospel. The law pulls away trust in our selves and the Gospel woorketh trust
in Christ. For the law sets before us the rightful will of GOD: namely that
we should keep the Law, or otherwise too be damned by the will of God. The
gospel sets before us the gracious will of God, which is, that God forgiving
our sins, will receive us intoo his favor for Chrysts sake. Therefore like as
by the law we come too the knowledge of our own weakness, and by this too the
knowledge of Gods rightful will and judgment, and so consequently too despair:
so by the understanding of the Gospel, we come unto the knoweledge of Gods
mercy for Christ's sake, who was given too be made a Sacrifice, that he
might take away the sins of all that believe in him. By this knowledge,
through the woorking of the holy Ghost, is conceived faith, whereby all sins
are abolished, and Christ's righteousness offered unto us, that we be no
more condemned as sinners, but appear in Gods sight rightuous and as his
sons: too whom eternal life is promised for an inheritance, according too
this Scripture, he that believes in the son has everlasting life: but he
that believes not on the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of GOD
abides upon him. Why so? Because he abides in his sin, for the which he
is bound unto everlasting pain, according too that saying, he that believes
not in the son, the wrath of God abides upon him. By the name of wrath is
signified curse and pain, joined with damnation. Heerby it appears how
needful faith is, and what it brings too pass.

Then follows. And he shall reprove the world of righteousness, because I
go too the Father, and you shall see me no more. That is, the holy Ghost shall
reprove the world, for not following true righteousness, wherthrough we might
stand before GOD. And this true righteousness is the righteousness of
Christ, namely that he going too the father is there an high Priest and
intercessour for the believers: for Christ's suffering and intercession too the
Father is the righteousness of the believers. But because the faithless
world believes not this, it is reproved of the holy Ghost. For he
effectually conuinceth, that righteousness cannot happen too men by any means
else, than by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, which falls too
their lot that believe on him. These are strange and woonderful things too them
that understand not the righteousness of Faith, but dream themselves too be
righteous either for the outward obedience of the law, or for men's
traditions, as the Pharisees in old time, and our Papists do in these days.
These perceive not that all the woorks of the world are far more imperfect,
than that they can overcome the power of the Devil and Death. But how is it
proved that Chrysts obedience is our righteousness? It is proved by most
grounded testimonies of the scripture. Paul Romans 5. Like as by the
disobedience of one man, (namely of Adam) many became sinners: So by the
obedience of one (namely of Christ) many shall be made rightuous. We have
this righteousness of Christ imputed unto us, when we believe on him,
according too that text too the Romans. With the heart we believe unto
righteousness. Also: Abraham believed God, and it was imputed too him for
righteousness. Paul Romans 3. We suppose that a man is made rightuous by
Faith, without the deeds of the law. The self same thing meeneth Christ in
this place, when he says: The holy Ghost shall reprove the world of
righteousness, because I go too the father. That is, the holy Ghost shall not
only prove me too have bin rightuous, but also shall manifestly show that I am
the righteousness of them that believe in me.

It follows further. And the holy ghost shall reprove the world of judgment,
because the prince of this world is judged. That is, the holy ghost shall
(mauger the world) prove me too be that seed that was promised too tread
down the Serpents head, that is too say, that should judge the Prince of this
woorld, with whom also are all his members judged and condemned. For if the
head be condemned, what can the members do? Wherefore let the Devil rage
against the godly as much as he lists: yet is he able too do nothing. He
shall lie in wait truly: but he shall not overthrow us, as long as we keep
our Faith strong and stable. For thus says John. This is the victory that
overcomes the world, even your faith. By the world is meant Satan himself
with all his band of Tyrants, Sophisters, Hipocrits and meritmongers. For Christ
by his spirit confounds the judgment of Satan, whoo by his guard condemns
the gospel. For he shall not stop the course of the Gospel, although he
oftentimes attempt it with rivers of blud, from the beginning of the world
unto this day, and specially after Chrysts Resurrection.

We have in what sort the holy Ghost shall reprove the world. Now let us
shortly see what he does in the Church. First he is present effectually in
the word and the sacraments. For wheresoever the word of God is preached
purely, and the Sacraments ministered according to Chrysts institution, there is
he present, and will work effectually in the heerers of the word, and in the
partakers of the Sacraments. But as for them that either here the word
slightly, or use the Sacraments without reverence, they set themselves against
the holy Ghost, and despise the ministration of the word and Sacraments, too
their own harm and damnation.

Ageine (as this Text teaches) the holy Ghost is present in the Church, as
a comforter, advocate, and teacher of the truth. For we in the world are
pressed with many inconveniences, against which we have need of a comforter:
least being discouraged with adversities, we should renounce our profession.
Our adversary the Devil accuses us daily, as he accused Job. Here could we
not stand without our advocate, who warranteth us that God is at one with us,
and will not cast us away for our sins, so we fall too repentance. Besides
this, we are infected with much and deep ignorance, so as we are not able to
understand gods matters. Wherefore we have need of the holy ghost too teach
us, who will lead us intoo all truth, according to Chrysts promise. And when
the spirit of truth shall come, he shall teach you all truth.

The holy ghost comes after two sorts: visibly and inuisibly. He came
visibly, intoo the Apostles upon Whitson-Sunday, as we shall hear when the
time comes. He comes inuisibly intoo men's hearts, when the Gospel is
preached, and he seals up the truth of the Gospel in the hearts of the
hearers. Christ speaks of both the commings of the holy Ghost. For that
which went before in the Apostles visibly, the same follows inuisibly
wheresoever the Gospel is taught purely. But too what end tends the doctrine
of the holy Ghost? He shall not speak of him self, but whatsoever he
heereth, that shall he speak. That is, the holy Ghost shall teach you the
same doctrine that I have taught you, and shall tell you whatsoever shall come
too pass. That is, he shall reuele unto you what manner of kingdom my
kingdom shall be, both in this life and after the general resurrection. And
he shall glorify me, because he shall take of mine, and show unto you. That
is, the holy Ghost shall by his record and effectual woorking, stablishe the
glory which the Father has given me: so as the gates of Hell shall not be
able too preuail a whitte ageinste my kingdom: for they can never darken my
glory.

Of the third.
NOw remains too speak of this saying: I have yet many things too say unto
you, but you cannot bear them away as now. This place do the Papists abuse,
as though the Apostles had not delivered a full doctrine too the church. And
this they uphold, too the end they may stablish their Masses, prayings too
Saints, Rosaries, Pardons, holy water, and other deceits of Antichrist. But
Christ speaks according too the capacity of his Disciples, and of the
weakness that was in them before his death, and of the gift that they should
receive after his resurrection, upon Whitson Sunday. As if he had said, I
would speak many things too unto you concerning my kingdom and other
mysteries: but as yet ye are not fully and thoroughly taught by the holy Ghost,
whom I will give you in his time, who shall lead you intoo all truth, that is
too say, intoo full knoweledge of my kingdom. This full truth did the
Apostles obtain upon the very day of Pentecoste or Whitson Sunday, which
afterward they did put in writing. We must seek the same truth, and hold our
selves conti^ted therewith, if we mind too be the Scholars of the holy Ghost,
too whom with GOD the father and the everlasting Son, be praise and glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

The.v. Sunday after Easter. The Gospel. John. xvj.
Verily, verily, I say unto you: what so ever ye ask the Father in my name,
he vvil give it you. Hithertoo have ye asked nothing in my name. Ask and ye
shall receive, that your joy may be full. These things have I spoken unto
you by Proverbs. The time will come when I shall no more speak unto you by
Proverbs: but I shall show you plainly from my Father. At that day shall ye
ask in my nam^. And I say not unto you that I will speak unto my Father
for you: For the Father him self loves you, because ye have loved me, and
have believed that I came out from GOD. I went out from the Father, and came
intoo the world. Again, I leave the world, and go unto the Father. His
Disciples said unto him: Lo, now thou talkest plainly, and speak no
Proverb. Now are we sure that thou know all things, and need not that
any man should ask thee any question: Therefore believe we, that thou cammest
from GOD. Jesus ansvvered them: now ye do believe. Behold, the hour
draws me, and is already come, that ye shall be scattered every man too
his own, and shall leave me alone. And yet am I not alone: for the Father is
with me. These words have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have
peace, for in the world shall ye have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I
have overcome the world.

The exposition of the text.
FOr a good consideration is this Gospel read in the church as upon this day.
For it conteyneth the cheifest woork of Christians, and the woork that is
peculier to them. For only Christen folks can perform this service of
Invocation unto God. For after that upon last Sunday was declared what is true
Faith, what is righteousness, what is judgment, and (too be breef) what is
the kingdom of Christ, and in whom it consists: In very good time and order
is mention made this day, of the chief service that the Citizens of Christ's
kingdom can perform, which is the true calling upon god. And because no
exercise of the godly is more needful than prayer, and that no woork is more
hard, than too pray aright: I will in this sermon entreat of prayer only. And
too the intent we may the eassier understand this doctrine, I will say two
things concerning prayer, which are these.

1 What Christian prayer is, and how many sorts there be of it. 2 What are the
conditions that must go with every prayer.
For when I have discussed these two places, I hope there shall be no man (so
he yield himself easy to be taught) which shall not clearly and plainly
understand, what thing Christian prayer is, and how needefully the service of
prayer is required at our hands.

Of the first
WHat thing is Christian prayer? It is a lowly lifting up of the mind unto
God, in desiring ought at Gods hand, or yielding thanks for benefits received.
Now yt there be two sorts of lifting up the mind unto God, first it is
confirmed by ye record of David, who going about too pray, says in the.25.
Psalm. Unto thee O Lord have I lift up my soul: and secondly by the form of
praying appointed too us by the Lord: Our father which art in heaven. Moreover
by the gesture of them that pray, whoo as they are praying are wont too lift
up their eyes unto heaven. This therefore it behooves us to know, that prayer
is not a prattling of the speech only: but that it is an humble lifting up of
the heart unto God, with which humble lifting up of the heart, words also
proceed out of the mouth.

But of how many sorts is Christen prayer? It is of four sorts, Deprecation,
Adoration, Intreatance and thanks giving. These four kinds of prayer will I
declare breefly.

Deprecation is an humble lifting up of a man's mind unto God, whereby is
desired deliverance from such things as trouble or ve^e him. As when we
desire too be delivered from Tirannie, violence, diseases, famine, and other
things that seem sharp unto us.

Adoration is a lowly lifting up of man's soul unto God whereby we desire some
benefit at his hand: as when we desire encreasements of faith, love,
patience, chastity: and when we crave those things that we have need of
toward the maintenance of this life.

Intretance is an humble lifting up of a man's mind unto God, whereby one
makes suit for an other: as when we pray for such as lie extreemely sick,
or for others that have need of our prayers.

Thanks giving is an humble lifting up a man's mind unto God, whereby we
yield thanks unto God, either for beneats bestowed upon our selves or
others, or for ridding our selves or others from some inconveniences. Now we
perceive what Chrystian prayer is, and how many kinds there be of it.
Hereafter remains that we speak of the continual circumstances of godly
prayer.

Of the second.
IN every godly prayer, there must needs be alwais these.v. properties and
circumstances. Forced, the earnestness of heart in him that prays: secondly,
consideration of the causes that move us too pray: thirdly, who it is that we
call upon: fourthly by whom we are herd: and fifthly what we ought to ask of
God. For these things shall make us a difference between the vain babbling of
the heathen, and the effectual prayer of the godly. Wherefore I beseech you
dear brethren, that you will diligently learn, and thoroughly wey these
continual circumstances of prayer.

The first circumstance of a godly prayer, is the affection of the heart, that
the heart be well bent and settled in praying. For if honesty require that our
body be well ordered when we have communication with men of more honor than
our selves: it is much more meet that our mind be very well disposed, when
we shall speak before God in the sight of his Angels. What manner of
affection then ought his too be, that will call upon God with fruit? First of
al, let him put off all imagination of his own glory, worthiness, and
desert. Next let him think upon his own needinesse, and p^rswade himself
that he is utterly destitute of al aid, unless the Lord reach him out his
helping hand. Then let him cast down himself by true repentance. And lastly
let him be kindled too prayer by confidence of gods promises. For who so ever
swells either with opinion of his own virtue, or feels not his own
needinesse, or casts not himself down before God through true repentance, or
wants faith: he prays with the Pharisie and not with the Publicane, that is
too wit, he prays not aright and effectually.

The second circumstance, is of the causes whereby we must be moved too pray.
And there be many causes, whereof I will rehearse some, too the intent that
greater desire of praying may be stirred up in us.

The first cause is Gods commandment, whereunto it becomes all creatures
too be obedient. Call upon me (says he) in the day of thy trouble. And
Chrysts Apostles do oftentimes provoke us too pray, by the commandment of
God. We must diligently muse upon this cause, which may stir up in us a
desire too pray.

The second cause is the promise. For God has promised that he will here our
prayers, according as it is said in this Gospel: Whatsoever ye shall ask
the father in my name. he shall give it you. Also in the Psalms: Call upon me
in the day of thy trouble, and I will here thee. Too here, is nothing else but
too grant our requests.

The third cause is the cross pressing us, that is too say, the feeling both
of our own and other men's needynesse. Here we must look about us, what
pincheth us at home, and what abroad: we must thoroughly wey the public and
private harms: we must think upon the distress of the Church, encountering
in this world against the devil and his members: and too be short, we must
think upon all the necessities that nip us in this life: whereby we may be
stirred up too call upon God.

The fourth cause is victory in temptations. Whereupon in the first of Saint
James, we are commanded too pray, as often as we are troubled with
temptations. And Christ says: Pray, that ye enter not intoo temptation. For
he that prays earnestly and continually, shall not easly be overcome, either
by the slightes of the devil, or the wickedness of the world, or the
provocation of his sinful flesh. Heervpon Solomon says: The name of the
Lord is a most strong tower, that is too say, The calling upon God, is a most
assured defense against all evils.

The fifth cause is, the sundry suttleties of Satan, who lays snares for us
in our doctrine and conversation. Paul Ephesians. 6. bids us take that sword of
the spirit (which is the word of God) against Satan, by all manner of
intreataunce and prayer.

The sixth cause, is the most plentiful fruit of often prayer. For the custom
of praying keeps us in the fear of God, and in godliness. For that man is
not easy too take a fall, whoo fencing him self with continual prayers, does
earnestly set his mind upon godliness. Contrariwise they that neglect the
exercise of prayer, ar subject too diverse casualties. Many that are led too
execution, know not so much as the form of prayer prescrybed by Christ: and
though some know it, if a man ask the question, they confess, they prayed
seldom or never.

The seventh cause is, the examples of holy men, whose chief care in this
life, was too call upon God earnestly. The Jews prayed thrice a day: in the
morning, at noone, and at night. So also did Daniell, and many others whoose
godliness is commended. But among many ye shall find some that in steed of
prayer, do not only in the morning, at noone and at night, but also whole
nights and whole days together, give them selves too wickedness, too make a
soft pillowe for the Devil, that he may rest the more quietly in their hearts.
These most weighty causes it behooves us too think upon earnestly, too the
intent we may drive away our drouzinesse, and be stirred up too call upon God
in good earnest.

But some passing over these most weighty causes, say: God knows whereof we
have need, and he bears us good will. For he is our Father, therefore we need
not weerie our selves with praying. I answer. True it is that GOD knows
what things we have need of, and he is our father in deed? conditionally
that we be his sons by faith. Neither do we therefore ask of God, because
we would teach him that which he knows not. But it is too be known, yt he will
not have ye order broken which he has appointed. For as he has ordained that
he will have us fed with meat and drink: which thing he could notwithstanding
do without these means: so his will is yt we should obtain the good things
that perteine as well too our salvation, as to the sustentation of this life, by
prayer which proceeds of faith. Ye receive not (says S. James. 4.)
because ye ask amiss. And Christ says: The lord shall give the holy Ghost
too them that ask, but he says not too loyterers or them that live careless.
We must therefore ask, if we set by our own welfare. We must acknowledge
both, as well the goodness of GOD whoo is ready too give too those that ask, as
the needinesse of our selves whoo should not be able so much as too draw our
breath, unless he sustained us

The third circumstance is, whoo he is that is too be called upon. It were no
need too speak of this circumstance, if there were not some too be found still,
that call upon I cannot tell what Saints. Wherefore I will speak breefly of
this circumstance, which is so exceeding necessary. And I say with good advise
and not at adventure, that God only is too be called upon. And the same alone
is God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost. The son is too be called
upon as one self same God with the Father and the holy Ghost. Agein he is too
be called upon as a mediator between us and God. That God alone is too be
called upon, it is confirmed by four reasons, whereof the first is
commandment. For we have commandment too call upon God only. Now whereas
nothing pleases God without faith: and faith cannot be without the word: it
follows that none is too be called upon, but he concerning whom we have
commandment.

The second is promise. No Invocation has promise, but that which is made
unto God: therefore we do amiss too call upon any other than God.

The third is example. We have no example of holy men that called upon
Saints. Wherefore let us tread in their steps, and let us yield this divine
service, unto none but too whom it is due, that is, alonely unto God.

The fourth is a manifest forbidding. Thou shall woorship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve. Wherefore it is too be hild for a most
certeintie, that the Devil brought in the calling upon creatures, that is too
say, upon Saints, for three intents. First that he might spoil Christ of his
honor. Next that he might work reproach too the Saints departed. And agein,
that the Idolaters that call upon Saints might perish. I warn you therefore
that are still in your error, too amend betimes, least ye fall into the hands
of the living God when you look least for it. Neither boots it them that some
say they do it of a good intent. For all intent of man in matters of salvation
is evil, unless it be guided by Gods word and the holy ghost. For thus
says God himself: The thoughts of men are wicked from the beginning. And
Paul says: The fleshly man, (that is, he that has not the spirit of God)
perceives not the things that are of God.

The fourth circumstance is: by who^ we ought too call upon God. For it is
written that God heereth not sinners. Therefore there is given unto us a
mediator Jesus Christ, in whose name we shall call upon God, according as
Christ teaches us in the Gospel of this day, saying: What soever ye shall
ask the father in my name, he shall give it you. Upon trust of him therefore,
and not upon confidence of our own worthiness, shall we make our prayer,
being sure that God will here us by him. Howbeeit, for as much as this
sentence of Chrysts is notable, and full of comfort, I will expound it more
distinctly, for it contains many profitable admonishments. This saying in my
name (that is, for my sake, and in acknowledging and confidence of me,)
comprehends many things, For it teaches, warns, and comfort.

I pray you what teaches it? First that our own worthiness is too be
excluded. For we may not call upon God in confidence of our own
worthiness, but in trust of Chrysts defense. Secondly, that Hypocrisy is to
be separated from true prayer. The Pharisie in his prayer, bosteth much of his
own holiness. I am not (says he) as other men: I offer the tenths of all that
I possess: I fast twice a week. This man prayed not in Chrysts name: but upon
trust of his own holiness, he rather poured out wast words than prayed.
Thirdly, that heathenish bragging is too be laid away. For the Heathen
thought they were herd, when they had first deserved it at Gods hand: Like as
Agamemnon thought he should be herd for his sacrifysing of an hundred beasts
at once. Fourthly, it teaches the difference between the prayer of Christen
folk, and the prayer of all other men. For only Faith makes the difference
between the prayers of Christians and of others. The Turks, Jews, Paynims
and such like think they call upon God, but in deed they do not: because they
are void of trust in the mediator, and acknowledge not him too be God, who is
the father, the son, and the holy ghost.

Of what thing does this saying in my name warn us? it warns us of our
blindness. For when Christ bids us ask in his name, no dout but they be
great things which we ought too ask. Being warned therefore by this saying, let
us open our eyes and look about us, what common and what private: what inward
and what outward: what ghostly and what bodily things we ought too demand:
and on ye contrary part, what evils we ought too pray too be rid off.

How does this saying in my name comfort us? It comfort us against two
very great impediments of Prayer, which are unworthiness and distrust. For
when he says, ask in my name, he will have us set his worthiness against
our unworthiness, and his promise against our distrust. But many receive not
that which they ask, because they ask amiss, neglecting their faith in
Christ, and rather beating the air with vain babbling, than percing the heaven
with ardent affection of faith. These cannot justly complain that they pray
often and obtain nothing. Wherefore that we be not found in the number of
them, let us pray with faith.

The fifth circumstance is of the things that we ought too demand or too
desire deliverance from. Things too be requested are of three sorts. For
either they concern gods glory, or our own salvation, or else the good things
that perteine too the commodity of this life.

Before all things we must pray for the advancement of Gods glory, according
too this, Hallowed be thy name. Notwithstanding we must not in this behalf
appoint God a mean: for he knows best by what mean his glory may be
advanced. But we must through assured confidence ask, and persuade our selves
that he will here us.

Also we ask our salvation, but without all condition, because we have an
universal promise of salvation. For every one that calls upon the name of
the Lord shall be saved.

As for the good things that make too the sustenance of this life, we must ask
them upon two conditions: namely so as the obteyning of the thing that we
demand, do neither hinder Gods glory, nor hinder our own salvation.

After the same manner must we pray for deliverance from those evils that fight
against these kinds of good things. The evils of the first and second sort,
are too be wished away without condition. But those evils that are troublesome
too us in this life, are too be wished away upon condition that it be no
hinderance too Gods glory and our own salvation. For Gods glory is too be
preferred before all things. And thus much concerning prayer. GOD grant us
grace that these words may take root in our hearts, through Jesus Christ, too
whom be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Upon the day of our Lords Ascension. The Gospel. Mark. xvj.
Jesus appeared unto the eleven as they satte at meat: and cast in their
teeth their unbelief and hardenesse of heart, because they believed not them
which had seen that he was risen agein from the dead: and he said unto
them: Go ye intoo all the world, and preach the Gospel too all creatures:
he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. But he that believes not
shall be damned: And these tokens shall follow them that believe. In my name
they shall cast out Deuiles, they shall speak with nevve tongs, they shall
drive away Serpents. And if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt
them. They shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover. So then
when the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received intoo Heaven, and is on
the right hand of GOD. And they went forth, and preached every where: The
Lord vvorking with them, and confirming the word with miracles follovving.

The exposition of the Text.
THis feast is ordained in the Church, for that article of our Creed, wherein
we profess our selves too believe in Jesus Christ ascending intoo Heaven,
when he had bin conuersaunt with his Disciples forty days after his glorious
resurrection. In this feast, as in others there be three things too be weyed.
First the story with the circumstances thereof. Then the benefit that is
bestowed upon us: And lastly the right use and minding of the story. These
three things offer them selves in the exposition of this Gospel. The sum
whereof is, that the Lord (the fortith day after his resurrection) appeered too
his Disciples, whom he vpbrayded with their unbelief and hardness of heart,
and commanded them too preach the Gospel through out all the world,
showing what fruit shall redound of the preaching of it too the hearers, so
they receive the Gospel by faith. Moreover too the intent their preaching may
be credited, he promises too confirm their doctrine with miracles. When he
had given this charge, he ascended visibly intoo heaven, and sits at the
right hand of his father. And his Disciples obeying his commandment, went
abroad too preach the gospel, the which our Lord confirmed with signs ensuing.
And this is the effect of the Gospel. The places are three, 1 The rebuking of
the Apostles. 2 The institution of the ministry of the word. 3 Christ's
Ascension intoo heaven.


Of the first.
THe fortith day after his resurrection, he appeared to his Disciples and
vpbrayded them with their unbelief and hardenesse of heart, because they had
not believed those that told them they had seen him risen ageine from death.
He finds fault with two things in his Disciples: hardness of heart and
unbelief, that is too say, the root and his fruit. The root is hardness of
heart, which takes increasement and strength, partly of it own original
beginning, and partly of it own corruption. For a man that is not inspired with
the holy ghost, cannot understand any of those things that are of the spirit
of God. Of this most naughty root there are very many and evil fruits. The
first is that which is rebuked here, namely unbelief. Out of this afterward,
bud most naughty branches, as disobedience toward God, and whatsoever
lewdness and wickedness is in this life. By which the power of the root
vnsuppressed, is perceived, and also seen how great increasement unbelief
has taken. For this is a most assured token, that whersoeuer sin reigns,
there unbelief as an Empress possesses the heart of man.

Furthermore, we may learn hereby, first (after the example of the weak
Apostles) not too despair of our selves being weak, although we cannot by
and by comprehend the heavenly mysteries. For the Church has evermore her
certain wounds for our Lord too pour his wine and Oil intoo. Neither is it
reason for any man too hope that he may put of all weakness, as long as he
carries this mortal body about him. But like as in old time the people of God
being brought intoo the promised land, had their neygbors the Philis^ines
enemies unto them, against whom they kept continual war. So we being
brought intoo Christ's church, have both inward and outward enemies against
whom we must make war, least we were sluggishe thorough idleness. The
other thing that we have too learn here, is that we should consider by the
deed of Christ not casting off his raw and weak Disciples, how gentle a high
Priest we have, who casts us not off for our weakness, so there be any
spark of faith in us. And consequently by his example also we may learn, too
deal gently and favorably with the weaker sort.

Of the second.
WHen Christ being ready too ascend intoo Heaven, gives commission too his
Disciples, saying: Go ye intoo the whole world, and preach the Gospel too
al creatures. He that believes, and is baptized shall be saved, and he that
believes not is condemned already, he begins the manner of setting up his
kingdom, and shows the fruit of the same kingdom.

By two means is the kingdom of Christ set up: by word and by the
sacrament: the fruit whereof is salvation of the people. Contrariwise, they
that be not Citizens in this kingdom, are subject too the sentence of
damnation.

Here we see there is great difference between the aministration of a
kingdom of the world, and Christ's kingdom: and no marvel at all: For the
kingdom of the world is fleshly, but the kingdom of Christ is spiritual.
That is set up and mainteyned by the laws of men: but this is set up and
mainteyned by the word of God.

Howbeeit forasmuch as the word of God conteyneth singular doctrines, I will
expound them somewhat more largely and distinctly, too the intent we may the
better understand Chrysts mind toward us, and the benefits of the Gospel.

First he says: Go intoo the whole world. Ye see the commission. For he
sends his disciples not too any one nation, but too all men, dwelling abroad
through the whole world. Heerby we may consider the riches of Gods mercy,
and the preciousnesse of Christ's sacrifice. It is Gods mercy that all that
were damned through sin, should here the voice of the Son of GOD,
concerning salvation too be obtained through Christ. For it is not too be
thought that God would have the voice of the son of man sound unto the world,
yt the gretest part should be destitute of the fruit thereof, but rather that by
heering they should live, and be saved through Christ, so that they received
the preaching of the Apostles by faith.

This is more plainly declared by this saying: Preach ye, or proclayme ye.
Too whom? Too all creatures, that is too say, too all men, without any
exceptions of persons, nations or kinds. For God is a lover of men, and
wills the salvation of all men, according too this saying, his will is, that
all men should be saved, and come too the knowledge of his truth: But what
must the Apostles proclayme? The gospel, that is too wit: glad tidings of the
ouercomming of the enemies of mankind, which are sin, death, the devil, and
hell: of peace made betwixt God and men: and of everlasting salvation, which
they that believe in Christ shall obtein by inheritance. This is the sum of
the Gospel. Howbeeit too the intent this sum may be the better understood, I
will give a more plentiful definition, the which I will also breefly declare
by testimonies of the scripture.

The Gospel is a doctrine reveled from heaven, wherein is showed deliverance
from sin, curse, and Gods wrath: and wherein is proclaimed forgiveness of
sins, salvation, and everlasting life too them that believe on the son of
God, for the sacrifice of the same son of God, that the goodness and mercy of
God may be published, and that they which are delivered by the son, may by
faith in the same son bring forth fruits worthy the Gospel. This definition
contains many things, which we will rehearse and confirm in order.

First I said, that the Gospel is a doctrine reveled from heaven, which thing
is confirmed by that which is written in the.xvj. to the Romans, where Paul
calls the Gospel a mystery hidden from the beginning. By which words he
signifies most manyfestly, that the Gospel depends not upon man's reason.
For if reason could by any means through it own sharpness, have perceived
this doctrine, it might in no wise have bin called a mystery hidden from
before all worlds.

Ageine, it is said in the definition, that in the Gospel is showed
deliverance from sin, from the curse of the law, and from Gods wrath. For
the prophet Danieil says: that Christ shall take away sin. And Paul says,
that the curse of the Law is abolyshed by the coming of Christ. Also the
heavenly father tells us from heaven, that he is pacified for his sons
sake. And this thing too be most true, all the godly do feel: having
witness of the holy Ghost, by whom they cry, Abba, father. Which thing
undoubtedly they should not do, unless they persuaded themselves for a
certeintie, that sin is taken away, the curse of the law abolished and Gods
wrath pacified.

In the third place is added, that in the Gospel is proclaimed forgiveness of
sins, salvation, and everlasting life. For thus says the Lord himself in
the.xxiiij. of Luke. So is it written, and so it behooued Christ too suffer,
and repentance and forgiveness of sins too be preached too all nations in
his name. And in this days Gospel he says. He that believes, shall be
saved. And the Lord him self says: He that believes on the Son, shall
have life everlasting. What needs many words? All the whole scripture
promises forgiveness of sins, salvation, and everlasting life too all that
embrace the Gospel.

But forbicause these benefits befall not too al me^ (for Cain, Judas, Saul,
and many others perished, and at this day alas, the most part of ye world
runs intoo destruction) therefore is added in the fourth place of the
definition, that these benefits happen too the believers. For the Lord says
plainly: he that believes in me shall not perish, but shall have life
everlasting. And least any man should think that this depends upon the state
of woorks, Paul writes, that a man is justified without woorks: and the same
Paul pronounces, ye everlasting life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ:
that is, yt it befalls too them that believe in Christ, not for their own
desert, but by the benefit of Christ.

In the fifth place is added, for the sacrifice of the Son of God. For thus
says Paul, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. For the Greek
word Apolytrosis, which Paul uses, signifies such a ransom as is made
by paymente of a fine for the pardon of a man's life. Such a fine paid Christ
for us when he was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him. 2. Cor. 5.

Sixthly is added: that the goodness and mercy of GOD might be published.
Which thing is confirmed by the example of the troop of Angels singing this
Himne at our Lords birth: Glory unto God on high, and on earth peace, and
unto men good will. We must think that this was done too this end, that all
that acknowledge this Christ, may (by the example of the most pure Angels)
lern too set out the goodness and mercy of God, specially seeing that nature
calls upon us too render thanks too such as have deserved well.

Last of all in the definition of the Gospel is added. That those which are
delivered by the Gospel, should bring forth fruits worthy the Gospel. For
Paul in the.2. Ephe. says: We are created in Jesus Christ unto good woorks,
in which we must walk. And the same Paul says, that we ought too walk in
the light, because we are the Children of light. For how I pray you stands
this with reason, that we should be exempted out of the bondage of sin, and
yet serve sin and be oppressed with the yoke thereof? The grace of God
(says Paul) appeered too the welfare of all men, too the intent that
renouncing all ungodliness and fleshly desires, we might live soberly, godlyly
and rightuously in this world.

Forasmuch then as we have by strong reasons showed, that sin, curse, and
Gods wrath are taken away by the Gospel: and that in their room do succeed
righteousness, salvation, and everlasting life for Christ's sake, as long as
we believe in him: and that for this benefit God will have us set forth his
goodness, and show thankfulness in all our whole life: It follows that the
Gospel (as I said) is a doctrine revealed from heaven, wherein is preached
deliverance from sin, from curse of the law, and from Gods wrath, and wherein
is proclaimed righteousness, salvation, and everlasting life too all that
believe in Christ, for the sacrifice of him, that the goodness and mercy of
God may be set forth, and that those which are delivered by the Gospel, may
bring forth fruits worthy the Gospel.

Thus much concerning the Gospel. And as for that which is added concerning
Baptim, whereby the benefit is applied too the Gospel, and sealed up, it is
spoken already in the first Sunday in Lent, and often elsewhere.

Of the third.
NOw follows the place which is peculiar too this feast. For the Evangelist
declares that our Lord ascended in too heaven: Wherefore I will say a little
(and that as plainly as I can) concerning Christ's ascension intoo heaven which
is an Article of our Creed.

In this article of our Lords ascension, there be three things too be
specially considered of us. First his coming down, for before he went up, he
came down. Secondly his ascension. And thirdly the fruit of Christ's ascension.

In the coming down of Christ from heaven intoo the earth, there are two
things too be considered: the gift, and the Example. The gift, for that
Christ descended from Heaven and took man's nature upon him, that by offering
him self in sacrifice, he might rid us of our sins. For by the sacrifice
of Christ, the father is pacified, and for Christ our mediators sake so
abased, all believers are received, and are the children and heirs of God. For
therefore did the Lord come down from heaven, therefore did he humble and
abase him self, that we might ascend from the earth too Heaven, and that we
might be exalted too everlasting life and glory. And the example: That we
also should come down and be humbled. 1. Peter. 2. Christ suffered for us
leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps.

Of what manner Christ's ascension intoo heaven was, the scripture shows. He
ascended visibly with a bodily and natural moving, and a cloud took him up
intoo heaven. Whereupon is said, he ascended above all heavens, Ephesians. 4.
Nevertheless, he did not by ascending, change his humayne nature intoo his
godhead, or so shed it out that it should be euerywher with his godhead,
although the union of them be inseparable.

The fruit of Chrysts ascension is manifold, according as it is easy too
gather by diverse places of scripture.

The first fruit therefore is, that Christ is a triumpher over his enemies,
which are sin, death, the devil, and hell. For these enemies has he
vanquished, and triumphed over them by his glorious ascension. He wyped out
sin when he was made a sacrifice for sin. As Soon as sin was wyped away,
death was disarmed: for sin is the sting of death. When death was once
destroyed, the devil lost his force and weapons. Lastly, for as much as hell
deuoureth only them that are under sin, death, and the devil: it follows
that Christ being the conqueror of sin death, and the devil, did also
overcome hell.

Secondly, he ascended, too be our head, which ascended into heaven first,
that he may show the way unto us: whervppon John. 14. I go my way to prepare
you a place, and I will take you up unto me.

Thirdly, he ascended, that he might from heaven spread the beams of his power
over all the world. Ephesians. 4. He ascended above all the heavens that he might
fill all things. Then is he not ascended too be utterly away from us: but
that with his present power he may rule heaven and earth and be present with
his Church unto the end of the world.

Fourthly, he ascended, that he might give gifts too men. Ephesians. 4. And he has
given, some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some teachers. That
is too say, he ascended, that he might be effectual in the ministry,
confirming it by wonderful miracles, and sealing it in the hearts of men.

Fifthly, he ascended, that we might have an advocate in heaven. 1. John. 1.
If any man sin, we have an advocate with God the father, Jesus Christ the
rightuous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.

Sixthly, he ascended, that he might draw our hearts unto himself. Math. 6.
Where as is thy treasure, there is also thy heart. Coll. 3. If ye be risen
agein with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ sits at
the right hand of the father. Our conversation then must be in heaven, where
our Savior sits in glory, too whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be
honor, praise, and glory world^ without end. Amen.

The.vj. Sunday after Easter. The Gospel. John. xv.
WHen the comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the father (even
the spirit of truth which proceeds from the father) he shall testify of
me. And ye are vvitnesses also because ye have bin with me from the
beginning. These things have I said unto you, because ye should not be
offended. They shall excommunicate you, yea the time shall come, that who
soever kills you shall think he does God high service. And such things
will they do unto you, because they have not known the father, neither yet
me. But these things have I told you, that when that hour is come, ye
might remember then, that I told you. These things said I not unto you at
the beginning, because I was with you.

The exposition of the text.
THis Gospel also is a part of that sermon that Christ made too his Disciples
the night before he suffered, the sum whereof we have herd a while ago. This
text conteyneth the promis of the Advocate the holy Ghost, whoo shall be
present in the Church when it suffers persecution by the wicked world. For
Christ tells us, it will come to pass, that wicked men, and specially the
Jews, shall be carried with so great woodnesse against the Church, that under
the pretense of Religion, they shall ru^ne with might and mayn upon the godly,
yea and persuade the world, that it is a certain service of God too kill the
godly: and too cast them out of their congregations. And he says, that the
cause of this outrage, is ignorance and blindness: that is too wit, that they
neither acknowledge the wrath of God against sin, nor understand the
benefits of Christ. The places are three.

1 The office of the holy ghost, and of the ministers of the word in the
Church. 2 A warning least the godly being offended at the stumbling block,
should renounce that profession and faith. 3 Of the cross of ye godly, and of
their glorious deliverance.
Of the first.
ANd when the comforter shall be come, whom I will send you from my father,
he shall bear witness of me: yea and you also shall bear witness. These
words contein the first doctrine of this Gospel, namely that the holy Ghost
and Apostles, and their successors must bear witness of Christ.

Concerning the holy ghost, these things are gathered out of the text. First
that he is one God with the father and the son. Secondly, that he is a
distinct person from the father and the son. Thirdly, that he proceeds from
the father and the son. And fourthly, yt he is given too the church by Christ.
And why he is given to the church, it is here declared, namely that he may be
a comforter: that he may be a teacher of the truth: and that he may bear
witness of Christ. Of which offices, I will therefore speak the more breefly,
because the same things are too be repeted upon Whitson Sunday.

Why is he called a comforter or Advocate? Like as by this terming of him, is
given an inkling of the persecution and accusing or condemning of the church
by the heathenish world: so is it also expressly meant thereby, that it shall not
be forsaken of Christ in the time of persecution, but that Christ sends it
an advocate, namely the holy Ghost.

The properties of this advocate are four: First, that he be at hand too
his Clyant, that is, too him that suffers violence or wrong, or is accused by
the wicked world. Secondly that he take upon him the case of each man, yea and
of the whole Church, as his own case. Thirdly, that he teach and admonish
him that erreth, and instruct him that he be not overthrown in his case.
Fourthly, that he comfort him in his trouble. Therefore when the holy ghost is
called an advocate, it is meant thereby, that he is the defender of the Church,
that he takes the case thereof upon himself: and that he teaches and
comfort the church.

Agein, the text says, that the holy Ghost shall be the teacher of truth. By
which name is showed, first that men can not obteyn healthful truth, of their
own disposition and nature. Secondly, yt the doctrine of truth is not of the
law, but of the Gospel. For reason of his own inclination does (after a
sort) understand the doctrine of the law. And thirdly yt the holy ghost
woorketh mightily both in the teachers and in the learners. For he makes the
teachers too understand the truth, and the learners too receive it. And
therefore we are admonished too call upon the teacher of truth, that he may
give us the key of knowledge: and too beware that we drive not away from us
that same most pure spirit, through our uncleanness. For in as much as he is
holy, that is, clean, chaste, and a maker of others holy, he dwells not in
an vnpure heart: that is too wit, in such a heart as tumbleth it self in his
own filthiness, and defiles it self as a swine by wallowing in the mire.

Besides this, he says: This holy Ghost shall bear witness of me. Of
which office the ministers of Gods word also shall be partakers.

But what does the holy Ghost witness of Christ? and what shall the
ministers of the word witness of him? First the holy Ghost and the ministers
of Gods word bear witness of Christ, that he is very God according too the
Scripture, one in Godhead with the father and the holy Ghost, as we profess
in our Creed. Secondly the holy Ghost witnesses, that Christ is very man
according too our Creed: who was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of
the virgin Mary. Thirdly ye holy Ghost witnesses, that Christ though he be
both God and man: yet is but one Lord, one Christ, one person, according as
our Creed bears record, and Christ also of himself, when he says: No man
goes up intoo heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the son of man
that is in heaven. Fourthly the holy Ghost bears witness of Christ's
office, that he is a bishop and a king. A bishop verily, which with his own
sacrifice pacifieth the wrath of the father, and by his intercession brings
us unto GOD. And a King, in that he has vanquished our enemies, death, sin,
the Devil and hell, and shall come too judge the quick and the dead. These
four things does the spirit witness of Christ. These four things are
delivered us concerning Christ in our Creed. These four things shall all
godly ministers of Gods word witness of Christ, til he come too judgment.

Of the second.
THese things have I spoken to you, that ye should not be offended. Christ
does the^ to understand, to what end he spoke so much of the church, of the
holy ghost, and of his death and resurrection: yt is to wit, yt being confirmed
by these things, they should not be offended with the rest of the world. This
admonishment is necessary at all times: for the world is full of stumbling
blocks. Woe (says Christ) be unto the world for offense: meening, that they
are like too buy it deer, that fall from the Gospel because of offenses. Now too
the intent every one of us may judge a right concerning an offense, I will set
forth a full doctrine concerning offenses.

An offense in general, is whatsoever keeps a man back from the right
course of the Gospel, that is too say, either word, deed, or outward
appeerance (if I may so term it) which is too any man a cause or occasion of
stumbling, or of being offended, so as either he be hindered or else step
aside from the right course of salvation.

Of this stumbling block there are more kinds than one. For there is one
offense or stumbling block which is called given: and another that is called,
taken. Which what manner of ones they be, I will declare by definitions and
examples.

An offense given, is that which rises either of some word or deed that is
evil in it self, or else of some word or deed, that is indifferent, that is
too wit, neither good nor evil, but cast forth out of season. Both of these
is straightly forbidden by Gods word, and Christ him self avouches it too
be better for a man too be drowned in the mids of the Sea, than too give
occasion of offense too any body. The examples are these: Arrius denied Christ
too be God, whereby he caused many too stumble, and was a cause of endless
damnation, both too him self, and too many others. David by his aduoutrie was
a stumbling block too all the inhabiters of his Realm, and had pearished for
ever, if he had not repented. Against this stu^bling block prays Solomon,
when he says: Keep me from the snare that they have laid for me, and from the
stu^bling block of the^ that work wickedness. The most part of the world
stu^bling at this block, stick in damnation, and daily many fall headlong intoo
destruction by dasshing ageynste this stu^bling block, both privately and
publikly. Privately are offended children, servants, and married couples.
Children see their parents absteyne from Gods service, and they abstain
likewise. They here their parents swear, and they swear as well as they.
They here them talk of ribaudry, and by and by they follow their example. For
wicked things stick fastest in mind. They see them bibbing, deceyuing, and
dealing unjustly with their neighbors, and they like good scholars learn the
same trades. But woe be too them by who^ such stumbling blocks are made. For
they with the whirle wind, and tempest of their stumbling blocks, do throw
down and beat out the crop of Chrysts church.

This household stumbling block is the seed of all evils in the world. For such
things as children learn of their fathers and moothers, they keep still when
they be old, and also teach the same too their children. Wherefore the parents
that fear god, must take exceeding great heed, that they be not stumbling
blocks too their own children. Therefore let them talk godlily, let them do
all things rightly. Let them serve God, and stir up their children too do the
like, and let them bring the^ up in correction and nurture of the Lord,
according as Paul admonishes: and let them always bear in mind this saying of
Christ, which is written in the ninth of Mark: whoosoeuer offends one of
these little ones that believes in me, it were better for him that he had a
millstone hanged about his neck, and were cast intoo the sea.

Moreover, this offense is committed also as well by the magistrate, as by the
subjects. As when Hieroboam set up a calfe in Samaria too be woorshipped, and
when the same man playing the tyrant did persecute the holy prophets of God.
But this offense is most grievous in ministers of churches, when they either by
lewd doctrine or corrupt life, give occasion too many too speak evil of the
Gospel, and minister special occasion of fas^ing too them that be weak^, as
are covetous persons, whoremongers, dronkards, murderers, and such others as
offend the Church with their behavior: Which sort the zealous Bishops ought
too dispose, least they by their falling, should draw many mo with them too
decay. Neither are subjects too be excused in this behalf: for we see what
the world is: all are corrupt. Who offends not in drunkenness? who gives
not occasion of stumbling by accustoming himself rashly too swearing? where is
there one among a number, that lays not some snare or other too stumble at?

Howbeeit, because offenses given, are not all of one sort (for some are given
by a word or deed that is evil in it self, and other some are given by a
word or deed not evil of it self, but done or spoken out of season:) It is
too be known, that the first kind without exception is too be shunned of al
men that have regard of everlasting salvation. But as for that offense that is
given by a thing indifferent, is not always too be eschewed, but we must
deal according too this difference of men. Some men are strong, as they that
already know the Chrystian liberty. Some are weak and have the beginning of
Religion, but are not sufficiently settled in the christen liberty. Other some
are obstinate, unable too be taught and wilful. The first sort is not
offended at the use of things indifferent, but rather reioyseth in the
christian liberty. The third sort are offended, but thou shall not care for
them, for they are the enemies of Christ. Neither shall thou abstain from the
use of things indifferent, for their sakes: and much less shall thou abstain
from true virtues: as are the true woorshipping of God, true invocation, and
true confession of the son of God. Neither shall thou abstein from true
doctrine, but after the example of Christ, teach thou and profess thou the
true Gospel, even in sight of hell gates. For so did christ: so did ye
prophets: so did the apostles: yea and all the godly of all ages. It is wont
too be commonly said, that he ye judges aright, teaches aright, and does
aright, ought not for any offense, too forbear any thing yt is aright. This
surely is most true, and is confirmed by the examples of Christ and his
apostles. But as concerning the middle sort of men (that is to wit, the weak)
the rule of Paul is too be noted: Rather tha^ I will offend my weak brother,
I will eat no flesh while I live. After the same rule it is too be deemed of
other things indifferent. For in all our doings there is a consideration too
be had of mutual charity and edifying.

Nevertheless this offense given, whereof we have already spoken, has yet
another difference, taken of ye difference of the persons. For some persons are
set in some room of authority: and other some are inferiors leading a private
life. The offense yt is given by a person set in any authority, is much more
grievous than yt which is given by a private person yt is placed in no office,
and therefore it deserves greter punishment, both in respect of ye person him
self, who defiles the place to which he is promoted by God, and also for
other men's sakes, too who^ he by his lewd example has given a more forcible
cause of falling. For even as the greater a stone is that falls from a high
rock, the more pieces it makes in the fall: Even so the greater state that a
person is of, and the higher yt he is placed in degree of dignity, so many ye
mo draws he down with him when he falls. Likewise also a minister of Gods
word, sinning in drunkenness, whoredom, manslaughter, or any other crime:
is a greater stumbling block, than a soldier, a courtier, a mariner, or a
ploughman, and therefore is too be restreyned and punished with greater
punishment: For he draws more with him unto decay. After the same manner is
too be deemed of others. David in the Realm of Iewrie was not an aduouterer
and a murderer alone: yet notwithstanding, his sin (by reason of the offense
that grew thereof) was more horrible than the faults of other men in Gods
sight: wherefore it was punished also with greeuouser punishements, specially
of the body. Much more grievously sins a dronken master of a house, than a
servant. For he is an example unto his whole household: but this other (as
a despised person)* is not taken for any example, except it be of as leude
as him self. And thus far as touching an offense given.

An offense taken, is that which any man takes too himself at other men's
well doings, or otherwise: and it is of two sorts. Humain and deuilish.
Humain, is partly of ungodly folk, partly of godly folk. Of ungodly folk, when
ye ungodly are offended, either at the doings of the godly, or at the free
usage of things indifferent, or else at the outward countenance of the
Church. For when the ungodly see the godly distressed under the cross, and
too be (as it were) outcasts in the world, the ungodly take thereby an
occasion of a sorer fall. As the Jews, which were offended at the lowlynesse of
Christ and the misery of his Church: after which sort many at this day also
are offended at the wounds of the Church. Contrariwise, the godly take
offense, when they see the wicked flourishe: when the Church is oppressed by
tirants: when many giltlesse persons are punished: and when they see the Church
turmoiled with heresies. But they overcome this stumbling block ageine, partly
by the strengthening of the holy Ghost, partly by the examples of Chrysts
church, and partly by earnest prayer: neither is there any better remedy
against the stumbling blocks of this kind, than too set against them the
continual custom of God, who suffers his Church too be overwhelmed with
sundry miseryes in this world* too the intent it may in time too come be
glorified with his beloved son our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Deuilish offense taken, is when men preposterously catch occasions,
which they stretche too a further liberty of sinning. Doutlesse the cause why
Cham scoffed so malapertly at his Father, was that he might purchase too him
self liberty too sin without co^trolement. We see very many such now a days,
which ever narowly pick out the faults of the holy fathers (as ye incest of
Loath, ye dro^kennesse of Noe, ye co^cubineship of Abraham, the aduoutrie and
murder of David, the perjury of Peter, the hard yoke that Joseph laid upon
the Egiptians, and the greedy gathering of Zachey:) too the intent they may
sell themselves too al naughtiness. Yea rather they seek by men's vices, how
they may harde^ them selves too the contempt of God. Wherefore not without
cause, this kind of stumbling is called deuilish, as the which is shored up
with slanders too the contempt of God.

Of the third.
THe third place is of the persecution or cross of the church: for which
place look before in the third Sunday after Easter.

Upon the feast of Pentecost, which we call Whitsonday. The Gospel. John. xiiij.
IF ye love me keep my commandments, and I vvil pray the Father, and he
shall give you another com^orter, that he may abide with you for ever: even
the spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive, because the world sees
him not, neither knovveth him. But ye know him: for he dwells with you,
and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortless, but will come too
you. Yet a little while and the world sees me no more: but ye see me. For
I live, and ye shall live. That day shall ye know that I am in my Father,
and you in me, and I in you. Flee that has my commandments and keeps
them, the same is he that loves me. And he that loves me, shall be loved
of my Father, and I will love him, and will shevve my own self unto him.
Judas says unto him (not Judas Iscarioth*) Lord, what is done that thou
vvilte shevve thy self unto us, and not unto the world? Jesus ansvvered,
and said unto them* if a man love me, he will keep my sayings, and my
Father will love him: and we vvil come unto him, and dvvell with him. He
that Ioueth me not, keeps not my sayings. And the word which ye here,
is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me. These things have I spoken unto
you, being yet present with you. But the comforter which is the holy Ghost
whom my Father vvil send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and
bring all things too your remembrance what so ever I have said unto you.
Peace I leave with you: my peace I give unto you. Not as the world gives,
give I unto you. Let not your hearts be grieved, neither fear. Ye have herd
how I said unto you: I go, and come ageine unto you. If ye loved me, ye
vvoulde verily rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: For the Father
is greater than I. And now have I shevved before it come, that when it is
come too pass, ye might believe. Hereafter vvil I not talk many words
unto you. For the Prince of this world comes, and has naught in me. But
that the world may know that I love the Father. And as the Father gave me
commandment, even so do I.

The exposition of the text.
THis feast which we call Pentecost, that is the fiftith day, was ordained in
remembrance of the confirmation of the Gospel, the fiftith day after
Christ's resurrection. For that day, our Lord sent the holy Ghost from heaven,
who sat upon the Apostles visibly in likeness of flambes of fire, and he
(according too Christ's promise) not only leads the Apostles intoo all
truth, but also certifieth the whole world, that Jesus Christ is in heaven,
who from thence confirms his doctrine by this wonderful deed. For like as
the fiftith day after the Jewish passover which they ate first in Egypt, the
law was given, and the doctrine thereof confirmed with great miracles according
as it is written. Exodus 19. Even so after the true Passover, (that is too wit,
after the killing of the Lamb of GOD which is Christ) Gods will was too confirm
the Gospel of his Son, with this woonderful deed, that is, by the visible
giving of the holy Ghost, according as we shall here more largely in the
lesson at Euensong.

Now let us enter upon the most sweet Gospel, which also is a piece of that
long Sermon that the Lord made to his Disciples the day before he suffered. The
sum of the text that you have herd, is, that Christ gives a true mark of
faith and love of God, and of the fruit of the same faith and love, namely that
the disciples should have quiet consciences through the holy ghost, whom he
promises that the father shall send in his name. Also Christ gives them to
understand of his victory against Satan, that even by this victory the world
may know, how well the father loves it. And al these things tend too ye
strengthening of his disciples, least through offense of the cross, they might
go back from their profession. The places are four.

1 The true mark of faith and of the love of God. 2 The fruit and use of
keeping the word of God. 3 Chrysts promising the holy ghost the comforter. 4
Of the peace that Christ promises too those that be his.
Of the first.
IF a man love me, he will keep my sayings. Let us mark these words
advisedly. For they show a true mark of faith and of the love of God. He that
loves Christ, heereth him willingly: He willingly keeps that which he
heereth: And he willingly does that which he keeps. For these things are by
nature joined together. We see it is a custom among men, that they do not
without weariness here those persons toward whom they are not very well
minded. And that contrariwise they covet nothing more, than with all
attentiveness of mind, to here those whom they love entirely: specially when
they know they speak many things sagely and wisely too their welfare and
profit.

But what is the saying of Christ? First too repent. For so did his messenger
John Baptist and he himself also begin his preaching. Heerby is uttered his
affection toward us: For without repentance it is impossible too be saved.
Whereupon he says, except ye repent, ye shall all perish. Secondly, too
believe the Gospel, that is, too believe assuredly that Christ is such a one
toward him, as he is declared too us in his Gospel too be, that is too wit,
a Savior, a Iustifier and a Redeemer. The end of this faith is the health of
our souls. 1. Peter. 1. and in John: He that believes in the son has
everlasting life. Thirdly, too bring forth fruit by this faith: First devotion
too godward, or service of God* Secondly in^^cencie of life, and keeping holy
both of mind and body: Thirdly, love of our neighbor flowing out of a true
faith, a pure heart and a good conscience: And fourthly too do the woork of our
vocation in fear, too the glory of God and profit of our neighbor. All these
virtues ar beutified with true patience, which is a certain obedience toward
God under the cross. He that will be my Disciple (says the Lord) let him take
up his cross and follow me.

What? Wherefore requirest thou so many things? Are we not justified and saved
by faith alone? Yes, it is true. But there is a difference too be put betwixt
the causes of salvation and the obedience that God requires of those that be
his. We are justified by faith only: but when we are justified, we are made
new men: that is too wit, the sons of God, and hence forth we must (after
the example of our father) lead a new and blissed life.

But here is too be considered also, that as there is a double mark of the
children of God: so there is a double mark of the children of Satan. The mark
of the children of God is one while inward, and another while outward. The
inward is repentance, faith, godliness, and good conscience. The outward is
heering of Gods word: and honest conversation among men. For as Christ
shows here that the love of his word, and the heering of it, is a mark of
his Disciples: so Peter requires honest conversation among men, whereby God
may be glorified, and his church edified. But the inward mark of Satan's
children is, too be without faith, without godliness, too have an evil
conscience, and evil affections too have the maistrie. The outward mark is,
outward contempt of the word, and a leude life. Mark well these marks, and let
every man examine him self, whither he be too be accounted among the children
of God, or among the children of the Devil. If he perceive him self too be
among the children of Satan, let him pull back his foot out of hand, least he
be thrown headlong intoo damnation sooner than he looked for. If he perceive
him self too be among the children of God, let him give God thanks, and desire
increase of faith, love, and other virtues: let him desire too be strengthened
by the holy Ghost, least he be withdrawn from his godly and holy race by the
sleights of Satan.

Of the second.
ANd my father will love him, and we will come unto him and dvvell with
him. Here are rehearsed the most sweet fruits of keeping the word of God.

The first fruit is, that the Father loves such as keep Christ's word. For
he holds them right dear in his beloved. Ephe. 1. How great a good thing
this is, it may be understood heerby, that those which believe not in Christ
abide under Gods wrath, according too this saying: He that believes not in
the son, the wrath of God abides upon him. Where as the wrath of God is,
there is sin, death, damnation, hell, the tirannie of the Devil, and (too be
short) all mischief. Contrariwise whereas is the love of God, there are the
enemies overcome, there is salvation, there is joy, there is life everlasting.
Therefore let us think upon this first fruit of keeping Gods word, that by
thinking thereon we may be kindled the more too love the word.

The second fruit is, and we (says he) will come unto him. Than the
which coming there can be no greater honor. If God the father, the son and
the holy Ghost come too him that keeps Christ's words, undoubtedly it
follows, that they came not too him before. But that he was in the devils
power, and in the kingdom of darkness, where death and damnation reign. It
is a great friendship if a King come too his subject, it is a great honor too be
visited of a man's better: but unto this honor none other is comparable, that
God the father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost come unto a man that
loves Christ, and keeps his sayings.

The third fruit is, that the Trinity not only comes too a man that keeps
Christ's sayings, but also makes his dwelling with him, and abides in him.
Christ meeneth by this most sweet promise, that those which here Christ's
word and keep it, are the temples of the Trinity, in whom dwells the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost. And although that all the whole church
is called one church of God: yet is every several Christian a several temple
of the holy Ghost. Behold how princely a promise this is. If any body should
promise a miserable man a great treasure of gold, he should have good cause
too be merry and rejoice, that of a poor and wretched creature, he should become
a rich and happy man. But here is promised a most incomparable treasure,
namely the dwelling of the Trinity in us, which far surmounteth all the
treasures of the world.

But what does the Father when he dwells in a man? what does the son?
what does the holy ghost? The father with his might sheeldeth and defends
the men in whom he dwells, against the rage of satan: whereas satan
executes full power upon all believers. The son with his wisdom and light,
teaches and lighteneth them against all mistes of all manner of darkness. The
holy ghost with his holiness, sa^ctifieth, consecrateth, and anoynteth them
too be the Prophets, Kings, Preests, and saints of the Lord. Too be Prophets,
because we see those things with the eyes of our faith, which no bodily ear is
able too conceive. Of this Prophetical office speaks Joel, according as Luke
also makes mention. Act. 2. Too be Kings, partly because we are made the
children of God by the victory of Christ: and also because that by the power
of Christ, we reign over death and hell. Lu. 22. I appoint unto you a
kingdom, like as my father has appointed unto me. Too be priests, because
when we believe in Christ, we have authority too offer unto GOD the
sacrifice of praise: we have liberty too call upon God through Jesus Christ
our only mediator and high priest: we have authority too teach Gods word.
Howbeeit every man according too the manner of his calling. And too be saints,
because that through Faith in Christ, we are accounted as pure as if we had
fulfilled ye law to the uttermost. Behold what a number of fruits the keeping
and loving of Chrysts word brings with it. There can be no greater
dignity, there can be no greater glory, there can be no honor or worship
more excellent. But what shall we lern by it? To live worthy so great honor,
that we by our own uncleanness drive not God out of our hearts: but rather
that we exalt him with continual praises, in true godliness and
sanctification. That so great worship ought to put us in mind heerof, Peter
teaches. 1. Pet. 2. where he says thus: you are a chosen generation, a kingly
preesthood, a holy nation, a people whom God claymeth proper too himself, that
ye should set forth, his woorks, whoo has called you out of darkness intoo
his wonderful light. You that in times past were no people, are now the
people of God, you which in times past obtained no mercy, have now obtained
mercy. Heerevppon the Apostle infers: Absteyne therefore from fleshly lusts
which fight against the soul, and make your conversation honest among the
Heathen. As many benefits of God then as we here of toward us, so many
spurs shall there be to prick us forward too godly and holy life. Wherefore
since Christ here promyseth so great things, and since that the heavenly
Trinity dwells in them that believe: Let us endeuer too be clean and pure,
as it be comes Gods temples too be. Let us be spiritual things, that we
may reign over sin, and not serve it any more in the lusts thereof. Let us
be prests that may offer quick sacrifices unto God, and call upon him by
faith in Christ. Let us be saints and segregated from the heathenish routes
of the world, that we fall not intoo our former filthiness agein.

Of the third.
ANd the comforter, the holy Ghost whom the father shall send in my name, he
shall teach you all things. This is Chrysts promise, whereby he promises his
Disciples the holy ghost. We have herd before what is the worthiness of the
Chrystians: Now let us here what is joined with this worthiness. And because
I am not able to utter these things according too their worthiness, I will
(after the manner of babes) prattle of each thing that is spoken in this royal
promise. These few words therefore do contain seven points concerning the
holy ghost, the which I will rehearse breefly, and apply them too our use. For
these points contein the causes why the holy ghost is sent and given.

First he is called an Advocate. Although I have spoken somewhat an eight days
hence concerning this name: Yet peradventure it shall not be amiss too repete
it agein too day.

Therefore he is called an Advocate (that is too say a spokesman,) because he
is at hand too the afflicted and does teach them, comfort them, and take
their case upon him as his own: and in conclusion compels us too cry out,
and too say with all our heart: Abba father, have mercy upon us for thy sons
sake, whom thou have given too be our Savior. And this is the first cause why
the holy ghost is given.

The second is, that he may quicken us, and thereupon he is called a spirit. Now
there is a double life. The one natural, wherethrough all living creatures
live: and this endures for a short time, for it is swalowed up by death: and
the other life is of God, from which Paul says, that all those are
estraungers which have not known Christ. The author of this life is that
spirit of Christ, which he promised too his disciples. This is not of short
continuance: but everlasting, as which is proper too the everlasting God. And
this life live al they that believe in the son of God. Gala. 2.

The third cause of sending and geeuing the holy ghost, is that he may make us
holy, of which operation he is called holy: and he makes us holy, at what time
he works faith in us when he regenerateth us, when he reformeth our
understanding, affections, and will: and too be brief, when he brings too
pass that we become new creatures, and live according too the will of God.

The fourth cause of sending and giving the holy ghost unto us, is that he may
stablish a certain louingnesse among us: and therefore he is said too be sent
from the father too his children. For as the father embraces his children with
an inward kindness and love: so he desires nothing more, than that the
children following the nature of their father, should maintain brotherly love
among them selves. Thus too do it beecommeth them that acknowledge God too be
their common father. As for those that refuse too do so, either they never
were his children, or else they are shamefully grown out of kind from the
nature of their father.

The fifth cause of sending the holy ghost is, that we may learn of him, in
what sort our heavenly father is minded toward us. Therefore the Lord says:
and he shall teach you al things. What? Shall he teach any other thing than yt
which the Prophets and Moses have taught? Or any other thing than is delivered
us in the scripture? No forsooth. For he shall teach the self same things. Does
not ye scripture suffice? Yes, it suffiseth as in respect of doctrine, but not
as in respect of our capacity. For although we here the word a thousand
times: yet is it ineffectual unless he teach within. For anointing (as says
the Apostle) teaches all things.

The sixth cause of sending and giving the holy ghost, is showed in this
saying, in my name. By which saying is signified the uttermost end or the
final cause why the holy ghost is given: which is, that they which believe in
Christ may be saved. For in as much as Christ is our salvation, and that the
holy ghost is sent in his name: there is no dout, but he is sent for our
salvation sake.

The seventh cause is, that he may confirm Christ's word in us. He (says
Christ) shall teach you all things: he shall put you in mind of all things
that I have spoken unto you. These things ar signified breefly concerning the
holy ghost, in our Gospel that is red this day in our Church: mo things are
noted yet more breefly in our Creed, which are, that the holy ghost is very
God, that he is the third person in Trinity, that he quickens and
sanctifyeth, and that we must lean unto him by lively faith, as unto the
father and the son. But as concerning these things we shall here more
another time, and have herd more a while ago.

Of the fourth.
MY peace I leave unto you, my peace I give unto you not as the world gives
do I give you. This promise of Christ is right great also, and much greater
than the world understands. Does not Christ say, (as we have herd of late)
in the world ye shall have trouble, and they shall cast you out of their
sinagoges? It is so. Therefore Christ makes a difference between the two
sorts of peace: between the peace of the world, and his peace. What manner of
peace the peace of the world is, there is no man but he understands. But what
manner of peace Chrysts peace is, only the children of God understand. For it
is that peace whereof the Gospel speaks, and of which I have entreated
abundantly the first Sunday after Easter. Nevertheless too the intent I may
breefly repete the same things: The peace of Christ is our reconcileme^t unto.
God, the remission of our sins, the giving of the holy ghost, and everlasting
life, according too this prayer of the Church: O God which by the lightning of
the holy Ghost have taught the hearts of the faithful, give unto us that
peace which the world cannot give, and that our hearts may be quiet. This
peace the son of God grant unto us, too whom with the father and the holy
Ghost be honor and glory for evermore. Amen.

Upon Whitson Monday. The Gospel. John. iij.
SO GOD loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that who so
ever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God
sent not his son intoo the world too condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. But he that believes on him, is not
condemned. But he that believes not, is condemned already, because he has
not believed in the name of the only begotten son of God. And this is the
condemnacion: that light is come intoo the world, and men loved darkness
more than light, because their deeds were evil. For every one that evil
does, hates the light, neither comes too the light, least his deeds should
be reproved. But he that does the truth, comes too the light that his deeds
may be known, how that they are wrought in God.

The exposition of the Text.
WE heard yesterday how the Gospel of Jesus Christ was confirmed by a
wonderful miracle, namely that Christ sent the holy ghost from heaven in a
visible shape, who^ not only the Apostles felt, but also all that were that day
at Jerusalem saw: according as Luke declares. Act. 2. This day the Church
sets forth a Gospel, wherein Christ comprehends a sum of that doctrine,
for the confirmation whereof the holy Ghost was given upon Whitsonday. Christ
talks with Nichodemus, who was one of the Pharisees and a Prince of the
Jews, as we shall here more at large upon Trinity Sunday.

Untoo him does Christ (in the text which I recited even now) declare the
causes of salvation and damnation, and shows from whence comes the
original both of salvation, and also of damnation. He says that Christ was
given, too the intent that they which believe in him should be saved. The
rest he witnesses too stick still in their damnation, as we shall clearly
see in the exposition of the text. The places.

1 The commendation of Gods louingnesse and mercy toward men. 2 The instrument
whereby Christ's benefits are applied too men, is sealed. 3 A comfort for the
godly against the temptation of sin and judgment. 4 The difference betwixt
the believers and the unbelievers.
Of the first.
SO GOD loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son. In these few
words is commended unto us the louingnesse and mercy of God: and that not by
naked words, but by a deed most excellent of all others. For it is not a true
love, which either lies hid in the heart only, or sits in the tongue: but
which proceeding from the innermore affection of the heart, vttreth it self by
word and deed. How then does God love here? He loves in such wise, that he
gave even his own son too be the price of the ransom for the redemption of
the world, that he might by his death redeem them that were adjudged too death
and damnation. Of this love of God speaks Paul. Romans 5. God condemns his
love toward us, in that when we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. And
Romans 8 If God be on our side, who can be against us? Who spared not even his
own son, but gave him for us all. We daily behold great tokens of Gods love
toward men, in all our whole life, and in the government of things.
Notwithstanding, that love which so shines forth in the matters of this
life, is scarsly a slender shadow of that most excellent love wherewith he
embraces us in his son, whom he has given too most bitter death for us.
This love of GOD has exceeding mercy going with it, of which Moises, the
Prophets, and the Psalms do preach in many places: out of whom I will take a
few testimonies, too confirm our belief concerning Gods good will toward us.
Moses Exo. 34. says thus. O Lord God of power, merciful, and gentle, and of
much compassion, and true, which extendest mercy unto thousands, which take
away iniquity, wickedness, and sin. Deuteronomy. 5. I am the Lord thy God that
shows mercy unto many thousa^ds that love me and keep my commandments.
Esai. 16. And his throne shall be prepared in mercy. Jonas. 4. for I know that
thou art a gentle and merciful God, pacient and of much compassion, and a
forgiuer of men's wickedness. David Psa. 2. The earth is full of the Lords
mercy. And the.102. Psalm. As far as the heaven is from the earth, so has he
strengthened his mercy upon them that fear him. Also Psalm. 103. The mercy of
the Lord is from generation too generation upon them that fear him, and his
righteousness upon their childrens children. Also in the same Psalm. The Lord
is merciful and gentle, slow too anger, and great in mercy, he deals not with
us according too our iniquities, neither rewards he us according too our
misdeedes: but as high as the heaven is above the earth, so much has his mercy
surmounted toward them that fear him. As the father pitieth his children, so
does the Lord pity the^ that fear him. There be many such testimonies of
scripture, which set out unto us the unspeakable love and mercy of God, and
show the largeness of the same love and mercy, and the effect and applying
thereof. For the largenes of gods mercy is seen in these points, that it
extends it self unto thousands, that it fills the earth, and that God
pitieth as the father pitieth his own children. The effect or fruit of it is
seen in this, that it takes away sin, that it justifies sinners, that it
acquiteth of ye due penalty. This mercy is grounded in his sone, because he by
offering himself in sacrifice has satisfied Gods justice, and by his obedience
toward the law of God, has purchased righteousness unto us. This mercy is
applied too them that love God, and fear him, and keep his commandments:
that is, too them that believe in Christ, which through faith perform new
obedience. But as touching this matter, more is to be spoken in the second
place. Let us here consider more deeply the words of the text. God so loved
the world (says he.) Who loves? God. Whom loves he? The world. Here stay
thy self, and think upon this word. He loves this world: Ergo his healthful
louingnesse perteyneth not to the Jews only, for they are but a piece of ye
world. He loves the world: Ergo he loves not only a certain few of ye world,
as the holy and virtuous yt are in the world: but rather Christ came into ye
world of purpose to save ye sinners. What meneth he then by the world? Al men
that are in ye world. Behold the Lamb of God (says John) which takes away ye
sins of the world. And agein, gods will is yt al men should be saved. As often
therefore as we here yt God loves the world, let us think our selves to be a
parcel of that world which he loves. How falls it out then yt he loves us,
considering yt we are sinners? God finds two things in us. One which he
himself has made, and another which comes of our selves. That we are men
consisting of soul and body, it proceeds of him: This his creature God
loves. But that we are sinners, we have it not of him, but it proceeeeth of
our selves. This does God hate, and for the clensing heerof has he given his
son: and wills that those which will be partakers of his mercy, should
mortify it in themselves by continual repentance. But how does God love the
world? So as he has given his son for it: that is to wit that he should take
upon him the sin of the world, and die for it upon the cross. Surely it is a
great love, than which there can be none greter. But reason is here offended,
which understands not Gods purpose, and obiecteth in this wise. Is not God
almighty? Yes surely. Can he not do what he lists? Yes undoubtedly can he.
Had it not bin better then if he had showed his love toward men by some other
mean? Austin answers. If he had done otherwise, neither would yt have
liked thee. It pleased him (says Paul) too save the unbelievers by the
foolish preaching of the Gospel. Wherefore setting aside the judgment of
reason, let us say with David: Thy word is a lantern too my feet. Also
this is too be known, that God is not only almighty, but also most just, most
merciful, and most wise. Mankind was fallen intoo sin. What did Justice
require in this case? Surely that mankind should be punished according too the
greatness of his sin. Now as his sin was infinite (for the infinite
goodness was defaced thereby:) so Gods justice required that either mankind
should suffer endless punishment, or else that rightful ame^ds should be
made in stead of the punishemente. This amends could none make but God. But
forasmuch as God ought not too be punished: the son of God took man's
nature upon him, and in it made satisfaction for the sins of the world. And
so God showed himself not only almighty, but also most just, most merciful, and
most wise. For he alone found out the way which reason could not find. He gave
his son, whoo by his heavenly power overcame sin, death, the Devil and Hell:
who of his mercy has received us: who with his righteousness has satisfied
the justice of God: who through his wisdom has found out the way of salvation.

Of the second.
THat all that believe in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Here is the instrument set forth whereby the benefits of our Mediator
Christ are applied unto us. Howbeeit for as much as these are the words of
the son of God, and the cheef flower or pith of the whole scripture: I will
sift them one by one, and show what doctrine is too be gathered of every word.

First he says: All. This word all remedieth two most grievous temptations:
whereof the one is of particularitie, and the other of unworthiness for the
multitude of sins. There are diverse that confess God too be merciful too
many for Christ's sake: but they dout whither so great a good turn perteine
too them selves or no. This is a sore temptation, the which the son of God
remedyeth with this one word all. For if Christ's benefit extended not it
self too all, he would in no wise have said all, but many or some. Let us then
give the praise of truth unto Christ, and let every man thoroughly persuade
him self, that Christ's benefits belong to him also. Ageine another temptation
rises of the thinking upon the greatness of sins, which temptation the
miseries of this present life increase. This does Christ remedy also by this
word all. For he says not every just man, or that commits the lesser
sins: but all: that is to wit, every one that is found within this wide
world. This also confirms the price of our redemption. The blud of Christ
(says John) cleanses us from all iniquity: that is too say, from all that
which we do amiss contrary too the law of God. Therefore let no man
despair by reason of the greatness of his disease. Our Physician Christ is
wise, and has an effectual remedy against all diseases, namely his own
death and obedience.

Then follows the second word: that believes: by which word mankind is
disseuered intoo two sorts of men: of whom the one believe, and the other
believe not. They believe, which persuade them selves that Christ is favorable
to them, according too his promise: and they believe not, which despise the
gospel, and will not credit Christ: and these perish through their own default.
Uerely the benefit extends it self too al men, and is offered too all
according too Christ's commandment: but it is received of the believers only,
according too Chrysts commandment and promise. Go ye intoo the whole
world and preach the gospel to al creatures. He that believes shall be saved.
Behold, the benefit is offered unto all: but only the believers take hold of
it: the rest perish through their own default. For although that God of his
mercy is willing too have all men saved: yet will he of his just judgment,
that the unbelievers perish, whom he would have saved, if they had not refused
to embrace their salvation by faith.

The third word is on him: For he is saved that believes on him, that is, on
the son of God, very man, the sauyoure of the world Jesus Christ. What is it
too believe on him? It is too despair of thy self, and too hope for all good
at his hand.

The fourth word is, should not perish. In this saying are showed two things:
First that all which believe not on Christ are subject too the sentence of
damnation. And secondly that men be acquit from this sentence of damnation, by
the merits of only Christ through faith only. This therefore is the greatest
benefit of the Gospel, too be set free from deserved destruction and endless
damnation.

The fifthe saying is: but have life everlasting. This is the cheifest benefit
of the Gospel. Endless death is due to us by our own desert: eternal life
is due too us by the deserte of Christ, so that we lean unto him by steadfast
faith unto the end. By these things now is too be gathered a firm difference
betwixt the law and the Gospel, and between works and faith: The law
promises eternal life: but it is too them that do the law. But because no
man is able too fulfill the law, it follows that no man can atteine life by
the law. The Gospel promises eternal life freely too all that believe in
Christ, because Christ has for all such satisfied the righteousness of the
law. Faith therefore receives that benefit freely which the law offers
without condition of fulfilling the law. Notwithstanding, when we have
obtained this benefit by faith, we must do works, not too the intent too
deserve Heaven and everlasting life by them, but as Gods Children too perform
true obedience too our Father, and to show our faith by our fruits, in all
godliness and honesty.

Of the third.
FOr God has not sent his son intoo the world too comdemne the world,
but that the world might be saved by him. He that believes in him is not
condemned: but he that believes not is judged already, because he believes
not on the name of the only begotten son of GOD. These words contain a
third place, that is too wit, comfort and terror. For it both comfort
the godly acknowledging their sins: and puts the stubborn in fear, that
will not believe in Christ. Now for as much as GOD easly saw what the
weakness of men was (and chiefly of those that earnestly think upon the
sentence of the law) and saw the wilfulness of no small number: he applied
his word unto them both. For the first sort, when they here how all that
yield not full obedience too the law, are subject too the sentence of death,
can not but be dismayed at the threatenings of the law. Those therefore does
Christ comfort, and says: GOD has not sent his Son too condemn the
world, but that the world might be saved by him. He speaks of his first
coming intoo the world, which was too save sinners that fall too amendment.
For he used this sweet allurement: Come unto me all ye that labor and are
laden, and I will refreshe you. Also, I came not too call the rightuous, but the
sinners too repentance. As many then as obey Christ's voice, and repent, are
free from the judgment of damnation. For thus says the truth: He that
believes in him, is not judged. That is too say, with the judgment of
damnation. This promise will comfort us against the sentence of the law, and
of our own conscience. For he that shall be judge of the quick and the dead,
says openly. He that believes in him, is not judged. The trust unto this
promise shall be needful for us in ye hour of death, against the thretnings of
the law, ye dredfulnes of death, ye flames of hell, and the tirannie of the
devil. For it cannot come too pass, yt the everlasting truth should lie.
Hithertoo concerning the comfort of them yt believe. Concerning the terror of
them yt will not believe ye gospel, it follows: but he that believes not, is
judged already, because he believes not in the name of the only begotten son of
God. what? Shall there the^ be none other judgment? Yes: the son of man shall
come too judgment in his time, according as he has promised. What meeneth he
then by saying: He is already judged, yt is too say: condemned. By this saying,
he shows what manner of ones all the children of Adam be without faith, yt is,
without Christ our mediator: namely that they be judged (yt is too say,
condemned) yt is to wit, as in respect of ye cause and the matter. For the
cause and matter of their damnation is in themselves, which is the
transgression of gods law and wilfully rebelling against God. Besides this, the
sentence of the law spoken long ago when he had first created man, and
afterward repented in mount Sinai, is that al they are cursed that obey not God
according too his commandment. Untoo this curse are all they tied that
believe not in the Son of God, who alone has taken upon him the curse of
them that believe in him. That this is so, we are done too understand by the
things that follow. And this is the judgment, that light is come intoo the
world, and men have loved darkness more than light. That is too say,
therefore shall men be damned, because they have not received the light of the
son of God by faith: but rather would abide still in their own ignorance, and
that by reason their woorks were evil.

Of the fourth.
FOr every one that does evil ha^eth the light, and will not come too the
light, least his vvoorks should be reproved. When thieves will steal, they
love the dark: so men that are not yet borne agein by faith in Christ too do
well, are carried with might and main unto naughtiness, and therefore do hate
the light of the Gospel: where contrariwise he that deals uprightly with a
good conscience, comes to the light, that is to say, does his woorks openly,
and is not afraid, that men should see the^. That is too wit, he that comes
too the light of Christ, and has learned of his spirit too do well, he abides
no longer in the darkness of ignorance, but endeuereth too walk like the
child of Light. Hereby then we may learn, first the difference between
them that believe, and them that believe not. For the difference is too be
found out by their works, as the Lord says in an other place: A good tree
brings forth good fruit: and an evil tree brings forth evil fruit.
Ageine we may learn, that the light of the Gospel cannot abide that we
should be wrapped in our old darkness. Too this purpose make so many
exhortations of Christ and his Apostles. In Matthew the Lord says: Let your
light so shine before men, that they may glorify your heavenly father. And
Paul says: Ye are the children of light, walk as in the light. After the
same manner also speaks Peter: Untoo which lively stone rejected of men, but
chosen and honored of God, come you, and as lively stones be builded upon it
a spiritual house, and a holy preesthood, too offer spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable too god through Jesus Christ. Let no man think therefore, that the
Gospel gives liberty too sin. The Gospel delivers from sin: Wherefore
it will not that we should any more yield our selves under the yoke of sin,
when we are once rid of it. If (says our Savior) the son have set you
free, ye shall be free in deed. He that commits sin, is the flaue of
sin. Then since we are set free by Jesus Christ, let us use our freedom in
such wise, as we may be the servant, not of sin, but of God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Too whom be honor for ever. So be it.

The third holy day in Whitson week. The Gospel. John. x.
Verily, verily, I say unto you: he that enters not in by the door intoo the
shepefolde, but clymbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a
murderer. But he that enters in by the door is the shepeheard of the sheep:
To him the porter opens, and the sheep here his voice, and he calls his
own sheep by name, and leads them out, And when he has sent forth his
own sheep, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know
his voice. A stranger vvil they not follow, but vvil flee from him: for they
know not the voice of strangers. This Proverb spoke Jesus unto them, but
they understood not what things they were which he spoke unto them. Then
said Jesus unto them ageine: Verily, verily, I say unto you: I am the door of
the sheep. All (even as many as come before me) are thieves and murderers,
but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door, by me if any enter in, he
shall be safe, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. A thief comes not
but for too steal, kill, and destroy. I am come that they might have life, and
that they might have it more abundantly.

The exposition of the text.
WE herd yesterday of the everlasting life which we atteine by faith in
Christ: and this day is showed unto us the true door, and the true door
keeper, least any man might stray from the right gate of eternal life, and
seek an other way or door, by which he cannot come too eternal life. Now too
the intent we may the better understand the text of this Gospel, we must
mark the occasion and purpose or drifte thereof, whereby the effect of the
meaning may be gathered. The occasion was this. Christ healed a blind man,
that had bin blind from his birth: by which deed he showed his Godheade, and
that he was the Messiah, which had bin promised long ago. But the Pharisees
and Scribes (who at that time were counted the shepheardes of Gods people) were
offended, as they that enuyed Christ, the honor of the Messiah, and true
shephearde that was promised. Against the ungodliness of whom, Christ
maynteyneth and vpholdeth him self too be the true shepeheard. His drift
therefore is too show the true sheepfolde, that is, too define the true
Church, whereof he alone is the true shepeherd. Thus have we the occasion and
drift of this sermon. And the sum of it is, that he both confuteth the
Scribes (which vaunted them selves too be the true shepeherds) and avouches
himself too be the true shepherd, in whose sheepfolde be as many as here his
voice and follow him, and depart from strangers: that is too say, from false
shepherds. The places are two.

1 Of false shepeherds. 2 Of the true shepeherd and sheepfolde.
Of the first.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that enters not intoo the sheepefolde at
the door, but climbeth in another way, he is a thief and a murderer. This
is the description of a false Prophet. And by setting forth the example of
one, he signifies all false Prophets. He is a false Prophet that enters
not in at the door. What is it, not too enter in at the door? It is too
appoint another way too salvation than Christ only. Then whosoever strayeth
from Christ, strayeth from the door, and is a false shepeherde. Arrius denied
Christ's Godhead: therefore did he stray from the door, for Christ is very
God. Photinus denied Christ's manhood: therefore he strayed from the door,
for Christ is very man. Sabellius made two persons in Christ: therefore
strayed he from the door, for Jesus is both God and man, one Lord, and one
Christ. The Papists say, we are not saved by the only merit of Christ:
therefore they straye from the door, for Christ alone is the Savior of the
world. The Pharisees and Papists thrust upon us men's traditions in steed of
the Gospel: wherefore they stray from the door, and enter intoo the
sheepfolde (that is, intoo the Church) by another doctrine, than the doctrine
of Moses, the Prophets, the Psalms, and the Apostles, for this is too climb
in another way. We may therefore note heerby the true mark of false Prophets,
which is too climb intoo the sheepefolde some other way than by the very
gospel of Christ, or than by Christ himself, and to take upon them the office
of teching. These false techers are thieves and murderers. They are murderers
after a double manner. First, in that they thought their own doctrine too be
sufficient too salvation, and the only doctrine that fed: when nevertheless
there is no understanding of the word, but if Christ open, and as it were
vnbolt the door. Secondly, for that they devised also new traditions of their
own brain, which they thought too be auaylable too salvation: according as
we manyfestly see it to have bin customably done by the Papists, which have
taught, that this work, this Mass, this Rosarie, this praying unto Saints,
and this order, deserved salvation. They are thieves moreover, first because by
their craftiness, they take away the true doctrine. 2. Cor. 11. like as the
serpent deceived Eve by his wiliness. Secondly, for that when they have stolen
away the true doctrine, they foyst in a wicked doctrine, wherethrough they
strengthen the hands of the ungodly, and discourage the heart of the rightuous.
Ezech. 13.

But what meeneth it that it follows in the text, As many as came before me,
are thieves and murderers? Came not Moses, Elias, Esaias, Heliseus, Jeremy,
Daniel, and many others before Christ? If they came before him, they were
thieves and robbers, according as ye lord in this place avouches openly. They
are said too come before Christ, yt come without Christ, yt come without his
doctrine and spirit. But the holy prophets of God came with Chrysts spirit and
doctrine: therefore they came not before Christ, neither were they thieves and
murderers, but true shepherds of Chrysts sheepfold. Heervpo^ Austin says well:
They come with him, yt come with gods word. I (says he) am the way, ye truth,
and the life. If he be the truth, they come with him yt be true. As many then
as come without him, ar thieves and murderers, yt is too say, they come of their
own heads, to ye intent to steal and kill. They are thieves because they say
that that is theirs which is an other man's: and they are murderers because
they also kill that which they have stolen. So then how great danger there
is in false teachers. They claim Chrysts flock to them selves like thieves:
and they kill them like murderers. Upon good cause therefore does Christ in
the Gospel warn all men too beware of false prophets, that is of false
teachers that bring not with them Gods truth.

Of the second.
But he that enters at the door, is the shepeherde of the sheep. Here he
entreats of the good shepherd, and defines him too be the good shepeherd
that enters in at ye door. There are four sorts of good shepeherds. For
first God himself is called the shepeherd of his sheep, according too that
which is written. Hierem. 22. Behold, I will gather the remnant of my flock out
of al lands, intoo which I had cast them out, and will bring them ageine intoo
their own grounds, and they shall increase and be multiplied. Also Psalm.
23. The Lord is my shepeherde, I shall want nothing: he shall put me in a
place of pasture. Secondly Christ, God and man, is also a true shepherd, as he
himself witnesses in this gospel, and as we have herd even now. I am the
good shepeherd: which thing he proved by that that he redeemed his sheep
with his own life. The third kind of shepeherdes are the godly teachers, of
whom the Lord speaks in Hieremie: I will raise up shepeheardes among them,
and they shall feed. And Christ makes Peter a shepeherd, when he says:
Feed my sheep. The fourth kind of Shepherds is the civil magistrate.
Whereupon king David is called the shepeherd of the people: and in old time
kings were called shepherds of people. Howbeit the Lord in this Gospel speaks
not of the first and last kinds of shepherds, but only of the middle sorts of
shepherds: that is, of himself and other godly teachers of the Church: of whom
I will speak somewhat, howebeeit breefly, because I spoke of this matter a
while ago. A good shepherd therefore in general is, first he that enters in
at the door, that is, which comes with Christ and brings the true Gospel,
as the prophets and Apostles did in old time, and as all do at this day as many
as teach the Gospel purely. Secondly, he that feeds the sheep, not with
rotten but with wholesome foder, namely with the lively word of God. Thirdly
this doorekeeper or porter opens: that is too say, Christ makes the word
effectual and auaylable too the salvation of the sheep. For unless Christ
open, in vain is the labor taken, and the sheep are not fed too any purpose.
Fourthly, he calls his own sheep by their names: that is too say, he
knows his sheep, he loves them, and embraces them with a singular care.
Fifthly, he goes before them. How? In doctrine, life, and Cross. For a good
shepherd must be a pattern too his flock in doctrine, life, and cross.
Sixthly, his sheep follow him, that is too wit, in pureness of doctrine, in
holiness of life, and in patience under the cross. But why do his sheep
follow him? First because they know his voice: Secondly because they flee from a
stranger: for they know not his voice. We have here a description, not only of
a true shepherd, but also of the true sheep, which are in one sheepfold of the
chief shepherd God. What is the sheepfold? It is the catholic church. Who be
the sheep? All that here the voice of the shepherd, following him and fleeing
from strange shepherds, who in deed are no shepherds but thieves and
murderers. Here are the differences too be hild betwixt the true Church and
the false Church. The proper marks of the true Church, are these: which whosoever
has not, let him know that he is none of Chrysts sheepfold.

Which are these marks of the true Church, or of Chrysts true shepfold? The
first is the uncorrupted voice of the heavenly doctrine, according too this
saying: My sheep here my voice: The second is the right use of Baptime. The
third is, the use of the Lords supper according to Chrysts institution. The
fourth is the use of the keys according too Chrysts commandment. The fifth is
the Cross. The sixth is mutual love among Chrysts sheep. The seventh is
mutual prayer one for another. And the eight is the mayntenance of the
ministry of gods word. These are the true marks of Christ's church, the
which a man may comprehend in fewer words. As we may say, that the first
mark of Christ's sheep, is the vncorrupt voice or preching of the gospel: the
second, the lawful use of the Sacraments: and the third obedience toward the
ministry of the word. For in these three are contained the other eight that
I set.

We have in general who is a good shepherd, and who be the true sheep. Now
let us apply them too examples. First, unto Christ the chief shepherd and
unto his sheep. And afterward too other ministers of the word, who under
Christ are also called shepherds.

Christ proves himself too be a good shepherd, by that he gives his life
for his sheep. For he came down from heaven too seek that was lost, too
heal that was diseased, and too close up the wounds which the wolves had given
his sheep. This shepherd went before his sheep in pureness of doctrine,
innocence of life, and cross. He feeds his sheep with the helthful foder of
God, that is, with the word of the gospel. He gathers together his stray
sheep. He keeps away the woolues with his sheepehooke. And too be brief,
he sets by nothing so much as by the welfare of his sheep. His sheep are
Abel, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Joseph, Anna, Mary, Simeon, and many
others, which leaving their error, gave ear too Chrysts voice, following him
in doctrine, life, and cross, who^ they shall follow in glory also, in their
time. For if we suffer with him, we shall be glorified with him. His sheep
at this day, are as many as believe the gospel, and serve Christ in true
profession and godliness.

Now what reward Chrysts sheep shall look for at their shepherds hand, who
is both the door and the doorekeeper, Christ himself shows, when he says:
If any man enter by me, he shall be saved, and he shall go in and out, and
shall find feeding, That is too say, if any man leave the darkness, and
follow me that am the light, he shall go in, namely by faith: and he shall
go out, by profession, godliness, and charity: and he shall find feeding,
that is too wit, by the word of life in this world, and by everlasting
blissednesse in the life too come.

Besides this, good shepherds are all godly ministers of the word, which
follow Christ's example in feeding of their sheep. Such a one was Helias,
such a one was Hieremie, such a one was Esaias, such were the Apostles, and
such now a days are all they that preach Christ sincerely and go before
their sheep in doctrine, life, and cross, which flee not the Woolues, but
keep them from Christ's sheepfolde with the sword of the spirit and ernest
prayers. These also have sheep of their own, those that hear their voice, and
follow them in doctrine, godliness, and patience. What? do not their sheep
belong unto Christ only? Yes, that do they. How then says he that they
belong too the shepherds that feed them? They are their shepherds in
respect of charge: but they are only Christ's in respect of possession and
ownership: for he has purchased the sheep unto him self with his own
precious blood. But in as much as we have lately heard the sermon concerning
the shepherde and his sheep, I will say no more of them here, but will betake
you all too our chief shepherd Jesus Christ, too whom with the father and the
holy Ghost be honor and glory for ever. Amen.

Upon Trinity Sunday. The Gospel. John. iij.
THere was a man of the Phariseys named Nichodemus, a ruler of the Jews. The
same came unto Jesus by night, and said unto him: Rabbi, we know that
thou art a teacher come from GOD: for no man could do such miracles as thou
do, except GOD were with him. Jesus answered and said unto him:
verily, verily, I say unto thee: except a man be borne from above, he cannot
see the kingdom of God. Nichodemus said unto him: how can a man be borne
when he is old? can he enter intoo his mothers womb and be borne again?
Jesus answered: verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be borne of
water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter intoo the kingdom of God. That
which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of the
spirit, is spirit. Marvel not thou that I said unto thee, ye must be
borne from above. The vvinde blovveth where it lusts, and thou hear the
sound thereof, but thou can not tell whence it comes, nor vvhyther it
goes: So is every one that is borne of the spirit. Nichodemus ansvvered, and
said unto him: how can these things be? Jesus answered and said unto
him: Art thou a master in Israel, and know not these things? Verily,
verily, I say unto thee: We speak that we know, and testify that we
have seen, and ye receive not our witness. If I have told you earthly
things, and ye believe not: how shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly
things? And no man ascends up intoo Heaven but he that came down from
Heaven, even the Son of man, which is in Heaven. And as Moses lift up the
Serpente in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lift up: that
whosoever believes in him, perish not, but have everlasting life.

The exposition of the Text.
THis feast may woorthely be called the feast of our Creed, or of our Faith.
For it is ordained too the intent folk should in the Church be taught
concerning God, whoo is one and true in substance, and three in persons: and of
benefits toward the Church. For after that Christ and his benefits: the
louingnesse of the Father in sending his son intoo the world: and the
sending of the holy Ghost too comfort the Gospel, had bin entreated of, the
former Sundays: the Church thought it convenient too knit al these things
together, and too teach them as this day, too the intent the things that were
declared at large, might breefly be brought too remembrance agein. And the
church sets forth this text of the gospel, which you have herd, for a very
good purpose. For in it are set forth Gods benefits toward his Church. For
as the Father sent his Son, yt he might become a sacrifice for sin: so is
the holy Ghost given too beget the believers ageyn, unto everlasting life. The
sum of this present Gospel therefore is, that those which are begotten
ageyn in the faith of Christ, are heirs of eternal life, by the benefit and
merit of Christ, whom the father has sent. Now to the intent we may keep a
certain order, I will in this sermon entreat.

1 Of the knowledge of God. 2 Of the spiritual regeneration or new birth. 3 Of
that most comfortable saying of Christ, as Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness: so must the Son of man also be lifted up. etc.
Of the first.
FOr as much as too know God, is life everlasting: it stands men in hand too
look for the true knowledge of God. The knowledge of God is of two sorts. The
one is heathenish, natural, and philosophical: and this is imperfect: For the
wise men of the world, which were not instructed by Gods word, erred in
four points. First in the substance of the Godhead. Secondly in the persons.
Thirdly in his providence. And fourthly in his will. The Epicures are hissed
out of all men, who denied that there is any god at all. The wise men which
confessed that there was but one God, misdeemed of his substance. For they
thought not him too be God, who is the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
Neither deemed they aright concerning the persons. As for Gods providence, some
of them took it quite away. Other some denied it too be universal. For they
were of opinion, that god cared for the gretest things, but not for these
earthly things. As for Gods will concerning free mercy, they were utterly
ignorant of it: but that he will one day punish the stubborn, they were
warned by the record of their own conscience. But from whence had the heathen
this slender knowledge, such as it is? David and Paul witness, that they had
this knowledge of God by his creatures. For Paul in the first too the Romans
says: That which is too be known concerning God, was manifest unto them.
For God did show it unto them. So that his invisible things, that is too say,
his eternal power and godhed are understood and seen, by the woorks from the
creation of the world, too this intent that they might be without excuse.
David also says: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handy woorks. That is too say, the heaven that we see, shows God
the woorkmaister thereof. The effect of all philosophical knowledge concerning
God, comes too this point: First man by beholding the things that are
created, is brought too this point, that he confesses there is some body by
whom all these things were made: and by whose power all things are governed:
and heerby he must of necessity be drawn too this eternal power and
godhead: for it must needs be, that he that made all things, must be of
auncienter continuance than all the things that are made, and so consequently
without beginning. And it follows of necessity, that this incomparable power
which suffizeth too rule so huge a woork, must needs be more excellent than
any other power, be it never so exceeding. Now this is the self same thing
that we call God: who ageyn, unless he be only one, surely is not he that
made all things, nor that rules al things, and therefore neither everlasting,
nor almighty, no nor GOD. This is the sum of that which the wise men of the
world do know concerning God. Of which knowledge the use is of three
sorts. The first is, that men may acknowledge God by his creatures: secondly,
that when they know him they should woorship him: and thirdly, that when they
know God, and woorship him not, they should be inexcusable. The first and
second are the propre end of knowing God. The third is accessarie through
man's own fault. Another knowing God comes of the Scripture, or of Gods
word, which knowledge is breefly contained in the Apostles Creed: which is,
that we believe there is but one God: that we believe there is three persons
in one Godhed: that we should know Gods will, and his benefits toward his
church: and that we should know the mean, by whom we may be made partakers
of the benefits of the holy trinity.

Howbeeit too the intent we have the fuller perceiuerance of this knowing of
God, I will set and expound four points concerning this helthful knowledge of
God, whereof the first shall be a confirmation yt there is but one God. The
second, a declaration that there be three persons in that one godhead. The
third, what is too be considered in every of the persons severally: and the
fourth what is the helthful use of knowing God. First the confirmation is too
be fetched out of records. And as for records yt confirm the unity of God,
I will take them out of Moses, the prophets, the Psalms, and the wrytings of
the Apostles. Moses. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. I am the Lord thy God that brought
thee out of the land of Egipte, thou shalt have none other Gods before me.
Deu. 6. Harken O Israel the Lord our God is one God. Esaias. 43. Before me
there is no God made, neither shall there be any after me. I am, I am God,
and there is no Savior besides me. 44. I am the first and the last, and
besides me, there is no God. Psalm. 18. Who is God but the Lord of hosts,
and who is strong, but our God? Paul. 1. Cor. 8. We know that there is none
o-other GOD but one. 1. Tim. 2. There is one God. These records and many
other* do evidently convince, that there is but one God, which thing the
Catholic Church also confesses, when it says: I believe in one God.

The second of the persons. That there be three persons in one godly nature,
not multiplied but abiding one in number: Reason is not able too conceive.
Wherefore this is a mystery rather too be reverenced, than too be serched.
Heervpon says Bernard. Too search this, is a point of rashness: but too know
it, is eternal life. And Solomon: He that is a sercher of his majesty, shall
be overwhelmed of his glory. Wherefore let us in this behalf, keep our
reason prisoner under Gods ward, and let us believe the testimonies of the
scriptures concerning so great a mystery. The reason why the Church believes
that there be three persons in one nature of Godhead, is this: There is but
one God, which thing is already proved by many testimonies. The father is God,
the son is God, the holy Ghost is God. Ergo the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost is one God. That the Father is God and likewise the Son, and the
holy Ghost, it is too be proved four ways. First by the clear words of the
Scripture. Secondly by their woorks. Thirdly by the woorship which is due too
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. And fourthly by the continual
consent of the Church.

The words of the Scripture are clear. Math. 3. The Father speaks from
heaven: the Son stands in the river, the holy Ghost comes down in
likeness of a Dooue upon Christ. 1. John. 5. There are three that bear
witness in Heaven: the Father, the word, and the holy Ghost, and these
three are one.

Ageine, their woorks show the same thing. The Father creates, the Son
creates, the holy Ghost creates. The Father justifies, the Son
justifies, and the holy Ghost justifies. The Father governs all things,
the Son governs all things, and the holy Ghost governs all things, These
woorks of creating, justifying, and governing, are proper unto God. Wherefore
in as much as they are attributed too the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost
alike, we must of necessity confess the Godhead of them.

The same thing is also confirmed by the worship of them. The Father is prayed
unto, the Son is prayed unto, the holy Ghost is prayed unto. But none is
too be prayed unto save only God, neither is any too be believed on, saving
God only: Wherefore the father, the son and the holy Ghost are one God.

Heeruntoo also perteyneth the consent of the church. This is the Catholic
faith, that we woorship one God in Trinity, and the Trinity in unity,
neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance. For the person
of the Father is one, the person of the son is another, and the person of the
holy Ghost is another.

The third is, of those things that are too be considered in the persons. In
the persons there be five things too be considered. 1. The substance. 2. the
person. 3. the distinction of the persons. 4. the woork. 5. and the will.

The substance or nature of the father, the son, and the holy ghost, is all
one. For the father is not one thing, the son another thing, and the holy
ghost a third thing: for the substance of the godhed is one, and the nature
simple. And therefore the father is said too be in the son and the holy
ghost: the son in the father and the holy ghost: and the holy ghost in the
father and the son.

The second thing that is too be considered in the Trinity, is the person:
that is too wit, that there is one person of the father, another of the son,
and another of the holy ghost. In this Trinity of persons nothing is before
or after other, nothing greater or lesser than other: neither in time, because
all the persons are coeternal: nor in nature, because al are of one self same
substance: nor in dignity, because they are coequal: nor in understanding
because they are comprehended in understanding all toogither.

The third thing that is too be considered in the Trinity of the persons,
is personal distinction. And here is first too be marked, how God is
discerned from creatures. And next how the persons of the Godhead are
discerned one from an other. The distinctions by which God is discerned from
creatures, are these. First, that in one undivided nature not multiplied, there
be three persons. Secondly that God is an everlasting mind. Thirdly that God is
the creator. Fourthly that God is in the world and above the world. And fifthly
that God is in all places, and yet contained within no place. These five
properties are incident too God only, and too no creature.

The persons are distinguished one from another, by double properties, inward
and outward. The inward, are too beget, too be borne, and too proceed. The
father alone begets the son: the son only is borne of the father* the
holy ghost only proceeds from them both. The outward properties are too
send, and too he sent: Only the father se^deth the son and the holy ghost
are sent, but after a diverse manner. The son being sent, took upon him
man's nature, wherein he was made a sacrifise. The holy Ghost is sent intoo
men's hearts too kindle a new light in their minds.

The fourth thing that is too be considered in the persons, is the woork of
the Trinity. Herein is the rule of Austin too be observed. The woorks of ye
Trinity (as in outward view) are undivided: howbeeit saving the property of
each person. The father creates, the son creates, and the holy Ghost
creates. The father regenerateth, the son regenerateth, and the holy ghost
regenerateth. But the Father creates by the son, and the holy ghost
preserves the things created. The father regenerateth in the son, by the
holy ghost.

The fifth thing which. I said was too be considered in the persons, is the
will: which what one it is, these things, following do declare. 1. First their
works past and present. 2. The commandments. 3. The threatenings and
promises of the law. 4. The promises of the Gospel. 5. Examples: and. 6. his
vnparcialitie, and that he is no accepter of persons. Al these things
toogither teach, that God is angry with sinners, and will punish them, and that
he will forgive the sin of all those that flee too the Mediator, and give them
everlasting life, without having respect of any nation or people.

Now remains the use, which is manifold. First therefore these things will
frame our judgment aright concerning GOD. For we must acknowledge God too be
such a one, as he has showed himself too be by his word and record,
according too the verse: Believe thou God that thing too be, which he has
showed he is too thee. Secondly, these things teach us too have a right
opinion concerning the creation, which is the work of the whole Trinity.
Thirdly too have a right opinion concerning the reparatio^ of mankind, which is
also the work of the whole Trinity, as is said before. Fifthly, these things
instruct us how to call upon god aright. For invocation is too be directed too
this God alone, which is the father, the son, and the holy ghost. Sixthly,
these things admonish us too live warely and holily, as in the sight of god.
And thus much concerning God and the Trinity, all which things are breefly set
forth in our Creed.

Of the second.
Unless a man be borne agein of water and the holy ghost, he cannot enter
intoo the kingdom of God. This is the second doctrine that I purposed upon:
For the better understanding whereof, two things are too be marked. The first
is, with whom Christ talks: the other, what was the occasion of this saying*
What manner a one he was with whom Christ talked, the text shows. He was an
honorable and a noble man: he was a Prince of the Jews: he was a Pharisie;
such a one as lived blameless according too the law of Moses. And the
occasion was this. Nicodemus came too Christ by night, and like a right
Pharisie thought himself righteous by the deeds of the law, by sacrifyses,
and by keeping of the Sa^othes. Wherefore he wondered yt John set out a now
doctrine concerning righteousness and Baptim* which he himself being a doctor
of the law, was ignorant of* Christ therefore preue^teth his judgment with this
saying. Unless a man be borne again, he cannot enter intoo the kingdom of
God. At these words Nicodemus is astonyed, and says: How can a man when he is
old be borne ageine? Too whom Christ answers: Verily I say unto thee, except
a man be borne agein of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. Here Christ shows that he meant not of the fleshly birthe
(according as Nicodemus understood him:) but of the spiritual birth, which he
proves too be needful by this, that our former birth is unclean. That (says
he) which is borne of the flesh, is flesh. That is too say, whatsoever is
borne in this corruption of nature, is unclean and guilty, and therefore not
meet too receive the kingdom of God. Heerevntoo he adds the manner of
regeneration. The vvinde blovveth where it lists, and thou heerest the noise
of it, but thou know not from whence it comes, nor vvhyther it goes. So
is every one that is borne of the spirit. That is too say: Like as the wind is
then first felt when it blows albeeit that no man know from whence it
comes, or whither it goes: so this spiritual regeneration is made after a
certain secret manner by the power of the holy ghost, which when it is done,
is perceived by the new motions of the new man.

Howbeeit too the intent (...) may understand these things, we must mark the
conueyances and instruments of this spiritual birth* First the seed of this
birth is the word of the Gospel, which is preached by the voice of the
ministers. Secondly the holy Ghost, who in the preaching of the gospel is
effectual, and works faith: by which we both give credit too the word of
God, and also persuade our selves that god is at one with us for his sons
sake, and therwithall altreth our nature too a new obedience. Thirdly when
these benefits are received by ^ayth* as it were intoo the soil of the h^^t,
then man being borne a new, feels by and by within himself the motions of the
holy ghost: and water is applied outwardly as a seal of the inward
regeneration, and a testimonial of the grace of Christ bestowed upon him. The
effects of this new birth are seen in the mind, in the affections, in the
will, and in the outward woorks. For the mind is lightened with the
brightness of God: the affections are purged: the will is made forward: and a
new obedience of all the powers is begone. Breefly, he that believes, is borne
a new.

Of the third.
AS Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Desert, so must the Son of man be
exalted, too the entente that all that believe in him should not perrish, but
have life everlasting. The Story of the setting up of the Serpent in the
wilderness, is in the fourth book of Moses and the xij. Chapter. Which
figure Christ in this place applies too his own person, saying: Like as
Moses lifted up the Serpente in the wilderness: This saying of Christ
conteyneth many things. For first it openly witnesses, that the law takes
not away sin. For if the law could take away sin, then Christ had not
needed too have bin sacrifized too purge sin. Ageine, it shows why Christ
was given too be the Messiah, and why the son of GOD took man's nature
upon him. For he was given too be lifted up upon the Cross, and that
salvation might by that means happen too the whole world. Besides that, this
saying shows that Christ's kingdom is spiritual and everlasting. Moreover
it teaches what manner of righteousness it is, whereby we stand before God, or
how we be made partakers of Christ's benefits, that is too wit, when we
believe on Christ that was lifted up, that is too say, that dyed upon the
altar of the Cross. Last of al here is set forth a most sweet comfort, that
this grace whereby we have entrance intoo heaven, is offered unto all men:
which thing this word of universality all that believe does show. Let us
therefore conceive good hope of salvation, which is offered too all men by
Jesus Christ, too whom with the father and the holy Ghost be honor for ever,
and ever. Amen.

Upon the first Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. John. x.
THere was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine
white, and fa^ed deliciously every day: And there was a certain beggar,
named Lazarus, which lay at his gate full of sores, desiring too be
refresshed with the crummes which fell from the rich man's boorde, and no
man gave unto him. The Dogs came also and licked his sores. And it fortuned
that the beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels intoo Abraham's bosom.
The rich man also dyed and was buried: And being in Hell in tormenres, he
lifted up his eyes and savve Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his bosom,
and he cried and said: Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus,
that he may dippe the tippe of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I
am tormented in this flambe. But Abraham said: Son, remember that thou in
thy life time receyuedst thy pleasure, and contrariwise Lazarus received
pain: But now he is comforted and thou art punished. Beyond all this,
betvveene us and you there is a great space set, so that they which would go
from hence too you cannot: neither may come from thence too us. Then he said:
I pray thee therefore Father, send him too my Fathers house (for I have five
brethren) for too vvarne them, least they come also intoo this place of
tormente. Abraham said unto him: they have Moses and the Prophets, let them
hear them. And he said: Nay Father Abraham, but if one come unto the^ from
the dead, they vvil repent. He said unto him: If they hear not Moses and
the Prophets, neither vvil they believe, though one rose from death ageine.

The exposition of the Text.
FRom the first sunday in Aduent hithertoo, has bin set forth the doctrine
concerning every several article of our Faith. Now in the Sundays following
unto the first Sunday in Aduent agein, is entreated of Chrysts miracles, and
of the nature and true fruits of faith: and that too this intent, that the
truth of the Gospel might be confirmed by the doctrine of miracles, and that
the doctrine of faith, and the fruits of the same, might stir us up too good
works. Christ teaches of good works, five ways. For sometime he is
contented with the doctrine alone, as when he says: Be ye merciful, fall too
repentance, bring forth fruits worthy repentance. And sometime he alleges
himself for an example for his too follow, as when he says: learn of me
because I am meek and lowly of heart. One while he propounds parables: as of
the good steward, of the ten virgins, of the seed cast intoo the ground, and
such others, whereof there is store in the stories of the Gospel. And another
while he uses threatenings, as when he says: except your righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisses, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven. Also woe be too you Scribes, Pharisees,
Hypocrites. etc. And now and then he sets forth the rewards and penalties,
with notable examples, like as he does in this Gospel. Too be short, the
Lord leaves nothing unattempted whereby he may make his disciples bent too
live honestly.

Now let us come too this days Gospel: the sum whereof is, that Christ our
Lord by putting forth two examples, discourageth us from unmercifulness and
cruelty toward the poor, and encourages us too pity, and too constantnesse
in suffering the miseries of this life. For as by the example of the rich
glutton, he teaches what punishment remains for the unmerciful: So by the
example of poor Lazarus, he exhorts too pity and honest life in the fear
of God. The use heerof therefore shall be, that the rich men which are
mercylesse toward their neighbors, may behold as it were in a table, what
punishment they shall one day abide, if they amend not betimes. And again,
that the poor being godly and afflicted in this life, may (by the example of
this poor man Lazarus) raise up themselves, and patiently tarry for their
deliverance and blissed rest, if they continue in faith unto their death. The
places be three.

1 The description of this Glutton, with the lessons thereof. 2 The description
of Lazarus, with the comforts thereof. 3 The Lords saying: They have Moses and
the Prophets.
Of the first.
THere was a certain rich man, which was clothed in Purple and fine
white. In this first place are four things too be marked, which are. 1. A
general rebuke of them that are cruel to the poor. 2. The cause of this
rich man's damnation. 3. The right use of riches. 4. The state of the wicked
men's souls after this life.

First therefore when this Glutton is damned, in general are all they reproved
that are hard too the poor, and which flowing in riches them selves, are
touched with no care of the poor: of which sort there be many in the world.
This rebuke perteyneth too those also, that neither with their counsel nor
with their substance do help the ministry of the world, or the needy
members of the church. Wherefore let every man advise himself well, and take
warning by the damnation of this Glutton, that he may learn too be wise.

The cause of this Gluttons damnation are not his riches, and the finenesse of
his apparel, and his deintie fare, so they had bin measurably used, as it
appears by the Gospel it self. For poor Lazarus was taken up intoo the rich
Abraham's bosom. For if riches had bin ye efficient cause of damnation, Abraham
also had bin damned: David had bin damned: and so had many other kings and rich
men bin damned. But riches, and honor and such other things may be an occasion
of damnation, namely when men abuse them to the dishonor of God, and the
contempt of their neighbor, too the maintenance of pride and superfluity. But
what were the causes why this Glutton was damned? Three horrible faults, which
are noted expressly in the text. Of which the first was fleshly carelessness,
which had with it these evils: that he repented not: that he had no feeling of
Gods judgment and wrath: that he was touched with no care nor regard of his
duty. For fleshly carfulness has these things continually going with it.
An other fault for which this Glutton was damned, was riot and surfeting, by
which both men's bodies and minds are ouercharged, that they cannot think a
whit of the matters of their salvation. The third fault for which the Glutton
was damned, was the disdeyning of Lazarus, which thing sufficiently bewrays
that he had no faith. For where as is true faith, there can be no cruelty
toward the poor and needy. For these three causes, was the Glutton damned.
After whose example many run daily too assured damnation, which with their
riches do meynteine carelessenesse, surfeiting, and disdain of Chrysts members.
Wherefore if we like too be saved, let us amend betimes, and let us take heed
that we abuse not Gods gifts too our own destruction.

In the third place it is to be gathered by this example, on the contrary part,
what is the true use of riches, which true use consists in these four points.

The first is, that we employ part of our substance too the mayntenaunce of the
ministry: and this use is confirmed first by the end of man. For man was made
too the end he should acknowledge and praise God. Wherefore the goods that he
has ought too be employed too this end. Secondly this use is confirmed by
the commandment of God oftentimes repeted. For God commands us too help
the church with our abilities. Moreover this use is stablished by the examples
of godly kings and other holy men, who wished nothing so much, as with their
riches too beutifie and maintain the ministry of the word. Against this
first and godly use of riches do many offend: among whom be: First such as
convert their riches too the overthrow of the ministry, like as many Tyrants
have done in times past, and do at this day. Secondly such as pluck away the
Church goods, and keep them too themselves. Thirdly also, such as bestow no
part of their own goods too the mayntenance of the ministry of the word.
And moreover, such as by suit or other sleights get intoo their hands the
Church goods under an honest title: as though they were ministers of the
Church, whereas they be no better than dombe dogs which neither have done
service too the Church or common weal, nor ever can do service, but are
slouthful bellies and dull beasts: whoo nevertheless will be saluted by the
names of Prelates, Chanons, Uicars, Abbots, etc.

The second and true lawful use of riches is, that we employ part of them too
the maintenance and garnishing of the common weal wherein we live. For commonweals are the sogeorning places of the Church: and therefore we owe
thankfulness unto them, although we should receive none other commodity by
them. Against this use many offend: as for example, those that pay not the
ryghtfull Tributes, those that raise unrightful Tributes: those that employ
not the Tributes too the mayntenaunce of the commonweals, but too riot and
surfeiting, and oftentimes too making wrongful wars.

The third right and lawful use of riches, is that every man should maintain
his own estate honestly without nigardship. Against which use offend, first
they that wast away their goods in drinking, feasting, and apparel too
sumptuous for their degree, as many do. And secondly also covetous men, which
delight in their own filthynesse, and maintain not their estate honestly as
becomes them, but are basely appareled and feed grossly, when in the mean
while their money lies rusting and rotting in their cofers.

The fourth true and lawful use of riches is, that we bestow some part of it
upon the poor, and specially upon such as in their poverty are also godly.
For this is ye chief cause why God sends poor folks among us, that he may
make a proof, whither we will follow his mercy according too Christ's
commandment. Be merciful as your heavenly father is merciful. Against this
use do many also offend with this rich glutton, whose fellows they shall be
one day in punishment, for that they have in this world followed him as their
master in cruelnesse toward the needy.

Now follows the fourth thing which I said was too be considered in the
example of the rich glutton: Namely, what is the state of their souls that
depart out of this life without faith. For whereas Christ says, yt the rich
glutton lifting up his eyes in hell, saw Abraham a far of, and desired that
Lazarus might dip the top of his finger in water too cool his tongue: he
peinteth out a table, which represents the state of wicked men's souls after
their death: wherein these things are noted. First the exceeding great torment,
and the continual worm of the conscience. 2. The remembrance of his cruelty
which he had executed upon them that were in misery. 3. Their desire too be
relieved by the help of those too whom they had bin unmerciful in this life.
4. That there shall be no end of their torments, and that it is in vain for
them to sue for any easement of their pains, For look what our Lord for our
capacities sake peynteth out by way of communication between the glutton and
Lazarus: that did the glutton feel in his own conscience, which the Lord (who
knows al things) could not be ignorant of. Let this punishment of
ungodliness therefore allure us too earnest repentance, that we be not put
too torments whither we will or no.

Of the second.
ANd there was a certain beggar named Lazaraus, which lay at his gate full
of sores, desiring too be satisfied of the crummes that fell from the rich
man's table, and no man gave unto him. In this example of Lazarus are many
things too be observed whereby we may receive both instruction and comfort.

First here is confirmed the Sermon of Peter, who says that judgment
begins at the house of the Lord. For God punishes his own in this life,
that they may as it were with a bridle be kept within the bounds of their
duty. For if all things should happen to them as they would wish, they would
be made drunken with the prosperous success of things, and fall from
godliness too ungodliness. Whervppon Moses speaking of the Jews, said: The
people sat down too eat and drink, and rose agein too play: that is too say,
they fell too Idolatry and other heinous offenses. Wherefore let us bear in
mind the saying of Paul. 1. Cor. 11. When we are judged, (that is to say
afflicted,) we are chastysed of the Lord, that we should not be damned with
this world. Therefore let us have an eye to Gods fatherly mind, as often as we
be hardly dealt withal in this life, and taking warning by our cross, let us
fear God, leading a godly and blameless life.

Ageine, by this example of Lazarus we are taught, that they are not all
wretched before God, which are cast under foot in this world: nor on the other
side all in Gods favor, that seem happy and blissed in this life. Lazarus was
miserable in this life: but he was in favor with God. The Glutton was happy
in this world: but he was in Gods displeasure. What was the cause? Lazarus
feared GOD through a lively faith: but the Glutton feared not God, but was
void of faith.

Thirdly we see in Lazarus an example of Gods providence. He lies despised
and disdayned. But when he lay without all comfort, the dogs came and licked
his sores. Whereby is signified, that God suffers not the godly to be so
ouerpressed with miseryes, but that he intermedleth comfort with their
sorrows. For there is no doubt but it came too pass by Gods providence, that
the dogs came and licked the sores of Lazarus, too the greater damnation of
the Glutton and his household. For the meynie followed the wickedness of their
master: for the text says, and no man gave unto him.

Fourthly let us mark here the common lot of the godly and ungodly. The
Glutton dies, and Lazarus dies. Death is common too them both, but not the
falling out of their death. For the Glutton by death passed too misery: but
Lazarus atteyned too felicity.

Fifthly here is too be marked in Lazarus, the ministry of the Angels. The
Glutton despised Lazarus while he was alive: but the Angels carried up his soul
when he was dead. He that was despised in his life, was regarded and honored
of Gods Angels in his death. Neither happens this in Lazarus alone: but that
which we read of him, is common too all the godly. For as the souls of the
godly are regarded of God: so are they carried by the Angels intoo the haven of
salvation and blissefulnesse.

Sixthly, in the example of Lazarus, we see what is the state of the godly
men's souls after this life. Lazarus is carried intoo Abraham's bosom. What is
Abraham's bosom? Like as Abraham was therefore called the father of the faithful,
because that with him was laid up the covenant of eternal life, the which he
keeping in faithful custody, delivered (as it were from hand too hand) first
unto his own children, and afterward too all nations: and that they are
called his children as many as are heirs of the same promise: So after death
they are said too be gathered intoo his bosom, because thy receive the fruit
of the same faith with him. For like as a man's sons when they come home
toogither at night from their daily labor, are cherished as it were in their
Fathers bosom: So the godly (after their travels taken in this life) are after
death gathered together intoo blisful rest, where they are well at ease and in
happy case until the rising agein of the dead. This bosom of Abraham is called
also Paradyse, as in that saying of Christ to the thief: this day shall thou
be with me in Paradyse: where (according too the Psalm) is abundance of joy
by beholding of God and everlasting pleasures in his right hand. Too be breef.
Blissed are they that die in the Lord, because they shall be evermore with God
and shall enjoy endless joy.

And as concerning the communication of Abraham and the Glutton, it is to be
known that these things happened spiritually. For so thought the Glutton with
himself in his torments, and such answer received he in his own conscience.

Seventhly behold in Lazarus, the image of the Church in this life. For it is
afflicted, and it is despised of the mighty and rich men of this world.

Of the third.
THey have Moses and the Prophets, let them here them* This is a very weighty
admonishment and exceeding behoofeful: for by this saying many are damned.

First every one is damned that receives not Moses and the Prophets. For
these are given of God too lead unto God and to show the way of salvation. He
therefore that receives them not, abides in his damnation.

Secondly they are damned that receive them, but yet set more by men's
traditions, and rather frame their life after men's commandments than after
Gods commandments, notwithstanding Gods charge given openly too the contrary.
For thus says he in Jeremy. Cap. 20. Walk ye in my statutes, and not in the
commandments of your fathers.

Thirdly are damned here Pope Gregory, the Anabaptists, and other Euthusiasts,
which look for new Revelations from heaven, and give more credit too the fumes
of a frantike and melancholicke brain, than too the heavenly voice, or rather
forsake and utterly cast away the word of God.

Fourthly we learn heerby too make much of the doctrine of Moses, the
Prophets, and Apostles, which will be a lantern for us too eternal salvation,
so we follow the light thereof. For the world has not a more precious treasure
than Gods word. David did make more account of this, than of ye finest gold.
Through this, Lazarus (who was poor in the world,) was rich before God. By
this did Job raise up himself in the mids of his miseries. Wherefore right
dear brethren, let us also love Gods word. Let us assure our selves that that
is the instrument whereby is offered unto us the preciousest of all treasures
Jesus Christ, and by him everlasting life, which our heavenly father grant
unto us by the same Jesus Christ, too whom be honor and glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

Upon the.ij. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. xiiij.
A Certain man ordained a great supper, and bad many, and sent his servant at
supper time, too say too them that were bidden: come, for all things are now
ready. And they al at once began too make excuse. The first said unto him: I
have bought a farm, and I must needs go and see it, I pray thee have me
excused. And an other said: I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I go too prove
them, I pray thee have me excused: And another said: I have married a wife,
and therefore I cannot come. And the servant returned and brought his master
word again thereof. Then was the good man of the house displeased, and said
too his servant: go out quickly intoo the streets and quarters of the city,
and bring in hither the poor and feeble, and the halt, and blind. And the
servant said: Lord it is done as thou have commanded, and yet there is roum.
And the Lord said unto the servant: go out into the hie vvayes and hedges, and
compel them too come in, that my house may be filled. For I say unto you,
that none of these men which were bidden shall taste of my supper.

The exposition of the Text.
LIke as the last Sunday it was showed in the Glutton, yt the contempt of a
man's neighbor is hinderance too salvation: so in this Gospel we are taught
another let which is too be shunned, that is too wit, that we set not more by
our own possessions and affairs, and by the care of worldly matters, tha^ by
the Gospel of Christ, or that we suffer not our selves to be let and busied
with the commodities and pleasures of this world, that we come not too the
supper, unto which we are bidden by the preaching of the Gospel. Now the
occasion of this Parable, was a certain Pharisees talk at a feast too which
Christ was bidden. For when Christ had declared, that such as are liberal
too the poor, shall be rewarded in the resurrection of the rightuous, the
Pharisie intending too sooth Christ in his words, said: Blissed is he that
eats bread in the kingdom of God. Notwithstanding for as much as Christ saw
the overthwart conditions and froward inclination of this Pharisie, and of the
rest of the Jewish nation: he put forth this Parable, wherein he peinteth out
both the just rejecting of the Jews, and the free receiving of the Gentiles.
The dryft and end of which Parable is, that we should not suffer the
transitory things of this life, too be a hinderance unto us for coming too
the heavenly supper, whervntoo we are bidden by the gospel. The places are
four.

1 The greatness of Gods mercy is poynted out in this Supper. 2 The
unthankfulness of the world is noted in those that refuse too come when they
are called. 3 Of his compulsion, how he compels, and by whom. 4 A thretning
of punishmente too them that receive not the Gospel.
Of the first.
HOw great Gods mercy is toward mankind, it is evident by many proves. For
not only Gods word, but also Gods exceeding great benefits toward the whole
world (and specially toward Christ's church) bear witness of Gods
inspeakable mercy. The earth (says David) is full of the Lords mercy. The
greatest proof of this mercy is the giving of his Son, too redeem the
world drowned in utter misery, and that by his death and passion, too the
intent that men being delivered from this misery, should be rewarded with
everlasting life, which is called here the great supper, and in Matthew the
marriage of the king, unto which great Supper men are called of Gods mere
mercy, too the intent they may be filled at it with spiritual daynties
everlastingly.

Howbeeit, too the intent the delicates of this Supper may be the plesanter
unto us: I will set out severally one by one the circumstaunces that are noted
in the text, and show what instruction and admonishment is too be learned by
each of them.

The first circumstance therefore too be considered in this supper, is
concerning him that bids us unto it. For thereupon hangs the estimation of
it. Who is it then that prepares this Supper? Is it some worldly king? No. Yet
were that King worthy too be much made of for his liberality, and too be
praised for his mercy, that would prepare a princely feast royally furnished,
for miserable and poor souls. Who is it then? It is God our heavenly father,
the Lord of Lords, and king of kings, who only is rich, and well stored with
delicates. This circumstaunce is a most evident testimony of Gods goodness
and mercy.

The second circumstance is, that God here the master of the house bids
guestes too Supper. c And what is meant by the name of supper? The very Gospel
and all those things that are joined with the Gospel: as is salvation and
eternal life. See how great mercy shyneth forth here What is the reason of
the terming of it so? Why are these so great good things called a supper?
Surely it is not done without great causes, of which number there be three
cheef. The first is because the Gospel promises everlasting joy and endless
good things. For as the Supper is set before men in the latter end of the day:
so the good things which the Gospel offers, shall (of the mere mercy of
God) be given in reward too the believers after that they in dystresse have
outworne the manyfolde labors of this life. The second cause is, for that like
as the evening (which is the time that men are woonte too prepare for supper)
is the end of the day: so the age in which all men by the ministry of
preaching, are bidden too repaste of the heavenly Supper, is of the last age.
The third cause is, for that the Gospel is the last voice of GOD in the
world, after which there is none other too be looked for: in likewise as the
Supper is the last meat that is set before men in the day. For there shall
never sound any other voice of God from heaven, but this self same voice of
the Gospel, shall sound unto the last day of judgment.

The third circumstance is in this word Great, by which is commended unto us
the richness of Gods mercy. For God bids not a king or two, or a wiseman
or two unto this supper: but he bids the whole world. He ouerskippeth not
the poor, he neglects not the rich men, he shuts not out the gentlemen,
he keeps not the country folk nor the townsmen from his feast: he holds
no skorne of the little ones, disdeyneth not ye great ones: al men without
exception that are dispersed through the whole world, bids he too that
great supper. For the text witnesses, both that it is a great supper, and
that many are bidden.

The fourth circumstance is of the manner of his bidding. The manner is
expressed in these words. And he sent his servant at the hour of Supper too
say too them that were bidden. Here by the name of servant is meant the
Prophets, Apostles and all godly teachers, whom God has sent from the
beginning of the world too bid guestes too the Supper. Too this supper did God
himself bid the patriarch Noe. He being bidden, bad the rest of the world in
Gods sted. Afterward when the world through it own unthankfulness was
perished in the flud: Abraham was by Gods own mouth bidden too this supper.
After which time, when the malice of the world was increased upon the earth:
God chose one peculiar people, among whom he often times raised up Prophets,
that bad guests too this supper. And the master of the house continued in so
doing, until he sent his own Son our Lord Jesus Christ, whom those that
were bidden hanged upon the Cross. And he being raised ageyn from death, sent
out his Apostels intoo the whole world, too bid all nations too this most
delicate supper.

The fifth circumstance is of the hour of the supper. What is this hour? It is
the time of grace, and the time of glory. The time of grace, is the time wherein
is preached unto men the liberality and mercyfulnesse of ye master of the
house: which time is divided intoo three parts: Intoo promise, performance, and
the time that has followed the performance. The time of promis was from Adam
unto the birth of Christ, almost four thousand year. Then was the time of
performance, during all the while that Christ was conversant here upon earth
in the flesh, and preached, and offered himself the price of redemption, for
them that were bidden too this supper. The time that followed the performance,
is thencefoorth from the sending of the Apostles intoo the whole world until
the day of Judgment: in which time we also be, and are bidden too this
Supper by the voice of the Ministers of Gods word. The time of glory in
eternity. When we shall sit down in the heavenly glory, not only with
Abraham and Isaac, but also with God the Father, God the Son, and God the
holy ghost: and shall enjoy everlasting mirth and gladness in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

The sixth circumstance is, the manner of the biddyng. Come (says he) for all
things are ready. That is too say (as we see in the bidding of John Baptist
and Christ) Repent, and believe the Gospel, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. This bidding requires repentance, that is too wit, an alteration of the
former life that we should depart from evil and do good: and it requires
faith, that is too wit, that we should believe that this Supper is set on the
Table for us: not in respect of our deseruyng, but of mere mercy, for the Sons
sake, whom God has given unto us, too be our wisdom, ryghtuousnesse,
sanctification, and redemption. For with these gifts (and as it were garments
of the Son of God) must we enter intoo the Supper of everlasting life. For
Christ by his wisdom reformeth our minds: with his ryghtuousnesse he decketh
us when we believe on him: with his sanctification or halowyng, he cleanses
us: and at length he receives us intoo his parlor, where shall be perpetual
redemption, glory, and happiness. And thus much concerning the first place,
wherein is set out unto us the mercyfulnesse of GOD, which is from generation
too generation upon all that fear him, as the virgin our Lords moother
sings.

Of the second.
But all began with one consent to excuse them selves. For they refused too
come too this Heavenly Supper. For as the swyne makes more account of the mire
wherein he berayeth himself, than of gold and precious stones: even so men
that are weltered in their own filthynesse, shun the goodlynesse of so great
a supper. In which thing three euylls are too be lamented: the myserie of
mankind, their exceeding great unthankfulness, and their corrupt judgment.
The misery is, that men being over pressed with sinfulness and curse, do not
only not goo about to wind themselves out of so great mischeeues: but also are
even delighted with the filthynesse. So far are they from seeking redress.
And this is that Christ speaks of: No man comes too me, save he whom my
father draws. The unthankfulness is, that men being bidden too a free
supper, that is too wit, too free deliverance from sin, from Gods wrath, from
the curse of the law, from hell, and from the devil: too forgiveness of
sins, too Gods favor, too righteousness, too heaven, too God himself, too
live blessedly with him for evermore: do notwithstanding refuse too come. Who
is able too bewail this unthankfulness sufficiently? The corrupt judgment
is, that men set more by transitory goods, than by everlasting goods: by a
few, than by many: by brittle, than by durable: by earthly, than by heavenly:
by things that maynteyne this life for a small time, than by things that
maynteyne both soul and body in everlasting life. Is he not counted foolish
that prefers clay before gold? Yes surely most foolish, as one that can
judge nothing aright. Much more foolish is he, yea far out of measure most
fool of all, that prefers death before life, sin before righteousness,
hell before heaven, the devil before GOD (and to be brief) innumerable evils
before innumerable good things. Let us acknowledge this our most corrupt
judgment, and let us pray to have our minds reformed with new light, that
we may rightly understand what things are good in deed: and orderly desire
the things that we judge aryght of: and persevere to the end in seeking those
things which we orderly desire.

Now that we have spoken thus much in general concerning the great misery of
mankind, the exceeding unthankfulness and most corrupt judgment of men: Let
us look upon the text, which continues the sundry manners of their excuses.
First it says: And all began with one consent too excuse them selves. That is
to say, the greatest part of the world being thanklesse hild skorne of the
benefit that was offered freely. The first therefore said: I have bought a
farm and I must needs go see it, I pray thee have me excused. Here is
described the first kind of men that excuse themselves. Under which kind are
all they contained, which trusting too their own power, refuse too come to
this royal supper. Yet is not power the efficient cause of this excuse: but
only an occasion in those which acknowledge not their power too come of God,
but lean unto their own puissance, that is too wit, too a staff of reed.
For when sin, death, hell, and the devil assault: man's power avails not:
for in this case the power of God only avails, namely Christ's Gospel, which
Paul defines too be the power of God too the salvation of every one that
believes. And that power and possession of lands is not the efficient cause
of refusing too come too this deyntie Supper, examples show. David was of
power, and had great lands. Nero also was of power, and had lands. Of which
two, the first being bidden too the marriage came: the other refused. Why so?
because the one used his power too the glory of God: the other abused it too
his own destruction. For being deceived by it, he refused too come too this
supper. Here therefore we are admonished too use our lands well, that they be
not a hinderance unto us, for coming too the heavenly Supper. I omit examples.

And an other said: I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I go too try them, I
pray thee have me excused. Here is described a second kind of men that
excuse them selves that they cannot come too this supper. Under this kind are
contained the rich men of this world. Why? Are riches the efficient cause of
this refusal? No surely. Abraham was rich: and the glutton of whom we herd
of late was rich: but Abraham was not let by his riches: For he made more
account of this Supper, than of his earthly riches. Contrarywyse the glutton
was droonken, and sotted in his riches, and therefore refused too come. For when
riches are in evil men's hands, they are as a bayte, whereby they being
enticed, are caught and killed. Therefore Christ says they be thorns, and
he avouches it too be a hard matter for a rich man too be able too enter
intoo the kingdom of heaven. The Philosopher Plato said right: that riches
were blind without wisdom, and that they are sharp sighted when they follow
wisdom. So may we also say, that riches are thorns without godliness, and
that they are roses, when they follow godliness. For the godly with their
riches (as it were with certain Roses) do beautify the ministry, the common
weal, and their own houses. Whosoever then has the riches of this world,
let him endeuer that godliness and charity may be the gouerners of them,
as we see it was in the holy Patriarchs, and Kings, and many other godly and
holy men.

And the third said: I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.
Here is discribed the third kind of men, that refuse too come too this
Supper. Under which kind are contained all those which being given too the
pleasures of this world, pass not for the Gospel of Christ. The marying of a
wife is not of it self either evil, or the cause of refusal: but only an
occasion unto some men that mysvse the gift of God. Abraham had a wife, and so
had many godly men: who notwithstanding did not therefore refuse too obey the
Gospel. Wherefore let married couples endeuer too have Christ with them, and let
them beware that they take not occasion of evil at that which is good.
Hythertoo we have herd of three kynds of men that excuse them selves for
coming at this Supper when they are bidden. And by these we may understand
all things that hinder men from harkenyng to the Gospel.

Of the third.
THe servant returning home, brought the master of the house word what
answer they made: and being sent forth ageyn, when he had gathered toogither
a great number of poor folk and cripples, he is commanded too compel men
too come in, that the house of his feast may be filled. In this compulsion is
set forth unto us a singular comfort. For GOD not only promises, not only
bids, not only commands: but he also enforces and compels folk to
come in too his Supper. But how compels he? Surely many ways, Parents and
householders shall compel their household, and by familiar nurture and awe
accustom them too here Christ, and too live after a godly and virtuous
manner. Heerupon is that saying of Paul: Bring up your children in the law and
fear of the Lord. The Magistrate shall likewise compel his subjects by good
laws and ordinances, by example, and by taking away of idolatry. Like as
Ezechias and Theodosius did, who took away the instruments of Idolatry. But
of all men it belongs chiefly to the ministers of the word too compel folk
by thretning and rebuking them: as we reed that Christ, the prophets, and
the apostles did.

Of the fourth.
NOne of those men that were bidden, and refused too come, shall taste of my
Supper. That is to say: All despisers of the Gospel shall be shut out from
everlasting life. For the wrath of God abides upon all that believe not in the
Son. This is the effect of the fourth place.

Howbeeit this days Gospel serves too three uses. The first is, that weying
thoroughly the greatness of Gods mercy, we should give him thanks by Jesus
Christ. The second is, that we should beware, that we withdraw not our selves
from obedience of the Gospel under no pretense. The third is, that we be not
mysseled, by the example of men of ^ower, rich men, and voluptuous men, and so
fall headlong intoo destruction: but rather that we endeuer by all means we
can, too be conveyed intoo this heavenly supper, by our Lord Jesus Christ, too
whom with the father and the holy ghost be honor and glory world without
end. Amen.

Upon the.iij. sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. xv.
THEN came unto him, all the publicans and sinners for to here him. And the
Phariseis and Scribes murmured, saying: He receives sinners and eats with
them. But he put forth this parable unto them, saying: What man among you
having an hundredth sheep (if he lose one of them) does not leave ninety and
nine in the wilderness, and goes after that which is lost, until he
find it? And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders with
joy. And as soon as he comes home, he calls together his lovers and
neighbors, saying unto them: Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep
which was lost. I say unto you, that lykevvise joy shall be in heaven over
one sinner that repents, more than over ninety and nine just persons which
need no repentance. Either what woman having ten grotes; (if she lose one)
does not light a candle and svveepe the house, and seek diligently till she
find it? And when she has found it she calls her lovers and her
neighbors together, saying: Rejoice with me, for I have found the grote
which I lost. Likewise, I say unto you, shall there be joy in the
presence of the Angels of God, over one sinner that repents.

The exposition of the Text.
THe occasion of this days Gospel is this. For as much the goodness of our
lord was so great that he disdeyned no man were he never so miserable or never
so great a sinner, but rather allured all men unto him, according too this
saying. Math. xj. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are laden and I will
refresh you. It came too pass, that the very Publicanes* knowing of this mercy
and goodness of Christ, came too him: that they might be partakers of the
grace that was offered most freely and bountifully too all men. And therefore
would Christ not only comfort them with words, but also with deeds, and with
keeping company with them. Therefore when any of them bade him too a meals
meat, he came and ate with them: and that too this end that he might win them
too God the father, that is too say, might turn them from their most
naughty ways, unto true and healthful repentance; too the intent that being
quit from the gilt of cursednesse, they might be made heirs of eternal life
through Jesus Christ. The Pharisees marking this doing of Chrysts (as they
were a proud sect, swelling in their own pharisaicall (that is too say false)
righteousness) murmured against Christ, and privily accused him of breaking
Gods law. But what says Christ too this? He techeth them both. The Publicans,
if he comes to save sinners: and the Pharisees, why he keeps company with
sinners: whereby is gathered, ye Christ's kingdom sighteth against the opinion
of the Pharisees and the kingdom of Satan. For as Christ's kingdom is mercy
and forgiveness of sins, in so much that the angels in heaven rejoice at
every sinner that repents: so Satan's kingdom is mercylesse cruelty, and a
certain overthrowing of sin. The places are two.

1 The murmuring of the Pharisees, and wherefore Christ kept company with
sinners. 2 It is taught by two parables, why Christ came intoo this world,
and what we must do, if we will be saved.
Of the first.
THe Publicans and sinners resorted too him too hear him, and the Scribes and
Phariseys murmured, saying: This man receives sinners and eats with them.
Here are set forth unto us two kinds of men, and their manners. The one is
of Publicanes and sinners, which come unto Christ too hear him, that they
might be gathered intoo his sheepfolde, and be saved. For after that they
herd how Christ rejected no sinners, but offered grace too all (so they refused
not too amend) they douted not too come unto him, yea and that upon great
hope of salvation. The other is of Phariseys and Scribes. These disalowed
Christ's doing and his mercifulness toward sinners, and therefore murmured,
saying: This man receives sinners, and eats with them.

Now of this murmuring of the Phariseys, there be many causes: whereof I will
rehearse some, that we may see with what spirit they speak, and beware our
selves, that we be not attached with the same disease, and seem too hinder
the salvation of other men.

The first cause therefore is envy or spitefulness, which is proper too the
Devil and his members. For this spitefulness sticking in their hearts, makes
them that they cannot abide, too see Christ and the Publicans in company
toogyther* for they enuyed the Publicans so much, that they could not find in
their hearts that they should be amended by keeping company with good men. Of
this sort of Pharisees there be (...) at this day, than will be known by the
name of Pharisees.

The second cause of murmuring, was intolerable pride in the Scrybes and
Phariseys, wherethroughe they despised the Publicanes as Dogs, in so much
that they eschued too eat meat with them or too enter intoo the house where
they were.

The third cause of murmuring was the ouerweening of their own righteousness
and holiness. For as they vaunted them selves too be rightuous for keeping
the traditions of their Fathers and for their sacrifices, (as he that says I
am not as other sinners, nor as yonder Publican: I fast twice a week, etc.) so
they stoutlye despised those that had not this vysour of holiness, as folk
accursed and abominable.

The fourth cause was, their desirousnesse too have raised a slander upon
Christ, for they went about too persuade the common people, that Christ was
such a one, as they were with whom he was conversant.

The fifth cause was a zeal yt they had too the law of God, but not a right.
For they made the commandment of the law, a cloak too their murmuring. For
Exodus 23. the law forbids them too have any company with the inhabyters of
the land. Also Exo. 34. They are commanded never too ioyn frendeship with the
inhabiters of that land, least it might turn too their own decay, that is
too wit, least being corrupted with their evil custom, they might be made
Idolaters and Heathenishe despisers of Gods law. For as Paul says: A little
leaven sowreth a whole lump of dough, and as it is in a certain verse. One
scabbed Sheep infecteth all the flock. Like as one Grape takes broosing at
the broose of an other Grape: so also are men easly made worse by the evil
company of others. Like as Medea also says in a certain place: The resort
of naughty women unto me has made me naught. Too this purpose also serves
this of Solomon: He that handles Pitche shall be defiled of it. Also: He
that does keep company with a proud body shall learn too be proud. And
Sirach: Every man accompanyeth him self with his like. Many such textes of
Scripture doubtless had the Phariseys gathered toogither too bring Christ in
a slander.

But what shall we say too these sentences of Scripture? Diverse of them carry
with them ye causes of forbidding them too have company with sinners. And (too
tell you at a word) the texts of scripture alleged, forbid the weaklings
(which may easly be made worse) too have company with such as will not be
converted, but rather labor with might and mayn too win others too be fellows
of their naughtiness. Christ could not be touched with this first: for he was
not a weakling, that he might be stained with the company of sinners: wherefore
the prohibition of the law concerns not him: for the law says in express
words, from whence also the rest of the things take their force: lest
peradventure they make thee too sin against me, if thou shall serve their
gods, which thing out of dout will be thy overthrow. The other agrees not too
the Publicanes, with whom the Lord is red here too have bin conversant. For
they meant not too make Christ a companion of their naughtinesie: but they
resorted unto him too here him, and that in obteyning faith by heering him
they might be saved. Their seeing that both Christ being moved with
compassion, keeps company with them, that he may bring them intoo his
sheepfold fro whence they were strayed: and that the publicans thirsting after
salvation, are desirous too be relieved of the burden of their sins, which
they feel too be most heavy: the Pharisees do wrong (...) murmr against
Christ. Whom notwithstanding, Christ gooth about too bring intoo the way
ageine, by putting forth these two parables: the one of the hundred sheep,
and the other of the ten grotes.

Now, out of these things that are answered too the quarellings of the
Pharisees, there rises a question. For seeing it is answered, that the
scriptures (which condemn the co^panying with evil men) do perteyn too the
weaklings: it may be demanded, in as much as we are weak, what it behooves
us too do? whither we ought utterly and continually too shun the Pharisees.
Too this question I answer: they are too be shunned, and they are not too be
shunned. The weak which find their own weakness, namely that they are
easy and ready too fall: let them lern by their own experienee too eschew ye
company of these who^ they stand in fear of lest they be berayed with their
pitche, and atteynted with their scabbednesse. For as Iustine the martyr says:
The mind of man by keeping company with naughtipacks, does draw unto it self as
it were a certain scabbednesse; and is filled with many evil humors. It is the
duty of householders, magistrates, and ministers of the word, too beware that
such be not suffered, by whose company the simple may be made worse. The
householder must suffer no servant in his house, that is a cause of offense too
his children. The magistrate must repress blasphemers with the sword. The
minister^ of Gods word must first chastise unclean persons by rebuking them.
And if they (...) nothing that way; they must cast the^ out of the church by
excommunication, that the godly and the simple may know how they ought too s^un
the company of them. And that such are too be eschued, this saying of Paul
teaches. 2. These. 3. We give you warning brethren in the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that be^^ueth
himself disorderly, and not according too the doctrine which he has received
of us. Let this then be spoken concerning the weak sort, which must utterly
shun the company of lewd persons. But as for them that are well instructed, and
those that bear public office, (whose duty it is too bring back the stray
sheep unto Christ) they may (or rather must) now and then be conversant with
the evil sort, as the physician is in company with the diseased person, not too
be infected with the hatches of his paciente, but too restore him too health by
his cunning and skill in lechecraft. After the same manner, it is not only
lawful for the ministers of Gods word, but also the very necessity of their
duty and the trust that is committed unto them, requires that they should
disclose the malice of the wicked and heal it as much as may be. But if the
disease shall be incurable, they shall follow the example of Physicians, and not
stand healing of that which they cannot heal: but commit the whole matter too
God, and be sorry for them.

Of the second.
WHat man of you that has a hundred Sheep. etc. By this Parable Christ
teaches two things. The one, why he came intoo the world: the other (which
depends upon the first) wherefore he is conversant among sinners. Whereupon
follows the confutation of the murmuring of the Pharisees. Why he came intoo
the world he shows by the example of the shepherde. For as the shepherde
goes intoo the wilderness too seek his lost sheep: so came Christ intoo the
world too seek men that were led away by sin intoo the wilderness. Ageine
because it is Christ's office too seek sinners, that they may be called back
too salvation, which thing cannot be done but if he keep company with
them: Heereuppon it follows that the grudging of the Pharisees against Christ
is too be disalowed, which would drive him from his embassage, that the weak
should not be healed. Therefore does he aptly witness in another place: I
came not too call the rightuous, but sinners too repentance. This is the
effect of the parable concerning the sheep: and the same thing does the
parable of the woman seeking her lost money, set forth. Now let us look upon
the parable of the sheep by peecemeale, yt we may find the more sweetness
in it, when we behold the carfulness of Christ our shepherd for us.

The man that had a hundred sheep is Christ Jesus, the true shepherd, who
gave his life for his sheep. John. 10.

By the stray sheep are meant all those yt perceive the^ selves too wander in
the wilderness: that is too say, which acknowledge themselves too be sinners,
and desire too be received, as the Publicans did here. They acknowledged
themselves too be sinners, and they herd report of the true shepeherd, and
therefore they had a mind too be received of him, when they herd him say:
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are laden, and I will refreshe you* And so
the text opens too us the parable of the stray sheep, in the publicans, who
heering Christ's voice, come too him, and acknowledge their error.

By the ninety and nine sheep understand all men in the world, who although
they stick still in their sins and in damnation, yet they perceive it not,
but rather think them selves righteous and blissed and therefore they refuse
too here Christ. For they imagine them selves too be more rightuous than y^ they
have ^eed of the righteousness of Christ. They think them selves more sound
and healthful, than too have need of Christ the Physicians help. That these
are signified by the ninety and nine sheep, the text it self does openly
prove. For the ninety and nine sheep are compared too the Scribes and
Pharisees, that is, too the Hipocrites that bragged them selves too be
rightuous. We have, who is the shepherde, who is the stray sheep, and who be
the fourscore and nineteen that straye not. Now let us see, first what t^me
the sheep began too stray. 2. How the shepherde came too seek the stray
sheep* 3. How he caryeth it when he has found it, intoo the fold, and heals
it, and feeds it. 4. What happened when the sheep was found.

When began the sheep too straye? First when it was driven intoo the
wilderness by the woolfe. That is too wit when Satan led our first parents
away from God. And secondly as often as men having bin called from their most
wicked ways, are by Satan's slight led away ageine from Chrysts sheepfolde.
So also at this day, as often as we step aside from the right way of salvation,
either in doctrine or in manners, we are likened too the stray sheep.

How came Christ our shepherde too seek the stray sheep* First ^ee come in
spirit, and that was in the holy Prophets and Patriarks, as often as he
stirred them up too show men the way of salvation. In this wise came he when
Moses was sent, when Helias was sent, when Helizeus, Esaias, and many others
were sent. Secondly he came in the flesh, when he took man's nature upon
him, and suffered for us.

How seeks he* and when he has found, how brings he it home too his
sheepefolde? He seeks the stray sheep by the preaching of the Gospel, when
he commands the gospel too be preached. And he caryeth it home intoo the
sheepfold, when he gathers the faithful intoo the Church. For he went intoo
the wilderness, and finding the sheep, laid it upon his shoulders, that is too
say, by the merit of his passion he brought intoo his Church, those that
believed in him.

How does he heal and feed the sheep that he has brought home into his
fold? He heals all his bruses with his blood, while he acquitteth those that
believe in him, from all giltinesse, and endueth them with his own
righteousness. He feeds them when he bestows the fodder of the Gospel up
on them, and cherishes the^ with his spirit. These good turns of the
shepherde toward his stray sheep, are exceeding great.

But what happens when the sheep is found? He calls toogither his friends
and neighbors, saying: Rejoice with me because I have found my sheep that
was lost? What this is, he himself expounds when he says: I say unto you,
there shall be joy in Heaven for one sinner that repents, more than for
four score and nineteen rightuous men that need no repentance. Lo what
comes too pass when a sinner repe^teth. Even the Angels rejoice with Christ
the shepherd. And the Angels in heaven rejoice for three considerations. First
for that me^ as well as they, are created too set forth Gods glory, which thing
cannot be done of them that repent not. For they as much as in them lies do
hinder the praise of God by all means. Secondly for that they see the kingdom
of Christ increased, by the coming in of new Citizens. Thirdly, for that
nothing likes them better, than too see the kingdom of satan abolished,
which thing comes too pass when men repent. But which are those ninety and
nine rightuous men that need no repentance? Is there any man with out sin
then? Surely there is no man without sin. For all have gone astray, and are
become unprofitable. But there be three sorts of sinners. For there be
sinners that think themselves rightuous, and therefore are said too have no
need of repentance: which thing doutlesse is too be understood of their own
judgment concerning them selves. For in very deed there is no man but has
need of repentance. Ageine there are sinners that know themselves too have
sins, and yet nevertheless go on still in their sins, not passing for the
law of God which accuses them. Also there are sinners that acknowledge their
sin, that is, which hate sin, and therefore do repent and flee unto Christ.
The first and second sort are signified by the ninety and nine sheep. And
the third sort is signified by the one stray sheep. The Scribes and Pharisees
represent a likeness of the four score and nineteen that repent not: and the
Publicanes represent the one straye sheep. What are we taught here? That the
greatest number is of them that perish, and the least is of them that are
saved: that is too wit, skarse one of every hundred. Heerevpon is that
complaint of Christ: many are called, but few chosen, that is too say, good,
that obey Christ calling them by his Gospel. We see this in examples. Before
the flood, the greatest part of the world followed the lewdness of Caine, in so
much as there were but only eight men found righteous, which were saved by the
Arc. Ageine, many years after, Melchisedech and Abraham well near alone were
godly. Besides that, only Loath with his daughters escaped out of those great
Cities Sodom and Gomorre, all the rest perishing in the fire for their
sins. Neither stands the case any otherwise at this day. The Gospel is
despised of most men, and received of very few. Therefore let us take warning
by this peril, too repent: that we perish not with the greatest part of this
thankelesse world. The Lord is gentle too receive us: The Angels long for
our amendmente: and our own soul health is in hand, which Christ offreth
unto all sinners that repent. Too him therefore be honor for evermore. Amen.

Upon the.iiij. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. vj.
BE ye mercyful as your father also is merciful. Judge not, and ye shall not
be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned. Forgive, and ye
shall be forgiven. Give and it shall be given unto you, good measure and
pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give unto
your bosoms. For with the same measure that ye mete vvithall, shall other
men mete too you ageyn. And he put forth a similitude unto them. Can the blind
lead the blind? Do they not both fall intoo the ditche? The disciple is not
above his master: Every man shall be perfect, even as his master is. Why
see thou a mote in thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that is in
thine own eye? Fither how can thou say to thy brother? Brother, let me
pull out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou see not the beam that is
in thine own eye? first thou hypocrite, cast out the beam out of thine own
eye, then shall thou see perfectly too pull out the mote that is in thy
brothers eye.

The exposition of the Text.
THis Sermon of Chrysts, perteyneth too the third part of Repentance. For ye
know that there be three parts of Repentance. Sorynesse, faith, and new
obedience or amendme^t of life. Sorynesse acknowledges the sin. and hates
and shunneth it. Faith flees unto Christ, who delivers from sin, and
justifies them that believe. New obedience consists in four things, which
are: Reverence toward God, holiness of life in every man too himself, love
of our neighbor, and diligence in that vocation too which every man is called.
Now for as much as these be the parts amendment of life, Christ in this
Gospel frames an exhortation to charity or love toward our neighbor, the
which he implies here under his parts. And because that mercy toward our
neighbor, is as it were the first imp of it: he exhorts unto mercy, by
which he meeneth al manner of duties which we owe one to another in this life.
For what soever one owes too another, when he has paid it, he is no longer a
detter: saving only of love, which we can not so fully pay, but that we must
always remain detters. Whereupon Paul Romans 13. Owe nothing too any man, but
that ye love one another. Now too the intent we may the more clearly
understand this Gospel: I will speak of two things.

1 What be the woorks of love or of mercy which is commended unto us in this
place. 2 What be the reasons wherewith Christ exhorts us here too show
mercy, that is too say, too the works of charity toward our neighbor.
Of the first.
BE ye merciful. etc, When the son of God exhorts his Disciples unto
mercy: he gives us to understand, both of what mind we ought too be one
toward another, and also that in this life, (by reason of many infirmities,)
each has need of others help. Which lesson if they which will be called
Christians, would in these days bear well away: there should be less debate
and less mischief. We will all of us be called Chrysts disciples: but no
man will do that he commands. The servant obeys the commandment of his
master: the handmayde has her eye waiting upon his mistress: yea there is no
man but he gives more ear too his superiors in this world, than many that will
be called Christians, do give too Christ their God and Savior, who hanged
upon the Cross for them, and earned heaven for them. And what is the cause?
Forsooth for that they are Christians in word only, and not in heart. For he
that is a Christian in very deed, minds nothing so much as too obey his
master Christ, of whom he has both his name and salvation. Wherefore I
admonish you too lay aside that fleshly carfulness, and too obey Christ, and
diligently too mark out of this Gospel, what duties toward our neighbors
he requires at our hands. In general truly, he requires louingnesse,
according as he says too his Disciples: Love ye one another as I have loved
you: In this they shall know you too be my Disciples, if ye shall love one
another. And nothing else requires he here when he says: be merciful. For
they that love, are merciful: and they that be merciful do love. So the
fountain shows the water, and the water the fountain. How be it Christ in
this place did therefore use the word Mercy, because he shows the nature of
true love.

This mercy which proceeds out of love, and is commended by Christ too his
Disciples in this Gospel, consists of four parts. Of which the first is in
the very heart, and is a certain courtesy and well liking, wherethrough we
co^^ter all things of our neighbor too the bell, and always hope for better of
him: This courtesy does Christ note by r^^^ouing the contrary, when he says*
Judge not: Heeruppon the Apostle* Cor. 13. Love thinks no evil. And this is
the mening of the (...). There is no cause then that any man should think,
that by this saying judge not, judgment is taken away either concerning the
difference of virtues and vices in men: concerning the duty of householders,
schoolem^ysters, civil Magistrates, and ministers of Gods word, or c^nserning
brotherly reproof when it is due, whereby one ought t^^ (...) back another in
too the way when he go thamisse, according too Christ's commandment. B^t
only that scope of the mind, whereby we take upon us the liberty too
misdeeme other folk, contrary too the rule of charity. For in respect of
judgment concerning the difference of things honest and dishonest: the law of
GOD is a grounded and immovable rule unto us. For whatsoever thing Gods law
calls dishonest or honest, we also must deem the same to be so in likewise.
For what a blockishnesse were it, not to discern these things? We must
therefore judge and put a difference between the tirannie of Nero, and the
gentleness of Fabritius: and so of the rest. Masters of housholdes have
commandment too bring up their children in nurture and chastisement of the
Lord. Also Solomon will have Fathers and Moothers too chasten their children.
And Hely the high Priest was punished, because when he saw his sons Ophne
and Phinees behave the^ selves amiss in the service of God (for they st^le
away the better parts of the Sacrifises) and also in their life, (for they
defiled them selves with fornication) he did not correct them with fatherly
judgment. Heerby it is manifest, that the saying of Christ takes not away
the duties of Householders: which surely they cannot execute, without judgment
and discerning between things well done, and things done amiss. Ag^in, what
should schoolesmaisters do, without judgment? For some scholars are too be
compelled too their duty by beating, and a warning is enough for other some.
The slothfulness of the one is too be chastised: and the for wardnesse of the
others is too be praised. I pray you must not a godly Schoolemaister be
endued with judgment in this case? In likewise is too be judged of the
Magistrate. He must punish the evil and maintain the good: which thing verily
cannot be ^oon, without judgment. And in as much as God allows the
Magistrate, it is ^anifest that he allows his judgment also: considering
that without judgment* the Magistrate is nothing but a vain title. The
ministers of Gods word must receiu^ some intoo the church, and put other some
out. And is not the power too judge granted them* They must comfort (...),
and some they must reprove: which thing doubtless requires a great judgment.
As touching brotherly rebuking, the commandment of Christ is manifest. Math.
18. If thy brother-sinne and thou know it, go and rebuke him between him and
thee alone. Is not the office of rebuking enjoined here too every Christian?
Yes surely. Wherefore when Christ says: judge not, he takes not away the
needful offices of superiors in this life, neither weakeneth he the discipline
of the Church: but only brydleth the malapertnesse of men, which either of a
corrupt judgment think amiss of their neighbors, or else without says and
charity challenge prerogative too themselves too find faults in other men:
which vi^e many cry out upon in others, and yet take leave to do it themselves
without controlment. Scarsly is there any man that can rightly excuse himself of
it.

The second part of mercy which Christ requires toward ones neighbor, is
noted in these words, Condemn not. By which saying he requires that we
should speak friendly and lovingly ^four neighbor, refrayning ye most foul
vice, which makes us hasty to speak evil of others, and to condemn them
without desert. Too be breef, Chrysts will is, that we should in our speech
and talk, further the honest name and good report of our neighbor. This saying
pertains also to private condemning, whereby one conde^neth another of malice:
and not to the offices of magistrates and ministers of gods word, who
oftentimes pronounce against evil persons, ye sentence that God has enjoyed
them to pronounce by virtue of their office. So Peter condemned Ananias and
Zaphira, as is written in the Arts of the Apostles. So Paul condemned
Alexander and Hymeneus. So Christ pronounced the sentence of damnations against
the hypocrites, when he said: woe be unto you Stri^es, Pharisees and hypocrites.
So when we condemn Antichrist, we pronounce Gods just judgment against hint.
But here let every man take heed, that without Gods word he (...) not of
wanto^nesse, rather than of true judgment.

The third part of mercy is too forgive a man that has offended us by doing
(...). This is exacted by this word forgive ye. For there pass many
offendings between man and man, which if we should not forgive one unto
another, there could be no quietness: yea rather, the band of man's fellowship
should be broken. (...) this duty is, it is easy for the godly (...), by the
form of that prayer which Chrust ^^th (...). For there we are commanded too
pray: forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
That this ^^^tion, as we forgive them that trespass against us is very
necessary, we are taught by the parable of the detter that owed ten thousand
Talentes, Math. 18. the kingdom of heau^^ (says he) is like a (...) freely
the whole debt too his servant that humbled himself unto him: So God our
father of his (...) liberality forgiueth freely al dette^, (that is, al^
sins,) unto them that (...) too Christ in true repentance. How be it like as
that king calls back (...) punish^ent, (...) servant that was (...) toward
his fellows, and exacted of him for his wilfulness and hardness toward his
fellow servant, that which he had forgiven him before for his humbleness and
intreat^^^: So God the father after he has (upon our submissio^) received us
into (...) example in (...) toward our neighbor, and too forgive him that
(...) against us.

Here ryseth a dark question. If we (...) forgive them that have offended
us, it seems too follow, that it is not (...). Unto this question I answer
thus: There is a distinction too be made between the very (...) his people,
too judge matters between brother and brother: which thing surely had bin
needless too be done, unless it had bin lawful too accuse. It is certain
therefore, that it is not forbidden Christen folk too accuse, as in respect of
it self, so a man be hurt or wronged. But as in respect of that which men add
too the accusation, (for there be many corrupt affections: and headiness,
desire of revenge, enmity, wilfulness, and such like) it is too be known
that these affections are utterly too be banished if thou will be a
Chrystian. Ageine, there is a difference too be put between him that has
hurt thee, or withhilde thy goods from thee, and desires forgiveness of his
fault, making restitution of that which he hild wrongfully: and him that has
either hurt thee or withhild thy goods, and proceeds too hurt thee and too
take thy goods from thee still. Too forgive him that seeks thy favor, Christ's
commandment and charity councelleth thee. And too accuse the other, (in
demanding not so much reuengement as the defense of the magistrate,) Christ
gives thee liberty, and many holy men confirm it by their own examples. Also
there is a difference too be put between him that has offended thee alone,
and him that has offended God, and troubles the church. Christ's
commandment extends too the first, but not too the last. For the love of
God and of our neighbor requires, that (too the uttermost of thy power) thou
should take away such things as are a hinderance too Gods service, and a
stumbling block too his church. Breefly, true faith and charity will teach
thee sufficiently, when it is a fault too accuse, and when it is well done.

The fourth part of mercy is poynted out in these words: give, and it shall
be given unto you. By this commandment is required, that we help our
neighbor at his need, with our counsel and deed. With our counsel, as often
as we see him stray from the right: and with our deed, one while by giving
alms largely, and another while by lending cheerfully, although we look not
for the like good turn at his hand. For too lend where a man looks for as good
a turn agein, is a common kind of courtesy even among Heathen men and sinners,
which are not yet called intoo Chrysts household by the Gospel. Hithertoo
concerning the mercy which we owe too our neighbor for loves sake, and for the
commandment of Christ: and concerning the parts thereof, which are four.
That is too wit, too have a good opinion of our neighbor, too speak well of
him, too forgive him his fault when he does amiss, and to help him with our
counsel and our deed, at his need. Now will we speak breefly of the second
place.

Of the second.
Christ uses five arguments in this exhortation too mercy, and to those
duties which are to be performed to our neighbor, which I will now rehearse in
order.

The first is comprised in these words: as your father is merciful. That is
too say, in executing mercy, have an eye too your heavenly father: for the
behauior and doings of the parents, must be a rule too the children too live
by. Therefore when as we see our heavenly father exceeding merciful, it
becomes us too follow his example. In this Argument are many circumstances too
be weyed. First that our heavenly father is almighty, having need of no man,
and yet that he has showed so great mercy too us wretches. 2 That we are
miserable sinners. 3 That our said heavenly father receives us intoo favor, of
his own mere mercy. 4 That we by nature were the children of wrath. Ephesians.
ij. 5 That this is his will, that being made his children, we should follow
his fatherly example. 6 That like as he has benefited us with his grace: so we
also should give to others freely: which thing if we do not, we sin horribly.
For first we despise his commandment. 2 We grow our of kind from him. 3 We
defile our selves with wickedness, which are the woorks of Satan's children. 4
We renounce the faith. 5 Our neighbor (whose misery ought to grieve us,)
lies in misery through our default. Let those that will be Chrystians, wey
these things thoroughly.

The second argument is grounded upon the profit that redoundeth too our
selves. Judge no^ (says he) and ye shall not be judged. Condemn not, and ye
shall not be condemned. Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. Give, and it shall be
given unto you. Here he confirms with his promises, the parts of mercy
which he requires. The propounding of the duty is this: Judge not. And the
promise of reward or confirmation of the thing propounded, is: and you shall
not be judged, and so of the others. The meening therefore is. He that has a
favorable opinion of others: shall find that others shall have the like of
him. He that speaks well of others, shall look for the same at others men's
hands. He that forgiueth willingly, shall find others as ready to forgive him, if
he happen too do amiss. He yt aydeth the needy with his counsel and deed,
shall agein in his need find both counsel and help: and that by my working,
says Christ. But contrariwise, he that surmiseth evil of others, shall be ill
thought of himself. He that speaks evil shall here evil. He that reuengeth
wrong, shall suffer wrong. He that denies counsel and help too him that
has need shall him self also in his need, long for help and lack it.

The third argument is employed in these words. Can the blind lead the
blind? Shall they not fall both into the ditche? As if he had said: Look in
what case a blind man is, too lead a blind man: In the same case is he that
teaches and lives amiss, too them whom he should guide by his doctrine and
life. But when the blind leads the blind, both of them fall intoo the
Ditche. Therefore he that teaches amiss and lives naughtely, is an occasion
of falling as well too others as too himself. Too the intent the^ that we may
eschew this mischief, we must behave our selves arighte, as well in doctrine as
in life.

The fourth argument is included in these words: The disciple is not above
his master: but every one shall be perfect, if he be as his master. Good
disciples or scholars must follow the example of their master. Therefore seeing
that Christen folk are Christ's scholars, it becomes them too express the
same in their life and manners, as much as lies in them too do.

The fifth argument is fetched from the consideration of our own misdeedes.
Why see thou a mote in thy brothers eye? etc. The mote in thy brothers eye,
is a light escape of thy brothers. The beam in thine own eye, is a great
misdeede of thine own. Every man therefore must consider his own faults
rather than other men's, and first sweep clean before his own door, as the
Proverb says. Which thing that we may do in deed, Christ grant, too
whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be honor and glory for evermore.
Amen.

Upon the.v. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. v.
ANd it came too pass, that (when the people preased upon him, too hear the
word of God) he stood by the lake of Genazareth, and savve two ships
stand by the lake side, but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were
washing their nets. And he entered intoo one of the ships (which perteyned
too Simon) and prayed him that he vvoulde thruste out a little from the land.
And he sat down, and taught the people out of the ship. When he had left
speaking, he said unto Simon: launche out intoo the deep, and let slip
your nets too make a draught. And Simon ansvvered, and said unto him: Master,
we have labored all night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless, at thy
commandment I will loose forth the net. And when they had so done,
they enclosed a great multitude of Fishes. But their net brake, and they
beckened unto their fellows (which were in the other ship) that they
should come and help them. And they came and filled both ships, that they
sonke ageine. When Simon Peter savve this, he fell down at Jesus knees,
saying: Lord, go from me, for I am a sinful man. For he was astonished and
all that were with him, at the draught of fishes which they had taken: and
for was also James and John the sons of Zebede, which were partners with
Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon: fear not from hence forth thou shall
catch men. And they brought the ships too land, and forsook (...), and
followed him.

The exposition of the Text.
THe occasion of this Gospel was this. The people being greedy of gods word,
followed Christ whither so ever he went, to here him. And when the preace for
desire too see and here him, did as it were throng him: he was compelled to
enter intoo Peter's ship, and too teach the multitude out of it. And too the
intent too make his doctrine of credit: he had them cast out their nets,
who had complained before, that they had labored all that night in vain. And
when they had done so, they caught a great number of Fishes, in so much as
two ships were not able too hold them. The lookers on being confirmed by this
miracle, did both receive his doctrine and also acknowledge his heavenly power.
And when Peter being taught by the miracle, was afraid, he was raised by the
Lord, and received a promise that he should afterward become a Fisher of men.
This is the sum of this present Gospel: which tends too this purpose, not
only that we should learn by the example of this multitude; first too seek
the kingdom of God: but also that we should be confirmed concerning the power
of Christ. For Christ shows that he has a care of those that he his: and he
declares that no man is able too perform any thing in his vocation, unless
^e be present with him in his business, and as it were put to his hand too the
doing of it: according as he says. Without me ye can do nothing. And the
Psalm says. Unless the Lord build the house, in vain do they watch that
keep it. The places are four.

1 The needfulnesse in heering Gods word is commended by the example of this
multitude, which was so greedy too here Christ. 2 An Image of the Church, and
of the teachers and hearers of the word. 3 The present miracle and the use of
the same. 4 The example of Peter, both in catching the Fishes, and also in the
acknowledging of Christ, meet too be followed.
Of the first.
ANd it came too pass when the people preased upon him too here him. The
example of this multitude teaches us, that the gospel is too be her^
desirously. For this people would never have followed Christ so earnestly, if
they had not understood that his doctrine had bin very needful. This
multitude then followed Christ, not too lie in the wind for him: not too take
advantage of his words: not too laugh him too scorn, as the Scribes,
Pharisees, and Hypocrites did: but too here Gods word, and too deefed with the
bread of salvation. For the word of God is heavenly bread, far sweeter than
the Honey and the Honey comb, as is said in the Psalm. This multitude therefore
like a sort of hungry souls, come flocking about him as one that were dealing
of some large alms: and not without cause. For as the body is sustained with
material b^^^d, because it is material it self: so is the soul nourished
with spiritual bread* which is the word of God, because it self is
spiritual. Again, like as the appetite too meat betokens health, and the
lothing of it is a ^oken that the body is faint and ill at ease: So the longing
after Gods word, (...) a sig^^ that the soul is in good plight, and
contrariwise the lothing of Gods word bewrays the disease of a crased soul.
Therefore if we loathe Gods word, we must do as they do that are diseased in
their body: For like as they take counsel of Physicians, that by receiving a
medicine they may recover health, and have a good stomach too their meat: So
we (when Gods word goes against our stomach, and that our soul lotheth
it) must by Prayer seek too Christ the Physician, that he may make our
souls too like of Gods word which is the bread of salvation: least we
starve for want of Gods word. For Gods word is the heavenly food: That is
too say, the bread of life, and the drink, whereof who so ever drinks,
shall not thirst for ever. Ihon. 4.

How be it, too the intent we may hunger after this bread of life, and thirste
after this heavenly drink, as this multitude did: We must think upon the
needfulnesse of this food: which being perceived, there is no man but will
have an appetite too it, unless it be such a one, as is so blinded and
bereft of his wits by the Devil, that he has no care at all of his soul
health.

The first needfulnesse is this: that every soul must needs die, which is
destitute of this heavenly food unto the end. For first we obtain life
when we conceive faith by the word. Ageine, the word is the food of faith,
wherewith it is fed and nourished. This needfulnesse is confirmed by our Lords
saying: He that believes not, shall die: for faith comes not from else
where, than by heering the word of God. Romans 10.

Ageine without this food, man abides under Gods wrath. He that believes not
(says Christ) the wrath of God abides upon him.

Besides that, this is the food that strengthens too eternal life. Heeruppon
says Paul: The Gospel is the power of God too salvation too every one that
believes.

Lastly (to conclude all in one word) Gods word is ye incorruptible seed (as
the Apostle Peter teaches) wherewith we (who before were the children of
wrath, by reason of ye sin of our first Parents and of our selves) are
begotten a new, and borne a new through the grace of the son of God. Therefore
as by nature, we are born the children of wrath, that is, of damnation vnt^
everlasting death: So by grace (through the seed of Gods word) we are borne
the children of grace, that is to say of blissing to eternal life. They that
believe are the children of Abraham, and heirs of the promise. Wherefore if
the health of our souls: if the escaping of death, Gods wrath, and damnation:
if the dignity that we are called too by being adopted the sons of God, do
move us: Let us be desirous of Gods word, let us here it and keep it: and
that not only after the example of this multitude, but also of the whole
Church, which coueteth nothing more, than too be thoroughly fed with this
word of God.

Of the second.
Jesus went intoo a Ship, in which he sat him down, and taught the
people standing on the shore. In these words is the state of the Church
militant and floting in the waves of this world, very trimly peinted out. In
which picture three things are too be observed. The ship it self: Christ
sitting in the ship: and the people standing on the shore. The ship it self
is a shadow of the Church. Christ betokens all true Preachers and teachers.
The people standing on the shore represent the heerers of the word: Now like
as a ship is horribly shaken when a tempest rises on the Sea: even so
nothing is more shaken and tossed in the world, than the church: which thing
the story of the whole world avouches. How sorrowful was the shaking of this
ship, when Cayne slew his own brother? And afterward when Loathe was in
Sodom, and Abraham in his wayfarings? Ageine, how sore was Gods Church
shaken, first in Egipte, and after that, by the space of fortye yeeares
toogyther, too pass over in silence the persecutions which the Church
endured at all times under the Judges, under the kings, and in the captivity
of Babylon. And too omit other things, and too speak of our time: How sore is
the Church shaken by them that will seem too be Citizens of the Church? Some
assail it with heresies, as with horrible tempests sent out by the Devil him
self. What is it that the Sacramentaries do not? What is it that the other
Sectaries, Anabaptists, and Libertines do not, too ouerturne this little ship
of Peter's? The Bishops condemn it of heresy. The Jews jest at it. The Turk
despises it. The civil Magistrate (in many places) appeacheth it of sedition,
as we read in the story of wicked Achab, who objected these words ageinste
the most holy. Prophet Helias. Art not thou he that troubles all Israel?
What shall I say concerning the new manner of assaulting the Church, which
those have found out, that will both be and are termed Gospellers? Like
ungodly persons and church-robbers, they convert too secular uses, the goods
that belong too the maintenance of the ministry of Gods word. Earnestly
does Satan with all his members bend him self too this one point, that is,
too overthrow the floting Church of Christ. But Christ is stronger than that
hell gates may prevail against it.

I have spoken of the floting of Christ's church: whereby also may easly be
perceived, how great the perilles of Gods ministers be. For as Christ sits
in the ship, so they also sustain a right great brunte of dangers, and many
are haled too most grievous torments. But the people stands on the shore,
that is, the most part of the heerers are out of peril. For when any
tempeste arises, either they hide them selves, or else they shrink quite away.
And thus much breefly concerning the shaking of the church.

Of the third.
ANd the Lord said too Simon: Launche intoo the deep, and cast out a net
too fish. Then Simon answering, said unto him: Sir we have labored all
this night and caughte nothing, notvvithstanding seeing you bid me, I will
cast forth a net. And when they had done so, they enclosed a great number of
Fishes. etc. This is the description of the miracle. Peter being paste hope of
catching any fish, casts forth a net at Christ's commandment, and caught
a great multitude, so as two ships were not able too hold them. Albeeit that
this miracle were wrought as well too confirm the doctrine of Christ, as also
too strengthen the faith of the beholders: yet notwithstanding it perteyneth
(after a certain manner) unto us also. For what so ever has bin written
heeretoofore, it was written for our instruction, that by pacyence and
comfort of the Scriptures, we might have hope. I will therefore show how
this present miracle serves for us.

First this miracle will assure us of the truth of the Gospel. For it is as an
authorized seal, wherewith God the Father seals the Gospel of his son. For
whatsoever miracles Christ, the Prophets, or Apostles ever wrought: they serve
all too confirm the doctrine. So we reed in Mark, and in the Epistle too the
Hebrews, Mark in his.xvj. Chapter says thus: The Lord wrought with the
Apostles, and confirmed their doctrine with signs that ensued. And too the
Hebrews.ij. The doctrine of salvation was confirmed, GOD auouching it by signs
and woonders, and sundry miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost.

Secondlye, this present miracle proves, that Christ is Lord, not only of
men, and of the Land, but also of the Sea. Whereby our faith conceyueth this
assuredness; that it persuadeth it self, that nothing either on the Land, or
on the Sea is able too withstand this puissaunt Lord, but that he can
puissauntly deliver his servants from all peril, like as he delivered the
Prophet Jonas out of the Whales belly by his heavenly power. There is no cause
then why we should fear the cruelty either offeendes, or of men, or of the
sea, so we leave unto Christ by lively faith. Whereupon John says: This is
the victory that overcomes the world, even your faith.

Heerwithall, this present miracle teaches, from whence ^ommeth the blissing
of our labor, and the increase of our substance. Peter had labored all night,
and too no purpose. Why so? because he had sought for blissing by his own
travel, and not out of the fountayn of blissing which is Christ. But after he
had cast forth his net at the commandment of Christ, he took a great number
of fishes. Whereby we are taught, that all blissing depends of Christ's
word. Against this do four kinds of men offend.

First, faythlesse folks, which think, that all blissing depends of their
own travail: against whose folly David soong the Psalm: Unless the Lord
build the house, in vain does he watch that keeps it.

Next, ungodly folks which imagine that the increase of their substance and
goods proceeds of usury and evil trades, yt is too say* of ye blissing of
Satan: and in deed many seem too grow rich by such means. But Solomon
says the contrary. The blissing of the Lord makes men rich. For as man can
not of right be counted streyghtway rich, when he possesses many things.
Bread is one thing: and the strength of bread is another. Many have bread and
other goods: of whom some can not use them: some abuse them too riot and
pride: some cram themselves with them from day too day, and other some make
them instruments too put their lusts and tyranny in ure. I pray you what manner
of blissing is this? Contrarywyse, the Godly that has but mean substance,
uses his goods too the glory of God, and the relief of others, and sets
out the giver of them with ^ good conscience.

The third kind of men that offend in this behalf, ar those sort which when
they have herd that the increase of things comes of ye lords blissing, become
more slouthful and slask, and neglect the labor of their vocation, where as
David in his psalm speaks against it. Blissed is the man that fears the
Lord, and delyghteth altogether in his ways, thou shall eat the labor of thy
hands. Blissed art thou, and well at ease shall thou be. (...) and thou shall
be well at ease. If many now a days would follow this rule, they should feel
the Lords blissing.

The fourth sort of offenders in this case, is of them that neither call upon
God when they use his blissing: nor call upon him for help* nor yield him
thanks for his blissing.

Let us learn here therefore by this present miracle both that men ought too
labor, and that the success and blissing of the labor comes only of God,
in what state so ever a man be. If a man be set over of hers, as a
magistrate, a leuetenant, and a master of a house, let him think thus. I will
labor lustely in the fear of God, I will serve God, and I will call upon him,
that he may prosper my labors. When the husbandma^ tilleth his ground, when he
sows it, when he carries his harvest into the barn, let him have God before
his eyes, let him know that all blissing is of the Lord, let him call upon
him, that he will vouchsafe too prosper his labor, and too bestow his
blissing upon him. So also let the preacher do: let him teach, admonish and
exhort: but yet at the commandment of Christ, and in the fear of God. But
perchance thou will obiecte: I do my duty, I till the ground, I preach
the gospel, I instruct my householde, but too no purpose, my paynefulnesse
has no good success. Learn here of Peter what thou want. Peter labored
in vain, until he had taken Chyrst too him intoo the ship. Therefore according
too Peter's example, give thou credit unto Christ, be not slack, but labor
in Chrysts name, and thou shall see how the Lord will bliss the^.

But I (say thou) see the woorst men commonly most too be luckie, and
contrariwise, I see the godly oftentimes most miserable. I say no more, but
mark the end. Wherefore consider this answer of David's, which is in
the.xxxvj. Psalm. I saw the ungodly (says he) lusty and flourishing as the
green Bay: and I passed by, and behold he was gone: and I sought him, and
he was not too be found. So, all the glory of the ungodly is a vanishing
smoke. Contrariwise, he that fears the Lord shall not be removed for ever.
We have examples. I pray you where are now those glorious Gia^ts? They are
swalowed up in the flood. Where is the rich glutton? He lies in torments. On
the contrary part, where is Abraham? where is David? where is poor Lazarus?
In heaven, where they enjoy true blissednesse. These men's examples let us
follow.

Of the fourth.
Which thing when Simon savve, he fell down at Jesus feet, saying.
Depart from me O Lord, for I am a sinner. See here what happened too Peter
and his fellows by this taking of fish. Peter is sore afraid, and wills
Christ too depart from him. What ought he not rather too have said Lord tarry
still with me, that we may have good luck in fishing? Like as Peter upon
this miracle acknowledged him self a miserable sinner: so acknowledged he
Christ too be rightuous, and endued with the power of the Godhead. Wherefore
he falls down at his feet also. Uerely men desire the presence of GOD: How
be it, as soon as they perceive him too be come, by and by they flee away,
and are afraid, by reason that their conscience accuses them of sin, until
they be cheered by the voice of God, and feel comfort against the remorse of
sin: according as the Lord in this place cheereth up him that was afraid,
saying: Fear not, from hence forth thou shall be a fisher of men. Here he
not only cheereth up Peter, but also chooses him too be an Apostle, that in
his time he may catch men with the word of his preaching. For as fishes are
caught with a net: so are men caught by the word of preaching, and gathered
out of the Sea of their sins, intoo the church of Christ: not too be killed,
but too live blissedly for ever through Jesus Christ our Lord, too whom be
honor, praise, and power for ever and ever. Amen.

Upon the.vj. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Math. v.
JESUS said unto his Disciples: except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter intoo the
kingdom of Heaven. Ye have herd that it was said unto them of old time:
Thou shall not kill: whosoever kills, shall be in danger of judgment. But I
say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother (unadvisedly) shall be
in danger of judgment. And whosoever says unto his brother Racha: shall be
in danger of a counsel. But whosoever says, thou Fool: shall be in danger of
Hell fire. Therefore if thou offrest thy gift at the altar, and there remembrest
that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thine offering before the
altar, and go thy way first and be reconciled too thy brother, and then come
and offer thy gift. Agree with thine adversary quickly, vvhiles thou art in
the way with him, least at any time the adversary deliver thee to the Judge,
and the Judge deliver thee too the Minister, and then thou be cast intoo
Prison. Verily I say unto he t: thou shall not come out thence, til thou
have paid the vttermoste farthing.

The exposition of the text.
THis text is a piece of that sermon that Christ made too his Disciples in the
mountain after he had newly chosen them: wherein (too speak breefly) he
teaches them that he came not too break the law, but too fulfill it. And
because the Phariseys being interpreters of the law, misconstrued and wrested
the law of God: Christ corrects their error, and interprets the law. For
they thought that the doctrine of the law perteyned only too the outward
deeds. Contrariwise, Christ proves that it pertains too the innermost
conceits of the heart. Afterward in the same sermon Christ prescribes a form
of giving Alms, an order of fasting, and the manner of praying. All which
things tend too this end, that men should understand how far they are off
from the perfection of Gods law, and how needful Chrysts coming was, on whom
whosoever believes, is exempted from the power of the law, and from damnation.
Thus much concerning the effect of Chrysts sermon in the mount. How beeit this
parcel of that Sermon, which is red in the church this day (as you have herd)
fyndeth fault with the Pharisaicall righteousness, and alleging the fifthe
commandment of the law shows how far the Pharisees ouershot themselves in
interpreting the law. For like as these thought it enough, too abstein from
killing with the hand: so Christ denounces them guilty of this law, not only
which commit outward murder, but all those that think any thing against their
neighbor, according as we shall here anon. The places are two.

1 Of three sorts of righteousness, Pharisaicall, of the law, and Christen. 2
An exposition of the fifth commandment.
Of the third.
EXcept your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Phariseys, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Too the intent we
may understand these things aryght, we must needs speak of three sorts of
righteousness. Of the Pharisaicall righteousness which Christ reproves
here. Of the Ryghtuousnesse that comes by the law, which God commends too
us by his own voice: and of the christen righteousness, through which only we
stand before God.

The Pharisaicall righteousness is described. Math. 15. of which description
these be the peculiar points. First they accuse Christ, so far is it from
their thought too acknowledge him for their redeemer. Again, they do all
things too the intent too be seen of men. They are hypocrites, appeering
outwardly religious and holy: whereas for all that, they are enemies of God and
all godly men, whom they snatch at like mad dogs. Also they make Gods
commandment void for men's traditions sake. For in place of Gods
commandments, they thruste in men's devises, too worship God withal
whither he will or no. This is the greatest stubbornness against God that can
be. For in this case not only god is despised, and more is attributed too man's
folly than too Gods wisdom: but also through men's traditions, the zele of
Religion is abolished too godward, and the woorks of charity plucked up by the
roots. Ouermore they preace unto God with their lips, and their heart is far
from him. Besides this, they are laid too devour widows houses, while they
draw them to themselves couetously under pretense of holiness. Furthermore,
they love the highest rooms, whereby is noted their pride. Last of all, they
shut up the kingdom of heaven before men, while by their false interpretation
of the law, they withdraw men from the fruits of Christ. In conclusion, they
are like too whytelymde toombes, as Christ says: for outwardly they seem
holy, but inwardly they swarm with vnpure affections. We have an example in
the Pharisey that went up intoo the Temple with the Publicane: who not only
boasted of his own good works, fasting, and Tenths, but also backbyted his
neighbor. So did he openly transgress the whole law of God, contained in the
first and second Table: and yet nevertheless he thought himself rightuous,
and that he had earned heaven with his woorks. By these things that have bin
spoken hithertoo, we may gather this description of the Pharisaicall
righteousness. Pharisaicall ryghtuousnesse consists in outward woorks,
void of the fear of God, and of Faith in God: which as it looks for heaven
at Gods hand, as a reward of his woorks, so it hunteth for praise at men's
hands for the visour of counterfeit holiness. It is no marvel therefore that
Christ says: Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter intoo the kingdom of heaven. And
thus much concerning the Pharisaicall righteousness. Now let us speak a
little of the righteousness that comes by the law.

Concerning the righteousness of the Law, I will say four things. First what
it is. 2 Whither any man may be justified by the law. 3 What is the use of the
law. 4 How the law is abrogated too them that believe in Christ.

The righteousness of the law is a perfect pure and continual obedience
toward the law of God. Or it is a continual and perfect loving of God and
our neighbor. For thus says the law: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as
thy self. For the law of God (which is the rule of the righteousness of the
law) requires not outward obedience only: but it requires at all men a
perfect, pure, and continual obedience toward God. And as it promises life
and salvation too them that obey: so it threateneth everlasting death too them
that perform not this obedience. It is not content with the outward visoure,
but it requires a pure heart, thoughts agreeable too Gods law, and a forward
and ready will too Godward: yea and a full and continual tunablenesse in all
the powers both inward and outward, agreeable too the will of God. That the
law requires such a ryghtuousnesse, it appears by the interpretation of
Christ, and by this saying of Paul. The law is spiritual, but I am carnal:
therefore requires it spiritual obedience.

We see what the righteousness of the law is. Now in the second place is
demanded, whither any one in all mankind may be justified by this
righteousness of the law. Too which question I answer simply, that no man
at any time after Adams fall (save only Christ) became rightuous, before God
by obedience of the Law: and that will I prove by four reasons.

The first: man's nature is unclean, and stained with the filthiness of sin,
and therefore it can no more yield pure obedience toward God, than a troubled
muddie spring can yield pure and clear water: or than a rotten tree can bring
forth good fruit. Whereupon Esaias. 64. cries out that all our righteousness
is like a most unclean cloth.

The second: All men find in them selves, that that obedience which they
perform too the law of God, has four points disagreeing with the law of
God. For first man's obedience is but now and then and by startes: whereas Gods
law requires a continual obedience. Secondly, it is defiled: for the heart of
man is unclean, from whence it proceeds. Thirdly, it is imperfect: for it is
not performed according too the streyghtnesse of the law. And fourthly, it is
glosed with evil opinions.

The third: the Scripture avouches in plain terms; that no man is rightuous
by the law, no not one. And David says: Lord, if thou look straightly upon
sin, who shall abide it? Also: No man living shall be found rightuous in thy
sight: that is too wit, by the deeds of the law.

The fourth: If men may become rightuous by the deeds of the law, we should
have no need of the righteousness of Christ. Heervpon says Paul. Gal. 2. If
righteousness come by woorks, then has Christ died in vain. For he died for
our sins, and rose again for our justification. Hereby it appears, that
no man has the righteousness which the law requires.

Now follows the third question concerning the use of the law, and what is
it. Of Gods law there be three uses: that is too wit. Outward, Inward, and
Spiritual. The outward use belongs too this outward man, that we may live
honestly in this life: which use is common too it with civil laws and
ordinances of men. The inward use perteyneth too the old man: for the law
reueleth Gods wrath unto us, by laying our sins before us. The spiritual
use perteyneth too the new man, that through faith we should begin too yield
obedience unto God according too his law, so farrefoorth (at least wise) as
may be done in this corruption: which obedience is acceptable too God for our
fayths sake in Christ.

Now follows the fourth question. For when the godly mind heereth, that the
law pronounces them all accursed which perform not perfect obedience too
the law: it begins too fear the sentence of the law. Here therefore it is
too be known, that Gods law is abrogated and utterly abolished too the
godly, as much as concerns the curse thereof. For so that we believe on
Christ, Christ has taken upon him the curse of the law for us. Wheruppon
Paul says: Christ became accursed for us. And John. 3. He that believes
not in the Son, the wrath of God abides upon him. And in his Epistle: The
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all iniquity, that is, from the curse
that should have bin due too us for our iniquity. And so have we breefly
told what is the righteousness of the law: that no man becomes rightuous
by the woorks of the law: what is the use of the law: and how far forth Gods
law is abrogated. Now is a little too be said, concerning Christen
righteousness, that we may understand wherein it is too be preferred before
the Pharisaicall righteousness.

Christian righteousness is Christ's obedience imputed to the^ yt believe in
him. For according too the right meening of the gospel, he is rightuous whos^
sins God forgiueth, and too who^ he imputes ye righteousness of his son, and
accepts him freely too everlasting life. For whosoever believes in Christ,
for as much as of a guilty person he is made unguilty, and of an unrighteous
person is made rightuous through Christ's righteousness, which is imputed
unto him: He is said too be justified, or too become rightuous. And that
Chrysts righteousness is imputed too him that believes, it is proved by many
textes of Scripture. He that believes on him that instifieth the ungodly,
unto him is his faith imputed for righteousness. And Romans the.5. Cha. Like as
by the disobedience of one man many became sinners: so by the obedience of one
man Jesus Christ, many become rightuous. 2. Corin. 5. Him that knew no sin
he made sin, that we might become rightuous before GOD in him. And that too
this righteousness of the Gospel, the woorks of the law are not required: many
testimonies prove. Romans 3. We suppose that a man is justified by Faith,
without the works of the Law. And Gal. 2. We know that a man is not
justified by the deeds of the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ: and we
believe in Christ Jesus, that we might be justified by faith, and not by the
deeds of the Law. Heeruppon now is concluded, that Chrystian justification is
an acquiting of that person from sin that believes in Christ, and an
imputing of Christ's righteousness unto him, and an accepting of him unto
eternal life freely for Christ's sake.

Thus much breeflye concerning the three sorts of righteousness. Now will I
add a few things touching the difference. And first I will tell how christen
righteousness differs from the ryghtuousnesse of the Law: and afterward
how it differs from the righteousness of the Pharisees.

The first difference therefore between the righteousness of the Law and the
christen ryghtuousnesse, is that the ryghtuousnesse of the Law, is of the
works of the Law, but the Ryghtuousnesse of the Gospel, is without the
woorks of the Law. The second is that the righteousness of the law, is the
righteousness of the woorker: but the ryghtuousnesse of the gospel is the
righteousness of the believer. The third is, yt the righteousness of the law
is not imputed freely: but comes to pass of ye desert of a ma^s own
obedience, but the righteousness of ye gospel is imputed without desert of a
man's own obedience. The fourth is, that ye righteousness of the law is a
formal righteousness, as which is framed to a man by his just dealings: but
the righteousness of the gospel is an imputed righteousness, when the just
dealyngs of Christ are imputed too him that believes. Therefore that man is
said too be justified according too the form of the law, which of an
unrighteous person, becomes rightuous through his own just dealing and
fulfilling of the law, according too this saying: The man that does these
things, shall live in them. But he is said too be justified af rer the manner
of the Gospel, who of a guilty person is made not guilty, by reason of Chrysts
righteousness, which is taken hold on by Faith. The righteousness of the
law is a perfect obedience of a man too the law of GOD. But the Christen or
Gospellcuyghtuousnesse, is Chrysts obedience imputed too him that believes. A
rightuous man after the law is he that deals justly and uprightly,
according too the meening of the law: But he is rightuous after the gospel
too whom God forgyueth his sin, and imputes Christ's ryghtuousnesse, and
whom he accepts too eternal life freely for Christ's sake. Justification
after the law, is an abling a man before God for the soundenesse and
perfection of his obedience too Gods law: but christian or Gospel
justification is an abling of man before God for the soundness and perfection
of Chrysts obedience too God the father.

Thus have we the difference between the christen righteousness and the
righteousness of the law. Now let us see how the Christian righteousness
exceeds the righteousness of the Pharisees. The Christen righteousness
exceeds the Pharisaicall in these four things. In cause, quality, effect
and end. The cause of christen righteousness is God, Christ's desert and
faith, taking hold of the benefit offered: but the cause of Pharisaical
righteousness is, man's hypocrisy, ignorance of Gods righteousness, and
outward obseruaunce of men's traditions. The quality of christen righteousness
is the obedience and fulfilling of the law in Christ: but the quality of
Pharisaicall righteousness: is but only an outward visour of feyned and
counterfeyt holiness. The effect of Christen righteousness is newness of
spirit, the fear of God, true godliness, invocation, true humility,
patience, and a beginning of obedience toward Gods law, in so much that a man
being justified by faith, desires nothing so much as to obey God. Too be
brief, his chief pleasure is in the law of the Lord, after he knows that
damnation is taken away by Christ's merit: but the effect of Pharisaicall
righteousness, is pride, glorying before God, superstition, disdeyne of ones
neighbor, and (too be short) such as the tree is, such is his fruit. For an
evil tree can not bring forth good fruit. The end of Christen righteousness
is too have peace with God, too have access unto God, too give glory unto
God, and finally too obtain everlasting life freely for Chrysts sake: but the
end of Pharisaical righteousness, is too give praise too a man's own self,
and too take it from God, and too vaunt among men: upon which at length shall
ensue horrible punishment, unless there be a turning too the Lord. Let this
suffice concerning the three sorts of righteousness, and the differences of
them, the which it is behouefull too bear in mind.

Of the second.
THe fifth commandment, Thou shall not kill, the Lord interprets himself,
too the intent too confute the false interpretation of the Pharisees. They
thought that only outward murder was prohibited. But Christ looked deepelier
intoo the law, and spyed out three of her murders beside the outward
manslaughter. Ye have herd (says he) how it was said too them of old
time: Thou shall not kill: for who so ever kills, shall be in danger of
Judgment. That is too say, who so ever shall kill a man, shall be guilty
before the judgment: for in this place he speaks of outward manslaughter,
and the punishment thereof, which is a civil condemnation by the Law. That
was called the judgment, wherein sat three men, at such time as the cases
were easy too be discussed. For he that had committed outward murder with
his hand, was guilty of death by the sentence of the Law: which sentence few
were able too pronounce. Here he speaks only of man's judgment by the
sentence of the law. For the spiritual judgment (which was the curse) was
sufficiently known. Now follows the interpretation. But I say unto you, he
that is angry with his brother, is in danger of judgment. Here he puts
anger among the kinds of murder. The Pharisees perceived not that this was
forbidden by the fifth commandment. Wherefore he says: But I say unto you:
As if he had said: The Pharisees hold opinion, that he only breaks the
fifth commandment, that has killed a man with his hand. But I say unto
you, that this law requires more. For it also forbids anger which
proceeds not of a just cause, and tends not too a good end.

Then adds he also another sin of the fifth commandment: And whosoever
shall say unto his brother, Racha, that is, he that by any sign shows him
self too scorn his neighbor, is in danger of a counsel: Wherein three and
twenty Judges satte upon the hearing of greater cases. Furthermore, who so
ever shall say unto his brother Fool, is in danger of Hell fire. That is
too say, he that rayleth and outrageth ageynste his neighbor, is an
offender ageynste Gods law, and consequently in danger of the pains of Hell.
Here Gods judgment is compared too a Senate of three score and eleven
Judges, which satte upon the hearing of the cheifest and weyghtiest cases.
Too be brief, by the fifth commandment are forbidden, first all
thoughts, whereby we think any evil toward our neighbor. Secondly, all
signs of contempt of our neighbor. Thirdly all bitter words against our
neighbor, as raylings or reuilings. Fourthlye outward murder. And
contrariwise, are commanded all works that are repugnant too these: as too
bear a freendlye heart toward our neighbor, too show our good will
toward our neighbor by outward signs, and too defend and save his person
from wrong.

Howbeeit too the intent that Christ might show how needful is love toward
one neighbor, and how pernicious is injury done unto our neighbor: he
gives two counsels, which contain two arguments.

The one is taken of the harm which a man that does wrong too his neighbor,
runs intoo before the judgment of God. The other is taken of the harm,
wherintoo he that has hurt his neybour falls, before the judgment of man.

The first stands thus: If thou offer thy gift at the altar. He put forth
an example that agreed too that time, and that people, while the common weal
of Moises was yet standing. And the meening of this saying is this, GOD
accepts not thy gift if thou hate thy brother, that is too say: No service is
acceptable too God, which is done by him that is out of charity with his
neighbor. But what is the meening of this rule? That God likes nothing that
comes from his enemy, for the gifts of enemies are no gifts. And in this
respect, John says: He that says I love God, and hates his brother, is a
liar. For the continual and natural fruit of loving God, is the love of a
man's neighbor. He that loves me, keeps my commandments. Then whereas
this fruit is not, it is certain that the tree is evil. Therefore whosoever
loves not his neighbor does offer sacrifice too God in vain.

In the Scripture, prayer is a sacrifice: but thou prayest in vain if thou
hate thy neighbor. Thanksgiving is ye calves of the lips. Now if thou will
have them accepted of God, first be at one with thy neighbor, and then offer
in Faith. The cross is a sacrifise, so it be te^pered with faith, for without
faith it is a just punishment of sin. The keeping of the Sabbath is a service
that pleases God: yet it is defiled with hatred toward a man's neighbor.
Alms is called in the Scripture a sacrifise of good sent. But Paul says,
if I spend all my substance upon the poor, and have no charity: I am nothing.
And in likewise is too be judged of every good work which God requires. Here
let every man examine himself, and not take a deceitful balance.

The second stands thus. Be reconciled too thy brother while thou art yet
in the way. etc. He that offends and hurts his brother, falls intoo the
hands of the Magistrate, and shall be cast intoo prison, from whence he shall
not be dispatched, until he have made full amends for his harms. Wherefore
too the intent this come not too pass, thou must be reconciled too thy
neighbor betimes: Therefore seeing that without charity thou woorshippest God
in vain, and fallest in danger of the Magistrate: thou art counseled too be
in charity with thy neighbor. Heerwith agrees the saying of God: He that
has not showed mercy, shall feel judgment without mercy. Heeruntoo pertains
also the parable of the detter, to whom God forgave all the det. etc.

But the Papists upon this place do build their Purgatory, whereof they
preach at this day in their Churches: too whom I answer.

1 In these words is no mention made of Purgatory, whereintoo he that has
hurt his neighbor, is cast by the Magistrate.

2 Because they flee too the Allegory, let them know that they leave too a
weak foundation. For first no Allegory is too be admitted, unless it can be
confirmed by the express word of God. Secondly, no Allegory is too be
allowed, that fights with the ground of our faith. Thirdely, no Allegory is
too be accepted, either wherein there is any absurdity, or whereupon ensues
any absurdity. Therefore in as much as no man is able too satisfy this
commandment fully in all points. Let us repent, let us flee unto Christ,
and then let us endeuer too obey God according too this commandment as much
as may be, by the help of Christ: too whom be glory world without end. Amen.

Upon the.vij. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Mark. viij.
IN those days, when there was a very great company, and had nothing too
eat: Jesus called his Dysciples unto him, and said unto them: I have
compassion upon the people, because they have been now with me three
days, and have nothing too eat: And if I send them away fasting too their
own houses, they shall faint by the way: for diverse of them came from far.
And his Dysciples ansvvered him: Where should a man have bread here in the
wilderness, too satisfy these? And he asked them: how many loaves have
ye? They said, seven. And he commanded the people too sit down on the
ground. And he took the seven loaves: And when he had given thanks, he
brake and gave to his Disciples too set before them, And they did set them
before the people. And they had a fevve small fisshes. And when he had
blessed, he commanded them also too be set before them. And they did eat,
and were suffized. And they took up of the broken meat that was left,
seven baskettes full. And they that did eat, were above four thousand. And
he sent them away.

The exposition of the Text.
THis Gospel is set forth for this time of the year, because it is harvest
time: and that too the intent too do us too wit, that Corn and fruits of the
earth do grow by gods blessing: whereby we shall be put in mind to be thankful
toward God for this his gift. We must therefore believe without all doubt,
that God gives us the things that grow out of the ground, too sustein this
life with all, which we must use reverently, as gifts reached and given unto
us by Gods own hand, and that too Gods glory, the profit of our neighbor, and
the maintenance of our own state. Now the sum of this Gospel is, that
besides that Christ by this miracle proves himself too ^ee the true Messiah,
endued with the power of the Godhead, he shows him self also too have care
of those that follow him, according too his promise: First seek the kingdom
of God and the righteousness thereof, and all things else shall be cast unto
you. The places be three.

1 The lot of them in this life that follow Christ. 2 The affection of Christ
toward those that follow him. 3 The right manner of using Gods gift.
Of the first.
WHen there was a very great company, and had not aught too eat. In this
company as in a Table, is showed unto us what is the lotte of them that follow
Christ in this world. For we must come too the possession of the heavenly
kingdom by many tribulations. This company came intoo the wilderness,
whereas is no bread, but hunger, danger, and death. The same fortune shall
all those feel that will follow Christ. Therefore it is not for naught, that
Christ bids him that will be his Disciple, too deny him self, and take up
his cross and follow him. And Paul: All that will live godlyly in Christ, must
suffer persecution. Notwithstanding, God be thanked for it, our case (for all
that) is better than theirs that seem happy in the world. For the end and
knitting up will be joyful: and therefore Christ says: Blissed are they that
moorne, because they shall receive comfort.

But what is the cause why Christ's Disciples shall be afflicted in this
world? This is no wonder. That which went before in the head, shall follow in
the members, as long as this world stands. And that is, because that in the
wilderness, (that is, in the world,) there are among the members of Satan,
that cannot away with Christ and his members. Which thing was foretold long
time ago. The seed of the Serpent shall byte the heel of the woman's seed.
That is too say, Satan and his impes shall persecute Christ and his members.
For when Satan sees Christ's kingdom increase, and his own decay: he
fretteth and fumeth, and like a wounded Lion steps up against Christ's
sheep, too devour them. And this is it that Peter says. The Devil goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. For the Lion having lost
his whelps, and besides that, being hungrye, falls upon whatsoever things
come in his way, too wast, devour, and destroy them. The like mind has
Satan. When he sees that he loses his whelps, that is too say, that those
which erst were under his power, ar turned unto Christ: he armeth his champio^s
against the church, that some of them may assail it with hypocrisy, some with
Sophistry, some with Tyranny, and other some with stumblingblocks and Scismes:
as he has done at all times heertoofore, and ceasseth not too do at this day.
And if he can do nothing else, he endeuereth too sterue the^ for hunger in the
wilderness. But on the contrary part, Christ valiantly defends the kingdom
which he has gotten with the sheading of his own blud. He gives the holy
Ghost, he gives bread, he rayseth up godly teachers too feed it with heavenly
fo^de, and he is at hand him self too succoure it in the mids of dangers,
according as he declares by this present deed. So little shall furious Satan
and the mad enemies of the Church prevail against it. For he himself
keeps watch about his Church, and defends it stoutly. Neither is there
cause why any man should surmise, that Christ is otherwise minded toward his
Church at this day, than he was at that time toward that multitude. For
although he do not at all times defend his Church with visible miracles: yet
notwithstanding he woorketh no less miracles at this day spiritually and
inuisibly in governing his Church. For with him there is no respect of persons,
but of faith and of the goodness of the case. Is it not a great wonder that
God so defended that one blissed man Luther, that Satan and all the world
being in arms ageinste him, were not able too stir one hair of his head? Is
it not a great miracle at this day, that the bishop of Rome with the most
flourishing part of the world, is not able too root out the Church? The Pope
doutlesse endeuoreth too stop the race of the Gospel with a flood of the
blood of Martirs. But the mo he murthereth, the mo spring still out of their
blud, as it is too be seen at this day in Spain and France.

Therefore let us fence our selves against the woodnesse of Satan, and
specially against the stumblingblocke of the deformity and poorness of the
Church: and let us not fleet from Christ for any ^^ar^ugs of Satan: neither
let us leave our profession although there were no shifte but we must needs
suffer famine in this wilderness: ne let us suffer our selves too be moved by
the example of those, that for persecution and ^amine depart from Christ as did
the Jews when they were pinched with famine and persecution by their enemies
that dwelt about the^. For in this manner did they resist the Prophet Jeremy,
according as we read. Ierem. 44. As for the woord^ which thou have spoken
unto us in the name of the Lord, we will in no wise here them. But whatsoever
goes out of our own mouth, that will we do. We will (...) sacrifice and
offer oblations to the Queen of Heaven (that is too say the Sun) like as we
and our forefathers, our Kings and our heads have done in the cities of Judah,
and in the streets of Jerusalem. For then had we plenty of bread, then were
we in prosperity, and no misfortune came upon us. But since we left too
offer, and too do sacrifise too the Queen of Heaven, we have had skarcenesse
of all things, and perished with the sword and hunger. But what does that
holy Prophet Jeremy answer them? It is not so (says he) but for your
abhominacions, and for the multitude of your wicked deeds does God punish
you, and because ye would not walk after the commandments of the Lord.
After the same manner a man shall find many at this day, which for hunger,
dearth of corn, and other discommodities, will fall from Christ and his gospel.
For they say, when we had Masses, when we found Monks, when we called
upon Saints, we had abundance of al good things. But after that this new
doctrine came up* many mis(...) came up with it. There is not (say they) so much
fear of God: there is less charity among men: there are greater and more
often fallings out between men: there is more tyranny: and all things are
deerer. Thus do folk excuse them selves that they should not follow Christ.
But if thou will know the causes of these misfortunes, I will tell thee. The
servant (says Christ) that knows the will (...) with the blasphemous speech
of evil men, so as ye should fall from Christ, because ye must follow him
into the wilderness, whereas is ye cross, famine, woolues, and a thousand
deadly dangers: but rather that we lift up our minds intoo heaven, where
Christ sits at the right hand of the father in heavenly glory. For we that
are his members, shall by none other way come intoo heaven, than by the same
that he we^^ whoo is our head. He in this life endured hunger and cold, and
other distresses: let us also bear the like patiently. Which thing if we do,
we shall one day be glorified with him.

Of the second.
ANd the Lord said to his disciples. I have pity of this people; because they
have followed me now these three days; and have nothing to eat. And if I
shall send the^ away to their own houses, they vvil faint by the way. In
these words is described the affection of Christ toward the people yt followed
him. He is sorry for the hunger of their bodies, and much more it is to be
thought, yt he was sorry for the hunger of their souls. For as the soul is
much nobler than the body: so ye hunger of ye soul is much more hurtful. What
the^ does the merciful Lord? He feeds the body with bodily food, and the soul
with ghostly food. He feeds the body with earthly bread, and the soul with
heavenly bread, yt is, with gods word. Here our reason (which will seem to
have skill in gods matters) though it be but foolish, demau^deth. What? is not
Christ God? why then did he not work a miracle and feed them out of hand? or
why did he not sustein them without bread? He would not alter ye order or nature
without a great cause. And the order appointed by God, is, yt like as the body is
fed with bread: so the soul should be nourished and sustained by Gods word.
And this is it that is spoken in Moses: Man lives not only by bread, but by
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Therefore it is not his
will, yt we should look for any thing contrary to this order appointed by God:
but that we should lean unto his heavenly mercy, looking for help at his hand
in time convenient. This order established by God, madbraind heads do invent.
It is written of two Hermites, that fell among thieves, and had not aught too
eat, that when they had endured hunger a great while, and that one of the
Thieves at length taking pity upon them, gave them bread too eat: The one of
them said, I will eat none unless it be given me from heaven. But the other
took it with thanksgiving, and ate it, and anon ^^ter he that looked for
bread from heaven, dyed for hunger, whereas the other escaped that looked for
no miracle, but took the bread that the thieves gave him, as it had bin at the
hand of God. The Anabaptists also inuert this order at this day. Christ has
commanded the Gospel too be preached, that the soul may be nourished with
it as spiritual food. But the Anabaptists (despysing the word) look for new
revelations without the word. Whereby it comes too pass that they fall into
the Devils snares, who turns himself intoo an Angel of light, too the
intent he may throw them headlong intoo damnation. Therefore because Christ
would not inuert the order established by God, he delayed the miracle. But yet
at length the affection that he bears too those that be his, (which is
greater than the affection of the father toward his children,) did overcome
him. For what manner of affection Christ bears toward those that are his, not
only the Evangelist shows in this Gospel when he says, I take pity of this
people: But also the Prophet Esaias. 49. sets it out in a most goodly figure.
Can the moother (says he) forget her own child, yt she should not pity the
son of her own womb? Although she should forget, yet will not I forget
thee. Behold, I have written thee upon my hands. Also the Parable of the
prodigal child, peynteth out this affection of Chrysts toward those that be
his. What shall I say of similitudes and parables? Chrysts cross shows what
manner affection he had toward his own. For he so loved us when we were yet
his foes, that he suffered most reproachful death too redeem us. But too what
purpose are all these things? First too this purpose, that we should put on a
childly affection toward God the father and our Lord Jesus Christ. Secondly,
that by falling intoo consideration of his love toward us, we should in this
life hold nothing deerer, nothing sweeter, nothing preciouser, than too submit
our selves wholly too his will, and too obey his voice, wherein consists the
perfection of a Christen man in this life. We read that our father Abraham did
so: who after he had herd the Lord say unto him: Walk before me, and be
perfect: received a commandment too offer in sacrifice his only begotten
son Isaac, whom Sara had borne unto him in his old age. But what does he?
he obeyed Gods will without delay, and making ready a bundel of sticks, went
about too slay his son. But the Angel of the Lord withhild his hand. This
being done, God said unto Abraham: Now I know that thou fear me. We see
here in our father Abraham, how earnest he was too obey God, since he would not
spare his only son, but would have killed him at the commandment of the
Lord. But alas for sorrow, there are many too be found, that will not kill so
much as one of their affections at the commandment of their most merciful
father God: so far of are they from desire of following the example of our
father Abraham. Furthermore Christ's fatherly example toward us, must put us
in mind of like good will and love toward our brethren. I have given you an
ensample (says he) love ye one another like as I have loved you.

Of the third.
THis present miracle, wherein God with seven loves and a few small fishes
feeds four thousand men, serves too this purpose, too confirm the truth
of Chrysts Gospel, and too increase the faith of the people that were present,
whereof I will say no more at this time. But I will speak somewhat concerning the
right usage of Gods gifts, whereby we may be stirred up too thankfulness
toward God, and use Gods blissing aright.

First therefore this is too be observed: that the bread increases in the
hands of Christ, as he prays and gives thanks too the heavenly father.
Whereby we are taught that all blissing is of the Lord, according as Paul. 1.
Timoth. 4. teaches, when he says. All the creatures of God are good. Stay
here a little, and consider how the things which thou have, as bread and drink,
are Gods creature and not thy creature. Wherefore thou playest the thief, if
thou take any thing from him against his will. Which thing thou do as often as
thou use Gods creatures without thanksgiving and calling upon God. For
whatsoever thou have as thine own, is another bodies and unlawful, unless
thou desire it of him. Heervppon it is that Christ teaches his servants too
pray: Give us this day our daily bread. See here. The self same bread is
called ours, and Gods. It is ours when we get it by just travel. And it is
Gods, because it is his creature, which it is not lawful for thee too use,
except thou ask him leave before. Therefore Paul adds also: for it is
sanctified or made holy by the word of God, and by prayer. It is sanctified,
that is too say, the use of it is made pure and lawful unto us, that we may
use the creature with a good conscience. But by what means is it sanctified?
By the word and by prayer. By the word, understand thou faith, which the word
requires. For by the word taken hold on by faith, we profess our selves too
believe two things. The one is, that the Lord according too his unmeasurable
and infinite wisdom, has created all things for man's sake. The other is,
that we are of ye number of those, who through grace in Christ, have recovered
that right of lordship over al other living things which was lo^^ in Adam, that
we may maintain this life, which we ought too employ too the enlarging of
his glory. This profession of faith is accompanied with prayer, that GOD may
grant us, too enjoy the food received at his hand with a good conscience,
in all fear and reverence. Lastly, we must knit up our meals with
thanksgiving, yea and with repetition of prayers: and so are our meats hallowed
unto us. But they too whom their meats are not hallowed in this wise, do
double wrong. For first they rob God of his honor, in that they call not upon
him, nor acknowledge him too be the giver of all good things. And secondly
they use the creature of God against the will of it: Whereupon Paul says
that the creature is made subject unto vanity. From the which vanity, God
in the second of Osee promises that he will deliver the creature. Now although
these things which are already spoken, may sufficiently warn us too use Gods
creatures aright, after the example of Christ: yet notwithstanding, too the
intent our slothfulness may be the more reproved, I will recite certain
reasons that may move us.

The first: Christ himself who created all things, prayed and gave thanks as
often as he had occasion too use Gods gifts. Much more then becomes it us
so too do, who are stark beggars in the Lords sight.

The second: The young Ravens do (after their manner) call upon the Lord, and
he feeds them. Whereupon David says, that the Lord gives food to the young
Ravens that call upon him. For the Raven acknowledges not her birds for her
own, as long as they be callowe, and therefore she forsakes the^: but the
Lord (because they should not starve) feeds them with little worms til they
be spoone fethered: and then their damme comes ageine, and knowing them
brings them up.

The third: The Turks assemble twice a day, before dinner and before supper too
desire the blissing of the Lord: and we christen folks neglect it.

The fourth: The Heathen men began their meals always with sacrifice and
invocation, although they could not call upon God aright.

The fifth: The church from the beginning of the world began with blissing,
whenever it had occasion to use Gods gifts. For nothing was more rise among
the^, tha^ calling upon God. For by our prayers we bid God too our meals,
too whom be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Upon the.viij. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Math. vij.
BEvvare of false Prophets, which come unto you in Sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do
me^ gather Grapes of thorns? Or Figs of thistles? Even so every good tree,
brings forth good fruits. But a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruits. A
good tree cannot bring forth bad fruits, neither can a bad tree bring forth
good fruits. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hevven down
and cast intoo the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter intoo the kingdom
of Heaven: but he that does the vvil of my Father, which is in Heaven, he
shall enter intoo the kingdom of Heaven.

The exposition of the text.
OF this Gospel there were two causes. One was the doctrine of our Lord
Christ which he set forth in the.v.vj. and.vij. chapiters. Another was the
vanity of false teachers among the Jews, who partly corrupted the doctrine
of Moses and the Prophets and partly abolished it. The Lord therefore
commands all men, both too learn the things that are arighte, and too
beware of the corruptions of false teachers. And in this respect, the Lord who
is the Physician of men's souls, follows the manner of faithful Physicians of
the body. For like as these after they have ministered true Physic, do
teach what hurtefull things are too be avoided: So the son of God our
Savior and Physician, does first and foremost appoint a wholesome medicine for
the soul, and afterward warns what things are too be eschued. The effect of
this gospel is this: That as the false Prophets (which are too be known by
their woorks) are too be shunned: so, true godliness consists not in the
bare professing of religion, but in true repentance and ame^dment. The places
are three.

1 A charge of eschuing false Prophets. 2 A description of false Prophets. 3
The forewarning of Christ: Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall
enter intoo the kingdom of heaven: but he that does the will of my father. etc.
Of the first.
BEvvare of false Prophets. This charge of Christ is universal, and
perteyneth too all men: wherefore it is too be advisedly weyed and borne away.
And in this charge three things are too be considered: Needfulnesse, Bond, and
Use.

The needfulnesse surely is much greater than the common sort understands.
For the Devil the enemy of Christ and of mankind, does all that he can,
either too abolishe utterly the kingdom of Christ, or too deface it with
stumbling blocks. For the performance whereof he uses diverse fetches according
too his own wont. For either he laboreth too take the wholesome doctrine quite
away, as he has done in Turkey: or else he endeuereth too corrupt it with his
trash, as he did in Paradise, and at all times since: or else he mangleth and
misturneth the Sacraments, as he has done in the papacy and many other
places: Or else he poysoneth the manners and lives of men with his venim. Then
he assaileth the Scripture and the sound Doctrine, too the intent too obtain
(at least wise) one of these four things. First too persuade us that God
regards us not. Secondly, that we should attempt somewhat against our own
vocation. Thirdly, that we should bring up a worshipping of God contrary too
his commandment. Fourthly, that we should wallowe in all filth and
wickedness. Which so ever of these four things our enemy shall compass, he
holds men as prisoners. For he that denies Gods providence, is condemned for
one of Epicures sect. He that executes his vocation deceitfully, is worse
than an Infidel. He that sets up a woorshipping contrary too Gods
commandment, despises God, and is rather the Devils servant, than the
servant of God. He that lives an dishonest life, is the bondslaue of sin,
and the hyreling of Death and of Satan. But what remedy is there against
these mischeeues? Pureness of Doctrine, and absteyning from false prophets.
For the pureness of doctrine teaches us that God regards us: in such wise
that the Lord keeps reckening of all the hears of our head. The same pure
doctrine holds us in our vocation, and teaches us the true manner of
worshipping God. Besides that, it conteyneth the rule of true holiness, and of
leading a blameless life.

The second thing which I admonished folk too consider in this first place, is
Bond. Now it may be demanded, whither this Bond perteyne too all men, or but
only too the gouernoures of the Church. For many think themselves excused, if
they obey those that have the ordinary calling. Untoo whom the prophet
Ezechiell in his third Chapter (or rather the spirit of Christ speaking in
Ezechiell) answered in these words. I have made thee watch man over the
house of Israel, and thou shall here the word at my mouth, and shall give
them warning from me. If I say too the ungodly, thou shall dye the death, and
thou tell it him not, nor speak unto him, that he may turn from his wicked
way and live: The ungodly person shall dye in his own sin: and I will
require his blud at thy hand. But if thou give the wicked man warning, and he
turn not from his wickedness, and from his ungodly way: He verily shall
die in his own wickedness, but thou haste delivered thine own soul. This
saying of the Prophet shows sufficiently that they are far wide which
surmise it too be inoughe for them if they obey their paryshe Curates, whyther
they teach well or ill. If it were so, the Turks and Ethnikes should be
saved, of whom many have obeyed their teachers. It is too be known therefore
that all men are bound too flee false Prophets, as pestilent Plagues of their
Salvation. For Christ's commandment is manifest, which here is given too
all men, for he speaks too the multitude. And John in his first Epistle, and
fourth Chapter, says: Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whyther they be of. GOD, for many false Prophets are gone out intoo the
world. And Christ says: My sheep here my voice. But what does that tirant
the Pope in this case? He says that the discussing of the doctrine belongs
too him and his shauelings.

I pray you what can be spoken or imagined more shameless? Is not this as
much as too ouermayster Christ's spouse, and too vsurp Lordship over the
Lords inheritance, notwithstanding that Peter the Apostle (whose successoure
he bosteth him self too be) were forbidden too do it? John Baptist
professes him self too be a servant too the spouse: but the Pope will be
master of the spouse. Christ coueteth too have his spouse kept chaste unto him
self: but the Pope defiles her with horrible aduoutrie. He teaches the
doctrines of Deuilles, whereby she may learn too play the strumpet. Paul
says: I have betrothed you too one man, that I may bestow you a chaste
virgin upon Christ. This betrothing is made by faith, of the most pure and
most chaste word of GOD. But the Pope (who bosteth himself too be Peter's
successoure) bestayneth this virgin with a thousand adulteries, when he
leads her away from embracing of her husband Christ, too sundry Idolatries
and woorshipping of Saints.

The third thing that I set out too be considered in this first place, is the
use of this prohibition or forbidding. Bevvare of false Prophets. Which use
surely is manifold.

For first this prohibition warns us, that there shall be false teachers in
the Church. Which thing the Lord signified also by the Parable of the man that
sowed good seed in his feelde, and of the enemy that came and sowed Darnel in
the same feelde. For the woodnesse of the Devil is so great, that he never
cease woorking too corrupt Gods word, which thing he began too do
as soon as ever our first Parents were created in Paradise. And at this day
(the more is the pity) he woorketh his feats through the whole world. Seeing
that we know this, we must be the more diligent and look better about us.

Secondly, this prohibition: Bevvare of false Prophets, must stir us up too
give our minds more earnestly unto Gods word. Whereupon Paul wishes,
that the Philippians may increase in all knowledge. And Christ says: Search the
scriptures, and learn of me. If ye abide in my word, ye are my Disciples in
deed, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall deliver you.

Thirdly this prohibition proves that the Church may both put down false
teachers, and set up true teachers in their stead. For it were in vain too
bid us shun false Prophets, unless it were lawful too displace them from
the Office and charge of teaching, and too appoint true ministers in their
roumes. Praise worthy therefore are those godly Kings and Princes, that are
careful for the reformation of the Churches, and the maintenance of the
ministry of Gods word.

Fourthly also this prohibitio^ shows, how the words of those yt teach are
too be received. If they teach the truth, they are too be heard no less than
God himself. For so says the Lord: He that heereth you heereth me, and he
that despises you, despises me. If they teach amiss, they are too be
eschued no less than Satan him self. For as Satan seduced Eve with evil
doctrine: so they that teach lies, disappoynt men of the grace of God, or
rather thrust them out of the heavenly kingdom, according as every man
knows too be done in the papacy.

Of the second.
WHich come unto you in Sheep clothing, but invvardelye are ravening
Wolves. In the declaration of this place, we will look upon five things in
order. First, from whence false prophets come and whither they go. Secondly. By
what names they be called in the scripture: whereby the greatness of the
peril may be understood. Thirdly. What is the outward countenance of false
teachers. Fourthlye. What is their desire and intent. Fifthly. What marks they
have whereby they may be discerned from true Prophets.

If ye ask from whence they come, and whither they go: I answer in few
words they come from Satan, as stirred up by him: and they go intoo the
Lords vineyarde (that is intoo the Church. Hereof are many examples. Into
that little Church of Adam, Eve, and Abell, there came the false teacher
Caine: who being armed by Satan, at length slew his own brother, because he
was of an other religion than he was of. After him followed many false
Prophets until the flud, wherewith both the false teachers themselves, and
also their disciples were punished. Anon after the flood, Satan sent false
teachers ageine into the church, which so wasted the Lords vineyarde, that the
truth of God remained alonely with a few of the house of Sem. So also from
thencefoorth unto Christ, always false teachers crepte intoo the Church, and
most commonly they got intoo their hands the chief ordering of things, as well
in lay matters as matters of the Church. After Christ's resurrection, there
came more false Prophets, and at all times they were most in number. At length
the Pope (who is very Antichryste) has sent out swarms of heretics (and
cheeflye Monks) which have most miserably torn Christ's Church with false
doctrine. And at this day there be false teachers every where. In conclusion
where so ever Christ lays his good seed intoo the ground, there by and by
Satan puts too his seed of Darnel. Therefore it is not for nothing, that
Christ warns us too beware of false Prophets. We know from whence false
teachers come, and whyther they go. Now that the greatenesse of the danger
may be weyed, I will rehearse certain of their names. First they are called by
a general name, false Prophets: that is too say, such as seem too be teachers
of the truth, having ordinary succession and authority, and yet
nevertheless are liars, as who in stead of true doctrine, do foyst in
deuilishe lies and men's dreams, of which sort there were store in the
papacy. 2. Of John the Apostle they be called evil spirits, as well for
that they are sent by Satan who is evil, as also an occasion of evil, and of
damnation unto many. 3. Of Jude the Apostle, they are termed Clouds without
water, like unto Caine, Balaam and Chore. Woe be unto them (says he) for
they have followed the ways of Cain, and are utterly given too the error of
Balaam for lukers sake, and perish in the treason of Chore. Fourthlye, Paul
calls them Dogs, both because they tear Gods word, and also because they
scare Christ's sheep from his sheepefolde. Fifthlye, they be called evil
woorkemen, because they work amiss, and the end of their labor is both
the destruction of them selves, and the damnation of those that give ear unto
them. Sixthly. The Apostle John calls them Antichrystes, not because they
deny Christ, but because they pervert Christ's doctrine, and are against
Christ in their life. Seventhly. Paul calls them enemies of Christ's cross,
because they impute not the beginning, mean, and end of Salvation unto
Christ's merit alone. In this Gospel they are called woolues, but yet masking
in sheep clothing, that is too say, pretending themselves too be made men,
where as that notwithstanding, they like woolues leap priu^lie into Chrysts
fold, tearing and killing Chrysts sheep, with false doctrine and counterfeyt
holiness.

But what is the outward countenance of false teachers. They come (says
Christ) in sheep clothing. The Lord in this place speaks not generally of
all evil teachers: but only of one kind. For there be some that teach well
and live amiss: and some that teach amiss, and live amiss: and other some
that teach amiss, and seem too live well. Of this third kind of Prophets
the Lord speaks here. For by them is greatest danger.

What is their desire. That does Christ set forth in a trim image. When
he terms them Woolues. For as the desire of the Woolfe is first too scare the
sheep from the fold: then too harrie them intoo the wooddes: and thirdlye too
devour them and destroy them. Even so the false Prophets endeuer by their wile
too withdraw the sheep, (that is too say, the godly and weak persons) from the
true church, and too drive them intoo the wilderness, where is no food of
Gods word, too the intent they may get the masterie of them, and at the
length, murder not so much their bodies, as their souls. How true this it,
Turkey bears witness, which is deceived by their false Prophet Mahomet: So
doothe the papacy plunged in error by the Antichriste of Rome. So do many
nations, which are led away in horrible outrages by the Libertines and
Anabaptists.

But thou say: How can I that am a rude and ignorant person discern in this
variety of opinions, who be the true techers? and who he the false. Too the
intent we may discern and judge the shepherd from the woolfe, Christ shows
us the marks of the woolf, and he draws out the false teachers in their
proper colors. They come to you (says he) in sheeps clothing. If a man look
but upon their outward visor, he would take them for most holy men, or rather
for angels of God. But if ye pluck off their visours, ye shall find them
woolues: first for that their voice is not like Chrysts voice: yea rather, with
a strange noise they scare away Chrysts sheep from their sheepfold intoo the
wilderness, too the intent they may kill men's consciences, and destroy their
souls. And this is one mark. Besides this, he adds an other, when he
says: Ye shall know them by their fruits. Here thou must be well aduysed,
that thou take not the leaves for the fruit. An evil tree has now and then
beautiful leaves: and agein^ A good tree oftentimes has plentiful fruit, but
leaves not altoogether so fair too see too. But what are the true fruits of
Prophets? They are three: worshipping, doctrine, and manners comformable too the
doctrine. The true Prophet has his manner of worshipping, his doctrine, and
his manners according too the prescript word of God. The false prophet has a
manner of worshipping devised by men, a doctrine of men's traditions, and
manners too outward show honest, howbeeit sauouring altogether of hypocrisy.

Of the third.
NOt every one that says too me Lord, Lord, shall enter intoo the kingdom
of heaven: but he that does the vvil of my father which is in heaven, he
shall enter intoo the kingdom of heaven. This saying of the Lord conteyneth
two lessons: One concerning them that shall be damned, and an other concerning
them that shall be saved. And he speaks of them that are in the outward
fellowship of the Church: for of the others, there is no dout but they be
damned. But who are they that be damned? They are those that glory of Christ,
and do not the will of the heavenly father. Who are those? They that brag of
Faith, which they have not, that is too wit, which profess faith without
repentance and godly life. These does Christ pronounce too be da^^ed, and no
marvel at all. For such persons sin horribly. First they sin in lying,
because they lie unto God. Secondly, in doing reproach, because they abuse
Christ's blood, which was shed for us. Therefore let us not follow the
outrages of lusts and tirannie: but let us deal in such wise, as sin may be
wiped out, and we made holy unto GOD. Thirdly, they sin in theft, because
they rob GOD of his honor. Fourthly. In murder, because they kill first
themselves through false persuasion, and then their neighbor by evil example.
Fifthly, they vnhalow the temple of the holy Ghost. Who are saved? They that
do the will of the heavenly Father. But here many stumble, and ouershoote
themselves. First, those that say the heathen are saved which live honestly in
this world, whose opinion this saying confuteth: He that believes not, the
wrath of GOD abides upon him. Secondly, those that maintain their own rule
too be the will of God. Against whom Christ says: They woorship me in vain,
teaching the commaundeme^ts of men. Thirdly, those that say the law is Gods
will: which thing is true in deed: But if salvation depended upon the doing of
this will: then should no man be saved. What is the will then, the fulfillers
whereof are saved? Christ answers in John the.vj. This is the will of the
Father that they should believe in him who^ he has sent. For thus says the
Lord: He that believes on the son, has life everlasting. This faith
caryeth with it godliness and charity, his natural fruits which the godly
bring forth through Jesus Christ, too whom be glory world without end.
Amen.

Upon the.ix. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. xvj.
Jesus said too his Disciples: There was a certain rich man, which had a
Stevvarde, and the same was accused unto him, that he had waste his goods.
And he called him, and said unto him: how is it that I heat this of thee?
Give accoumpts of thy stevvardshippe, for thou may be no longer Stevvarde.
The Stevvarde said within himself: What shall I do? For my master takes
away from me the stevvardship. I cannot dig, and too beg I am ashamed. I
vvote what too do, that when I am put out of the stevvardship, they may
receive me intoo their houses. So when he had called all his masters
debtors toogither, he said unto the first, how much ovvest thou unto my
master? And he said an hundred runs of Oil. And he said unto him: take
thy bill and sit down quickly and write fifty. Then said he too
another: how much ovvest thou? And he said one hundred quarters of Wheat.
He said unto him: take thy bil and write four skore. And the Lord
commended the unjust Stevvarde because he had done vvisely. For the children
of this world are in their nation vviser than the children of light. And I
say unto you: Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when ye
shall have need, they may receive you intoo everlasting habitations.

The exposition of the Text.
CHrist in this Gospel exhorts his Disciples too do good too their
neighbors: and he does it by example of a parable: the effect of which is
this. The steward of a certain very rich man is careful what shall beecome
of himself when he is put from his office. Much more therefore must Christen
folk (which are Gods stewards in sundry gifts) be careful what shall
befall them when they have made their account, that is too wit, when they
shall be departed out of this life. But as the steward purchases him self
friends with the Mammon of unrighteousness, that may receive him when he is
removed from his office: So let Christen folk with their goods and with their
gifts, make the poor beholding too them, that they by their record may
receive them intoo everlasting habitations. This is the su^me of this present
Gospel. Howbeeit too the intent it may turn to our more plentiful
instruction, I will entreat of four points. Which are these.

1 A reproof of the abuse of Gods gifts. 2 Causes of doing good too the
poor. 3 A complaynt that the children of this woorld are wiser than the
children of light. 4 The use of riches and the desert of good deeds.
Of the third.
WHen as this text sets before us a steward that had wasted his masters
goods: in general the abuse of Gods gifts is blamed. For who is he that for
the most part abuses not the gifts that God has bestowed upon him? After
what sort this is, I will declare by a few examples. Wisdom is given too some
man too help the unskillful with his counsel, and too rule the rude with his
discretion: but now it is made an instrument of craftiness to beguile men.
Riches are given too cherish the members of the church with all: but now they
are spent about unprofitable shows and charges. The tongue is given too man
that he should use it in teaching things godly and honest, and too bear
witness too the truth: but what is done now a days? It serves too
slander, rail, forswear, backbyte, and blaspheme. Strength and power are
given for the defense of Justice, and of good matters. But now they are a
maintenance of ye tyrants, who use them too overthrow the truth and too subvert
commonweals. After the same manner, other gifts of God are greatly abused,
which abuses surely issue from these springs following, and not from else where.

First, the sin that dwells in us, brings forth such buddes: and the
less it is at commandment of the spirit, so much ye mo evils does it bring
forth. For it is a most deep sink of al evils, which can not be wholly
purged in this life.

Agein, our adversary the devil thirsting our damnation, lies in wayt for
men, and practices a thousand fetches too destroy us, too the intent that
either utterly abolishing Christ's kingdom, or pestering it up intoo a
straight room, he may stablish his own kingdom.

Besides that, the world yields most lewd examples, whereby we are allured
too do the like. For (as one says) evil custom is the food of
naughtynesse. And Paul says: A little leven sowreth a whole lump of dough.

Moreover, this evil is increased by the negligence of gouerners, which compel
not me^ by streighter awe to do their duty aright. Howbeeit, we that glory
too be called Christians, ought too be kept in our duties, by the
remembrance of these things ensuing.

First the commandment of God sticking continually in our minds ought too
put us in remembrance of our duty. Secondly, honesty it self, and the
renoume of virtue ought too spur us forward: that we abuse not shamefully
the gifts of GOD. Thirdly, the worthiness of the thing ought too be a
spur unto us. For what is more seemly for the children of God, than too
make them selves conformable too ye example of their most loving father? and
fourthly our own calling. For we be called too holiness, that we also
might be holy, and that the use of those things that God has granted unto
us might be holy. These things must we think upon earnestly.

Of the second.
FOr as much as all this whole gospel is set forth too stir us up too do
good too our neighbor, I will speak these things in order concerning well
doing. First I will recite the causes, whereby we ought too be stirred up
too do well. Then will I entreat of the fruits thereof: and lastly of the manner
of well doing, according too certain rules. God in his law seems too set
forth a great reason, when he says: Love thy neighbor as thy self: As if he
had said: This is one reason why we ought too love one an other, for that man
is next neybour unto man. Of which love there is a most goodly example set
forth in the Samaritan, which was so careful and diligente over the man
that had fallen among thieves. One man therefore ought too do well by an other,
because man is neighbor unto man, and that in two respects. First in
respect of creation: for one self same God created us all: now we see how
great kyndnesse there is in many living things which healpe and cherishe one
an other with mutual dutyfulnesse, as is too be seen in the Storkes. 2. Man
is neighbor too man in respect of likeness. For all men are made too the
likeness of God, and have all one nature of manhood. 3. Man is neighbor too
man by reason of conversation of life and humane fellowship. And these three
respects of neyghbourhod are common too us, not only with all Chrystians, but
also with all men in the world, as both Heathen and Jews. Howbeeit a
Christian is neighbor too a Chrystian, first in respect of the mystical body.
For all we that believe in Christ, have put on Christ, and we are his
members, and he is our head, and we live al by one self same spirit of
Christ. Surely this respect of neybourhod ought of duty too stir us up too
do good one too another: If we thought earnestly upon this society and
mystical conjunction of us al in one body, then undoubtedly like as the hand
plays ye servant too all the rest of our members, and in likewise every
member unto other: so we also by reason of this mystical conjunction in our
body, should seek too do good one to an other. 2. A christian is neyghbor too
a christian, in respect of regeneration or new birth, whereby we are born a new
ye children of God the father. Therefore seeing that brothers of one womb do
serve one an others turn in this life: much more becomes it us so too do,
who call upon God the father of us all saying, Our father which art in heaven.
3. A christian is neybor too a christian in respect of our calling, For we
be called too the unity of spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4. 4. A
Chrystian is neighbor too a Chrystian in respect of the glory too come. For
all of us by faith do look for one self same glory of immortality, where
we shall be fellows toogither everlastingly, praising God with one mind.

Thus much concerning the causes of mutual well doing among men. But what are
the end thereof? There be four chief. First Gods glory. This ends should
of duty put the children of God in mind too do good. 2. The relief of our
needy neighbor whoo is our own flesh. 3. Example: whereby others may he
edified and provoked too like well doing. 4. The reward. For Christ says: He
that gives a draught of water too one of my disciples in my name, shall not
lose his reward.

Howbeeit forasmuch as a question may be asked concerning the manner of well
doing. I will add somewhat also concerning the same. Salomo^ in the fifth of
the proverbs says: Drink the water of thine own well, and of the ryuers that
run out of thine own spryng. Let thy wells flow out abroad, that there may
be ryuers of waters in the streets, but let them be only thine own, and not
strangers with thee. Here he knitteth three things toogither. First^ that a
man should enjoy his own goods: secondely that he should bestow part upon
others: and thirdly that he should be master of his own goods: and not lashe
out all in one day. Too be short, Gods word, faith and charity are the
certeynest rules that can be. But of this matter more shall be spoken, when
we come too entreat of the use of riches.

Of the third
THe children of this world are vvyser in their kind, than the children of
light. This is a most grievous complaint, that the children of this world are
wyser in their kind, than the children of light. That is too wit, worldely
men are more careful in getting temporal goods, which perteyn only too this
present life, and that continuyng but a very short time) than Christians are
careful for the gettyng of heavenly goods, which shall endure for ever.
Surely this blindness is lamentable. The body is regarded, and the soul is
neglected. Who sees not how true this saying of Chrysts is? Show me a
husbandman that is not more careful in gathering goods, and fynding his
householde, than some Christian is too get the treasures of heaven. The
merchant man sayleth the sea, is in hazard of many dangers, oftentimes
suffers great loss, and endures cold and heat, and that not for one hour,
one day, or one year, but all his life long: only too scrape toogither earthly
possessions. But the Christen man can scarce find in his heart too tarry out
one hour too here Gods word, or too be present at the distribution of the
Sacraments. They spend many hours in toys and tales: but they can not find
one hours leisure, no nor scarce a minute of an hour too call upon God, and
too talk with Jesus Christ in prayer. But what are the causes of this
blindness? They are chiefly two. The one (which is also a cause of other
inconveniences) is the corruption of man's nature, which makes a man more
forewarde too evil than too good. The other cause of this blyndenesse, is, for
that earthly goods are sensible, and therefore do move the mind more
strongly: for a good thing moves not, unless it be known. Whervppon
Austin: we may love things unseen, but things unknown we can not love.
Now sensible things are more known than spiritual things, because sensible
things are known by experience, where as spiritual things are known only
by Faith. What is too be done then? We must endeuer too abound in knowledge
of heavenly things, too the intent we may also abound in the feeling of
them. And therefore Paul wishes too the Phillippians, that they may abound
in all knowledge and understanding, too this end, that they may be pure and
without offense unto the day of Christ.

Of the fourth.
MAke y^e friends of the wicked Mammon, that when ye shall have need, they
may receive you intoo everlasting habitations. It is called the wicked Mammon
or the Mammon of vnryghtuousnesse, either for that riches are prouocations
unto evil, or because riches are false and deceytful. For they cannot be
called the Mammon of iniquity, because they are wrongfully gotten. For alms
done of goods wrongfully gotten, pleases not God. Moreover there be two
things too be discussed of us in this place. One is the doctrine concerning
riches, and an other is what is mente by that he says: When ye shall have
need, they shall receive you intoo everlasting babitations.

Albeeit that I said some what concerning riches an eight weeks ago, when I
expounded the Gospel of the Glutton and of Lazarus yet notwithstanding I will
now breefly repete the whole doctrine concerning riches. For there is no cause
too the contrary, but that a man may sing a good song more than once. And I
will say three things concerning riches.

The first is what manner of means of getting riches are lawful. The second
is, in what sort God would have us minded toward riches. The third is, which
is the right and lawful use of riches.
Therefore as touching the lawful means of getting riches, we must begin first
of all with Christ's rule. Math. 7. Seek first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness. The first and cheef regard therefore is too be had of the
soul, that that may be rich in God. The^ because this life has need of
helps, goods may be ^ought according to Gods ordinance, and it is lawful too
employ a man's travel in getting those things yt are necessary for our living
and furniture. And this is warranted not only by the examples of the saints,
but also by the commau^deme^t of God. For God promises his blessing too them
that labor after a godly manner. Thirdly, the gain that comes too us that
travel by the blissing of God, is too be taken, as it were at Gods hand.
Neither may we use evil practices, whereby too draw other men's goods unto
us. Also it is lawful too take the fruit of a man's labor as a just reward. In
bargayning, let craft and falshod be away. Let us do al things openly and
simply, with the same faythfulnesse that we would require at other men's
hands. Let our labor be lawful in lawful vocation, so as we may with a
good conscience, boast, that we have done nothing against any man deceytfully.

Hithertoo we have spoken of the ryghtfull way of getting riches. Now will I
show in few words in what sort we ought too be minded toward riches, when
we have gotten them. For we must use a singular cunning that our riches (when
we have gotten them) become not thorns and snares too us. Which thing too
avoid, let us follow the counsel of David and Paul, of which the one in
the.62. Psalm says: If riches flow unto thee, set not thy heart upon them.
And the other.1. Tim. 6. says: Warn the rich men in the world, that they
be not proud, nor trust not in the vncerteyntie of riches, but in the living
God. The cheifest point therefore is, that we be not led away with
covetousness of the riches of this world, and that we set not our mind or
trust upon them. Let us be ready too put them from us as often and whenever
it shall please GOD. Whither we have them or want them, let us account them as
transitory and frail things, and prefer Gods blissyng alone before all
things in the world. Away with trust in uncertain riches: away with pride and
disdeyne of the poor. Let come trust in the giver of the riches: let come a
godly and lowly mind.

And so have we how we ought too be minded toward riches. Now will I put
too a little concerning the right use of riches. When I handeled the Gospel of
the Glutton* I said there were four lawful uses of riches. Of which the
first is, that they should serve too the glory of God, the furtherance of
religion, and the mayntenance of the ministry of Gods word. For if we be
borne too glorify God, surely all that ever we have, must serve too that
purpose. The second is, that we should with our goods succ^ur and garnish
those commonweals in which we live. In which consideration tributes are too
be paid with a cheerful mind. The third use is, that we should maynteyn
our selves honestly according too our degree, and sustain our household: that
our house may be kept honestly after ye rate of our ability, without filthy
nigardship, and foolish lavishness. The fourth and last use is, that our
springs (according too Salomons counsel) should flow forth abroad: that is too
wit, that we should be liberal too the poor, and rich in good woorks, too
the intent that many may enjoy our goods, giving thanks with us too God the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who ministers all things abundantly.
Against these four kinds of using riches aryghte, many do offend, as we
have herd in the Gospel of the rich glutton and poor Lazarus.

I have spoken of riches: Now remains too be expounded what is meant by this
saying: That when you have need, they may receive you intoo everlasting
habitations. Doothe not Christ only receive the believers intoo the^ heavenly
habitations? How then is it said here, that the poor (because we have made
them our friends with the unrighteous Ma^mon, shall receive us intoo
everlasting Tabernacles? First it is manifest, that Christ in this place
directs his words too the believers. For in the beginning of the text it is
written: and Jesus said unto his disciples, that is too say, too those that
are justified, and have eternal life in Christ. Ageine this is manifest, that
eternal life is Gods gift by Jesus Christ. It follows then, that there is an
other manner, whereby the poor receive them that have bin liberal to them,
intoo everlasting life, than that whereby Christ receives them. How then shall
they receive us intoo everlasting tabernacles? As witnesses and auouchers of
our faith. For by the fruits they judge of our faith, whereby alonely they
know men too be saved. The same meenyng (though in other words) is often
set forth in the scripture. God shall reward every man according too his
works, not for that woorks deserve heaven: but because they are evidences of
faith, and the fear of God: like as contrarywyse, evil woorks proceed of
unbelief. Therefore let us be myndefull of this saying, and stir up our
selves with it, too do well too our neybour, following the example of Christ our
savior, too whom be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Upon the.x. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. xix.
ANd when he was come near too Jerusalem, he beheld the City, and vvepte
on it, saying. If thou hadste known those things which belong unto thy
peace, even in this thy day thou would take heed. But now are they hid
from thine eyes: For the days shall come unto thee, that thine enemies shall
cast a bank about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every
side, and make thee even with the ground, and the children which are in thee:
And they shall not leave in thee one stone upon an other, because thou
know not the time of thy visitation. And he went intoo the Temple and
began too cast out them that sold therein, and them that bought, saying unto
them: It is written: My house is the house of prayer, but ye have made it a
den of thieves. And he taught daily in the temple. But the high preests and
the Scribes and the chief of the people went about too destroy him, but
could not find what too do. For all the people stacke by him, and gave him
audience.

The exposition of the Text.
THis Gospel consists of two parts, whereof the one teaches what Christ
did without the City Jerusalem: and the other techeth what he did in the
temple after he was come intoo the City. While he was without the city, he
beewayled the misery that was too come upon the City, and therwithall
prophesied of the destruction of the whole city and the people. In which
thing he both showed his affection toward all mankind, and also declared
plainly, how great Gods wrath is toward sinners that repent not. Then entering
intoo the temple, he fyndeth fault with the abuse of the Temple: he drives
the buyers and sellers out of the temple: he testifies that the temple is a
house of prayer, that it is too say, a house dedicated to God and his service:
and that it is not meet too defyle this house with worldly busynesses. Now
there are (as I said) two parts of this Gospel, one of Christ's weeping,,
and of his prophecy concerning the sacking of the city, and the destruction
of the whole nation. And an other of Christ's deed in the Temple. But these
two parts conteyne in them many points and lessons, and therefore I will
speak of them severally one by one.

Of the first part.
Of this first part there be two places, which are.

1 Christ's Prophecy against the City Jerusalem, with the circumstances
thereof. 2 The use of this part in our church.
Of the first.
IN the first place do meet many circumstances, which are first Christ's
affection toward mankind. 2. The prophecy it self. 3. The time of the
visitation. 4. Whereby they might have known the time of their visitation. 5.
Why they knew not the time of their visitation. 6. Their punishment for
neglecting their visitation. 7. The delay of their visitation.

The first. Christ beholding the City, wept upon it. This weeping of Christ's
is a notable witness of Gods mercy toward mankind. For our Lord beewaileth
their destruction, no less than a most pitiful father bewaileth the
destruction of his own children, whom he loves as himself: which destruction
has surely none other cause, than their unthankfulness toward the gospel.
For how could it otherwise be but that the son of God, (who was borne very
man too this intent, that he should by the offering up of himself in sacrifyce,
set mankind free from everlasting damnation,) should be grieved at so great
unthankfulness of men, whom he has created to salvation from the beginning,
and afterward called too repentance by sending his Prophets and Apostles unto
them?

The second. For the days shall come unto thee, that thine enimyes shall cast a
bank about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and
make thee even with the ground, and thy children which are in thee. Here
Christ prophesyeth of the misery that should come upon Jerusalem: which
misery happened unto them in very deed, the fortith year after. I will
divide the story of this misery intoo three parts: whereof the first is an
assignement of those things that happened before the destruction of the city
Jerusalem: The second is a reckening up of the euyls which the Citizens
suffered in the seege: And the third is a noting of ye misery that followed the
sacking of the City.

What happened before the spoil of the City? Surely many things, whereby God
would have called his people too repentance: as Prophesies, signs, woonders,
and foretokens. Prophesies, as this Prophecy of Chrysts, whereof we have herd,
and whereof mention is made in these words. Zach. 1. And it will come too pass
in that day, that I shall make Jerusalem an heavy stone for all people. All that
lift it up shall be torn and rent, and all kingdoms of the earth shall be
gathered toogither against it.

Also there went woonders before. A whole year toogither there appeered a
Blasing star over the City Jerusalem, in the likeness of a fiery swoorde.
And warlike Chariots and horses were seen encountering toogither in the air.

Signs: The door of the temple opened of it self in the night: and a voice
was herd in the Temple, saying: Let us remove from hence, let us remove from
hence.

Foretokens: A man of the common sort, named Jesus, cried in the streets: A
voice from the West, a voice from the East. And the more he was chastised by
the officer, the more he cried out. By these Prophesies, woonders, signs, and
foretokens, did the Lord allure the Jewish people to repentance, but al was to
no purpose, and therefore ensued most grievous punishment.

Let us then speak of the punishment. The first day of sweet bread began
the seege, and continued unto the eight day of September. By and by after
arose inward sedition in the City, wherethrough friends and kinsfolk slew
one an other without mercy. By reason of the stinche of the carcasses of them
that were dead, there grew a most sore plage, in so much as it was not possible
too bury the dead. Heerevntoo came hunger, which was so great, that the
mothers did eat their own children: besides a number of other most shameful
matters, which I let pass. In the civil sedition (wherein were slain two
thousand men) the Temple was set on fire, and utterly consumed. Afterward, the
foreparte of the City was taken of the enemy: and within a while an other
part: and at length all the whole City came intoo the hand of the enemies.

After the siege, the vanquished people was had in so great contempt, that
seven thousand of the nobility and chief personages, were appointed too the
common works lyk^ slaves: and many were reserved too open shows. The number
of them that were slain (besides those that perished of hunger in the City)
was fourscore and seventeen thousand. As many as were under.^xvj. years old
were sold by the soldiers. The honest women and maidens were ravished by the
men of war. Afterward again under Domitian, there arose a new persecution.
For Domitian made a search for all that were of any kindred or alliance too David
or Christ. Thus much concerning the bodily punishment that ensued the
contempt of the son of God, wherewithal was joined a spiritual punishment in
conscience, and at the end followed eternal torment in hell.

The third: If thou had known, yea if thou had even in this day. etc.
The time of visitatio^ is that wherein God visits, sometime too punish
sinners, and other whiles too do good too the godly, and that many ways.
Howbeeit the chief time of the visitation of Gods mercy, was the time of
Christ's preaching, when he allured both them and all the world too
repentance, offering grace and everlasting life too those that repented. Of
this time speaks the Lord.

The fourth. Whereby might the Jews have known the time of their visitation?
They had many evident proofs and tokens of it. First Christ's miracles did
openly show his power. If ye believe not me (says he) believe my works,
for they bear witness of me. Secondly, Daniel foretold this time of
visitation, in Babylon. Thirdly: the kingdom of Judah was removed according too
the Prophecy of Jacob, Genesis.48. The scepter shall not be taken from Judah,
until Zilo shall come, that is too say, the seed of the woman, which is Christ
the Lord. Fourthly, least they should be offended at Christ's poverty, they
were warned of it before by the Prophet Zachary, whoo in his nynthe Chapter
says: Behold thy King shall come poor. Fifthly, John's record concerning
Christ. Sixthly: the voice of GOD the father over Christ in his baptim, and in
the Mount: These and many other things might have certified the Jews of
Christ's presence, and of the time of their visitation.

The fifth: But therefore knew they not the time of their visitation, seeing
they were put in mind of it by so many signs? There were two veyles: the one
fleshly, the other spiritual. The fleshly veyle was, for that being masked in
the pleasures, allurements and cares of the world, they could not consider
those things that perteyned too their soul health, but they thought as is
written in the second Chapter of the book of Wisdom. Short and full of
weariness is the time of our life, and there is no ease in the end of man,
neither is there any man known too have returned from the dead. Come on
therefore, let us enjoy the pleasures that be present, let us leave tokens of
our mirth every where, for that is our portion. After this manner was the rich
glutton masked, who^ some write too have bin a citizen of Jerusalem. So was he
also that said, when he saw his barnes full of corn: Now my soul take thy
pleasure. But what happened too him? In the mids of his pleasures, he was
called away too punishment. And their spiritual veyle was that whereof
Christ speaks here: and whereof Paul speaks in the first too the
Romans. He gave them over intoo a reprobate or froward mind. And.2. These. 2.
He gave them strong delusio^, that they should believe lies, which would not obey
the truth. And this is the rightful judgment of God.

The sixth: The punishment for neglecting their visitation, which is double:
Bodily and temporal, Ghostly and eternal. Untoo the temporal and bodily
punishments: perteyneth this horrible wasting of the City: and also all the
miseries and mischeeues of mankind, which miseries and mischeeues ought of
duty too put us in mind of repentance.

The seventh: The cause of the delay of the punishment. This does Paul
expound. Roma. 2. when he says: that the riches of Gods goodness and long
sufferance do provoke us too repentance. For God is slow unto anger, that is
too say, unto vengeance, and that is to the intent that we at length
acknowledging our sins, should mourn for them, and flee unto Christ by true
faith.

Of the second.
FOrasmuch as Paul says: That all that is written, is written for our
lerning: Let us see what is the use of this Doctrine.

First therefore let us that believe in Christ, and are the holy Jerusalem of
God, here the voice of Christ bewayling our sins: and let us learn how he is
affectioned toward us. Also let us know the time of our visitation, whom God
has visited woonderfully in this realm: First with his word, which surely
is preached purely in all the Churches of Denmark. Howbeeit, because we have
slenderly obeyed his gospel, he has visited us with war, with famine, with
pestilence, and every man after a sundry fashion. And if we repent not, (yea
and that betimes,) he will visit us ageine with war, pestilence, and famine,
and at length will utterly destroy us. Let us repent therefore: let us promis
amendment: let us embrace Christ's gospel: and (too be short,) let us frame
our lives after a godly and holy manner, that we may skape in the day of wrath.

Of the second.
ANd he entered intoo the temple. etc. In this second part of the Gospel,
there are four circumstances chiefly too be observed.

The first is the wickedness of the high Priests. The Temple of Solomon was
ordained, not too keep marts and markets in, but for these purposes: First
that Gods word, should be taught in it, and that the people should come
toogither in it, and pray according too that which Solomon himself says in
the Dedication of the Temple. Whatsoever thy people shall pray in this place
(that is, in this Temple) thou shall here them in thy dwelling place in
heaven, and when thou have herd them, thou shall be favorable unto the^.
Besides this, it was established by law, that the Sacrifices should be slain
hard by the Temple, according too the law. The Pharisees and high Priests
did all things contrary heereuntoo. For they despised Gods word, they
practiced heathenish chopping and changing, yea rather (as Christ says) of
Gods temple they made a den of thieves. Thieves murder many too the intent
too get their goods too themselves. And the high priests (through their false
doctrine and misinterpreting of the scriptures) murdered many thousands of
men, while they traitorously bereft their souls of everlasting bliss. Hereby
it sufficiently appeered, how wicked these high priests were against God:
for they not only despised Gods word themselves: but also gave other men
occasion too despise it, and wilfully too withstand it too their utter
destruction.

The second is, the driving of the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. Christ
drives out the buyers and sellers, and that with outward violence. By which
deed first he testifies him self too disallowe the ungodliness of the
Pharisees. And secondely he declares himself too be the true King and high
priest of this people. Their king verily, in that he sets his hand too the
taking away of ungodliness, like as Ezechias did when he took away the brazen
Serpent, because the people did Idolatry unto it: and their high priest, in
that he defends the true Doctrine, and rebukes the baggage of the Pharisees.

Moreover, this driving out, was a certain fatherly warning, yt the temple
should be destroyed, unless they amended. By this deed he gives them to
understand, of the punishment which all the ungodly should run intoo, that
had misused Gods temple: namely that Christ should one day cast them quite out
of the Temple. Furthermore let both parties, (I say both Magistrates, and
governors of Churches) learn hereby: The one too take away the instruments
of wickedness, by force of hand and outward violence: And the other: too cut
of all Supersticion (as much as may be) with the swoorde of the spirit, that
is too say, with Gods word. So did blissed Theodosius, who took all Images
and Idols out of the Churches. So did that most godly Prince John Fridericke
Duke of Saxony. These men's example followed that Prince of most holy
memory, Christian King of Denmark, the third of that name, whose benefit the
schools and Churches in this Realm enjoy still at this day.

The third is concerning Gods Temple, which is of two sorts: made with hand
or visible, and spiritual, or not made with hand. And either of them is the
house of Prayer. My house (says Christ) is the house of prayer. The use of
the Temple that is made with hands, consists cheeflye in these points:
First that it be a public place, wherein the word of God may be taught
and herd. Secondly, that the Sacraments be ministered there. Thirdly, that the
godly resort thither too pray for the common need. And lastly, that it be a
place, wherein is made open and common confession of Religion. But what is done
in the Papacy? Instead of Gods word, are thrust in men's traditions: Instead
of the distribution of Gods mysteries, there are set forth most horrible
dishonorings of God: They set heaven too sale: they blase the Mass for the
quick and the dead: they rob the Church of the Sacraments: they defile
the Sacraments with their blasphemous additions: and of the place of open
profession of the Gospel, they make a consistory of Hipocrytes, which
conspyre against the Gospel of Christ. Thus much concerning the Temple that
is made with hand. The Temple that is not made with hand or the spiritual
Temple, is both the whole catholic Church, and every severally member thereof.

For thus says Paul writing too the Corinthians: Know ye not that the
Temple of God is holy which is you? Yea, the builder of this Temple Christ
says. If any man harken too my word, we will come unto him, and dvvell
with him. And therefore all the whole church and the several members thereof are
called Gods temple, and are his Temple in deed. The foundation of this Temple
is the son of God. For other foundation can no man lay, than that which is
laid already, which is Jesus Christ. This temple is raered by the son of God,
and builded by the Prophets, Apostles, the Ministers of the word, the godly
Magistrates, and holy householders, according too the grace which the Lord
gives too every of them in their Temple. This Temple is purged and kept clean
by the blud of Christ. The doorekeeper of this Temple is the holy Ghost, when
men knock at the door of it with prayer and faith. And this Temple is not
idle. For in it is continual praising of God, continual prayer, holy
oblations, and (too comprehend all in one word) service of God without
weerynesse: for unto this holy use is this holy Temple of God dedicated. But
as for such men as follow their own lusts, their Tyranny, their usury, and
deceyt: They not only vnhalowe this Temple of God, casting out the doorekeeper
the holy Ghost, and driving away the woorkmaister Christ* but also they become
the Temples of Satan, wherein the blud of Christ is dishonored, Gods word put
too ^eproche: and in stead of praying too God, succeeds worshipping of
Saints, cursings, blasphemies, slanders, and (too conclude at a word) all
the Church ringeth of the praises of Satan.

But what moves us too covet too be the Temple of God? First, the dignity.
For what greater glory is there, than too be the Temple of the holy Trinity?
Secondly, the profit: For by this means we pass from the chapel of Satan
(where nothing reigns but death and damnation) too the house of God and
everlasting bliss. Thirdly: the end for which man was created. For we are
created too be the temples of God. On the contrary part, it is to be
considered, how unworthy a thing it is, and how great a treason too God, too
defile this Temple with any wickedness. And therefore we must enforce our
selves with all our power, too do true service of God in this his Temple, and
too offer too him the Sacrifice of our lips, that is too wit, thanksgiving, and
the frankincense of our heart, that is too wit, faith and innocence.

The fourth is: The world judges far otherwise of them that are the Temples
of God, than Gods word does. The world supposes that the honorable, the
myghtie, the wise, and the rich are received intoo this Temple: But the word
of God teaches the contrary, and examples show it. And although no man be cast
of for the nobility of his birth, for his power, for his wisdom, or for his
riches: yet it falls out for the most part, that such men being entangled in
the affairs of the world, have the less mind of this spiritual Temple.
Examples heerof are Caine and Abel: Esau, and Jacob. Thus does God always
choose the weak things of this woorld, that he might put the strong things too
shame. But this will not move. For Christ says: Fear not thou little flock,
for it has pleased my father too give you a kingdom. Too whom through Christ
with the holy Ghost, be honor without end. Amen.

Upon the.xj. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. xviij.
Christ told this parable unto certain which trusted in them selves that
they were perfect, and despised other. Two men went up intoo the Temple too
pray, the one a Pharisey, and the other a Publicane. The Pharisie stood and
prayed thus with him self. God, I thank thee that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or as this Publicane. I fast tvvyse in the
week: I give Tithe of all that I possess. And the Publicane standing a far
of, vvoulde not lift up his eyes too heaven, but smote his breast, saying: God
be merciful too me a sinner. I tell you this man departed home too his house
justified more than the other. For every manne that exalts himself shall be
brought low: and he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

The exposition of the text.
THe occasion of this Gospel was, that after Christ had taught concerning the
force of Prayer, and the form of praying, he minded also too set forth
evident examples, wherein he might paint out the nature both of effectual
Prayer, and hypocritish boasting. For in as much as no man can pray aright,
except he first be rightuous by faith in Christ: it comes too pass that
many imagine themselves too be rightuous, and therefore think themselves too
pray aright. Wherefore it was needful too make a difference betwixt them that
are rightuous in deed, and those that counterfeit a righteousness. For they
that will ^eeme rightuous and are not, do in no wise pray. But such as
acknowledge their sins, and repent them earnestly, they only being made
rightuous by faith, can pray effectually and aright For this cause therefore
the Lord sets here two images before us. Whereof the one is of hipocritish
Prayer, and the other is of true and godly Prayer. The Pharisie (who thought
himself godly and rightuous, and was not so) makes us a Prayer too know an
Hypocrite by. Contrariwise, the silie Publicane casting himself flat before
God, and acknowledging his own uncleanness, and yet nevertheless fleeing unto
mercy: does by his example set forth a form of true and healthful prayer.
The places are three.

1 Of the righteousness of the Law, and of the fondness of the Pharisie. 2 Of
Christen righteousness, and of true repentance. 3 Christ's judgment
concerning the Pharisie and the Publicane.
Of the first.
HE said too certain which had an opinion of themselves that they were
ryghtuous. Here I must needs speak of the righteousness of the Law, what
is it: and what is the use, end, and prerogative of it. For thereby we shall
understand, how far the Pharisees are wide from the true righteousness.

What is the righteousness of the Law? It is a perfect obedience of all our
members inward and outward, unto Gods law: of the heart, the affections,
the will, the mouth, and* breeflye of all the powers and abilities as well of
the body as the mind: which obedience it behooves too be, not at startes,
but continual: not vain, but perfect and full: not stained, but pure and
chaste: such as might have bin performed by Adam before his fall, and such
as is performed by the holy Angels in Heaven. That the righteousness of the
Law ought too be such a one, both Moses and Christ do teach in these
words: Thou shall love the Lord thy GOD with all thy heart, with all thy
soul. with all thy strength, and with all thy power: and thy neighbor as
thy self. Moreover forasmuch as he is pure, holy and chaste, nothing can
please him but that which is pure, holy, and chaste. And they that fulfill
this righteousness, they only have the promise of the Law. For thus says
Moses: The man that does these things shall live in the^. No man (Christ
only excepted) did ever perform this perfect and continual obedience,
such as the Law requires. Wherefore all they* that think them selves
ryghtuous with this righteousness of the law, are not only blind and
arrogant, but also blasphemous against the law of GOD, which they measure by
their own slender skill; and not by the voice of GOD. That none is able too
fulfill the law of GOD, I have declared a late, and will now breefly bring the
same too our remembrance ageine. First our members both inward and outward
(wherewith we should execute obedience to the Law) are mangled, and corrupted
with a certain horrible outrage, so as they are able too do nothing aryght.
Agein, the Law of sin as a most stout Giant grypeth our limbs, even after
that we be borne a new, that we cannot perform what we would. Heereuppon
S. Paul cries out: O unhappy man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body subject too Death? And in another place. Too will, is present with me,
but too perform I find not in my self. Also, I do not the good that I would
do, but the evil which I would not do, that do I. Thus the regenerate have
a forewarde will, but they are destitute of ableness too perform that which
they would: so importunate is our household enemy, withdrawing us from that
which is good. What shall we say then of them whose will is not yet
reformed, such as all they be that are not regenerate? Too the furtherance
hereof also makes it, that the Law of God is spiritual: but we are carnal.
For thus has Paul (being at that time a faithful Chrystian) said: The Law
is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin. Hereby it is easy too
see, that we are not able to perform due obedience too the law. For how is it
possible that flesh should perform spiritual righteousness? I alleged many
and sundry other reasons not long ago, whereby I showed that no man in this
life is able too yield perfect and full obedience too the Law.

What is too be done then? Here thou shall first hear the voice of the
Law. What says he? Curssed is he that continues not in all the things
that are written in the book of the Law: Here thou hear the sentence of
the Law. Let this saying of the law humble thee before God, and utterly cast
thee down, that thou may acknowledge both the filthiness of thy sin, and
thy just damnation. What is too be done here? Are we able too eschew the
curse of the law? Thou art not able of thine own power. Wherefore thou must
either perish, or else seek a remedy against this damnation of the law: but
other remedy surely there is none, than only Jesus Christ: who purposely came
into the world too take upon himself the curse of the law, and too deliver
all that believe on him, from the power of the law, that is, from damnation
which the law threatens too those yt transgress it. Therefore this curse
extends it self too all men that here not Christ, nor are clothed with his
rightuousnesses, that they may appear apparelled therewith in the sight of
God. For Christ is the end of the law, too justify all that believe. Romans 10.
These things have I spoken concerning the righteousness of the law, too this
intent, that I might show how fond these Pharisees were, which thought
themselves rightuous, and hilde scorn of others, as unholy and unrighteous.
But what is the cause that this Pharisie and the rest of his rabble thought
themselves rightuous? The cause was blindness. For he was so blind, that he
saw not the meening of the law: yea rather, he saw only the covering of the
law, and never looked into the breast of the law, according as the text of
this gospel sufficiently declares. For he says: I thank thee that I am not
as other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or as this Publicane. He had
seen the letter of the law then, but not the spirit: that is, he stacke only
in the outward woorks, but he considered not the spiritual meening which the
law requires.

How be it too the intent these things may be set the playner before our eyes,
let us see first what manner of works this Pharisees were. Secondly. Let us
lay them too the law of God. Thirdly, let us gather thereby, what wanted in him.
And fourthly, let us see of how many sins he was found guilty, and cast by
the law, though he vaunted himself rightuous before men.

The works of this Pharisie were faithless, proceeding of mere misbeleefe
and pride. Now in as much as the scripture says plainly: without faith it is
impossible too please God: who is so mad as too call this outward visor,
righteousness?

Let us lay his works that he bosteth of, too the word of God. The law
requires pure obedience: This man out of his most unclean heart, draws
slanders against God and his neighbor. The law commands him too love his
neighbor: He accuses him, yea and that before the judgment seat of God.
What should I make many words? He has done nothing according too the
appointment of the law: Is it not a great matter too be no extortioner? too
be no unjust man? too be no aduoutrer? too fast, and too give alms?
Surely these things are not too be disalowed. But this Pharasie did wretchedly
defile the good deeds he had done, with self love and pride.

What wanted he then? The well spring of good works, faith in Christ, which
woorketh by charity: Whereas this is not, be the work never so sightly and
fair, yet can it not be acceptable unto God: yea rather, it is an
abomination before GOD, specially when there goes an opinion of
ryghtuousnesse with it, like as we see in this Pharisie.

We have seen from whence the works of this Pharisie proceeded, and how
far they are void from the righteousness of the law, and what he wanted:
Now let us see how grievously he sinned, and how unrighteous he was. First he
durst preace unto God, and boldly speak unto him, being without fear of
God, without faith, without repentance, without the mediator Christ: by whom
only the enteraunce too the father is set open. Is this so great a wickedness?
Yea: In this act he breaks all the commandments of the first table, and
as it were trampleth it under his feet. Ageine* he being but dust and ashes
durst boast before GOD: when notwithstanding, it is written: The giltlesse is
not giltlesse before thee. How great a pride was this I beseech ye? Though
he despise both God and men, doothe he not feyne himself nevertheless too
be ryghtuous? Thirdlye he abused the Temple of GOD, which was ordained too
pray for forgiveness of sins both public and private. But what makes he
of the Temple? A Court bar too accuse others at. Fourthly he lays violent
hands upon all the whole second Table, and breaks it contrary too the
nature of Charity, which is wont either too salve the sins of our
neighbor, or else too conceal them. What does he? I am not (says he) as
other men, extortioners, unjust, aduouterers. Yea all this seemed but a little
too him.

Wherefore being in the upper end of the Temple, he looked behind him, and
saw the silie Publicane praying, and he had no sooner espied him, but he
accuses him by and by at the judgment seat of GOD. Neither am I (says he)
as this Publicane. If he had bin a godly man in deed, he would have bin glad
for the Publicane, as the Angels of GOD were, which rejoice in Heaven upon
a sinner that repents. But when as he accuses the repentaunte, he shows
sufficiently of what spirit he spoke. He ought too have remembered the
saying of Jesus the son of Sirach: Despise not a man that turns from his
sin. For we are all of us in corruption, that is too say, subject too
sundry miseries. Let him that stands, see yt he fall not, says the Apostle
Paul. As touching the fasting and Tything of this Hipocrite, I say no more but
this.

Fasting whereby the stoutness of the flesh is subdued: is a thing not
evil. But if thou fast too merit any thing at Gods hand, then thy fasting
becomes an abomination. For God will not be woorshipped with men's
traditions: but according too the rule of his own law. Concerning Tything, I
say this: That God so ordained it in his common weal, that the Priests of the
Tribe of Levy should have whereon too live. And Christ says: The labourer is
worthy of his hire: and thou shall not moozel the Ox that treads out the
Corn.

Of the second.
LIke as in the Pharisey we have seen what manner of ryghtuousnesse the
Pharisaicall ryghtuousnesse is: and have showed the fondness of it, by
comparing it with the ryghtuousnesse of the Law: So now follows the second
doctrine, concerning Christen ryghtuousnesse, which is represe^ted unto us in
this Publicane, as it were in some lively image. Howbeeit because the scripture
teaches of virtues by two ways, that is too wit, by rule and by example: I
will first see what the scripture says of Christen righteousness. And
afterward I will show the same in the example of the Publicane, that in so
doing the rule may be confirmed by example.

Now as concerning the rule of Christen righteousness, these are clear
sayings. Paul in the third too the Romans says: All have sinned, and are
destitute of the glory of God: and they are justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth too be
the mercy seat through faith in his blood. And anon after in the same chapter:
We uphold that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the law.
2. Corrinth. 5. Him that knew no sin, he made sin, that we might be made
the ryghtuousnesse of GOD in him. Romans. ^. Like as by the disobedience of
one man, many become sinners: So ageine by the obedyence of one man, many are
made ryghtuous. And of Abraham: Abraham believed GOD, and it was imputed unto
him for ryghtuousnesse. And David: Blissed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Such sayings as these, there are
without number in the Scripture concerning Christen righteousness, but I have
alleged these few, that I might thereby gather a general doctrine concerning
Christen righteousness.

First therefore is gathered of these Textes, that Christen ryghtuousnesse is
not of works, albeeit that he which is justified, begins henceforth too
do good woorks. This therefore is too be borne in mind, that works are in
such wise excluded, as that they are not the cause of this righteousness but
the effects and fruits, as I will show hereafter. Secondly, is gathered of
these sayings, that Christen righteousness is not the obedience of men
themselves, but of Christ for them. Thirdlye, that this obedience of Christ's
is bestowed upon man, too the intent he may be rightuous by it, and not by
his own righteousness. Fourthly. That whosoever believes, is made partaker
of this righteousness of Christ's, so that it is imputed too him as his own.
For Christ is the end of the Law, too justify every one that believes.
Fifthly, that because we are sinners we be reconciled unto the Father by
Christ, whom GOD has set forth too be the mercy seat. Sixthly. That Christ's
blood was shed for the sins of them that believe, so as the Justice of God,
or of the Law is satisfied. Seventhly. By all the things gathered, it falls
out, that christian righteousness consists of acquytall from sin,
imputation of Christ's ryghtuousnesse, and acceptance unto everlasting life,
freely for Christ's sake. This is the sum of the doctrine of the church
concerning Christen righteousness: whereby it comes too pass, that Christen
justification is an acquital from sin, an imputacion of Christ's
righteousness, and an acceptance unto eternal life freely for Christ's
sake. How be it, this is further too be borne in mind, that by faith only
(whereby we are justified) this ryghtuousnesse is effectual, and brings
forth fruits most acceptable too God, through Jesus Christ. And where this
fruit is not seen, there is skarce any faith too be found. For when we
believe, therewithal we are borne new men, that we should yield new
obedience unto God.

Now let us see this self same doctrine of Christen ryghtuousnesse in the
example of the Publicane. First (as the text says) he stood a far of. For
being put in fear with his own unworthiness he durst not come forth with
the Pharisie intoo the sight of Gods majesty. In likewise Peter falling down
at Christ's feet, said: Away from me, for I am a sinful man. Likewise the
Centurion, Lord I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof.
This fearfulness in the conscience of man, ryseth of the knoweledge of the
Law: by the squyre whereof when a man examineth his own deeds, he is
enforced too cry out, I am a sinful man. Secondly he dares not lift up his
eyes. Here is noted how the Publicane was ashamed of the filthynesse of his
sin. 3. He knocks himself upon the breast, whereby is signified his
striving against wanhope and despair. 4. when he says: Lord be merciful
unto me a sinner: he gives us too understand how we ought too flee unto
God only for the putting away of our sins. Hithertoo he has wrestled with
sin, with the sentence of the Law, and with wanhope: By which wrestling is
declared that he was sorye in deed. Now follows, how he wound him self
out of this Hell as it were For when he says, GOD be merciful too me a
sinner: he reyseth himself up by faith against despair. For here he called
too remembrance the promises concerning Christ, that GOD will be merciful
unto sinners, which falling too repentance do flee unto Christ with true
faith. For he is the propitiation for our sins. In reysing him self up in
this wise, he imputes sin too himself, and mercy unto GOD: he
acknoweledgeth himself the sick man, and GOD too be his Physician: he
sets mercy against sin: and so believing God too be favorable unto
him, he is justified by Faith alone. After the same manner did Daniell. Untoo
thee Lord be righteousness, and unto us confusion and shame.

And so we may learn of this Publicane, first the manner of true repentance
and Christen righteousness: for even as true repentance is true sorynesse for
sin: even so Christen righteousness is to be loosed and acquit from sin,
when we come unto God by true faith, as I have said before. 2. We may learn
of him, of what sort true Prayer ought too be. For it must proceed from the
bottom of the heart in the fear of God, and lean unto the propitiation which
is in Jesus Christ. 3. We must learn of the Publicane too behave our selves
after a lowly manner both before God and before men.

Must we then live after the manner of Publicans? Yea surely must we, so far
forth as they repent and amend, according as this Publicane did. For as this
Pharisie is not mislyked for the outward honest works that he did, but
because he trusted in the works. So this Publicane is not too be commended
for the sins that he had committed, but for his repentance which ensued.
Yea, we have lessons in both of them, that we may fare the better by. With
both of them we must go too Church: with both of them we must give thanks
unto God: with both of them we must pray. We must learn of the Pharisie,
too do honest outward woorks: and of the Publican, too bring with us
godliness of mind and true faith.

Of the third.
I Say unto you, this man went home too his house justified, and not the
other. Here we have Christ's judgment of the Pharisie and the Publicane. The
Publicane (says he) departing out of the Temple came home too his own house
justified by Faith. And the Pharisie returned not justified, but rather
condemned. This confirms he with a general sentence: For every one that
exalts him self, shall be brought low, and he that humbles himself shall
be exalted. The Pharisie exalted himself, thinking himself rightuous by his
deeds of the law, which were none at al: and therefore he was brought low, by
the sentence of damnation. The Publicane humbled himself by acknowledging his
sin, by lowly prayer, and by trust in Gods mercy through Christ: and
therefore he was exalted by the grace of acquitall, and glory of blissednesse.
That we may be humbled after this man's example, Christ grant, too whom with
the father and the holy ghost be glory for evermore. Amen.

Upon the.xij. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Mark. vij.
JESUS departed from the coasts of Tire and Sydon, and came unto the Sea of
Galilee, through the mids of the coasts of the ten cities. And they brought
unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech, and they
prayed him too put his hand upon him. And when he had taken him aside from
the people, he put his fingers intoo his ears, and did spit, and touched his
tongue, and looked up too heaven and syghed, and said unto him: Epham, that
is to say, be opened. And straight way his ears were opened, and the string
of his tongue was losed, and he spoke plain. And he commanded them that they
should tell no man. But the more he forbad them, so much the more a great deal
they published, saying: He has done all things well, he has made both the
deaf too hear, and the dumb too speak.

The exposition of the text.
THis Gospel conteyneth one of the Lords miracles whereby he showed his
power, his will, and his office. His power appears in this, that all things
created are at his commandment, as the Sea, the Winds, the Feendes, and
diseases, as in this place. His will is seen by his readiness too help, for
he is most ready too help all that call upon him. His office appears in
that he is a savior according to his name, which is Jesus. Those three things
are too be seen well near in every of Christ's miracles, which we must
learn too use aright. For we must use the power of Christ our Lord ageinste
the tirannie of the world, Sophistry, and Hypocrisy, yea and ageynste all
the whole kingdom of Satan. Let us set the knowledge of his will against the
ouerthwarte will and judgment of our flesh. Let us arm our selves with the
minding of his office against all Antichrists that will rob Christ of his
office. These three things we may behold in this present gospel as in a
Glass. Here the deaf and dumb man is hild in bondage by the Devil. But what
does Christ in this case? He uttering his power opens his ears, and
loses his tongue, maugre the Deuilles resistance. Ageine in that he helps
this miserable and wretched creature, he shows him self too have a remorse
of his misery, and by so doing, utters his good will toward him. Lastly,
he declares his own office, in showing him self ready and cheereful too
help this man. For by this deed he does us too understand, that he was
sent too help the afflicted and those that are in misery. We have what
Christ means by his miracles. Now let us see the sum of this present
Gospel. Christ heals the deaf and dumb man that is brought unto him. By
which deed is signified, that Christ came intoo the world too help such as
come unto him, according too this text: Every one that calls upon the name
of the Lord shall be saved. The places are three.

1 The example of them that bring this deaf and dumb man unto Christ. 2 The
deed and miracle of Christ. 3 The fruit of this miracle too the beholders.
Of the first.
DEparting ageine out of the coast of Tire. etc. Before we enter intoo the
first doctrine the occasion of this present miracle is too be observed: Which
was Christ's journey, and the place from whence he took his journey.

His iourneying it self declares how busy the Lord was in his office, and
how earnestly he thirsted our salvation. The place shows, how he mente
that the Gentiles also should be made partakers of his benefits. For he came
too seek that which was lost.

Now let us see the first doctrine. They brought unto him a man that was both
deaf and dumb, and besought him that he would lay his hands upon him. Here
are two things too be marked, first what these bearers of this deaf man do:
and secondly what they request: what do they? They bring unto Christ a man
that is deaf and dumb. In these few words is a christen man's life described.
Which description it stands us in hand too understand aright, too the intent
we may handsomely follow the example of them. For first they acknoweledge
Christ too be the true Messiah, and secondly they believe in him: both
which things they declare by this deed. For no man comes unto Christ as
too a savior, ne calls upon him, but he that believes in him. For like as
no man believes, but he that hears: so no man calls upon him but he
that believes. Romans 10. By this reason faith being conceived of the word of
life, is the soul health and righteousness of Chrystians.

Is this faith idle? No. Here are showed three fruits of it. The first is
confession: for here by their deed and word they confess Christ. For even
as men believe with the heart unto righteousness: even so is confession made
with the mouth unto salvation. The second is the calling upon Christ: For
Faith and invocation are so knit toogither, that ye may sooner separate heat
from fire, than pluck them asunder one from an other. The third fruit of
Faith is brotherly love, which these bearers utter in heart, in woork, and in
word, by bringing this afflicted and miserable creature unto Christ. See
thou now what manner of men these bearers were? See thou the whole life of a
Christian peynted out in their deed, as in a table? But wherefore was this
done and written. That both I and thou might have an example of reverence
toward God, and of charity toward our neibor. This is a pattern of a true
christian life. We must therefore believe in Christ as these men did. We must
confess Christ as these men did: and Faith requires that we should call upon
him as they did. Besides this (according too the example of these men) it
becomes us too love and help our neybor with heart word and deed, I pray you
what greater woork of love can there be, than too bring unto Christ a man in
thraldom under the power of the devil, wretched, a miserable, despised and
utterly disdeyned among men, and too take so great care for an other man's
welfare.

Heerby let rich and poor, noble and unnoble, citizens and cuntriefolk, learn
what becomes them, if so be they mind not too bear a face of Christianity
in vain. Let every man according too the state of his calling endeuer to bring
as many as he can too Christ, and too call upon him, and too have a godly
carfulness for the welfare of other men.

Here ryseth a dout. This deaf man had no faith: for he could not hear the
word, whereby faith is conceived: and yet was he healed by Christ for the faith
of other men. It seems therefore yt a man may be saved by an other ma^s
faith. I answer: Christ loosed the tung of the dumb man, and then being called
upon by the diseased person, he gave him faith: upon the attaynment whereof, the
diseased person was saved by his own faith, and not by another man's faith.
Again there is a difference too be put betwixt corporal benefits and
everlasting Salvation. As for corporal benefits, the godly may obtein them
even for the ^^godly at Gods hand. But as for salvation, they can not obtain
it for them, unless they themselves also have first conceived faith by the
word of GOD. For except the godly might obtain corporal benefits for the
^^godly, the world could not stand in this so huge a flud of wickedness and
stumblingblocks.

Thus much concerning the deeds of these bearers, and the profitable example
thereof. Now let us see what they desired of Christ. They besought him (says
the text) that he would lay his hand upon him. For they had marked how Christ
by laying on of his hands had given health unto many before. How beeit too the
intent we may understand this ceremony, four things are too be observed
concerning laying on of hands, First how ancient this custom of laying on of
hands is. Secondly, too who^ it belongs too lay hands upon others. Thirdly,
too what purpose and end the laying on of hands serves. Fourthly, what is the
mystical meening of hands.


As concerning the antiquity of the custme of laying on of hands, the
Scripture teaches, that this custom is taken of the fathers. For in the.48.
of Genesis we reed, that the Patriarch Jacob laid his hands upon the heads
of Manasses and Ephraim, the sons of Joseph. Which custom afterward was
confirmed too the Jews by law: and this ceremony continued unto the time of
Christ, who also used the same, and delivered the use thereof over too his
Apostles. And that too laying on of hands was joined prayer, it is manifest by
the.xix. Chapter of Matthew, where it is written, that children were brought
unto Christ, that he might lay his hands upon them and pray.

Thus have we how ancient the custom of laying on of hands is. Now let us
see to whom it belongs too lay on hands: which thing is too be gathered by
the laying on of hands, of Jacob and others. For it was the guyse, that the
elders should lay their hands upon the yongers, the fathers upon their
children, and the Preests upon the people. For it was a solemn ceremony, in
the power of those that were in authority or degree above others.

But too what end was this ceremony ordained? It may be gathered by the
Scripture, that it was ordained too five ends. First, that it was done of
purpose too bliss and pray, as in Mat. 19. and Mark. 7. is declared. Secondely
for offering: for the Preests were wont too lay their hands upon the heads of
the beasts that were slain for sacrifice. 3. For healing: like as Christ did
oftentimes lay on his hands when he went about too heal such as were brought
unto him. 4. That by praying the holy ghost might be bestowed upon them: as
we reed in the Acts of the Apostles. Fifthly in giving orders too the
ministers of the word, hands were wont too be laid upon those that were
received intoo the ministry.

Now will we add somewhat concerning the mystical meening of hands. They
that blissed folk by laying on of their hands, did supply the room of God.
The hands signified Gods help and favor. The laying on of hands signified,
that he on whom the hands were laid, was under the favor and protection of
God, and that he was blissed of god. In their blissings, Gods favor and help
were wished for: and in sacrifices, the hosts were dedicated unto God. In
healyngs, Gods hand stretched out it self, while by his power he restored the
sick unto health. Likewise in the giving of the holy ghost, the hands
signified Gods presence. In consecrating the Preests this was meant by laying on
of hands: that those which took orders were dedicated unto God as
sacrifices, and were allowed and appointed too the service of God. Thus much
concerning the first place, namely concerning the laying on of hands. Now let
us breefly consider what this place confirms, what it confuteth, and whereof
it admonishes us. It confirms that the children of God are led by the
spirit of God, and should exercise themselves in godliness and charity. It
confuteth those that boaste of their empty faith void of the true fear of
God and charity too their neighbor. And it admonishes us too perform the
works of faith as well inward as outward, if we will be accounted among the
children of God.

Of the second.
THe second doctrine that I purposed, is concerning the deed and miracle of
Christ. Now too the intent we may understand this deed, certain things are
too be noted concerning Christ's miracles. The Prophets, Christ, and the
Apostles wroughte miracles, too assure men that the doctrine which they taught,
was of God, and too the intent that men being convicted of Gods truth by
miracles, might believe, and by believing be saved. That these are the cheef
ends of miracles, John the Evangelist bears witness in his second chapter,
where he says thus: This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee,
and manifested his own glory, and his Disciples believed on him. Here are
two ends signified: Christ's glory, and the faith of the Apostles. The
glory of Christ comprehends the power of his Godhead, his affection toward
mankind, and his office and the certeintie of his doctrine. Howbeeit there is
a difference too be made between the Prophets and Apostles, and Christ. The
Prophets and Apostles wrought not miracles by their own power, but by the
divine power of Christ, whose spirit spoke by the mouth of them. But Christ
wrought miracles by his own power. Wherefore like as the Prophets and Apostles
by their miracles declared them selves too be the servants of Christ: so
Christ by his miracles showed himself too be the Lord and God of them. And if
any man demand why miracles are not wrought now a days by the ministers of
Gods word: Thou shall understand, that as soon as miracles had confirmed
Christ's glory and the truth of God: they had discharged their duty. And
therefore we must no more look for miracles, but we must hold our selves
content with the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, which God has
confirmed with many miracles long ago. Thus much concerning miracles in
general. Now let us come too the miracle of this day, in which are many
circumstances too be observed, whereof each one conteyneth a singular doctrine
and admonishement.

The first, Christ took him aside from the people. And why did he so? For two
considerations, that is too wit, for ye time and for the meaning. For the time,
because he would not as yet have his kingdom published unto the whole world.
For he had not yet accomplished his sacrifice: he had not yet broken down the
wall that was between the Jews and the Gentiles: which thing was done
afterward when he armed his disciples with this commission: Go intoo the
whole world, and preach the Gospel too all nations. And for the meaning,
because he that desires too have Christ too be his Physician, must depart
out of the preace of the malicious persons and repiners. For there is no
agreement between Christ and Beliall.

The second. He thrust his fingers intoo his ears. Surely this was not done
but for some purpose. For by that sign he both showed the preciousnesse of
his flesh which he had taken upon him, that by offering it in sacrifice
mankind might be restored too his former helthfulnesse, which he had lost by
sin: and also gives us too understand, that his word can neither be heard
nor understood, unless our ears be opened by Christ's finger, that is too
say, unless the holy Ghost do open the ears of our heart.

The third. And he spit and touched his tongue. By this mystical manner of
dealing, he does us too wit, that the ability too speak proceeds of him,
and that he will work effectually in his church by means.

The fourth: He looked up intoo Heaven. By this gesture he signifies, that
his mind is lifted up too his heavenly father, whom he prayed unto, not
only for this man, but for all others that are afflicted. For prayer is not so
much the sound of the mouth, as the humble lifting up of the heart unto God:
which lifting up of the heart, is signified by the outward sign of the eyes
looking up too heauenward. Whereupon David says: I have lift up mine eyes unto
thee that dwell in the Heavens. Of which thing we also are put in mind
when we say: Our father which art in heaven.

The fifth: He sighed. Surely it must needs be a great matter that caused so
great a personage too sighe. Therefore had he not an eye al only too this dumb
man, whom he could have delivered from his disease with one beck: but he had
an eye too these five things. First too sin, which is the cause of all miseries
in mankind. 2. Too the tirannie of the Devil, who had so sore oppressed
mankind, with which tirannie he knew he had too encounter. 3. Too the curse
of the law, which he should take upon him self, too the intent we might be
cleared of our giltinesse. 4. Too his own most bitter death which he should
suffer for all mankind. 5. Too the unthankfulness of the greatest part of the
world. For he foresaw that many should utterly hold skorn of his benefit, and
many of rechlessenesse neglect it: in so much as the least part of the world
should embrace his benefits too their salvation. The sixth: he speaks too
this dumb man and says: Ephata, that is too say, Be opened. It was not for
nothing that Mark in this place used the Hebrew word, for by this word Christ
shows, first how great is the power of his Godhed, who by his word both
commands and brings too pass what he will: whereby not only our faith
concerning Christ's Godhead is confirmed, but also we are done to understand,
that all those are in safety, which are under his government, and have
committed them selves too his protection. And by this word is showed, how
great the strength of Gods word is, specially where it is laid hold on by
true faith. 3. That no man can be saved without Christ's word, whereby he
commands us such things as are meet for us too do. 4. By this commandment,
Be thou opened, He signifies that man's will is required in the matter of
salvation: not for that the will being vnrefourmed by the hand of God, is
either able or willing, but for that, when it is moved and framed by the holy
Ghost, it should not strive against the holy Ghost. 5. That the woork of
Salvation is wholly Christ's, and not man's: according as the Hebrewe word
shows.

The seventh: And forthwith his ears were opened, and the string of his
tongue was loosed, and he spoke perfectly. This present miracle, was also a
benefit of Christ toward this miserable man. By which miracle is showed, that
at Christ's commandment, and at the preaching of his word, we are loozed
from the shackles of the devil, that we should not be fettered any more with
them. This miracle (that I may repeat it in few words) confirms that
Christ both can and will help all that are afflicted, which are brought too
him, and seek his help. Also it overthrows the error of them, which
shunning Christ as a straight judge, do call upon Saints. And moreover it
warns us to flee unto Christ only by faith and prayer, when we are in
trouble and dystresse.

Of the third.
ANd he charged them that they should tell no body. But the more that he forbad
them, so much the more did they publish it, and vvonder at it. Christ
forbyddeth them too tell this deed abroad: and they ought too have obeyed his
commandment. Wherefore the goodness that ensued, was too be ascribed, not to
their dysobedience, but to ye goodness of Christ. For it was his will too have
had this deed kept secret till after his resurrection.

But what fruit sprang of this miracle of Chrysts? First the beholders
conceived faith in Christ. Secondly they published this deed, and gloryfied
God: which glorifying god is the utmost end of all Christ's works. But what
is it too praise God? The praising of God, springs of knowing God: which
consists in these things. Too have a right opinion of the substance of the
Godhead, and of the persons of the Godhead: To believe assuredly that he is
the fountain and welspring of al goodness and good things. Too flee too him by
Christ in all necessities. Too confess thy faith openly as these men did: and
in such wise too give light too others by thine example, that many being
moved thereby may flee unto Christ, too whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost be honor for ever. Amen.

Upon the.xiij. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. x.
JESUS turning a side too his disciples said: Happy are the eyes that see the
things which ye see. For I tell you that many Prophets and kings have
desired too see those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and too
here those things which ye here, and have not herd them. And behold, a
certain Lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying: Master, what shall I do
to enherit eternal life? he said unto him: what is written in the law?
how read thou? and he ansvvered and said: Love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all
thy mind: and thy neighbor as thy self. And he said unto him. Thou have
ansvvered right. This do and thou shall live. But he vvilling to justify
himself said unto Jesus: And who is my neybor? Jesus ansvvered, and said: A
certain man desended from Jerusalem too Hiericho, and fell among thieves,
which robbed him of his raiment, and vvounded him, and departed, leaving him
half dead. And it chanced that there came down a certain Priest that same
way, and when he savv him, he passed by. And likewise a Leuite, when he
went nie too the place, came and looked on him, and passed by. But a certain
Samaritane as he iourneyed came unto him: and when he savv him, he had
compassion on him, and went too, and bound up his vvounds, and povvred in Oil
and Wine, and set him on his beast, and brought him too a common Inn, and
made provision for him. And on the morovve, when he departed, he took out two
pence, and gave them too the Host, and said unto him: Take cure of him, and
whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come ageine I vvil recompense thee.
Which now of these three think thou was neighbor unto him that fell
among the thieves? And he said unto him: He that shevved mercy on him. Then
said Jesus unto him: Go and do thou likewise.

The exposition of the text.
THis Gospel consists of two parts: in the former whereof Christ commoneth
with his disciples of true blissednesse, and teaches them wherein the same
consists, that is too wit, in the knoweledge of him self. In the latter
he disputes of the right way too eternal life, of Gods law, and of loving God
and our neighbor: in the discourse of which point: he propounds a parable
whereby he teaches who is too be counted our neighbor. The places are four.

1 Which is the true blissednesse. 2 The Lawyers question concerning the
atteinement of everlasting life and Christ's answer too the same. 3 The chief
points of the Law. 4 Of the Parable whereby we are taught whoo is our
neighbor.
Of the first.
Jesus turning aside too his Disciples, said: Happy are the eyes that see the
things which you see. For I say unto you that, etc. Here Christ teaches which
is the true blissednesse and what is the true and substanciall joy of man in
this life, that is too wit, too see the son of God. Then if they only be
happy or blissed, that see the son of God, it follows that none attein too
bliss by their own woorks and deserts. Wherefore this seeing of Christ is
worthy too be desired.

But it is too be known that the son of God is seen after two sorts: that
is too wit, in this life, and in the life too come. In this life he is too be
seen in three manners: first carnally only. Then carnally and spiritually at
once. And last of all, spiritually only.

Carnally only, Christ was seen of the greatest part of the Jewish nation,
which nevertheless was damned. Therefore the seeing of Christ in the flesh
only, does not of it self profit too salvation: but rather furthereth too
greater damnation. Herod saw Christ, so did Pilate likewise, so did Judas,
Cayphas, and many other ungodly persons, whose damnation teaches us, that too
see Christ outwardly in the flesh, avails not too salvation, if there go not
true faith in Christ with it.

Christ was seen in the flesh and in the spirit at once toogither, of the wise
men, of Marie, of Simeon, Zachary, Zacheus, the Apostles, and many others,
whose seeing turned too their soul health, because they not only beheld Christ
with their outward eyes, but also with the eyes of their heart. Which thing
is manifestly seen in that woman, which for washing Christ's feet with her
tears, and wiping them with the hear of her head, heard Christ say unto her,
that her sins were forgiven her, for the faiths sake which she had in him.
Of this seeing chiefly speaks our Lord in this place, when he says: Many
Prophets and Kings have longed too see that you see, and have not seen.

In spirit only do all they see Christ, which believe in him: for so does
Christ him self interpret it, when he says: As Moses lift up the Serpent in
the wilderness: So must the son of man be exalted, that all which believe
in him, may not perish but have life euer^asting. After this sort did Abel see
Christ in his sacrifice, and so did Abraham, of whom Christ bears record,
saying: Abraham saw my day, and was glad. So see we Christ at this day, as
many of us as believe in him. Now, that they which see Christ in this wise,
are blissed: this saying of our Lord unto Thomas testifies: Blissed are they
that believe and see not. For we see him in the Gospel, where he appears face
too face unto us, that we should be transformed intoo the likeness of him.

Hithertoo concerning the first manner of seeing Christ, and the parts of the
same: after which manner he is seen in this world. Now follows the other
manner of seeing, which is in the glory too come, where we shall see him most
perfectly, and be delighted with everlasting gladness, enjoying the most
pleasant and comfortable beholding of him.

But wherefore does he avouch those too be happy that see Christ? First for
that Christ is the word of life, without which there is no salvation too be
looked for. For this word of life delivers the believers from eternal
death. For like as he that sees not Christ (and specially with the eyes of
faith) abides in prison, and under the power of the Devil: even so he that
sees Christ, overcomes the world, and all evils, according too this of John:
This is the victory that overcomes the world, even your faith. But do we
not see many godly men too be in ill case in this life, and too be put too most
grievous punishment? I answer. Yet are they blissed for the sequel of the
matter. For there shall be a most joyful deliverance from all evils
wherewith the godly are oppressed in this life. And therefore Christ says in
Matthew. Blissed are those that mourn, for they shall receive comfort.

Of the second.
A Certain Lawyer stood up, tempting him and saying: Master, what shall I
do too have everlasting life? Jesus ansvvered: Thou shall love the Lord thy
GOD. And as it is written in Matthew: if thou will enter intoo life keep the
commandments. Too the intent we may understand this answer of Christ
aright, it is too be noted, that there are two kinds of men with whom Christ
has too do. For some are Hipocrites: and some repent in good earnest. The
Hipocrites being proud and swelling through opinion of their own
righteousness, think them selves too have no need of Christ: and therefore they
persecute him, one while by tempting him another while by slaundering his
doctrine, and sometime by open violence. When such as these be do seek the
way of salvation, he poynteth them too the law, and says: If thou will enter
intoo life, keep the commandments. But those that fall unto repentance,
and seek the way of salvation at Christ's hand, are not sent by Christ unto
the law and too Moses: but he takes them too him self, and bids them
believe on him. Which thing when they do, he grau^teth over his own
righteousness unto them, that they should not be subject too the curse of the
law. We will make this more apparent by examples. The Pharisie of whom we
heard a late, seemed rightuous unto him self, but he was pronounced
unrighteous by Christ, because he had not the righteousness of the law which
he made his bragges of. Contrariwise the Publicane that brought his sins
intoo the Temple with him, which he there bewailed, fleeing too the mercy of
God, went his way home justified. And in as much as he was justified and made
rightuous, he was also made an heir of eternal life. In Matthew the lawyer
asks Christ the question, saying: what shall I do too get eternal life?
and Christ answers: If thou will enter intoo life, keep the commandments.
Contrariwise, the wretched thief being a sinner repents upon the Cross, and
calls upon Christ by faith, too whom Christ says: This day shall thou be
with me in Paradise, that is too wit, in everlasting life. In this Gospel
comes also a Doctor of the law too tempt the Lord, and says: what shall I
do too possess eternal life? Too whom our Lord answers. Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, and thy neighbor as thy self, which is all one as if he said,
if thou will enter intoo life, keep the commandments. But too the sinful
woman. Luke 7. he says. Thy faith has made thee whole. And so Christ deals
with two kinds of men, according too the diversity of whom, he shows the
right way unto heaven.

Why shows he the way by ye law, since no man was ever able too come too
heaven by ye way? Because it is the straightest way too heaven, according too
this: The man that does these things, shall live by them. This way therefore
does Christ show too them that hold scorn of him. For whosoever despises
Christ, either he shall die for ever, or else fulfill the law, which is
impossible for him too do. Agein, there is another way to heaven, which is
open too those only that believe in Christ, who is the way intoo heaven.

Of the third.
THou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy whole heart, with all thy
whole soul, with all thy whole power, and with all thy whole thought,
and thy neighbor as thy self. This is a sum of Gods law, and an
abridgement of the ten commandments. In both of these commandments there
are four things too be considered. First the affection that is required too
be in man toward God and his neighbor. 2. The object, namely God and the
neighbor. 3. The causes of obedience, that is too say, of loving God and our
neighbor. 4. The manner of loving.

1 The affection that the Law requires, is louingnesse, which can not please
unless it be pure, and void of hypocrisy. For nothing can please God which
is painted, because he is void of all paynting, and is holy, pure, and
uncorrupted.

2 The obiectes, (that is too wit, the things whereabout the affection of
loving must be occupied) are God and our neighbor.

3 The causes of loving God and our neighbor, are set down in the
commandment. For God is too be loved, because he is our God and Lord: and
our neighbor is too be loved, because he is our neighbor.

4 The manner of loving is expressed also. For God is too be loved with all the
whole heart, with all the whole soul, and with all the whole thought: and a
mannnes neighbor is too be loved as a man loves himself. Howbeit, the things
that we have touched breefly, must be expounded more at large.

Love or charity in general, is an entier affection, embracing a thing with
freendly and hearty good will, in such wise as the mind burns in desire of
it, and wishes most well unto it. This charity is of two sorts: the one of
God toward the creature, and the other of the creature toward God and other
things. Ageine the love of God toward his creatures is of two sorts. One
universal, wherewith he embraces all his creatures, susteyning and upholding
them, that they may continue in their state. This louingnesse is called also
his universal mercy. Another is peculiar, whereby God with the inward affection
of his heart, loves his Church right dearly in his son. This moved him too
give his son, according too this saying: so God loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten son. This moves him too give the holy Ghost. This moves
him too preserve the Church. Too be short, this louingnesse makes him too
give himself whole too his Church. The thinking upon this love of God, will
comfort us against the sentence of the Law, against the bitterness of the
cross, and against temptations at the instant of death. Also this louingnesse
of God, causes God too chastise his children, and again too heal them when
he has stricken them.

I have spoken of Gods love toward his creatures Now follows concerning the
love of the creature toward God and men, and other things. This charity or
love is the entier affection wherewith man must love God: and next God, his
neighbor as him self. This love of the creature therefore is of two sorts also
One wherewith it favors God, and another wherewith it favors the neighbor.
Now, that love wherewith it becomes us too embrace creatures, has many
degrees: Of which the first is that, whereby we love our brethren that are
knit unto us by aliance of Christ's spirit. The second is that, whereby we
favor those that are bound unto us by any aliance of the flesh. The third
is that, whereby we love others that are unknown unto us. The fourth is that
whereby we endeavor too do good too our enemies. The fifth is that, whereby we
favor each other creature, according too the degree of their worthiness.

Which are the causes of loving God, or wherefore do we love GOD. Although it
may be sufficiently known by the commandment: yet notwithstanding, I will
repeat the causes more deeply, and set each of them severally by it self.
Therefore the love of man toward God, first is kindled by the remembrance of
Gods benefits toward us, and by thinking upon the unmeasurable love that he
bears unto us ward. Secondly it must be increased by the lively feeling of
Gods favor toward us, whereof we have experience every minute. And thirdly
it must be exceedingly enflamed by hope and trust of the good things promised.
These causes are contained in these words: Love the Lord thy God. He is
Lord, that is too say, Defendor: God, that is too say, Gouerner and Savior:
and Thine, that thou should look for all good things at his hand.

We have (after a sort) what manner a thing the love of God is, wherewith man
ought too love God: and therwithall we have seen the causes. But what is the
manner of loving? In what manner and after what sort must we love him? That is
expressed in the text by these words: With all thy whole heart, with all
thy whole soul, with all thy whole power, with all thy whole thought.
This word whole, signifies three things which must go jointly with man's love
toward God. First that the love of men toward God must be perfect: secondly
that it be pure, and thirdly that it be continual. Then are they said too love
God with all their whole heart: which perfectly, purely, and continually bear
an earnest love toward God, so as they fear him only, trust in him only, and
repose their hope in him only. Me^ are said too love God with all their whole
soul, when their will is answerable in all things, perfectly, purely, and
continually, too his heavenly will. Which thing we pray may take place, when we
say: Thy will be done. He is loved with all a man's whole power, when all the
members inward and outward do perfectly, purely, and continually bend the^
selves together too obey and serve God. He is loved with all a man's whole
thought, when there is no space too be found wherein God is not loved purely,
perfectly, and holily. This is the manner of loving God substancially, which
never was in any man since Adams fall, save only in Christ: albeit there be
certain slender beginnings of it in the regenerate. Of which thing there be
four tokens.

First too prefer the obedience of God before all things in the world;
according too this: He that loves me, will keep my commandments, and my
father will love him.

Secondly too use the holy Mysteries reverently in the fear of God.

Thirdly too allure others by our example, too love God.

Fourthly too love our neighbor for Gods sake. Where these four things meet,
thou have evident tokens of love begone toward God: which must from day too
day take new encreasement in the regenerate.

I have spoken of the first point of the law, that is, of the love toward GOD:
Now will I speak of the second point, that is too wit, of loving our
neighbors: concerning which, let these three things be observed. The causes
of the love, the manner, and the order. The causes are twain: the one is
commandment, and the other is nature, because man is neighbor unto man. The
commandment of God is, that we should one love another. Christ also gives
this charge: Love ye one onother. Too dysobey this commandment, is a most
heinous offense. The other cause is nature, soothly for that man is neighbor
too man, and that many ways: as in respect of creation: in respect of
resemblance: in respect of regeneration: in respect of the common life: and in
respect of the glory too come: of which degrees of neighborhood we have
spoken already a while ago.

How is the neighbor too be loved? The Lord answers: Love thy neighbor as
thy self. Now how every man loves himself, let every man learn of himself.

The order of loving is showed before, that is, that those should be loved
most, that are alied too us by the spirit of Christ. Then secondly those that
bind us by any aliance of the flesh. Thirdly our enemies also are to be loved,
as Christ teaches Math. v. And as Christ shows by the parable that he
puts forth here. And thus much concerning the two chief points of the
Law, wheruntoo it is manifest that no man is able too yield full obedience,
which thing I showed a late by four reasons.

Yet is not this Law given for nothing. For first we are taught hereby, what
was the state of man before his fall, when it was yet uncorrupted. For then
was man able too fulfill this law in all points. Ageine heerby we understand
how sore man's nature is corrupted, when we see how far we are wide from
the perfect obedience of the Law. Besides this, we are warned too acknowledge
our own frailty and uncleanness, and too flee unto Christ who is ye
perfection of the law, to justify every one yt believes. Moreover we be taught
what is the end of the law, and what are ye chief points of religious life,
wherein we must occupy ourselves. Lastly, hereby we are admonished too think
of what sort the obedience of the Angels and of the holy men, shall be in
the everlasting life.

Of the fourth.
AND he vvilling to justify himself, said unto Jesus: who is my neighbor?
When this Lawyer had received an other answer than he looked for: least he
might seem too be ouerset by holding his peace, swelling in opinion of his own
righteousness, he asks whoo is his neighbor. Too whom Christ made a far
other answer than he looked for. And too too the intent he may fetch in ye
Lawyer to assoyle ye case him self, he puts forth a long parable, saying:
A certain man came down from Jerusalem too Hierico. etc. But in as much as
all men are neighbors one too an other, why did he not answer simply thus?
Al men are neighbors one too another. This answer would have seemed both
easier and shorter. The Lord did this to correct the lewd interpretation of the
Pharisees and Lawyers. For they interpreted ye law after this manner. Love thy
friend and hate thine enemy. So by these men's judgment, those that were
friends, were deemed neighbors also one too another. Which error Christ
disproueth in the fifth of Mathewe, and teaches that we must love our enemies
also. Therefore for as much as Christ and the Lawyer agreed upon the case
concerning friends: (for both of the^ confessed that friends were too be
loved,) Christ goes about too make the Pharisie confess that enemies are in
the number of neighbors, for all men are either friends or foes unto us. The
Pharisie grants that friends are too be accounted neighbors. But because
the dout is concerning enemies, Christ tells this parable of the Jew and the
Samaritane, that is too wit, of two that by profession were most utter
enemies. For the Jew hated the Samaritane extreemely, and counted him as a
dog, and the Samaritane could not but know it. But what comes too pass? The
Jew falls among thieves, he is robbed, he is wounded, and he is left half
dead. After that certain Jews had passed by this wounded man, and were no
whit moved with his mischance: the Samaritane comes and helps the poor
wretch. He performs the deeds of charity upon him: he sets him upon his
own beast: he caryeth him too his own Inn: he has a care of him: he
compoundeth with his host that he should entreat him well and freendly: and he
promises to pay it, if he lay out any more about the enterteinment of him.
Which of these think thou (says Christ) was that man's neighbor. Was it the
Leuite that passed by? or the Priest? or this Samaritane? The Pharisie
answered: He that shevved mercy too him. And Jesus said unto him: Go thy
vvayes and do likewise. The Pharisie confesses that the Samaritane performed
the deeds of charity toward the wounded man, and that therefore he was
ryghtly called his neighbor. And hereupon is made the answer, that all men
are neighbors one too another. Howbeeit to the intent too abate the high
looks of the Pharisie, he bids him go and do as the Samaritane did. By
which saying he shows that the Pharisie is far from the perfection of the
law. Wherefore let us follow the Samaritane as much as we can, through the grace
of Christ, too whom with the father and the holy Ghost, be honor, praise and
glory world without end. Amen.

Upon the.xj. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. xviij.
ANd it chanced as Jesus went too Jerusalem, that he passed through Samaria
and Galile. And as he entered in too a certain town* there met him ten men
that were Lepers, which stood a far of, and put forth their voices, and
said: Jesus, master have mercy upon us. When he savve them, he said unto
them, go show your selves unto the preests. And it came to pass that as they
went they were cleansed. And one of them when he savv that he was cleansed,
turned back again, and with a loud voice praised God, and fell down on his
face at his fete, and gave him thanks. And the same was a Samaritane. And
Jesus ansvvered, and said: Are there not ten cleansed? But where are those
nine? There are not found that returned again too give God praise, save only
this stranger. And he said unto him: Arise, go thy way, thy faith has made
thee whole.

The exposition of the Text.
THe sum of this Gospel is, that Christ is the true Messiah, very God and
very man, who by his mighty will only, can help whom he list. And he lists to
help all that flee unto him, as the example of these.x. Lepres shows. For he
disdeineth them not as many other men do: but he utters his fatherly mind
toward them in healing the^ when they call upon him, and in ridding them from
their disease, which was both most foul and most contagious. Neither is he
otherwise minded toward any other, tha^ he was toward these miserable souls
so yt they crave his aid as these did. Therefore let us look upon these Lepres,
and learn what manner a high priest we have, yt is to wit, not only such a one
as is sorry for our mischa^ces: but also such a one as by his own mighty will,
is able to help those whom he perceives too crave his help, and to set them
free from al misery. For even as he cleansed these in their going away, or
rather when they were absent: even so although he be not seen present, yet
can he help. Wherefore let us preace unto him with assured faith in all our
necessities, assuring our selves that we shall find help in due time. And
thus much breeflye concerning the sum and use of this Gospel. The places are
three.

1 Of these ten Lepres. 2 Why the Lord sent them too the priest. 3 Of the
thankfulness of the Samaritane, and of the unthankfulness of the other nine.
Of the first.
IN the first doctrine of this Gospel which I have purposed concerning ye
Lepres: I will say these things in order. How despised Lepres were among the
people of Israel: what the deed of them teaches us: how a great number are
infected with spiritual Leprosy, and have need of Christ to be their
Physician: and what we may gather of Christ's deed, concerning his affection
toward us.

Lepres were counted among the Jews, unclean and unworthy too be conversant
among the Israelites, and that was for their most foul and contagious disease,
wherewith they were atteinted. And by the appointment of Gods law, they carried
about with them badges of reproach and sorrow, whereby they were put in mind of
their ungodliness and wicked deeds, for which they were fallen intoo such
misery. In Leuiticus are numbered five badges, by which they might be discerned
from other men, least they should be defiled with their infection. One was a
loose garment. Another was a bare head. The third was a face muffled. The
fourth was a dwelling separated from resort of men. And the fifth was an open
Proclamation, whereby they were proclaimed unclean: as which were unworthy too
be conversant among ye Israelites. Heerby it is easy to conjecture, in how
great sorrow they lived, and how miserable their state was: and being beset with
these miseries, they resort unto Christ. Whereupon we may gather remedies
against three kinds of temptations: of which the first springs of the
thinking upon the misery and filthiness of our sin. The second proceeds of
our own untowardness, for yt we be not of sufficient behavior to sue to so
great a prince, as is our Savior Jesus Christ. The third issues of the
consideration of deserts, whereof we perceive our selves to have none at all.
For according to the example of these Lepres, we must not suffer our selves
too be feared away with these things, from resorting to our only Physician and
Savior.

Now we see what these ten Lepres did. As the Lord entered into a certain
^ovvne (says the text) there met him ten Lepres, which stood a far of, and
lift up their voice, saying: Jesus, master have mercy upon us. Here have we
in these Lepres an example of true lowliness, faith, invocation, and
confession.

That they stand a far of, it is a token of submission and lowliness. For in
consideration of their disease (and of sin which was the cause of their
disease,) they did from the bottom of their heart, cast themselves down before
God, acknowledging their own misery, the foulness of sin, and the most
just sentence of the law condemning them. And so they are rightly humbled
before God. Which humbling of themselves is the first greece or step unto
glory, like as pride is ye first step unto shame: which thing the Lord himself
witnesses, when he says: Every one that exalts himself shall be brought
^owe, and every one that humbles himself, shall be exalted. Let us then
follow these men's example, and cast down our selves by true repentance,
before god: which thing if we do, it shall happen too us according to Christ's
saying: He that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

In that they resort unto Christ, it is a witness of their faith, which they
had gotten by heering him spoken of abroad. For out of all dout they had heard
of this most sweet saying of Christ, wherewith he allureth all men unto him
after so fatherly a sort, and offers his grace unto all men: Come unto me all
ye that labor and are laden, and I will refresh you, and you shall find rest
unto your souls. This word come all ye that labor, they had hard, and
conceived hope, that he who offered himself so gently unto all men, would not
shake them of. Wherefore through the faith that they had conceived, they
encouraged themselves, and came unto Christ. Let us also (after these men's
example, whereby the fatherly promise is confirmed,) be encouraged to hope
well of Christ in all our adversities.

The fruit of this faith follows, which is Invocation. For thus they pray:
Jesus, master, have mercy upon us. In this their most earnest prayer, first
they acknowledge themselves too have no deseruings, but rather horrible sins.
For he that says, have mercy, bosteth of no desert, nor feels any
worthiness: but rather he confesses his own unworthiness, and
acknowledges himself unworthy a benefit. Secondly in this prayer they
acknowledge Christ too be the true Messiah, and the vanquisher of death and al
misfortunes. They acknowledge him too be meek and merciful, not such a one
as increases the affliction of those that be afflicted, but rather such a
one as remedieth and heals their diseases. Let us also follow this example of
praying, and let us in our prayer, think and acknowledge Christ too be such a
one in very deed, as they describe him too be in this their prayer.

Also in these Lepres we have an example of confession, which can never be
plucked away from prayer: and surely a man could not confess Christ in those
days without peril. For the men of greatest might and wisdom did persecute
Christ, and forbad folk to profess him, as we read in the.ix. of John, where
the Pharisees rebuke the blind man whom our Lord had restored too his sight,
because he confessed Christ. But let bs follow the example of these Lepres. For
although the affliction seem grievous, which is too be sustained for
professing Christ: yet notwithstanding the soulhealth whervntoo the profession
tends, is greater and more certain, than that we should fleet from it for
any fond frayings.

I have spoken of the bodily Leprosy, and of the commendable deed of these
Lepres. Now will I breefly describe the spiritual Leprosy, and show the
remedies of it. The spiritual Leprosy is the attaynting and infection of the
mind, the heart, and the affections of man, so as no part in man is pure and
clean. This Leprosy also has his marks. Whereof the first is separation from
the household folk of God, and from the company of the Saints, Angels, and
men. The second is an uncovered head, that is too say, a bareness of the gifts
of ye holy Ghost, full of reproach: whereof is said in Ezechiell: thou were bare
and full of confusion. The third is a muffled mouth, that is too say, a stinking
breath and a pestilent blast of most leude talk, which proceeds from an
unclean heart. The fourth is a dwelling set from resort of men, such as the
dwelling of the rich glutton is, who dwelt a great way from the habitation of
the blissed fort. The fifth is open proclamation, that is to say, the curse of
the law, which is openly proclaimed against all that repent not, that is,
against all spiritual Lepres.

But what remedy is there against this ghostly Leprosy? It is not too be
cured by any cunning of man. There is but only one Physician that can cleanse
it, which is Jesus Christ. Too who^ if the Lepre come and humble himself
before him, calling upon him, and craving too be healed: This most skilful
Physician will by and by, first with his own blud wash of the filth of this
spiritual Leprosy, and then with his spiritual oil anoint the infected
limbs, until they be made full whole. Untoo him therefore must we go on the
feet of faith: his medicine which is offered by the voice of the Gospel, is
too be received with the mouth of the heart, that is too say, with faith: Of
him is too be requested that effectual Oil, wherewith the appaired powers and
strength are renewed: and great heed is too be taken, that we fall not intoo
this Leprosy ageine, by loosing this helthfull medicine of Gods word, and
this healthful Oil of the holy Ghost. Which thing if we do, the curing of
us will be the harder afterward. For when any disease has taken too deep a
root, it is a harder matter too heal it.

Of the second.
As Soon as he savv them, he said: Go and show your selves too the priest.
Whom he had healed in their going away by his only beck, the^ sends he too
the priests, who though they were wicked and covetous: yet did they serve in
the ministry ordained by God. But why sends he them too the Preests? There
were many and great causes.

The first was, that he might try their faith: whither they believed his word
and his promise. For God is wont by diverse means too try the steadfastness
of his servants in faith: not too their hurt or hinderaunce, but too the intent
that their faith being tried, and as it were fined in the fire of temptation,
may become the purer. So was the faith of Abraham tried, when he was
commanded too go kill his only begotten son. So was the woman's faith of
Syrophaenicia tried: and there be many other examples, as of Job, Joseph,
David and all others.

The second is, that by this his doing he may confirm the public
ministry ordained by GOD. For the Preests had a commandment too discern
and judge of Leprosy: and too receive intoo the open congregations, such as
will be thoroughly cleansed, excluding the others. And if he had done
otherwise, he might have seemed too have broken Moses law, which he came
not too break, but too fulfill and perform.

The third is, because the law and the Preesthood bear witness of Christ,
according as he says himself: The law and the Prophets bear witness of me.
For whereas the preests were commanded too judge of Leprosy, and to take an
offering for the clensing of the Lepre that was healed: It was a figure of
Christ's power, who cannot only judge of Leprosy, but also cleanse the same:
and that with the sacrifice of his own body, and with his own precious blood.

The fourth is, that the preests might lern by that miracle, that the true
Messiah was come. For so Esaias told them before, that Christ should show his
presence by woonderful miracles, among which this is reckened up for one, that
he should make the blind too see, and cleanse the Lepres. Therefore when the
preests had seen this heavenly miracle, they should have concluded upon the
Prophecy of Esaias, that Jesus the son of Mary was the true Messiah promised
in old time too the fathers, specially since the Prophesies concerning Chrysts
coming, did level all too this time.

The fifth is, that the Priests being by this miracle convicted, that Christ
the true Messiah was come, should send their hearers, and the people unto
Christ the most skilful and cunning Physician both for body and soul: which
thing they did not, least their own gain should be abated. They have
many folowers now a days, specially in the papacy.

The sixth is, that these Lepres being received by the record of the Preests
should show their bountifulness toward God and the ordinary ministry.

Notwtstanding, beside these true causes for which Christ sent these Lepres too
the Preests. The Papists have forged another, namely that we should shriue
our sins too the Preests, numbering up all our faults, with all the
circumstances of them, which surely is a thing impossible. The Papists therefore
do wrest this text too a strange sense, and with their allegory do make
grinnes wherewithal the wretched consciences are horribly snarled. And so of a
most comfortable Gospel, they make a most butcherly slaughterhouse of
consciences. What? Is not private confession too be retained? Yes in deed,
but not in consideration of this Allegory: nor yet after the manner of the
Papists, which like Judges exact the reckening up of all a man's sins, and
deny that there is any remission if there be not a full rehearsal of all the
sins, which (as David witnesses) no man understands, and much less can
he then reckon them up.

But what is the cause why auricular confession is kept still in our Churches
of Denmark? For the commodities thereof, which are very many.

The first is, that in this private talk, the rude and ignorant may be
instructed, which have need too be instructed in the Cathechisme.

The second is, that in it striplings and young men, may be tried how they
profit. For it is the duty of a good shepeherd, not only too teach godly
doctrine openly, but also his office requires, that (after the example of
Paul) he should make a proof of his hearers at home, how much they have
profited in godliness. For in this private communication, he shall prick
foreward the slouthful as it were with a spur, he shall commend the
diligence of those that have profited much, and encourage them too like
continuance.

The third is, that in this private conference, an accounte of their faith is
required of those, whose faith and relygion may justly be doubted of.

The fourth is, that in this talk, the weak consciences are relieved with
doctrine, counsel and comfort, specially when they be entangled with any
scruple of conscience. For such persons do well by themselves, if they get
them too their shepherds, that they may be raised and receive comfort.

The fifth is, although he that believes truly in Christ, is clearly acquit
from his sin: for where as sin is a falling from Gods law and will, with a
binding of the party too everlasting death and damnation: out of doubt every
one is acquit that believes the free promise, according too this saying: he
that believes in the Son has everlasting life: whereupon it follows, that
true absolution is a deliverance of the believing man from his being bound too
eternal death and damnation: yet notwithstanding it is profitable for all men
too hear the Gospel privately also, which being uttered by the mouth of the
Minister, declares forgiveness of sins, and inheritance of the kingdom of
Heaven too them that believe. For then verily is the kingdom of Heaven opened,
when the Gospel that is preached, is received by faith.

Of the third.
ANd one of them seeing that he was clenzed, came back again with a loud
voice, glorifying God, and fell upon his face before Jesus, gyuing thanks In
this Samaritane we see a most godly example of thankfulness and
thanksgiving. Now too the intent we may be stirred up by his example, I will
say somewhat concerning true giving of thanks in this order. First what it is,
and what causes it has: next what things are required too it: and lastly for
what things we ought too give thanks.

As concerning the first, true thanksgiving is an acknoweledging and confessing
of benefits received, toogither with a thankfulness of mind and a publishing
of Gods goodness. This appears plainly in this our Samaritan. He
acknowledges himself too be cleansed of his Leprosy: he confesses the same
thing openly: he returns with a thankful mind unto Christ: giving him
thanks for his benefits and blasing abroad his goodness. This thanksgiving
has diverse causes. First the knoweledge of God the benefactour. 2. The
knowledge of himself. 3. The perceyuerance of the benefit. 4. An affection
earnestlye bent by faith unto the praising of God: all which things we see
in this Samaritane. Too the furtherance heerof also, come the examples which
may stir us up too this thankfulness.

Thus have we what thanksgiving is, and what causes it has. Now let us see
what things are requisite unto it. There are two things requisite. First
virtues whi^he can never be separated from true thanksgiving: and secondlye
the lawful manner of thanksgiving. The chief virtues are two: Truth, and
Rightfulnesse. Truth, like as it simplye and openly acknowledges GOD the
benefactour (as this Samaritane does) so it excludes Hypocrisy and lying.
Hypocrisy truly, that thou may give thanks not only with thy mouth (as
the Pharisie did) but with thy mind and voice toogyther. And it excludes
lying, that thou should not ascribe thy success in dishonest things unto
GOD: as if a thief would give God thanks for a fat booty, or a harlot for a
wanton Lover. And Rightfulnesse excludes pride and the abuse of the thing: and
on the contrary part puts us in mind of thankfulness, of humbling our
selves, and of calling upon God.

The manner of thanks giving is sufficiently showed, both in the example of
this Samaritan, and by this saying of Paul: I thank God through Jesus Christ.
For when the Apostle says: By Jesus Christ, he meeneth first, that in
thanksgiving, Faith must shine before. Next, that we should acknowledge
our selves too have received the benefit by Christ. Then that we should
refer all things too Gods glory. And lastly, that we may both know that our
thankfulness is accepted through Christ, and also that by the same Jesus
Christ, we have access too God the father, too give thanks too him for his
benefits received.

Now follows a question for what things thanks are too be given. Job gives
thanks for the harms that he had received. This Samaritane gives thanks for
the riddance from his disease. And so it follows, that thanks are too be
given both for adversity and for prosperity, howbeeit after a diverse manner.

When thou give thanks for adversities, as for affliction or other miseries,
thou must do four things. First, the burden by weying heavy upon thee, must
put thee in mind of thy sin, and of repentance. For it is the witness of
Gods judgment for sin. 2. Thou must accept the cross and every other
mis^rie as a rod of thy most dear father, nurturing thee and chastizing
thee, lest thou should perish with the disobedient. 3. Give God hearty
thanks for this his fatherly chastisement, and. 4. Thou shall humbly desire,
either deliverance from the burden that presses thee, or else assuagement,
conditionally, that it be no hindrance to Gods glory, and thine own salvation.

For prosperity thou shall give thanks with promise of continual mindefulnesse
of them. And thus much concerning true Thangesgiuing. But alas, no mo but one
of the ten comes back, the other nine go their ways unthankful for the
good turn that they had received. Whereupon the Lord says: Are there not ten
clenzed? and where are these nine? There are not found that returned again
too give GOD praise, save only this stranger. Here thou see an example of
horrible unthankfulness, in those that had forgotten the benefit newely
received. There be many such in the world. But what became of them? by
shaking faith off, they continued in state of damnation, when in the mean
season this Samaritan heereth, Arise, go thy way, thy faith has made thee
whole. Him let us follow too our only Savior, which is Jesus Christ our Lord,
too whom with the father and the holy Ghost be honor, praise and glory for
eeuer and ever. Amen.

Upon the.xv. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Math. vj.
NO man can serve two masters: for either he shall hate the one and love the
other, or else lean too the one, and despise the other: ye cannot serve God
and Mammon. Therefore I say unto you: Be not careful for your life, what
ye shall eat or drink: nor yet for your body, what rai^ment ye shall put
on. Is not the life more worth than meat? and the body more of value than
raiment? Beehold the fowls of the air, for they sovv not, neither do they
reap, nor carye intoo the barnes: and your heavenly father feeds them. Are
ye not much better than they? Which of you (by taking careful thought) can
add one cubite unto his stature? And why care ye for raiment? Consider the
Lilies of the field how they grow: They labor not, neither do they spinne.
And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his royalty, was not
clothed like one of these. Wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the field
(which though it stand too day, is too morovv cast into the furnace:) shall he
not much more do the same for you, O ye of little faith? Therefore take no
thought saying: what shall we eat, or what shall we drink or vvherevvithe
shall we be clothed? After all these things do the Gentyles seek. For
your heavenly father knovveth that ye have need of all things. But rather
seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all
these things shall be ministered unto you. Care not then for the morovve, for
too morovv day shall care for it self: sufficient unto the day is the
travail thereof.

The exposition of the text.
THis Gospel is a part of that long sermon that Christ made too his
disciples, Math. the 5.6. and.7. Chapters. In which part he condemns
covetousness and distrust, as which cannot stand with the service of God. For
No man (says he) can serve two masters. Again, with many arguments taken
of Gods providence, he disswadeth from ungodly and Heathenishe carfulness of
things perteyning too this life: which carfulness springs partly of not
knowing Gods providence: and partly of distrust bred in us by nature. Last of
all, he prescribes a certain rule too those that are his: Seek first the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all things else shall be cast unto
you. And least any man should surmise this saying too be a defense for idle
slothfulness, he adds: For sufficient unto the day is the travel thereof.
This is the su^me of this Gospel. Now will we purpose certain places, which
are these.

1 Our Lords saying: No man can serve two masters. 2 How great the providence
and care of God is for us. 3 The commandment and promise of Christ: Seek ye
first the kingdom of god and his righteousness, and all things else shall be
cast unto you.
Of the first.
NO man can serve two masters. For either he shall hate the one, and love the
other. etc. By the two masters whom Christ says no man is able too serve,
we must understand two things which are so clean contrary one too another,
that they cannot be toogither: but that where the one is, there the other must
needs be away. Such as are (for examples sake) vices and virtues: heavenly
things and earthly things: the flesh and the spirit: the true woorshipping of
God and Idolatry, under which is contained covetousness, and God and the
devil. Of which Paul speaks in this wise: What agreement is there between
Christ and Beliall? Why no man is able too serve such masters, the reason is
easy to show, because they command and require contrary things of their
servant: therefore if thou obey the one, by and by thou do against the
other: and so contrariwise. The people of Israel (as we find in the xviij.
Chapter of the third book of Kings) would have served the true God and Baal
together. Whose error the Prophet Helias reproouing, says unto them: Why
halte ye on both sides? If the Lord be God, follow him: and if Baal be
God, follow him. As if he had said, You will serve two masters that command
you contraries, which thing it is not possible for you too do, without the
contempt of the one of them. For when you serve Baal, you offend God with
foul whooredome. The same vice does the Prophet Osee reprove in this people.
But men will needs make such shifts for themselves. The Paynims worshipped both
God and the devil, peinting the one white and the other blacks. And being
asked why they did so: they answered. We worship God, that he should do us
good: and we worship the devil, because he should do us no harm. After ye
same manner some in these days hold still the popish superstition for ye most
part, and yet nevertheless pretend to embrace Gods word and the true
religion. In these days we will serve both covetousness, and our belly, and
yet therwithall we bost our selves too be true worshippers of God, but yt can
not be. He that worshippeth the devil, has renounced god. He that embraces
ye Popish Idol service, has troubled the well of gods word. He that serves
covetousness, can not be the servant of God. Which thing the Lord purposed
to show chiefly in this Gospel. Why so? Because Paul writing too Timothy
says: They that will be rich, do fall intoo temptations, and the snares of the
devil, and into many unprofitable and hurtful desires, which drown men in
destruction and damnation. For covetousness is ye root of al evil, in seking
after yt which, diverse have strayed from the faith, and wrapped themselves in
many sorows. Here does Paul cu^ningly peint the nature of covetousness, which
fights full but against godliness and ye service of god. For they have
contrary effects. He yt serves covetousness falls into the snares of ye
devil: but he yt serves God, bursteth the snares of the devil. Covetousness
drowneth a man into destruction and damnation: but ye serving of God delivers
him. Covetousness leads away from faith: but the woorshipping of god keeps
men in faith. Covetousness snarleth a man in many sorrows, but the serving of
God leads a man into everlasting joy. Covetousness is the root of all evil,
and the service of God is the welspring of al good. It is no marvel therefore
yt Christ says: No man ca^ serve God and Ma^mon. For they fight one against an
other, and are delighted in contrary things. God commands thee too seek
the welfare of thy brother: but covetousness counsels thee to live to thy
self, as we see in ye rich glutton. God commands thee to bestow of thy goods
upon the poor: but Mammon bids thee get other men's goods by hook or by crook.
God will have thee sober: But Ma^mon bids thee run to riot and take thy
pleasure. Howbeeit it is here to be noted, that the Lord denies not but a man
may have riches and serve God both at once. For Abraham had riches: so had
David: so had Joseph in Egypt, Ezechias, Josias, Theodosius, Cornelius, and
many other, who nevertheless served God. Why so? Because they served not
their Riches, but made their riches servants unto them. Therefore the Lord
says in express words: No man can serve God and riches. What is it to serve
riches? It is to set a man's heart upon them as David says. It is too heap up
riches by hook and by crook. It is to keep goods wi^h wrong, and not to^
dispose them by Gods commandment. It is too shrink from the faith, and from
the fear of God, for hoording up of riches, and to deuyse sundry ways too
heap up riches. Howbeeit for as much as the chief cause of covetousness, is
Heathennish carfulness for the belly: Christ endeavors to take away this
cause. For he deals like the skillful physicians, who when they take in hand
to cure any disease, do show the danger of the disease, and first practice to
take away the roots and causes of the disease.

Of the second.
Be not careful for your life, what you shall eat nor what you shall
clothe your body vvithall. Christ does not by these words prohibit godly and
holy care, but Heathenishe and ungodly care. Therefore least any man might
imagine that this saying of the Lord is a maintenance too slothfulness
(before I fall in hand with the arguments whereby our Lord endeuereth to call
us from heathennish and unlawful care,) I will speak a few things concerning
lawful and unlawful care. For a man had need too be well advised in this
case, and diligently to distinguishe the one from the other. For as there is no
greater plague to the worshipping of God, than heathennishe care and ungodly
thoughtfulness: so there is nothing more too be wished, than that every man
should walk carefully in his vocation before God. It is to be known
therefore, that there are three sorts of care. One is wicked and heathenish:
an other is necessary and holy: and the third is mixed of both. The midlemost
is not only lawful, but also needful and holy: in so much as he that has it
not, can not be reckened among the children of God.

The ungodly or the Heathenishe and wicked thoughtfulness and care, is that
which grows of distrust and of the ignorance of Gods providence. This
heathenish care is in the Gospel of this day condemned by the mouth of Gods
own Son, and forbidden too the children of God by many reasons, as we shall
see afterward. This unholy and prohibited carfulness, is sometime called the
care of the flesh, partly because it proceeds of the corrupt judgment of
the flesh, without faith, and partly because it tends too a fleshly end,
namely the ease and restinesse of this present life.

The carfulness which I said was necessary, godly and holy, without which no
man can be accounted among the children of God, is commended unto us by
testimonies of the scripture, and many examples of holy men. Romans 12. It is
said: Let him that rules, do it with diligence. 1. Tim. 5. If there be any
that cares not for his own, and specially for them that be of his household,
he has renounced the faith, and is worse than an infidel. Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, had a godly care for their household. After that Joseph had prophesied
of the seven plentiful years, and of other seven barren years that should
follow those plentiful, he took upon him at Pharaos commandment, too care
for the employment of those seven years store and provision, after a godly
manner. Daniel in Babylon, and the godly kings and Prophets among the people of
God, did not compass so great matters, without this godly care. Paul. 2. Cor.
^^. Coloss. 2. 1. Thessal. 2. utters his carfulness for the church. So do
kings for their realms: householders for their households: the ministers of the
word for their heerers: the schoolemasters for their scholars: and too be
breef, al me^ in their several vocation may have (or rather ought too have)
this holy care, if they will execute their duty accordingly. But too ye intent
this holy and needful care be not steined with any vice: it is too be
known, that five things are required thervntoo. Of which the first is, Gods
commandment. For the godly mind, must take nothing in hand but by the
commandment of god. Honest therefore must that vocation be whereof the care
shall be godly and holy. Agein that holy care must proceed of faith, for
without faith, nothing can please God. Thirdly, forasmuch as if the Lord keep
not the City, they watch in vain that keep it: prayer and thanksgiving must
go with it. Prayer verily, wherewith too desire gods help: and thanksgiving,
whereby too attribute our success unto God, and not too our own wisdom or
worthiness. For soothly it is ye best remedy yt can be against the temptation
of hethenish thoughtfulness, too flee unto God by earnest prayer. Which
thing Paul teaches in the fourth chapter too the Philippians in these words:
Be careful for nothing, but in all things let your requests be made known
too God by prayer and entre^ance with thanksgiving. Fourthly our care must tend
principally too the glory of God. For although regard may be had too the
welfare of our house: yet the principal end must be Gods glory. Fifthly if
our care and travel have not so good success as we would wish: Let us submit
our selves to ye will of God our father, in true fear and lowlynesse, according
to the counsel of Peter, saying: Submit your selves under the mighty hand of
God, that he may exalt you in the time of exalting, and cast all your care
upon him, because he cares for you. And Psalm. 5. Cast thy care upon the
Lord, and he shall feed thee, and he shall not suffer the just man too be
tossed continually for ever.

The mixed care is that which in part ^eemeth godly, and in part is convinced or
found too be ungodly. As when we regard the things that perteine too our
duty, (which thing God requires ernestly at our hands:) but yet through a
certain misdouting of Gods providence, bred in us by nature, we pass our
^ounds, and traitorously rush intoo Gods office. As when a householder brings
up his children aright and after a godly manner, and looks well too his
household: but so, as over much fearfulness and sorrow drives him too
impacience, when his travel and care have not success according too his mind.
Therefore let the godly man cast this care upon the Lord, and do his duty
lustely, and not suffer his godly care too be stained with heathenishe
distrust, too the intent that having cast away this hethenish distrust and
sorowfulnesse, peace may continue with us inwardly, and we may be more
modeste and meek toward men, with whom let us serve al one God, shaking of
the yoke of Mammon and heathenishe carfulness. Thus much have I said
concerning the three kinds of carfulness, too the intent we may know from
which of them the Lord dissuadeth us in this Gospel. For he dissuadeth us not
from the godly and holy carfulness, such as he himself sustained most of
all men, but from the ungodly and hethenish care. Now here be set in order six
arguments, by which is confirmed Gods providence and care for us. Whereupon is
concluded, ye heathenish care which proceeds of want of knowing Gods
providence, is too be shaken off.

The first argument. Is not the life more than meat, and the body more than
raiment? That is, if God have given the greater thing without your care, why
should he not give that which is the lesser? Then since he has without your
care given us soul and body, which are great things, why should he not give
us food and raiment whereof these things have need, that they may continue and
not decay, specially seeing he has created all these things too our use.

The second. Look upon the fowls of the air, which nether sovve nor reap,
nor gather intoo their barnes: that is too say, Your heavenly father feeds
the birds of the air which are far inferior unto you, if ye respect the
degree of worthiness, why then should he not feed you whom he has
created after his own likeness? With this argument does David comfort
himself when he says: Which gives meat too the young Ravens that call
upon him.

The third. Which of you by taking thought is able to make himself one cubit
higher? and wherefore then take ye thought for your raiment? As if he had
said. Uaine is this thought of yours. God gives stature of the body without
thy care, and why should he not give raiment without this thy heathenish
distrust of god, as though he refused to assist thee in thy labor.

The fourth. Consider the Lilies of the field how they grow. The Lilies in
the feeldes take their sap of the earth, according as God has disposed
before: and they are so beautifully arrayed, as that Solomon in all his glory
was not arrayed like one of them. Seeing then that God does so much for the
Lilies which wither away within a while, and shall be burned: why should he not
clothe us whom he has created too eternal life?

The fifth. After all these things do the Heathen seek. As if he should say:
You in times past, after the manner of Heathen folk, were ignorant of Gods
providence, and void of Faith. But now ye know that GOD has a care of you.
Why then seek ye things needful for your life, with heathenish carfulness.

The sixth. Your Father knovveth that you have need of all these things. Mark
these things advisedly. He says not, the dreadful GOD, the jealous God, the
maker of Heaven and earth, he that visits the sins of the fathers upon their
children knows: but he says, your father knows: whose father? your
father. What manner a father? your heavenly father. Because he is heavenly, he
is also most good, most mighty, and most wise. Because he is most good, he
will give those things that be good. Because he is most mighty, he can give
what he will. And because he is most wise, he knows how, what, and when it is
meet too give.

Of the third.
Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all things
else shall be cast unto you. In this short saying of Christ are two things,
commandment and promise. The commandment is: Seek first the kingdom of
God, and the righteousness of God. And the promise is: And all things else
shall be cast unto you. First and foremost therefore let us see the
commandment, and then the promise.

The commandment is, that we should seek the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness of God. Here it is demanded what manner of things Gods kingdom
and righteousness are. And ageine, after what means they are too be sought.
The kingdom of God is of three sorts in the scripture: that is too wit: of
power, of grace, and of glory. He bids us not seek the kingdom of his
power, but of his grace: from whence is the passage too the kingdom of glory.
What is the kingdom of grace? It is that kingdom wherinto we are received of
mere grace, while we believe the Gospel. For the Gospel is as it were the
voice of a crier, whereby they are called too this Kingdom. Of this speaks
Christ in an other place: The kingdom of God is among you. Then is this
kingdom, the grace of God which Christ's Gospel offers. The promise is the
gate. The bringer in, is the holy Ghost, which sanctifyeth and regenerateth us
a new in the Laue of Baptime by the word. Breefly, this kingdom of grace is
mercy, forgyuenesse of sins, ioyfulnesse of conscience, and deliverance from
the kingdom of Satan. What is that righteousness of God which he bids us
seek? Out of all doubt it is the new life and obedience which God requires
of his children. And it is called the righteousness of God, because it
pleases god, that is too wit, for the faithes sake whereby we are reconciled
too God in the blud of Christ.

The promise is: And all things else shall be cast unto you. That is too say,
the things that perteine too the sustenaunce of this life shall be given you.
But Paul (whereof no man doubts) did busily seek the kingdom of God: and yet
notwithstanding in the.xj. chapter of the second Epistle too the Corinthians,
he co^plaineth, that he was distressed with hunger and thirst. Agein holy Jacob
suffered scarceness of corn and other victuals, in so much that he was
constreyned too go with his household intoo Egypt, least he and his should
have perished for hunger. Therefore this promise of Chrysts seems vain. I
answer: Chrysts promise fails not: for the truth can not lie. For Christ who
is our Physician is not ignorant when remedies are too be ministered, and when
they are too be withdrawn. He regards not so much our unskillfulness, as
his own wisdom. Therefore let us take this for a certeintie, that he
forsakes not those that are his. As for that we now and then want things
necessary, there be many causes. First, that we may be exercise in
patience. 2. That now and then our sins may be punished with these plagues.
3. Forasmuch as we oftentimes seek things superfluous, we justly and
rightfully want things necessary. 4. Because we abuse things when we have
the^. 5. Because we yield not thanks unto God. 6. Because we distrust God.
7. Because we diverse times ascribe the good things yt we receive, rather too
our own endeuer and peinfulnesse, than too God the giver of them. Wherefore if
we covet Gods blissing, let us confess and do as the Prophet does, which
says: All things are thine Lord, and we render unto thee the things ye we
have received at thy hand. Heer^ as the prophet confesses al things too be
Gods gifts: so he turns all things too Gods praise. Which thing that we
also may do, our heavenly father grant us through Jesus Christ, too whom be
glory world without end. Amen.

Upon the.xvj. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. vij.
AND it fortuned that Jesus went intoo a City called Naim, and many of his
disciples went with him, and much people. When he came nygh too the gates of
the City: Behold, there was a dead man carried out, which was the only
Son of his Moother, and she was a widow, and much people of the City
was with her. And when the Lord savv her, he had compassion on her, and
said unto her: vveep not. And he came nighe and touched the Coffin, and they
that bare him stood still. And he said: Young man, I say unto thee arise, and
he that was dead sat up, and began too speak. And he delivered him too his
Moother. And there came a fear on them all. And they gave the glory unto God,
saying: A great Prophet is risen up among us, and God has visited his people.
And this rumor of him went forth through out all levvry, and through out all
the regions which lie round about.

The exposition of the text.
Paul the Apostle writing too the Romans says: What things so ever are
written they are written for our instruction, that through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures we might have hope. Wherefore when we read the
most sweet Gospel of this day, let us know that it perteyneth not only too
that widow of Naim, but also too all mankind. For Christ in this Gospel
bears witness of the power of his own Godhead, of his pitifulness toward
them that be in distress, and of his office. For first the Lord proves
himself too be almighty, in that he ouermaistereth Death, which is the
sting of sin. Agein he vttreth his pitifulness toward us, in having
compassion upon this woman's miseries. And he shows that it is his office
too destroy the works of the Devil, for unto that purpose came he intoo
the world, as Moses, the Prophets, he himself, and the Apostles testify.
These are the things in general, that are too be considered in this Gospel.
Howbeeit too the intent we may receive the greater fruit thereby, I will
propound three places, which I will entreat of in this Sermon.

1 What manner of affection Christ bears toward us. 2 The declaration of
this present miracle, with the circumstances of the same. 3 An Image of all
Mankind.
Of the first.
THe Evangelist tells a story of a certain young man that was dead, and
carried out too be buried: at the sight whereof, our Lord was moved with
compassion. For when he behilde the sorrowful moother, he conceived a deeper
thought. There came too his remembrance the fall of mankind, the tirannie of
the Devil, and the greatness of the miseries wherewith mankind is distressed by
reason of sin. He considered it was his office too overthrow these
fortificatio^s of Satan. For he saw in this woman, a pattern of man's
wretchedness, which did put him in mind of man's fall and of his own
office.

We may therefore gather two things of this place. One what we be: and
another, what Christ is toward us. We in very deed are miserable, in
distress, and damned, and we cannot of our own power wrest our selves out of
so great mischeeues. Christ is God and man, and came too save that which was
lost, who in this case utters his affection toward mankind. For he is
none otherwise minded toward us, than he was toward this widow. He is
grieved for her calamities, and he is grieved for ours. He helps her, and he
will help us also. This is the very thing that the Apostle says, writing to the
Hebrews: we have a high priest that can be sorry with us in our infirmities.
Yea surely, he has greater affection and love toward us, than this widow
has toward her only son, whom she follows here weeping too the place of
his buryall. For thus says the Prophet: Can a woman forget the Babe of her
own womb? though she do forget, yet will not I forget thee.

But what are the causes of this unspeakable louingnesse of Christ's toward
us, that are all too be dawbed with the filthiness of many wicked crimes?
Surely there is no desert of ours, ne worthiness in us. Howbeeit there be
four causes whereby the son of God is moved too embrace us with so great
louingnesse.

The first is his fatherly kindness. For he created us, and therefore we are
his by right of creation. And although he know us too be full of filth and
wickedness: yet notwithstanding he finds somewhat in us that is his, namely,
that we be his creatures. Thou have mercy on all things (says the wise man)
and thou hate none of the things that thou haste made.

The second is the worthiness of our creation: Namely for that we are
created too the likeness of God, according too this: Let us make man after our
own image and likeness. And because this image was for the chief part thereof
defaced through sin: the Lord himself came too repair it ageine. Which thing
comes then too pass, when we beholding him steadfastly by true faith are
transformed intoo the likeness or image of God.

The third is, the end too which we are created. For we are created too be
the temple of God glorifying God. And albeeit that this Temple was then
unhallowed through sin: yet the stuff of it was still remaining, whereof Christ
might buyld up a new Temple.

The fourth is the destruction of Satan's kingdom, too overthrow the which,
Christ came intoo this world. A certain hansel of this destruction was given in
this miracle. Christ encountered oftentimes with Satan, and oftentimes did
put him too flight, and at length overcame him when he rose ageine from death.
This victory of Christ's shall be seen perfect in the last day, when the
last of al enemies (death) shall be abolished. These four causes moved our
Lord too take flesh upon him and to become man: and in the flesh, that is in
the nature of man, too suffer both in soul and body for mankind.

And although this affection of Christ's be oftentimes commended unto us in
the word of God, and warranted with many miracles, yea and with the obedience
of the Son of God himself, who was obediente too the father even unto the
death of the cross: yet notwithstanding there be three things that labor too
persuade us otherwise. That is, the law, conscience and the heap of miseries
wherewith* we be overwhelmed in this life. For these things cry unto us that
we are abiects from Christ.

The law says: Cursed is every one that continues not in all the things that
are written in the book of the law. And there is no man but he sees he has
innumerable ways transgressed ye law. We look upon Eve who became subject to
the sentence of cursing for breaking of one commandment: and what shall
become of us that have offended God so often.

The sentence of this law is confirmed by the fearfulness of the conscience,
which is as good as a thousand witnesses, as it is said in the Proverb. The
conscience is a thousand witnesses. Heeruntoo perteyneth this saying of the
Poet: As each man's conscience finds him, so feels he in his heart, a
joyful hope or dreadful fear, according too desert. And S. Bernarde says:
The evil conscience of our sins, is our witness, our judge, our tormentor,
and our prison: for it accuses us, it judges us, and it condemns us. What
can be more grievous (I pray you) than day and night too carry such a witness
about us in our breast? Many being convicted by the record of this conscience,
have abridged their own lives, while they could not endure too hear her
accusing them and bearing witness against them.

Too the furtherance heerof comes the huge heap of calamities, which confirm
ye sentence of the law and the conscience. Against these.iij. most grievous
temptations, let us in true repentance set Christ alone. He came intoo the
world to take away ye curse of the law: too wipe out sin: too turn intoo glory
all the miseries of those that believe in him: howbeeit in such wise as al
things ar done orderly. This world is a wast wilderness, from whence we must
pass intoo our country. The people of Israel came not by and by intoo the
resting place that was promised them. Joseph came not too so great dignity in
Egypt, without imprisonment before. Christ entered not into his glory till he
had bin first crucified, dead and buried. Wherefore it behooves us also to enter
into glory by the cross. For thus says Paul: If we suffer with him, we shall
reign with him also. He yt shunneth the encounter, looks for ye garland in
vain. No man shall be crouned (says the Apostle) but he that contendeth
lawfully. The same says: we are made safe by hope. Therefore against the curse
of the law, let us set Christ who became accursed for us. Against our
conscience accusing us, let us set Christ acquiting us from sin. If the son
set you free (says he,) you are free in deed. Against the miseries of this
present life, let us set Christ and the purpose of God: whose will it is yt we
should become like unto ye image of his son. To be breef, let us in true
repentance and faith flee to the throne of grace our Lord Jesus Christ. In him
only shall we find help at time convenient. For he says too all that believe in
him: Be not afraid my little flock, for it has pleased my father too give
you a kingdom. And so let us not suffer any thing in heaven, in earth or hell,
too persuade us that Christ is otherwise affectioned toward us, tha^ he was
toward this widow. Therefore let us lern heerby yt god judges far otherwise
than does ye world. Our God and mediator Jesus Christ does not after the
manner of the world reject them that be in misery and distress, but he
receives all that come unto him, according too his promise: Come unto me all
ye that labor and are laden, and I will refresh you, and ye shall find rest unto
your souls. Furthermore godly widows may lern heerby, what a patron^,
advocate, and comforter they have: Let gouerners of churches learn hereby, not
to shun such as be in misery and distress: And let the magistrate learn by the
example of Christ not too despise, not too shake of, not too condemn men
because they be in misery and distress, but rather too cherish and comfort
them. Ageine let us all learn too embrace one another with mutual affection of
charity, and too comfort one another after a godly manner. And thus much
concerning the first part of this Gospel. Now follows the second.

Of the second.
IN the declaration of this present miracle there be many circumstances. Of
which each one has his several lesson, and therefore I will rehearse them in
order with their lessons, and admonishmentes.

The first: When the corse was carried forth, the widow his mother followed
after, and a great company of the city with her. Here we see two things: of
which the first is the solemn bearing out of the Corse, which the sorrowful
moother follows: and the other is the honor and solemnity of the burial.
They carry the dead Corse after an honest sort too the place of burial, so also
did the holy Fathers. Abraham buried his wife honorably. Joseph conveyed the
Corse of the Patriarch Jacob too burial, with a great train of people. Jacob
and Esau buried their father Isaac honorably. Too be short, among all the
Godly there was great solemnity used in burials. And that was done in hope of
the resurrection of their bodies, and of the immortality that is too come. The
Church at this day follows the example of the holy fathers, though many be
too be found which cast out their dead Corses as if they were the carcasses of
swine. In our burials is used such a solemnity as this is. The godly being
present follow the Beer: and there is singing, ringing, and sometime preaching.

They that follow the Beer, do first utter their good will toward him that
is departed. 2. By this deed they show an example of their faith, concerning
the rising agein of the dead. 3. They are warned that they themselves in their
time (when the Lord shall thinks good) must follow, and by death take their
leave of these miseries of the world.

Then is there singing, and that is, too the intent the living may comfort
themselves with godly Psalms, and give GOD thanks for him that is dead, if
he depart in the true profession.

The ringing is, not only too call the people toogither too bring the Corse
too church, but also that the living may thereby be put in mind of Gods
trumpet, by which all the dead shall be waked up in the last day.

Lastly there is preaching, too the intent that those which wayt upon the
Corse too Church, may carry home some instruction and comfort with them against
death. And thus much breefly concerning the first circumstance, and the
solemnity of burial which is observed among us.

The second: Our Lord says too the widow, weep not. Here some demand
whither it be lawful too moorne for the dead. The examples of holy men and
the scriptures admit mourning for the dead. In Deuter. the last Chapter, all
the people mourned in the desert for Moses when he was dead. Abraham bewailed
his wife Sara. Joseph a holy man mourned many days for his Father Jacob. David
mourned for Ammon his son: Israel for Samuel: Martha for Lazarus: and den
Lord himself also wept for Lazarus. Jesus the son of Syrach in his* ^8.
chapter says: My son shed thy tears over the dead, and begin too sorrow as
if thou hadde^^ suffered harm. But Jeremy in his* 22. Chapter says: Bewail
not the dead. And Christ says here too the woman: weep not. These
countersayings Paul reconcileth. Th. 4. where he says* Brethren I would not
have you ignorant concerning them that are fallen a sleep, that ye sorrow not as
others do which have no hope. Then is it heathenish sorowing that is
forbidden, which has no hope of comfort by the resurrection of the dead. But
measurable mourning is granted, such as they use which have comfort set
present before the^.

But in as much as we fall intoo mention of comfort, let us breefly say from
whence Christians may fetch comfort in the death of their friends. First let
them think upon Gods will, which they are bound too obey. 2. Let them think
upon the universal case of al men. For we must all die once. 3. Let them
think upon Gods ryghtuousnesse. For what is more rightful than that he
which has given life, should take it too himself ageine, and keep it, when
he sees it good so too do. 4. Let him think upon Gods wisdom, who only
knows whither it is more for our behoof too live or die. For he takes many
away, either because they should not be made worse, or else that they should
not endure any more troubles in this mortal life. 5. Let them think with
themselves that the dead are set free from all miseries of this life. 6. Let
them think it is vain too take long sorrow for them, fith sorrow cannot call
them ageine. For so did David comfort himself in the. 12. Chapter of the
second book of Kings. He moorned as long as his Child lay sick: but when he
was dead, he arose and washed, and ate meat. 7. Let them think that he which
soroweth ouermuche; does hurt his own body, and in so doing sins against
God. 8. Let them think that the bliss of immortality is not too be enuyed
too the party deceased. For blissed are they (says the Scripture) that die in
the Lord. 9. Let them think upon the resurrection of Christ, and of our
selves also, which shall be at the latter day. For this thought must be a
common remedy, not only against the sorrow that we conceive for the dead: but
also against all afflictions as well of mind as body. But some man obiecteth.
I have forgon the comfort of my life. The^ thou bewaylest not him that is dead,
but thou bewaylest thine own self and thy loss that thou have by forgoing
him. It is a natural thing too weep. Thou say truth: but let grace
overcome nature. Th^s much is added breeflye in the second circumstance
concerning comfort at the death of our dear friends.

The third: Our Lord touches the coffin wherein the dead^ men lay. By which
touching he declares that his body was the instrument too get us life and
salvation.

The fourth: He speaks too the young man and says: I say to thee, young man
arise. So also raised he the young ma^d, as is in Mark. So raised he Lazarus,
that had bin buried four days, as is in John. Here we are taught, both
that Christ is stronger than death, and that his word is the word of life and
salvation.

The fifth: The dead man ryseth at Chrysts call, and this is the miracle, he
rises yt was dead: he began straight ways too speak: and our Lord delivered
him too his moother.

The sixth: Fear fell upon them al* and they glorified God, saying: A great
prophet is risen up among us, and God has visited his people: and this saying
was spread abroad of him through all Ievvrie. Here is described a double fruit
of this miracle. The one befalls too the present heerers: and the other
extends unto others, too whom the report of this miracle came. The present
beholders conceived faith hereby, and so feared God, glorifying him with true
woorship, and acknowledged the Messiah too be come whom also they confessed.
Besides that, the report hereof came unto others that were in Iewrie and the
country bordering thereupon, who in likewise conceived Faith in the Messiah.
And in these days the report hereof comes unto us, whereby we may
acknowledge Christ too be the very Messiah and too be stronger than death*
and may conceive faith in him: magnifying God with heart, voice, confession, and
manners: and so it will come too pass, that one day we shall have by him a
joyful resurrection too everlasting life.

Of the second.
Saint Ambrose says that the image of the Church is set forth here: and
because it represents our estates, it is worth the opening. The widow (says
he) signifies ye church: the dead young man, every sinner yt lives without
repentance: and the (...) the body of sin. The widow bewaileth her dead
(...)* That is to say, the church l^^^nenteth for the vnrepentantnesse of the
wicked, and entreats Christ too move them and draw them too him with his
word and his spirit. Christ therefore bids them that carried the corse too
stand still. For the sinner is borne to hell byfoure porters, which are the^e:
First (...) of longer life. Secondly looking upon other men's faults.
Thirdly presumption upon Gods mercy. And fourthly, ^^atterie of lend company.
Now if thou wilt rise from the death of sin, thou must needs here Christ
who bids the porters stay. First therefore then must exclude hope of long
life, because life is ^ncerteyn (according as the experience of many teaches)
and peril is at hand as it is too be seen in the rich glutton. Ageine, thou
must not set another man's evil l^^e before thee as a pattern too follow*
but thou must submit thy self too God as Abraham did: thou must trust in him:
and thou must ^mend thy conditions: knowing that the (...) in judgment* It
(...). The (...) that thou gave me has given me of the Apple. Thirdly l^y
away presumption of Gods mercy: for this presumption is a great contempt of
God. Romans 2. Fourthly put away flatterers that entice thee too evil. And when
thou have done so, lean upon Christ with lively faith, the will quicken thee
too eternal life, the which, Christ grant unto us, (...) whom be (...) for
evermore. Amen.

Upon the.xvij. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Luke. xiiij.
IT chanced that Jesus went intoo the house of one of the chief Pharisees to
eat bread on the Saboth day: and they vvatched him. And behold, there was a
certain man before him which had the dropsy. And Jesus ansvvered, and spoke
unto the Lawyers and Pharisees, saying: Is it lavvfull too heal on the
Sabbath day? And they hild their peace. And he took him and healed him, and
let him go: and ansvvered them, saying: which of you shall have an Ass or an
Ox fallen intoo a pit, and will not straight way pull him out on the
Sabbath day? And they could not answer him ageine too these things. He put
forth also a similitude too the guestes, when he marked how they preaced
too be in the highest roumes, and said unto them: When thou art bidden too
a wedding of any man, sit not down in the highest room, lest a more
honorable man than thou be bidden of him, and he (that bad him and thee) come
and say too thee: give this man room: and thou begin with shame too take
the lowest room. But rather when thou art bidden, go and sit in the lowest
room, that when he that bad thee comes, he may say unto thee: friend, sit
up hyer. Then shall thou have vvoorship in the presence of them that fit at
meat with thee. For whosoever exalts him self, shall be brought low,
and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

The exposition of the Text.
THe occasion of this Gospel was this. Christ being bidden too dinner of a
certain Pharisie, was watched by those that sat at meat with him, that
either in his words or in his deeds they might have found somewhat too charge
him withal. For the world is so wicked, that like as men cloak vices under the
visors of virtue: So they are not ashamed too raise slander upon honest
deeds and true virtue. So great is the malice of men. Notwithstanding, Christ
is not feared away with their lewdness, but keeps his old wont, and
executes his office even in the thickest of his enemies, leaving us an
example, that we should not cease too proceed in well doing, though we
should see all the whole world hent against us. Christ therefore heals this
wretch, declaring therein the might of his Godhead, his most forward will too
help them that be in misery, and his Office for which he came intoo the
world. Moreover he shows the right manner of halowing the Saboth day, and by
his deed does as it were, define the true keeping of the Saboth. By which
thing, like as he reproves the pride of the Pharisees and their ignorance in
the scriptures: So he exhorts them unto true humility. And thus much
concerning the sum of this present Gospel. The places are three.

1 Of the Saboth, and the true woorks thereof. 2 Of the miracle by which the
true use of the Saboth is confirmed. 3 Of true Humility.
Of the first.
WHen the Lord was bidden too dinner by a certain Pharisie upon the Sabbath
day, and that a certain man diseased of the Dropsy was brought before him, he
demanded of those that seemed too themselves too be wyser than other men,
whither it were lawful too heal upon the Sabbath day. And the cause why he
put forth this question, was, for that as the Pharisees had with their gloses
corrupted the other scriptures: So also had they defaced the keeping of the
Sabbath. Howbeeit forasmuch as the question is concerning the Saboth, we will
set forth the whole doctrine concerning the Saboth, and speak of four things
in order. First wherefore God ordained the Sabbath day. Secondly what is the
right use of the Jews Sabbath. Thirdly what manner of holy days ours ought too
be. And fourthly of the true Ceremonies of the Church, and of the ends of them.

Why then did God ordeine the Sabbath day? There be rek^ened chiefly five
causes. Of which the first is, that it should be a perpetual Sacrament or
remembrance of Gods rest after the creation of the world which he made in six
days with all the furniture and contents thereof. This cause is alleged in
the second of Genesis, where Moses says, that the Lord commanded the Saboth
day too be kept holy, because he rested that day from creation. The same thing
also is declared in the.xx. of Exodus in these words. The seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord. For in six days the Lord God made heaven and earth.

The second cause of the ordeyning of the Sabbath is, that it should be a type
and counterfigure of Christ's Sabbath keeping. For it represented the Sabbath,
which Christ the true Passover and creator of the new Heaven and new earth
should rest in his grave upon the Sabbath day, and keep the very Sabbath
arighte. And therefore he commaundes the Jews straightly too keep the
Sabbath day. And by the unsearchable devise of his wisdom he ordained, that
Christ the true Paschall Lamb, should be slain and put too death upon the
very day of the Passover, and that he rested the Saboth day following in his
grave.

The third cause also why the Saboth was ordained, was that it should be a
pledge of the promise. For God promised his people a Saboth, that is too say,
a rest. Esaias* the.xiiij. And in that day, when GOD shall give thee rest from
thy labor, and from thy confusion, and from thy hard bondage wherein thou
did serve. etc. The people of GOD look for three kinds of rest. The first
is from the labor of the present troubles in this life. The second is from
the temptations wherewith our own Conscience and the Devil assaulteth us.
The third is from the thraldom of the Devil, so as he may never more bring
us under his bondage and hard yoke.

The fourth cause of the institution of the Sabbath is, too the intent there
should be a time certain for teaching and hearing the word of GOD, or that
there should be a time wherein there might be an open and common professing
of the religion, in which the godly might take comfort, and the ignorant be
instructed in godliness. Esaias. 58. If thou call a delicate Saboth: Then shall
thou delight in the Lord, Job. 22. Then shall thou delight in the almighty,
and lift up thy face unto GOD. For the Saboth was not ordained too play and
drink in, but too pray and praise God in. Whereupon Austin says, it is
less evil too go too plough than too play upon one of those days.

The fifth cause is for civil policy, which is commended too Gods people.
Deuteronomy. 5. in these words. Keep the Saboth day, that thy man servant, thy maid
servant and thy self may rest. And afterward. Thou shall do no manner of
work therein, thou and thy son and thy daughter, thy man servant, and thy
maid servant, thine Ox and thine Ass, and the Stranger that is within thy
gate. And thus have we the true causes, and the right use of the Iewishe
Sabbath. Now although the Jewish Saboth toogither with other ceremonies of
Moses, be abolished and disanulled, so far forth as perteyneth too the
keeping of the seventh day of the week: Yet notwithstanding, as touching the
use of it, it is continual, as a thing ratifyed by the law of God and nature.
For like as God will be served, and that his word shall be preached: So nature
tells us it is utterly necessary, that there should be some certain time
appointed for holy matters. Therefore there must needs be certain days
appointed, for folk too assemble and meet in openly at certain hours, that
the word of God may be taught and learned, too the intent all things may be
done orderlye, and after a comely fashion in the Church, according as Paul
teaches the Corinthians.

Moreover, in our holidays two things are too be observed. One is, what is
to be eschued: Another is, what is to be done. Three things are too be
eschued. The first is outward labor: And that too the intent the mind may
wholly intend too Gods service: that is too say, that it may wholly intend too
hear Gods word, too learn it, and too consider upon it. And therefore it is
the Magistrates duty too provide that the service of God be not hindered at
such times by bodily labors. Howbeit, here it is too be known, that there
be four exceptions which excuse those that labor at such a time. The first
is necessary. For our Lord himself excuses his Disciples for plucking the
ears of corn upon the seventh day, as says Matthew in the twelfth Chapter.
The second is the profit of the Church, like as the preests did all things
upon the Saboth day which seemed needful in the Church, without trouble of
conscience for the Saboth. The third is the profit and sauegard of our
neighbor: wherefore our Lord also healed the man that had the dropsy, upon the
Saboth day. The fourth is the authority of the superiors, too whom we must
be obedient. But let the superiors take heed that they offend not him which
is their superior, while they hold their inferiors too straight. The second
thing that is too be eschued, is voluptuous life, toogither with all the
works of darkness which fight full against keeping holy the Saboth day.
Thirdly thou must eschew the contempt of godly ceremonies: soothly least either
by absenting thy self, or by despising the holy Ceremonies, thou give others
example too become worse.

Thus have we what things are too be eschued in our holidays: Now let us see
what is too be done in them. First therefore in as much as the Jews were
occupied in killing sacrifices, and in offering: Let us also slay the
sacrifices of our own bodies, and offer the Calves of our lips: Let us
earnestly repent: let us glorify God with heart, mouth, confession, and
behavior: let us offer the incence of our heart: that is too wit, faith, and
hope: let us offer the sacrifice of well doing, with which kind of sacrifice
God is delighted (as the Apostle says too the Hebrews:) Let us be quick too
give alms: Let us cherish the weak members of the Church: and let us heal
them also (as much as may be) after the example of Christ and other holy men,
which exercised themselves in the true holyday works.

Now remains somewhat too be said of Ceremonies. Ceremonies are customs
and ordinances made too govern the body of the Church withal. These, if they
be lawful, (for I have nothing to do with ungodly Ceremonies) either have
their warrant of the manifest word of God, as Baptim and the Lords Supper:
or else they make in deed too the mayntenaunce of the doctrine, and
orderlynesse of the Church, and are ordained by some counsel of the
spirituality, or by the godly Magistrate. These Ceremonies serve too two ends.
For they are ordained for comlynesse and orders sake. Of comeliness are two
parts: The first is, that we should be stirred up unto godliness by those
helps: The latter is, that modesty and gravity might appear in the
ministration of godliness* Order consists of three parts. The first is,
that the chief dooers or heads of the congregations, might have a certain
rule too deal by. The second is, that the heerers accustom themselves too
obedience and discipline. The third is, that peace and quietness be provided
for, by mainteyning the Church in good estate. Thus much breefly concerning
godly Ceremonies and the ends of them, and the parts of those ends.

Of the second.
THe second lesson which this Gospel teaches, is concerning the miracle
whereby the man was healed that was diseased of the Dropsy. In this miracle
are four things too be observed. The question, the healing, the defense of
the deed, and the use of the same.

The question is put forth by Christ himself, whither it be lawful too
heal upon the Sabbath day. Heerevntoo the Pharisees make none answer, for if
they had denied it too be lawful, they should have seemed cruel against the
miserable soul that was diseased of the Dropsy. If they had granted it too
be lawful, they would have bin afraid too seem transgressoures of the Law.
If he had not healed him, they would have said, that either he could not or
would not help this diseased person. And if he had healed him, they would
have thought themselves too have had just cause too accuse him as a breaker of
the Sabbath, and so consequently as a despiser of the Law of GOD. Here was
danger every way. But our Lord passing not for their Sophistry, took this
wretched man that was diseased with the Dropsy, and healed him before the
Pharisees faces, and sent him away whole and sound. In which deed (as I said
at the beginning) he showed both his power, his will* and his office, Now
follows in the third place, the defense of this deed. Which of you (says
he) having an Ox or an Ass fallen intoo a Pytte, draws him not out by and
by upon the Sabbath day? As if he had said, either it is lawful too heal a
man upon the Sabbath day, or else unlawful. If it be lawful, why lay you
wayt for me as a transgressour of the Law if I do it? But if it be
unlawful, why do you save your Asses and your Oxen upon the Sabbath day?
What said they too this? They could not answer theruntoo (says the
Evangelist.) But too what use serves the healing of this Dropsy by Christ?
Too two uses. The one is general, whereof I have spoken already, namely,
that by this miracle Christ might show his power, his will, his office, and
the truth of his Doctrine, and thereby confirm faith in the beholders. And
the other is special* For doubtless this man that was diseased of the
Dropsy, was fallen intoo it by disordered surfeiting.

Wherefore we also may learn, that Christ despises not those that have cast
themselves intoo diseases through their own fault, so that they follow the
example of this man that had the Dropsy, that is too say, if they come unto
Christ with all their heart: and if they suffer themselves too be touched and
healed by him: that is, if they believe his word, fall too repentance,
acknowledge Gods just wrath, and desire pardon and healing of their sore, or
at least wise assuageme^t of it for Christ's sake.

Of the third.
ANd he said too the guests that preased for too sit highest at the table:
when thou art bidden too a feast. etc. As by this parable he condemns pride:
so he teaches true humility which is a very rare virtue. Of which I will say
these things in order. First what humility is, next how many kinds of it
there be. Thirdly what causes it has, as well of furtheraunce as of
hinderaunce. And fourthly what be the fruits and rewards of true humility.

As touching the first: too the intent we may know what humility is, we must
see who the Scripture calls humble or lowly. Paul calls those humble whom
Christ calls poor in spirit, such as those are which being utterly void of
all opinion of their own strength, wisdom, and righteousness, impute unto
God alone, whatsoever good thing they have. Humility then is a virtue,
wherthrough we acknowledging our selves as we be in deed, do wax vile in our
own sight: and utterly voyding from us all trust in our own strength, wisdom
and righteousness, do cast down our selves before God, and in him only seek
all good things through Christ. Notable examples heerof are in Mary Magdalene,
in the thief, in the Publicane, in David, and in other holy men. This is the
true humility, of which Chrysts promise is too be understood: blissed be
the poor in spirit. Thus have we what humility is. Now let us see how many
sorts there be of it. One is whereby we cast down our selves before God: and
another whereby we humble our selves before men. But we must beware yt pride
put not on ye visor of humility: which if man pluck not of, surely God will
bring it too shame. But let us leave that visor, and speak of the true
humility yt has respect too God and man. Humility too godward, is ye true
fear of God, springing of ye true acknowledging of our own infirmity, and of
Gods goodness toward us: such as was the humility of Manasses in Prison,
who when he could not bow the knees of his body because of the straightness
of the prison, did bow the knees of his heart. So did Abraham humble himself,
when he confessed himself too be but dust and ashes. True humility too
menward, is a true mildness, where through we prefer not our selves proudly
before any man, but with a single meaning apply our selves unto all men. Of
this humility we have the greatest example in ye son of God, whose example
Paul admonishes us too follow. Phil. 2. So was the blissed virgin humble, so
was Anne the Prophetisse, and so were many others.

Now must I speak of the causes (according as I promised in the third place)
which surely are many. The first is Gods commandment. For the first table
requires humility too Godward: and all the second table requires
humbleness to manward. The second is, the example of Christ. Whereupon Paul in
the second chapter too the Philippia^s: Let the same mind be in you which was
in Jesus Christ, who being God took the shape of a servant upon him. The
third is the consideration of thy self, what thou warte before thy birth,
what thou art from thy birth too thy death, and what thou shall be after
this life. Thou warte seed and blood in thy mothers womb, now thou art in a
wilderness of miseries during this life, and in the end thou shalt be
woormes meat. The fourth is, that thy goods and good gifts (if thou have
any) are not thine own, but Gods, bestowed upon thee too do good with unto
others. Therefore if thou be either proud of them, or abuse them, thou must
stand in fear of horrible punishment. The fifth is, too think that God is
able too take away what gifts soever thou haste, if thou abuse them, and yield
not the praise too him alone. The sixth is, that many which seem too have less
gifts than thou, do oftentimes imploye their labor more too the profit of
the common weal and the Church than thou do. For as God is the strength of
bread, so is he the power whereby any thing is made acceptable too himself. And
these are the six causes, which being knit toogither, make true humility:
the which is hindered by two mischeeues, strife, and vainglory. Wherefore Paul
in the second too the Philippians says: Do nothing of strife or vaineglorie,
but through humility, let every man esteem other better than himself. For as
for those which have a delighte in striving, like as they be destitute of
charity: so are they also void of true humility: and vaineglorie fights
full butte ageinste humility. Thus have we what humility is, of how many
sorts it is, and what causes it has. Now follows that which I promised too
speak of in the fourth place, of the reward and natural fruits of the same.
He that is humble shall receive three fruits: the first before God: the
second before men: and the third in himself.

First before God the fruit is, that he which is rightly humble, has God
dwelling in him. Whereupon Esaias. 57. I dwell high above, and in the
Sanctuary, and with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit. And in
the.66. Whom shall I regard? Even him that is poor, and of a lowly troubled
spirit, and stands in awe of my words. Luke the second, GOD exalts the
lowly. 1. Peter. 5. God resists the proud, and gives grace too the lowly.

Before men the lowlye person receives this fruit. Even as the proud body is
disdeyned of al men: even so he that is lowly in deed, is honored of all men:
and an honest name and report follows him.

In himself, the lowly person finds these most sweet fruits. First
humility or lowliness is the mother of chastity and patience. Secondly, it
is the way unto wisdom. Proverbs. 11. Where as is lowliness, there is
wisdom. Thirdly, it is the keeper of faith, and of the fear of God. Fourthly,
it is the furtherance of invocation, and after a sort, procures too be
heard of the Lord. Psalm. 101.

The Lord looked down upon the prayer of the lowly. Fifthly, glory
accompanies lowlynesse. Math. v. Blissed are the poor in spirit, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 24. He that humbles himself, shall be exalted.
Proverbs. 29. The lowly person shall come too woorship: not for that
lowlynesse deserves these things, but because these things fall unto the
lowly through the lowlynesse of Christ. To whom be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

Upon the.xviij. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Math. xxij.
WHEN the Pharisees had heard that Jesus did put the Saducees too silence, they
came toogither: and one of them (which was a doctor of law) asked him a
question, tempting him and saying: Master, which is the greatest
commandment in the law? Jesus said unto him: Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, This
is the first and greatest commandment: And the second is like unto it. Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments hang all
the law and the Prophets. While the Pharisees were gathered toogyther, Jesus
asked them, saying: What think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They said
unto him: The son of David. He said unto them: How then does David in
spirit call him Lord, saying: The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my
right hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool. If David then call him
Lord, how is he then his son? And no man was able too answer him any
thing, neither durst any man (from that day forth) ask him any mo questions.

The exposition of the text.
THis Gospel contains a sum of the christen doctrine, that is too wit, the
doctrine of the law and of the Gospel. A Pharisie propounds a question
concerning the law: and Christ ageine an other concerning the Gospel, but for
a sundry purpose. For the Pharisie asks a question concerning the law, too
the intent too tempt Christ, and too pick a quarrel too him. But Christ
demanded of him concerning the Gospel, too the intent too bring the
misweening Jews and Pharisees, unto the true knowledge of the law and the
gospel. For they, because they thought yt men were justified by the deeds of ye
law, despised the Gospel, supposing there was no need of any other doctrine
too the attaynment too salvation, than the doctrine of the law, whose error
Christ confuteth. See here the goodness of Christ. Although the Pharisees ask
the question upon malice, yet notwithstanding Christ answers them according
too his own office, and teaches an absolute doctrine concerning the law and
the Gospel. Therefore the sum of this Gospel is, that Christ contriueth all
the law and the Prophets intoo these two points: which are the love of God,
and the love of our neybour. Afterward he enquireth of the Messiah, that is too
wit, of himself, too the intent he might show what one he was, namely, God and
man, who was too this end promised too the fathers, that he should destroy the
works of the devil, and that all kinreds of the earth might be blissed in
him, who becoming our priest should pacify Gods wrath by paying our ransom
for us. The places are three.

1 Of the Saducees whose mouths our Lord stopped. 2 The question concerning
the sum of the Law, and a rule how too serve God. 3 The question concerning
the Messiah.
Of the first.
THe Pharisees hearing that he had put the Saducees too silence, assembled
toogither. etc. Albeeit that the Pharisees and Saducees were of a sundry
religion one from another, and defended contrary opinions: yet they agree in
this, that both of them do set themselves against Christ. Herod and Pilate
were enemies: yet they agree in this point, that both of them desire too
dispatch Christ out of the way. Thus does ungodliness conspire against Christ
and his holy Gospel. As concerning that he says: Christ had put the Saducees
too silence: it is too be known, that the Saducees (who denied, that the
souls of men lived after death, and took away the resurrection of the dead)
did strive against him, either too the intent too win him too subscribe too
their opinion, or else too make him a laughingstocke too the rude people, that
was seduced and noozled by these teachers. Therefore they stepte unto Christ
after this manner: If the dead shall rise ageine, many incommodities, many
debates, and many absurdities will ensue. This they go about too prove in
this wise. There was a certain woman among us, that had bin wife too seven
men one after an other. Now if there shall he a rising ageine of the dead,
this woman shall arise, and the seven husbands that she had shall arise also.
Now if she stick too any one of them, the rest will fall at odds with him: and
if they all dwell with her toogither, nothing can be more troublesome too the
woman, nor nothing more hard for the men too abide. Therefore seeing that these
absurdities should follow the resurrection of the dead, it is ill done too
auouche that there shall be a resurrection. This was their manner of reasoning,
whose duty it had bin too instruct the people a right concerning the hope
of everlasting life, from which like a sort of false caytiues they withdraw
me^, and yet will needs be called rightuous. But Christ stops these fellows
mouths, and so puts them too silence, that being dashed out of countenance
with his words, they had not what too say. Therefore he reproves them,
confuteth them, and teaches them. He reproves them, for that they were
ignorant in the Scriptures, and yet would take upon them too be teachers of the
Scripture. He confuteth the^ openly by putting forth an example. God is the
God of the living: God is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: Ergo, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob do live. If they live, they live either in their bodies, or
in their souls. In their bodies they live not for you know their tumbes:
therefore they live in their souls, which you falsely surmise too die together
with their bodies. But now men's souls live, that in their time they may
return intoo their bodies, too the intent that such as have done well in this
life may receive reward, and those that have done evil may suffer just
punishment. This is the sum of the confutation. What does that teach? two
things. The one is, that the dead shall rise ageine by the might and power of
GOD, unto whom nothing is impossible. He was able too create all things of
naught, and why shall he not be able too call souls ageine intoo their
bodies, specially since he has determined it, and that it is too the
aduau^cement of his righteousness and glory? Paul in the second too the
Philippians says: We look for a Savior from Heaven, even Jesus Christ,
which shall transform our corruptible bodies, that they may become like
unto the glorious body of him, through that same power, whereby he is able
too make all things subject too him self. Therefore when our reason begins
to dispute of ye resurrection, let us set four things against it. Gods
determination: Gods almightinesse: Gods justice: and Gods glory.

His determination, for that he has ordained and appointed too raise the dead.
Because God is unchangeable, he will never call back ageine or disanull this
determination. And there are certain examples of this determination remaining.
Christ our Lord rose agein from the dead. Enoch was conveyed alive intoo
Heaven. Helias was taken up alive intoo heaven in a fyrie Charyot.

Let his almightynesse be set against our reason, which thinks it
impossible for the dead too rise ageine. For if he could not do the thing that
he has determined too do, he were not almighty. And if he were not almighty,
neither were he too be called God*

His justice requires, that we should render reward too them that have
deserved well, and punishment too the ungodly. We see that in this life the
godly for the most part are in ill case, and the ungodly in good case. But now
in as much as Gods justice requires that the good should fare well and the
evil should fare amiss, and that it falls not out so in this life: there
must needs be another life to come, wherein God according too the rule of his
righteousness should render too the godly, life everlasting, and to the
ungodly the payns of hell.

Also gods glory is too be set against the Saducees opinion and our own
reason. God made man for his own glory, that he should continually praise and
glorify him. Which thing verily could not come too pass except there were a
resurrection of the dead.

Moreover, Christ instructs the Saducees, concerning the state of men after
the resurrection. There shall be no use of marriage, there shall be no begetting
of children: but they shall live for evermore in continual chastity, as the
Angels of God do. Therefore there is no debate to be feared between the many
husbands that have had one self same woman too wife one after an other, when
they lived here. Thus much concerning the Saducees, and the confutation of
their error, and the confirmation of us for the Resurrection of the dead: the
belief whereof is warranted unto us by the determination of god which is
unchangeable: by his mightiness, whereby he is able too make all things subject
too him: by his justice, wherthrough he recompenceth every man according too
his deeds: and by his glory, which must be rendered unto him of the Saints
world without all end.

Of the second.
NOw steps forth the Pharisie, and demaundes of Christ which is the cheifest
commandment of the law. Our Lord answers: Thou shall love the Lord thy
God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy powers. This
is the first and greatest commandment: and the second is like unto it. Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments hang all
the law and the Prophets. That is too say, whatsoever Moses and the Prophets
do teach of the true service of God, it is contained in these two points.
Forasmuch as I have lately on the.xiij. Sunday after Trinity, and often
elsewhere spoken concerning the law of God, and told what it is: what is the
use of it: that no man is able too fulfill it: and how it is abrogate from the
godly: I will not here repete the same things any more, but will speak of two
other things. First wherefore Christ says that the second commandment of
loving a man's neybour, is like unto the first of loving God. Ageine, because
Christ says, that the whole Law and Prophets do rest in these two
commandments: which is for that in them is contained whatsoever Moses and
the Prophets have taught concerning the true service and woorshipping of God: I
will speak a little of the true woorshipping of God, that we may stand upon a
sure ground in that behalf.

As touching the first point, it is too be known, that the second
commandment of loving a man's neybour, is not said too be like the first,
either in order, or in object, or in degree of loving. For in order the first
commandment is the former. The object (or thing whereon the first
commandment rests) is God, according as the object of the second
commandment of man, our neybour. The degrees of love require, that the
cheifest good thing should be loved most: and then all other things each in
their order, according too the degrees of their worthiness. Therefore is not
the second commandment like the first, in order, in object, or in degree of
love. How then is it like it? First in the affection of loving, because either
of them both demands unfeigned love. Secondly in band: for both of them
bind us either to obedience, or too punishment. And lastly in attaynement of
obedience: for he that says he loves God, and hates his neighbor, is a
liar, says John the Apostle. And thus much breefly concerning that the second
commandment is like the first of loving God. Now will I speak of the true
woorshipping and service of God, because the commandments of loving God and
our neighbor, contain the ground and substance of woorshipping God.

Therefore too the intent we may the better understand the doctrine of
worshipping God aright, I will speak of four things in order which make too
the opening of the matter. First I will give a rule whereby the woorshipping of
God is too be exacted and tried. Secondly I will show a substancial
foundation, whereupon too ground the worshipping and service of God. Thirdly I
will declare what work may rightly he called Gods service. Fourthly I will
show what manner of men are able too yield rightful service unto God. These
four points being thoroughly known, it will appear unto us manifestly
which is the right fashion of woorshipping God.

Then as concerning the first rule of serving God, let this be set for a
general and immovable rule: That no worshipping pleases God, but such as is of
his own appointment. This rule is not admitted of all men: and therefore we
must fortify it with strong foundations. First therefore God in the prophet
Esaias, and Christ in his Gospel confirms this rule with these words. They
woorship me in vain, teaching doctrines that are the devises of men. And the
holy Ghost by the mouth of Paul Coloss. 2. condemns al woorshipping that men
devise of their own brains. And the Lord in Jeremy says: walk in my
precepts. Ageine it is impossible too please God without faith. But service is
done too the intent it may please: Wherefore it must needs be done by faith:
but of faith it can not be done, unless it be warranted by the
commandment and manifest word of God. For faith depends of the word of
God. By these most certeins reasons the service of God is in such wise
confirmed, that he that will stand too the denial of it, may be thought more
fool, than he that denies the Sun too be up, when it is high noone, and
that the day is at his full light. Therefore let us hold this rule fast, and
not suffer it too be wrested from us by any sophistry.

The use of this rule is manyfold. First by this rule is stablished the
authority of the law maker. For in a common wealth where every man may make
laws at his pleasure, the authority of the sovereign Lord falls intoo
contempt. This authority chalengeth the Lord too him self in the first
commandment, when he says: I am the Lord thy God. etc. The second use of
this rule is, that this rule delyuereth from error, that we should not err
in woorshippyng God. The third is, that it hinders the superstitions and
malapertnesse of men in deuysing new woorshippings. Thus far concerning the
rule of woorshipping GOD, namely that no worship pleases God, but such as is
of his own appointment: and concerning the confirmation and use of this rule.
Now will I breefly speak of the foundation of Gods service, which is the
thing that I purposed in the second place.

Now this foundation consists partly in the true knowledge of God, and partly
in the knowledge of our selves. We attayn too the knowledge of God by the
word, and by the record added too the word. For both of them teach us,
first that God is the fountain of all power, wisdom, righteousness and
truth. Secondly that all glory is too be given unto him. Thirdly that he is
most ready too help. And fourthly that he will have all men too flee unto
him in any danger. We attain too the knowledge of our selves by two things:
that is by considering the Image of God, too which man was created, and by
weying our own strength and power as they are now. The thinking upon Gods
image, directs us too the consideration of the end for which we me^ were
made reasonable creatures: and it poynteth us too the duty wherein it becomes
us too be continually occupied, namely that we should express the Image of God
in all holiness and purity. The weying of our strength and power as they be
now, enforces us too confess our selves utterly unable too perform our duty
as we ought too do. These two knowledges therefore tend too this purpose, that
we should give all the glory unto God, and take from our selves all matter of
boasting: and this knoweledge shows unto us our own filthiness and
infirmities. These things being thus opened concerning the rules of Gods
service, and the foundation thereof, I will now come unto that which I
purposed in the third place, and I will clearly define what the true service or
woorshipping of God is.

The service of God therefore is, a woork commanded by God, done of faith,
chiefly too the setting forth of Gods glory. Here first is showed, what
woorks are Gods service, that is too wit, those only, which God has commanded
in his law, as it evidently appears by the rule before given. Secondly is
added faith, out of which ye woork must proceed. For faith is ye compasser of
all good woorks: and that is, because no woork can please God, unless the
person yt does it, please him before: and yt person pleases by faith. Cain
makes sacrifice: and Abel makes sacrifice. Both of the^ had Gods
commandment, yet was not Caines sacrifice a woorshipping of GOD as Abels was.
Why so? because Caine had no faith, but Abel had. Cornelius in ye.ix. of the
Acts, and the Pharisie give alms. Both of them had commandment so too do.
And the work of Cornelius was Gods service, because it proceeded of faith:
but the Pharisees deed was abomination because the person pleased not GOD.
Two husband men till their ground: the one does God high service, ploughing
in the fear of GOD, and looking for blessing from God: And the other pleases
not God, because he is void of faith and the fear of God. And yet have both
of them commandment of the work. In the sweat of thy brows shall thou
eat thy bread. The handmaydes that do service obedientlye too their
mistress, (peradventure in sweeping the flore) have both of them the
commandment also. But she that brings faith with her too her business,
does service unto GOD: where as she that wants Faith, though she do in
deed that which she is bound too do of duty, yet cannot her work be
called a service of God.

Furthermore, the woork that is commanded and wrought in Faith, must tend too
Gods glory chiefly. This is confirmed by the testimony of Esaias: Every one
that calls upon my name, have I created too mine own glory, I have shape^
him, I have made him. But what is it too glorify GOD? In few words, it is
too attribute all glory unto him, and too praise him with heart, with mouth,
with confession, and with behavior.

Now follows that which I promised too speak of in the fourth place. That is
too wit, who they be that are able too yield true woorship unto God.
Although this may be gathered of the things that went before: Yet
notwithstanding I will show it breefly here. They only can do service and
woorship unto God, that have access unto him: but the children of God only
have access unto him: wherefore they only can do him service aright. His
children are all those that believe in his name. John. 1. And these have
access unto the Father through faith. Romans ^. And for the same cause Christ
teching his Disciples too pray, bids them say: Our father which art in
Heaven, meaning that none but his Children can call upon him. Let this suffice
concerning the true service of God, the sum whereof is contained in loving God
and our neighbor. Now remains that I speak of the third doctrine.

Of the third.
WHhat think you of Christ (says he) whose son is he? They say unto him,
David's. The Pharisees thought themselves rightuous by the law: but if that had
bin true, Christ had bin promised in vain. For thus says Paul in the second
too the Galath. If righteousness come by the law, then Christ dyed in vain.
Our Lord therefore asked them of the Messiah, that is, of Christ, that by
making mention of him, he might stir them up to know and consider to what end
the law was given, and too think wherefore the Messiah was promised. Which
thing if they had done aright, they should have reasoned thus. The Messiah
was promised too take away sin, like as Esaias witnesses: He bare our
diseases. Genesis 15. In thy seed shall all nations be blissed. Therefore it is
needful, that the son of David, should be not only man, but also God, the
Lord of David, according as the Psalm testifies: The Lord said unto my
Lord. etc. By this kind of reasoning, they might have judged aright both of
the law and of Christ, and so they had embraced Christ the Savior, too whom
be honor world without end. Amen.

Upon the.xix. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Math. ix.
JESUS entered intoo a ship, and passed over, and came intoo his own city:
And behold they brought too him a man sick of the Palsy lying in a bed.
And when Jesus savv the faith of them, he said too the sick of the Palsy:
Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. And behold, certain of
the Scribes said within them selves: This man blasphemeth. And when Jesus
savv their thoughts he said: wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? whether
is it easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, or to say, arise and walk?
But that ye may know that the son of man has power too forgive sins in
earth. Then says he too the sick of the Palsy: Arise, take up thy bed, and
go unto thine house. And he arose and departed too his house: But the people
that savv it marueled, and glorified God, which had given such power unto
men.

The exposition of the Text.
THis Gospel conteyneth one of those miracles wherewith, as our Lord
testifies his power, will, and office: so he confirms the certeyntie of his
doctrine. It is showed in this present story how Christ, healed a man yt was
diseased of the Palsy: Which deed his heerers accept not all with one mind.
For the Pharisees blaspheme: the common sort by beholding the miracle, are put
in mind of the presence of God, and are confirmed in Christ's doctrine: whereby
they not only conceive fear* and faith, but also utter the true fruits of
faith by setting forth ye goodness of God. This gospel therefore is as a
certain picture. wherein Christ's kingdom in this world is painted out, in
which there be some that bring the diseased unto Christ: and some that
murmr, as the Pharisees in all times: and other some that fear god aright,
and glorify him for his deeds. Among these sundry sorts of heerers, stands
Christ in the mids, receiving all that come unto him, despising no man for
his misery, healing their wounds, releasing our sins, and with his holy
spirit, as with a most precious balm, he assuaged our brooses, and healed
them. This is the sum and the drift of this days Gospel, which for
instructions sake I will divide intoo three places.

1 Of those that brought this man that was sick of the palsy in a bed
unto Christ that he might heal him. 2 The murmuring of the Pharisees
accusing Christ, and his defense. 3 The end and use of Christ's miracles.
Of the first.
ANd Jesus taking Ship. etc. Here first and formoste is too be considered the
occasion of the miracle wrought in this place by our Lord. Christ taking ship
(says he) passed over and came intoo his own City, that is too wit,
Capernaum. For he kept there very much. What was the cause of this his going
thither? He had bin in the land of the Gergesenes, where be healed a man
that was possessed of the Devil: and when the Deuilles desired that they might
enter intoo the swine, the Lord agreed, and so the herd of swine ran headlong
intoo the Sea, and were drowned. When the inhabiters saw this, they came unto
Jesus, desiring him for too depart from them, for they did set more by their
swine than by Christ and his Gospel. And surely they have many fellows in
these days, whom we may rightly call Gergesenes. Two things therefore are too
be observed here: one, which is set forth for us too eschew, and another
which is commended too all godly folk too follow. The unthankfulness of the
Gergesenes is too be eschued, that set more by a piece of Bakon than by their
soul health. Like unto whom, are the most part of those, that are called
by the name of Chrystians. Christ's forwardness is set forth for us too
follow, who upon every occasion that he could catch hold on; was earneste
too enlarge the bounds of his kingdom. For as by this journey he shows how
greatly he thirsted man's salvation: so by his example, he commends unto
us diligence in his vocation.

Now follows the first part of this Gospel. And behold they brought unto him
a man that was sick of the Palsy lying in a bed. And Jesus seeing their
faith, said unto him that was sick of the Palsy* Be of good cheer my
son: thy sins are forgiven thee: In this first part of the story we
have four things which are needful too be observed. The first is the
example of the bearers. Secondlye, the man him self that had the Palsy.
Thirdly, the respect that Christ had too the faith of the^. Fourthly, how the
man that had the Palsy was received of Christ.

As concerning those that bare him, their faith bewrays it self by tokens
certain, which burns in such wise whersoeuer it is, that no ashes can choke
the flame of it. This faith had they conceived, either by seeing him teach and
heal others before, or upon the report that they had herd of Chrysts doings.
The effect is that they had persuaded the^ selves, that he would receive them
that were afflicted, and heal them. This lively faith of these ^earers,
yields five fold fruit, of which the first is, the confession of Christ,
whom it was a hard and rare matter too confess among so many outrageous
enemies. The second is in^ocation, which can no more be from true faith,
than heat can be from fire. For all the wisshes of the believers (which
never cease) are inuocations. The third is, valiantness of mind, in that
they hazarded their life for acknowledging of Christ. For the Pharisees,
Scribes, and chief men of this people did persecute all those that gave any
honor unto Christ. The fourth is, the love of their neighbor, whereby they
favored their neighbors vnfeynedlye. And the fifth is the pain and trouble
that they took for the help of their neighbor. For they not only bear him,
which was a point of charity: but also when they could not come the next way
unto Christ, by reason of the throng they gate up intoo the house top, and let
down the diseased soul by the windbeams: which deed was not void of danger.
What learn we by this? Let us even in spite of the world confess Christ as
these bearers did. Let us call upon him both for our selves and for others. Let
us put our selves in peril for ye truth of ye Gospel if need so require. Let us
love our neighbor entirely, not only in affection, but also in deed. And
let us spare no pains if we may do them any good.

An other thing which I said was too be observed in this first part, is the
man himself that was diseased of the Palsy, in who^ are three things too be
marked. His disease, the cause of his disease, and that he would be carried
unto Christ. His disease was the Palsy, which is when one of a man's sides,
either the right side or the left loses his feeling and natural moving. Surely
a right grievous disease: whereby ye whole use of a man's body is hindered. The
cause of the disease was double. Uniuersall, which is original sin in all
men. And special, which had his beginning either of disordered living, or
else of some very sore disquietnesse of mind. Now in that he would be borne
unto Christ, it betokens that he had faith, like as those had that did
bear him.

Let us also follow this example of him that had the Palsy. Let us acknowledge
as well our inward as our outward disease, let us confess our sinfulness, and
let us suffer our selves too be carried unto Christ, as this man that had the
Palsy did.

The third thing that I admonished you too consider in this first part, is
that Christ saw the faith of those men: that is too wit, of him that had
the Palsy, and of them that carried him. Whereby we may learn these things.
First in what sort Christ is minded toward us. For he is of the same mind
toward us, that he was toward the man that was sick of the Palsy. For the
Lord is no accepter of persons. And secondly, that Christ has not an eye so
much too the greatness of our sins, as too our faith. This faith obteyneth
of Christ all things for the welfare both of the body and the soul. And
although I think this man that was sick of the Palsy, had some little spark
of faith: yet I will not strive against it, if any man say that the bearers had
the faith and not the Palsy man. For it is no strange matter, for corporal,
yea and for spiritual benefits too be obtained for the faith of other men.
For like as one man by his wisdom, may make another man prove wise: so he that
believes, may by his faith obtain faith for other men. Howbeeit, like as no
man is wise by another man's wisdom, but by his own: so no man is saved by
another man's faith, but by his own. Here then we may learn, both too pray
for other folks, that the grace of God may increase toward them: and also too
request others that they will commend us too God with their prayers. For the
prayers of the godly is greatly auailable.

The fourth thing that I set forth too be looked unto in this first part, is
the manner how he received this Palsy man, which is expressed in these
words. Be of good cheer my Son, thy sins are forgiven thee. Here let
two things be thoroughly weyed. The one is, why he received this Palsy man in
such wise: and the other is, the saying of Christ in receiving him.

This Palsy man seeks deliverance from his bodilye disease: and wherefore then
says Christ, thy sins are forgiven thee? Undoubtedly there be great and
weighty causes.

The first is, too teach us that diseases are the reward of sin, as Paul
says: the reward of sin is death. And Christ in the.5. of John, says unto
one whom he had healed, behold thou art made whole, beware thou sin not
hereafter, least some worser thing befall thee. 1. Cor. 11. for misusing ye
Lords supper irreverently, many were dead, and many were weak.

The second is too teach us where the healing of the body is too be begone,
namely, at the mind, whose spots must first be clean wiped out, before a
man minister Physic too the body. Let us therefore keep this order in curing
our diseases. First let us acknoweledge the disease: Next let us repent, and
desire forgiveness of our sins for Christ's sake: Then let us in the fear
of God, and with thanksgiving use the ordinary means of help: and let us
acknoweledge the Physician too be Gods minister, who in Gods sted, shall put
too his hand too the healing of us.

The third is too reprove the Pharisees by this saying, who judged not aright
either of his person, or of his office. For always there be some, yt seek too
pick quarrels too the woorks of God. Which thing warns us that we should not
be the less diligent in doing our duty.

The fourth is, that taking hold of this occasion, he might instruct us more
fully, concerning his own person, his love toward men, and his office for
which he was sent intoo the world by his father.

Now let us wey our Lords words: for he says too ye Palsieman: Son, be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. These be the words of the son of
God, wherefore they are to be weyed advisedly. This word son is to be set
against despair, which this present disease would have persuaded him unto. This
saying, be of good cheer is to be set against the curse, which evil
conscience went about to persuade ye wretch in. Thy sins says he. Here grace
surmounteth far above sin. This saying are forgiven, is to be set against
ye dream of satisfaction, of merits, and of righteousness that comes by
the ^awe. Thy sins (says he) are forgiven thee. In so saying he applies the
benefit of his grace too the poor wretch. Thus have we here the Doctrine of
salvation, remission of sins, justification and adoption. For these benefits
stick linked together so fast continually, that they cannot be plucked
asunder. He requires faith: to him that believes, he forgiueth his s^nnes:
whom he has absolved from his sin, him he adopteth too his son, and
accepts him as rightuous: and who^ he has justified, him also will he
glorify by bestowing everlasting bliss upon him: neither is there any other
way of obteyning salvation, than y^ which is set out unto us in this example.
The palsiema^ does.iij. things. He acknowledges his sin: he acknowlegeth
himself to be justly punished for his sin and he puts his trust in the son
of God. Agein, Christ does iij. things. He releaseth sin: he adopteth him to be
his son: and accepts him too eternal life. Follow you this example.
Acknowledge thy sin in good ernest: acknowledge gods just judgment: and believe
in the son: and thou shall feel sensibly, that Christ will bestow his
benefits upon thee. Let this suffice to be spoken concerning the first
doctrine of this Gospel: and now follows the second.

Of the second.
ANd behold, some of the Scribes said within them selves: This man
blasphemeth. And when he savv the thoughts of them, he said: why think you
evil in your hearts? Here the grudging of the Scribes, and Chrysts answer
do^ show in what sort the kingdom of Christ, and the kingdom of Satan meet
one against another. We have here two things: of which the one is the
accusation of the Scribes accusing Christ, and the other is Christ's most
rightful defense. The accusation of the Scribes was this. This man is a
blasphemer. Wherefore? because he takes upon him too forgive sins, which
perteyneth only unto God. For (according too the phrase of the scripture.)
Blasphemy is too attribute that thing unto a creature, which is proper or
peculiare unto God. Now too forgive sin is propre unto God* which thing is
assured by the testimony of Esaias, where the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet
says: I am, I am he that wipeth away thine iniquities for mine own sake, and
I will no more remember thy sins. Heervppon they think they may conclude as
by an infallible consequent, yt Christ is a blasphemer, after this manner.
Whosoever takes upon him that which is peculiare unto God, is a blasphemer.
This Jesus takes upon him that which is peculiare unto God: Ergo, this Jesus
is a blasphemer. And undoubtedly it had bin a true argument, if Christ had bin
like the Scribes, that is too wit, if he had bin mere man, and not God also.
See I pray you how much our Papists and Monks are worse than the Scribes. The
Scribes were taught by the word^ of God to defend this proposition: No man ca^
forgive sins but only God. But the Papists attribute forgiveness of sins
too the merits of saints, too Masses, and too pardons: which things they
deal not freely, but fell them very dearly. Surely a wonderful kind of
chapmen. They sell that which they have not: they sell men the smoke of words,
and take ready Gold for it. They promise their chapmen Heaven, and deliver
them Hell.

But what shall we say of the ministers of Gods word? Do they forgive
sin? They forgive not of themselves: but they pronounce forgiveness of
sins, too all that they find like this man that was sick of the Palsy.
They give not ought of their own: But they offer another man's, by the
commandment of Christ. For they offer forgiveness of sins by the voice
of the Gospel. As many as receive this voice by faith, do out of all doubt
receive forgiveness of sins. For Christ says: he that heereth you,
heereth me.

But what says Christ too this accusation? When he savv their thoughts, he
said: why think ye evil in your hearts? vvhyther is it easier too say, thy
sins are forgiven thee, or too say, arise and walk? Here Christ does
three things. First he saw the thoughts of them, which is the property of
God only. Whereupon the Scribes ought too have thought that Christ was more
than mere man. For no man is able too see the thoughts of another man. For
only the spirit of God searches the depth of men's hearts. Secondly he
blames them: why do ye think evil in your hearts? As if he had said:
ye sin in thinking amiss of me. By this we may note* that evil thoughts
are sins* Thirdly by visible sign he confirms his hidden Godhead. As if he
had said: you say, that he that takes upon him that which is peculiar unto
GOD alone, is a blasphemer: for he hurts Gods name and fame. Uerely I
confess this too be true. But in that ye believe not me too be GOD you do
amiss. Wherefore you are blasphemers, and not I. And now that I may show and
prove my self too be very God, I heal this Palsy man with a beck only,
which surely is peculiar too the power of the Godhead. If I can do this by my
divine power, why should I not also forgive sin? Who can utterly take away
a disease, but he that takes away the cause of the disease? Now you see with
your own eyes, that I take away the disease: and why believe you not that I
am able too take away the cause of the disease also, which is sin? Thus
Christ appealeth too his own doings, which bear record of him. For thus
says he in John: If ye believe not me, believe my woorks which bear
witness of me. Of this second doctrine therefore we may learn three
things. First that there is continual battle between the kingdom of
Christ, and the kingdom of Satan. For Satan is ever grudging and devising
of sundry wiles, how he may enter upon Christ's kingdom, according too
this: and thou shall lie in wait for his heel. Secondly, that Christ by his
wisdom and power, overcomes the power and devises of Satan, according too
this: there is no wisdom, there is no counsel against the Lord. And thirdly,
that we should submit our selves under him, acknowledging him too be very
GOD, and confessing him with all such as flee unto him in true repentance.

Of the third.
ANd the people seeing it, were afraid, and glorified God. Here we have the
effect and fruit of this miracle in the beholders, which fruit the Evangelist
sets over in this story unto us. I have oftentimes spoken of Christ's
miracles heeretoofore: and therefore I will say little here Christ by this
miracle confirmed the power of his Godhead: his own fatherly will toward men:
his office (which is too save) for which purpose he was sent: and sealed up
the truth of his Doctrine, as it were with some authentical and Princely
seal. Ageine in the heerers was conceived faith: out of faith f^owed the fear
of God: and by faith they glorified God with heart, voice, confession, and
manners. Hereby then let us also gather these four things concerning Christ:
and toogither with these lookers on, let us conceive faith, fear God, and
glorify him, who is too be praised, world without end. Amen.

Upon the.xx. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Math. xxij.
Jesus said too his Disciples: the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that
was a king, which made a marriage for his son, and sent forth his servant
too call them that were bidden too the wedding, and they would not come*
Ageine he sent forth other servant, saying: Tell them which are bidden:
behold, I have prepared my dinner, mine Oxen and my fatlings are killed, and
all things are ready, come unto the Marriage. But they made light of it, and
went their vvayes: One too his Farm place, another too his marchaundise: and
the remnaunt took his servant, and entreated them shamefully, and slew them.
But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth, and sent forth his men of
war, and destroyed those murderers, and brent up their city. Then said he
too his servant: the Marriage in deed is prepared, but they which were
bidden, were not worthy: Go ye therefore out intoo the hye vvayes: and as many
as ye find, bid them to the Marriage. And the servant went forth intoo the
hye vvayes, and gathered toogither all, as many as they could find, both good
and badde, and the wedding was furnished with guestes. Then the king came in
too see the guestes: and when he spied there a man, which had not on a
wedding garment, he said unto him: Friend how came thou in hither, not
having a wedding garment? And he was even speachles. Then said the king too
the ministers: take and bind him hand and foot, and cast him intoo utter
darkness, there shall be vveping and gnashing of teeth. For many be called,
but fevv are chosen.

The exposition of the Text.
Look what Christ does continually, y^ does he also in this days Gospel.
For as the good father exhorts his children too honest life, and that sundry
ways: So Christ the Lord and father of the world too come, is not contented
with one way, but assayeth many ways too keep his children in their duty.
For sometime he does it with fair words, as when he says in Matthew. 11.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will refresh you, and
sometime with fatherly promises, as when he says: he that comes unto me, I
will give him of the water of life. Sometime with rewards, when he bestows
the present benefits upon them. And sometime with threatenings, as when he
says in the.18. of Mark. He shall come and destroy those husbandmen, and let
out his vineyard unto others. After the same manner, in this Gospel he deals
partly by threatenings, putting forth a Parable: for he threatens destruction
too those that shall refuse too come too his marriage clad in wedding raiment:
and partly by promises, that he will honorably welcome and well enterteine those
that come and are apparelled in wedding raiment. Therefore the sum of this
Gospel is, that Christ requires of his, a life worthy ^o holy a calling, and
threatens horrible punishment unto those that live in the Church without
repentance and sanctification, which is that wedding garment yt this
bridegroom requires. The Places are three.

1 The opening of the Parable. 2 The blaming of him that sat at the wedding
without a wedding garment. 3 Chrysts complaynt: many are called and few
chosen.
Of the first.
THe kingdom of heaven is likened too a man that was a king. etc. Now too the
intent this present gospel may become the sweeter too us: Let us look upon
the parts of this similitude, which are many.

The first: In this place the kingdom of heaven signifies the Church
gathered toogither by the voice of the Gospel, which of Peter is called a holy
nation, a kingly preesthoode, and a chosen generation.

The second: The man that was a king, signifies God the father of heaven, whom
Paul calls the king of kings, and Lord of Lords.

The third: The kings son is our Lord Jesus Christ: of whom he says: This is
my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. This son of God is called of
David the Brydegroome decked with holy decking.

The fourth: Untoo this son did the father then make a marriage, when he
willed him too be borne of the blissed virgin Marie, and he (as David says)
comes as a bridegroom out of his chamber. This son took the Church unto
him as his spouse, and betrouthed her unto himself, according too this saying
of the Prophet Oseas: I will marry thee too my self for ever, and I will marry
thee too me in righteousness and judgment, in mercy and compassion, and I
will marry thee too me in faith, and thou shall know the Lord. This Bridale
(as in respect of all mankind) was begone by handfasting, as soon as the first
man and woman were created. For when God made man, too the intent he should
know him and love him, when he garnished our first parents with Original
righteousness, when he imprinted the Image of his Godhead in them: then did he
make this ensurance. Notwithstanding, this ensurance was broken by and by
through the craftiness of Satan, who entised man too wicked breach of
wedlock, so as he forsook his true spouse, and took him too that most
filthy whoremaister the Devil: Which injury the despised Bridegroom
revenged when he made the harlot naked by taking away the kings image, and
spoiling her of his wedding Jewels. Howbeeit, O wonderful goodness of the
Bridegroom. He determined too redeem his spouse that had bin carried away and
most filthily defiled. And so the father of this Bridegroom puts her
forthwith in hope of this redemption, by making her a promise of the blissed
seed. At length when the fullness of time was come, the father sent out his
son, borne of the virgin Mary, bound under the law, too redeem his spouse yt
was under the curse of the law, which thing came then too pass, when he made
himself the ransom, wherewith she was redeemed and recovered out of the hands
of the adulterer Satan.

And as in respect of each man severally, the Church is handfasted and
betrouthed too Christ her Bridegroom, by faith and Baptim, according as the
Bridegroom himself sayth^ I will betrouth thee too my self for ever, and I
will marry thee too me in righteousness and judgment, in mercy and
compassion, and I will marry thee too me in faith, and thou shall know the Lord.

In this betrouthing there are two things in general too be considered. The
one is the contract and promise of the Bridegroom: and the other is the
couenanting of the Bride whereby she is bound unto her husband. In the
covenant of the Bridegroom there are three things. First the good will and
fr^e love of the Bridegroom, whereby he favors the Bride without any desert
of hirs. Secondly, the meening of the continuance of the wedlock between the
bridegroom Christ, and the Church his spouse. I will betrouthe thee too me
(says he) for ever. Therefore he continues the Churches husband for ever.
Thirdly the reckening up of the Jewels which Christ the Bridegroom bestows
upon his wife, and they are numbered here too be four. Righteousness,
judgment, pity, and mercy. With his own righteousness decketh he his wife,
when forgiving her sins he ascribes his own obedience unto her, where
through she appears a comely and beautiful Bride in the sight of the
Bridegroomes father. With his judgment he reuengeth her of them that did her
wrong: mainteyning her, and pulling her back intoo the way when she steppeth
awry. He embraces her with pity: that is too say with husbandly affection.
For this pity is a kindly louingnesse, issuing from the innermost closets of
the mind. And he embraces her with mercy, in that he pardons her daily
misdeeds, and rueth her miseries. These four things are in the covenant of the
Bridegroom. And in the couenaunte on the behalf of the Bride, there be two
things. The acknoweledging of the benefit with the praising of GOD: and faith
whereby the spouse leans upon her husbands breaste, and without any distrust
looks for all the good things that he has promised. By this mutual
contract let us conceive Doctrine, comfort, and faith, that no discouragement
of any adversity cause us too fleet from this Bridegroom, who never
forsakes his spouse, unless she like a forsworn woman do first break the
faith and troth that she has plighted. Ageine we learn hereby also, that
whosoever has not the faith of Christ, is none of Christ's, but is defiled
with shameful aduoutrie. Hereby it appears how truly John has said in
his Apocalips: Blissed are they that are called too the Lambs supper.

The fifth: It is too be observed, what they be that bid the guests too this
royal marriage. First the eternal GOD, the Bridegroomes Father by his voice
bids guestes too this wedding: Next, many holy Fathers before the flud.
Then after the flud, Noe and Melchisedech: Joseph and Moses in Egypt. The
holy Prophets and Kings in the land of Canaan, Daniel in Jury. After these
comes the Bridegrooms own master of household John Baptist, and poynted out
the Bridegroom with his finger, whoo also himself with his Apostles, made
Proclamation and bad guests too the wedding, saying: Come, all things are ready.

The sixth: The provision for the Marriage feast is too be considered. For
even like as at the Marriages of men, are killed Bulls, Sheep, Oxen and wild
beasts: so also against this marriage there is made most excellent provision,
and large alowance of al things. First there is set before us, not corruptible
bread, but lively bread from heaven: whereof whoosoeuer eats, shall never
after hunger. Next is set before us water of life. For thus says the
Bridegroom himself: If a man drink of the water that I shall give him, he
shall not die. Thirdly the Bridegroom refreshes our werye souls with his
own body and blud. Fourthly, he furnishes us with his own apparel, whilst
we put him on by Baptim. For thus says the holy Ghost by the mouth of Paul:
As many as are Baptized, have put on Christ. And fifthly, our iunkets are the
fruits of the tree of life, whereby the Bryde shall have her strength, that
she may never die.

The seventh: But they (says the text) refused too come. Did they so? What a
churlishness is that? Were they bidden and would not come? What let them?
First their household guest sin that ^^^elleth in the^. This guest holds
them back with his pretty conceits, that they cannot come too the wedding
when they are bidden. Secondlye the Bridegroomes enemy, that is too wit, the
Devil besetteth and forlayeth all the ways, and by diverse means stops up
the passage too the wedding. Thirdly, sundry affairs keep them away. For one
has a Farm, another has Oxen, another has a wife, and another some other
thing to busy himself about. And the rest caughte his servants, and slew
them. The Story of the world shows this too be most true. Untoo this
wedding did he bid Abell: But the Devil sent out his champion Caine, and
killed him. Untoo this wedding did Noe bid guestes by the space of a hundred
and twenty years, but those that were hidden, mockte him and laughed him too
skorne for his labor. Untoo this did Joseph also bid guests in Egypt, but a
filthy strumpet accused him, and made him too be cast intoo prison. Too this
did Moses bid guestes, but he suffered many things at their hands, whom he
bad. Too this wedding did the most holy Kings and Patriarchs bid guests, but
their talk was hild skorne of. At length came the Bridegroomes own master of
household, John, but he was murdered by Herod. To this wedding does the
Bridegroom himself the very son of God bid guestes, but he is hanged upon
the galowes of the cross. Too this wedding do the Apostles bid guestes, and
after them all godly ministers of God word: Whom the Diuill assayling, partly
with his Sophistry, partly with his Tirannie, and partly with his Hypocrisy,
strives too kill. So the greatest part of the world being unkind, refuses
too come too this wedding of the son of God.

The eight. What says the king too this? First he is angry which surely is no
marvel. For he saw both himself and his marriage despised of those, which
will they nill they are compelled too confess, that what so ever good thing
they have, they may thank him for it. Secondly he punishes them bodily:
whereof the thanklesse world which the Lord destroyed in the flud, had
experience. This does the burning of Sodom bear witness of: This does the
destruction of Jerusalem testify. Thirdly he punishes spiritually in this
life, with darkness and ignorance: and after death with everlasting pains.
Greece, Turkey and Italy, and the greatest most flourishing part of the whole
world, are examples of this punishment. This does the rich glutton testify,
who repenting too late and in vain, in Hell, is tormented there with endless
pains.

The ninthe: Does the king for men's unthankfulness, break of the marriage,
which he had determined upon? No, But he says too the servants: The wedding
is ready, but those that were bidden, are not worthy. Although this may be
understood of the unthankfulness of the whole world: yet does Christ in this
place entreat chiefly of the unthankfulness of the Jews, whom in these words
he threatens too shut out from the marriage of the kings son.

Go ye therefore out intoo the high vvayes, and as many as ye find, bid them
to the marriage. Behold the bountifulness of this king. He wills all men too
be bidden too his sons marriage without respect of nation or persons. For he
speaks of the calling of the Gentiles too the gospel. And it is too be
marked advisedly, that he says: whom so ever you find, bid them too the
marriage. But when was this spoken too the Bridegroomes servant? Even then,
when Christ said: Go ye intoo the whole world, and preach the gospel too all
creatures. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved: and he that
believes not, is condemned already.

The tenth: And the servant went forth intoo the high vvayes, and gathered
together all, as many as they could find, both good and had, and the
wedding was furnished with guests. This came too pass after Whitsonday,
after that the Apostles were armed with the holy Ghost, and from thencefoorth
unto this day by the ministers of the gospel.

Of the second.
ANd the king came too see his guests: and when he spyed a man there, which
had not on a wedding garment, he said unto him: Friend how came thou
hither, having not a wedding garment? This place teaches, first that in the
visible congregation of the Church, the evil are mingled with the good until
the last day: which thing the Parable of the Darnell declares also. Neither is
any such Church to be hoped for in this life, as the Anabaptists dream of.
For the Church is in all points like a feeld wherein wheat and Darnell grew
both toogither. For like as wheat abides wheat still, although never so much
Darnel spring up from time to time: So the Church continues holy, though it
have diverse rotten members. As many as profess christen religion, are members
of the Church: howbeeit some be quick and some dead. Those be quick that
have a lively faith: and those be dead which profess the religion without
lively confidence in Christ. As for those that are out of the visible
congregation of the Church, they are enemies of the doctrine, and neither
quick nor dead members of the Church.

It follows, that the King coming in, saw a man without his wedding garment.
What is this wedding garment? This is needful too be known, that we may enjoy
the sweetness of Christ's marriage perpetually. At the last day, there shall
stand in this kings sight, two kinds of men: of whom the one refused too come
too this wedding, as the Turks and the ungodly Jews, and many heathen nations
at this day. It is manifest that none of these has a wedding garment: Of whom
notwithstanding, many do love civil honesty. Wherefore this outward
ciuilnesse of Aristides, Fabritius, Fabius Maximus, and Cato, is not that
wedding garment which he requires. And the other sort came too the marriage,
that is too say, they conveyed themselves intoo the outward congregetion of the
Church at the preaching of the Gospel. Howbeeit these are not all of one
hew. For some trust too their own woorks, and think their shamefulnesse too
be covered with the garment of their works. Is this the wedding garment? No
in good sooth: For they are thrust out from the marriage: but none are thrust
out from the marriage, that bring a wedding garment with them. Others some have
no works but evil woorks: howbeeit they brag of faith, and boast themselves
too be faithful, and they suppose that this their fond craking is the
wedding garment, but they are deceived. For of such hipocrits the Lord says:
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter intoo the kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. And other
some believe a right, and these mortify the flesh and live in the spirit, and
repent and set their mind too live blameless. These only have ye wedding
garment. Therefore whither ye call lively faith or holiness of life the
wedding garment, ye shall not take your mark amiss. For as the calling too
this marriage requires faith: so requires it also true holiness. And that
this is the true wedding garmente, it appears in Abel, Abraham, Maudelin, and
many other Saints. And it is no marvel that such a lively faith should
be the wedding garmente. For whosoever believes his sins are released, Gods
wrath is taken from him, and he becomes the son of God. For it is written,
he gave them power too become the sons of God, as many as believed in his
name. He that believes on him has everlasting life. Moreover, Christ's
righteousness is imputed too the believer, wherewith the man being
apparayled, appears rightuous in the sight of God. But here thou must beware
that thou put not on a visor instead of the true garment: that is too say, yt
thou boste not of vain presumption instead of true and lively faith. If thou
covet too know the marks of it, these they be. Whersoeuer is true faith, there
is also repentance with it, there is hate of sin, there is true fear, and
ageine there is comfortablenesse of heart kindled by the holy Ghost, a desire
too further Gods glory among men, the duties of charity, or (too comprehend
all in one word) true holiness, which is none other thing than a sequestring
of our selves from the wickedness of the world by mortifying the flesh, and a
clinging unto God by quickening of the spirit. Wheresoever this holiness is,
it is at continual strife. For the flesh fights against the spirit. This
holiness is not made perfect at an instante, but grows all the time of a
man's life, which thing the lives of the saints may easly teach us. And
thus much concerning the wedding garment.

But I pray you, what shall be done too them that have not this wedding
garmente? That does the Text tell in these words. Bind him hand and foot,
and cast him intoo utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. The outer darkness betokens punishment and sorrow, which are out of
the kingdom of God, namely in Hell. Intoo this darkness was the rich glutton
cast, and so shall all those be cast that are not found clothed in the
wedding garment.

Of the third.
MAny are called, and fevv chosen. This saying of Christ conteyneth two
things: that is too wit, a setting forth of the mercy and goodness of GOD,
who calls all men too his sons marriage. Neither is it too be thought that
he calls any, who^ he would not have too be at his sons wedding: and a
complaint ageinste the unthankfulness of the greatest part of t^^ world. Many
(says he) are called. For the Bridegroom commanded his Apostles too go
forth intoo all the whole world, and too call men too this marriage, as he
said before: Call too the marriage whosoever ye find. But fevv are chosen. That
is, few have the wedding garment. For such are chosen, as are sorted out from
others, and are excellent above others. Therefore Peter says, that Christians
are chosen too sanctification of spirit, that is too wit, that they should be
holy in spirit. Uerely GOD will have all men saved, as Paul teaches, and this
parable shows, yea and Christ's own words witness. Math. xj. Come unto
me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will refreshe you. Let us set this
saying against all the enemies of Gods grace. Therefore if thou look too
Godwarde, Gods will is that all men should be saved, and come too the
knoweledge of the truth, and he calls all men (without exception) too the
marriage of his Son. But if thou look unto menwarde, few are chosen, that
is too say, few when they hear the Gospel do receive it by faith, and
become holy in spirit. Wherefore the cause of damnation is not in GOD, but it
is too be sought for in our selves. How often (says Christ) would I have
gathered thy Children toogither, and thou would not? Behold thou have here
two things. Christ would: and Jerusalem would not. Therefore by this saying
we are warned, that it is not enough too hear the Gospel, but we must also
obey the Gospel. For (as Peter says) it is therefore preached, that we
should be mortified as toward the flesh, and too live after the spirit.

Thus much concerning this days Gospel: whereby we may learn that God has
not created us too damnation, but too blissfulness, and that he has freely
prepared all things that perteine unto true blissednesse. And ageine, that
those which are damned, are damned through their own fault, as which would not
obey the Gospel. Wherefore if we have regard of our soulehelth, let us put on
the wedding garment, and let us mind true holiness, through Jesus Christ
our Lord: Too whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be honor for
evermore. Amen.

Upon the.xxj. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. John. iiij.
THere was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at Capernaum. As Soon as
the same heard, that Jesus was come out of Ievvrie intoo Galilee, he went
unto him, and besought him that he vvoulde come down and heal his Son.
For he was even at the point of death. Then said Jesus unto him: except ye
see signs and wonders, ye will not believe, The ruler said unto him: Sir,
come down or ever that my Son die. Jesus says unto him: Go thy way, thy
Son lives. The man believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him.
And he went his way. And as he was going down, the servants met
him, and told him, saying: Thy Son lives. Then inquired he of them the
hour when he began too amend. And they said unto him: Yesterdaye at the
seventh hour the Fever left him. So the Father knevve that it was the same
hour, in the which Jesus said unto him: Thy Son lives: and he believed,
and all his household. This is ageine the second miracle that Jesus did, when
he was come out of Ievvry intoo Galilee.

The exposition of the Text.
THis Gospel teaches us, whither we ought too flee for succor in all the
troubles of this life: that is too wit, too the fountain of all welfare and
felicity, Jesus Christ. Which thing Esaias also puts us in mind of, when he
say^h: Ye shall draw water out of the wells of the Savior. Too this well,
we must come, not with feet, but with mind: not with reason, but with Faith.
Furthermore, this Gospel shows, how forward Christ is too help, who
sends away none that comes too him, without comfort. For he is not
otherwise affectioned toward any man, than toward this noble man, this
Courtyer of Herodes court, whom he not only comforted by word, but also
helped by miracle. The sum of this Gospel therefore is included in this
saying of Joel: Every one that calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.
The places are three.

2 Of men's miseries, and of the cause and remedy of the same. 2 Of the rebuke
wherewith Christ rebukes this servant of the kings. 3 The true nature and
inclination of Faith.
Of the first.
THere was a certain Ruler whose son was sick. This sad father, and his
sick son, do set before our eyes the miseries of this world, which as they
are the punishments of sin: so are they also as it were certain sermons of
Gods judgment, whereby we are allured too repentance, like as this Courtier
being sad for the sickness of his son, feels his own sin, and
bewayleth it. Heervntoo makes also that saying of Esaias. Their distress shall
be a lerning unto thee. Howbeeit too the intent we may the better consider
Gods goodness toward us, I will declare by what means God is wont too call
us chiefly too repentance: These ways are chiefly six.

The first: He sets forth the doctrine of the law, wherein he paynteth out
our sins as in a table: shows the blindness of our mind: be wrayeth our
douting of Gods providence, promises and threats: utters the uncleanness of
our affections: and shows the stinche of the stomach, the turning away our
will from God, and the horrible atteinting of all our powers. Agein in the
second table of the law, he paynteth our unfaithfulness toward men, and the
uncleanness of our thoughts, so that if there appear any uprightness in
our whole life before we be converted unto Christ, the same is no better
than a cloth stained with matter, and most vnpure blud: which thing Esaias
complayneth of in these words. All our rightuous doing are as a most
filthy cloute. The cause why the law sets this our filthiness before us,
is, that we being warned of their stinche, should repent, and depart from
our most wicked ways.

The second: The excess of inward miseries, which no man is able too describe
and bewail sufficiently, was never yet so great, neither was any man's
calamity yet so extreme, but that any of us might fall intoo the same, as
Ambrose godlyly admonishes us, saying: We either are now presently, or
heretofore have bin: or may be, in the self same ease that this same man was
in. In how great misery was Adam, who not only saw the one of his sons
murder his brother: but also behilde the most sorrowful fallings of his
posterity from GOD by the space of nine hundred years? How great was the
grief of David's mind, when he saw the rauishmente of his daughters, and the
slaughter of his sons? What should I speak of a few? All men feel the
biting of the Serpent: which biting serves too none other purpose, than that
we should thereby acknowledge Gods most just judgment, and flee unto him
for pardone, by true repentance. Manasses like a mad man rose up against the
Church of GOD by the space of.xxv. years toogither, and defiled himself in
horrible wise, neither had it come intoo his thought too repent him, if he
had not bin led away prisoner intoo Babylon, where the straightness of
imprisonment gave him understanding. For being nurtured there in the
schoolehouse of misery, he bowed the knees of his heart, and in humble wise
desired pardon of his sins, which thing he also obtained.

The third: God sets before us the examples of other men, tragical factes,
and horrible punishementes of others, that taking warning by them, we may fall
too amendment. For all the falls of men that are set out in stories, either of
the Scripture, or of worldly writers, tend too this end too make us
heedefull. Caine by falling intoo sin, was overwhelmed with everlasting
pains. Saul fell from God, and returned not by repentance, but was
overwhelmed with Gods wrath. Many in these days falling from the Gospel,
light intoo the Deuilles snares, out of which they are never able too wind
themselves ageine. Wherefore taking warning at these men's horrible falls and
most dreadful punishment, let us fall too amendment betimes least God cast us
of in his anger, and then we too late remember the saying of the Poet: For
happy folk we may them take: who^ others harms the warer make.

The fourth: Sometime God preaches by tempests, earthquakes, and dreadful
sights in Heaven, such as were seen before the destruction of Jerusalem, as
blasing stars in the likeness of swoords: of which sort our age has seen
many, whereat, if we take not warning too repent and amend, we shall fall
intoo most sore punishments. The year.1561. since Chrysts birth, there was
seen in the Sky a man nailed upon a Cross, having a Crown of Thorn upon
his head. Of this sight I have many witnesses, whereof diverse are noble men and
godly persons, right woorthye of credit. The same day it rayned blood, and
many other things are seen daily. As often then as such manner of sightes are
showed us from Heaven, let us know that God allureth us too repentance by
these tokens of his wrath. And whereas the Lord says: Be not afraid of the
signs of Heaven, he means that we should fall too repentance, least the
euilles which the signe^ threaten, should light upon us. For all things work
toogither too the welfare of them that repent.

The fifth: The death of the Son of God is set forth too us, wherein God
shows that he is exceeding sore displeased with sin, and therwithal
provoke us too repentance. For he upon the cross stretches out his arms
bathed in his own blud, and allureth all the whole world too repentance, and
offreth grace too all that repent. Therefore whosoever makes delays too
repent, he despises Gods son and shall suffer dreadful punishment when his
time comes.

The sixth: The end of this life is uncertain. For our life is like a bubble
or a flower in the field, which flourishes too day and too morrow is cast
intoo the fire. Saint James also opens unto us the frayltie of this life.
We have seen many that lived without repentance, taken away with sodeine
death, so as they could have no leisure too repent. The Axe (says John) is
set too the root of the tree. And Solomon says: Whither the tree fall too the
South or too the North, look in what place the tree falls, there shall it
lie. That is too say, look in what case the rightuous Judge shall find thee
at the hour of thy death, such shall thou be judged too be.

See how many ways the Lord provoke us too repentance. Himself says: I
will not the death of a sinner, but that he should turn and live. This
good will of his he declares unto us: in yt he provoke us so fatherly by
so many means too repentance: which provocation too repentance, doubtless
perteyneth too all men.

But Paul says: that God has not chosen many wise men after the flesh, nor
many me^ of power, nor many noble men borne: and yet the same man says: God
will have all men saved. How then does he not choose? God is said not too
have chosen them, not because he would not have them saved, but for the sequel
of it. That is too say: bicaus^ the wisdom of this world, and power, and
nobility of birth do like baytes entice and withdraw many from obedience of
the Gospel. David was rich and puisant, and Nero also was rich and puissant.
Of which two, the first was not enticed by his riches and power, too fall from
the Gospel: but the other by making more account of his present prosperity,
than of the glory of the life too come, made his riches an occasion of his
own damnation. Isaac was borne of a noble stock, and Ismaell was a noble man
borne too. But yet both of them were not of like inclination: For Ismaell
holding himself content with the nobleness of his birth, despised the
promises: whereas contrariwise Isaac by believing the promise, was justified and
saved. By these examples it appears evidently, that the Lord rejects no man
for the gifts that himself has heaped upon the^. For power, riches and noble
birth are Gods good gifts. And happy is he yt uses them well. But he yt uses
them amiss, he by his own default turns Gods gifts into instruments of his
own damnation. Let us therefore embrace Paul's counsel, if we have any care of
our salvation. For thus says he. 1. Cor. 7. Let the^ yt use this world be as
though they used it not. He would not have a christen man's mind abused about
erthly things, so as they should lead us away from the right way of this life.
He will have us so to live, as if we should pass out of this life at every
minute of an hour. Therefore in all ye affairs of this present life, let us have
our hearts lifted up too the consideration and mynding of the heavenly life.
Hereunto perteyneth this saying of Paul: Seek the things that are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of the father.

Of the second.
Jesus said unto him: Unless ye see signs and wonders ye will not
believe. Here Christ finds fault with the courtier who was in great favor,
and one of the cheef about Herod: which thing Christ seldom did, specially
for as much as men came too him in heaviness too seek his help. Heerby we
must learn, not too be clawbacks of the Court, and too speak things that may
please: but too touch the bile as Christ did, and too put him to pain, that
afterward he may ye more luckily be healed. Now as touching this faultfinding
of Chrysts, it is to be understood that God rebukes sometime as a Judge, and
sometime as a Father: so that there is one fault finding which is iudgelike,
and another which is fatherlike. The iudgelike is, that whereby he reproves the
unrepentant persons as a Judge, such as were the Scribes, Pharisees, and
Hypocrites, after such manner as is in Matthew: W^ be too you scribes, Pharisees
and Hypocrites. This is a dreadful manace of the eternal damnation: Too which
all the world is subject for despising the Gospel, according too this: He
that believes not, is judged or condemned already. The fatherly rebuke is that,
whereby God chastizeth every son whom he receives unto him. This tends too
this purpose, that we should not be disappoynted of the promised
inheritance. All the holy men from the beginning of the world unto this day,
are an example of this rebuking. For there was never yet any of them, but he
felt this fatherly rod one time or other. It is good for me (says David) that
thou have brought me low, that I might learn thy iustifications. Both these
kinds of rebuking should of duty put us in mind too flee sin, that we
fall not intoo the hands of the living God, and perish for ever, as cast away
through our own fault. Here let us lift up our eyes, and look upon the
conditions of the world.

Many will seem as though they were no strangers too godliness, but yet in
hope of long life, they delay their repentance from day too day. Many are
deceived by their own Stoical imaginations, and say: If I be predestinate to
eternal life, I need not greatly too take thought whither I live well or ill,
for God will not alter his own decree for my sins. This is an horrible
blasphemy. First for that this horrible saying does exceeding great wrong
unto God, whose will is not that any man should be damned, but that all
should be saved, and that by salvation (that is too say by Jesus Christ) whom
they must embrace by faith. The Lord did not command the Gospel too be
preached too this man or that man, but too al men indifferently, and he adds
a condition: He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not
shall be damned. No destiny is able too alter the decree of God. Therefore we
must think in this wise, that like as Hector says in Homer: The best hansell
of good luck that can be, is too fight for a man's country. So is it an
undeceivable destiny too believe the Gospel, at lest wise if a man mind too
be saved.

Another sort because they here that Gods mercy is great do sin at their
pleasure, and repent at their leisure. This imagination has overthrown many,
and overthrows many at this day. Paul says: be not seduced: God is not
mocked. What soever a man sows, that shall he reap.

And other some set before the^ the multitude of them that sin. That man
(says he) has a mind too be saved, no less than I. God will not cast away
so great a multitude. But look what happened in the flud. Christ in spirit by
the mouth of Noe preached too the spirits, that is, too them whose souls are
now in prison: But the most part of the world refused too here Chrysts spirit
preaching, in so much as only eight persons were saved. Naught at all booted
here the multitude of the evil. Five cities (whereof the chief were Sodom
and Gomorre) hilde scorn too here God speak. What avails them their
multitude? Did they not perish euerychone saving Loath and his two daughters?
Wherefore let us beware that the multitude of them that sin, hinder us not
from repentance. Let us shun the words of the ungodly that provoke us too sin.
Let us bear in mind Chrysts saying who can not lie: unless ye repent, ye
shall al perish as they did.

Of the third.
AND the man believed the saying that Jesus spoke unto him* and went his
way. Here it is first too be observed, that Christ rejected not the
Courtier because his faith was weak. In deed he found fault with the
weakness of his faith, but he did not cast him of: For the Lord did not break
the broosed reed nor quench the smoking flax: but rather he relieved the
one, and stirred up the other. He chydeth his disciples for their wavering
faith, yet he puts them not from him as unworthy persons. For he knows
what our infirmities are: he knows with how great engines our faith is
assaulted: he knows that in all mankind there is horrible douting.

But Philip says too the Eunuche that de^ired Baptim: If thou believe
perfectly. Therefore if baptim can not be bestowed, but where as is perfect
faith: neither are other benefits too be looked for. Here are two questions
one of douting and the other of the perfection of faith. As too the douting I
answer thus. Faith is both strong and weak: howbeeit in respect of sundry
beginnings. For if ye have an eye too the flesh, doutes rise continually one
after an other. Sara too whom the seed was promised, laughed, and according
too the understanding of the flesh, did cast great doubt. So Abraham and many
holy men, as often as they be touched with the feelyng of the flesh, begin
somewhat to doubt. For the flesh is evermore against the spirit: neither can
any man look for so great strength of Faith, but that it shall be oftentimes
battered with the battelrammes of the flesh. But if ye look too the Spirit,
Faith is strong, and casts no doutes. Abraham (says Paul) sticke^ not,
through distrust, for that he was forspente with years, and his wife Sara
barreyne both by nature and age: But he gave glory too God, in believing
that he was able too make good his promise.

How is faith perfect? does it not need of daily encreasements. It is a
perfect faith and yet has need of daily encreasments. He had a perfect faith
which said: Lord I believe, how be it, increase thou my faith. This may be
showed by this most goodly similitude. A child that is newly borne is a
perfect man: And a man full grown is a perfect man. So also stands the case
with faith. The faith is perfect which receives and takes hold upon Christ
perfect: but it has need of daily encreasementes, too the intent it may
become full in all his parts. Like as a child though he be a perfect man,
yet has need of daily food and nourishement, too the intent he may come
too his full growth and making: Even so he that believes, has need too
mind Gods word continually, has need of the Heavenly bread, and has need
of the spiritual drink, too the intent he may from day too day take new
encreasement: Which thing we see in the Apostles. Peter had faith when he
said: Whither shall we go? thou haste the word of life. How be it this
faith of Peter's got greater strength and came as it were unto full growth on
Whitsunday, when having received Christ's spirit visibly, he came abroad, and
at one sermon wan three thousand people unto Christ. So also must faith
increase in all others: which, if a man have respect too, the substance of it
is perfect by and by as soon as it is conceived by the word: but if ye have
an eye too the quantity of it, it grows greater by daily increase.

And as concerning the doings of Faith, they are most trimly set out in this
Courtyer. For first faith compels this Courtyer too flee unto Christ for
refuge in his adversities, as unto a most true and skillful Physician for all
diseases and greefes. Secondlye, it enforces him too call upon Christ, and
too crave his aid. Besides this, it makes him not too give over Christ
forthwith, when he could not at the first intreataunce, win his purpose, but
too hang upon him with earnest suit, and not suffer himself too be shaken of
for a rough answer, from him whom he acknowledged too be the only Savior.
And by so doing he obteyneth of Christ what he would. Wherthrough his faith
encreseth the more and he becomes the more cheerful and earnest in suing, and
yields the fruits of confession and glorifying, as is said here, And he
believed and all his whole household. Heerby then we may gather ye faith has
six fruits going with it continually.

The first is, that faith will drive us too Christ in our adversities, too
seek help at his hand. It knows no saints too call upon, but only Christ,
whom it acknowledges too be the only mediator between God and man.

The second is, that when it is come unto Christ, it calls upon him, not
for it own worthiness, but upon trust of his gentleness and mercy.

The third is, that though it obtain not out of hand, yet it cease not like
a sluggarde, nor faints like a cowarde, but proceeds still in praying.

The fourth is, that it obteyneth what it will, and it wills that which may
turn too the glory of God.

The fifth is, that after it has obtained what it will, it grows more and
more, and comes too a fulsome quantity.

The sixth is, that after it yields the fruit of confession and praise of
GOD. And this sentence is too be marked heedfully. He believed and all his
house. The like thing reports Luke of Cornelius. Heerby therefore we may
learn too inure our household unto godliness: Let us be a patron and
example of doctrine unto it: Let us instruct the ignorant, chastise the
offenders, quicken up the dullerds, and (too be short) let us too the
uttermost of our power endeuer yt there may be as many churches as there be
households. But as for them that have no care of their household, too see them
traded in godliness, they may brag of faith as much as they list, for they
have but the smoke of faith and not faith it self, which is always bearing
fruit through Jesus Christ our Lord, too whom be praise and glory world
without end. Amen.

Upon the.xxij. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Math. xviij.
THerefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain man that was a
king, which would have accounts of his servants. And when he had begone
too reckon, one was brought unto him, which ought him ten thousand talents:
but for as much as he was not able too pay, his Lord commanded him too be
sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment too be
made. The servant fell down, and besought him, saying: sir have patience
with me, and I will pay thee all. Then had the Lord pity on that servant,
and loosed him, and forgave him the dot. So the same servant went out, and
found one of his fellows which ought him an hundred pence, and he laid
hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying: Pay that that thou ovvest.
And his fellow fell down and besoughte him, saying: have patience with me,
and I will pay thee all. And he vvoulde not, but went and cast him intoo
prison, till he should pay the det. So when his fellows savve what was
done, they were very sorry, and came and told unto their Lord all that
had happened. Then his Lord called him, and said unto him: O thou
ungracious servant, I forgave thee all that debt when thou desiredst me:
should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had
pity on thee? and his Lord was vvrothe, and delivered him too the gaylers,
till he should pay all that was due unto him. So likevvyse shall my heavenly
father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive* not (every one his
brother) his trespas^e.

The exposition of the Text.
THe occasion of this Gospel was the question that Peter asked of Christ, how
often he should forgive his brother that offended him, whither unto seven
times. Too him Christ answers: I say not too thee seven times, but unto
seventy times seven times, that is too wit of sinnings. Seventy times seven
are four hundred fourscore and ten: Whereby is signified, that we must
forgive the fault of our brother that repents, as often as he offends
against us. For he put a number certain for an infinite, Howbeeit in as much
as this seemed hard to Peter: our Lord put forth a parable, the sum whereof is
this. God our heavenly Father pardons us oftentimes offending against him.
Wherefore we also must forgive our brethren that have dealt amiss with us, as
often as they be sorry for it. This Gospel therefore pertains too the third
part of Repentance: namely too the leading of a new life by faith: of which new
life, one part is a forgiving one an other of the mysdeedes that escape us. Now
too the intent this parable may be the more clearly understood, I will make a
comparison of things in this wise. Like as a very rich creditour is in respect
of a very poor detter, but yet such a detter as humbles himself and casts
himself down flat at his creditours feet, beseeching him of release: Even so
does God behave himself toward sinners, humbling them selves before him in
true repentance, and casting them selves down, and craving forgiveness for
Chrysts sake. But the rich creditour releaseth the debt too the detter that
humbles him self: Ergo God of his mercy forgiueth the repentant person all
his sins. Now like as God behaueth him self toward sinners oftentimes
offending against him: so must a Christen man behave himself toward his
brothers or fellow servant that trespass against him. Therefore like as GOD
forgiueth us our misdeeds freely: so must we also forgive the displeasures
wherewith we are impeached by our brethren. Ageine on the contrary part: Look
in what wise the Creditor deals with his detter too whom he erst released
his debt, and afterward found him cruel against his brother: so does God
deal with those whom he earste received intoo favor, and afterward finds
them cruel toward their neighbor. But the Creditour calls such a
thanklesse person too a backrekning: Ergo God calls back too straight
judgment, such as are hard too their neigbours, Therefore we must forgive
our neighbor as often as he trespasseth against us. The places are three.

1 The true manner how too repent. 2 A commendation of Gods mercy toward
sinners. 3 The mutual duty of Chrystians too forgive and too be forgiven.
Of the first.
THe parable of the creditor and detter sets forth a very trim manner of
repentance and amendment, than which there is not a more excellent in all ye
new Testament. Wherefore let us thoroughly wey all the circumstances thereof: who
is the Creditor: when he requires a reckning: why we are his detters: how
much we owe him: what is too be done when our account is called upon: how Gods
justice may be satisfied, which exacteth payment of that which is due.

Who is the Creditor? God the heavenly king. He has lent us many good
things. He has created us after his own image. He has given light intoo our
mind, rightnesse intoo our heart, and both inward and outward powers,
wherewith we might perform obedience unto him. But are not these things
blotted out through the sin of our first parents? That is very true. Howbeeit
ye gifts that he bestowed upon Adam, belonged too all his posterity. Then at
such time as our first Father lost his gifts he cast both himself and us
with him intoo death. Therefore God does right too require of us that which we
lost in our first parent. Yea verily, we have diverse ways increased the det,
and it is grown too so great a sum, that no man is able too pay it, though
he should sell himself, and all that he has.

When does the Creditor demand the det? Although he do continually put us
in mind of this debt, yet he is too be thought then chiefly too call for a
reckening of it, first as often as our own conscience charge us with sin,
and as it were cites us too the judgment seat of GOD. Secondly, when the holy
Ghost comes in the ministry of the law, and reproves sin, and cites us
unto punishment, if payment be not made. Ageine, when the signs of Gods
wrath are seen, either in heaven or on earth. And moreover when we are vexed
with cross or sickness, which are as it were Gods ministers that call upon us
for the payment of the det.

But why are sins called dettes. Because that as ordinary dets do bind men
too payment: so do sins bind men too satisfaction of the penalty, unless
there be made a discharge.

Wherefore do we owe? This is told already. For we owe so much as he put
intoo the hands of our forefather Ada^, all the which we have lost, and
moreover have burdened our selves with new dets, provoking Gods wrath
ageinste us by our daily transgressing of his most holy law.

How great is the sum of the det? The Creditour answers, that thou owe
ten thousand talents, and that thou have not one halfpeny toowards it: so far
art thou off from ever being able too discharge so great a debt. The ten
commandments contain the parcels of the debt. There is demanded of thee
the fear of God, love, faith, and patience, in the first commandment:
Inasmuche as thou haste not performed this obedience and discharged thy self
of it, thou art run in arrerages. After this manner is the det too be
examined in every several commandment of the first and second table: and
thereupon the greatness of the det is too be gathered.

But what is too be done in this case? We must follow the example of this
Detter which falls down before his Creditor, humbling himself and desiring
releasment, which he also obteyneth. That is too wit, we must acknowledge
the greatness of our sin: we must be sorry from our heart, that we have
not paid that we ought: and upon trust of Christ we must flee unto our
heavenly father, desiring forgiveness and releasment of the det. Which thing
if we do, we have a promise that he will forgive us the whole debt, and
receive us intoo his favor. This thing is plainly showed in this present
miracle: whereof I will now set forth certain examples too stir us up withal.

The sinful woman in the.vij. of Luke acknowledging her det, sought unto
Christ for favor, and leaned unto him by lively faith: and by and by the Lord
told her she had obtained releasement of the det. For thus he says: Many
sins are forgiven her. But there it is added: because she has loved much.
Notwithstanding, Christ says not, she has satisfied her det with her
louingnesse: but after she had obtained releasment of the det, then she loved:
which thing Christ shows plainly by this Parable propounded here. For when
the Pharisie was offended, because Christ did not shake of this woman as a
sinner, and mislike of her service as vnpure he corrected his ouertwhart
judgment in this wise. A certain Creditor (says he) had two detters, of
which the one ought him five hundred pence, and the other ought him fifty.
Now when neither of them was able too pay, he forgave the^ both. Tell me
therefore whither of these loves him most? The Pharisie answering, said: I
suppose he too whom most was forgiven. And Jesus said unto him: thou have
judged aright, and turning too the woman he said unto Simon: See thou this
woman* I am come intoo thy house, and thou haste given me no water for my
feet: but she has washed my fee with her tears, and wiped them with the
hair of her (...)* Thou haste given me no kiss: But she has not ceased too
kiss my feet. Thou have not anointed my head with Oil: but she has
anointed my feet. Wherefore I sa^ unto thee, that many sins are forgiven
her, for she has lo^^ed much. For too whom little is forgiven, he loves
little And he said unto her. Thy sins are forgiven thee. Here we see
plainelye, that when she had obtained releasement of her det, then she loved.
For after forgiveness of sins must follow new obedience, which is termed
here by the name of love.

Also let us look upon the example of David, in whom are to be seen these
two motions which we saw in the sinful woman: great fearfulness, and
comfort. For when he was reproved by the Prophet Nathan for rauishing an
other man's wife, and for fleeing her husband, there rose up in David horrible
^e^^fulnesse for the greatness of his det, of which sort of fears, he himself
describes many. There is no rest in my bones for the sight of my sins. He
acknowledges Gods wrath against sin: He is sort that he has displeased
God: He is afraid least God should shake him of, as he had seen Saul
dreadfully cast away before: and finally he feared both eternal and present
punishment. Here had he bin for^^^ for sorrow, if he had not herd the
comfort of the Prophet in Gods room. Thou shall not die, the Lord has
taken away thy sin. At the hearing of this comfort, faith kindled in him,
whereby taking hold upon the releasement, began too behold the mercy of God,
and rested upon the mediator.

We have heard a late, a most goodlye example in the Publicane, whoo in
such wise acknowledged the greatness of his det, that he durst not so much
as lift up his eyes. And yet having bearde of the greatness of Gods mercy,
he rayseth himself by faith, and prays: O God be merciful too me a
sinner. And so he obtained a free discharge of ye whole debt.

Let us set before us these examples, which plainly show us the doctrine of
repentance and fogiuenesse of sins: That forgiveness of sins is the free
releasement of the debt, which happens too him that repents, and flees
too Gods mercy for Chrysts sake. And although this release be utterly free as
in respect of our selves: ye^ if we look upon Christ, (who for our sins
suffered dreadful punishment) there is made satisfaction too God for our det.

Let us therefore mark well this word releasement, which of itself alone
conteyneth in it right manyfolde Doctrine. First it overthrows the Moonkish
doctrine of satisfaction. For if salvation befall men through releasement of
the debt according too the Gospel, what a madness is it too say, that
salvation happens for satisfaction of the det for releaseme^t and payment do
so fight one against an other, that they can inn^ wise stand both in one
respect. Secondly it overthrows all merits of men. For how (...) that be
of merit, which is of free gift? Paul says openly. Unto him that woorketh,
rewards is given, not of favor, but of duty: but unto him that woorketh
not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is imputed too
him for righteousness* According wherewit^ David also says: Blissed are they
whose iniquities are forgiven and whose sins are covered. Thirdly the word
of releasment overthrows satisfaction, which the Papists teach* which
satisfaction must be made (as they bear men in hand) by pilgrimages,
fastings, and alms deeds. Also it quenches the fire of Purgatory. For if
the det be released, why is the detter punished? Lastly this word releasement
opens unto wretched sinners the gate of grace: in the conflict of death, it
is the haven of salvation: and it is the welspring of al comfort. And thus much
concerning the first place.

Of the second.
Because this text concerning the parable of the creditor, shows how great
gods love and mercy are toward mankind* I will speak somewhat thereof. The
mercy of God is of two sorts: The one is universal, wherthrough he suffers
the sun too rise upon the good and bad: and the other is particular,
wherewith (as a most dear father) he embraces the Church of his son. Of
which Christ speaks in the third of John. So God loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son, too the intent that every one which believes in
him should not perish, but have life everlasting. Our heavenly father could not
by any greater record, have declared his mercy toward us, than in giving his
son, who might by his death redeem ^^ from deserved damnation, and give us
everlasting life. Therefore as often as we here Gods mercy named, let us
think th^^^ things.

First let us think how great the misery of mankind is before he be
received intoo favor. Mankind lies under foot, and wounded by the Devil,
with whose venime being moreover poys^^ed, he breaths nothing but sin, for
which he is subject too eternal pains.

2. The causes of this misery are too be thought upon, which are partly the
sins of our first parents, and also our own filthiness. For although that
by the fall of them, we he bound unto the sentence of damnation: yet
notwithstanding by our own (...) from day too day we are bound too sorer
punishments.

3 The louingnesse of God and his gentleness toowards mankind is too be
thought upon. For the loving kindness (says Paul) and the gentleness of God
our Savior appeered unto all men. What greater loving kindness could there
(...), than that he has not cast us away for so great shamefulnesse and filth?

4. Is too be thought upon, the ransom, that is too wit, the Sacrifice of
the son, whereby man's misery is relieved, and sin abolished. Him that
knew no sin, he made (...), that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him. 2. Cor. 5.

5 Is too be thought upon, the way by which we may come too the possession of
Gods mercy. That way is showed in the first place, and is none other than true
repentance.

6 Is too be thought how far forth Gods mercy stretches: that it is not
belonging too a few, or too the men of one age: but indifferently too all that
fear him. For the holy virgin being taught by the spirit of Christ, whom
she had conceived by the holy Ghost, sings in this wise: Gods mercy is from
generation too generation too them that fear him: that is, too all that repent.

7 Is too be thought upon, continual thankfulness in all the whole life,
that we may glorify GOD for his so great mercy, with heart, mouth,
profession, and behavior.

8 We must think how we may be heedfull in framing our whole life, that
we lose not so great a benefit through our own fault, as this detter did.

Of the third.
THe third thing that I purposed upon, is of mutual forgiving each others
skapes that are woonte too happen. For this goes jointly with belief of
forgiveness of sins. Now there are two things yt go ioyntlye with belief of
remission of sins: Namely Grace and Gift. Grace is the very Justification it
self, whereby Christ's righteousness is imputed too them that believe, and
their sins clearly are forgyuen. Of this we have spoken in the first
place. Gift is the very bestowing of the holy Ghost, wherthrough a man that is
justified by faith only, is toogither therwithal regenerated and sanctified,
that is too say, is mortified in the flesh, and quickened in the spirit. The
flesh is mortified, when the custom of sinning is abolished: and the spirit
is quickened, when we begin to perform new obedience unto God. A certain
parcel of this quickening, is mutual forgiving, whereby each of us forgive
other their misdeedes and displeasures. How necessary this forgiveness is,
this days Gospel shows most evidently, as I said at the entrance intoo it.
Christ has commanded us too pray: forgive us our dets as we forgive our
detters. For Christ will have us too follow his fathers example.

How be it there are two kinds of men that offend us. Some as soon as they
perceive themselves too have offended, do by and by in humble wise desire
forgiveness. But as touching those that proceed too offend, thou shall forgive
their offenses after this manner. Laying aside all desire of revenge, thou shall
not cease too love him still, but rather requite him with a good turn instead
of injury, although thou have an ill opinion of him as he does deserve: for
when as GOD bids wish well too our enemies, he does not forthwith
require that we should like well of those things that he him self condemns:
but his meaning is only that our minds should be clear from malice. But as
touching those which as soon as they have offended, come by and by and desire
forgiveness, we must receive them intoo favor as our brethren, so as we
may have a good opinion of them, and therewithal be persuaded that the
remembrance of that sin is wiped out before God.

Moreover, it is too be known, that there happens two manner of offenses
among brethren: by the one of them, one brother hurts another: by the other
the Church is hurt, that is too wit, by some stumbling block when some
person lives naughtely and does evil, although he do no harm at all too
our own person or goods. After this sort did that incestuous person hurt
the Church of Corinthe, whom it took too favor upon his amendment. This
forgiving or releasement is of two sorts. Thou shall lay aside all hatred
toward him, and then upon his submission thou shall receive him intoo
favor, and embrace him as thy brother, whom thou did earste shun least
thou should stain thee with his infections. Let this suffice breeflye
concerning the third place which requires mutual forgiveness of ye scapes
that happen between man and man, and that after the example of the heavenly
father, who has forgiven us so great a debt for Chrysts sake, too whom be
glory for evermore. Amen.

Upon the.xxij. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Math. ix.
THen the Phariseis went out, and took counsel how they might tangle him
in his words. And they sent out unto him their Disciples with Herodes
servants, saying: Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way
of God truly, neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the
outvvard appearaunce of men. Tell us therefore, how think thou? Is it
lavvfull that tribute be given too Caesar, or no? But Jesus perceiving their
wickedness, said: Why tempt ye me ye ypocrites? Show me the tribute
money. And they took him a penny. And he said unto them: whose is this Image
and superscription? They said unto him: Cesars. Then said he unto them:
Give therefore unto Caesar, the things vvhch are Cesars: and unto God, those
things which are Gods. When they heard these words, they marvelled, and
left him, and went their way.

The exposition of the Text.
THe intent of the holy Fathers that appointed this gospel to be read in the
church, was that there should remain in the Church, a doctrine concerning ye
difference of the spiritual kingdom of Christ, and the kingdom of the world.
And ageine, that the godly might know how far forth the civil Magistrate
is too be obeyed. Now the occasion of this Gospel was the malice of the
Pharisees, who (according too the Prophecy of David) took counsel against
the Lord and against his anointed, too the intent they might overthrow his
kingdom, and stablish their own superstition. The whole gospel is occupied
about this question, whyther Gods people ought of right too be subject too the
civil and foreine Magistrate, and too pay him Tribute, and too obey him? Too
this question Christ answers thus. The Church owes obedience too all those
too whom it is subject. Then in as much as the Jewish people is subject both
unto God, (for he chose it too be his peculiar people) and unto Caesar, who
has subdued it by force of arms: it ought too render unto God, that which is
due too God, and unto Caesar, that which is Cesars. This answer serves too
this purpose, that he may teach how his Church ought too be subject too the
civil Magistrate, and pay tributes, and so long too obey, until it command
any thing that is against Gods word and the law of nature. The places are two.

1 Of Hypocrisy and customable unthankfulness toward those that have
deserved well. 2 Of the question of the Pharisees and of the Magistrate.
Of the first.
THen the Pharisees went their way, and took counsel how too take
advantage of his words. All the whole story of the gospel bears witness
that the Pharisees were Christ's enemies. And although there were nothing yt
they could find fault with, either in his Doctrine or in his life: yet seek
they al occasions that may be, too trouble him without cause, and too raise a
slander of him as though he taught evil and lived evil. This has bin a
continual practice of Hipocrites in this world. We have an example of it in
Christ's church at this day. The Monks and popish Pharisees know well enough
that our Doctrine which we teach, is taken out of the wrytings of Moses, the
Prophets and Apostles, and they have nothing that they may justly find fault
with in the behavior of many godly ministers: yet invent they diverse crafts
too defame them, and seek a thousand ways too deface the gospel, and they
had lever see the Turk reign, than the pureness of the gospel maintained.
From whence comes this so great outrage? From whence is all his malice? They
are Satan's champions, and therefore it is no wonder though they endeuer too
break intoo Chrysts camp. Besides this, they have hitherto highly bin
esteemed and much set by, and were called most holy fathers. But now because
their hypocrisy is discovered, they grow out of credit, and their superstition
is hissed at and despised. Therefore bend they all their force too stop the
course of the Gospel by slaughter and bludshed. But God be thanked, Chrysts
Church is builded upon a most firm rock, so as the gates, that is too wit,
the devises and the powers of hell are not able too prevail against it. Since
then that this is an ordinary matter, it is not too be marvelled, that these
Pharisses do according too their accustomed manner.

Let us see the^ by what policies they invade Chrysts kingdom. Our Evangelist
appropriateth unto them four policies, which they use before they put too
their hands. The first is Counsel. They took counsel (says he) For counsel is
the foundation too woork upon. Therefore they meet and confer their wicked
devises toogither: and the more mischeeuous that each of them is in giving
advise, the more is he commended. This did the spirit of Christ in David
foresee long before, as we find in the second Psalm. Why did the heathen so
furiously rage, and why did the people imagine vain things? They were vain in
deed, because the Lord turned their devises intoo folly. Ageine, here is
noted too what purpose all their counsels tended. Too take him in a trap in his
words, says the Evangelist: that being so taken, he might be made a
iestingstocke too the people: his doctrine be defamed: his authority be
abased: and he at last be haled too punishment as a blasphemer against God,
and an heretic and evil dooer. Ye see the drifte of the Pharisees
counselling toogither. In the third place follows what manner of devise they
found out. It lyked these good councellers too send their disciples with
Herodes servants. A very subtle fetch, that they might have witnesses
present too report his errande too Herod, if he had said ought that
afterward might scarce be well lyked of. These their disciples had they
noozeled thoroughly in hypocrisy, that they might be the fitter too deceive.
For none deceive men ^ooner, than those that outwardly pretend holiness and
courtesy, when privily they purpose too beguyle. Fourthly the communication of
those hypocrites is described in this wise. Master, we know that thou
speak the truth, and teach the way of the Lord aright, and that thou
carest not for any man. This is the beginning of their talk: which surely (if
thou look upon the words) is most apt. For it conteyneth two things: First
they acknowledge him too be their master, and afterward they attribute unto
him the virtues which a faithful teacher ought too have. When they
acknowledge him too be their master, their meening is too seem, not his
enemies, but his friends, or rather his disciples, and such as had great desire
too learn at his hand. And when they attribute unto him the virtues that a
true teacher ought too have, they craftily wind them selves in with him, too
the intent he should believe they meant him no harm. But there is no devise,
there is no wisdom against the Lord. And what are those virtues which they
attribute unto Christ? The first is, the love of truth. We know (say they)
that thou art true. The second is, certeyntie of doctrine. And that (say
they) thou teach the way of God aright. And the third is, steadfastness and
stoutnesse of mind. And thou carest for no man, say they. Wherefore? Because
thou respectest not any man's person (and this is the fourth virtue) for thou
(say they) regardest not any ma^s person. These four virtues are great, and
are required of all Gods ministers. The love of truth dryueth away the
darkness of ignorance, and makes the truth too shine out clear. The
certeintie of doctrine makes us that we be not tossed too and fro with the
winds of variable doctrine, nor flote in the fondness of false reports.
Steadfastness and stoutnesse of mind make a man invincible in his office. When
the teacher has no respect of any men's persons, it makes that the truth
can not be suppressed for fear, or for any other thing. These virtues does
the Lord attribute too John the Baptist, and the sequel showed, that he was
endued with them in deed. For when Herod had taken away his brother Philips
wife. John boldly withstoode him, not fearing the person or state that Herod
bare. For he said: It is not lawful for thee too have thy brothers wife: For
which thing he was put too death within a while after. Such virtues had Helias
also, who resisted the wicked King Ahab, and said openly too his face: It is
thou and thy fathers house that trouble Israel. But as for those that do not
this, are more rightly too be called hirelings, than true shepherds. Hithertoo
concerning the practices of Hypocrites ageynste Christ.

Of the second.
NOw follows their question, wherewith they think too catch such hold of
Christ, that he cannot shift away from them. Is it lavvfull (say they) too pay
Tribute unto Caesar or no? Here they thought that of necessity and simplye
he must have answered one of these two things, either that it was lauful, or
not lawful. If he had said it had bin lawful, he should have displeased the
people, upon whom the Emperor had laid this burden against their wills: and
so the Pharisees might have had a gap opened to destroy him, when the people
had abandoned him. And if he had said it had not bin lawful Herod's servants
were at hand too carry him forthwith as a seditious person too be punished.
What does the Lord then too this question? He does two things. First he
rebukes the^, and afterward he ass^yleth their question. Jesus (says the
Evangelist) perceiving their wickedness said: why tempt you me ye
Hipocrites. Here they found true by their own experience, the thing that they
had spoken too him before in the way of flattery: thou respectest not the
persons of men. The solution too their question he framed in this wise. Show
me a piece of the tribute money, and they shevved him a penny. Whose image
and inperscription is this, says he? They said unto him, Caesar's. Then said
he unto them: Give therefore unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, and
unto God those things that are Gods. The question is answered in such wise, as
that neither our Lord suppresseth the truth, nor the Pharisees have any hold
too pick quarrels too him: Wherefore being confounded they wondered and went
their ways. So little can any devise or any craftiness prevail ageinste the
Lord.

But what does this answer of Christ's teach us? First it puts a
difference betwixt Cesars kingdom and Gods kingdom: that is, between the
kingdom of the world and the Church. Ageine it puts a difference between
the persons that are chief of these two diverse kingdoms. Also it teaches
that obedience is too be performed in both kingdoms: that is too say, that
God must have his service in his spiritual kingdom, and that due dutifulness
must be performed too the civil magistrate. In this place I should show what
is due too God, and what too the civil magistrate: Howbeeit forasmuch as I
have often heretofore entreated of the service of GOD, I will now speak here
only of the Magistrate, too the intent we may be put in mind how godly
opinion we ought too have of the magistrate, I will therefore say five things
concerning the Magistrate. First from whence he is, and what he is.
Secondlye, what conditions ought too ^elong too a good Magistrate. Thirdly,
what is his duty, and what are the ends of the civil gouernemente:
Fourthlye, what right the Magistrate has upon the bodies and goods of his
Subjects. And fifthly what the Subjects owe too their Magistrate.

The first that I purposed, that is too wit, from whence and what the
Magistrate is, is declared by Paul in the third too the Romans, where he
teaches that the Magistrate is of God. For there is no power (says he) but
of God, and the powers that are, are ordained of God. Which thing truly is too
be understood of the rightful government, and not of the confusion that is
oftentimes seen in states of government for men's wickedness. Therefore as
long as good Magistrates guide the helm, we see God (after a sort) present
with us, and ruling us by the hand of those whom he has sent over us.
Contrariwise, where ungodly Magistrates bear the sway, verily the wickedness
it self proceeds of the devil and of the lewd will of the ruler: But yet God
being displeased, lets loose the reins too tyrants and ungodly persons,
that he may thereby revenge the unthankfulness of men.

Thou have from whence the Magistrate is: and what he is, the same Paul
defines: namely that he is Gods ordynance for the wealth of his subjects,
while the good are made much of, and the evil punished with bodily pains.

The second that I purposed upon, was of the conditions or properties of a
good magistrate, which in the.xij. of Exodus are counted four. That is too
wit, that a judge or a magistrate should be wise, fearing God, true and not
covetous. Wisdom must rule his doings, lest in execution of justice, he may
offend through error, and give wrong judgment. The fear of God must make him
have an eye too God in all cases, and too beware that he do not any thing that
may offend him. Truth must put him in mind that he admit not false
interpretations and wresting of the laws, nor give ear too clawbacks and
flatterers. The hatred of covetousness must maintain sincerity and vpryghte
dealing in judgment. For whereas are Judges that will be brybed, there farewell
equity. For if the accepting of persons be the marring of judgment, that
right can take no place: undoubtedly covetousness will bring too pass, that the
judge shall rather look upon the person than the case. Therefore who soever
bearing office is led with rewards, he can not see what is rightefull and good.
For rewards do blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the
just. And heervpon it is, that Esaias calls covetous judges thieves fellows.

The third thing that I purposed concerning the Magistrate, was of his offce,
whereof I will now speak. And I will show the duty of a magistrate partly by
ye testimonies of the scripture, and partly by the examples of famous men yt
have borne office too their commendation. The duty of a magistrate in
general, is to be a keeper of Gods law, that is a maynteiner of true religion.
This duty does the godly magistrate then fulfill, when after the example of
David, Josias and Ezechias, he takes away Idolatry and the occasions of
Idolatry: Like as Ezechias brake the brazen serpent intoo poulder: Josias
purged this Temple from diverse Idols: Moses brake the Calfe: And David by
exhortations brought the people too do true service unto God. For since the
magistrate is ordained of God too be Gods minister for the weal of man:
verily he must too his power rid out of the way what things so ever he sees
hurtful unto man, that the common wealth of the realm and the welfare of his
subjects be not impeached. Agein the magistrate must after the example of
Josias, see that true religion be set forth, maynteyned and spread abroad, and
that wicked doctrine be abolished. And although the civil magistrate and the
minister of Gods word be two distinct offices: yet in this point they both
may and must agree, too seek toogither the glory of God and the welfare of
mankind: but yet keeping the lawful means of either of their callings: that
is too wit, that the civil magistrate endeuer too take away wickedness, and
advance Gods glory by commandment and sword: and that the minister of Gods
word by teaching, exhorting, rebuking and threatening. Furthermore because
religion can not be maynteyned without teachers and lerners. It is the
magistrates duty too set up schools, and too maintein them with livings,
that the teachers and lerners may apply them selves too the study of
godliness. Besides this, the examples of Ezechias, and of the King of Niniuie,
do warn the Magistrate, that he should by solemn prayers unto God, and by
true conversion too the Lord, endeuer too turn away Gods wrath either present
or at hand. And these things are too be referred too that part of the law
which chiefly concerns religion. And as perteyning too the outward civil
state: The office of a good Magistrate in his common weal, is all one with the
office of an honest householder in his house: that is too wit, that like as the
goodman of the house rules his children in nurture, chastises the stubborn,
makes much of the good, deals rewards among them, and (too be brief)
bends himself wholly too this, that his household may appear too be as well
ordered as can be: even so must the magistrate do in his common weal, that
he may rightly be called the father of his realm. But if any man desire too
have the duties of a Magistrate reckened up unto him: Let him know that the
first duty of a Magistrate is desire of peace, that we may serve God in
quietness, and abolish superstitions which corrupt the true religion, and are
a hinderaunce too true godliness. The second duty of a Magistrate is, that
every man do his duty aright, which cannot be done, but where the laws
are in force, and thoroughly executed. For too make laws and not too put them in
execution, is the destruction of commonweals. Wherefore as it is lawful for
the Magistrate too make honest laws: so he must take heed, that they be not
despised, which thing comes too pass when they are not executed. The third
duty is too punish offenders, and too defend the giltlesse, according too
the tenor of the laws, and the moderation of wise men. By these things it is
easy too gather what are the ends ye Magistrates serve for: namely that he is
ordained on Gods behalf, for the profit of the Church and of commonweals.
Wherefore it is well said, that a Prince ought too have a care of gouernemente,
of religion, and of his own house.

The fourth thing that I promised too entreat of, is, ye right of the
Magistrate over the bodies and goods of his Subjects. Xenophon the Philosopher
binds a Magistrate unto this Law: A King must be led, not by affection
but by Law. Wheruppon it follows, that the Magistrate has so much power
over his Subjects and their goods, as the laws that are agreeable too the ten
commandments and too the law of nature, do permit and bear with. Therefore
he has power and authority (according unto the fourth commandment) too
command his Subjects needful duties, which are for the safegarde of the
common weal, and the profit of every person.

Now remains that which I purposed in the fifth place, concerning the
duty of Subjects toward their Magistrate. The duty of the Subject
toward the Magistrate, may be brought intoo four points: That the first
may be (according too the fourth commandment) too honor the Magistrate: that
is too say, too regard him and reverence him as the minister and liuetenant of
GOD: so as thou honor him, fear him, have a good opinion of him, construe his
scapes in the better part, and not backbite the Magistrate, as the rascal
sort are wont too do. For that is straightly forbidden by Gods word. Curse
not the Prince of the people. Under the name of curse are signified all
slanders and backbitings. The second, too obey his proclamations and
statutes, as well in paying tributes, as also in other things, so farre-foorth
as thou may lawfully without impeachement of religion and of the law of
Nature. Heeruntoo perteyneth this saying of Paul: warn the^ too submit
themselves too rule and power too obey the officers, and too be ready too all
good works. The third too pray for Magistrates. Exhort them (says Paul)
above all things too make prayers, supplications, intercessions and
thanksgiving for all men, for kings, and for all that are in authority, that
we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. The
fourth, not too rush intoo the office of the Magistrate: but too refer the
discussing of matters too the discretion of the Magistrate, if any thing seem
too perteine too the welfare of the Realm. And thus much concerning the
magistrate. God grant us grace that we may yield both true service unto God,
and duetifull obedience too our Magistrates through Jesus Christ our Lord, too
whom be glory for evermore. Amen.

Upon the.xxiiij. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Math. ix.
WHile Jesus spoke unto the people: Behold there came a certain ruler, and
vvoorshipped him, saying: my Daughter is even now disceased, but come and lay
thy hand upon her, and she shall live. And Jesus arose and follovved him, and
so did his Disciples. And behold a woman which was diseased with an issue
of blood twelve years, came behind him, and touched the hemme of his
vesture. For she said within her self: If I may touch but even his
vesture only, I shall be safe. But Jesus turning him about, and when he
savve her, he said: Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee
safe. And the woman was made whole even the same time. And when Jesus came
intoo the rulers house, and savve the Minstrels and people making a noise, he
said unto them: get you hence, for the maid is not dead but sleeps. And
they laughed him too scorn. But when the people were put forth, he went
in, and took her by the hand, and said: Damsel arise. And the Damosel
arose. And this noise was abroad in all that land.

The exposition of the Text.
IN this Gospel it is manifestly described how our Lord succoureth his Church
that is under the cross. For look how Christ our Savior was minded
toward this Ruler, and toward this afflicted woman: even so also is he
minded toward me and thee, yea and toward all folk that after the example
of these persons (that is too wit, of this ruler and this woman) do flee too
him, according too that Prophecy of Ioell concerning Christ: All that call
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. With this Prophecy do both
Chrysts words and his deeds agree. His words are: Come unto me all ye that
labor and are laden, and I will refresh you. His deeds are every where too
be met withal: He heals the blind, he cleanses the Lepers, and heereth
this Iairus, and this woman, and he succoureth those that call upon him. This
therefore is the sum of this Story, that our Lord woorketh two miracles:
He heals a woman that had bin diseased twelve years: and he rayseth the
dead Daughter of this Iairus. In both these deeds he shows what mind he
bears toward all folk. The places are three.

1 The example of this woman, her state, faith, supplication and healing. 2 The
example of Iairus and the raising of the dead maid. 3 The mockage, wherthrough
Christ was skorned of his enemies.
Of the first.
Although that in the Gospel the Ruler Iairus be mentioned first for
coming too Christ: yet notwithstanding I will speak first of this woman that
had the blouddie issue, because she is placed in the mids of the Story of
this Ruler. Therefore there are in this woman four things too be noted: First
her estate: secondly her faith: thirdly her supplication: and fourthly the
healing of the disease wherewith she was combered. Of which things, each one
conteyneth a several lesson and admonishement.

The state of the woman was this: first she was a simple and a fearful woman:
secondely she had bin combered.xij. years with an issue of blud, whereby it is
easy too conjecture how sore she was for spent and weakened. He that is
combered but one mooneth with so grievous a disease, is miserable, and
afflicted enough: and what shall we say then of this woman that was troubled
so many years? Thirdly Mark adds that she had suffered many things at the
Physicians hands, of who^ some with one medicine and some with another had
martyred the silie woman piteously. And for a vauntage she had by this time
spent al her substance upon them, so that by this most grievous disease she
was brought too utter beggerie: and yet al those expenses had don her no good,
but rather she was every day worse than other. The remorse of conscience had
made this bodily disease of hirs more bitter. For whereas the scripture says,
that he which sins against the Lord, falls intoo the hands of the
Physician: What could she think else than ye god had cast her away? This was
the state of this woman, hard enough, disease of body, gnawing of conscience,
beggerie and contempt. But was she therefore an abject before God? Did Christ
shake her off for all that? No surely. For he came for the afflicted: he came
for sinners. Let us therefore take courage at this woman's example, too raise our
selves in our miseries. Let us acknowledge gods just wrath against us for our
sins: we have herd what was this woman's state: now follows her faith. She
came behind him and touched the hem of his garment, for she thought within
her self: If I may touch but the hem of his garment, I shall be safe. This
saying of hirs declares sufficiently, what manner of faith she had. She
persuaded her self for a certeintie, that if she might touch but the hem of
his garment she should atteine too health. How came she by so great faith? By
the universal promise which she applied too her self. Doutlesse she knew
this promise of Christ: Come unto me all ye. etc. Here she first
attributes too Christ the praise of truth: Secondly, she applies the
general saying too her self, in this wise. He calls all folks unto him,
he promises help in general too all, he will refreshe all that are combered.
I am one of those that are combered, I am one of that multitude which he
calls wholly unto him. Therefore I verily believe he will help me. We see
how this woman stirred up her faith: Now will we apply this too us.

As often as the cross pincheth thee, either within or without, acknowledge
this cross too be as a certain Sermon, whereby thy misery and damnation is
set before thine eyes. Secondly, behold the word of promise and the examples,
and think that God is no accepter of persons, but that he will have mercy on
all men in Christ Jesus. With this confidence fall upon Christ, and persuade
thy self that he will here thee and grant thee thy request, if thou ask
not poison, that is too say, if thou ask not that which will do thee no good,
or which may hinder Gods glory. And apply unto thy self this saying: Come
unto me al. etc. which thing when thou have done, thou shall feel comfort.

But this woman had Christ present and saw him with her eyes? but he is far
from me. This a temptation of the flesh: against which set thou first Chrysts
promise: I am with you too the end of the world. And secondly, that which the
Lord said too Thomas. Blissed are they that believe and see not. And moreover,
that Christ is no accepter of persons, and how by certain examples when he
was here in the flesh, he showed how he would deal with the rest that
should call upon him.

But I am a great sinner: I believe thee. But Christ came intoo the world too
save sinners. So says he first him self: I came not too call the rightuous,
but the sinners too repentance. Paul repeting this, says: It is a sure
saying and worthy too be embraced of all men, that Christ Jesus came intoo
this world too save sinners. Also healthful grace appeered unto all men. Then
let us behold the examples of Gods mercy. Adam had cast him self and all the
whole world into damnation: Nevertheless, he repents and is received. Paul
persecuted Christ's Church. Peter denied Christ: and Manasses had defiled
him self with horrible Idolatries, and with plentiful bloodshed of the
saints: and yet all these upon their repentance were received into favor.
Whereby is showed how true this saying is in the Prophet: As truly as I live
(says the Lord) I will not the death of the sinner, but that he should
turn and live. Heereuntoo make also these earneste assurances of Christ:
Uerely, verily, I say unto you, he that believes in me shall not perish but
have life everlasting. Set thou these sentences and these examples against the
thought of the greatness of thy sins, and know thou that Gods mercy
exceeds the hugeness of sin, and that grace abounds above misdeede.

But I know not whither I am predestinate. This is the sorest temptation and
comes even from Satan himself. Who is fallen? Adam and his posterity: For
we were in him as in ye general lump of all mankind. Who received ye
promise? was it not Adam? Then even as thou art fallen in Adam: so art thou
partaker with him of the promise, so that thou will give credit too the word
of promise. Ageine, it is a clear saying of Paul: God would that all men
should be saved and come too the knoweledge of his truth. Heereuntoo also
makes it, that Christ gives a general commandment too his Disciples: Go
ye intoo the whole world and preach the Gospel: he that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned.

But faith is the gift of God, which he gives too whom he will: See how
many things the flesh deuiseth too shut himself out of the way of Salvation.
Faith is Gods gift: but it is bestowed in this wise. He sets his word
forth unto thee, and bids thee believe it, and in thy thought will ^^e
work effectuallye. But take than heed that with the Jews thou resist not
the holy Ghost, which thing Stephen charge his own Nation wythall. When
Christ looked upon the City of Jerusalem, and thought upon the desolation
thereof, he wept and said: How often would I have gathered thee toogither as
the Hen gathers her Chickens, and thou would not? Behold Christ will, and
he wills none other thing than the Father wills. What would he? Gather
the children of Jerusalem too his sheepeholde. But Jerusalem being deceived
by her own seducers and false Prophets, would not: Jerusalem being caught
with the bayte of riches, power, pleasures, and cares of this world, would not
obey Christ her sheepeherd. Wherefore as she perished by ye just judgment of
god: so perished she by her own default. Wherefore trusting too Gods promises
(specially being universal) and confirming our selves with examples: Let us
with this woman flee unto Christ in our sorrows and afflictions: so will it
come too pass that we shall find help in time convenient. We have seen the
faith of this woman* Now let us look upon that which I said was too be
considered in the third place, concerning this woman: namely, what manner of
prayer or supplication this woman made.

She holds her peace, she speaks too her self, and she does no more but
touch the hem of Jesus garmente. Here is no prayer too be herd of us. True
it is in deed: here are recited no words of praying: howbeeit here be
signs of one that prays, and the effects of prayer. The tokens or signs
are that she comes too him, touches the hem of his garment, and within her
self, thinks of his gentleness and from the bottom of her heart wishes too
obtain mercy. Christ heard this wish no less than if it had bin a most
earnest prayer. The effects that ensued it were comfort and healing.

We read also of Moses, that though he moved not his lips: yet the Lord
said unto him, wherefore cryest thou unto me? Whereby we are taught that the
prayer which perceth the clouds is not a wagging of the lips, nor a babbling of
words, and much talk: but rather an humble lifting up of the mind too God,
in which any thing is desired of God through faith in Christ. This thing is
confirmed by the witness of David, who says: Too thee (O Lord) have I lift up
my soul.

Moreover, for as much as there is no greater service of God, than too call
upon him aright, and that it behooves the godly too be occupied continually
therein: I will breefly say somewhat concerning right invocation. I told a
little before what true prayer is: now will I show what conditions praying
ought too have continually. There be five continual conditions and as it were
properties of a godly prayer, which are these. First after what sort our mind
must be framed too pray. Secondly what should move us and provoke us too pray.
Thirdly whom we ought too call upon. Fourthly upon what foundation we should
ground our selves when we preace intoo Gods sight too pray. And fifthly, what
is too be sought, and when with condition, and when without condition.

The first. Our mind must be framed in this wise: First we must put of all
thought of glorying in our selves, like as this woman acknowledged nothing but
filthiness in her self. Secondly we must feel our needinesse, which this
afflicted woman felt very great in her self. Then let a man with true
repentance cast him self down before God, and that rather in mind than in
body. That this woman did so, it appeared in that she came behind him. Lastly
let the mind be kindled too pray by assured faith. For except a man bring
steadfast faith with him, he wastes his words rather than prays. And it is
manifest by the promises, that this woman brought such a kind of faith with her
unto the Lord.

The second. The causes that may move us too pray, are many. This woman without
doubt thought upon Gods commandment, in which he earnestly requires this
service at our hands. Ageine, she was not ignorant of the promises. Otherwise
she had not come forth too praying with so great confidence. Whatsoever you
shall ask in my name, (says Christ) my Father will give it you. Besides this,
she had felt the Devils tyranny, and her own needinesse, whereby she was
moved too seek help of him, who only is able too help. Also she considered
the examples. She saw how Iairus had made suit unto the Lord for his
daughters health, and many other examples did she think upon. By these and
many other causes she was stirred up too pray. Therefore let us also be
stirred too yield unto God this service of Invocation. First by the
commandment of God: Secondly by the promises: Thirdly thinking upon the
Devils tyranny: Fourthly by feeling our own misery and needynesse: and
fifthly by the examples of the saints.

The third: Who is too be called upon? Only God, who is the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost. For neither Angels nor men are too be called upon.
For this is the everlasting commandment of God: Call upon me in the day of
trouble. Also: Thou shall woorship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou
serve. For too call upon any creature, it is rank Idolatry, for which the
world is horribly punished, because such Idol service is high blasphemy
against God.

The fourth: There is good cause too demand upon what foundation we may
ground our selves too preace intoo Gods sight. For if we look upon our
selves, our own confusion and shame will fray us away from praying. Again,
the scripture says: God heereth not the sinners. Certain it is that no man
trusting upon his own woorthynesse, is able too pray. Wherefore that only
Mediator between God and man Christ Jesus is too be sought unto, who
offers him self too be our spokesman, when he says: Whatsoever you shall
ask of the father in my name, he shall give it you. Through the worthiness
of him therefore have we access too God the father.

The fifte: What is too be prayed for? Three kind of things are too be
sought for by prayer, and three kind of things are too be wished away by
prayer. First we must pray that Gods glory may be reverenced amongs men.
Secondly we must pray for soul health, and thirdly for things necessary too
the maintenance of this present life. And contrariwise, we must wish away,
first whatsoever hinders Gods glory: secondly whatsoever is against our
salvation: and thirdly whatsoever is troublesome too us in this life. Let us
assure our selves we shall obtain these things, and specially those which are
set in the first and second place. The good things or bad things of the third
kind must be prayed for or wished away, with condition that Gods glory be not
diminished, nor our own salvation hindered.

The fourth thing that I purposed upon concerning this woman, is the healing
of her. Wherein is too be told what Christ said and did, and what had happened
unto her. What said Christ? Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made
thee whole. And in so saying he healed the woman by his divine power. What
happened too the woman? And the woman was made whole from that hour? Here we
have many things. First, that those which believe, are adopted Gods children,
according too this text. Too as many as believed on his name, he gave power too
become the sons of God. Secondly in what sort Christ is minded toward the
afflicted. Thirdly that faith obteyneth any thing of God. And fourthly that
Christ shows here the power of his own Godhead, utters his will,
manifests his office, and confirms the truth of his Gospel. Of these
things I will speak no more, because of the shortness of the time.

Of the second.
ALso in this Ruler Iairus we have an example of faith, Invocation,
Confession, and Hope. Behold there came a certain Ruler. Here have thou his
faith, and worshipped him, Here have thou the fruit of faith, Invocation.
These two contain confession. Lord (says he) my daughter is even now
deceased: but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live. Behold with
how great hope he prays. We then may learn hereby too repair unto Christ
in our necessities, too call upon him by faith, too confess him, and too
assure our selves that we shall obtain of him whatsoever is for our welfare.
But what does Christ? He follows him. And when Jesus came intoo the house of
the Ruler, and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise, he said: Get
ye hence. And when the people were put forth: he said too the Damsel: Damsel
arise. And the Damsel arose: and the fame hereof was bruted over all that
country. Because the circumstances of this example do almost in all points
agree with the example of the woman: Let the things that I have spoken already
concerning the woman, suffice at this time.

Of the third.
WHen Christ said: the maid is not dead, but sleeps, they skorned him.
Here let us look upon three things. First that the world not only is
unthankful toward Christ his benefactor, but also laughed him too skorne. And
why so? because the world is blind, and therefore cannot judge aright of
Chrysts doctrine and doing. The fleshly man perceyueth not the things that are
of Gods spirit. Flesh has no taste but of flesh. The wisdom of the flesh is
at enmity with God. Therefore unless we will go astray and become skorners
with the world, let us harken too the Gospel, that our mind may be more
rightly instructed concerning Gods works. The second thing which we ought
here not only too look upon but also too wonder at, is that Christ
nevertheless proceeds in his holy purpose. He is not driven away with never
so great unthankfulness of the world, that he should forsake his Church. He
bears rule even in the mids of his enemies. The third thing that he
teaches to be observed here, is Chrysts example. Therefore if we be
skorned for our profession, let us look upon the son of God, and let us set
light by these skornes, which are the Devils dizardes. The malice of the world
must not trouble us, but the example of gods son must encourage us: for he is
with us according too his promise: I will be with you unto the end of the
world. Untoo this our only mediator toogither with the Father and the holy
Ghost be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Upon the.xxv. Sunday after Trinity. The Gospel. Math. xxiiij.
WHen ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by
Daniell the Prophet, standing in the holy place: let him that reads it,
understand it. Then let them which be in Ievvry flee intoo the Mountains.
And let him which is on the house top, not come down too fetch any thing
out of his house. Neither let him which is in the field, return back too
fetch his clothes. VVoe shall be in those days too them that are with
Child, and too them that give suck. But pray that your flighte be not in
the VVinter, neither on the Sabbath day. For then shall be great tribulation,
such as was not from the beginning of the world too this time, nor shallbee.
Yea, and except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be
saved: but for the chosens sake, those days shall be shortened.

Then if any man shall say unto you: Lo here is Christ, or there is
Christ, believe it not. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false
Prophets, and shall do great miracles and wonders. In so much, that if it
were possible, the very elect should be deceived. Behold I have told you
before. Wherefore if they shall say unto you: behold he is in the Deserte,
go not forth: behold he is in the secret places, believe not. For as the
Lightning comes out of the East, and shyneth intoo the West: so shall the
coming of the son of man be. For wheresoever a dead carcass is, even
thither will the Eagles resort.

The exposition of the Text.
THis Sermon of our Lords, conteyneth a notable admonition, very necessary in
this perilous time. For seeing that Paul says: whatsoever things are
written, are written for our lerning: there is no reason we should think that
these things are spoken and written for the Jews only: But rather for us who
are now nearer the latter day than the Jews were. This Sermon is both most
dreadful and also most comfortable. For in respect of the ungodly and such as
repent not, no Sermon can be more terrible, for it threatens horrible
punishment unto them. But in respect of the godly and those that repent,
this sermon is full of comfort. For it promises deliverance from all these
miseries. When ye see these things (says he) lift up your heads, for your
redemption is at hand. The occasion of this sermon was a double demand of
Chrysts Disciples: who taking occasion upon his foretelling of the destruction
of Jerusalem (whereof the Prophecy goes before in the self same Chapter)
demanded of him first when that should come too pass, and afterward what
sign should go before the Lords coming. Unto these questions the Lord
answers, not according as their fleshly desire required, but according as he
knew too be profitable for their instruction too their soul health. The sum
of this Sermon is, that Christ foretells the time of the destruction of
Jerusalem, and shows the tokens of his coming unto Judgment. The places
are two.

1 Christ's answer and his foresaying. 2 The use of this Doctrine.
Of the first.
CHrysts answer has.ij. parts: in the first of which he answers to the
first demand: namely wherein ye disciples asked him when Jerusalem should be
destroyed: and in the latter he answers too the second demand, wherein his
disciples asked him of his coming to judgment.

The former part contains the signs that go before the destruction of
Jerusalem, which being many, are reckened up, not only in the text which you
have herd, but also in the beginning of this Chapter.

The first sign is that there shall come false Chrysts, that is too wit, fond
men, which shall beely themselves that they are Messiases and Sauioures: which
thing has come too pass. For there came three Archknaues one after another,
that drew a great multitude of men after the^. One Teudas, and a certain
Egiptian, and Simon the Sorcerer. Teudas (in the time that Cuspius was
president of Jury) persuaded the people too take their goods and follow him
too Jordan. For there he bare them in hand, he would with a beck divide the
waters, that they might pass drishod, and so recover their liberty, and set
themselves free from the bondage of the Romans. Too whom the foolish people
obeying, when they looked in vain for the miracle, were al slain. This
Egiptian also promised salvation, welfare, and rest too them that followed him.
But they also being deluded, suffered just punishment for their rashness.
Simon the Sorcerer, (when he could not for money buy of Peter, the gift of
giving the holy Ghost visibly, and herd Peter say: Cursed be thou and thy
money too,) devised another way, which he by his Diuelishe crafts vernished
and ouercast with a gloss of godliness. So he said he was the power of God,
and through his slightes many were deceived. Now, why God suffered this thing.
Paul too the Thessalonians answers: because they had no will too believe the
truth. God sent them strong illusions, that they should believe lies. This
punishment are they worthy too have, that wilfully shut their eyes against the
clear light of the Gospel. Afterward the text contains an admouition. For
thus says Christ. See that noman deceive you. Many shall come in my name,
saying I am Christ. This horrible punishment of the Jewish people, may put us
in mind to fear God and reverence Chrysts gospel.

The second sign that should go before the destruction of Jerusalem. Ye
(says he) shall here of wars, and of the rumors of wars. The stories
testify that many such wars went before the destruction of Jerusalem. First
were slain two thousand through the malapertnesse of a soldier that skoffed
at the privy members of the Jews. Ageine, murderers did set upon men
openly, and carrying swords closely under their clokes slew all men that they
met. Besides this, there were slain at Caesarea, two thousand. At Schythopolis
thirteen thousand. At Ascalon two thousand and five hundred. At Ptolomais
twenty thousand. At Alexandria fifty thousand: and at Damasco ten thousand.
Behold how true Chrysts foresaying was, and how sore the Jewish people was
punished for their unthankfulness. What shall I say of the famine, pestilence,
and earthquake, that happened according too Chrysts prophecy? All these things
do show the sins of the people, and yet they were but certain florishes and
fleabitings too the mischeeues that ensued.

The third sign, was the persecution of his Disciples. You shall be hated of
all men (says he) for my names sake. This persecution began at the death of
the most holy martyr Steven, and afterward grew daily more and more. Now, the
affliction of Chrysts disciples was of four sorts. First in their bodies: for
some were whipped, some crucified, and some put too one torture and some too
another. The second affliction rose of the stumbling block that was cast by
those yt fell from the gospel. For many being discouraged with the bitterness
of persecutions, fell from the gospel too the exceeding great greef of Chrysts
disciples. The third affliction of Christ's disciples came by false prophets, of
whom there were to many in that time, and Epiphanius* writes of them: as ye
Simonians which were the folowers of Simon the sorcerer, who afterward fell
down in the mids of the City of Rome, and perished. After these come the
Menandrians, which were the folowers of Menander: the Saturnilians, which hung
upon Saturnilius: the Basilidians which followed Basilides: the Nicolaites,
which followed the filthiness of Nicolas that was one of the seven Deacons,
the Gnostickes, of whom the frantic furies were without number. And as for
Ebion and Cherinthus, which were enemies too the Godhead in Christ, I will
not speak of them. See how many armies they had of false teachers, that
would not be content with the singleness of the Gospel of Gods Son. The
fourth affliction of the Disciples was the malapertnesse, stubburnesse, and
unthankfulness of the whole people.

The fourth sign: And the Gospel shall be preached over all the world, for a
witness too all nations. Paul witnesses that this was done when he says:
Herd they not? But their sound went forth intoo all the world. Hithertoo
concerning the signs that went before the destruction of Jerusalem. Now in
the text is described the figure of the destruction. When ye see the
abomination of desolation which is spoken of by the Prophet Daniel standing
in the holy place, then let them that are in Ievvrye, flee unto the
Mountains. As if he had said, then shall the army approach which shall
destroy Jerusalem. This abomination was the wickedness and Idolatry of the
Jews, wherewith almost all the whole Nation was infected. It is called
abomination, (which is as much too say as lothelinesse) because GOD lothed
it as a most filthy thing. And it was termed the abomination of desolation,
for the punishemente that ensued: which punishment was the desolation and
waste of the Jewish people. Hithertoo concerning Christ's answer unto the
former demand of his Disciples, touching the destructyon of Jerusalem. Now
follows his answer too the second demand, which was concerning his
coming, wherein four things are too be considered. First, that he byddeth
us beware of false signs: If any man say unto you: Behold here is Christ,
or there is Christ, believe him not. Another is that he warns his Disciples
that they should not through drowsiness forget his admonishement. Behold
(says he) I have told you of it before. As if he had said, I would have
you always mindful of this my foretelling, lest that forgetting it (after the
example of others) ye renounce your profession. The third is, that his coming
shall not be in the corners of the world, or in the wilderness: but that it
shall be in the open face of all the world. Like as the Lightning (says he)
comes out of the East, and flasheth intoo the West: Even so also shall the
coming of the Son of man be. Therefore there is no cause why you should
believe them that shall come, and falslye take upon them the name of the
Messiah. The fourth is the gathering toogither of the elect unto Christ.
Wheresoever the carcass is (says he) thither will the Eagles also resort.
That is too say according too Paul's interpretation: When Christ comes too
judgment, we shall be taken up too meet him in the air, and so we shall
be with him for ever.

Of the second.
Forasmuch as these things that happened too the Jews, are signs of those
things that shall come too pass in the latter days before the coming of
Christ, intoo which days it is our hap too light: It is meet that we look
upon those things that are done in our age, and too see how they agree with
these things.

Among the signs, we have heard before, first that there should come some
that should feign themselves too be the Messiah: the like whereof has
happened a few years ago in Germany. For a certain Hollander named David
George, took upon him too be Christ, and deceived many, who afterward
being dead, was dug up ageine and burned. There were others also both of
Jews and of other nations, which came too an evil end, both they and their
folowers. Ageine, as touching wars and brutes of wars, Turkey and many
other nations do show how well this sign agreeeth too our time, and surely
sorer things are yet too be looked for. Besides this, the daily reports that
are brought unto us, do declare how sore the church is persecuted in many
realms, as in Turkey, in Greece, in Italy, in Spain, and in Holland. Many
sects spring up from time too time, exceeding great is the unthankfulness of
the world toward the Gospel, the manners of most men are very corrupt.
Heervntoo makes also the fourth sign of the Lords coming unto judgment,
that the Gospel is preached well near over all the world. And although this
thing be not done openly every where in public place: yet notwithstanding,
in all realms of the world there be some that here the Gospel. Why is it
preached? for a witness unto us: and that after a double manner. For it is a
witness of salvation if we believe the Gospel: and it shall be a witness of
our just damnation, if we believe not the Gospel. Now let us gather the
uses of Christ's forewarning.

The first use is that whereof I have spoken already, namely, that all these
things have happened for our instruction also, that thereby we may think,
what hangs over this most unthankful world, before the coming of our Lord
unto judgment.

The second. These things set before our eyes the greatenesse and filthiness
of our sins, and they are as it were certain preparatiues of the
punishementes which they shall sustain that have not repented.

The third. We are admonished here what vengeance abides for them that
defile themselves with the blood of the Saints. He that persecuteth you
(says Christ) persecuteth me. Why? because this persecution is made for the
Gospel of Christ and for professing of him. Now some of Christ's adversaries
rejoice when they have done wickedly: but the time will come, that they shall
suffer bitter pains for the blud of the faithful that they have shed, which
cries out from the earth unto God and calls for vengeance wherewith the just
Judge shall pay them home in their time, according too this text: Uengeance too
me and I will requit it: their foot shall slip in time convenient. The Lord
delayeth punishment, and according too the richness of his goodness and long
suffering provoke them too repentance. For he is not delighted in the
destruction of sinners, but he would rather that all men should amend and live
according as he himself witnesses by his Prophets in these words. As truly
as I live (says the Lord) I will not the death of a sinner, but that he should
turn and live. Notwithstanding, he that abuses this goodness of God, does
hoord up wrath too himself against the day of vengeance.

The fourth use of this forewarning is, that it puts us in mind of
repentance. When certain reported unto Christ, how Pilate had mingled the
blood of the Jews with their sacrifices and that the Toure of Silo falling
down had killed eyghteen men: he said, except ye repent ye shall all perish
likewise. For he avouches that this was done, not only for those that
perished there, but also for others, that they taking warning at their
mischaunce, might amend. Much more ought the misery of the Jewish people
too put us in mind of repentance, specially seeing the cause is not unlike. For
they were plaged chiefly for contempt of religion. And I beseech you what
thing is there here unlike? Wherefore let us take warning by the Jews too
amend betimes, that we run not intoo the hands of the living God, sooner than
we look for.

The fifth use is, that by the persecution of the Church which at that time
was very sore, we must learn that the Citizens of Christ's kingdom in this
world must not floorishe and enjoy the outward dominion of the world. For as
the Church of Christ is not bound too any certain place: so the glory and
renown thereof consists partly in the conscience of the godly, and partly in
loking for ye appeera^ce of Jesus Christ.

The sixth use is, that we should join our selves too the citizens of Chrysts
kingdom, and not be frayed away with the hugeness of persecutions. For
although all that will live godlily in Christ must suffer persecution: yet
notwithstanding, Christ pronounces them blissed, because that after the
present affliction, shall follow glory whervntoo there is no way but by the
cross.

The second is, that by the harms of the Jews and by their hurts we should
become the warer. Therefore too the intent we go not astray with the Jews, let
us follow the Lamp of Gods word: for this alone can make us safe from
misgoing. Thy word (says David) is a lantern too my feet and a light unto
my steps. And Paul will have us too carry before us the word of God as a
burning cresset.

The eight is, that we are admonished too set the name of God (which is a most
strong toure) against al ye misfortunes that hang over us. For thus says
Solomon. The name of the Lord is a most strong toure, too which the just man
shall flee and be saved. Some put their trust in chariots (says David) and
some in horses, but we will call upon the name of the Lord. By the name of
the Lord is meant an humble prayer which proceeds of true faith in Christ,
and this faith is it that overcomes the world. For thus says the Apostle:
This is the victory that overcomes the world, even your faith. Why so?
Because they call upon Christ the vanquisher of ye world, and have Christ
present, against whom hell gates are able too do nothing. Let us pray therefore
that neither our mind may be dazeled with brainesicke opinions, nor our faith
quayle in so great hurlyburlyes.

The ninth is, that we should fortify our selves against stumblingblocks,
whereof there shall be very many: but when they come, we must remember Chrysts
saying: Behold I have told you before. Neither shall these stu^bling blocks
be al of one kind. For some stumbling blocks shall be of persecution: some of
ye fewness of the^ that profess Christ: and some of them that fall from
Christ. For many in these miseries that are too come, shall utterly renounce
Chrysts name and his Gospel, and submit themselves agein unto Satan. Many in
this small company shall be bringers up of diverse sects, and yet they shall
professs Christ. Against this geere will Christ have us fensed. And because
that harms foreseen do hurt the less Christ would have his church warned of
them before hand.

The tenth use is, that we living in the fear of God, should wayt for the
coming of our Lord Lesus Christ, who shall bring us full redemption, which
redemption is the full and final end of all Chrysts benefits, unto which al
other benefits are appointed. For the order of Christ's benefits is this that
is described in.1. Corin. 1. in these words: God has made Christ our
wisdom, our righteousness, our holiness, and our redemption, too the intent
that he which glories, should glory in the Lord. He is our wisdom, when he
reueleth his fathers will unto us in his Gospel. He is our righteousness,
when we by believing his Gospel have his righteousness imputed unto us. He
becomes our holiness when we being justified are moved with the holy
Ghost, through whose operation we henceforth purpose a new life. And at length
he shall be our redemption, when full salvation shall happen unto us through
him, too whom with the father and the holy Ghost be honor, praise, and
glory world without end. So be it.

Upon the Purification of Saint Mary the Virgin. The Gospel. Luke. ij.
AND when the time of their Purification (after the law of Moses) was come,
they brought him too Jerusalem, too present him too the Lord (as it is
written in the law of the Lord: every man child that first opens the
matrix, shall be called holy too the Lord) and too offer (as it is said in
the law of the Lord) a pair of turtle Doves or two young Pigeons. And
behold there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Symeon. And the same
man was just and godly, and longed for the consolation of Israel, and the
holy Ghost was in him. And an answer was given him of the holy Ghost, that
he should not see death, before he had seen the Lords Christ. And he came
by inspiration intoo the Temple. And when the Father and Mother brought in the
Child Jesus too do for him after the custom of the Law, then took he him
up in his arms, and said: Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in
peace according too thy word. For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. Which
thou haste prepared before the face of all people. A light too lighten the
Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.

The exposition of the text.
IN this feast is handled a part of Christ's story, namely how he was offered
up in the temple, according too the Law: and how Simeon a ryghtuous man
acknoweledged Jesus the Son of Mary too be the very Messiah, yea and that by
instinct of the holy Ghost, by whom he had received an answer that he
should not die before his eyes had seen Christ the Lord. Who^ when he had
seen he took him intoo his arms, and blissed him. Which done he uttered
his thankfulness too Godwarde in a song. Here we must call too remembrance
what we have hithertoo heard concerning Christ, too the intent we may know
the continual story of him. We have therefore herd first of his glorious
birth, that he was borne in Bethleem. Secondlye, of his Circumcision, that he
was circumcized the eight day. Thirdly how he was acknoweledged and honored
by the wysemen. Now follows the offering up of him in the Temple, which
offering up fell out according too the Law, when he was full six weeks old.
The places are three.

1 The offering up of Christ in the Temple. 2 Simeons description and blissing.
3 Simeons song.
Of the first.
GOd had ordained sundry customs of offering in the old Testament, not too
the intent men should be justified before God by the work of sacrifising
(for if the blud of Oxen and Gotes could have put away sin, Christ had not
come in the flesh too purge sin by the sacrifice of his body: but there
were other causes, of which number are these.

The first is, that by this exercise, the Idolatry of the Gentiles might be
hindered. For in as much as all men even the most barbarous, are touched with
a certain reverence of Religion: they will set up fashions of woorshipping God
after their own device. Howbeeit, because no service pleases God, save that
which is of his own appointment, God him self ordained by Moses sundry
services, too the intent that by the multitude of Ceremonies which God had
ordained, the Iewishe people might be withhilde from Idolatry, and serve the
one God that had brought them out of the land of Egipte, and bestowed upon
them innumerable other benefits both ghostly and bodily.

The second cause is, that inward godliness might be exercised by these
outward helps. For these outward sacrifices were not of themselves Gods
service, but only stirrings up of the true service and woorshipping: which
thing appears by Esaias, where God abhors outward sacrifices without inward
godliness of mind.

The third is, that they should be open witnesses of thanksgiving, whereby this
people should both be stirred up, and also confirmed, and testify openly
that they served this God, which had brought them intoo the land of Canaan, and
fed them by miracle in the wilderness.

The fourth is, that by this means the ministry of Gods word might be
stablished: that the ministers of Gods service and the Preests might have
whereon to live. He that serves at the altar (says Paul) let him live of the
altar. And Christ: The labourer is worthy of his hyre. This custom did they
hold in old time in the church, when they came toogither too here the word,
and receive the Sacraments. The godly according too their abilities bestowed
somewhat too the maintenance of the ministers, and the relief of the poor,
which gathering was called a contribution. From hence also issued the manner of
tything.

The fifth is, that these old oblations be a shadow of the sacrifice of
Christ that was too come, and as it were a place wherein they were put in
remembrance of Christ too come. This did the godly well understand, as Abel,
Noe, Abraham. For they did not think that they put away sin and death by
their sacrifices: but they trusted to the sacrifice of Christ, birth virtue
whereof, their sins also were purged. When Abel slew his sacrifices, he
thought thus. First when he saw the blud of the sacrifice, he thought upon
the sin of mankind which had deserved eternal pains. Secondly he looked
forward too the thing yt was signified: for he thought that his sacrifice was a
figure of the promised seed: that is too wit, of Christ, who should purge
sin by offering himself in sacrifice. Thirdly by thinking so. Abelles faith
was confirmed and increased, wherethrough he was both justified before God,
and accepted of God. Furthly upon this faith ensued thanksgiving and newness
of life. Such as offered after this manner, pleased God. Thus much be spoken
concerning the sacrifices of the old Testament in general. Now will I speak
of that manner of sacrifices which is mentioned in this gospel.

There was a double commandment appointed too be observed when any child
was borne. The one was of the moother, how many weeks she ought too abide
out of the company of men. And the other was of the child that was borne.
Concerning the mother this was the order: that if she were delivered of a
manchild, she should keep her self close xxxvij. days: and if it were a
womanchilde, she should continue close twyse as long. For then she ought too
be out of the congregation.lxxiiij. days. And this thing was not done for any
unworthiness that was in the woman, but for two other causes: that is too wit,
needfulnesse, and further meening. The needfulnesse was, that by this means
consideration might be had of the health of the woman, who after the throws of
her childbed, has need of rest that she may gather strength agein, and godly
husbands ought at such times too have special regard of the weakness of their
wives: and it behooued women also too keep this law of nature, both for their
own sakes and also for other women's sakes. The meening of it was, that this
barring them out of company, should do men too understand, that al which are
descended of Adam, are barred from God for the sin wherein they are borne, and
that therefore they have need of Chryst^ sacrifice too purge them.

The other commandment concerned the child that was borne: And that also was
of two sorts. The one general and the other concerning the first borne.

The general commandment was that when the woman had fulfilled the time that
she was excluded from the congregation of the church, there should be
sacrifices offered whither it were for a son or for a daughter, in what order
so ever they were borne. This sacrifice did put them in mind first that their
children were borne sinners, and therefore had need of clenzing and of
forgiveness of sins. Secondly that by this means they should be consecrated
to god. Thirdly that the parents should know that they begat children to God,
and not too themselves or too Satan. And fourthly that there was a further
meening in the matter: namely that their children should be a figure of Christ
that was too be offered.

The special commandment was, concerning the first borne, as well in men as
in beasts, that they should be offered unto God: First in remembrance of that
great benefit, that the Lord sparing the people of Israel, did strike the first
borne of Egypt, as well in men as beasts. Secondly for ye signification thereof,
that is too wit, that the only begotten son of God and first begotten son of
Mary, should be offered up in time too come for our deliverance from the Egypt
of sin. Let this suffice concerning the law and the signification thereof, and
now let us come too the offering up of Christ.

The law commands that every first borne which opens the moother, being
conceived of man's seed, should be offered up in this wise. But Christ was not
so conceived after the manner of man, but he was conceived by the holy ghost,
and borne of a most chaste virgin: Ergo he was not bound by the law, too be
offered up in the temple, after the manner of others that were first begotten. I
answer. Christ was also at his free choice whither he would have bin conceived
and born, and afterward whither he would have bin circumcised and suffered death
or no. But he yt was free becam the servant of al, to the intent he might make
al free: or as Austin says: God became man, to ye intent to make men gods.
Paul says: he was bound under the law, too the intent he might redeem those
that were under the law. And therefore he being the first borne would also
be offered up in the Temple.

But how was he the first borne? There was never any such borne. First he was
first borne in his Godhead, for he was the eternal Son of God. This day
(says he) have I begotten thee. Secondly he was the first born son of Mary in
his manhood. For she never bare any before him nor yet after him. Thirdly he
was first borne in grace. For he was the first man that ever was borne, which
being offered up unto God, was accepted of himself. Fourthly in power. For he
was the first borne of the dead. And fifthly that we might be borne new men
through him.

Furthermore it is too be marked, that mary offered a pair of young pigeons,
whereby, is showed that she was poor. For the richer sort did offer a Lamb.
Hereby we may learn, not too be abashed of our poverty. It was Chrysts will
too be borne poor, that he might make us rich, so that we will accept his
riches with a thankful mind.

Of the second.
AND behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon. Here we
have first a description of Simeon and afterward his blissing. First he is
commended for his righteousness. For he lived so among his people, that he was
counted of all men for a good and just man. The Evangelist meeneth not by this,
that he was so rightuous, that he had no need of any other righteousness:
(for in his own song he confesses Christ too be his savior: but that he
lived unblameable among men, and honestly, so as he did no man harm, but good
too all men according too his power. Such a one is called of Cicero, (or
rather of al men, a just or rightuous man. Secondly he is commended for his
godliness. For he feared God. Under the name of fear is comprehended the whole
service of God. For he that fears God, as he eschueth al things wherewith he
knows he shall offend him: so also does he whatsoever he perceives too be
acceptable too him. This fear has his beginning of faith. There is an other
fear of God without faith, which is no service of God: and such a one there is
in all the ungodly. For they always dread Gods judgment against them, and
would rather that there were no God, than too be punished for their
wickedness. The fear that is commended in Symeon, was none such. For it
follows that he waited for the comfort of Israel. By which saying is showed
that he longed very ernestly for the coming of Christ. For he knew that the
prophesies of Jacob and Daniel pointed too this time of his. Wherefore he
longed for it the more earnestly, and wished that his life might be prolonged
until he might see Christ present. And it is no marvel that he waited so
earnestly for Christ's coming. For he was (says the Evangelist) full of the
holy Ghost. Such was this holy man.

But what was the reward of this godliness? He receives an answer of the
holy ghost, that he should not see death before he had seen the Lords
Christ: and by the motion of the same holy Ghost he came intoo the Temple.
And what did he there? When the Parents Joseph and Mary had brought in the
Child, he took him intoo his arms and praised God. Now has this holy old
man that which he desired so earnestlye, and he gives witness too Christ,
openly protesting this child too be the same anointed Savior that was
promised too the fathers.

We have the godliness of Simeon what it was: now let us set him before us.
Let old men first and afterward al men learn of him too fear God. Let them
learn too live holilye and uprightly among men. Let them learn too take
Christ intoo their arms, that is too say, intoo their hearts. Let them set
him out, praise him, and profess him. Which thing if they do, they shall one
day with Simeon, receive a plentuous reward in Heaven.

Of the third.
NOw follows Simeons song. Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace
according to thy word. This song has customably bin soong in the church many
hundred years, and we are wont to sing the same when corpses are laid intoo
their graves. For it co^teyneth a doctrine concerning Christ and it techeth
from whence chief comfort is too be sought, specially at what time we must
depart out of this life. Now too the intent we may understand this song the
better, I will divide it intoo two parts. In ye first whereof the old man Simeon
rejoices in his own behalf: and in the latter part comprehends very breefly
the benefits of Christ toward ye whole world.

The first part is: Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace
according too thy word. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Here the
old man Simeon reioyseth in his own behalf, that he had seen Christ with
his bodily eyes, according too the answer that he had received of the holy
Ghost. For albeeit he had seen him before with the eye of his faith, like as
our Lord says of Abraham, Abraham saw my day, and was glad: yet
notwithstanding because he had received a promise of ye holy ghost, yt he
should see Christ present with his bodily eyes before he dyed, he was greatly
delited with his sight, and with great strength of faith desired straight too
be delivered from his body, yt he might be gathered to his fathers in peace.
But see, he received a promise that he should see the Lords anointed. Here is
brought him a poor babe, there appears here none other outward countenance
than of contempt. Is he offended at this outward countenance? No. Whom he
saw too be lea^^ with his bodily eyes, him saw he too be greatest with the
sight of his faith. Whom he behild base in the shape of a servant with his
bodily eyes, him knew he too be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. And he was
not ignorant what Zachary had prophesied of him: who says: Behold thy King
comes poor. He knew he came not too take intoo his hand the kingdoms of the
world, but too give the kingdom of God too believers. Heerby also we may lern
too believe the scriptures, and too look upon Christ and his church, not only
with our bodily eyes, but much rather with the eyes of our faith. And seeing
he desires too be let go by and by, and to change this miserable life for
death, he declares sufficiently, that Chrysts kingdom is not of this world,
but an everlasting kingdom, which consists in peace of conscience. As if he
should say, Grant me now that I may die in peace and happily. Hereof may we
gather both instruction and comfort. Instruction, that the spiritual
beholding of Christ which is by Faith, makes a man too depart ioyfullye out
of this life, because he that before his death sees Christ in this wise, has
a light too guide ^^m unto life. He that follows me (says the Lord) walks
not in darkness. Contrariwise, he that sees not Christ, passes from the
death of this present life unto everlasting darkness. And we may gather
comfort, because they that see Christ at the instant of death, have wherewith
too comfort themselves. They know they are at the point too be dismissed in
peace. They know they shall not goo too darkness, but too everlasting joy.
Because the thief upon the Cross, not only saw Christ with his bodily eyes
piteously tormented, but also saw him conqueror of death, with eyes of his
faith: he herd the Lord say: This day shall thou be with me in Paradyse. So
Steven at his death saw Christ, and with exceeding pleasure and ioyfulnesse of
mind, said unto him: Intoo thy hands (O Lord) I commit my spirit. After
this manner, thou also when sickness brings thee too the pittes brinke, look
too Christ thy Savior by Faith, and desire of him that he will let thee
depart in peace, that is too say, that he will give thee leave too depart out
of this life, and too enter intoo the rest that is promised too all the
faithful.

This thought will make us manfully despise this world, and the miseries of
this present life, and comfort our mind with hope of salvation, the which he
that can not lie has promised us. Now ensues the other part of this song.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all people, to be a light to
lighten the Gentyles, and to be the glory of thy people Israel. Here are
breefly showed two things. The one what are Chrysts benefits: the other, to
who^ these benefits are appointed. The benefits are salvation, light and
glory. Without Christ then, the world sticks still in damnation, darkness,
and shame: and that is for sin. For Christ takes away damnation, and restores
salvation: he drives away darkness and sheadeth forth light: he remoueth
shame and gives glory. How great things are these I pray you? Surely no man
is able too value them sufficiently.

But (...) whom are these benefits appointed? Too all people, Jews and
Gentiles: howbeeit they must be received by faith. For they are offered
universally too all, such is the unsearchable goodness of God: Howbeeit with
condition: he that believes shall be saved: and he that believes not, shall
be damned. Wherefore if we covet these good things, let us with Simeon receive
this our Lord and Savior Jesus intoo the arms of our heart, and lean unto him
with stedy faith. To this our savior be honor and glory for ever and ever. So
be it.

Upon the Annuntiation of our Lady Saint Mary the Virgin. The Gospel. Luke. j.
AND in the sixth month, the Angel Gabriell was sent from God intoo a city
of Galilee named Nazareth, too a virgin spoused too a man whose name was
Joseph, of the house of David, and the virgins name was Mary. And the Angel
went in unto her, and said: Hayle full of grace, the Lord is with thee:
Blissed art thou among women. When she savv him, she was abashed at his
saying, and cast in her mind what manner of Salutation that should be. And
the Angel said unto her: fear not Mary, for thou have found grace with
God: Behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a son, and shall
call his name Jesus: He shall be great, and shall be called the son of
the highest: And the Lord God shall give unto him, the seat of his father
David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his
kingdom there shall be none end. Then said Mary too the Angel: how shall
this be, seeing I know not a man? And the Angel answered, and said unto
her: the holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
ouershadovv thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be borne, shall be
called the son of God. And behold, thy cousin Elizabeth, she has also
conceived a Son in her age: and this is the sixth Month, which was called
barrein, for with God nothing shall be impossible. And Mary said: Behold
the handmayde of the Lord, be it unto me according too thy word And the
Angel departed from her.

The exposition of the text.
THis feast conteyneth the story of the conception of Jesus Christ, which is
told unto the virgin by the Angel of God. For long ago the three thousand
nine hundred and sixtith year before his conception, God promised the seed of
the woman that should tread down the Serpents head: that is too say, which
should destroy the Devils woorks, sin, and death. God being mindful of this
promise, sends his Angel too the most chaste virgin, too whom he brings
tidings that she should conceive by the holy Ghost without the seed of man,
and bring forth a Son, that should be the savior of the world. This is
the sum of the story, whereof there be five principal points, and these are
they.

1 A description of the message. 2 The Salutation of the Angel. 3 The
comforting of the troubled Uirgin. 4 An exposition of the Message. 5 The manner
of the conception.
Of the first.
IN the description of this Message many circumstances are too be observed, of
which we will consider every one severally by it self, too the intent we
may draw out of it some doctrine too confirm our selves.

The first is time. In the sixth month (says he) that is too wit, after the
conception of John Baptist, who according too the sayings of the Prophets,
should be the forerunner of the Lord, that men might prepare the way
ageinste the coming of their King. And it was the twentieth year since the
Scepter was taken from Judah. For thus was it Prophesied before by the Patriarch
Jacob. The scepter shall not be taken from Judah* until Silo come, that is,
till the seed of the woman come, which was promised too our first Parents.
Therefore this circumstance of time conuinceth, that this son of the virgin is
the true Messiah. For he was borne the self same time that ye holy Ghost had
spoken of before by the prophets. And as concerning ye day, this is worthy too
be remembered, that the killing of the paschal Lamb, the conception of Christ,
and the passion of him, fell all upon one day of the year, on which day the holy
Fathers supposed that Ada^ was created. These things set out unto us the
truth of Gods promises. God delayed too send his Son a great while after
the promise was made: but yet he continued true in his promises. The Son
has promised that he will come too judgment: but he makes delay: yet will he
come when he thinks good.

The second. The Angel Gabriel was sent of the message. Why so? First that Gods
ordinance might be observed: for like as GOD was wont too send his Angels
before too give men knoweledge of his will: so now an Angel is sent of an
ambassade in the salvation of mankind. For the Apostle in the first too the
Hebrews shows, that this is the duty of Angels. Agein in as much as a bad
Angel was the cause of our first destruction, it was convenient that a good
Angel should be the first messenger of the restorement of salvation agein.
And thirdly this was convenient for the most pure virgin also, that a most
pure messenger should be sent unto her.

The third. That this messenger was sent from God. The Ambassadors of
Emperors and Kings are looked for very desirouslye, that it may be known
what is the pleasure of such great Princes. Behold, he that sends here
is the highest Emperor, and great is the Ambassadoure that is sent. Wherefore
we ought of duty too be stirred up too great wonder.

The.iiij. The place to which he is set, is rehearsed by name. For he is sent
too a City of Galilee named Nazareth. The cause that this was done, was for
that it was so prophesied before. And besides that, God shows that he
regards the things that are base upon earth. Wherefore there is no cause that
any man should think himself a castaway, because he is either poor or an
abject upon earth.

The fifth: Too what person he is sent, namely too a virgin that was
betrouthed too a husband. In deed Christ ought too be conceived of a virgin,
and borne of a virgin, according too the forsayings of the Prophets: for men
have bin brought forth intoo the world after four sundry manners. The first
manner was of Adam only, who was shaped of the slime of the earth. The second
was of only Eve, who was wrought out of a ribbe of Adams. The third was of
Christ only, who was borne of a most pure virgin. And the fourth is the common
birth of all other men, which are conceived of the seed of male and female
toogither.

Christ then was conceived and borne of a virgin. First for that if he had
bin borne of the seed of man and woman, he should have bin conceived, and born
in sin. But it was meet that he which came too take away sin, should be
without sin. Ageine it was meet that the Prophesies should be fulfilled.
It was said in the third of Genesis, the woman's seed shall tread down the
Serpents head: And in the.29. of Genesis: the scepter shall not be taken away
from Judah, until the coming of Silo, that is too say: of the son of that
foresaid woman. Esaias. 7. Behold (says he) a maid shall conceive and bear a
son. Moreover it was convenient it should be so, for the signification of
the spiritual regeneration, which is not the will of the flesh, or of the
will of man, but of the will of God. Whereupon S. Austin says: It behooved our
head by special miracle as touching his body, too be borne of a virgin, too
the intent he might do us too understand, yt those which are his members, must
be borne a new of the spirit. And whereas this virgin was betrouthed too a
husband: there were good causes thereof. For by this means both the
worthiness of marriage is commended, and provision was made for the sauegarde
of the Uirgins honesty and good name, yea and the virgin had given unto her a
keeper, that should have care of her.

The sixth: That Joseph was of the house of David. And it was convenient he
should so be: cheeflye for the Prophesies. For it was foretold that when
Christ came, he should be borne of the lineage of David. Which thing was not
unknown too the very Scribes and Pharisees.

Of the second.
THe second membre of this Euangelical story, is the Salutation of the Angel,
which is this: Hail full of grace, the Lord is with thee: blissed art thou
among women. Here let us think of our first moother Eve, and the most holy
virgin the moother of Jesus, and let us mark how diverse sayings they heard.
Eve heard: I will multiply thy sorrows. Sorrows are tokens of cursing, before
faith. Mary herd Hail, that is too say, be glad. And he adds the cause.
Thou art full of grace: that is too say God has received thee intoo favor,
and has chosen thee alone of all womankinde, too whom he will do a singular
benefit. The Lord is with thee: That is too say, thou have God thy defender
and Savior. Blissed art thou among women. That is too say, like as Eve was
cursed among women, or rather all women were cursed for her sake: So art thou
blissed through the gift and favor of God. For unto thee is happened so great
good luck, that thou shall be the moother of the promised seed. This is the
meaning of the Angels greeting. Whereby it is easy too gather, how foolish
they are that will make a prayer of it, wherewith they call upon the blissed
virgin, contrary too the manifest word of God. Untoo which kind of people I
say no more but this at this time: Cursed is every one that calls upon any
creature, and which wresteth the words of the scripture too stablish horrible
Idolatry, in contempt of the son of God, too the slander of the most holy
virgin, and too their own most certain damnation. At such time as true
Invocation is taught in the Church, it is also showed therewith, that calling
upon Saints is a service of the Devil, brought intoo the Church by the
Devil.

Of the third.
AT the heering of this greeting, the virgin is troubled, and museth within
her self what manner of salutation it should be. Too whom the Angel said:
Mary, fear not: for thou have found favor with God. See here what Gods word
does. First it makes afraid, and afterward it comfort. Fear not (says
he) as if he should say: I come not too bring thee tidings of any sadness, I
come not too show that God is angry with thee. For thou have found favor with
God. Here we have a sure doctrine, that only Gods favor puts away fear.
Al other things have fear joined with them. Friends have fear joined with
them, least they should forsake us when we have most need of them. Health has
fear, least it should be appaired. Riches are not possessed without fear. For
they may be lost, and the loss of them leaves sorrow behind it. Power
fears, as which may be overcome by a stronger tha^ it self. Only Gods favor
drives fear away. He that is in this, may freely both in life and in death,
laugh the Devil and all his crafts too scorn. Inasmuch as this favor or
grace is possessed by faith, and increased by godly exercises, it stands us
all in hand to beware we lose it not through our own default. For if we lose
that, there remains nothing but trouble of conscience and curse.

Of the second.
BEhold thou shall conceive, and bear a son, and thou shall call his name
Jesus. This is the declaration of the message: the sense whereof is this: I by
Gods commandment do bring thee word, that shortly thou shall be a moother,
and bear a son whom thou shall name Jesus. Undoutedly, here the most chaste
virgin thought upon the promised seed. She heeres it told her on Gods
behalf, that she shall bear a son, whom she is willed too name Jesus, this
name Jesus which signifies a Savior, she took too be set against the curse
and death, intoo which our first parents were fallen for their transgression.
This name is wont too be expounded more at large upon the day of the
Circumcision: wherefore as now I pass on too the rest.

He shall be great says the Angel. Great in deed, as who is the son of the
highest: Great in deed, as who should overcome Satan: Great in deed, as who
should give the greatest things: Great in deed, as whose kingdom is
everlasting. The Lord God (says he) shall give him the seat of David his
father, and he shall reign in Jacobs house for ever, and of his kingdom there
shall be none end. If we mark this description, we shall find four things
too be spoken here concerning Christ. For first he shows his true manhood,
when he says that he shall be borne of the virgin. Ageine he suppresseth not
his Godhead: for he says, he shall be called the son of the highest. The
son of the highest is of al one nature with the highest. Thirdly when he
adds: he shall be great, he signifies the union in person. For although he
be God and man, yet is he one person and not two. In the fourth place is noted
his office, that he is a Savior and a king that shall reign for ever. How
could it be said of Christ, that he should have the seat of David his father,
when as he himself says. My kingdom is not of this world, according also as
the sequel has declared, and that David's kingdom was a civil government in
Iewrie. David hild but the shadow of the kingdom, but this his son
possesses the very kingdom it self. David's kingdom was a figure and shadow
of Christ's kingdom, and therefore both are called one kingdom, because David
was the shadow, and Christ's was the very kingdom it self. Besides this, it
is the manner of the Scripture, too peint out heavenly things by outward
images, too the intent the comparison may help our weakness.

Of the fifth.
ANd Mary said too the Angel, how shall this come to pass, seeing I know no
man? As if she should say, how can I be made with child bodily (as thou
say) seeing I have not as yet companyed with man? The most chaste virgin knew
it was an order established by God, that men should be conceived of the seed
of man and woman. Neither had she seen or herd of any example too the
contrary, since the creation of our first parents. And therefore following the
judgment and experience of her reason, in the order that God had stablished,
she demanded: How may this be seeing I know no man? shall this conception
come by some strange manner. And the Angel answering, said unto her. The
holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
ouershadovve thee. And therefore that which shall be borne of thee, shall be
called holy, the son of God. Here the Angel shows the manner of the
Conception, and remoueth the cause of the Conception from nature, unto GOD the
maker of nature. As if he had said: Thou shall not conceive of man's seed,
but of thy seed alone shall thou bear a Son, and that, by the operation,
not of nature but of grace. For the holy ghost by his heavenly power shall
cause a very manchilde too be conceived of thy seed alone. Heerupon says
Austin: By the grace of God or the power of God and the woorking of the holy
Ghost, was that thing which is united too the word, taken of the virgins
flesh: and that for this cause, that if it had bin conceived of the seed of
man, it had bin unclean as all the rest are that come of Adam. And that which
is of ye flesh is flesh, untruth, and vanity. John. 2. Now it behooved that
by Christ should be brought in grace and truth. Therefore he could not be
begotten by man, but it behooved that thing too be done by some secret power of
God: too the intent that being clear from all sin, and holy, he might also
make us pure and holy, by becoming an holy and unspotted sacrifise too his
Father. Ageine, he was conceived of the holy Ghost, too the intent we might
know that whatsoever the son speaks, is the most assured will of the
father. For the holy Ghost is the substa^tial love of the father and the son.
Furthermore because the holy Ghost is the spirit of sanctification and
purging. For he of that blud which he had made pure, framed the body of
Christ, that it might be clean and free from all sin, as is said before
also. These were and are the causes, why it was not seemly for Christ too be
begotten of the seed of man, but by the operation of the holy Ghost alone. And
thereof does the Angel give an incling, when he says: and therefore that holy
thing that is borne of thee, shall be called the son of God.

Now although ye blissed virgin gave credit too these words of the Angel: yet
notwtstanding too the intent her faith might be the better confirmed, he
adds a sign whereby she is assured. And behold (says he) thy cousin
Elisabeth also has conceived a Son in her old age, and this is the sixth
month too her that is called barein. As if he had said: thou reasonest with thy
self that it is against the law of nature, and the order established by God,
that, thou should conceive and be still a virgin, and bear a child and
continue still a virgin. But I will show thee another thing which is also against
the order of nature. Thy cousin Elizabeth is barrein both by nature and by
reason of years: By nature surely, because she has lived so many years with
a husband, and never had child, in so much that too her reproach she is
called barreine: By reason of years, for that she is now past the years of
childbearing, although she had bin never so fruitful in times paste:
notwithstanding, this is the sixth month since she conceived, such is Gods
ordinance and will. Wherefore confirm thy self with this sign, and assure
thy self it shall come too pass in deed, that thou shall bear a Child also.

See here the custom of God, who never deals with man by his bare word,
but always adds some outward sign, too the intent he may apply him self
the more too our weakness, while he offers his will too our mind by his
word, and as it were visibly too our senses by outward signs, which are the
seals of his word. So in these days he had disclosed his will unto us by his
Gospel, the which he seals up with the outward signs of Baptim and the
Lords supper.

Howbeeit, in this communication of the Angel with the virgin, this speech is
too be noted where he says: ^or with God no word shall be impossible. This
word, and this saying of the Angel contains two things. First it seals up
the truth and certentie of Gods promises. And secondly it admonishes us to set
gods power against al sense and judgment of the flesh, and to assure our
selves yt God is true, although the whole frame of things should go about to
persuade us otherwise: and to say with the virgin, do according to thy word:
thou reuelest thy will by thy word: fulfill thy will by thy power, that thou
alone may be glorified. Thou art a sinner, and bewailest thy misery. But harken
what Gods word says of his will. I will not the death of a sinner. Also, all
that call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. Include thou within this word
both Gods will and his power, against which nothing is able too stand. When you
art sorrowful because thou art at deaths door, flee unto Christ and here his
word. Blissed are they that die in the Lord. In this word join together Gods
will and his power, and then assure thy self yt death shall be unto thee the way
to blissfulness, through Christ Jesus our Lord, too whom with the father and
the holy Ghost be honor, praise, and glory world without end. Amen.

Upon the Nativity of John Baptist. The Gospel. Luke. j.
Elizabeth's time came that she should be delivered, and she brought forth a
son. And her neibors and her cousins herd how the lord had shevved great mercy
upon her, and reioiced. And it fortuned that in the eight day they came too
Circumcise the child, and called his name Zachary, after the name of his
father. And his mother ansvvered and said: not so, but his name shall be called
John. And they said unto her: There is none in thy kindred that is named with
this name. And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called.
And he asked for vvriting tables, and vvrote, saying: his name is John. And
they marueiled al. And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue also,
and he spoke and praised God. And fear came on all them that dwelled nie unto
him. And all these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hie country of
Ievvrie, and they that herd them laid them up in their hearts, saying* what
manner of child shall this be? And the hand of the Lord was with him. And
his father Zacharias was filled with the holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying:
Praised be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people.
And has raised up an horn of salvation unto us, in the house of his servant
David. Even as he promised by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which were
since the world began, That we should be saved from our enemies, and from
the hand of all that hate us. That he would deal mercifully with our
fathers, and remember his holy covenant. And he would perform the oath
which he swore too our father Abraham for too forgive us. That we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, all
the days of our life, in such holiness and righteousness, as are acceptable
for him. And thou child shall be called the Prophet of the highest, for thou
shall go before the face of the Lord too prepare his vvays. Too give knowledge
of salvation unto his people for the remission of sins. Through the tender
mercy of our God, vvherby the day spring from an hye has visited us. To give
light too them that sat in darkness, and in the shadovv of death, and to
guide our feet into the way of peace. And the child grevv and vvexed strong
in spirit, and way in wilderness til the day came, when he should show
himself unto the Israelites.

The exposition of the Text.
ALthough it be a heathenish Idolatry too call upon Saints, which thing is
done by the Papists in the feasts of Saints: yet it is very behoofefull
(and that for many causes) too keep still the feasts of some Saints.

The first cause is, for that it is very profitable that the story of the
Church should be known. For from thence we may fetch instruction,
confirmation, and comfort. The second is, for that it is a sweet thing too
think upon Gods benefits toward his Church, whereby comes singular fruit
too the godly hearts. The third is, that thanks may be given to God for his
benefits toward the members of his Church. The fourth is, that by weying
thoroughly the variable chances of the Saints, we may arm and strengthen
our minds against chances present and too come, which we must needs taste of.
The fifth is, that the Saints may be as it were samplers unto us, of
repentance, conversation, woorshipping, confession, constancy, patience, and
other virtues, according to which we may frame our lives. The sixth is, that
we with godly gronings should desire too come too the fellowship of the
Saints. These and other weighty causes there be, why we retain feasts of
Saints in the Church. Would God that many men abused not the feasts of
Saints and other things too their own pleasures and mad devises, like as
many in the papacy abused chiefly this feast, when they hallowed it with
dau^cing and reueling with meetings of lovers, with bibbing and tippling al
night long, and with other more shamfull things which I will not speak of,
wherein they pleased not God nor the Angels and Saints, but they served Satan
too the reproach of God, and of the Angels and Saints. Thus much breefly
concerning the feasts of Saints, and the right use of them. In this feast I
will entreat of one point only, that is too wit, the story of John, out of which
I will build certain admonishments.

Of the Story of John Baptist.
IN the Story of John Baptist, let these circumstances be weyed. His parents,
his conception, his birth, his bringing up, his calling, his office, Chrysts
record concerning John, his death, and the things that happened about his death
and after his death.

John Baptists parents were Zachary, a priest, a holy man, and of blameless
life: and his moother was Elizabeth, a woman far stricken in years and of
singular godliness. Of both these Luke the Evangelist bears this witness in
his first chapter: They were both perfect before God, and walked in all the
laws and ordinances of the Lord, that no man could find fault with the^. And
they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and both were well stricken in
age. This description shows of what years the parents of John were, with
what innocentnesse they lived, and that being now grown in years, they were
destitute of the comfort of their old age, because Elizabeth was barren, not
only by nature when she was yet young, but also by reason of age, for yt she
was now become an old woman. Notwithstanding, contrary too the course of nature
and the discommoditie of barre^nesse, at length they obtain that which they
had sought at gods hands with great earnestness. Therefore this circumstance of
John's parents, techeth many things. First yt the prayers of the godly shall be
herd at length. Secondly that we must not cease from praying, because our
requests seem too be delaied somewhat long. For we must knock still til yt
door of grace be opened unto us. Thirdly that the afflicted continuing in
faith, and keeping themselves blameless, shall at length atteine comfort.
Fourthly that those which are coupled in marriage, must live in the fear of
God, and be unrebukable. And fifthly that the ministers of Gods word and
their wives, ought too shine before others in all kind of virtues. For like as
Zachary the husband beautified the dignity of his office with the holiness
of his life: So his wife Elizabeth led a holy and blameless life. For they
knew themselves too be promoted too a place of such woorship, that their
life was more looked upon than others were. Would God there were not many that
are Zacharies in talk, but no Zacharies in life. But they shall one day find
their judgment.

The second circumstance is of John's conception, wherein many things are too be
considered. For first his conception was fortold by an Angel to Zacharias his
father, as he was doing his duty in the temple: which thing when the forspe^t
old man believed not, he was stricken dumb in punishment of his unbelief.
Here, first offreth it self the duetifulnesse of the holy angels, which are
gods messengers, and ministers to gods church, to defend it and serve it
according to gods will. But concerning Angels more is too be spoken upon S.
Michaels day. Secondly it is to be observed here, yt God is wo^t to here those
which executing their office accordingly, do call upon him with faith. For he yt
executes not aright (as much as in him lies) the office yt is committed unto
him, is void of faith, and cannot pray. Wherefore, following the example of
Zachary, let us both execute our charge as we ought to do, and also call
earnestly upon God, yt he may relieve our necessities, for he is mind full of
his promises. Furthermore we are taught here, that Gods doing and
determination is not hindered by ye impedime^ts of nature. For although Zachary
were forspent, and that Elizabeth were barren both by nature and years: yet
Gods purpose goes forward, and Elizabeth co^ceyueth according too Gods
determination. Heeruppon we may build a general rule, namely that nothing
can disappoint Gods determination and purpose. He has decreed too raise agein
the dead, but unto nature this seems impossible? Which is most too be
believed in this case? Nature, or Gods word. Let the praise of truth be
given too God, and let us believe it for a certeintie, ye he which is ye
almighty truth and the most true almightinesse, both will and can perform
whatsoever he has determined. Therefore a barren woman conceiueth, and a
forspent old man becomes a Father against natures will, how be it at the
commandment of him that is the author of nature, whom the Child acknowledged
in his moothers womb, when at the coming of Mary after her conceyuing at the
voice of the Angel, he sprang in his moothers womb, in witness that God
receives infants, and will be woorshipped of them, according to the Psalm: out
of the mouths of infantes and sucking babes have ye made perfect thy praise.
But more is too be spoken of this matter on the day of the visitation of the
blissed Uirgin.

The third circumstance is of his birth, whereof Luke speaks in this wise:
Thou shall (says the Angel) call his name John, and thou shall have joy and
gladness, and many shall rejoice at his birth. And when John was borne, the
neighbors heering what had happened too Elizabeth, did set out the mercy of God
and reioysed with Elizabeth. This circumstance puts us in mind of
thankfulness toward God for his benefits received: it puts us in mind too
rejoice with the^ to whom God does good: it puts us in mind of the duty of
godly parents, namely that we should betake our children unto God: and it puts
us in mind of the gladness which we receive of the blissing of God, that we
should refer it too Gods glory.

The fourth circumstance is of John's bringing up, whereof the Evangelist
speaks thus: The Child grew and wexed strong in spirit, and was in
wilderness until the day that he should show himself too the Israelites. And
while he was in wilderness, (as Matthew tells) he had a garment of Camels
hair, and a Lether girdle about his loins. And his meat was Locusts and wild
Honey. This is a description of meetly hard bringing up. For in as much as it
was a high office that he should take upon him, he was not too be brought
up in pleasures, but rather he was too be enured too pains taking from the
Cradle. For (as one says) it is a great matter too be enured from a Child.

But what shall we learn hereby? Munckerie? In no wise. What then? We must
learn three things hereby. Soberness, obedience toward God, and enurance
too hardness. For soberness and restraint of life ar by this example of John's
commended: not only too those that shall be ministers of Gods word, but also
too al Christians. Secondly, obedience too Godward in our vocation is commended
unto us. For it is not too be thought that John chose this work and this
kind of living, as though it were a holyer thing too live in wilderness than
in the open assembly of men: but he thought it behooved him to follow his
calling. Moreover enurance is commended unto us by this example, too the
intent that being acquaynted with hardness, we may not be discouraged with
the burden of troubles, if at any time we be put too the bearing of
hardness. Those that be brought up deintely, become womanish, so as they be
meet for the doing of no notable thing, according as experience teaches in
many. The Lether girdle that was about his loins, was a token of the
contention which he should have in his office, against the Scribes, Pharisees,
Herod, and other the enemies of Chrysts kingdom.

The fifth circumstance of John's calling. Of this circumstance Luke writes
thus: The word of the Lord came unto John the son of Zachary. This was the
word of calling, whereby he was called of God too the ministry. Here is
modesty commended unto us, that we should after the example of John, wayt
for the voice of the caller, whither it be of God without means, (which
happened often in old time, after which sort the Prophets, Apostles, and others
now and then were called:) or of God by means, that is too wit by men, that
have authority too call too any service in the common weal or in the Church.
Against this example of modesty do curious folks offend, who without calling
climb up into offices, by the windows or the roof of the house, rather than
by the door. Such are they which by friends or by large gifts hunt for
spiritual promotions, and that not too serve God, and edify his Church, but
too feed their bellies, which thing comes commonly too an ill end.

The sixth circumstance is of his office, whereof Luke speaks in this manner:
And he came intoo all the coasts about Jordan, preaching the Baptim of
repentance for the remission of sins, as it is written in the book of Esaias.
The voice of a crier in wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord, make straight
his paths. etc. We have John's office, namely that he baptizeth and preaches
repentance, that he may prepare the way of the Lord, and point out Christ our
Lord. And because he was the first minister of God that baptized by Gods
commandment, he was called Baptist. And because he preached repentance, he
was called a Prophet. And because he poynted out Christ, he was called Elias,
that he might come in the spirit of Elias, and prepare the way of the Lord. In
this man's office do shine many virtues: as constancy, stoutnesse,
confession, tribulation, defense of the truth, earnestness and endeavor too
enlarge Chrysts kingdom. He feared not Herod: he regarded not the Pharisees.
But he maintained his office stoutly even too the death.

The seventh circumstance, is of Christ's record concerning John. Of this
circumstance writes Mathewe in his eleventh chapter, where John being cast
into prison, sendes two of his Disciples too Jesus, too know of him whither he
were the same that was too come, or whither some other were too be looked for.
And after Chrysts answer, is immediately put Chrysts record concerning John.
What went ye out (says he) intoo the wilderness too see? A reed? How be it
for as much as this commendation of Chrysts given unto John, is declared in
the third Sunday in Aduent: I will say no more of it here.

The eight circumsta^ce is of John's death, and of those things that happened
about his death and after his death. In his death are these things: the
occasion of it, the cause of it, the kind of the death, and John's example. The
occasion was this. Herod took away his brothers wife, and used her as his
own. Because John saw this thing too be against the law of God and the
honesty of nature, he said too Herod. It is not lawful for thee too have thy
brothers wife. Wherewith Herod taking displeasure, did cast John in prison.
Before John had done so, Herod loved him: he esteemed him as a Prophet: and
now and then used him as a counselor. But as soon as John began too reprove him
for his incest, and unclean life, Herod of his friend became his enemy, and
cast John intoo prison as an evil dooer. This example of Herodes is followed of
many now a days: They make much of Gods servants as long as they displease
them not, and as long as they blame not their vices: But as soon as they bewray
their disease, by and by like mad men they lay hands upon their Phisicians.

The cause of his death was Herod's oath. For when Herod at a feast had behild
the daughter of Herodias daunsing, she lyked him so well with her daunsing,
that he swear he would give her whatsoever she would ask, even too the one
half of his kingdom. As soon as the Damsel her^ this, she runs too her
moother, and asks counsel of her, what she should request. Her moother
(who hated John for finding fault with her whoredom) bad her ask John Baptists
head, which thing she obtained. For out of hand a hangman was sent for too
cut of John's head, and so it was delivered too the Damsel.

Thus have we the cause of John's death, and the kind of his death. Behold,
here at the request of a young wenche was put too death that noble personage,
than the which there was not a greater among them that are borne of women
according unto Christ's testimony. This verily is the lot of the church.
Here we see that Christ's church is gotten with blud and kept with blud.
This example of John's, is too be followed of all sincere ministers of Christ:
Namely, rather too choose death than too wink at men's sins: assuring them
selves yt he which accepted John's blud as a most acceptable sacrifise, will
also have regard of them in the mids of the fire. Too him therefore be honor,
praise, thanksgiving, and glory for ever and ever. So be it.

The Visitation of Mary. The Gospel. Luke. j.
ANd Mary arose in those days, and went intoo the Mountains with haste,
into a City of Ievvrie, and entered intoo the house of Zachary, and saluted
Elizabeth. And it fortuned, as Elizabeth heard the Salutation of Mary, the babe
sprung in her belly. And Elizabeth was filled with the holy Ghost, and cried
with a loud voice, and said: Blissed art thou among women, and blissed is the
fruit of thy womb. And whence happens this unto me, that the Mother of
my Lord should come too me? For lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation
sounded in mine ears, the babe sprang in my belly for joy. And blissed art
thou that beleeuest: for those things shall be performed, which were told
thee from the Lord: And Mary said. My soul magnifieth the Lord: and my
spirit reioyseth in God my savior. For he has looked on the poor degree
of his handmayden. For behold from henceforth shall all generations call me
blissed. Because he that is mighty has done too me great things, and holy
is his name. And his mercy is on them that fear him throughout all
generations. He shows strength with his arm: he scatters them that are
proud in the imagination of their hearts. He puts down the mighty from
their seats, and exalts them of low degree. He fills the hungry with
good things: and sends away the rich empty. He remembers mercy, and
helps his servant Israel. Even as he promised unto our Fathers, Abraham
and his seed for ever. And Mary abode with her about three Months, and
returned ageine too her own house.

The exposition of the Text.
Wherefore feasts of Saints were appointed in the Church, is already showed
both at other times, and also upon the very day of John Baptist. The effect
of the matter comes unto this end, that we may have examples of
repentance and of Gods mercy, or (too speak more at large) first that when
we are fallen with them, we should not despair of forgiveness, but look up
for grace, repenting us earnestly of our sins, after the example of the
Saints. Secondly that we should follow their faith: according as Paul
warns, commending Abraham's faith unto us. Romans 4. And thirdly, that we
should endeuer too be like in conditions too the Saints, living after an
honest, godly, and upright fashion, and renouncing all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, as Paul teaches in his Epistle too Titus.

For this purpose, let us think that this feast also was instituted, not that
we should call upon the holy Uirgin, which is wicked Idolatry: but too the
intent we may have wherewith both too edify our mind and too direct our life
too godliness and virtue, after the example of this most chaste Uirgin.

Now the sum of this story is, that the Uirgin Mary after she knew that
both her self was with Child by the holy Ghost* and that Elizabeth her
cousin now in her old age, was great with Child also, went too her cousin
Elizabeth too see how she did: and that upon their meeting, they talked
toogither of that which was happened, and comforted one another. And too the
intent that Mary might show a token of her thankfulness, she made a Psalm
and song it too the praise of God. The places are two.

1 The story of her visitation. 2 The song of the Uirgin.
Of the first.
IN the story of the virgin four circumstances are chiefly too be considered,
which are: First the mutual courtesy between the Uirgin and Elizabeth. 2.
The Salutation of the Uirgin. 3. Elizabeth's record of the Uirgins faith. 4. The
miracle of the Babe springing in his moothers womb.

The first circumstance. Mary arose in those days and went intoo the
Mountains with haste intoo a City of Ievvry, and entered intoo the house of
Zachary. The blissed Uirgin utters a most fair fruit of her Faith, that is
too wit, love toward her neighbor. For she being a young woman bylde no
scorn of Elizabeth being an old woman, but went too her in half, too help
her, and comfort her, thinking thus: Behold my kinswoman is forespent with
years: and besides that, she is by miracle become child bearing, which
thing was denied by nature. Therefore she has need of my help. Wherefore I
will go too her that we may take comfort toogither one of another talk, and
too do her some service. Heerby may young married wives learn, how it
becomes them too be minded toward ye aged women. Although Mary were endewed
with greater gifts than ever any woman in the world was: Yet was she not
proud of it, she thinks not: Shall I that am garnished with so great gifts,
do service too this old trot? But rather she thinks that the greater she
is, and the more excelling in principal gifts, so much the more is she
bound too do other folk service. Albeeit that Joseph dreamed that the Sun
and Moon and eleven stars did woorship him, by which dream was signified
that his Pa^entes and brethren should one day woorship him as their Lord: yet
was he not proud of it, but served his old Father, and was obediente too
him, according too the rule of Jesus the Son of Syrach. The greater that thou
art, so much the more, humble thou thy self in all things, and thou shall
find favor before GOD. Be gentle too speak unto in the company of the
poor, and humble thy soul unto thine elder. He that frames his life after
the rule and the example of Mary, shall reap most plentiful fruit. For first
he shall find favor in Gods sight. For as God resists the proud: so he
gives grace too the lowly. Secondly he shall find favor among men. For like
as all men hate proud folks, so they love those that be lowly and gentle too
speak unto. Besides this, he deserves, that young men should honor him
when he is old. For as it is Gods just judgment, that he which in his youth
despised old men, should be despised himself when he is old: so is it Gods
justice that he which in his youth did reverence old men, and had them in
estimation, should be honored and loved of young folk when he is old. Also
let our maidens learn hereby, not too run gadding about too other folks
houses, nor too give themselves too idleness, but too do their business
speedyly after a godly and womanly fashion: except perchance they had rather
follow the example of Dina, who brought home shame with her, tha^ the example of
the blissed virgin, who brought home honor and an everlasting report of
honesty with her. In old time no treasure was more set by of maidens than
shamefastness. But now a days many show al manner of shamlesse lightness, both
in apparel and behauior, of whom a great number do justly abye their
unshamefastness.

The second circumstance is of the Greeting. For the virgin entering intoo
Elizabeth's house greeteth her by and by. A freendly greeting is a token of
courtesy, lowlynesse, and good will. The usual manner of greeting among the
Jews, was, peace be too thee, and peace be too this house: which manner of
greeting puts us in mind of many things. For first this order of greeting
is a confession whereby we acknowledge all peace, all good fortune, yea and
all prosperity too be of God. Secondly it is a prayer. For he that with a
true meening heart says, Peace be too thee: it is as much as if he should
say, I beseech thee O heavenly Father, too grant thy peace too this man: and
too defend him with thy protection against Satan the unappeasable foe of thy
church. Thirdly this greeting is an exhortation, whereby we exhort him that
we salute, too call upon God, too preserve the man himself, his house, his
children, and whatsoever is his. Fourthly his greeting and wishing of peace, is
a certain warning that we have enemies, that lie in wait for us continualle.
Whereby we are put in mind, not too sleep, but too wake, that they fall not
upon us unawares. Fifthly, this godly salutation is a thanksgiving. For when we
wish peace of God too other men, we openly acknowledge that God is the author
of peace, whom we praise in this confession. Therefore let us learn of this
virgin, too receive one an other, with mutual greetings.

The third circumstance is, Elizabeth's testimony concerning the virgins faith.
And Elizabeth was filled with the holy ghost, and cried out with a loud
voice, and said: Blissed art thou among women, and blissed is the fruit of thy
womb. etc. Blissed art thou that have believed, for all things shall be
performed that the Lord has spoken unto thee. Elizabeth is filled with the
holy ghost, by whom she is certified of the virgins conception. For in as much
as it is against nature for a maid too be with child, it behooved the author of
nature too be the teacher of grace, and giver of the gift which happened
contrary too nature. Agein, according as she was taught by the holy ghost, she
commends the virgins faith when she says: Blissed art thou that have
believed. Which short sentence teaches many things. For first it covertly
gives an inkling that al be wretched which are faithless. Secondly it
teaches that unto the believers befalls the true blissednesse, which he is
in Christ Jesus the most plentyfull welspring of all blissednesse. Thirdly it
shows what is the fruit of faith, when she says: For those things shall be
performed which the Lord has spoken too thee. As if she should say:
Although the experience of all men cry against it: although Nature say nay too
it: although reason determine flat against it. Yet shall the thing be
performed that the Lord has spoken too thee, namely that thou being a maid
shall bear a Son, according too Gods word. Hereby may we also learn, what
is the true inclination of Faith, and after the example of the virgin, too give
credit too Gods word, though all the whole nature of things should seem too
warrant the contrary.

The fourth circumstance. At the virgins greeting the child sprang in his
moothers womb, and by a certain gesture gave knoweledge that the Messiah was
at hand in the virgins womb. Surely this was a great miracle, that a Babe as
yet unborn intoo the world, acknowledged the repayrer of nature. By which
miracle both the faith of Elizabeth and Mary was confirmed, and the goodness
of God toward infantes declared, who promised Abraham long ago, that he
would be the GOD of him and of his seed for evermore. In assurance of which
promise, he established a law, that every male child of eight days old
should be circumcised. In as much therefore as this promise perteyneth unto
us, the Anabaptists do wickedly and shamelesly, who will not have the infants
of Christians baptized: that is too wit, will not have them enjoy their
ensealement, which are heirs of the heavenly grace according too the promise.
The Anabaptists say thus: He that hears and believes, is too be baptized:
but an Infant hears not, nor can believe: and therefore he is not in any
wise too be baptized. But the wretches are deceived. They ought too reason
thus rather. The Infa^ts of Christen folks have the promise. Therefore this
promise is too be sealed up unto them by Baptime, as it was sealed up too the
Children of the Jews by Circumcision. The word of promise offreth grace: and
the Sacrament of the promise seals up the grace, and teaches by outward
token, according as is said upon the day of our Lords supper. Therefore let us
set John before us, whoo in his moothers womb being full of the holy Ghost,
is heir of the grace common too all Infants that have the promise. But they
say, this was a miracle, I confess it was a miracle, and surely a great
miracle, like as all Gods works in his Church are miracles. Notwithstanding,
I put too thus much, that this self same miracle teaches us, that Babes are
able too receive the holy Ghost. If they be able too receive the holy
Ghost: if they be the Children of Abraham: if they be heirs according too
the promise: If Christ command them too be received: why are they not too
be baptized? specially seeing that Baptime is a certain sealing up of these
things.

Of the second.
WHen Mary had herd Elizabeth talk of the benefit done too her by God, namely
that she should be the moother of the Messiah, she utters the
thankfulness of her heart toward God, whom she prayseth in this Psalm,
partly for that exceeding great benefit, which happened unto her, and also
for the mercy, might, and truth, which he extends toward men, while
through his mercy he receives them that fear him intoo his favor, justly
punishes the stubborn, and now at length performs that he had promised so
long ago too the fathers. The use of this Psalm is, that knowing Gods
mercifulness we should believe: that knowing his might, we should fear:
and that knowing his truth, we should hope, and with patience wait for the
things that God of his grace has promised: setting his mercy against sin,
his might against the Devils tirannie: and his truth against all the
temptations that the flesh or the Devil ministers. And for these causes the
ancient Church has ordained, that every day in the congregation of the
godly, this song of the Uirgins should be soong. Now let us breefly expound
every verse.

1 My soul does magnify the Lord.

2 And my spirit reioyseth in God my Savior.

3 For he has regarded the lovvlynesse of his handmayd. For behold from
henceforth all generations shall call me blissed.

This is too say: I praise God highly, and am altogether set upon gladness,
and that for God my saviors sake. For he is my joy, because he has bestowed
so great favor upon me. He has regarded and with free favor embraced me his
lowly and base handmayde, who have lived hithertoo despised in base estate, and
even after the manner of vile bondslaues: yea and so regarded me, that all ages
shall from henceforth account me (not base and despised as before, but) blissed:
to whom so great grace is extended, that I shall be the moother of the
Messiah, who is the savior of me and of all that believe in him. By Maryes
example we may learn, first too acknowledge our own vileness, and to cast our
selves down before God in true repentance. Secondly to acknowledge Gods
benefits toward us. Thirdly to praise god for his benefits: and fourthly too
provoke other too thankfulness by our example.

4 For he that is mighty has magnified me, and holy is his name. The chaste
virgin makes here no boast of merits. She attributes nothing too her own
power, but imputes all things unto God, who only is mighty, and whose only
name is holy, and therefore deserves most highly too be reuere^ced. For as often
as God is named, he ought too be praised for his holiness, which shines
forth in all his woorks with exceeding mercy, just judgment, myghtinesse, and
truth, according as the virgin declares particularly in her psalm.

5 And his mercy is on them that fear him through all generations. This verse
teaches three things. First that God is merciful. Secondly how largely Gods
mercy spredeth it self. And thirdly too what persons that mercy befalls.
Concerning Gods mercy there be many notable sayings and examples. I (says
he) will be thy God, and the God of thy seed for ever. Also: I am the God
that shows mercy. And in Esaias: I am with thee because I am thy merciful
Lord God. And the son of Syrach: Gentle and merciful is God, and will release
sins in the day of trouble. Heerevpon Paul calls God the father of
mercies, saying: Blissed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
father of mercies, which comfort us in all our troubles. The examples of
this mercy that has bin showed, are many. Of which the cheifest is, that he
has given his only begotten son, that the world might be saved by him.
Heervntoo makes this saying: So God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten son, too the intent that all that believe in him should not perish,
but have life everlasting. Images of this mercy are the prodigal child, the
Samaritane, and the lost sheep. How largely extends this mercy of God? The
virgin answers: from one generation too an other: that is too say, too all
ages and too all nations, according too this saying: The earth is full of Gods
mercy. Heertoo perteyneth this place of ye psalm: Gods mercy endures for ever
and ever. By Gods Justice Adam and all his posterity was made subject too
wretchedness. And by Gods mercy Adam and his offspring was made partaker of
grace, so they purchase not damnation too themselves by their own default.
Heervntoo pertains that saying of Esaias: I have given thee too be a light too
the Gentyles, that thou may be my Salvation too the vttermoste parts of the
earth. And Simeon says: A light which thou have prepared too all people. Too
whom befalls this mercy? Mary answers: Too those that fear him. This
self thing does David witness in these words: The mercy of the Lord is from
generation too generation upon them that fear him. And agein, his salvation is
near them that fear him. Therefore where as is the true fear of God, there
also Gods mercy takes place. But what is this fear of God? It is true
godliness and religion, wherewith they are endued that lean unto Christ by
steadfast faith. But here must discretion be had between the cause of mercy,
and the quality of them too whom it befalls. There is none other cause than
Gods fatherly good will and well liking in his dear beloved son, according as
he him self says: This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. The
quality of them too whom mercy befalls, is not merit or desert, but a mark
of Gods children, which are made his children by faith, according too this: he
have power too as many as believe in his name, too become the sons of God. By
faith only are we borne the sons of God: but when we are become the sons of
God, we must (as it becomes Gods children) live in all godliness,
innocence, and other virtues, the which the blissed virgin co^prehendeth here
under ye name of the fear of God.

6 He has shevved strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their own hearts.

7 He has put down the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble
and meek.

8 He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty
away.

She sets out Gods judgment against the proud, and his mercy toward the
lowly. Hereof are showed examples without number, both by ye holy histories,
and by daily experience.

9 He remembering his mercy has helped his servant Israel.

10 As he promised too our forefathers Abraham and his seed for ever.

This is too say: God has accomplished his promise of mercy by sending his
son. Therefore he is sothfast, and to be praised for his sothfastnesse. Too who^
be praise, confession and glory of mercy, power, righteousness, and truth for
ever and ever. Amen.

Upon the feast day of S. Michael the Archangell. The Gospel. Math. viij.
AT the same time came the disciples unto Jesus saying: Who is the greatest
in the kingdom of heaven? Jesus called a child unto him, and set him in the
midst of them, and said: Verily I say unto you, except ye turn and become
as children, ye shall not enter intoo the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever
therefore humbles himself as this child that same is the greatest in the
kingdom of heaven. And whosoever receives such a child in my name, receives
me. But whoso does offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drowned in the depth of the sea. VVoe unto the world, because of
offenses: necessary it is that offenses come. But vvoe unto the man by whom
the offense comes. Wherefore, if thy hand or thy foot hinder thee, cut him
of, and cast it from thee. It is better for thee too enter intoo life halt or
maimed, rather than thou should (having two hands or two feet) be cast
intoo everlasting fire. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast
it from thee: It is better for thee too enter intoo life with one eye, rather
than (having two eyes) too be cast into hell fire. Take heed that ye
despise not one of these little ones. For I say unto you: that in heaven their
Angels do alvvayes behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.

The exposition of the Text.
THis feast was appointed and received in the Church, too the intent we might
learn Gods benefits toward us, who has given us his Angels too be our
keepers. Wherefore the congregation is too be taught this day concerning
Angels chiefly. Howbeeit forasmuch as the Gospel that is wont too be red
this day, contains singular lessons: I will first open the Text of the
Gospel, and afterward speak somewhat concerning Angels. The occasion of this
Euangelical lesson, was the statelynesse of Chrysts disciples, who after they
had herd Christ make mention of his departure: fell at strife for the
soueraintie: whom Christ calls back from their error, and sets a child in the
mids of them, saying: Except ye be as children ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Besides this, he dissuadeth them from ministering occasion
of offense, and commends children unto us that we should receive them intoo
the church, knowing that of such is the kingdom of Heaven. The places are
four.

1 The reasoning of the Apostles about the soueraintie and the reproof of
them. 2 The warning too avoid offense. 3 Christ's commandment of receiving
Children. 4 The nature and office of Angels.
Of the first.
THe Disciples came unto Jesus, saying: who is greatest in the kingdom of
Heaven? Here comes first too be marked the blindness of Chrysts Disciples,
understanding not yet what manner a one Christ's kingdom is. They dreamed it
should be a civil government, wherein Christ should reign as chief sovereign,
and his Disciples as Dukes should rule the whole world under him. And therefore
they demand which of them should be chief and next unto Christ. So
wonderful blindness had bewitched their minds.

Agein, we may see here the Devils venim which wrought even in those
instruments of God, namely Christ's Disciples, who were ordained too be
Apostles and ambassadors of Christ our king in his spiritual kingdom. What
does the Devil? he stayneth them with the most ugly vice of pride, in so
much as they fell already too reasoning for the soueraintie: that is too say,
which of them should be Lord over the rest. What does Christ unto this
foolish pride of his Disciples? Surely he might justly have cast them of, as
proud and utterly unmeet too bear any sway in the government of his spiritual
kingdom: yet does he not so, but admonishes them fatherly. And as he
corrects their error: so he sharply reproves the vice of pride. For thus
says he: Jesus called a Child unto him and set him in the midst of the^,
saying: Verily I say unto you: Except ye turn and become as children, ye
shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Here he teaches by example and
doctrine, what manner a ones he would have the ministers of his kingdom too be.
He will have no odds betwixt them as touching the affection of their minds. He
will not have one look loftely at another: but yt they should be lovingly
minded one too another, showing dutifulness one to another. He will not have
the^ in his ghostly kingdom, too reign proudly one over other after the manner
of the heathen. For in civil gouernements there is an other consideration too
be had. Ageine, he makes here a difference between his own government, and
the worldly kingdoms. He that is cheef in worldly kingdoms will be honored
and served of al men. Contrariwise he that will be cheef here, must be
servant too all: not in words as the Pope is, but in very deed, as were
Paul, Peter, the Apostles, and other sincere preachers of the Gospel. So is he
greatest in Christ's Church that is most servant, and he is least that is
most lordly. Now too the intent Christ may revoke his disciples from this
pride, he adds a most sore threat, saying: Except ye become children, ye
shall not enter intoo the kingdom of Heaven. But what means the Lord that
he would have his Disciples like little Children? Does not Paul seem too
teach otherwise, when he writes too the Corinthians in this wise? Let us not
be children in understanding. Christ will have us like too Children, and Paul
will have us unlike too Children. Both are true. We must be like too Children,
and ageine we must be unlike too Children. We must be like too Children,
first in true lowliness and denying of our selves, as the Lord says:
whosoever humbles himself as this Child. Therefore he that will be Christ's
Disciple must lay down all pride. Heeruntoo perteyneth this saying of Christ:
he that will follow me, let him deny him self. That is too say: he that will
be my Disciple, let him have a lowly opinion of himself, and let him take
nothing proudly upon him. Ageine, we must be like unto children in respect
of merits. For like as children cannot boast of their own deseruings against
their parents: even so may not Christ's disciples boast of any merits before
God, but confess them selves too be babes, as who are able too do nothing
without his fatherly providence. Thirdly we must be like children in affection.
For as children commit them selves wholly too the regard of their parents: so
must Chrysts disciples put them selves wholly intoo Chrysts tuition, looking
for all welfare at his hand. Fourthly we must be like children in purpose of
obeying. Good children stand not reasoning what manner a thing it is that their
father commands: but they take heed what he commands, and follow his will
as their rule too woork by: as Abraham did, who at Gods commandment was ready
too slay his only begotten son for sacrifice. Abraham stood not thinking what
shall this deed profit God? The death of my son is most troublesome unto
me, and can do no good too God. But rather he thought thus: Thou my God have
commanded me this, therefore will I follow thy will as my rule too work by, and
I will obey thee. Lastly we must be like children, in malice: that is too
wit, like as children give not themselves too naughty practices, nor gather
not couetously nor follow filthy lustfulnesse: So must Chrysts disciples
absteyne from evil.

And we must be unlike too children, first that we be not found like babes,
seeking after untoward things, as children do before their senses are settled:
Secondly that we be not weak in faith as children which are not able to
conceive spiritual things for want of years of discretion. Thirdly that we
give not our selves too playing with fleshly affections. Fourthly, that we
waver not vncerteynly and vnstayedly like children in the doctrine of
godliness, and that (as Paul says) we be not carried about with every blast
of doctrine: but that we yield a holy chyldhoode, whervntoo Peter exhorts
us, when he says: As newborn babes, 1 Peter. 2.

Hereunto he adds also ye reward of true lowliness, when he says:
Whosoever receives such a child in my name, receives me. Let this be weyed
advisedly. First by this saying: Christ will have us embrace his children
lovingly, and that for his sake. Secondly, it witnesses, yt what soever is
bestowed upon the godly in his name, he estemeth as if it were bestowed upon
himself. Whom would not this promise stir up too do ye deeds of curtesy too
his brethren, and specially too the members of Chrysts church? On the other
side, it warns us of the punishment which they shall suffer that despise any of
those that believe in Christ. He that offends one of these which believe in
me (says he) it were better for him that a mylstone were hanged about his
neck, and he drowned in the botom of the sea. This only threat ought too
hold us within our duty, that we should not be so ready too offend
others. But of this point there follow more.

Of the second.
WOE be to the world for offenses. Needs must offenses come.
Notvvithstanding, vvo be too that man by whom the offense comes. This
saying of Chrysts contains three things. The first is, a forewarning that the
world is full of offenses. The second is, a somewhat dark inkling of the causes
of offenses. The third is, a threatening of the punishment that shall light upon
the author of the offense.

The first teaches us, warns us, and confirms us. It teaches us what
shall come too pass, namely that the word shall be full of offenses.
Secondly, that these offenses shall bring w^ upon men, that is to say,
punishment, under which men shall cry woe too themselves by reason of their
anguishe. This word woe as ( Basil says) is a lamentable m^ne, wherwithal they
that groan under the cross do utter their grief. Thirdly that the Church
shall not be at rest in this life, but yt when it shall seem most quiet, then
shall storms arise suddenly, wherewith it shall be wonderously shaken. The church
shall in this world be like the bird Halcyon, which lays her eggs and
hatcheth them, and brings up her y^^ng ones upon the sea. This bird can
never warrant her self one calm day, but frames her self too all hazards.
When the sea is calm, she and her young birds are glad: and if any tempest
arise, she bears it out with a stout courage, feeding her mind with hope of
a calm. So the church is in the world as on the sea, where she brings
forth children. She can never be in any surety of the storms of this world,
such as are all false prophets, the devil, a man's own flesh, and the lewd
manners and examples of men. When these storms are coming against the Church,
then must she be in a readiness against all fortunes. But at the length she
shall overcome all things by Jesus Christ, the ouercommer of the world, whom
when we take hold on by faith, we also become ouercommers of the world,
according too this saying: This is the victory that overcomes the world,
even your faith: Why does this overcome the world? because it has Christ.

Secondlye this saying of Christ's warns us, that we our selves be not
either by word or deed an occasion of offense unto others, or suffer our
selves too be led intoo offenses, and slip back ageine intoo our former
darkness, and so fall away shamefully from Christ: as it happens too many
now a days, where Sophisters and Tirantes toss and turmoyle all things at
their pleasures.

Thirdly this saying of Christ confirms us in the faith of Christ. For when
we see the sequel answerable too the forwarning, we are assured of the
Gospel, and strengthened in our faith, that we should not with the most
part of the world renounce our profession.

The second thing that Christ's saying conteyneth, is a somewhat dark inkling
of ye causes of offense. Needs must offenses come says he. But whence is this
necessity? Of God? No truly. For God is not ye author of evil, neither
deliteth he in offenses, but is angry with the authors of offense, as ye
punisheme^ts of them show. Whence are they the^? are they of the deuil^ ^ea
verily, even of the Devil. For he practices nothing else than too overthrow
Christ's Church by offenses and stumbling blocks in doctrine, in manners and
in affliction. The Devil ioynes too him the Sophisters, Hipocrites, and tirants
of the world, whom he stirs up too the intent he may leave nothing
unattempted, which by any means may make either too the overthrow or too the
rending of the church in pieces: and that does the story of the church show,
both before the flud, and after the flud: in Egypt in the wilderness in diverse
persecutions, under Judges, Kings and Capteyns, in captivity and out of
captivity, even unto the coming of Christ. Agein, after Christ the story of
the church has infinite testimonies of stumbling blocks, wherewith Satan like
an enemy inuadeth Chrysts church.

The third thing that Chrysts saying conteyneth, is a thretning of punishment
which the author of offenses shall endure. VVo be to that man (says he) by
whom the offense comes. His meaning is, that those which are an occasion of
offense too others, shall be punished with most grievous pains. And it is not to
be douted but he meeneth everlasting pains. Howbeit, too the intent we may
take the better heed, yt we become not authors of offense, I will entreat of
them breefly.

Some kinds of offenses are too be eschued, which take their differences of
their causes. There is one kind of offense that ryseth of evil doctrine, or of
corrupting the doctrine of the Church. He that after this manner is an offense
unto others, follows the steps of the Devil his Father, who overthrew the
first man and woman with this kind of stu^bling block. Genesis 3. Another kind
of offense is that which springs of evil manners, that is too wit, when other
folks regarding thee, do counterfeit thine ill conditions. He that in this
wise is an offense too men, builds up the kingdom of Satan, and
overthrows the kingdom of Christ, and therefore great heed is too be
taken of them. Where (I pray you) is there one among a number that gives not
occasion of offense in this wise? Whither ye look too the Clergy, or too the
laytie, too the Magistrate or too the subjects, ye shall see al things full of
offenses of manners: so as it was not for naught that Christ said: W^ be too
the world for offenses.

The third kind of offense rises of the abuse of things, which of their own
nature are indifferent: which must be shunned, that the weak be not offended.
The wilful and ungodly are too be despised: and for warrant thereof we have
Christ's example. As concerning offenses we have said more elsewhere.

Of the third.
TAke heed that ye despise not one of these little ones: for I say unto you,
that in heaven their Angels do alvvayes behold the face of my Father which
is in Heaven. Here Christ commends Children unto us, that we should not by
any means offend them. And he adds the reason why. Because the Angels of
them behold the face of God the father that is in heaven: that is too say,
seeing God has so great regard of children, that he charge his Angels too
keep them, it becomes not us too dishonor them. Here we may note that
children have Angels too their keepers, which defend the^ against Satan.
Ageine we may be stirred up too thankfulness toward God, for so great a
benefit. Moreover, let us endeuer too keep it still by godly behavior. And
lastly let us beware that we do not by any ungodliness or shameful dealing,
estraunge from us, those which in heaven rejoice in the holiness and pure
life of the godly.

Of the fourth.
THe fourth thing that I purposed upon, was concerning Angels, of whose nature
and office I will speak a little, partly that we may know what manner of
keepers the church has, and also that we may understand in how great perils
we are.

An Angel is a creature of God, spiritual, understanding, mighty, made too
serve God in his Church. From which end of their creation certain of them are
fallen and become enemies of the Church. But some fell not, but continued in
their innocence, wherein they do service too God and his Church. Of which the
Epistle too the Hebrews says thus: Are not all ministering spirits, and sent
too minister for their sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation? Of the evil
Angels the Lord says, that Satan with his company is a liar and a
murderer from the beginning. And Peter says: The Devil goes about like a
Lion seeking whom he may devour. Heerby it is easy too understand that the
Church in this world is as a City: which as it is defended within by good
Angels: so is it assaulted without by ill Angels. Then seeing we are set in so
great danger, let us pray God too defend us with his Angels, and unto him
be praise, honor, and power for evermore. Amen.

Upon the feast of all Saints. The Gospel. Math. v.
Jesus seeing the people, went up into the Mountain: and when he was set,
his Disciples came unto him, and after that he had opened his mouth, he
taught them, saying: Blissed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom
of Heaven. Blissed are they that mourn, for they shall receive comfort.
Blissed are the meek, for they shall receive the inheritance of the earth.
Blissed are they which hunger and thirst after ryghtuousnesse, for they shall
be satisfied. Blissed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Blissed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Blissed are the peacemakers, for
they shall be called the Children of GOD. Blissed are they which suffer
persecution for ryghtuousnesse sake for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven.
Blissed are ye when men revile you and persecute you, and shall falsely say all
manner of evil sayings against you for my sake: rejoice and be glad, for great
is your revvard in Heaven. For so persecuted they the Prophets which were
before you.

The exposition of the Text.
Feasts of Saints, were appointed in the Church, not without right weighty
causes, which I will rehearse in order, that we may use the feasts of Saints,
too our own behoof.

The first cause is, that the Story of the Church may be known, for that is
exceeding profitable. For thereby we understand both the state of the Church,
and also what defenders and what enemies the church has had.

The second is, that Gods benefits toward the members of his Church may be
thought upon. Paul of a persecuter became an Apostle. Peter for all that he
had denied his master, was received intoo favor again. Mary Magdalen the
sinner was accepted for a daughter, while she stayed upon Christ by faith. At
the very point of death, Christ offered himself too be seen of Steven. And so
in every of the Saints are several benefits of God to be seen.

The third is, that having considered these benefits of God toward the
Saints, we should give God thanks, for that he was so merciful to wretched
sinners, turning themselves too the Lord by true repentance, as to receive them
intoo favor, and too garnish them with so many benefits, and to hold them up
with his spirit in this wilderness.

The fourth is, that the sundry casualties of the Saints should be weyed and
compared with the perils of our times. As the godly were oppressed by the
ungodly in old time: So are they at this day. In times past the Saints
rejoiced under godly governors, and now and then ageine were feign too feel
the hard yoke of Tyrants: and so do they in these days also. In these
variable chances we must harten our selves with the examples of the Saints.

The fifth is, that we should follow the Saints in patience, in life, in
serving God, in profession, in steadfastness, and in other virtues. The
Saints therefore must be as it were examples and rules too lead our life by.
Gods word requires repentance, woorshipping of God, confession, and patience:
And the Saints minister unto us examples of the same.

The sixth is, that we with godly gronings should desire too come too the
company of the Saints, too the intent that being at length delivered from
these distresses, we may live blissedly for evermore with Christ. In
consideration whereof Christ avouches his disciples to be blissed, although
they be afflicted with sundry miseryes in this life. And to this purpose
perteyneth this days Gospel, concerning sundry blissednesses, according as
we shall here anon. Therefore let us declare every blissednesse severally by it
self. There is but one point.

Of the blissednesse of Christ's Disciples.
BLissed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. (...)
of this place is, that there is no cause why they should think them selves
unhappy, that from the bottom of their heart feel themselves in very deed too
be void of all righteousness, since this self same feeling of a man's own
poorness is the first step whereby he mounteth up too the cheef riches: that
is too say, too the kingdom of Heaven: not by it self and of it own nature,
but because it compels us too seek him, who is the only way intoo Heaven.

What manner a thing spiritual or ghostly poverty is, it may be the easlier
understood by a comparison. For like as the poorness of beggerie, is not
only extreme needinesse, but also the open profession of the same: so the
poorness of spirit, is not only the vttermoste want of heavenly riches,
that is too wit, of righteousness, holiness, and innocence: but also the
profession of the same want before God, of who^ we desire relief of our
needinesse, for Christ's sake. This poorness then consists in true
repentance and in craving the riches of Heaven.

The Moonkes abused this place. For out of it, they taught that by poverty,
that is too say by beggerie, men merited the kingdom of heaven, whereas Paul
in the sixth too the Romans says plainly: Eternal life is Gods gift
through Jesus Christ our Lord. If it be a free gift: surely it is not
purchased with poverty, which doutlesse deserves nothing of it own nature,
but is a punishment, the cause whereof is partly wastefulnesse, partly sloth,
partly the penalty of some sin, and partly tryalles sake as was the beggerie
of Lazarus.

Blissed are those that mourn, for they shall receive comfort. This is a
woonderful Sermon. He avouches the mourners too be blissed, whereas nothing
is more against blissednesse than mourning. But Christ's saying is too be
understood of the success of the mourning, and not of the time of mourning.
For thus says he: because they shall receive comfort, that is when their
mourning is at end in this world. This mourning proceeds partly of the
poorness of spirit, and partly of the miseries of this present life, which do
as it were with a certain fire boil us and try us, and as it were with spurs
quicken us up too crave the endless joy which shall wipe away all tears.
Then is not mourning of it self the cause of blissfulness, but because it
drives us unto Christ, who is the author of all comfort. Heervntoo therefore
makes that saying of Paul: we rejoice in tribulations, because they woork
patience: patience, trial: trial, hope: and hope is not confounded, because god
loves us. Heerby it may be easly perceived, that Christ speaks not of
every kind of mourning, but of the mourning yt is according to God and not
according to ye world.

Blissed are the meke, for they shall receive the inheritance of the earth. The
meek are peaceable, mild, gentle, courteous, and such as bridle their
affections: such as are easy too be entreated to forgive wrong when they are
misused: and such as had lever lose a thing than to stand in contention for it.
This virtue of meekness, springs of the true fear of God and of true
lowliness: the which, Christ commends to those yt are his, saying: learn of
me because I am meek and lowly of heart. It is a rule, yt Chrysts Disciples
must be meek. The example of the rule is Christ. For he will that we look
upon him when we mind this virtue. The Lord says not: learn of me too raise
the dead, to chase away devils, to walk drishod upon the sea, to fast.xl. days
and.xl. nights without sustenance: but he says, learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly of heart. This lowlynesse has with it brotherly louingnesse, whereof
the Lord says: By this shall all men know ye too be my Disciples, if ye
love one another. But what is promised too the meek? Blissednesse, and that is
for the sequel thereof. For they shall possess the earth by right of
inheritance: not for that we shall live upon the earth, but figuratively. For
the land that was promised in old time unto the Fathers, was a figure and
representation of the heavenly kingdom, and therefore the very thing it self
is called by the name of the shadow of it.

They that abuse this place too stablish the doctrine of merits, as though we
could earne heaven by our own power, are fools and understand not Chrysts
words. He says, they shall possess the earth by right of inheritance. Where
is that right of inheritance? Are we not therefore heirs, because we are
freely adopted in Christ by faith? Does not Paul say: Eternal life is gods gift
through Jesus Christ our Lord? It is another matter too speak of the causes of
salvation, and too speak of the new qualities of the^ yt are heirs of ye
salvation.

Blissed are those that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be satisfied. Christen folk in this life shall never draw so much water out of
the fountaynes of salvation, but that they shall be more thirsty than before.
Wherefore here the Lord comfort them, promising that the time shall come, that
they shall be satisfied: for the which satisfying and suffizance, they shall
profess themselves happy. Whosoever hungreth and thirsts after
righteousness, wishes two things. First that God may be openly glorified by
right doctrine, holy life, and profession. And secondly that each man privately
should acknowledge God, conceive faith in Christ, be filled with the holy
Ghost, and mind gods righteousness in holy and pure life. Of this filling
speaks David, and says it shall then be, when his glory shall appear. For
there (as it is in the Apocalips) the Saints shall neither hunger nor thirst
any more.

Blyssed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Here is commended
unto us, mercy toward those that be in misery. For Christ will have his
Disciples not only too be touched with their own misfortunes, but also too
rue other folks miseries: Which thing undoubtedly is the duty of true
charity. Neither does Christ require only that we should be sorye with
other men for their harms and miseries: But he requires our deed
therewithal: His will is that we should put too our helping hand. And least
they might be discouraged with the unthankfulness of men, he adds a
promise. For he promises that he which is merciful too his neighbor, shall
obtain mercy again. and that, not only with God, but also among men. God
promises mercy too the merciful, and brings too pass also that we find
mercy among men, while he boweth their minds too do us good.

Blissed be the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Cleanness of heart is
here commended unto us, which is set against two very great vices, craftiness,
and lustfulnesse. When it is set against craftiness, it is a simple or single
good mening, whereby we deal with men unfeignedly and plainly without crooked
fetches too deceive them. This saying of Christ therefore is quite against the
judgment of most men. For a number think themselves then happy then, when
they can craftily compass men and wind them in, too deceive them. In respect
whereof they hunt both for the commendation of wisdom and for gain, and
also gape for the favor of great men. Notwithstanding, Christ will not have his
Disciples do so, but rather that they should be contented with a simple well
mening, so as their heart, hand, and tongue may seem al too agree thoroughly at
one. Too these does he promise that they shall see God, in the sight of God
consists the highest bliss. But when cleanness of heart is set against
lustfulnesse, it is the very true chastity, which Paul calls holiness,
when he says: Perform holiness, without the which no man shall see God. For
like as God abhors lusts: so he is exceedingly delighted in the chastity
of the faithful.

Blissed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.
Here Christ commends too his Disciples a great virtue and a rare.
Peacemakers and those that endeavor too make and maintain peace and
quietness. These because they have a contrary desire too the children of
Satan, shall be called the children of God, as who after the example of God
their father, are authors of peace and quietness, and do help and delight
many with this their seeking of peace. For like as precious balm fills all
the whole house with his sweet sent: so one man that is a seeker of peace, is
able too bring too agreement a great company that is at odds: And therefore
not without cause does David commend the desire of concord and peace, singing
thus: Behold, how good and pleasant a thing it is for brothers too dwell in
unity. As the excellent ointment that runs down from the head upon the
beard, even upon the beard of Aaron, and droppeth down by the skirtes of his
garments. As the dew of Hermon that falls upon the mountayns. For as the
dew makes the ground fat through the blissing of ye Lord, so whersoeuer there
be many peacemakers, there are fruitful and happy commonweals, Churches
and householdes. Contrariwise, where as is not the love of peace, there is
scorchyng and droughte, that is too say, extreme misery and wretchedness.

Blissed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake: for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven. Because the stumbling block of persecution does
most shake the minds of the weak: he does in very good season put his
Disciples in mind of the Cross, too the intent they should not be dismayde
with the sharpness of persecutions, and so renounce their profession: but
rather look wisely upon the kingdom of heaven which is set before them, the
desire of atteinement whereof, might make them strive more earnestly too enter
intoo it by many tribulations. Therefore let us follow the example of those that
run in a race: who always have an eye too the prise that is appointed by the
master of the gaming, and so run forth cheerfully till they come too their
races end. So will Christ have his too do: he will have no loytering, but
vnweeryable endeuer of running, till they come too the end of their race which
is the kingdom of heaven.

Ageine whereas Christ names but one cause of persecution, namely
Righteousness: his meening is, that we should so order our life, that we
be not compelled too suffer for our own fault, or for our own misdeedes. For
then should persecution be a just punishment, and not a testimony of the
defense of righteousness and truth. And Peter admonishes us that we should
not suffer as evil dooers, but as well dooers: and that, after the example of
Christ, the Prophets, Apostles, and many Martyrs.

Blissed are you when men reuyle you and persecute you, and falsely report all
manner of evil sayings against you for my sake. He expounds what it is too
suffer persecution for righteousness. If they revile you (says he)
wrongfully. If they persecute you for hatred of the Gospel. If they report
all evil of you falsely (for if they say truth, you shall not be blissed.) If
ye suffer persecution for your sins, ye shall not therevppon be happy. For
(as one says) it is the cause and not the blud, that makes a martyr.

Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Reward is a
recompense of obedience yielded too GOD in persecution. The Lord meeneth not
by this saying, that we merit heaven by persecution, for heaven is the
inheritance of his children. But rather he spurreth us forward to the
sufferance of persecution, by setting before us his Fathers clemency, who
promises a recompense for the troubles that we endure in this life, which
recompense is founded upon the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, too whom
with the Father and the holy Ghost, be honor, power, and glory for ever
world without end. AMEN.

All glory, honor, thanks, and praise, be given too God alone,
The Father, Son, and holy Ghost, three severally in one.

FINIS.
A Table too find the Gospels, contained in this work.
1 THe first Sunday in Aduent. fol. 1. a 2 The second Sunday in Aduent. 5. a 3
The third Sunday in Aduent. 8. b 4 The fourth Sundaye in Aduent. 12. a 5
Christmasse day. 16. a 6 Saint Stephens day. 21. b 7 Saint John Evangelists
day. 26. a 8 Sundaye in Christmasse week. 29. a 9 New years day. 32. b 10 The
Twelfth day. 36. b 11 The first Sundaye after the Epiphanie. 41. a 13 The
second Sunday after Epiphanie. 45. b 14 The third Sundaye after Epiphanie. 51.
b 15 The fourth Sunday after Epiphanie. 56. b 16 The fifthe Sundaye after
Epiphanie. 61. a 17 The Sunday called Septuagesima. 65. a 18 The Sunday called
Sexagesima. 70. a 19 The Sunday called Quin quagesima or Shroue-sunday. 75. a
20 The first Sundaye in Lent. 79. b 21 The second Sundaye in Lent. 84. b 22
The third Sundaye in Lent. 88. b 23 The fourth Sundaye in Lent. 93. b 24 The
fifth Sunday in Lent commonly called passion Sunday. 98. b 25 Palm Sunday.
103. b 26 Maundy Thursday. 106. a 27 Good Friday. 111. a 28 Easter day. 124. a
29 The second holy day in Easter week. 130. a 30 The third holy day in
Easter week. 135. b 31 The first Sundaye after Easter. 140. a 33 The second
Sundaye after Easter. 144. b 34 The third Sundaye after Easter. 149. b 35 The
fourth Sundaye after Easter. 154. b 36 The fifthe Sundaye after Easter. 159. b
37 The Ascension day. 164. a 38 The sixth Sundaye after Easter. 168. b 39
VVhitsunday or Pentecost. 173. a 40 VVhitson Monday 178. a 41 VVhitson Tuesday
182. b 42 Trinity Sunday. 186. a 43 The first Sundaye after Trinity. 191 b
44 The second Sunday after Trinity. 196. a 45 The third Sundaye after
Trinity. 201. a 46 The fourth Sunday after Trinity. 206. a 47 The fifthe
Sundaye after Trinity. 210. b 48 The sixthe Sundaye after Trinity. 215. b 49
The seventh Sunday after Trinity. 221. b 50 The eight Sundaye after Trinity.
226. b 51 The ninth Sundaye after Trinity. 231. a 52 The tenthe Sundaye after
Trinity. 236. a 53 The eleventh Sunday after Trinity. 241. a 54 The twelfth
Sunday after Trinity. 246. b 55 The thirtenth Sunday after Trinity. 251. b 56
The fourteenth Sundaye after Trinity. 257. a 57 The fifteenth Sunday after
Trinity. 262. b 58 The sixteenth Sunday after Trinity. 267. b 59 The
seventeenth Sunday after Trinity. 272. b 60 The eyghteenth Sundaye after
Trinity. 278. a 61 The ninteenthe Sundaye after Trinity. 283. a 62 The
twentieth Sunday after Trinity. 288. a 63 The.xxj. Sundaye after Trinity. 293.
b 64 The.xxij. Sundaye after Trinity. 299. a 65 The.xxiij. Sundaye after
Trinity. 304. a 66 The xxiiij. Sundaye after Trinity. 309. a 67 The.xxv.
Sundaye after Trinity. 314. a 68 The Purification of our Lady. 318. b 69 The
Annu^ciation of our Lady. 323. b 70 The Nativity of S. John Baptist. 328. a
71 The Visitation of our Lady. 332. b 72 Saint Michaell the Archangel. 337. a
73 The feast of all Saints. 341. b
To the Reader.
Forasmuch as this present work shall come too the hands of all men, as well
of the rudest, vnskilfullest, and vnlearnedst sort, that are utterly ignorant
of the Latin tongue, and of the right understanding of such words, as are taken
out of the Latin intoo English, for the more beautifying of our speech, and
better expressing of our minds: as too the hands of the skillful and learned
sort: I have added a brief declaration or exposition of certain of those
words used in this my Translation. Wherein as I seek and wish the
furtherance of the one sort, (for too read and not understand would do them
small pleasure:) so I desire the favorable acceptance of the other sort: whose
help and aid I gladly crave too the amendment and gentle interpreting of
such faults as have escaped either me in translating, or the Stacioner in
printing.

A
ABandon, too give over, too yield up, too leave or cast up, too forsake, too
put intoo the hand or power of an other man, too submit too an other man's will
or use. Absurdity, a thing clean contrary (or at least wise irksom) too
reason, such a thing as it greeueth a man too here it, irksomeness,
fondness. Accessorie, that which comes from elsewhere, an appurtenance that
is not properly or peculiarly belonging too a thing, that which naturally is no
part or member of a thing, and yet goes with it in such wise, as it may at
all times be separated from it without impayring the former condition, estate,
and nature of it. An accident or extraordinary. Administration, the manner of
disposing and ordering of things, as well in small matters, as in government
and great affairs. Admiration, woonderment or maruelling at a thing, high
commendation and praise given too any thing, reioycement or delight in a thing.
Admonition, admonishment, warning, inkling, foretelling of any thing. Advocate,
a spokesman, a counselor, such a one as by his advise and travel aydeth and
comfort a man in his need. Affected, minded, disposed, inclined,
affectioned. Aggrauate, too make heinous, too set out too the vttermoste, too
burden a man with a thing, too lay sore too ones charge. Allegory, is a
Sentence or Oration, importing in it a meening diverse or strange from the
common sense of the words, and it is as it were a continual Metaphor. Look
Metaphor. Aliaunce, kindred that comes in by marriage, and by a Metaphor, it is
the linking, knitting, or joining of folks wills and consents toogither in
any thing. Apprehended, too lay hold upon a thing, too take hold of a thing,
too catch a thing, too attein too a thing. Ardent, fervent, burning, glowing,
hot, earnest, unfeigned. Authentical, that which is of authority, that
which caryeth a weight, estimation, or majesty, substanciall, effectual,
aucthorized, allowed.
B
BArbarous, is pro^^rly he that is not a Greek or a Roman, which name is now
applied too any that is in conditions and manners rude, feerce, cruel,
uncivil, unnurtured, or in speech gross, unlearned, harshe, vneloquent. Also
it signifies an Alient, Forreyner, or Stranger borne. Benefactour, any body
that bestows a good turn, pleasure, benefit or friendship upon us.
C
Calamity, proprelye a laying of Corn by excess of wind and soul weather,
and by a Metaphore, also it signifies any manner of great trouble,
affliction, adversity, or misery that overthrows a man or brings him
under foot. Celebrate, too set forth, too publishe, too solemnize, too utter,
too declare, or too do a thing with praise, devotion, reverence, pomp, or
ioyfulnesse. Centurion, a Captain of a hundred men. Circumstance, a far
fetch or windlasse in a matter, a thing that comprehends matters in it. Also
the large setting out of a thing by his several members and particulars. A
going about the bushe. Circumstant, things that are about us, things that beset
or be seege us, things that enuyron and hem us in on all sides, things always
conuersaunt and at hand with us, things that accompany us. Civility,
courtesy, good behavior, honest conversation, comely and gentle behavior.
Communion, felloweship, partaking, partnership, company, use or enjoying of a
thing in common. Also the uniting or knitting toogither of diverse persons as
it were in one league and bond of aliance, as well by inseparable consent of
will and affection of mind, as by outward conversation and trade of life.
Consecrated, hallowed, made holy, put or appointed too a holy use, assigned too
the service of God. Constancy, a steadfast and continual sticking too the
truth, and an immovable abiding in all goodness. It is contrary too wavering.
Contrite, broosed or broken, as things are brayed in a morfer. Thereof comes
Contrition, which is an inward remorse with an earneste sorrow and grief of
mind for sin, or for offending God. Convince, too prove a thing
substancially, evidently and plainly: too overcome by manifest and apparent
reason: too show a thing by such effectual and open arguments, that the very
adversary may not be able too gainsay it. Cross, is put for any persecution,
affliction, trouble, loss, hinderance, disease of body, or disquyetnesse of
mind. Curiosity, an ouermuche carfulness, or inquisitiveness in other
men's matters. He that is infected with this vice, Paul terms a Busybody.
Curiousness, is an ouermuche preciseness in a man's own doings.
D
DElusion, or Illusion, Mockery, mockage, a deceitful thing, and whatsoever
bleareth men's eyes that they cannot discern the truth. Demonstration, a
pointing too a thing with the finger, a setting forth of a thing too the eye,
an open, plain, and manifest showing of a thing. Deprave, too mar, too
corrupt, too infect, too stain, too defile. Distinguishe, too put a difference
between things; too separate intoo parts or members, too disseuer, too
divide. Durable, longlasting, of long continuance, that which endures well,
that which is able too hold out.
E
EXclude, too shut out, put out, thruste out, or keep out.
F
Felicity, happiness, blissednesse, blissfulness, the full and perfect state
of being well, the full fruition or enjoying of God and all good things.
Figurate, too signify or pretend a thing after a covert and dark manner, too
shadow or represent, too meene or betoken, too employ or purporte, too bear
the Image or likeness of a thing, too counterfeit.
G
Glory, is a renowned and universal report of woorthynesse, purchased by
deserts of many great benefits and good turns. Glorify, too give glory,
honor, praise, or commendation too any body, or too maintain the good name,
honor, and estimation of a body. Also too bring too everlasting bliss and
heavenly felicity.
H
HAbitation, a dwelling place. Hypocrite, is such a one as in outward
apparel, countenance, or behauioure, pretends too be another man than he is
in deed, such a one as counterfetteth himself too be holy or rightuous, and
is not. Honor, is the estimation that is given by agreeable judgment and
consent of good men too any body in commendation and reward of his singular
virtues.
I
IMpediments, lets, hindrances, stoppes. Incest, unlawful copulation of man
and woman within the degrees of kindred or aliance forbidden by Gods law,
whyther it be in marriage, or otherwise. Incorporate, too grafte one thing
intoo the body of an other, too make one body or substance of two, or mo, too
mixed or put toogither. Incur, too run intoo. Infallible, vndeceyuable, that
which will not deceive, nor can be beguyled, vnguileful, vndeceitful,
deceitlesse, sure, certain, assured, soothfast. Institute, too begin, too go
in hand with a thing, too ordeine, too purpose, too appoint, too make, too
found, too stablishe, too decree, too set up a new, too bring in a new.
Interpret, expound, open, make plain and manifest too an other man's
understanding, too show the sense or meening of a thing. Also too accept or
take the meaning of a thing in good or ill part. Iunocation, is a calling upon
any thing with trust in the same. It consists of two parts, that is too
wit, of prayer and thanksgiving. Iustisied, found rightuous, made rightuous,
accounted or accepted for rightuous, that is too say, free and clear from sin
or set free from sin and the penalties thereof.
M
MAgistrates, are all Princes, Rulers, Governors, or Officers placed in
authority by God, or by the souerein of any common weal. Majesty, the
stately port and honorable renown of any Prince, people, superior, or
souereine: and the comely and beautiful grace of any thing that is excellent.
Matrone, an ancient, sober, and discreet woman, that either has, or has had
children, such a one as for her sad behavior deserves too be called a
mootherly woman. Mediation, the earnest minding or thinking upon a thing, the
often consideration and musing upon a thing, mindfulnesse, study. Metaphor, is
the putting over of a word from his proper and natural signification to a
foreign or improper signification. As Fol. 62. where the world is termed a
field, Christ a seedman, and his word the seed: in which speeches, the
words field, seedman, and seed, importe other things than their proper
signification yields. Minister, a servant that is always at hand, or that is
ready too put his hand too all things. It is a name sitly given too the
Clergy, as which puts them or ought too put them continually in mind of
their duty and calling, which is too be servants of God and his Congregation,
and not Lords ne servants of the flesh, the world, and the Devil. Moral,
perteyning too manners, behavior, conversation, and life among men. Mystery,
a secret or hid thing, ye understanding and knowledge whereof passes the
capacity of common reason too teach unto.
O
ORacle, an answer or saying of God, or of a Prophet in Gods name, such as is
certain and infallible.
P
PArable, is an applying of some thing that has no life or no body, too our
matter, fitly alleged for some likelynesse or vnlikelinesse which it has too
our purpose. Particularitie, is the restrayning of the largeness of Chrysts
benefits (which are offered generally too all men) unto a feawe: And it is
properly the occasion of falling which as well the wilful as the weak do take
by miswresting or by misunderstanding the doctrine of Election and
predestination. Pastort, Shepherds, a name aptly applied too the Ministers and
Curates of Chrysts church, whereby they are put in mind too feed their flocks
with Gods word and Sacraments and good example of life. Perplexity, anguish,
distresses, (according too our English proverb) a pecke of troubles. When men
be so snarled and entangled, that they wot not which way too wind them
selves out, or what way too turn them. Pomp, the countenancing of things in
furniture and setting forth too the outward show. Prefigurate, covertly,
darkly or slightly too foretoken, foreshew, import, shadow, or represent a
thing too come. Preposterously, aukly, frowardly, ouerthwartly, untowardly,
vndaftly, setting the cart before the horses, arsiuersie, topsiteruie.
Privation, the utter taking away, voydance, or bereeuing of a thing, so as it
have no more being. Prohibition, a forbidding, a forwarning, a forfending, a
commandment or law restrayning a man from doing a thing. Propiciation,
procurement of mercy, forgiveness, atonement and favor. Propiciatorie, that
which reconcileth, or which purchases mercy, forgiveness, atonement, and
favor. Also it is put for the mercy seat. Proposition, a ground or foundation
in a sentence or oration, whereupon too build, dilate, argue, gather and
conclude the matter. Also it is sometime put for the full effect, conteint,
purport, and meening of a sentence or matter. Purify, too purge, too cleanse,
too make clean, too make pure, too skowre.
R
REgeneration, or new birth is when by being washed outwardly by Baptim, and
clenzed inwardly from sin by the woorking of the holy Ghost, we are graffed
intoo Christ, and made the children of God, and heirs of his heavenly
kingdom. Renegate, is he that renounceth or forsakes his profession: as when
a Protestant becomes a Papist. A Turncote. Reprobate, a castaway, a forlorn
person. Also a froward, perverse, wilful and obstinate person, such a one as
is given up too his own wickedness, and hardened in his wilfulness, and so
consequently past grace.
S
Sacrilege, is properly the stealing of Holy things, or of things dedicated
and appointed too a holy use, or the stealing of things out of a holy or
hallowed place. And so by a manner of speech, it is any spiteful or contemptuous
fact done too the derogation of Gods glory or the breach of Religon, and is
as it were high treason too God. Sanctify, too halow, too make holy, too keep
holy: whereof comes Sanctification, which is halowing, making holy, or
holiness. As Christ is our Sanctification, that is to say, Christ is our
holiness, or the thing that makes us holy. Salvation, soulehealth, or rather
perfect bliss, heavenly joy, and everlasting welfare both of body and soul.
Or it is the clear deliverance and free saving of us from sin, death, hell,
the Devil, and damnation, by Jesus Christ. Satisfaction, is a making of amends
for misdeeds, displesures, or wrongs done, too the full contentation of the
party that was grieved. Secular, worldly, of the world. Society, fellowship,
company. Solemnize, too do a thing with great pomp, reverence, or devotion.
Sincere, pure, clean, vncorrupt, unmingled, undefiled, unfeigned, unstained,
void of guile, void of craft, sweet, sound, upright.
T
TAbernacle, a Tent, Hall, or Pauilion, such as men of war pitch in the fields
too lie in. Testimonies, witnessings, witness bearings, records, depositions.
Throne, a Kings seat or chair of estate, a seege Royal. Tumult, uproar,
hurlyburly, commotion, insurrection. Type, a figure, shadow, sign, toke^,
representation, or Image of a thing too come.
V
Unite, too make one thing of two or mo, too cupple, to knit too join
toogither. Vocation, or calling is that estate, degree, or trade of life too
which any man is allotted, either by birth, by commandment of God, by
appoyntmente of the Magistrate, by opportunity of time, or by necessity.
FINIS.
It is too be noted, that the two miles mentioned in the.131. leaf of the
first side and.22. line, are dutch miles which make of our English miles,
seven miles and a half.

Also it is too be noted, that the author of this woork deuideth the Table of
the ten commandments in such wise as that he puts the fifth
commandment intoo the first Table under the name of the fourth, and begins
the second Table with the sixth commandment, which is of prohibiting
murder, which he accounts as fifth in order, proceeding after the same
manner unto the last commandment, which he deuideth intoo two
commandments, contrary too the usual order and account of our Church.



Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman dwelling in Knightrider street, at the
sign of the Marmayde: for Lucas Harrison and George Bishop.

Anno Domini. 1569.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


