HELS Torments: and HEAVENS Glory.

Printed by Adam Islip for George Loftus, and are to be sold at his shop in
Popes head alley. 1601.

To the Reader.
THe present careless security of all men in general, is like unto our first
parents neglect of Gods sacred commandment in Paradise, when the seducing
serpent no sooner persuaded evil, but it was instantly put in practice: You
shall die (said God) was heard, but you shall not die (said the devil) was
believed. Our ears are daily acquainted with the threatenings of God denounced
against sinners, and yet that sin, that broad waypath and high way to hell,
is attempted with a delectation and pleasure, so crastie and subtle are the
baits and lures of the deceiver, and so void of spiritual wisdom is the
soule-murdering sinner. But if due consideration were had of the wages of
sin, and the reward of unrighteousness, and to what bitterness it will
turn in the end, it would make us less bold to sin, and more fearful to
offend, if we would take into our company for a daily consort, the pale
memory of death, and whereto he summoneth us after this life. Death in it
self is very fearful, but much more terrible, in regard of the judgment it
warns us unto. Imagine to see a sinner lie on his departing bed, burdened and
tired with the greevous and heavy load of all his former trespasses, goared
with the sting and prick of a festered conscience, feeling the crampe of death
w^esting at his heart strings, ready to make the ruthful divorce between
soul and body, panting for breath, and swimming in a cold and fatal sweat,
wearied with struggling against the deadly pangs: Oh how much would he give for
an hour of repentance! at what rate would he value a days contrition! Then
worlds would be worthless, in respect of a little respite, a short truce
would seem more precious than the treasures of Empires, nothing would be so
much esteemed as a moment of time, which now by months and years is lavishly
spent.

How inconsolable were his case, his friends being fled, his senses frighted,
his thoughts amazed, his memory decayed, his whole mind aghast, and no part
able to perform that it should, but only his guilty conscience pestered with
sin, continually upbraiding him with bitter accusations? what would he
think when (stripped out of this mortal weed, and turned both out of the
service and houseroume of this world) he must pass before a most severe
Judge, carrying in his own conscience his enditement written, and a perfect
register of all his misdeeds: when he should see the Judge prepared to pass
the sentence against him, and the same to be his Vmpire, whom by so many
offenses he has made his enemy: When not only the devils, but even the
Angels, should plead against him, and himself maugre his will, be his own
sharpest appeacher: What were to be done in these dreadful exigents?

When he saw that ghastly dungeon and huge goulfe of hell, breaking out with
fearful flames, the weeping, houling, and gnash^ng of teeth, the rage of all
those hellish monsters, the horror of the place, the rigor of the pain, the
terror of the company, and the eternity of all those punishments. Would you
think them wise that would dally in so weighty matters, and idly play away
the time allotted them to prevent these intolerable calamities? Would you then
account it secure, to nu^se in your bosom so many ougly serpents as sins
are, or to foster in your soul so many malicious accusers, as mortal faults
are?

Would you not then think one life too little to repent for so many
iniquities, every one whereof, were enough to cast you into those everlasting
and unspeakeable torments? Why then do we not (at the least) devote that
small remnaunt of these our latter days, to the making an atonement with God,
that our consciences may be free from this eternal danger? Who would rely
the everlasting affairs of the life to come, upon the gliding* slipperinesse,
and running stream of our uncertain life?

It is a preposterous policy (in any wise conceit) to fight against God till
our weapons be blunted, our forces consumed, our lims impotent, and our best
spent; and then when we fall for faintness, and have sought ourselves almost
dead, to presume on his mercy. It were a strange piece of art, and a very
exorbitant course, while the ship is sound, the Pylote well, the mariners
strong, the gale favorable, and the sea calm, to lie idle at rode: and when
the ship leakes, the Pylote were sick, the mariners faint, the storms
boisterous, and the sea turmoyled with surges, to launch forth for a voyage
into a far country: yet such is the skill of our evening repenters, who
though in the soundness of health, and in the perfect use of reason, they
cannot resolve to weigh the ankers that withold them from God, nevertheless,
feed themselves with a strong persuasion, that when their senses are astonished,
their wits distracted, their understanding dusked, and both body and mind
racked and tormented with the throbs and gripes of a mortal sickness, then
will they think of the weightiest matters, and become Saints, when they are
scarce able to behave themselves like reasonable creatures? being then
presumed to be less than men: for how can he that is assaulted with an
unsettled conscience, distrained with the wringing fits of his dying flesh,
maimed in all his abilities, and circled in with so strange encombrances, be
thought of due discretion to dispose of his cheifest jewel, which is his
soul? No, no, they that will loiter in seed time, and begin then to sow when
others begin to reap: they that will royot out their health, and cast their
accounts when they can scarsely speak: they that will slumber out the day, and
enter their journey when the light does fail them, let them blame their own
sollic, if they die in debt, and eternal beggerie, and fall beadlong into the
lapse of endless perdition.

Great cause have we then to have an hourly watchful care over our soul,
being so dangerous assaulted and environed: most insta^tly entreating the
divine Majesty to be our assured defense, and let us pass the day in
mourning, the night in watching and weeping, and our whole time in plain^ull
lamenting, falling down upon the ground humbled in sacke-cloth and ashes,
having lost the garment of Christ, that he may receive what the persecuting
enemy would have spoiled, every short sigh will not be a sufficient
satisfaction, nor every knock a warrant to get in. Many shall cry Lord, Lord,
and shall not be accepted: the foolish Virgins did knock, but were not
admitted: Judas had some sorrow, and yet died desperate. For sl^w not (says the
holy Ghost) to be converted unto God, and make not a daily lingering of thy
repair unto him: for thou shall find the suddainenesse of his wrath and
revenge not slack to destroy sinners. For which cause, let no man soiourne
long in sinful security, or post over his repentance until fear enforce
him to it, but let us frame our premises as we would find our conclusion,
endeavoring to live as we are desirous to die: let us not offer the maine
crop to the devil, and set God to gleane the reproof of his harvest: let us
not gorge the Devil with our fairest fruits, and turn God to the filthy
scrapes of his leavings: but let us truly dedicate both soul and body to his
service, whose right they are, and whose service they owe; that so in the
evening of our life we may retire to a Christian rest, closing up the day of
our life with a clear sunne-set, that leaving all darkness behind us, we may
carry in our consciences the light of grace^* and so escaping the horror of
an eternal night, pass from a mortal day, to an everlasting morrow:*

Farewell*
STrike sail, poor soul, in sins tempestuous tide,
That runst to ruin and eternal wrack:
Thy course from heaven is exceeding wide,
Hels gulf thou ent'rest, if grace guide not back:
Satan is Pilot in this navigation,
The Ocean, sin; the rock, hell and damnation.
War with the dragon, and his whole alliance,
Renounce his league, intends thy utter loss;
Take in sins flag of truce, set out defiance,
Display Christ's ensign with the bloody cross:
Against a Faith-proofe armed Christian knight,
The hellish coward dares not manage fight.
Resist him then, if thou will victor be,
For so he flees, and is disanimate;
His fiery darts can have no force at thee,
The shield of faith does all their points rebate:
He conquers none to his infernal den,
But yielding slaves, that wage not fight like men.
Those in the dungeon of eternal dark,
He has enthralled everlasting date,
Branded with Reprobations cole-blacke mark,
Within the neveropening ramd up gate:
Where Dives rates one drop of water more
Than any crown that ever monarch wore.
Where furies haunt the harttorne wretch, despair,
Where clamours cease not, teeth are ever gnashing,
Where wrath and vengeance sit in horrors chair,
Where quenchlesse flames of sulphur fire be flashing,
Where damned souls blaspheme God in despite,
Where utter darkness stands removed from light.
Where plagues inviron, torments compass round,
Where anguish rores in never stinted sorrow,
Where woe, woe, woe, is every voices sound,
Where night eternal never yields tomorrow:
Where damned tortures dreadful shall persever,
So long as God is God, so long is ever:
Finis:
Of the punishments which our Lord threateneth unto such as live a sinful life.
ONe of the principal means that our Lord has used oftentimes to bridle the
hearts of men, and to draw them unto the obedience of his commandments, has
been, to set before their eyes the horrible plagues and punishments that are
prepared for such persons as be rebels and transgressors of his law. For
although the hope of the rewards that are promised unto the good in the life to
come, may moove us very much hereunto: yet are we commonly more moved with
things that be irksome unto us, than with such as be pleasant: even as we
see by daily experience, that we are vexed more with an injury done unto us,
than delighted with any honor, and we are more troubled with sickness, than
comforted with health: and so by the discommoditie of sickness, we come to
understand the commodity of health, as by a thing so much the better
perceived, by how much more it is sensibly felt. Now for this cause did our
Lord in times past use this mean more than any other, as it appears most
clearly by the writings of the Prophets, which are every where full of
dreadful sayings and threatenings, wherewith our Lord pretends to put a
terror into the hearts of men, and so to bridle and subdue them under the
obedience of his law. And for this end he commanded the prophet Jeremy, That
he should take a white book, and write in the same all the threatenings and
calamities which he had revealed unto him, even from the first day he began to
talk with him, until that present hour, and that he should read the same in
the presence of all the people, to see if peradventure they would be moved
therewith unto repentance, and to change their former life, to the end, that
he might also change the determination of his wrath, which he had purposed
to execute upon them. And the holy Scripture says, That when the Prophet had
done according as he was commanded by almighty God, and had read al those
threatenings in the presence of the people, and of the rulers; there arose such
a fear and terror amongst them, that they were all astonished, and as it were
bestraughted of their wits, looking one in another face, for the exceeding
great fear which they had conceived of those words. This was one of the
principal means which almighty God used with men in the time of the law
written, and so he did also in the time of the law of grace: in which, the
holy Apostle says, That as there is revealed a justice, whereby God makes men
just, so is there also revealed an indignation and wrath, whereby he punishes
the unjust: for which cause, S. John Baptist (the glorious forerunner of our
Savior Christ) was sent, with this commission and embassage to preach unto the
world, That the axe was now put to the root of the tree, and that every tree
that brought not forth good fruit, should be cut down and cast into the
fire. He said moreover, That there was another come into the world, more
mighty than he, that carried in his hand a fan, to winnow and cleanse
therewith his flower, and that he would put up the corn into his garner, but
the chafe he will burn in a fire that should never be quenched. This was
the preaching and embassage which the holy forerunner of our Savior Jesus
Christ brought into the world. And so great was the thunder of these words,
and the terror which entered into men's hearts, so dreadful, that there ran
unto him of all estates and conditions of men, even of the very Pharisees and
Publicanes, yea, and soldiers also (which of all others are wont to be most
dis solute, and to have least care of their consciences*) and each of them
demanded for himself particularly of that holy man, what he should do to
attain unto salvation, and to escape those terrible threatenings which he had
denounced unto them, so great was the fear they had conceived of them.

And this is that (dear Christian brother) which I do at this present (in the
behalf of almighty God) deliver unto thee, although not with such fervencie of
spirit and like holiness of life, yet that which imports more in this case,
with the same truth and certainetie; for so much as the faith and Gospel which
S. John Baptist then preached, is even the same now taught.

Now, if thou be desirous to understand in few words, how great the punishment
is, that almighty God has threatened in his holy Scriptures to the wicked,
that which may most breefely and most to the purpose be spoken in this matter,
is this: That like as the reward of the good is an universal good thing, even
so the punishment of the wicked is an universal evil, which comprehends in
it all the evils that are. For the better understanding whereof, it is to be
noted, That all the evils of this life are particular evils, and therefore do
not torment all our senses generally, but only one, or some of them. As taking
an example of the diseases of our body, we see, that one has a disease in
his eyes, another in his ears: one is ficke in the heatr, another in the
stomach, some other in his head. And so diverse men are diseased in diverse
parts of the body; howbeit, in such wise, that none of all these diseases be
generally throghout all the members of the body, but particular to some one of
them. And yet for all this, we see what grief only one of these diseases may
put us unto, and how painful a night the sick man has in any one of these
infirmities, yea, although it be nothing else but a little ach in one tooth.
Now let us put the case, that there were some one man sick of such an
universal disease, that he had no part of his body, neither any one joint or
sense free from his proper pain, but that at one time and instant he suffered
most exceeding sharp torment in his head, in his eyes, and ears, in his
teeth, and stomach, in his liver and heart: and to be short, in all the rest
of his members and joints of his body, and that he lay after this sort
stretching himself in his bed, being pained with these greefes and torments,
every member of his body having his particular torment and grief: He (I
say) that should lie thus pained and afflicted, how great torment and grief of
mind and body (think ye) should he sustain? Oh, what thing could any man
imagine more miserable, and more worthy of compassion? Surely, if thou
should see but a dog to be so tormented and greeved in the street, his
very pains would move thy heart to take pity upon him. Now this is that (my
dear Christian brother, if any comparison may be made between them) which is
suffered in that most cursed and horrible place of hell, and not only during
for the space of one night, but everlastingly, for ever and ever. For like as
the wicked men have offended Almighty God with all their members and senses,
and have made armor of them all to serve sin, even so will he ordain, that
they shall be there tormented every one of them with his proper torment.

There shall the wanton unchaste eyes be tormented with the terrible sight of
devils: the ears with the confusion of such horrible cries and lamentations
which shall there be heard: the nose with the intolerable stink of that
ougly, filthy, and loathsome place: the taste, with a most ravenous hunger and
thirst: the touching, and all the members of the body with extreme burning
fire. The imagination shall be tormented by the conceiving of greefes present:
the memory, by calling to mind the pleasures past: the understanding, by
considering what benefits are lost, and what endless miseries are to come.

This multitude of punishments the holy scripture signifies unto us, when it
says, Math. 15. Psalm. 10. That in hell there shall be hunger, thirst,
weeping, wail^ng, gnashing of teeth, swords double edged, spirits created for
revengement, serpents, worms, scorpions, hammers, wormwood, water of gall, the
spirit of tempest, and other things of like sort. Whereby are signified unto us
(as in a figure) the multitude and dreadful terror of the most horrible
torments and pains that be in that cursed place. There shall be likewise
darkness inward and outward, both of body and soul, far more obscure than
the darkness of Egypt, which was to be felt even with hands, Exo. 20. There
shall be fire also, not as this fire here, that tormenteth a little, and
shortly ends, but such a fire as that place requires, which tormenteth
exceedingly, and shall never make an end of that tormenting. This being true,
what greater wonder can there be, than that they which believe and confess
this for truth, should live with such most strange negligence and carelessness
as they do? What travel and pains would not a man willingly take to escape
even one only day, yea, one hour, the very least of these torments? and
wherefore do they not then, to escape the everlastingnesse of so great pains
and horrible torments, endure so little a travel, as to follow the exercise of
virtue. Surely, the consideration of this matter were able to make any sinful
soul to fear and tremble, in case it were deeply regarded.

And if amongst so great number of pains, there were any manner hope of end or
release, it would be some kind of comfort: but alas it is not so, for there the
gates are fast shut up from all expectation of any manner of ease or hope. In
all kind of pains and calamities that be in this world, there is alwais some
gap lying open, whereby the patient may receive some kind of comfort: sometimes
reason, sometimes the weather, sometimes his friends, sometimes the hearing
that others are troubled with the very same disease, and sometimes (at the
least) the hope of an end may cheer him somewhat: only in these most horrible
pains and miseries that be in hell, all the ways are shut up in such sort, and
all the havens of comfort so embarred, that the miserable sinner cannot hope
for remedy on any side, neither of heaven, nor of earth, neither of the time
past, or present, or of the time to come, or of any other means. The damned
souls think, that all men are shooting darts at them, and that all creatures
have conspired against them, and that even they themselves are cruel against
themselves. This is that distress whereof the sinners do lament by the
Prophet, saying: The sorrows of hell have compassed me round about, and the
snares of death has besieged me: For on which side soever they look or turn
their eyes, they do continually behold occasions of sorrow and grief, and
none at all of any ease or comfort. The wise virgins (says the Evangelist)
that stood ready prepared at the gate of the bridegroom, entered in, and the
gate was forthwith locked fast. O locking everlasting, o enclosure immortal,
o gate of all goodness, which shall never any more be opened again. As if he
had said more plainly, the gate of pardon, of mercy, of comfort, of grace, of
intercession, of hope, and of all other goodness, is shut up for ever and
ever. Six days and no more was Manna to be gathered, but the seventh day,
which was the Sabbath day, was there none to be found: and therefore shall he
fast forever, that has not in due time made his provision aforehand. The
sluggard (says the wise man) will not till his ground for fear of cold, and
therefore shall he beg his bread in summer, and no man shall give him to eat.
And in another place he says: He that gathers in summer, is a wise son,
but he that gives himself to sleeping at that season, is the son of
confusion. For what confusion can there be greater than that which that
miserable covetous rich man suffers, who with a few crumbs of bread that fell
from his table, might have purchased to himself abundance of everlasting
felicity, and glory in the kingdom of heaven? But because he would not give
so small a thing, he came to such an extreme necessity that he begged (yea,
and shall for ever beg in vain) only one drop of water, and shall never
obtain it. Who is not moved with that request of that unfortunate damned
person, who cried, O father Abraham have compassion on me, and send down
Lazarus unto me, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and touch my
tongue, for th^se horrible flames do torment me exceedingly. What smaller
request could there be desired than this? He durst not request so much as one
cup of water, neither, that Lazarus should put his whole hand into the water,
nor yet (which is more to be wondered at) did he request so much as the whole
finger, but only the tip of it, that it might but touch his tongue; and yet
even this alonely would not be granted unto him. Whereby thou may perceive,
how fast the gate of all consolation is shut up, and how universal that
interdict and excommunication is, that is there laid upon the damned, since this
rich glutton could not obtain so much as this small request. So that
wheresoever the damned persons do turn their eyes, and on which side soever
they stretch their hands, they shall not find any manner of comfort, be it
never so small. And as he that is in the sea choked, and almost drowned under
the water, not finding any stay whereupon to set his foot, stretches forth his
hands oftentimes on every side in vain (because all that he graspeth after,
is thin and liquid water, which deceives him) even so shall it fare with the
damned persons, when they shall be drowned in that deep sea of so many
miseries, where they shall strive and strug*gle always with death, without
finding any succor or place of stay, whereupon they may rest themselves. Now
this is one of the greatest pains wherewith they be tormented in that cursed
place: for if these torments should have their continuance li^ mitted but for a
certain time, though it were for a thousand, yea, a hundred thousand millions
of years, yet even this would be some little comfort unto them, for nothing is
perfectly great, in case it have an end: But alas, they have not so much as
this poor and miserable comfort: but contrariwise, their pains are equal in
continuance with the eternity of almighty God, and the lasting of their
misery with the eternity of Gods glory. As long as almighty God shall live,
so long shall they die: and when Almighty God shall cease to be God, then
shall they also cease to be as they are. O deadly life, o immortal death! I
know not whether I may truly term thee, either life or death: for if thou be
life, why do thou kill? And if thou be death, why do thou endure?
Wherefore I will call thee neither the one, nor the other, for so much as in
both of them there is contained something that is good: as in life there is
rest, and in death there is an end (which is a great comfort to the afflicted)
but thou have neither rest not end. What art thou then? Marry, thou art the
worst of life, and the worst of death; for of death thou have the torment,
without any end, and of life thou have the continuance without any rest O
bitter composition, o unsavorie purgation of our Lords cup! of the which, all
the sinners of the earth shall drink their part.

Now in this continuance in this eternity, I would wish that thou (my dear
Christian brother) would fix the eyes of thy consideration a little while:
and that as the clean beast cheweth the cud, even so thou would weigh this
point within thy self with great deliberation. And to* the intent thou may
do it the better, consider a little the pains that a sick man abides in one
evil night, especially if he be vexed with any vehement grief, or sharp
disease. Mark how often he tumbleth and tosseth in his bed, what disquietnes he
has, how long and tedious one night seems unto him, how duly he counts
all the hours of the clock, and how long he deemeth each hour of them to
be, how he passes the time in wishing for the dawning of the day; which
notwithstanding, is like to help him, little toward the curing of his
disease. If this then be accounted so great a torment, what torment shall that
be (trowyee) in that everlasting night in hell, which has no morning, nor so
much as any hope of any dawning of the day? O darkness most obscure! o night
everlasting! o night accursed even by the mouth of almighty God and all his
Saints! That one shall wish for light, and shall never see it, neither shall
the brightness of the morning arise any more. Consider then what a kind of
torment shall that be, to live everlastingly in such a night as this is, lying
not in a soft bed (as the sick man does) but in a hot burning furnace,
foming out such terrible raging flames. What shoulders shall be able to abide
those horrible heats. If it seem to us as a thing intolerable to have only
some part of our feet standing upon a pan of burning coals, for the space of
repeating the Lords prayer, What shall it be (think you) to stand body and
soul burning in the midst of those everlasting hot raging fires in hell, in
comparison of which, the fires of this world are but painted fires. Is there
any wit or judgment in this world? Have men their right senses? do they
understand what these words import? or are they peradventure persuaded, that
these are only the fables of Poets? or do they think, that this appertains
not to them, orels that it was only meant for others? None of all this can
they say, for so much as our faith assures us most certainly herein. And our
Savior Christ himself, who is everlasting truth, cries out in his Gospel,
saying, Heaven and earth shall fail, but my word shall not fail.

Of this misery there follows another as great as it, which is, that the
pains are always continuing in one like degree, without any manner of
intermission, or decreasing. All manner of things that are under the cope of
heaven, do moove and turn round about with the same heaven, and do never
stand still at one state or being, but are continually either ascending or
descending. The sea and the rivers have their ebbing and flowing, the times,
the ages, and the mutable fortune of men, and of kingdoms, are evermore in
continual motion. There is no fever so fervent, that does not decline,
neither grief so sharp, but that after it is much augmented, it does
forthwith decrease. To be short, all the tribulations and miseries are by
little and little worn away with time, and as the common saying is, Nothing is
sooner dried up than tears. Only that pain in hell is always green, only
that fever never decreaseth, only that extremity of heat knows not what is
either evening or morning. In the time of Noah's flood, Almighty God rained
forty days and forty nights, continually without ceasing upon the earth, and
this sufficed to drown the whole world. But in that place of torment in hell,
there shall rain everlasting vengeance, and darts of fury upon that cursed
land, without ever ceasing so much as one only minute or moment. Now what
torment can be greater, and more to be abho^^^d, than continually to suffer
after one like manner, without any kind of alteration or change? Though a meat
be never so delicate, yet in case we feed continually thereupon, it will in
very short time be very loathsome unto us: for no meat can be more precious and
delicat than that Manna was, which almighty God sent down unto the children
of Israel in the desert, and yet because they did eat continually thereof, it
made them to loath it, yea, and provoked them to vomit it up again. The way
that is all plain (they say) wearieth more than any other* because alwais the
variety (yea even in punishment) is a kind of comfort. Tell me then, if things
that be pleasant and savorie, when they be always after one manner, are an
occasion of loathsomenesse and pain: what kind of loathsomeness will that be
which shall be caused by those most horrible pains and torments in hell,
which do continue everlastingly after one like sort? What will the damned and
cursed creatures think, when they shall there see themselves so utterly
abhorred and forsaken of almighty God, that he will not so much as with the
remission of any one sin, mitigate somewhat their torments. And so great shall
the fury and rage be which they shall there conceive against him, that they
shall never cease continually to curse and blaspheam his holy name. Unto all
these pains, there is also added the pain of that everlasting consumer, to wit,
the worm of conscience, whereof the holy Scripture makes so oftentimes
mention, saying, Their worm shall never die, and their fire shall never be
quenched. This worm is a furious raging despite and bitter repentance,
without any fruit, which the wicked shall alwais have in hell, by calling to
their remembrance the opportunity and time they had whiles they were in this
world, to escape those most greevous and horrible torments, and how they would
not use the benefit thereof. And therefore when the miserable sinner sees
himself thus to be tormented and vexed on every side, and does call to mind
how many days and years he has spent idly in vanities, pastimes, and
pleasures; and how oftentimes he was advertised of this peril, and how little
regard he took thereof: What shall he think? What anguish and sorrow shall
there be in his heart? Have thou not read in the Gospel, that there shall be
weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth? The famine of Egypt endured only
seven years, but that in hell shall endure everlastingly. In Egypt they found
a remedy, though with great difficulty and charge, but for this, there shall
never any remedy be found. Theirs was redeemed with money and cattle, but
this can never be redeemed with any manner of exchange. This punishment cannot
be pardoned, this pain cannot be exchaunged, this sentence cannot be
revoked. Oh, if thou knew and would consider, how every one condemned to
hell, shall there remain tormenting and renting himself, weeping, and wailing,
and saying: O miserable and unfortunate wretch that I am, what times and
oportunities have I suffered to pass in vain? A time there was, when with one
cup of cold water I might have purchased to my self a crown of glory, and
when also with such necessary works of mercy in releeving the poor, I might
have gained life everlasting. Wherefore did I not look before me? How was I
blinded with things present? How did I let pa^^^ the fruitful years of
abundance, and did not enrich my self? If I had been brought up amongst
Infidels and Pagans, and had believed that there had been nothing else but only
to be borne, and to die, then might I have had some kind of excuse, and might
have said, I knew not what was commanded or prohibited me: but for so much as I
have lived amongst Christians, and was my self one of them professed, and held
it for an article of my belief, that the hour should come when I should give
up an account after what order I had spent my life: for so much also as it was
daily cried out unto me by the continual preaching and teaching of Gods
ambassadors (whose advertisements many following, made preparation in time,
and labored earnestly for the provision of good works:) for so much I say as I
made light of all these examples, and persuaded my self very fondly, that
heaven was prepared for me, though I took no pains for it at all: what deserve
I that have thus led my life? O ye infernal furies, come and rent me in
pieces, and devour these my bowels, for so have I justly deserved, I have
deserved eternal famishment, seeing I would not provide for my self while I
had time. I deserve not to reap, because I have not sown; I am worthy to be
destitute, because I have not laid up in store; I deserve that my request
should now be denied me, since when the poor made request unto me, I refused
to releeve them: I have deserved to sigh and lament so long as God shall be
God; I have deserved, that this worm of conscience shall gnaw mine entrails
for ever and ever, by representing unto me the little pleasure that I have
enjoied, and the great felicity which I have lost, and how far greater that
was which I might have gained, by forgoing that little which I would not
forgo. This is that immortal worm that shall never die, but shall lie there
everlastingly gnawing at the entrails of the wicked, which is one of the most
terrible pains that can possibly be imagined.

Peradventure thou art now persuaded (good Reader) that there can be added no
more unto this, than has been said. But surely the mighty arm of God
wants not force to chastise his enemies more and more: for all these pains
that are hitherto rehearsed, are such as do appertain generally to all the
damned: but besides these general pains, there are also other particular
pains, which each one of the damned shall there suffer in diverse sort,
according to the quality of his sin. And so according to this proportion,
the hautie and proud shall there be abased and brought low to their great
confusion. The covetous shall be driven to great necessity: the glutton shall
rage with continual hunger and thirst. The letcherous shall burn in the very
same flames which they themselves have enkindled. And those that have all their
life time hunted after their pleasures and pastimes, shall live therein
continual lamentation and sorrow. But because examples are of very great force
to moove our hearts, I will bring only one for this purpose, whereby somewhat
of this matter may the better be perceived. It is written of a certain holy
man, that he saw the pains (in spirit) of a licentious and worldly man in this
sort. First he saw how the devils that were present at the hour of his death,
when he yielded up his ghost, snatched away his soul with great rejoicing, and
made a present thereof to the prince of darkness, who was then sitting in a
chair of fire, expecting the coming of this present. Immediately after that it
was presented before him, he arose up out of his seat, and said unto the
damned soul that he would give him the pre-eminence of that honorable seat,
because he had been a man of honor, and was always very much affected to the
same. Inconti nently after that he was placed therein, crying and lamenting in
that honorable torment, there appeared before him two other most ougly devils,
and offered him a cup full of most bitter and stinking liquour, and made him to
drink and carouse it up all, perforce; saying, It is meet, sithence thou have
been a lover of precious wines and bankets, that thou should likewise prove
of this our wine, whereof all we do use to drink in these parts.

Immediately after this there came other two, with two fiery trumpets, and
setting them at his ears, began to blow into them flames of fire, saying, This
melody have we reserved for thee, understanding that in the world thou wast
very much delighted with minstrelcie and wanton songs: and suddenly he
espied other devils, laden with vipers and serpents, the which they threw upon
the breast and belly of that miserable sinner, saying unto him, that for so much
as he had been greatly delighted with the wanton embracings and letcherous
lusts of women, he should now sollace himself with these refreshings, in
stead of those licentious delights and pleasures, which he had enjoyed in the
world. After this sort (as the Prophet Esaias says in the 47 chapter) when the
sinner is punished, there is given measure for measure, to the end, that in
such a great variety and proportion of punishments, the order and wisdom of
Gods justice, might the more manifestly appear.

This vision has almighty God showed in spirit to this holy man for
advertisement and instruction, not that in hell these things are altogether so
materially done, but that by them we might understand in some manner the
variety and multitude of the pains which be there appointed for the damned.
Whereof, I know not how some of the Pagans have had a certain knowledge: for a
Poet speaking of this multitude of pains, affirmed, That although he had a
hundred mouths and as many tongues, with a voice as strong as iron, yet were
they not able only to express the names of them. A Poet he was that spoke
this, but truly therein he spoke more like a Prophet or an Evangelist than a
Poet. Now then, if all this evil shall most assuredly come to pass, what man
is he, that seeing all this so certainly with the eyes of his faith, will not
turn over the leaf, and begin to provide for himself against that time?
Where is the judgment of men now become? Where be their wits? yea, Where is
at the least their self-love, which seeks evermore for his own profit, and
is much afraid of any loss? May it be thought that men are become beasts, that
provide only for the time present? Or have they peradventure so dimmed their
eye sight, that they cannot look before them? Hearken (says Esaias) Oyee deaf
and ye blind, open your eyes that you may see, Who is blind but my servant?
And who is deaf but ye, unto whom I have sent my messengers? And who is blind,
but he that suffers himself to be sold for a slave? Thou that see so
many things, will thou not suffer thy self to see this? Thou that have thine
ears open, will thou not give ear hereunto? If thou believe not this, how art
thou then a Christian? If thou believe it, and do not provide for it, how
can thou be thought a reasonable man? Aristotle says, That this is the
difference between opinion and imagination, that an imagination alone is not
sufficient to cause a fear, but an opinion is: for if I do imagine that a
house may fall upon me, it is not enough to make me afraid, unless I believe
or have an opinion it will be so indeed: for then it is sufficient to make me
afraid. And hereof comes the fear that murderers always have, by reason of
the suspicion they conceive, that their enemies do lie in wait for them. If
then the opinion and only suspicion of danger is able to cause the greatest
courage to fear, how is it that the certainty and belief of so many and so
great terrible miseries (which are far more sure than any opinion) does not
make thee to sear. If thou perceivest, that for these many years past thou
have lead a licentious and sinful life, and that at the last, according to
present justice, thou art condemned to these horrible torments in hell: if also
there appear by probable conjecture, that there is no more likelihood of thy
amendment for ensuing years to come, than there was in those already past, how
happens it, that running headlong into so manifest a danger, thou art not at
all afraid? Especially, considering the sinful state wherein thou live, and
the horrible pains and torments which do attend for thee, and the time which
thou have lost, and the endless repentance which thou shall have therefore in
the most horrible torments of hell. Assuredly, it goes beyond the compass of
all common sense and conceit of humane reason, to consider, That there should
be such negligent, wilful, gross, and careless blindness, able to enter
and take such deep rooting in the soul of man.

WHo loves this life, from love his love does err,
And choosing dross, rich treasure does deny,
Leaving the pearl, Christ's counsels to prefer,
With selling all we have, the same to buy:
O happy soul, that does disburse a sum,
To gain a kingdom in the life to come.
Such traffic may be termed heavenly thrift,
Such venture has no hazard to dissuade
Immortal purchase, with a mortal gift,
The greatest gain that ever merchant made:
To get a crown where Saints and Angels sing,
For laying out a base and earthly thing.
To taste the joys no humane knowledge knows,
To hear the tunes of the celestial quires,
T'attaine heau'^^ sweet and mildest calm repose,
To se^ Gods face, the summ^ of good desires:
Which by his glorious saints i^ (...) ^yde,
Yet sigh* with seeing, never satisfide.
God as he is, sight beyond estimate,
Which angels tongues are untaught to discover,
Whose splendour does the heavens illustrate,
Unto which sight each sight becomes a lover:
Whom all the glorious court of heaven laud,
With praises of eternities applaud.
There where no tears are to interpret greeves,
Nor any sighs, heart dolours to expound,
There where no treasure as surprised by thieves,
Nor any voice that speaks with sorrows sound:
No use of passions, no distempered thought,
No spot of sin, no deed of error wrought.
The native home of pilgrim souls abod,
Rest's habitation, ioies true residence,
Ierusalem's new city built by God,
Formed by the hands of his own excellence:
With gold-pav'd streets, the walls of precious stone,
Where all sound praise to him sits on the throne.
Finis.
Of the glory of the blessed Saints in Heaven.
TO the end there might want nothing to stir up our minds to virtue, after the
pains which Almighty God threateneth to the wicked, he does also set before
us the reward of the good: which is, that glory and everlasting life which the
blessed Saints do enjoy in heaven, whereby he does very mightily allure us to
the love of the same. But what manner of thing this reward, and what this life
is, there is no tongue, neither of angels nor of men, that is sufficient to
express it. Howbeit, that we may have some kind of savor and knowledge
thereof, I intend here to rehearse even word for word, what S. Augustine says
in one of his meditations, speaking of the life everlasting (ensuing this
transitory time) and the joies of the blessed Saints in heaven. O life (says
he) prepared by almighty God for his friends, a blessed life, a secure life, a
quiet life, a beautiful life, a clean life, a chaste life, a holy life, a life
that knows no death, a life without sadness, without labor, without grief,
without trouble, without corruption, without fear, without variety, without
alteration, a life replenished with all beauty and dignity; where there is
neither enemy that can offend, nor delight that can annoy, where love is
perfect, and no fear at all, where the day is everlasting, and the spirit of
all is one: where almighty God is seen face to face, who is the only meat
whereupon they feed without lothsomnesse: it delights me to consider thy
brightness, and thy treasures do rejoice my longing heart. The more I consider
thee, the more I am stricken in love with thee. The great desire I have of
thee, does wonderfully delight me, and no less pleasure is it to me to keep
thee in my remembrance. O life most happy, o kingdom truly blessed, wherein
there is no death nor end, neither yet succession of time, where the day
continuing evermore without night, knows not any mutation; where the
victorious conqueror being joined with those everlasting quires of Angels, and
having his head crowned with a garland of glory, sings unto Almighty God
one of the songs of Syon. Oh happy, yea, and most happy should my soul be,
if when the race of this my pilgrimage is ended, I might be worthy to see thy
glory, thy blessedness, thy beauty, the walls and gates of thy city, thy
streets, thy lodgings, thy noble citizens, and thine omnipotent king in his
most glorious majesty. The stones of thy walls are precious, thy gates are
adorned with bright pearls, thy streets are of very fine excellent gold, in
which there never fail perpetual praises; thy houses are paved with rich
stones, wrought throghout with Zaphirs, and covered above with massy gold,
where no unclean thing may enter, neither does any abide there that is
defiled. Fair and beautiful in thy delights art thou o Jerusalem our mother,
none of those things are suffered in thee, that are suffered here. There is
great diversity between thy things and the things that we do continually see
in this life. In thee is never seen neither darkness nor night, neither yet
any change of time. The light that shines in thee, comes neither of lamps,
nor of Sun or Moon, nor yet of bright glittering stars, but God that
proceeds of God, and the light that comes of light, is he that gives
clearenesse unto thee. Even the very king of kings himself keeps continual
residence in the midst of thee, compassed about with his officers and
servants. There do the Angels in their orders and quires sing a most sweet and
melodious harmony. There is celebrated a perpetual solemnity and feast with
every one of them that comes thither, after his departure out of this
pilgrimage. There be the orders of Prophets; there is the famous company of
the Apostles; there is the invincible army of Martyrs; there is the most
reverent assembly of confessors; there are the true and perfect religious
persons; there are the holy Virgins, which have overcome both the pleasures of
the world, and the frailty of their own nature; there are the young men and
young women, more ancient in virtue than in years; there are the sheep and
little lambs that have escaped from the wolves, and from the deceitful snares
of this life, and therefore do now keep a perpetual feast, each one in his
place, all alike in joy, though different in degree. There, Charity reigns
in her full perfection, for unto them God is all in all, whom they behold
without end, in whose love they be all continually inflamed, whom they do
always love, and in loving, do praise, and in praising, do love, and all
their exercises consist in praises, without weariness, and without travel. O
happy were I, yea, and very happy indeed, if at what time I shall be loosed
out of the prison of this wretched body, I might be thought worthy to hear
those songs of that heavenly melody, sung in the praise of the everlasting
king, by all the citizens of that so noble city. Happy were I, and very
happy, if I might obtain a room among the chaplains of that chapel, and
wait for my turn also to sing my Alleluia. If I might be near to my king, my
God, my Lord, and see him in his glory, even as he promised me, when he said:
O father, this is my last determinate will, that all those that thou have given
unto me, may be with me, and see the glory which I had with thee before the
world was created. Hitherto are the words of S. Augustine. Now tell me
(Christian brother) what a day of glorious shine shall that be unto thee (if
thou lead thy life in Gods fear) when after the course of this pilgrimage,
thou shall pass from death to immortallitie; and in that passage, when others
shall begin to fear, thou shall begin to rejoice, and lift up thyhead because
the day of thy deliverance is at hand? Come forth a little (says S. Jerome
unto the Virgin Eustochia) out of the prison of this body, and when thou art
before the gate of this* Tabernacle, set before thy eyes the reward that thou
hopest to have for thy present labors. Tell me, what a day shall that be,
when our Lord himself with all his Saints, shall come and meet thee in the
way, saying unto thee: Arise and make have O my beloved, my delight, and my
Turtle dove, for now the Winter is past, and the tempestuous waters are ceased,
and flowers do begin to appear in our land. Cant. 2. How great joy shall thy
soul then receive, when it shall be at that time presented before the throne
of the most blessed Trinity, by the hands of the holy Angels (especially by
that Angel, to whom thou was committed, as to a faithful keeper) and when this
Angel, with all the rest, shall declare thy good works, and what crosses,
tribulations, and injuries thou have suffered for Gods sake. Acts 9. S. Luke
writes, That when holy Tabitha, the great alms giver, was dead, all the
widows and poor folk came about the Apostle S. Peter, showing unto him the
garments which she had given them: where with the Apostle being moved, made his
prayer unto Almighty God for that so merciful a woman, and by his prayers he
raised her again to life. Now what a gladness will it be to thy soul, when in
the midst of those blessed spirits thou shall be placed, with remembrance of
thy alms deeds, thy prayers and fastings, the innocence of thy lise, thy
suffering of wrongs and injuries, thy patience in afflictions, thy temperance
in diet, with all other virtues and good works that thou have done in all thy
life. O how great joy shall thou receive at that time for all the good deeds
that thou have wrought! how clearly then shall thou understand the value and
the excellency of virtue! There the obedient man shall talk of victories;
there virtue shall receive her reward, and the good honored according to their
merit. Moreover, what a pleasure will it be unto thee, when thou shall see
thy self to be in that sure haven, and shall look back upon the course of
thy navigation which thou have sailed here in this life: when thou shall
remember the tempests wherein thou have been tossed, the straits through which
thou have passed, and the dangers of thieves and pirates, from whom thou have
escaped. There is the place where they shall sing the song of the Prophet,
which says, Had it not ben that our Lord had been mine helper, it could not be
but my soul had gone into hell. Especially, when from thence thou shall behold
so many sins as are committed every hour in the world, so many souls as do
descend every day into hell, and how it has pleased Almighty God, that among
such a multitude of damned persons, thou should be of the number of his
elect, and one of those to whom he would grant such exceeding great felicity
and glory. Besides all this, what a goodly sight will it be to see those seats
filled up, and the city builded, and the walls of that noble Jerusalem repaired
again? With what cheerful embracings shall the whole court of heaven
entertain them, beholding them when they come laden with the spoils of their
vanquished enemies? there shall those valiant men and women enter with triumph,
which have together with the world conquered the weakness of their own
frail nature. There shall they enter which have suffered martirdom for Christ's
sake, with double triumph over the flesh and the world, adorned with all
celestial glory. There shall also daily enter many young men and children,
which have vanquished the tenderness of their young years with discretion and
virtue. Oh, how sweet and savorie shall the fruit of virtue then be, although
for a time before her roots seemed very bitter: sweet is the cold evening after
the hot sunnie day; sweet is (...) ^ountaine to the weary (...) travailer;
sweet is (...) sleep to the tired servaunt: but much more sweet is it to the
Saints in heaven to enjoy peace after war, security after peril, eternal
rest after their pains and travels: for then are the wars at an end, then
need they no more to go all armed, both on the right side and on the left. The
children of Israel went forth armed toward the land of Promise, but after that
the land was conquered, they laid down their spears, and cast awa^ (...)
armor, and forget (...) and turmoile (...), each one under the shadow of his
pavillion and harbor enjoied the fruit of their sweet peace. Now may the
watching Prophet come down from his standing, that did watch and fix his feet
upon the place of the Sentinel. There is no more fear of invasion by the
terrible atmies of the bloody enemies: there is no place for the subtle
crafts of the lurking viper: there cannot arrive the deadly sight of the
venomous Baseliske, nor yet shall the hissing of the ancient serpent be heard
there; but only the soft breathing air of the holy ghost, wherein is beholden
the glory of Almighty God. This is the region of all peace, the place of
security, situated above all the elements, whether the clouds and stormy
winds of the dark air cannot come. O what glorious things have been spoken of
thee, o city of God. Blessed are they (says holy Tobias) that love thee, and
enjoy thy peace. O my sold praise our Lord, for he has delivered Jerusalem
his city from all her troubles. Happy shall I be, if the remnant of my
posterity might come to see the clearenesse of Jerusalem: her gates shall be
wrought with Zaphirs and Emeraulds, and all the circuit of her walls shall be
built with precious stones, her streets shall be paved with white and
pollished marble, and in all parts of her territories shall be sung Alleluia. O
joyful country! o sweet glory! o blessed company! who shall be those so
fortunate and happy that are elected for thee? It seems a presumption to
desire thee, and yet I will not live without the desire of thee. O ye sons
of Adam, a race of men, miserably blinded and deceived. O ye scattered sheep,
wandering out of your right way, if this be your sheepcoat, whether go you
backward? What mean you? Why suffer you such an excellent benefit to be
wilfully lost for not taking so little pains? What wise man would not desire,
that all labor and pain of the world were imposed unto him? that all sorrows,
afflictions, and diseases were even poured upon him as thick as hail; that
persecutions, tribulations, and greefs, with one to molest him, another to
disquiet him, yea, that all creatures in the world did conspire against him,
being scorned and made a laughing stock of all men; and that his whole life
were converted into weepings and lamentations, so that in the next life he
might find repose in the heavenly harbor of eternal consolation, and be
thought meet to have a place among that blessed people, which are adorned and
beautified with such inestimable glory. And thou, o foolish lover of this
miserable world, go thy way, seek as long as thou will for honors and
promotions, build sumptuous houses and palaces, purchase lands and possessions,
in large thy territories and dominions, yea, command if thou will whole
empires and worlds, yet shall thou never be so great as the least of all the
servants of almighty God, who shall receive that treasure which this world
cannot give, and shall enjoy that felicity, which shall endure for evermore,
when thou with thy pomp and riches, shall bear the rich glutton company, whose
burial is in the deep vault of hell: but the devout spiritual man shall be
carried by the holy Angels with poor Lazarus into Abraham's bosom, a place of
perpetual rest, joy, sollace, and eternal happiness,

Of the benefits which our Lord promises to give in this present life, to
such as live a just and godly life.
PEradventure thou will now say, that al these things before rehearsed, be
rewards and punishments only for the life to come: and that thou desire to
see something in this present life, because our minds are wont to be moved
very much with the sight of things present. To satisfy thee herein, I will
also explain unto thee what may answer thy desire. For although our Lord do
reserve the best wine, and the delicat dishes of most delight, until the end
of the banquet, yet he suffers not his friends to be utterly destitute of
meat and drink in this tedious voyage: for he knows very well, that they
could not otherwise hold out in their journey. And therefore when he said unto
Abraham, Fear not Abraham, for I am thy defendor, and thy reward shall be
exceeding great: By these words he promised two things, the one for the time
present, that was, to be his safeguard and defense in all such things as may
happen in this life; and the other for the time to come, and that is, the
reward of glory which is reserved for the next life. But how great the first
promise is, and how many kinds of benefits and favors are therein included,
no man is able to understand, but only he, that has with great diligence
read the holy scriptures, wherein no one thing is more often repeated and set
forth, than the greatness of the favors, benefits, and privileges, which
Almighty God promises unto his friends in this life. Hearken what Solomon
says in the third chapter of his Proverbes, as touching this matter. Blessed
is that man that finds wisdom, for it is better to have it, than all the
treasures of silver and gold, be they never so excellent and precious: and it
is more worth than all the riches of the world, and whatsoever man's heart is
able to desire, is not comparable unto it. The length of days are at her right
hand, and riches and glory at her left. Her ways be pleasant, and all her
passages be quiet, she is a tree of life to all those that have obtained her,
and he that shall have her in continual possession, shall be blessed. Keep
therefore (O my son) the laws of Almighty God, and his counsels, for they
shall be as life to thy soul, and sweetness to thy taste. Then shall thou
walk safely in thy ways, and thy feet shall not find any stumbling blocks.
If thou sleep, thou shall have no cause to fear: and if thou take thy rest,
thy sleep shall be quiet. This is the sweetness and quietness of the way of
the godly, but the ways of the wicked are far different, as the holy Scripture
does declare unto us. The paths and ways of the wicked (says Ecclesiasticus)
are full of brambles, and at the end of their journey are prepared for them,
hell, darkness, and pains. Do thou think it then a good exchange, to
forsake the ways of Almighty God, for the ways of the world, since there is
so great difference between the one and the other, not only in the end of the
way, but also in all the steps of the same? What madness can be greater, than
to choose one torment, to gain another by; rather than with one rest to gain
another rest? And that thou may more clearly perceive the excellency of
this rest, and what a number of benefits are presently incident thereunto, I
beseech thee hearken attentively even what Almighty God himself has promised
by his Prophet Esaias, to the observers of his law, in a manner with these words,
as diverse interpreters do expound them. When thou shall do (says he) such
and such things, which I have commanded thee to do, there shall forthwith
appear unto thee the dawning of the clear day (that is, the son of justice)
which shall drive away all the darkness of thy errors and miseries, and then
shall thou begin to enjoy true and perfect salvation. Now these are the benefits
which almighty God has promised to his servants. And albeit some of them be
for the time to come, yet are some of them to be presently received in this
life: as, that new light and shining from heaven; that safety and abundance of
all good things; that assured confidence and trust in the almighty God; that
divine assistance in all our prayers and petitions made unto him; that peace
and tranquillity of conscience; that protection and providence of Almighty
God. All these are the gracious gifts and favors which almighty God has
promised to his servaunts in this life. They all are the works of his mercy,
effects of his grace, testimonies of his love, and blessings, which he of his
fatherly providence extends.

To be short, all these benefits do the godly enjoy both in this present life,
and in the life to come: and of all these are the ungodly deprived, both in the
one life, and in the other. Whereby thou may easily perceive, what difference
there is between the one sort and the other, seeing the one is so rich in
graces, and the other so poor and needy: For if thou ponder well Gods
promised blessings, and consider the state and condition of the good and the
wicked, thou shall find, that the one sort is highly in the favor of Almighty
God, and the other deeply in his displeasure: the one be his friends, and the
other his enemies: the one be in light, and the other in darkness: the one
do enjoy the company of Angels, and the other the filthy pleasures and
delights of swine: the one are truly free, and lords over themselves, and the
other are become bondslaves unto Satan, and unto their own lusts and
appetites. The one are joyful with the witness of a good conscience, and the
other (except they be utterly blinded) are continually bitten with the worm of
conscience, evermore gnawing on them: the one in tribulation, stand steadfastly
in their proper place; and the other, like light chafe, are carried up and
down with every blast of wind: the one stand secure and firm with the anchor
of hope, and the other are unstable, and evermore yielding unto the assaults of
fortune: the prayers of the one are acceptable and liking unto God, and the
prayers of the other are abhorred and accursed: the death of the one is quiet,
peaceable, and precious in the sight of God, and the death of the other, is
unquiet, painful, and troubled with a thousand frights and terrors: To
conclude, the one live like children under the protection and defense of
Almighty God, and sleep sweetly under the shadow of his pastoral providence;
and the other being excluded from this kind of providence, wander abroad as
straied sheep, without their sheep heard and master, lying wide open to all
the perils, dangers, and assaults of the world. Seeing then, that a virtuous
life is accompanied with all these benefits, what is the cause that should
withdraw thee, and persuade thee not to embrace such a precious treasure? what
art thou able to allege for excuse of thy great negligence? To say that this
is not true, it cannot be admitted, for so much as Gods word does avouch the
certainetie hereof. To say that these are but small benefits, thou can not,
for so much as they do exceed all that man's heart can desire. To say that thou
art an enemy unto thy self, and that thou do not desire these benefits,
cannot be, considering that a man is even naturally a friend to himself, and
the will of man has ever an cie to his own benefit, which is the very object
or mark that his desire shoots at. To say that thou have no understanding
nor taste of these benefits, it will not serve to discharge thine offense, for
so much as thou have the faith and belief thereof, though thou have not the
taste, for the taste is lost through sin, but not the faith: and the faith is a
witness more certain, more secure, and better to be trusted, than al other
experiences and witnesses in the world.

Why do thou not then discredit all other witnesses with this one assured
testimony? Why do thou not rather give credit unto faith, than to thine
own opinion and judgment? O that thou would make a resolute determination,
to submit thy self into the hands of almighty God, and to put thy whole trust
assuredly in him. How soon should thou then see all these prophesies
fulfilled in thee: then should thou see the excellency of these divine
treasures: then sholdest thou see how stark blind the lovers of this world
are, that seek not after this high treasure: then should thou see upon what
good ground our Savior inviteth us to this kind of life saying: Come unto me
all ye that travel, and are laden, and I will refresh you; take my yoke upon
you, and you shall find rest for your souls: for my yoke is sweet, and my burden
is light. Almighty God is no deceiver, nor false promiser, neither yet is he a
great boaster of such things as he promises. Why do thou then shrink back?
why do thou refuse peace and true quietness? why do thou refuse the gentle
offers and sweet callings of thy pastor? how dare thou despise and banish
away virtue from thee, which has such prerogatives and privileges as these
be; and withal, confirmed and signed even with the hand of Almighty God? The
queen of Saba heard far less things than these of Solomon, and yet she
traveled from the uttermost parts of the world to try the truth of those
things that she had heard. And why do not thou then (hearing such notable,
yea, and so certain news of virtue) adventure to take a little pains to try
the truth and sequel thereof? O dear Christian brother, put thy trust in
Almighty God and in his word, and commit thy self most boldly without all
fear into his arms, and unloose from thy hands those trifling knots that
have hitherto deceived thee, and thou shall find, that the merits of virtue
do far excel her fame: and that all which is spoken in praise of her, is
nothing in comparison of that which she is indeed.

That a man ought not to defer his repentance and conversion unto God, from
day to day: considering he has so many debts to discharge, by reason of the
offenses committed in his sinful life alredie past.
NOw then, if on the one side there be so many and so great respects, that do
bind us to change our sinful life; and on the other side, we have not any
sufficient excuse why we should not make this exchange. How long will thou
tarry, until thou fully resolve to do it? Turn thine eyes a little, and
look back upon thy life past, and consider, that at this present (of what age
soever thou be) it is high time, or rather, the time well nigh past to begin
to discharge some part of thy old debts. Consider, that thou which art a
Christian regenerated in the water of holy Baptism, which do acknowledge
Almighty God for thy father, and the Catholic church for thy mother, whom
she has nourished with the milk of the Gospel, to wit, with the doctrine of
the Apostles and Evangelists: consider (I say) that all this notwithstanding,
thou have lived even as loosely and dissolutely, as if thou had been a mere
Infidel, that had never any knowledge of Almighty God. And if thou do deny
this, then tell me what kind of sin is there which thou have not committed?
What tree is there forbidden that thou have not beholden with thine eyes? What
green meddow is there, in which thou have not (at the least in desire) feasted
thy letcherous lust? what thing has been set before thine eyes, that thou have
not wantonly desired? What appetite have thou left unexecuted, notwithstanding
that thou did believe in almighty God, and that thou were a Christian? what
would thou have done more, if thou had not had any faith at all? If thou
had not looked for any other life? If thou had not feared the dreadful day
of judgment? What has all thy former life been, but a web of sins, a sink
of vices, a way full of brambles and thorns, and a froward disobedience of
God? with whom have thou hitherto lived, but only with thine appetite, with
thy flesh, with thy pride, and with the goods and riches of this transitory
world? These have been thy gods, these have been thine idols, whom thou have
served, and whose laws thou have diligently obeyed. Make thine account with
the Almighty God, with his laws, and with his obedience, and peradventure thou
shall find, that thou have esteemed him no more, than if he had been a god of
wood, or stone. For it is certain, that there be many Christians, which
believing that there is a God, are induced to sin with such facility, as
though they believed, that there were no God at all: and do offend no whit the
less, though they believe that there is a God, than they would do, if they
believed there were none at all. What greater injury, what greater despite
can be done, than so to contemn his divine majesty? Finally, thou believing
all such things as Christ's church does believe, have notwithstanding so led thy
life, as if thou were persuaded, that the belief of Christians were the
greatest fables or lies in the world. And if the multitude of thy sins past,
and the facility thou have used in committing of them, do not make thee
afraid, why do thou not fear at the least the majesty and omnipotency of
him, against whom thou have sinned? Lift up thine eyes, and consider the
infinite greatness and omnipotency of the Lord, whom the powers of heaven do
adore, before whose majesty the whole compass of the wide world lies
prostrate; in whose presence, all things created, are no more than chafe
carried away with the wind. Consider also with thy self how unseemely it is,
that such a vile worm as thou art, should have audacitie so many times to
offend and provoke the wrath of so great a majesty. Consider the wonderful and
most terrible severitie of his justice, and what horrible punishments he has
used from time to time in the world against sin; and that not only upon
particular persons, but also upon cities, nations, kingdoms, and provinces,
yea, upon the universal world: And not only in earth, but also in heaven; and
not only upon strangers sinners, but even upon his own most innocent son,
our sweet Savior Jesus Christ, when he took upon him to satisfy for the
debt that we owed. And if this severitie was used upon green and innocent
wood, and that for the sins of others, what then will he do upon dry and
withered wood, and against those that are laden with their own sins? Now, what
thing can be thought more unreasonable, than that such a frail* wretch as
thou art, should be so saucie and malapert as to mock with so mighty a Lord,
whose hand is so heavy, that in case he should strike but one stroke upon
thee, he would at one blow drive thee down headlong into the deep
bottomless pit of hell, without remedy. Consider likewise the great patience
of this our merciful Lord, who has expected thy repentance so long, even
from the time that thou did first offend him: and think, that if after so
long patience and tarrying for thee, thou shall still continue thy leaud and
sinful life, abusing thus his mercy and provoking him to further indignation
and wrath, he will then bend his bow, and shake his sword, and rain down upon
thee even sharp arrows of everlasting wrath and death.

Consider also the profoundnesse of his deep judgments, whereof we read and
see daily so great wonders. We see how king Solomon himself, after his so
great wisdom, and after those three thousand parables and most profound
mysteries uttered by him, was forsaken by Almighty God, and suffered to fall
down and adore idols. We see how one of those seven first deacons of the
primative church, which were full of the holy ghost, became not only an
heretic, but also an arch heriticke and a father of heresies. We see daily
many stars fall down from heaven unto earth, with miserable falls, and to
wallow themselves in the dirt, and to eat the meat of swine, which sat before
at Gods own table, and were fed with the very bread of Angels. If then the just
and righteous (for some secret pride or negligence, or else for some ingratitude
of theirs) be thus justly forsaken of almighty God, after they have bestowed
so many years in his service. What may thou look for, that have done in a
manner nothing else in all thy life time, but only heaped sins upon sins,
and have thereby offended almighty God most greevously?

Now, if thou have lived after this sort, were it not reason that thou
should now at the length give over, and cease heaping sin upon sin, and
debt upon debt, and begin to pacify the wrath of Almighty God, and to
disburden thy sinful soul? Were it not meet, that that time which thou have
hitherto given to the world to thy flesh, and to the devil, should suffice?
and that thou should bestow some little time of that which remains, to
serve him, who has given thee all that thou have? Were it not a point of
wisdom, after so long time, and so many great injuries, to fear the most
terrible justice of Almighty God, who the more patiently he suffers
sinners, the more he does afterward punish them with severitie and justice?
Were it not meet for thee to fear thy long continuance so many years in
sin, and in the displeasure of Almighty God, procuring thereby against thee
such a mighty adversary as he is, and provoking him of a merciful loving
father to become thy severe terrible judge and enemy? Were it not meet to
fear, least that the force of evil custom may in continuance of time be
turned into nature; and that thy long vicious usual manner of committing
sin, may make of a vice, a necessity; or little less? Why art thou not
afraid, least by little and little thou may cast thy self down headlong
into the deep pit of a reprobate sense, whereinto after that a man is once
fallen, he never makes account of any sin, be it never so great.

The Patriarch Jacob said unto Laban his father in law: These fourteen years
have I served thee, and looked to thine affairs; now it is time that I should
look to mine own, and begin to attend unto the affairs of mine own household.
Wherefore if thou have likewise bestowed so many years in the service of this
world, and of this frail transitory life, were it not good reason, that thou
should now begin to make some provision for the salvation of thy soul, and
for the everlasting life to come? There is nothing more short, nor more
transitory than the life of man; and therefore providing so carefully as thou
do for all such things as be necessary for this life, which is so short,
why do thou not provide likewise somewhat for the life that is to come?
which life shall endure for ever and ever.

The conclusion of all the premises.
IF now all this be so, I beseech thee even for the bitter passion of our
sweet savior Jesus Christ, to remember thyselfe, and consider that thou art a
Christian, and that thou beleevest assuredly for a most undoubted truth,
whatsoever the true faith instructs thee. This faith tells thee, that thou
have a judge above that sees all the steps and motions of thy life: and that
certainly there shall a day come, when he will require an account of thee,
even for every idle word. This faith teaches thee, That a man is not
altogether at an end when he dies, but that after this temporal life, there
remains another everlasting life; and that the souls die not with the bodies,
but that whiles the body remains in the grave, until the general day of
judgment, the soul shall enter into another new country, and into a new
world, where it shall have such habitation and company, as the faith and
works were which it had in this life. This faith tells thee also, that both
the reward of virtue, and the punishment of vice, is a thing so wonderful,
that although the whole world were full of books, and all creatures were
writers, yet should they all be wearied, and the world come to an end, before
they should end their description, and make a perfect declaration what is
comprehended in each one of these points. This faith informs thee also, that
the debts and duties which we owe to almighty God, are so great, that albeit a
man had so many lives as there be sands in the sea, yet would they not
suffice, if they were all employed in his service. And this faith likewise
tells thee, that virtue is such an excellent treasure, that all the treasures
of the world, and all that man's heart can desire, are in no sort comparable unto
it.

Wherefore, if there be so many and so great respects that do invite us unto
virtue, how comes it to pass, that there be so few lovers and followers of
the same? If men be moved with gain and commodity, what greater commodity
can there be than to attain life everlasting? If they be moved with fear of
punishment, what greater punishment can be found, than the most horrible
everlasting dreadful torments in the lake of fire and brimstone, to continue
even world without end? If that bonds of debts and benefits; what debts are
greater than these which we owe unto the almighty God, as well for that he is
which he is, as also for that which we have received of him? If the fear of
perils do move us; what greater peril can there be than death, the hour
thereof being so uncertain, and the account so strait? If thou be moved with
peace, liberty, quietness of mind, and with a pleasant life, (which are things
that all the world desires) it is certain, that all these are found much
better in the life that is governed by virtue and reason, than in that life
which is ruled by the affections and passions of the mind, for so much as man is
a reasonable creature, and no beast. Howbeit, in case thou account all this as
not sufficient to move thee thereunto, yet let it suffice thee to consider
further, that even Almighty God so abased himself for thy sake, that he
descended from heaven unto the earth, and became man, and whereas he created
the whole world in six days, he bestowed three and thirty years about thy
redemption, yea, and was also contented for the same to leese his life.
Almighty God died, that sin should die: and yet for all this do we
endeavor, that sin might live in our hearts, notwithstanding, that our Lord
purposed to take away the life of sin with his own death. If this matter
were to be discussed with reason, surely this already spoken might suffice to
prevail with any reasonable creature: for not only in beholding Almighty God
upon the cross, but whether soever we do turn our eyes, we shall find, that
every thing cries out to us, and calls upon us to receive this so excellent
a benefit: for there is not a thing created in the world, (if we duly consider
it) but does invite us to the love and service of our Savior Jesus Christ,
insomuch, that look how many creatures there be in the world, so many
preachers there are, so many books, so many voices, and so many reasons,
which do all call us unto almighty God.

And how is it possible then, that so many callings as these are, so many
promises, so many threatenings, and so many provocations, should not suffice to
bring us unto him? What might almighty God have done more than he has done,
or promised more greater blessings than he has promised, or threatened more
greevous and horrible torments than he has threatened, to draw us unto him, and
to pluck us away from sin? And yet all this notwithstanding, how comes it
to pass, that there is so great (I will not say arrogancy, but) bewitching of
men, that do believe these things to be certainly true, and yet be not
afraid to continue all the days of their life in the committing of deadly
sins? Yea, to go to bed in deadly sin, and to rise up again in deadly
sin, and to embrue themselves in every kind of loathsome, detestable, and
odious sin, even as though all their whole endeavors intended by the
practice of sin, to resist all grace and favor in the sight of God? And this
is done in such sort, so without fear, so without scruple of mind, so without
breaking of one hours sleep, and without the refraining of any one delicate
morsel of meat for the same, as if all that they believed, were dreams, and
old wives tales, and as if all that the holy Evangelists have written, were
mere fiction and fables. But tell me thou that art such a desperate wilful
rebel against thy Creator and Redeemer, which by thy detestable life and
dissolute conversation, do evidence thy self to be a firebrand, prepared to
burn in those everlasting and revenging horrible fires of hell: What would
thou have done more than thou have done, in case thou had been persuaded,
that all were mere lies which thou have believed:?; For although that for
fear of incurring the danger of the princes laws, and the execution of their
force upon thee, thou have somewhat brideled thine appetites; yet does it not
appear, that for any fear of Almighty God, thou have refrained thy will in
any one thing, neither from carnal pleasures, nor from taking revenge of thine
enemies, nor from backbiting and slandering thy neighbors, nor yet from
fulfilling thine inordinate lusts and desires, in case thine ability served
thee thereunto. Oh, what does the worm of thy conscience say unto thee,
whiles thou art in such a fond security and confidence, continuing in such a
dissolute and wicked life as thou do? Where is now become the understanding,
judgment, and reason, which thou have of a man? Why art thou not afraid of so
horrible, so certain, and so assured perils and dangers? If there were a dish
of meat set before thee, and some man (albeit he were a lier) should say unto
thee, refrain to touch and eat thereof, for it is poisoned; durst thou once
adventure to stretch out thy hand, to take a taste thereof, though the meat were
never so savorie and delicate, and he never so great a lier that should bear
thee thus in hand? If then the Prophets, if the Apostles, if the Evangelists,
yea, if Almighty God himself do cry out unto thee, and say, Take heed thou
miserable man, for death is in that kind of meat, and death does lie lurking
in that gluttonous morsel, which the devil has set before thee? How dare
thou reach for everlasting death with thine own hands, and drink thine own
damnation. Where is the applying of thy wits, thy judgment, and the discourse
and reason which thou have of a spiritual man? Where is their light, where is
their force? Since that none of them do bridle thee any whit from thy common
usual vices. Oh thou wretched and careless creature, be* witched by the
common enemy Satan, adjudged to everlasting darkness, both inward and
outward, and so do go from one darkness to the other. Thou art blind to
see thine own misery, insensible to understand thine own perdition, and
harder than any Adamant, to feel the hammer of Gods word. Oh, a thousand times
most miserable thou art, worthy to be lamented with none other tears, than
with those wherewith thy damnation was lamented, when it was said, Luke 19. Oh,
that thou knew this day the peace, quietness, and treasures, which
Almighty God has offered unto thee, that do now lie hidden from thine eyes.
Oh miserable is the day of thy nativitie, and much more miserable the day of
thy death: for so much, as that shall be the beginning of thine everlasting
damnation. Oh, how much better had it been for thee, never to have been
borne, if thou shall be damned in the horrible pit of hell for ever, where the
torments are perpetually durable. How much better had it been for thee never
to have been baptized, nor yet to have received the Christian faith, if
through the abusing thereof by thy wicked life, thy damnation shall thereby be
the greater? For if the light of reas^n only suffices to make the Heathen
Philosophers inexcuseable, because they knowing God in some degree, did not
glorify him nor serve him (as the Apostle s^yth in the first to the Romans;)
how much less shall he be excused, that has received the light of faith, and
the water of Baptism, yea, and the holy Sacrament of the body and blood of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, hearing daily the doctrine of the Gospel,
if he do nothing more than those Pagan Philosophers have done.

Now, what other thing may we infer of the premises, but breefely to
conclude, That there is none other understanding, none other wisdom, none
other counsel in the world, but that setting aside all the impediments and
combersome dangerous ways of this life, we follow that only true and
certain way, whereby true peace and everlasting life is obtained. Hereunto are
we called by reason, by wisdom, by law, by heaven, by earth, by hell, and by
the life, death, justice, and mercy of Almighty God. Hereunto are we also
very notably invited by the holy Ghost, speaking by the mouth of Ecclesiasticus
in the sixth chapter, in this wise: My son hearken to instruction even from
the first years of thy youth, and in thy latter days thou shall enjoy the
sweet fruit of wisdom: Approach unto it, as one that ploweth and sows, and
with patience expect the fruitful increase which it shall yield unto thee. The
pains that thou shall take, shall be but little, and the benefits that thou
shall speedily enjoy, shall be great. My son hearken to my words, and neglect
not this my counsel which I shall give thee, put thy feet willingly into her
fetters, and thy neck into ^er chains: bow down thy shoulders, and carry
her upon thee, and be not displeased with her bonds: approach near unto her
with all thy heart, and follow her ways with all thy strength, seek for her
with all thy diligence, and she will make her self known unto thee, and
after that thou have found her, never forsake her: for by her shall thou find
rest in thy latter days, and that which before did seem so painful unto
thee, will afterward become very pleasant. Her fetters shall be a defense or
thy strength, and a foundation of virtue, and her chain shall be a robe of
glory: for in her is the beauty of life, and her bonds are the bonds of
health. Hitherto Ecclesiasticus. Whereby thou may understand in some degree,
how great the beauty, the delights, the liberty, and riches of true wisdom
are, which is virtue it self, and the knowledge of Almighty God, whereof we
do entreat. But if all this be insufficient to mollify our stony hearts,
lift up thine eyes, and fix thy thoughts constantly to behold our omnipotent
God in his mercy and love toward sinners upon his dying cross, where he
made full satisfaction for thy sins. There shall thou behold him in this form:
his feet nailed fast, looking for thee, his arms spread abroad to receive
thee, and his head bowing down, to give thee, as to another prodigal son,
new kisses of peace and atonement. From thence he calls thee (if thou
would hear) with so many callings and cries as there be wounds in his
whole body. Hearken thou therefore unto these voices, and consider well with
thy self, that if his prayer be not heard that hearkeneth not unto the cries
of the poor, how much less shall he be heard, that makes himself deaf to
such cries as these, being the most merciful cryings of our loving savior,
and intended for our souls salvation. Who is he that has not cause to
resolve himself wholly into tears to weep and bewail his manifold offenses?
Who is he that can lament, and will not lament at this? Unless he be such a
one as sees not, nor cares not what great shipwreck, wast, and havocke he
makes of all the riches and treasures of his soul.

FINIS.

