THE FIRST BOOK OF THE PRESERVATION OF King Henry the vij. when he was but
Earl of Richmond, Grandfather to the Queens majesty; Compiled in english
rythmicall Hexameters.

Viuit in eternum post funera viuida virtus.
Virtue remains alive after death lively for ever.
Quo magis difficilior, copulchrior*
Hoc opus, hic labor est.
Imprinted at London, by R. B. and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the Bible. 1599.

To the Printer.
PRint with a good letter, this book, and carefuly Printer:
Print each word legibill, not a word nor a sillabil alter:
Keep points, and commas, periodes, the parenthesis observe;
My credit and thy report to defend, both safely to conserve.
To the Right honorabel, worshipful, gentel, and learned Readers, whosoever;
that are both true fauorits of poetry, and of right ancient Heroicke
Hexameters.
RIght honored, worshipful, and gentell Reader, these Hexameters and
Pentameters in English, are misliked of many, because they are not yet come to
their full perfection: and specially of some, that are accounted and known to
be Doctors and singularly well learned and great Linguistes: but especially of
the plain Rythmer, that scarce knows the footed quantity or metricall
scanning thereof; much less to read them with a grace according to the same.
But for him, I say thus; Scientia nullum habet inimicum, praeter ignorantem.
Whose books are stuffed with lines of prose, with a rythme in the end; which
every fiddler, or piper, can make upon a theme given. Nevertheless, I confess
and acknowledge that we have many excellent and singular good Poets in this our
age, as Master Spencer, that was, Master Gowlding, Doctor Phayer, Master
Harrington, Daniell, and diverse others whom I reverence in that kind of
prose-rythme: wherein Spencer (without offense spoken) has surpassed them all.
I would to God they had done so well in true Hexameters: for they had then
beautified our language. For the Greeks and Latins did in a manner abolish
quite that kind of rythme-prose: And why should not we do the like in
English? But the ignorant and adverse part will say, our speech is not copious
enough: But I say that it is: and besides it would be the more enriched,
adorned, and more eloquent, if they would make trial thereof, or could compose
them artificially and eloquently to delight the Readers, to resound with a
grace in their ears. Nam nihil difficile volenti. But this is the true cause
why they do not so; Hoc opus, hic labor est: which the chief Doctors and best
learned of them all, cannot deny; And perhaps some of the best of them, that
are curious carpers and reprehenders of this true metrified verse, though
skillful in other arts, cannot formally compose the like as France did; who
observed a better Prosodia then Stanihurst. For Tully was not so good a
Poetician as he was an Orator. God bestows his gifts severally, and more
bountifully on some then on others. For Homer in Greek, and Virgill in Latin,
surpassed all that ever were before or since, in true footed Hexameters; but
not in prose. Neither were Homer and Virgill the first that versifyed in their
natural language: But others did attempt to Poetize before them, in the like
verse; or else in truth I suppose they could not have done so well. Every thing
has a beginning, which at first cannot be made so perfect. Those verses which
Ennius made, before Virgill made any, were not so well liked: as for example;
Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem: Yet Virgill most commonly had his
book about him. Therefore I reverence Stanihurst; who being but an Irish man,
did first attempt to translate those four books of Eneados, which (if he be
living) I desire him to refile them over again; and thus have written in
verse: If the Poet Stanihurst yet live and feeds on ay-er,
I do request him (as one that wishes a grace to the meter)
With words significant to refile and finely to polishe
Those four Aeneis, that he late translated in English.
I do the man reverence, as a fine, as an exquisit Author:
For that he first did atempt, to translate verse as a Doctor.


For at the first, Master Askam had much ado to make two or three verses in
English: but now every scholar can make some. What language so hard, harsh, or
barbarous, that time and art will not amend? As I have written in an other
place, thus; Naught can at once be begone, or present made, to be perfect.
By travel, all hard things are brought to singular effect.
Yet that Apelles could Cytheraeas beawty depolish;
Had not he time to delyne, her picture finely to finnysh?


This true kind of Hexametred and Pentametred verse, well bring unto us four
commodities. First it will enrich our speech with good and significant words:
Secondly it will bring a delight and pleasure to the skillful Reader, when he
sees them formally compyled: And thirdly it will encourage and learn the good
and godly Students, that affect Poetry, and are naturally enclyned thereunto, to
make the like: Fourthly it will direct a true Idioma, and will teach true
Orthography. For as gould surpasses lead: so the Hexameters surpass rythme
prose. And as concerning the same, this have I written: As yelo gould purified
does surmount every mettell:
So fine verse metrifyed, this rythme-prose greatly does excel.
With words significant, such rural rythmery confound,
And metricall verses with a new rythme lawraly compound.
For sily Muse fear not: since every paltery Rythmor
With words vnmetrifyed would seem to be counted a Doctor:
Whose works seem to be good, representing Tantalus appels,
Which did apeare to be gold; but touched were, turned in ashes.


And in another place.

Cloud not your Orient fine skyll, with dregs of a drowzy
Conterfaited prose: This Roman verse has a glory.
As redolent Gilyflowers perfumes a delight to the senses;
Men's memories to refresh: So scanning Rythmery verses
Bringes a delight to the minds, etc.
For these rybaud and baudy Poets be but the devils agents, and are to be
detested; but the virtuous and godly Poets are to be both reverenced and
regarded: as I have here written; As domiport slug-y snayle, his passage
plainly to disclose,
Leaves a print as he goes, but a shining slyme to no purpose:
So does a bawdy Poet (his brainesicke folly to publish)
Write amorous madrigals; some lewd loue-toy to recognize.
Aim at a true Period, Christ Jesus: flee from al evil:
Roaue not aside to detract his praise: learn rightly to leauell.
Wits misabus'd will apeare as a goulden ring in a swines snowte.
Gods word such reprobate lewd wits does worthily confute.
Show me the tree by the fruit: so says Saint Luke that Euangel,
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or fygges of a thystel? Saint Luke, ca. 6.
verse. 45.

Saint Matthew ca. 13. verse. 30.37.38.
Christ shows by parables, who be tares and who be the good seed:
The One by the devil sown, and the other sown by the goddhead:
Both to be reapt at a time, and both to be parted asonder:
Both to be bound in sheaues, and both to be laid from another:
The One to be laid in a barn, the other to be thrown by Iehoua,
Into that burning lake, that burning fyry Gehenna.


And we, that profess Christianity, should not use any paganism, to detract
gods glory, as the paganis'd Poets did, in the time of ignorance. For this I
have written of them: I mean, of Homer, Virgill, and others; Only the fault
was this; they lived in a time then of error,
And to the Pagan gods most of them yielded an honor.
Those secular sages, which gods true word did abandon,
Wilfully lost them selves, and others left at a randon.
But should we Christians (confessing one God Imortall,
Trinity, Unity, one, deifyed with glory coequall)
Call to the Pagan gods; to detract praise from the Redeemer,
Our souls sole-sauiour? Should we such blasphemy suffer?


In truth, all they that profess true Poetry should seek to further the
advancement of gods glory what they may (which I pray God they may do, to
bannish all these fond fantastical and Veneriall Poets) and also to do their
best endeavor in true Hexameters, to abolish this plain rythme-prose; that
we may imitate and follow the best learned, and ancient Poets: as Homer,
Virgill, and Lucan in Chronicles. For that an heroical verse composed in
Hexameters, is most correspondent to a right honorable nature: as appeared by
Alexander the great: as I have composed in Hexameters following.

When that Alexander did come to the Tomb of Acbilles,
That monument to behold; he pronounced these very speeches,
And with a sigh thus said: Thrice Larissaeus is happy,
For that he greek Homer had, to record his glory so worthy.
* And when he had conquered great spoils from king Darius,
There was a chest of gould, that, he said, was fit for Homerus
Books, to be safely reposed. For he kept them safe, as a Jewel,
Under his own beads-head: whose work divinely does excel.
And Maro laurigerent, in verse most glorious enrold
Venturous Aeneas exployts, and worthiness extold.
Which brought Rome in a muse, with a grace so loftily slowing.
Whose praise still will abide, while seas or earth ar abiding.
And that we may imitate them as near as we may, in poetizing of verified
Chronicles, I have elsewhere written thus; Learn of Maeonides; who writes of
Hector, Achilles,
Of Troilus, Diomede, of craft-contriuer Ulysses.
If so be that Chronicles had not bin skilfuly written,
Kings valiant exployts, lords fame, and knights valor had bin
Drowned in oblivion. For time (fames greedy deuowrer)
Leaves fame vnmemoriz'd; as a tree consumed with a canker.
You fine metricians, that verses skilfully compile
(As fine artificers hard Iron do refile on an Anuile)
This verse irregular, this rustic rythmery bannish:
Which does abase Poetry: such verse such meter abolish.
For lily milke-white swannes flote on streams clear as a crystal.
And in a foul mud-y lake, donguehill duckes strive for an offall.
Both Greeks and Latinists such verselesse verse did abandon:
Whose verse is purified, as gould is tried by the touchstone.
As vinegar does aford, no pleasant taste to the palate:
So words vnmetrifi'd, which rythmers rudely promulgate,
Bring no delight to the wits, nor sound with a grace in a man's ear.
Every worthy Poet will such rude rythmery forbear.


Surely this kind of scanning verse is not to be discommended: and who so
does, has no warrant so to do. And who so does discommend Stanihurst, or
France, let them make so many verses. For many will dispraise their books,
that cannot whiles they live make the like. For it is more easy for every man
to find a fault, then to make so many: as I have written, thus; For curious
cauilist but a small mote easily will see,
Sooner in each strangers eysight, then a beam in his own eye.
Hardly he will such books in a true verse notably perfect.
For many men ready be to find faults, hasty to correct.
Such Sycophant humorists, like quayles feed chiefly by poison:
Whose Stoicall censures and selfe-mindes stand for a reason.


And whosoever shall discommend mine, I would request him to make so many as I
mean to make in five books, in rythming Hexameters. For, as I think, the
rythme does give the^ a grace in our english tongue especially, above other
tongues; so it be good rythme, though they be the harder to make. The best
verse that France made, was in rythming Hexameters, of the nativity of
Christ. And if he make so many better, I will reverence him: If so many, and
not better (so that he rail not) I will commend him. I discommend no man's
works; for that I know none have more defects then mine own. For it is the
enriching and beautifying of our language, and the credit and glory of the
verse, that I regard. For I am no mercinary man, nor write with an hired
pen, nor expect vain glory. But who so does slander these verses, and
cannot amend them, nor make so many, let him keep his wind to cool his
potage. For my answer shall be silence. As Diogenes answered one that asked
him a foolish question; saying that silence was an answer fit for such a fond
demand. And in respect of them I will say, as the bird said to Caesar: Operam
and laborem perdidi. But as for you, that are true fauorits both of Poetry, and
of this true metricall and scanning verse; I wholly submit and refer my self
to your favorable censures and assistance: to see if we can yet once again,
set on foot this footed verse; that it may run smoothely, with a grace and
credit. I would I were but as Ennius to a fine Maronist, or to a skillful
Maeonides. And also I request you to take in good part these simpel verses of
mine: wherein, at idel times, I have both taken pleasure and pains. For all
those that profess learning (and especially such as are descended of honor or
of true gentilitie) should chiefly like of this kind of heroicke Hexameters:
as Alexander did, of Homers; or Augustus, of Virgils. And if these shall like
you, I shall be glad: and do purpose (God willing) yer that a year come about,
to set forth another book.

I do not utterly discommend or condemn this prose-rythme; but do only prefer
this Roman verse far above it. And I know, most of them that be learned will
so think; and especially when it is brought to perfection: unless they be
some carping Cauilists paradoxically captius, or preiudicius. For I know,
plain song is good; but prick song is known to be better: and there is great
difference betwixt an Orient pearl, and a black simpel bugel. If you find
any faults in my book, I would request you to amend them, and to send them in
a privy note to the Stationer. But now least I should be too tedious, wishing
to you all as to my self, in our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus; I most humbly
take my leave: resting yours, in all love and duty to commmand.

A Brief rule or prosodie, for the understanding of the quantity of some
peculiar words in this book; until I have set forth a Verbal, or littel
Dictionarie, with a Prosodia requisite for Poetry.
THis monasillabel, on, being an adjective, is indifferent, either long or
short: but being an aduerbe, always short.

Also me, thee, ye, he, and she, are long or short.

All words ending in O, are indifferent.

Pre and pro, in dissyllabels are indifferent: in trisyllabels, likewise
indifferent; except it be in an Anapaest: as, preminence, president, preualent,
and the like. In some quadrisyllabels, long: as premeditate, predominant,
precogitate, and the like. And in some quadrisyllabels, long, or short: as for
exampel; preposterus presumptuus, and the like. The Latin and the English
quantity in some words are not alike, but are merely dissonant. And we are
to follow our natural prenuntiation and accent in words: Yet following the
latin as near as we may; observing the right Euphonia: as for exampel; we say
in Latin, orator long in ra: but in English we make ra, in orator, short.

De, in dissyllabels and trisyllabels is always short. In some
quadrissyllabels it is long: as; demerited, depopulate, demonicall, and such
like: And again in othersome it is either long or short: as; denunciate,
determinate, denominate. And in words of five syllabels it is short: as;
dedication, deprehension: And in words of six syllabels it is long: as;
determination, delapidation; and such like.

My, why, thy, and by, are indifferent.

Besides; there are some words, which sometimes by pronunciation we make but
monasyllabels: as; air, fire, flower, power, shower: which as dissyllabels,
are written thus; ay-er, fy-er, flow-er, pow-er, show-er.

And likewise sometime we make dissyllabels, trisyllabels: as; desire,
de-si-er. require, re-qui-er; aad such like.

And words having doubel consonants in the middel of dissyllabels (as;
account, attend, applause, afford, and the like) by figure are made short, by
the detraction of a letter: as; acount, atend, aplause, aford: and so in
polysyllabels likewise. Lastly some words are indifferent: as cre, in credit:
co, in comet: pee, in peepel: and ci, in civil; and such like. Which I will,
God willing, in my Verbal and Prosodia set forth more at large. In the mean
while gentel Reader, have patience. For I mean not to compose these Hexametred
verses irregularly.

The Author to his book.
STay bisie book for a while. What rage constraines thee to wander,
Like fugitive vacabond, into the world to be seen?
Post not in haste, so deformed: let faults be reformed by thy master:
Art not ashamed to repair unto the Court of a Queen?
Unpolished to repair, to the regal throne of an Empress,
Our Queen Elizabeth? only the worlds Diamonde,
Crowned with an eternal Diadem: whose glorious Highness
Treasures of Poetry, chief in all arts does abound.
Thou art scarce purified, to be seen of her exquisit Highness.
Better I think it, at home safe in a chest to remain;
Then to depart so deformed, poor clothed, and plain as an hermit.
Self love, self arogance, makes many fools to be feign.
If that I leave thee so rude, her Grace may worthily blame me.
What will a Prince, think thou, of so renowned a Land,
When thou come to the Court so defaste, vouchsafe to peruse thee?
Thy reverent Sovereign greater afaires has in hand.
Go not away gadding, from me that loved thee so dearly:
But com again, that I may once yet again thee peruse,
Quickly return to thy friend, with me to remain in a safety:
Com to thy master again, com to me, com to thy Muse.
Manes, that Diogens servant, ran away in a fury:
Some wished Diogen for to go fetch him again:
Not so said Diogen, but laughed, and thought it a folly:
But pretty book I do seek; how that I might thee retain.
What shall I do? For alas, my book runs hastily gadding,
In metrifi'd poetry, not poetiz'd as I meant.
Some faults you learned tolerate: fools love to be scoffing.
Since that I thee manupend, now I to late do repent.
If that he chance to repair to the Court; I the Courtier exhort,
Not cauiling to deface this pretty book that I pend:
Though that he comes not adorned with robes; yet friendly to support
And to reform his faults, if that he can them amend.
No body shall thy report, with a glosing distichon extol;
Like popular parasite, or Thraso grandiloquent.
Let thy desert be thy praise: seek not to be praised as an Idol.
Better I had thee refil'd, if that I were eloquent.
Since that I plainly do see, thou will go from me so simpel,
Therefore I leave thee my book, friendles alone to depart:
Like Peregrine pilgrim traueling but mean in aparel,
And with a name unknown: which is a grief to my heart;
For that I see many faults, and have no time to reform them.
Run not away from me so: thy sily state I do rue.
For many will disalow, and will thee shamefuly condemn.
Zoilus is but a doult. My pretty libel, adieu.
A farewell to his book.
MY pretty book farewell: God send thee prosperus access
Unto the Court: to the Queen vouchsafe my name to be namelesse.
Thy sovereign Patroness (if please her grace to defend thee)
Can patronize thy defectes. Whom God preserve, as a bay tree,
Long to be predominant, with Lords of her privy Counsel:
Namely the Lord Keeper, with learned laws who does excel:
That Metropolitan eake, whom I think my self to be bound to;
Th'Archbishop, at Lambeth: that wise Lord Treasurer also:
And Senator Cecill; that apeares to the Realm a defender:
Son to the Lord Burleigh late dead, his wise witie father,
That sapient Nestor: which did by policy compass
Much quiet unto the Realm. For like as Caelifer Atlas,
On large broad shoulders sore pressed, propped up heaven:
So with his experience, this noble Realm was vpholden.
For why? The state of a Prince consists chiefly by counsel
Of witie grave Senators, whose wit with virtue does excel.
And I beseech God bless that noble pillar of highness,
Glorius Earl, Talbot, stout Earl of Shrewsbury; doubtless
Virtues true president: of al humane curtesy mirror:
Mirror of armipotence. Whose nobel name was a terror
Unto the French Regiment: to the Crown still known to be constant:
Worthy to be credited with a Prince, as a faithful atendant:
And to be chiefly preferred; that he may with bounty the better
Stand a defense to the Prince, to the Public weal as a pillar.
And God grant to that Earl of Oxford, mirror of highness,
Happiness in this world: God bless his Lady the Countess,
Elizabeth Trentam, that right true Maiden of honor,
Immaculat Virgin: whose house and name I do favor,
With reverence as I should. For I came my self of a Trentam,
Aunt to thee, Lady renoun'd: yet I am not known to thee Madame.
Loath I am yet to be known. For I should be known to the best sort:
Known to that Earl Deuereux: whom I pray God daily to comfort.
Vere, Deuereux, Talbot, three nobel principal howses,
Ar to be greatly renoun'd, for their nobility peerless.
Quae supra nos nihil ad nos.
And I do charge thee my book, with things not rashly to meddel,
Which are above our reach, that concern us but a littel:
Nor to detract any fame, from Peers or States that are highest.
For littel meddling, of most is thought to be wisest. Ovid. Viue tibi, and
longenomina magna fuge.

As the Poet poetiz'd, that Naso Poetical Author;
Frugaly live to thy self: flee far from great men of honor.
For many men that atend some Lords, or daily do follow,
Do but as Aesops dog, that a substance lost for a shadow.
Yet many men be preferred, by the means of great men of honor;
Such special persons which they most dearly do favor.
Farewell again pretty book: be dutiful unto thy betters:
Humbly with all reverence, submit thy self to thy Rulers.
The Dedication of the book to the Queens Majesty.
Unto the magnipotent, the renowned princes of Europ,
Emperes Elizabeth, this petie libel I give.
Which I present to thy Grace, as a prime Primirose or a Couslop,
Only the flow-er of all our Chronicles, I believe:
Skilfuly pend by the knight Sir Thomas Moore then a Courtie'r,
Learned in arts: who delin'd that, that he knew to be true,
Grounded on experience: requisite to be read of a Ruler.
This donatiue, Sovereign, deigne to receive to thy view.
Give but a grace to my verse, it mounts, O Queen, in a moment,
Up to the spang'd Element, up to that ayry Lion:
Give but a check to the same, it falls down (thrown with a contempt)
Down to the Tartarian river of hell, Phlegeton.
A prayer.
O My God, O God of hosts, God of Abraham, and God of Isack,
And the God of Jacob (thou that did regaly ransack
Tartarus infernal: who gave himself as a ransom)
And here was crucified, to redeem our souls from a thraldom)
Sanctify thy creature, inspire thy grace to my spirit:
Stand my defense, guide me with thy celestial eyesight.
O my God, O Savior, vouchsafe me grace to my speeches:
Then will I magnify thee, my mouth shall sing to thee praises
Unto thee only, my God, my voice shall still be resounding
Perpetual praises, while breath and life are abiding.
The Epistel to the Queens most excellent Majesty, my renowned Sovereign and
Princess, Elizabeth, Queen of England, France, and Irland, etc.
SO, I the man that am he, that afourds small praise to the Muses:
And yet in Hexameters, I mean to metrifie verses,
Unto the worlds Diamond, to the Phoenix rare; that does excel
In pre'minence as a Prince. Whose praise my wits ar vnabel
Here to record, as I should: as a work to large, or a matter
Fit for a Maeonian fine skillful pen to decypher.
Whose stout progenitors great fame, her glory does advance.
Which if I could Poetize, is a work yet worthy remembrance:
Grant to me no learning, Muses, thou Pagan Apollo,
Cynthia, with Charites, thou blandiloquent merry Pytho,
Mercury, with Sappho, Pallas named also Minerua, A contradictory to the
Paganiz'd invocation.

Grant to me no favor: But thou, thou mighty Iehoua,
Thou, Lord Emmanuel, Lord of celestial heaven,
Only God imperial, to me wretch terrestrial harken.
Since litel help they grant, and cannot aford any favor;
To those Idolatrous Pagan gods, yeald not an honor.
Yeald reverence to the Lord; who is the creator of all us:
And do not here atribute any praise, but wholly to Jesus.
shall we gods anger, by wilful blasphemy kindel?
When John kneeled before that blessed glorius Angel,
Do not so, said he: for I am but thy felo servant. Revel. 22. verse. 8.9.

Give thou praise to the Lord, to the Lord, that is only triumphant:
Unto whom only belongs all praise, and glory for ever.
Shall we, his creatures, then adore and inuocat other?
24. of Leuit. v. 14. and 23.
That son of Shelomith, which gods name wilfuly blaspheam'd,
Was not he stoned to death, by the Lord God rightfuly condemned?
Sorcerer hight Elimas was justly deprived of his eysight;
Act. 13. ver. 8. etc.
For that he by speeches did deputy Sergius excite
For to renounce our God: whom Paul and Barnabas also
Taught him before to believe. We should such blasphemy forgo.
Barnabas (in Synagogues) and Paul (that faithful Apostel)
Act. 14. v. 12.13 14.
Preached at Iconium: by faith, Paul healed a crippel.
When the peepel saw it, they would have done to them honor,
And brought them sacrifice, not praising God the creator.
Barnabas, of the peepel, was called Jupiter; and Paul,
Mercury: But they gave praise to the Lord God imortal.
Act. 14. ver. 12. and 13.
And in amongst them went, and rent their clothes in an anger:
We are but creatures as you, gods glory to further.
Shall we detract any praise, from Christ, our Lord God of heaven;
Like bisy-snowted swine, which vproote herbs from a garden? Similie.

Let paganiz'd parasites, that purpose smoothly to flatter,
Call to the Pagan Gods, their gods, to reforge up a matter.
Right reverent Sovereign, the renowned Princes of England,
Glorious Elizabeth, Queen of France, Queen of al Irland;
I (he that am too too bold) this simpel gift, but a trifel,
Unto thy Grace dedicate; my simpel skill to disabel.
If that I could poetize thy deserts, to thy glory coherent,
Might not I greatly rejoice? But I want art, and skill is absent.
Your luculent eyesight, to my rude Muse regaly distill.
For radiant sunnebeames displayed, will shine on a dounghill. Similie. Exampel.

If that I were Chorilus, yet a faithful mind of a Subject
Deigne to receive Sovereign, with a princelike bountiful aspect:
Plutarke, in Regum Apo.
Like Artaxerxes, stout king: whose gracius Highness
Thankfuly drank water, from palms of silly Zinetes:
And in a cup of gold, he sent to the poor man a thousand
Goulden massy darecks; yet he was but a poor sily peasant:
Like that princely Philippe, King of Macedonian Empire,
Who great courtesy showed, when a poor man gave him a dinner.
And Christ our Savior, vouchsafte to receive of a woman,
4. cha. of John verse. 6.7.8.
Which was a Samaritan, water drawn forth of a fountain,
Named Jacobs well: and Christ said; If she the perfitte
Gift of God did know, and him that did so demand it,
She would have asked Christ Jesus freely the water
Of life eternal: who could that water aford her.
Deigne then an ear to my Muse, thou Queen, whom mighty Iehoua
Regaly does beatize, as a fortunate Elizabetha.
Whose very magnificence to the type of glory does ascend:
Which to the world al abroad, thy regal virtue does extend.
As Phoebe with radiant bright beams, this world does ilustrate: Similie.

So to thy Realm (O Prince) thou do'^^ thy mercy promulgate.
All precious Diamondes, and pearls do not equaly glister: Similies.

Some stars more glitering: one Prince surmounteth another:
So my benign Sovereign, thou Queen (our gracious Empress)
Art as a true period, of true perfection endless:
Like to the stars in sky, to the sand inbountabel, in sea: Similie

So be the Lords benefits to thy self, O Queen, to thy Country.
For why? The Lord God of Hosts preserues thy prosperus estate,
Against foreign enemies: whose drifts he decrees to be frustrate.
Sentence.
For men on earth purpose: but God that rules in heaven,
Rules on earth as a God. Just God disposes of all men.
Gods providence hiden is. What man can possibly foreshew,
What future age will afourd? God alone man's destiny does know.
That God above, god alone, preserve thy Grace as a Pattern
Long to be Septriferent, this stout Realm wisely to govern.
And for all his benefits, let us all to the Lord God of Hosts grant
Perpetual praises: who to thee still stands as a Gardaunt:
Rightfuly crowned a Queen, as a rightful Queen, as a right heir
Unto the regal Crown, and lawfuly known to be daughter,
Of King Henry that eight, late King: woe ruled as a puisant
Conqueror of kingdoms, with fame and glory triumphant.
Grafton.
His father Henry the seau'nth, thy wise stout grandfather, obtained
The Imperial diadem: who vice and tyrany disdained;
As Chronicles do report. This King, by the States privy consent,
Elizabeth married, promised by former agreement:
Which was a Plantagenet, first and eld'st daughter of Edward,
Namely the fourth: who slew at Bosworth field bludy Richard,
That tyranus cruel hog, most worthily plagued for ofences.
He, by the said marriage, did unite those notabel houses,
York and Lancaster: whose long contentius envy
Caused civil intestine warfare. This conquerus Henry,
Venturus and valiant, was asygn'd by the Lord to be ruler.
Every King has a time. Thus this worlds glory does alter. Virg. Sic tra^sit
gloria mundi.

I he that once could not, nor meant, in heroical english
Rythmecal Hexameters, any book so timely to publish:
Yet when I knew that I could compose new rythmery verses,
Lately become metricall, which are right verses of Antike;
Then did I wish, that I could dedicate such books to thy person,
Worthy so great a Regent; thy deserved glory to blazon:
Which fro the East, to the West, does spread Whose fame to decypher,
More praise demeriteth, then I can now possibil utter.
Similie.
Like as a Crystal spring transparent unto the bottom,
Flows with a silver stream: So (puisant Prince) to thy kingdom,
And to thy Common weal, thou show thy self as a Princess
Merciful, and liberal thy good life virtue does express.
God to thee gave many gifts; ^^ brethen my mind can imagine:
Which do atract to thy self most hearts with a force A^amantine.
I he the same man before, as a man scarce known to the Muses,
Boldly presume to present foote-scanning rythmery verses.
Unto thee, worlds Sovereign: vouchsafe, O Queen, to peruse them:
Stand as a Princely Patron, nor (ofensiue) justly me condemn.
If tonitr'ant bisie Jove should always strike in his anger, Poetice Si
quoties peccant, etc.

Every man that ofends, with lightning flame of a thunder,
Should not he then be bereft or despoild quite of his armor?
So if I have many faults, yet good Queen stand my protector.
And I with all reverence, do beseech your gracious Highness,
Though many things at amiss, yet pardon grant to my rudeness.
Though that I, Maeonides (who writes of Hector, Achilles,
Of Troilus, Diomede, of craft-contriuer Ulysses)
Nor Maro Laureat am (who the laurel crown to the Romans
Wanne, as a Princely Poet: who recorded fame to the Trojans)
Yet, for a zeal that I have, these primor fruits of a Subject
(Lately beseem'd a Poet) with a regal friendlines accept:
For why? My pipe is of Ote, not Apollos, skilfuly compact: Poetice.

Nor Ciceroes eloquence I retain; for a work that is exact.
Truly thy Princely benign acceptance of my beginnings,
Shall my mind animate, to record some greater atemptinge.
For my delight (O Queen) my drift and only my purpose,
Is to record Chronicles; metricall verse fitly to compose,
And to refyne our speech, to procure our natural english,
Far to be more elegant; that verse may skilfuly flourish.
Which when it is re'difi'd, eloquent, and known to be perfect;
Unto thee, and to thy Realm (O puisant Prince) what a credit?
Hexameters will amend our speech (thou sacred Eliza)
Publish an Orthography, and teach us a true Idioma.
Stories are requisite to be read of States that are highest,
As Kings imperial, throned in regalitie chiefest.
If so be that Chronicles had not bin skilfuly written;
Kings valiant exployts, lords fame, and knights valor had bin
Drowned in oblivion. For time (fames greedy deuowrer) Similie.

Leaves fame vnmemoriz'd; as a tree consumed with a canker.
Historical Chronicles well penned by the learned (as aforesaid.)
Does manifest represent (as a Comedy shows, on a stage played)
Men's vice, and virtues: Similie. Similie.
as a true glass visibly does show
Men's face, and favor; their faults in visnomy to view.
For by the great diligence of men, man's memory (chiefest
Treasurer of knowledge; with learning skilfuly furnished)
Enroules in Chronicles the renowned deeds of heroic
And valiant Worthies, their fame and victory warlike.
For Chronicles do recite faults, and falls, of many Princes,
Horribly that tyraniz'd, sore plagued for their sorry vices.
Was not lofty Babel, first built by proud sorry Nimrod?
Whose arogance had a fall: Genesis chapter 10. and 11.
and was not merciles Herod
^^t. 12 v 21.23 ^^tonius fol. ^. cha. 49. Chro. chapter 13. ^s. 20 ^f kings chapter
^er. 24.
By greedy vermin spoild, that murdered so many children.
And Nero that tyrrant, the detested monster of all men,
Stabbed himself with a knife. That wicked King Jeroboam
Plagued by the Lord, that he di'd. And lewd ungodly Iehoram
Was by godly Iehu, through shoulders shot with an arrow,
Which through pierced his heart, that he languisht for very sorrow.
When that a Prince has a will, whose will does stand for a reason,
Lulled in errors lap; that will infectes, as a poison
Both to the King, and Realm. For wherein proud sorry Princes
^race. Quic^d delirant ^ges plectun (...) Achiui. ^milie.
Fondly delyre, pitiles Subjects ar plagued with a witness.
Thanks be to God, our Queen does rule with singular advice:
And with mercy benign, as a Prince dotb quallifie justice.
Our Sovereign does apeare, as goulden Cynthia shining
Glides by the firm Element, her bright beams cheerefuly showing
Unto this earthly Chaos: So her grace (glorius extant)
Shines to the common wealth, with love, and mercy regardant: Similie.

Whose special rare gifts, and virtues daintily lusture,
Like Orient Diamonds, or splendent pearls on a vesture.
All you princely Regents, you Kings (well known to be Rulers)
Learn to refrain from sin. Our Lord God terribly sinners
Impenitent does plague: not a King, nor an Emperor he spares:
All estates are alike. Who with gods dignity compares?
Cast down your Diadems, your Crowns and dignity despise:
Mere vanities count them, but seek to do good, to do justice.
Yeald reverence to the Lord, to the Lord your duty to perform,
You are Christ's Subjects, your Subjects peaceably govern.
Your pre'minence but a charge, your life but a blob, but a blossom.
When death strikes with a dart, what avails a King or a Kingdom?
^mus in ^a. de more
That Platonist, Socrates, did afirme, that a man's body living,
Was but a grave to the soul; which to felicity lasting,
Should by deserts demigrade: most divine speech of an heathen.
For by the faith in Christ, we come to the kingdom of heaven,
^ilie.
As radiant rud-y Phoebe exhales his vapory moisture
Unto the firm Element, with his ardent hot sun-y lusture:
So the God omnipotent, our souls with sins heuie laden,
Freely by mercy benign, extolles to the kingdom of heaven.
^ilie.
Death bringes every thing to decay. For like as a fresh flower
Springs for a time redolent; but can not possibil endure:
So does a king for a while reign with great dignity present;
Whose great glory decaies, whose proud pomp dures but a moment,
Like as a man does in years wax old, so should he be wiser:
And as he grows in age, so should his life be the beter.
Think this world to be vain, and think this life to be mortal:
And to the King of Kings, let us yeald out selves to be loyal.
Who to redeem our souls, ordained his only begotten,
Only beloved son, to be sent down freely from heaven,
And to be here crucified (as a sinlesse man for a sinner)
To mitigate Gods wrath, to appease his infinite anger.
Who by the death that he di'd, has cleans'd us freely from evil:
For that he conquered has sin, death, and also the Devil.
Whiles we do live, let us al live well. Time stailes away leapes, Similies.

Like as a cloud vanishes. For as every step that a man's steps,
Is but a step to the grave: so plodding age, pedetentim
Stouping, creepes on a pase. Age is to death as a pilgrim,
Which for a time dothabroad wander; but in end he returns home: Similie.

So for a time we do live, but in end death will be the bridegroom.
^tence. ^ilie.
No body can stay time. Time stays for no body. Time swift
Flies away on apase, as a bird that flies from a man's sight.
Therefore Princely Regents both vice and tyrranny forgo.
^k. chapter 8. (...). 36.
For what avails a King, what avails an Emperor also,
If that he lose his soul, to live here fortunat always?
As patient Job said, each mortal King to thy self say;
(...). chapter 1, ver.
Naked I came to the world, fro the world hence naked I shall go:
Formed of earth was I first, to the earth yet again shall I turn to.
^lesiastes. 1.
That sapient Solomon naught here, but vanity, could find,
With manyfould miseries, with great vexation of mind.
What man alive can afourd (as gods word plainly does express)
^t. 6.27. ^rouerbe.
One cubit unto his height, by carking ears that are endless?
Let not a man be to bold, though God be merciful, and stays.
For when he strikes, his stroke is a stroke importabil always:
And then he plagues, when he strikes. For where the almighty Iehoua
Rightfuly plagues for ofense, what avails a man's cataplasma?
For with a slothful pase gods anger goes to reuengement:
But when he comes, he rewards eternal pains for a torment.
Here I will end, O Queen. O Lord our only creator,
(Our Lord Emmanuel, our Christ and sole mediator)
Add to thy life many years, as he did to the King Ezechias: 2. of Kings. chapter
20. ver. 6.

Safely defend thee from harm, as he safely preserved Elias:
And that he grant to thy Grace, after this life (as a chosen
Vessel of his, purified) joys in Celestial heaven;
Ioyfuly there to remain with Jesus Christ the Redeemer,
Imparadiz'd as a Saint, with Saints in glory for ever.
As two Greek letters in Grecian Alphabet, Alpha,
First letter plaste is; but placed last is Omega:
So will I continual, first and last, praise thee for ever;
If that I could Poetize, as I would; thy glory to further.
Your Graces Subject, in faith, love, duty to command:

THE FIRST BOOK OF The preservation of King Henry the vij. when he was but
Earl of Richmond.
O Father Omnipotent, our Lord and only Redeemer,
(Which on a throne, deifi'd, there sits, and shines as a Jasper,
And as a Sardine stone, incompast round with a Rainbow, The first part of
the Revelation of Saint John in effect, verbatim.

Like to the bright Emeraud) with thy grace my spirit endow.
From which throne, lightnings, voices, with loud flashy thunders
Duly proceed. Where four and twenty colaudabil Elders
Seated in as many seats, all clothed with a white lily garment,
Crowned with Crowns of gould, on their heads stately refulgent.
Seven Lamps of fire, ar there eternaly burning:
Gods very godly spirits, on God there faithful atending.
Near to the throne is a sea of glass, which shined as a Crystal.
There four beasts full of eyes ar about that stately Tribunal:
First was like a Lion, next seemed a calfe to resembel,
Third had a face of a man, fourth beast was formed as an eagel.
Every beast of them, six wings had them to belonging:
And full of eyes ar within, day and night ioyfuly singing
Three times, holy be God the almighty, that ever is holy:
Holy before which was, which is, which shall be God only.
And when those four beasts gave praise to the Lord God Jesus,
Which on that throne sat (who for ever lived, who redeemed us)
Those reverent Elders their Crowns commendably threw down,
And fell flatly before that Lord, that sat on a Tribune:
Worshipped him that lived, and lives with glory for ever.
For thou glory deseru'st, that made all things by thy power.
Unto whom Archangels, and Angels greatly rejoicing,
With Cherubins, Seraphins, are there eternaly singing.
Thou father only my God, which art, wast, shall be for ever: Genesis chapter 1. ver.
1.2. etc.

Who the terestriall Orb (which stays it self by the Center)
Quadruply partiting; fire, air, earth, watery substance,
Out of an ugly Chaos did frame, and store with abundance
Of several creatures, and made man last (as an image
Like to thy self) upright, to behold this globe with a visage: Genesis chapter 1. v.
^ and. ^7.

Placed him in Paradise, in a sacred garden, in Eden:
Where, by the fondnes of Eve, they lost those joys then of heaven:
Thou Lord only for aye, whose power and glory supernall
Genesis ca. 2. verse. 2.
This star-y spang'd Element, and this whole world universal
Made (as a mighty Monarche) n six days; only the seventh
Day he reserved to be kept, as a sacred day, as a Saboth:
Which God by Moses did apoint and consecrat holy:
And that day to be kept (by the cou'nant) from labor, only.
Thou, he the same very God, three persons, one God in essence,
Exodus ca. 20. ver. 8.9.10.
Raise up aloft to thy self, my weak spirit hale to thy presence.
Leauy the lines that I write, let thy law still be my load-starre;
Still to direct me my course, here trewly to write; that I differ,
No not a word, fro thy word; that I may in mind as a Christi'an
Glorify Christ crucified; to detest that sect of a Pagan.
Sanctify me, my Iehoue, in Christ I repose al afiance:
Therefore I humbly beseech, of thee my Lord, an asistance:
Grant that I may Poetize that credibil history, written
By Sir Thomas Moore; of an english story the maiden.
For why? The learned knight wrote that, that he knew to be certain;
Troth, with his art to deline, credit of both safely to maintain.
For that he was then alive in Court, in prime of his young years:
And by that experience, that he knew and learned of others
By good inteligence, he reserved for his history faultlesse;
Thereby the truth to deline; quite void of flattery doubtless.
Which when he had manupend, in brief prose skilfuly finnisht,
Straight he the same (to be known) in print did apoint to be publish^.
In which book I do mean, by the grace of God, to deliver
Nothing else but a truth; gods name and glory to further:
Nor with a pen that is hyr'd, I write; verse smoothly to compile, Similie

Like glauering parasite; with a veil, lewd states to depensile.
If so that envy repine, and slaundring tongues do calmunize
Troth will in end be my praise, and shame the reward to the devilish.
Fear not at all, sil-y Muse, to report so thankles an errant:
Boldly declare to the best, their faults: troth shall be thy warrant.
This Knight Sir Thomas, was made Lord Chaunceler after:
Who was known to be learned,, of a chief assembly the speaker:
Grafton.
He both lost his life, of his office made a refusal,
For that he would not agree to the Kings supremacy regal.
My Muse encouraged (first praising God as a giver
Of all good benefits) these words she began to deliver:
North Sovereign Phoenix, thou stout Queen, famus Eliza,
Of grace and sapience (peerless Prince) sacred Idea,
Deigne with a gratius eye, to peruse (O Christian Empress)
This pretty book manupend, manumiz'd to thy gratius Highness.
Al you earthly Kings, you Kings aduenturus, hearken:
You States pontifical, with atentiue ears to me listen:
You Lords imperial, of her Highness wise privy Counsel,
(Whose sapient wisdoms to record, my wits are vnabel)
You Lords, in general, that atend in Court on a Princess
(Only the worlds Sovereign) lend listening ears to my verses:
You Catholic Divines, graduat divinity Doctors,
Which be the sauory salt, of Gods word lively professors:
You sapient Senators of Innes of Court, that are ordained
To minister Justice, by the Queens authority constrained:
Arts reverent amatists, of both Figure.
University famus
(Whose Orient fine wits, of Roman verse be desirus)
Deigne to behold this verse, although it seem but a trifel.
For many times you see, that a pearl is found in a Muskel. Similie.

Here I do mean to recite, how our Queens Grandfather, Henry,
That King magnanimus, with a stout and conquerus army,
With valerus chiuisance, did a tyrrant manfuly conquer,
Richard, lately the King, that vile, and shameful usurper:
Henry's fame to report, in scanning verse, as I purpose:
Prince Edward stratagiz'd, and Richards tyrrany disclose.
Grafton.
When stout King Edward, at a field near Teuxbury gotten,
Where Queen Marg'ret was, with her eld'st son, forcibly taken,
Named to be Prince Edward: which was there bluddily murdered
By tyranus Richard,
And she sent prisoner to London: where she remained
Till that her own father had, (that french Duke named to be Reiner,
Of Sicyl also the King) with a ransom kindly redeemed her.
When Jasper (stout Earl of Pembrooke) natural uncle
Unto this Earl Richmond, when he knew how stoutly the battle
Was fought and manupriz'd, and saw all things to go backward:
How stout Earl Warwick, was slain by conquerus Edward,
And how Henry the sixth in Tower safe kept was abiding:
How London citizens disdained him, now to be their King:
How his confederates, and frieends grew weaker on each side:
And how King Edward, himself and his cosen enui'd;
Wittily considering (as a wise Earl) sought to prevent it,
Both their lives to preserve, where they might safer inhabit.
In peril ambiguus, that course is best to be taken, Sentence.

Which shall avail to do good. In time privy danger is helped:
As by the sequel apeares.
Mindfuly Muse memorize, first how this vertuus Henry
(Saved alive many times, by the Lords protection only)
Came to the Crown as a King, here sent by the Lord his apointment:
Sent to the Realm as a Prince, that should here make an atonement.
Exampels in diverse places of the Bibel.
For Gods sacred elect are straungely preserved by the Lord God.
Our Lord and Savior was saved from murtherus Herod:
From the Lions, Daniel: from strength of mighty Golias,
Holy David: Joseph, from brethren: faithful Elias,
From wicked Iesabel: that younger godly Tobias
Saved by the Lords Angel: and was not trustily Jonas
Kept in a whales belly safe, three nights? God saved Machabeus:
Noe with his own families, was saved from destiny grieuus:
Exodus chapter 2. v. 6.7.8.9.
Moses thrown in a flagge, to be drowned, was saved by the daughter
Of tyranus Pharaoh, manumiz'd to be nursed by the mother:
Israel, and Shadrach, Meshach with Abednego likewise.
Grafton. fol. 712. Edw, 4.
Gods divine providence his blessed will will acomplish.
First when he was but an Earl, he being then but of young years,
Was by the Lords providence preserved from many dangers
And peril of losing his life, and life of his uncle
Martial Earl Pembrocke: who behau'd himself as a nobel
And valiant Chiuali'r, when they were like to be taken
By Roger hight Vaghan; whose craft was speedily foreseen:
And he the said Vaghan, who thought them surely to murder, Grafton. fol. eodem.

Rightly received a death, that he purposed falsely for other.
Those fraudulent Judges, that acused falsely Susanna,
Rightfuly were condemned, by the Prophet sent by Iehoua;
Worthily stoned to death, as they had wrongfuly judged
Godly Susanna to die: thus God th'vngodly rewarded. History of Susanna. Ester.

And on a Gallow tree, that proud presumptuus Hamon
Rightly was hanged, that aledg'd to guiltless Mardoche treason,
This foresaid Vaughan was charged, by the King his apointment,
For to aprehend those Earls; but he therein mist of his intent.
Each self-will of a King, or command, is not a godly
Thing to be done. For a Prince enraged fiercely with envy,
Seeks to do wrong causeless; which God will avenge in his anger.
(For God on high, God above, knows all) for he plagues an ofender.
Mark what a chance foloed. These Earls fled thence to the Castle.
Grafton.
Of Pembrooke: who were eftsoons pursued by the subtle
Fierce Morgan Thomas, who the Castle strongly besieged,
Environed with a trench: yet they were safely preserved
By David ap Tbomas, who the siege raised; yet very brother
Unto the said Morgan. Can men gods purposes alter?
1. Sam. chapter 20. ver. 35, etc.
Was not godly David, by the means and faithful atonement
Of Jonathan, preserved from King Saules murderus intent?
Henry the sixth propheci'd (who this Earls state and very favor
Viewed for a while; noting his Princelike witty behaui'or:)
Lo this is he, for a troth, that in end shall surely by wisdom, Grafton fol.
692. Edw, 4.

By valor of Knighthood, and stoutnes ataine to the Kingdom.
This good King (as a Prince inspired) did prophecy trewly,
For what he told, proou'd true, by gods revelation only.
For God alowes his elect, several gifts. Every perfect
Good gift comes fro the Lord, by the gift of gods very spirit. Iam, 1.17.

For the Prophets propheci'd of Christ: God gave his Apostels
Maruelus and strange gifts, as he gave his glorius Angels. 1. Pet. 1. v. 10.11.

Now to my matter again.
These Earls, safely preserved, durst not stay there any longer;
But got away, in all have, from thence, for fear of a danger.
Like as a light foot Roe, from quick-sent hounds to the green wood, Similie.

Lustily bounceth away, to save life, skips on a maine scud:
So these Earls got away from thence, to Timby, that haven
Town in Wales: to the which by constraint luckily driven,
They made provision for ships. And like as a Swallow
Similies.
Quickly the skies does sheare; or rather like as an arrow
Flies from a strong man's bow: So they from thence with a Navy
Grafton fol. 713. Edw. 4.
Sailed to the Duke Francis; who received them both very friendly:
Faithfuly them promising, that they should have his asistance
For to do them pleasure, and what they wanted, alowance.
Where these fortunate Earls, in great security living,
Safely remained a while, King Edwards anger avoiding:
Ioyfuly there passing their time, where he with his uncle
Highly regarded at Arms, at Tylt, and Turnee did excel.
Tempora mutantur, etc.
Every time has a change: we in times mutabil alter.
Gods will prescient prescribes a determinate order,
His great glory to raise.
Can minds associat to kingdoms, amity foster?
Or perfect lovers, can they riuality suffer? In Lucan.

Caesar could not abide to be submisse, or to be loyal
To valiant Pompey, that acounted no man his equal.
Every King has his heir, or next to the Crown, in a suspect:
For that he thinks, that he will not prove so true, as a subject.
Love to be Kings and Kings breed brothers mutual hatred, Sentence.

No faith observing, like tyrrants set by no kindred.
Can faith and falshoode, in self same seat be resiaunt? Sentence.

Such contrarieties are placed flatly repugnant.
Mark what a chance happened, that counter-checkt, in a moment,
All their Courtly delights, to their clean contrary Judgment:
For when as Edward namely the fourth, did know for a certain,
That these venturus Earls were sailed safely to Britain,
Unto the foresaid Duke, and there lived friendly together;
Highly regarded of him, nor at all did fear any danger.
Grafton fol. 715. Edw. 4.
These sorry new tidings, did aflict his mind not a littel:
For that he thought those Earls, might bring him quickly to trubbel.
Ambassadors therefore to the Duke he sent of a purpose,
With grave discretion, his message wisely to disclose:
Who did acomplish his heasts, like wise States made many proffers
Unto the Duke, promising large gifts, and bountiful offers:
So that he would vouchsafe, those English Lords to deliver.
Unto whom immediate, this Duke thus framed an answer:
So to do, it were not requisite, nor stood with his honor.
But least that those Lords, should seek elsewhere any succor,
To prejudice their King, he devised to seclude them asunder,
With vigilant persons to be safe kept, one from another:
And from them to remove each Page, and every servant,
Which was an English man, that there were on them atendant.
Answered in this sort, they took their leave with obeisance:
And so returned to the King, to show their faithful atendance.
Who when he heard these news, he believed that he stood in a safety:
His mind was quieted, quite freed from factius envy.
Therewithal, he to the Duke forthwith then wrote in a letter,
How that he would him yearly reward; with thanks for his answer:
Friendly requesting him, that he would those words but acomplish,
Which of his own free will, he did so faithfuly promise.
See what a suspitius mind works: how greedines of gould
Princelike minds does ataint, by force of flattery contrould.
Like as a sulphurus heat (encompast round) lies hollow, Similie.

Closed in a vapory clowd, there struggling strives for an issue;
Which with a strange rattling, with a rumbilo loud flashy thunder,
Filles th'element with a noise, and center of earth with a wonder:
So privy suspicion, conceived in heart with a fury,
Breeds great displeasure, and raging cankerus envy.
Ovid. Principijs obsta Scro medicina paratur, etc.
For when King Edward had better pondered all things,
He (that had experience) sought first to prevent the beginnings,
Least that he might be deposed. When a wound with mallady festreth,
And grows inueterate, that sore what surgery cures?
When nature vanishes, which cannot work any longer,
What medicine can avail, man's former health to recover?
Flexibil at first is young tender tree to be bowed:
Grown by continuance very big, disdeignes to be moved.
For when he considered, that rightly this Earl fro the lynage
Sprouted of Henry the sixth, then he sought for a further auantage. Grafton.
fol 73^. Edw 4.

For that he knew well enough, if that there were any living
Righteus heir to the Crown, that lin'aly came from his offspring,
Might bring his Diadem, and regal scepter in hazard.
Therefore again to the Duke he charged grave men to go forward,
Doctor Stillinton with two more, sent with a treasure
Once yet again to present, his Grace more largely to pleasure;
If that he would but allow and permit curteus Henry
(Named Earl of Richmond) with them to return in a safety,
For special causes; that their King, bountiful Edward,
Would join in marriage (wherein then he seemed to be forward)
Elizabeth to this Earl; which was well known to be daughter
To their liege Sovereign: which luckily fortuned after.
Thereby this Earl might have those lands that he claimed in asurance,
If that he were married so nere to the King in alyance.
And so the King stood sure, that none might make any tytel
Unto the Crown, but he might all foreign faction expel.
They in all have get away their message wisely to transpose:
Who to the Duke at large, each particularity disclose.
When that he their message did know, he paused for a good while,
What was best to be done, since The Earl lived there but in exile:
But when he considered that he should be matched with a Virgin,
Their own Kings daughter, to be linktin league with his own kin:
Where that he might be preferred to some great dignity present,
There as an Earl, or a Duke, to rule by the King his apointment;
First he began to deny: but pleased with treasury given,
What with soliciting, and gould so gainfuly gotten,
Kindly this answer he gave; that he was content to deliver
Henry that Earl, not a sheep to the wolf, but a son to the father.
Similie.

And in a letter he wrote, how The Earl was much had in honor,
Both for his own wisdom, valiaunce, and witty behaui'our.
They then seized of a prey, which they had greatly desired,
Thankfuly took their leave, and from thence quickly departed
Unto the town of Saint Malo, bord'ring near to the sea shore:
Minding thence to depart, when ships were made ready. Wherefore
The Earl when he knew that he should be returned home, for very sorrow
Since that he was so betrayed, he fell sore sick of an ague:
Imagining that he should, as soon as he landed in England,
Be stratagiz'd; but see: who can Gods dignity withstand?
Gods divine providence, and sacred dignity supreme
Rules al humane cause; though humane causes ar extreme. Sentence.

Mark gods omnipotence: whose works ar wonderus, extant
Still to be seen: who preserved this venturus Earl at an instant,
Saved (as a strange miracle) by the faithful love of a stranger,
For many times men ar helped, and saved by the means of another,
Like as a Physician does seek man's health to recover:
So will a friend, for a friend, in trubbels stand a defender.
Vulcan against Troy was: but Trojans friend was Apollo,
And Venus indiferent, Pallas not: mortaly Juno
Malliced Aeneas, as alyed wholly to Turnus;
Yet was he by Venus help, preserved from her enmity grieuus,
Vndubitate Pylades was a friend to woeful Orestes:
To Damon, Pythias: Patrocles friended Achilles:
Diverse examples. Virg.
Alcyde aided Hylas, Aeneas friend was Acbates:
Eurialus, Nisus: Diomedes friended Ulysses:
And to be chief memoriz'd, that firm and trusty Zopirus,
*Who cut his own ears off, Babylon to procure Darius.
Darius stout King in his hand fair Pomegranat having, Pl^tarch. in Apo.

One of his especial friends asked him (merrily jesting)
What things especial (if he might have that that he wished)
Would he request for his own? As there were grains to be counted,
So many friendly Zopyres (as a wise King) wisely did answer.
For what more pretius, then a friend that friendeth another? Pluta. in Apo.

As fire and heat both, cannot be parted asonder:
So love and friendship cannot be without one another.
For when on John Chewlet (that was for a Courtier, only
Counted a stout man at arms) who loved this gratius Henry,
Heard that he was very sick, and from thence like to be conueigh'd, Grafton.
fol. 738. Edw. 4.

Shortly to King Edward, he (therewith wofuly dismayed)
Posted amain to the Court, and present stepped to the Kings Grace,
Heavily perplexed: who looking sad with a pale face,
Stood as amassed before this Duke, with a stearne heavy countenance,
And not a word did speak: as a man that wanted his vttrance,
Therewithal astonished, to behold so fearful an object
(Like as a Prince vigilant) he did some treachery suspect:
Yet when he considered this Knights state, chearefuly thus spoke;
Show me the cause (good John) that thou so monefuly do look.
Therewithal he, to the Duke reverent, with an humbel obeisance,
Boldly declared what he meant, and spoke with a treatibel vttrance;
Sentence.
Pardon I crave, Sovereign, if I speak: Truth verily never
Shameth his own master. What auailes then fondly to flatter?
Hear then a truth, O Duke, for like as Cynthia shining,
Inueloped with a cloud, obscures her self from ilustring:
Similie.
Semblably truth for a time obscured, many times lies hidden;
Truth yet in end will apeare: truth never permaneth unknown.
O my renowned Duke, will thou now falsify promise,
Firmly betrothed to this Earl? What a fault is this, what a blemmish?
O that I were buried. Shall I live to know thy dishonor?
Truly my mind (O Duke) is vexed with an infinite honor, Similie.

For that I greatly do grieve, that this stout Earl to the slaughter
Should (as a lamb) be betrayed, and there to be slain of a Butcher.
This will bring thy renown, O Prince (which every man's mouth
Extols up to the clouds) to decay. For (plainly to tell troth)
If so be (my Sovereign) thou will so shamefuly suffer
Henry this Earl to depart, thou stain'st thy glory for ever:
Thy former valiance, and fame that shine to the worlds end,
Shall as a smoke pas away. Shall a Prince such craftines intend? Similie

Peace good John (quoth the Duke) peace, peace: I pray thee believe me:
For these Embasadors do protest and say that he shall be
Grafton. fol. ^38. Edw. 4.
Spows'd to the Kings daughter (which their King faithfuly promised)
And to be next to the King, plaste in authority chiefest.
Well, said John to the Duke, in whom shall shame be reputed,
If that he dye by the way, or in English Realm be beheaded?
For that I dare venture my life, that it is but a practice
This sily soul to deceive, this sick Earls life to relinquish:
If that he shall be beguiled in such sort, let me no longer
Live to repair to thy Court: if he should dye, dye had I rather.
Laertius. lib. 4 chap. 2.
When Dionise the tyrant, would needs have Plato beheaded,
Zenocrates answered; not before that mine be deprived.
But many say, that a King that knows not how to disembel,
Knows not at all to rule: such sleights be devised by the Devil.
If that I may be so bold to speak but a word in his absence,
O my benign Sovereign, lend ear and give to me credence.
For why? This Earl of a truth lies sick, and likely to perish. Similie.

If fro thy Realm he depart, what Prince will trust to thy promise?
Nothing more perilus, then a compound poysonus honny:
No body more trecherus, then a foe, that seems to be friendly.
With tunes harmonicall sweet singing merrily Meremaides Similie.

Falsely betray Mariners: So these men sent, as aforesaid,
Smoothly deceive your Grace, with fair speech, and money given.
Under a cloak of love, lies concea'ld craftines hidden. Sentences.

O fond discrecion, on fair words wholly relying.
Experiment best is, where words, and deeds are agreeing.
Craft has a godly pretense; but a murderus end. Similie.
For a fowler
Merrily plays on a pipe, when he craftily takes a plouer.
Iscariot Judas, that false and wicked Apostel,
Falsely betrayed with a kiss, and sold our Lord for a trifel.
Laomedons falsehood ( Priamus father, and son of Ilus)
Caused his own bludy death, and loss of Troy, city famus.
1 Macha. chapter 11
Was not Alexander, by craft of King Ptolemaeus,
His false fath'r in law, deprived of his Empery famus?
Bluddy Polymnestor (which of gould was so desirus)
Beastly did obtruncate Priamus son, young Polidorus.
Virg.
More to recite, what auailes?
Therefore I humbly beseech your Grace (O Duke) to remember
Grafton fol. 739. Edw, 4.
This disconsolate Earl, that lies near dead of a fever:
Send that he may be retained. Let not thy glory be blemmisht:
Keep faith inuiolate, let a prince perform what he promised.
Thus this Knight, to the Duke, his whole mind (wofuly distressed)
Plainly without any guile, or dissimulation, expressed.
Lastly, by persuasions, this wise Duke (ruled by the Counsel
Of good John Chewlet; who this Earls state knew to be feebel)
Sent Peter Landoyse, chief Treasurer, only the foresaid
Ambassadors to delay; that The Earl might safely be conuai'd
Unto the Sanct'ary there: which was with speed then efected.
Which so delighted his heart, that his health there quickly revived.
Like as an Heart in a chase, that is hurt or pincht with a greyhound, Similie.

Bounceth away on a maine, and runs most swiftly, to get ground:
Yer that he should b'imbost, fro the greyhound speedily does get,
And privy lewnes in a brake, imbaies himself in a thicket;
There to recover his hurt: So this Earl (escapte from a danger)
Lived in a place priuiledg'd, his former health to recover.
Would to God every Prince, that rules in every Kingdom,
Would be so ruled by the good wise counsel, and by the wisdom
Of plain trouth-speakers, and also that every Courti'er
Would not aledge any lies to the Prince, to defame on another.
Now to my matter again.
When these Embasadors perceived they were so deluded,
Grafton. fol. 739. Edw 4.
Both of an Earl, their prey, and of gould freely delivered;
Told Peter Landoyse, their king would take it in ill part,
They to return so deceived, of their Earl and money homeward.
But Peter Landoyse assured them, that he should be
Safe in a sanct'ary kept (which they would warily foresee)
Or to be straightly detein'd, in a safer custody forthwith;
So they need not at all, to doubt or fear any mischief.
They pacified by the means of Landoyse curteus answer,
Thought it a folly to stay in Britain Realm any longer:
But willed Landoyse (to the Duke their duty remembering)
Those promises to be kept, their leave there then fuly taking:
Who promised that he would.
So these Embasadors sailed thence, and landed in England. Grafton. fol. 755.
Edw. 4.

And there told to the King each chiefest point of his arrand.
Who when he heard their speech, persuaded partly by reason,
How that he should be detein'd there safe, or safe in a prison
(He not at all fearing th'intendment of fory persons)
Showed himself as a Prince, more bountiful unto the Commons,
And liberal to the poor.
But time his course has: time staylesse daiely does happen, Sentences.

With swift breach curelesse, with gould not again to be gotten.
O wavering fortune, when thou seem most to be smiling, Poetice.

Mutabil intendment meanest, and mischievus ending.
Every time has an end, O worldly variety, never
Known to remain constant! What is here that permaneth ever?
For stout king Edward, when he found himself to be sore sick,
And when he thought that he was (in a manner) past any physic,
Straight to the Queens kindred, did send on away in a poste-hast;
Grafton fol. 760. and fol. 761. Edw. 5.
Unto the Lord Rivers (whom he knew to be firm, to be steadfast)
And to the Lord Hastings (Lord Chamberlain then of England)
And to the Lord Marquess (whom she first had by her husband
Named Sir John Gray, which was made knight in a battle
Fought at Saint Albons, and there was slain: who did excel
In valor of Knighthood)
Willing them to repair to the Court, with speedines, eftsoons,
And to resort to the King, for diverse and many reasons.
Who to the Court in all have did come: who courtly saluting
Were resaluted again, on another semblably greeting.
Every Lord that came to the Court, by the King his apointment
Went to the Kings presence. When he saw them there to be present,
He took them by the hands (though inward panges with a sorrow
Greatly molested his heart) and, underset with a pillow,
Spoke to them, as foloeth:
My Lords, and kynsmen, your presence heartily welcome: King Edwards last will
or admonition to the Queen, his children, and Nobility.

Whose frendshippes I found more sure to me, than a kingdom.
My life is but a blast, I feel death woeful aproching:
And I rejoice, that I have my friends here at my departing.
My body wastes away, I find my self to be feebel,
Also my blud to decay: I feel my self but vnabel
For to pronounce many words. Therefore, my Lords, to me listen.
Concord in friendship, be faithful unto my children:
And to my Son, your Prince, I charge you for to be loyal,
Safe to preserve his Grace, to defend this Realm universal.
For the Cicil tyrrants could find no greater a torment,
Then cruel envy, that hagge, which fosters deadly reuengement.
Seneca in Epist. lib. 14.
Marcus Agrippa declared that small things daily, by concord,
Eftsoons grow to be great: and great things, fondly by discord,
Quickly declyne to ruin.
Plutark in reg. Apo. theg. and Stob. ser. 82.
That grave old sapient Scyllurus, named Chironensis
(Four score sons who begat) when he lay sick, thus did he publish:
Every one, dear sons, in his hand here take but an arrow,
And break them forthwith. Which they did speedily. But now
Each on a sheafe of shaftes, my sons, take, forcibly break them,
Which to do, each did asay; but could not. Then with a solemn
Similie.
Speech thus he spoke; As you could not them break: So, my children,
True fyrme and constant conjunction of many brethren
No body can dissolve. Therefore live friendly together.
If so be you separate your selves each one from an other,
Then shall your enemies (as a prey snatched up of a Tiger)
You (disagreeing so) with a small force easily conquer.
So my beloved Lords, if you, by malicius envy,
Shall fall at variaunce, which of you stands in a safety?
Prosperus are Kingdoms, public weals statefuly flourish, Sentence.

Where States concording do perfect amity stablish:
But when a Realm disagrees, that Realm is seen very seldom
Long to remain a Monarche. For certain every Kingdom
Hatefuly disseuered (faith and tranquillity wanting)
Turned is up side down, ruinus disconsolat ending.
Hate does a Realm ruinate. Therefore my Lords, I beseech you,
Every one to be friends, my precepts duly to follow.
Every Lord, by the hand, there present took on an other
(Who did apeare to be friends) though their hearts were far asunder.
And then he spoke to the Queen sore greev'd: who mournefuly looking,
Tears from her eyes gusht forth, as bubbling blobbes from a welspring.
Farewell dearly beloved: your children charily cherish,
See them well to be bred with good and singular advise.
And you, my children, be dutiful unto the mother:
Use these your kinsmens counsel, in stead of a father.
For litel young children should wisely be ruled, by the counsel
Of wity grave Senators, whose fame and virtue does excel.
And, with a sorroful heart his children sadly beholding,
Stretched his hand to them all, these same words faintily speaking;
God bless you children, farewell Lords dearly beloved:
Who with trickling tears (sad sighing) woefully mourned.
And then he held up his hands to the Lord, his mercy beseeching,
And to receive his soul, to the joys that are ever abiding.
Therewithal he faynting, in a swoune grew straight to be speachlesse,
Gasping breath who did yeald, with a pale face and body senseless.
Whose soul imparadiz'd, I believe is with the Creator,
Our Lord Emmanuell, our Christ, and sole mediator.
Who when he had regaliz'd 3. years and credibly twenty,
Tomb'd in a fair monument, at Windsore lies, in an abbey.
How that he died, many men did doubt. For he died on a suddayn.
Sundry, by surfeit, afirm'd: which no body knew to be certain:
But many thought, that he was put away, by the vile privy treason
Of tyranus Richard, by the means of some sorry poison:
As Sir Thomas More, in his own book skilfuly penned,
Thought (by the speech that he learned) that he was sure privily poysned.
And not a thing unlike. For he spared no body, whose life
Might dominire as a King, whose life might work him a mischief.
He was a vile Machauile, and still took time at a vauntage.
To work such stratagemes, his lewd mind gave him a courage.
Similie.
As wax is molify'd, and clay made hard, by the sunshine:
So to the word of God, good men's hearts daily will enclyne:
But lewd are hardened by the word. Such obstinat error
Permaneth in reprobates: whose end is damnable horror.
Description of Edward the fowerth.
This valiant Edward was a Prince, of a beawtiful aspect:
Whose face shyn'd with a fair sanguine complexion indeckt:
Whose yelo burnished hair did shine, like glorius amber:
Similies.
Whose gray eyes twinkling, like stars, did cheerefuly glister,
Comelines of person, very tall of bodily stature:
Exquisit every part was featured: and of a nature
Merciful and liberal: whose stout heart (bouldly by wisdom
And politic valiaunce) of right did atayn to the kingdom.
He was a Prince patient, in great prosperity pleasant,
And not at all arogant, in great adversity constant,
Not timorus wavering: to steadfast friend very faithful:
To fra'dulent enemies, se^ere, implacabel, hateful:
Fortunat in warfare: but somewhat gi-uen (in excess)
To womanish daliaunce, as his history plainly does express.
This stout king Edward many times would say, that he loved well
Three special paragons, in seu'ral gifts who did excel:
First was wily by kind: but an other seemed to be godly:
Shores wife was meriest, as a woman void of al envy.
The just and lawful title, that Richard Duke of York, father to king Edward,
made to the Crown of England.
RIchard Plantagenet, Duke of York, rightly the garland
Sought by law to regaine; his right to the Crown then of England:
And he preferred a byll, to the nobil common asembly,
Grafton fo. 757. et 758.
Held at Westminster. Where after merciful Henry
(Namely the sixth) his death, they all (there jointly together)
Granted by parliament.
Gave this Realm to the Duke, his right heirs in the remainder.
But this stout Richards stout lucklesse mind was vnabel,
For to prolong so long: but in end was slain in a battle,
Near to the town Wakefield (and left here these many children;
Edward, George, Richard: all three well known to be brethren)
And yet he swear many times by solemn oaths, Stow. fol. 944. and fol. 972.
that he never
Would any treason atempt, or against him raise any power.
His three sons, whom I named, were like three Martial Hectors,
All of a stoutnes alike, on another glory detractors.
This foresaid Richard, to the foresaid fortunat Edward,
Was father vndubitate: son and heir namely to Richard,
Stout Earl of Cambridge;
Who married Dame Anne, sole heir and daughter of Edmund
Mortimer, Earl of March, Richards niece, namely the second.
So that he was, by the laws, right lawful heir to the Kingdom:
Which Edward did ataine by force, and partly by wisdom.
Henry the fourth did usurp, and put down wrongfuly Richard,
Second King by name, at Pomfort slain, by the coward
Sir Pierce of Exton: who struck him down, as a butcher
Strikes an ox, on his head. Woe worth so shameful a monster.
This trecherus bludy Duke did bring eight tal men in harness,
Grafton fol. 412. Henry. 4.
Each man a bill in his hand, like thieues, to murder his Highness:
Who with a bill that he got by force, did manfuly withstand
Those Machauile hypocrites (for he killed four men with his own hand)
Till that he was struck down by the Knight: who leapt in a chay-er
Like crauenus coward, to repose him self from a danger.
The Second book of the tyranny and usurpation of king Richard: and how king
Henry the seventh, when he was Earl of Richmond, was preserved in his time.
A prayer.
I (He, that here does a peale to the sacred seat of a Kingly,
Kingly tribunal throne, of a King celestial only,
Only the King of Kings, the triumphant Lord God imortall.
Three persons, one God, deifi'd with glory coequall)
Humbly before thee my God, that King, and Lord God of heaven,
Wholly my self prostrate give ear, O Lord to me listen: Ephe. 2.5, 8.

Sanctify me by thy grace, and justify me by thy mercy,
For by the grace of God, comes our salvation only.
Grant that I may paraphrase, stout Henry's glory to publish,
And to promulgat abroad King Richards tyrrany devilish.
I He, that only before (in Roman rythmery verses)
Did modulate, with a thin oten pype, fortunat Henry's
Flight that he made to the Duke, with his uncle; there in, a safety
Both to remain for a time, till time should prove to be friendly.
Which was a work of thanks: But now, now, murtherus horror,
And Machauile stratagemes I record of a lewd malefactor,
That did usurp as a king, that killed his own very brethren,
Murdered his Nephues wife, and many ^^ores, or a sudden,
Mournefuly Muse manifest the detested deeds of a tyrrant,
Monster of all mankind; whose sins to the world ar aparant:
With salt watery tears, this woeful tragedy pensill:
Tears, from a sabel pen of direful Ebony, distill.
I to the clouds seek not to mount, like Icarus in sky: Ovid. poetice.

Nor like proud Phaeton, with a mind presume to be lofty.
Witty Thales maiden, that saw him look up on heaven,
And in a ditch to decline; he is well served, quoth the maiden,
For that he looked aloft, when he should have looked on his own feet.
Look not aloft sily Muse: but show thy self to be discreet.
Here I do mean to declare (O Queen) how shamefuly Richard,
That Duke of Gloucester (but a younger brother of Edward,
Lately the King) did ataine to the Crown, and dignity regal.
Trewly my mind does abhor that I should here make the recital,
What Machauile policies, what shifts, what crafty devises,
What tyranus stratagemes he devised, to crucify Princes.
First of al, here to begin; he stabbed and killed with a dagger
Grafton fol. 713. Edw, 4.
Henry the sixth, when he was safe kept (as a prisoner) in Tower.
For that he considered King Henry's life was an hind'rance,
Both to the King, and him: by the which they wanted asurance.
Therefore he did this fact, his brother firmly to settel
In throne of Regiment (whose state he knew to be fickel)
For that he knew that he might, when a sure foundation is laid,
Build, as he would himself. Can a building stand that is unstaid?
Similie.
Like as an hungry Lion (ramping) will seek to deuow-er
Every beast that he meets, til he has full apeased his hunger:
Sentence. Nulla fides, regni socijs. c and.
So this vile bludy Duke their deaths did wilfuly conspire,
Which did opose themselves, that he might not ataine to this Empire.
For greedy thirst of gould, and fervent love of a Kingdom,
All felo mates does abhor: there faith is found very seldom.
Like as a weak patient, that lies sore sick of a dropsy, Similie

Drinks, yet is always dry; so that no liquor, his hasty
Or greedy thirst, can alay: Grafton. fol. 781. and fol. 719. Edw. 5.
So minds that proudly desi-er
Imperial regiment, still thirst, and long for an Empire.
Next he, the Duke Clarence (his brother) caused in a malmsey
Butte to be drowned, as a Duke (though guiltless) found to be guilty:
Immagining that he might, then sooner ataine to the Kingdom,
When that he was put away. For he diu'd each drift to the bottom.
Like Auroras bird, that fluttereth up to the welkin, Similie.

Soareth aloft higher, then a gross man's sight can imagine:
So this proud greedy Duke (whose mind so lofty did aspire)
Reached a thought higher, than mean wits thought, to this Empire.
O what a vile perilus serpent, Sentence.
what a cormoran helhound
Is cruel ambition! which seeks man's glory to confound.
For minds insatiate will atempt still, still, to be highest:
First to be greatly preferred; next, equal; then to be chiefest.
See James. 3. v. 16 17.
Ambitius wisdom comes not from above; but is earthly,
Sensual, and devilish, contentius, and full of envy:
But sapience from above, is gentel, merciful, harmless,
Wrongfuly not judging, but void of hypocrisy doubtless.
Now to proceed, as I meant.
King Edward, when he knew that he was so spitefuly drowned,
His sorry misfortune, and lewd luck, greatly repented.
For when as other Lords would speak for a lewd sorry person
(Humbly beseaching him, that he would vouchsafe him a parson)
Sadly the King would say, many times, O brother unhappy!
For whom, no body would once seem to request any mercy.
But many men do repent, when it is too late to redress it.
That privy vile bludy fact, that he did so shamefuly permit,
Struck a remorse in his heart.
Surely the more that a mind is clogd with a grevius offense,
More dolor and anguish does torment daily the consci'ence.
Sundry report diverse reasons of their privy malice,
Fiercely revived again; each cause yet proved but a surmise. Grafton fol.
741. Edw. 4.

For why? The King and Queen suspected a prophecy fore-tould,
Which they immagined would prove to be true; that a G should
(Thought to be George Clarence) their nobil progeny supplant.
Which soon was verified, and proved to be true by the tyrrant,
That Duke of Gloucester; when he was proclaimed a Pro^ector:
Who to the Kings children, did prove their sole malefactor.
O fond suspicions of minds? Who can the characters
Of futur happes foretell, set down by celestial orders?
Similie.
Like as a cocks crowing, or crackling flame of a fy-er,
Daunteth a lusty Lion, which flies for fear of a danger:
So does a suspicion, conceived by the bruit of a rumor,
Breed in a Princes mind, but an inward fear, but a terror.
Grafton fol. 742. Edw. 4.
Some did afirme, this Duke should match with Mary, the daughter
Of Charles Duke Burgon: which Edward daily did hinder.
Similie.
Which was a grief to the Duke, as a sore that festereth inward,
For that his own brother so dealt, that apeard to be for-ward.
Thirdly, the cause was aledg'd, that this Duke, George, had a servant
Wrongfuly condemned, that should as a Sorcerer enchant
Their regal persons, and their posterity. Wherefore,
This Duke complaining to the King, was araign'd as a Traitor:
With sorry words who reuyl'd, and still did murmur against them.
Whereby the king, in a rage, this Duke did speedily condemn.
There is a time, for a man, both where and when to do wisely:
As did apeare by the Duke, who proved too daungerus hasty.
Silence seldom ofendes: large speech often stirs up anger. Sentence.

That wity grave Socrates his scholars charged to remember, Maxim. Sermon.

Three special documents; to be shamefast, wise, to be silent:
Most requisite for them, that they may prove to be prudent.
For let a man see much, let him hear, and say but a littel. Proverbs.

For littel meddling does seldom bring any troubel.
As litel hot sparkels many times do kindel a fy-er Similie.

Great, fierce, and violent: So lewd speech stirs up anger,
Sore, sharp, and vehement. And as fire forcibly great streams
Vpflaming spreads: So lewd words enmity by means
Endamaging disperse. And as fire quenched is hardly, Similie.

Till that it has burned to the full, and that very fiercely:
Whose force does ruinate, burn and consumes in ashes
Great, large, huge tenements, fair, fine, and sumptuus houses:
Semblabel (in like sort) is an anger merciles ardent,
Continuing vehement: whose mad rage and fury fervent
Does towns depopulate, subuerteth flatly the cities,
Vpturneth castles, murdreth Kings, and many Princes
Stout, wise, and valiant. What is it, but mischeuus Envy
Cankereth up in her heart? To do wrong, she practiceth only:
Which she delights most in. With pride she iettes, as a copesmate,
Immagining vengeance. Woe worth so spiteful: brewbate.
Similie.
Better a staf that bendes, than a staf that breaks asunder:
Sentence.
Better a man patient, than a man that stirs up anger.
Sentence.
No wrath so vehement, as brothers enmity: whose rage
Fiercely revived again, what man may possibil assuage.
As for an exampel; fierce Typhon killed Osyris:
Romulus also Remus: Cambises wrongfuly Smerdis.
To her Majesty.
Here I desist for a time, O Queen. For like an abortiue:
Droupeth before he be ripe: so my book may prove but ofensiue, Similie.

If that he pass to the print, yet my poor skill has adornist
That, that I mean to deline. Soft fire makes malt to be sweetest. Proverb.

And God grant thee to rule, as a joyful Prince to thy p^^p^l,
Princely so long to live, as an Heart, as an oak, or a woo^^l:
If so be your Highness this verse and history fancy.
Then will I gladly procead; else not. For I count it a folly.
Here is a Book that I made which Pagan Jove in his anger, Iam opus exegi etc.

Nor steel shall out wear, nor time authentical, ever.
The Author to his Muse.
Here let us harbor a while: things ar to be done in a measure.
Every tide has an ebb: pains past to recount, is a pleasure.
Glory to God, God above: which was God from the beginning,
Which is, which shall be our Lord eternal abiding.
Senerissimae Reginae.
En meliorae canam, si placant carmina Princeps:
Sin tibi displiceant, hic marus aheneus esto:
Certain Latin verses, that were made long since by one Doctor Buste a
physician, in commendation of the Queens Majesty, when she came to Oxford.
IVno, Minerua, Venus, nemerosae in vallibus Idae,
Iudicium formae dum subiere suae,
Juno iactat opes. Quid tum? Prudentior illis
Est Pallas; Pallas haud opulenta tamen.
Inter formosas, si tu Dea forte fuisses,
Vicisti reliquas. O Dea, quarta Deas.
Quam Juno iaeiuna foret! Quam pallida Pallas!
Quam dea vana Venus! Quam dea sola fores!
Sit Venus alma viris; regni virtutis egena est.
Omnia sunt tua: in Juno, Minerua, Venus.
Translated into English Hexameters, and Pentameters, verse for verse.
Juno, Minerua, Venus, in vales of wodded hill Ida,
Whiles, which was fairest, they did agree to be tried,
Juno she bragd of wealth. What then? Then thought to be wisest,
Was Pallas; Pallas was not a wealthy godesse.
If that among those fair godeses, thou fair gods had ben,
Thou had surpast them (there, as a fourth Gods) all.
Juno, she how ieiune? Now pale had Pallas apeared?
And Venus how vainelike? Thou then an only godesse.
Let Venus all men please, yet throne of virtue she wants.
All things are thine: thou Juno, Minerua, Venus.
And Saphickes in English, I have made thus:
Godly Queen Princess president remains
Only our fortress resident apeareth,
Duly like Empress pre'minent requires
All us appointed,
Stoutly with bouldnes provident, to venture
Bouldly foes fiercenes violent to con^uer,
Manly with stoutnes diligent defend her,
Which is anointed.

