A SHORT AND PLAIN proof by the Word / and works off God / that Gods decree
is not the cause off any Man's sin or Condemnation. AND That all Men are
redeamed by Christ. As also. That no Infants are Condemned.

Collos. 2.8. Beware least there be any man that spople you through
Philosophy / and vain deceit.

Psalm. 119, 113. I hate vain inventions: but thy Law do I love.

Printed 1611.

To the lady Bovves, Grace, and wisdom, from above.
WOrthy Lady, when I began to consider to whom I might best commend the care
of this so great a cause; my heart could conceive of none so fit as you, and
that for two causes and the third may not be wanting. The first is, because I
know your faithful unfeigned love to God and his truth, and that in many
things according to knowledge: The second because I know there is none in that
Land that has better means to procure a cause of religion, to be handled
according to the judgment of the best: The third is the faithful revere^d
loueing respect I bear to you; and that from your own worthy deserts in the
best things, and in all good unto me. I pray and beseech you by that love of
God, that has been in you of long time: (the which I wish may abound in you
more and more) that you fail not my hopes herein which are: That you will
either plainly see an upright consionable sound answer from the word of truth
to this ground here propounded: or else give glory to God, and receive it for
the blessed truth of God. The ground is easily and plainly set down, which
is that God giueing Adam freewil / and power in himself not to eat of the
forbidden fruit / and live: or to eat / and dye / could not in his eternal
decree; ordeyne or appoint him to life, or death, for then had his Freewil been
overthrown: and if Adam had not eaten and sinned (which was to his own power)
then had not death entered: Therefore God did not decree that death should
enter: and then Gods decree is not the cause of any man's condemnation. I now
pray you Lady, with all the love off my soul 'entertaine this great cause off
God, into your thoughts, and let it take up your best meditations, that good
thereby being produced, you may still be an instruement to advance the gospel
off Jesus Christ: and you shall be sure off an high recompense off reward at the
hands off the most high in heaven, and your remembrance shall be blessed among
the Saints upon earth, Thus praieing the Lord to bless you, and to give you
his holy Spirit with a gracious, wise, understanding heart, to descorne a right
the things that differ. I take leave* withal the grace and faithful honesty
off my heart, (as I have cause) desiering your best good.

Tho: Helvvys.
June 2. 1611.
Psalm. 111.2. The works of the Lord are great, and ought to be sought out off
all them that love them.


To all that wait for salvation by Jesus Christ* Grace and peace from God.
WHereas we formerly in a little treatise / entitled a Declaration off Faith,
of English people remaining at Amsterdam, have in the fifth Article in short
set down our faith / of Election and Reprobation, concerning salvation and
condemnation: there having been some eprivate opposition since we writ it /
the love of God and unto his truth constrains us to speak thus much more as
we are able / for the mainteynance of this clear light of truth / that God
has not in his eternal decre appointed some particular men to be saved: and
some particular men to be condemned and so has redeamed but some: But that
Christ is given a ransom for all men, yea even for the wicked, that bring
swift damnation upon themselves, denying the Lord that has bought them. 2.
Pet. 2.1, It may and will seem straing that we of all others should take in
hand to deny in a cause of so great controversy / and so deep a mystery: to
which we answer / that it concerns us as much as any / and therefore though
we be not so able as we desire we were / yet because we ought we are ready to
show our selves willing with the best ability we have: and in that it is a
deep mystery / (as the whole truth of God is) the more need had we to search
into i^: that by the grace of God we might find the depth of it / so far as God
has revealed in his word / as al men ought to do. And we pray the Godly
Reader not to be deceaved by that old deceit of the mystery of iniquity /
the man of sin which is / to persuade / that it is to high a point / and to
deep a mystery for thee to enter into / for by this deceit has the mystery
of iniquity prevailed / and does to this day prevail / with thousands / and
ten-thousands not to search into any part off the Scriptures at all.

But to rest upon the faith of the Church: and though many (blessed be God) be
broken out from that depth of darkness / yet they are not come to that clear
fountain of light / to know / profess / and practice / that the Lord does
require at their hands to search into and know / his whole truth / revealed in
the scriptures. And for this mystery in had / let it be plain unto the that
if thou oughest to know that a Savior is sent / then thou oughest also to
know to whom he is sent: and if thou think to satisfy thy self in that thou
know he is sent a savior to thee / therein do thou not seek the glory
of God / nor the good of thy brother / and then the love of God is not in thee.
Therefore cast away all excuse / and apply thy heart / withal care full
diligence / and faithful vprightnes / to search / and find out the depth of
this high point and mystery / that thou may give glory to God / for sending
his son a Savior for all Men.

And so praying the God of light to make this truth also to break forth and
increase amongst you / as (blessed be his name) it has done / and does daily
break forth and increase / in these parts / and that amongst them / which
your selves accomt best reformed Churches. We require thy loveing patience to
bear with our wants / and thy conscionable consideration of that which is
spoken to the / from the word of God / whose Spirit be upon thee / Amen.

Among the rest of the fearful works of the mystery of iniquity, this is
not the least (if not the greatest) that men seduced by Satan, and sin
(through ignorance) are grown to that hight off evil, as they do call the
Creator (who is a Spirit) to account: and they will have a natural reason off al
his works. And to come to one particular, they will have a reason how sin
came, and who or what was the first cause thereoff? the word off God cannot
restrain these men, they will not be kept within the bounds thereoff: But they
will enter into the secret counsels off God, and by their vanie Philosophy,
measuring Gods thoughts by their thoughts and his ways by their ways, they
will find out a cause off sin before the World was: and finding that the
Almighty has decreed al things that come to pass, and that off him, and
through him al things are, they will and do conclude most blasphemously that
God has foredecreed that sin should come to pass: and not content to stay
themselves here, they run on with an high hand, and because they see sin
enters by actio^, and that God is the moveing cause off al things. For in him
we live / and move / and have our being. Act. 17.28. These men by their
natural art, and from their hearts that are carnal, must, and do necessarily
conclude that God is the moving cause in the action off sin. But yet by the
craste and subtiltye off Satan who lies in wait hereby to deceive under a
culler, they say that God is not the author off sin, nor actor off sin: But
he is the author and actor off every action, and they Will have Gods providence
in every action, although the action be sinful, but not Gods providence in
the sin off the action, as in Adams eating off the forbidden (...), and moveing
cause in the action off eating, but not in the sin, not seeing that that
action was the sin.

Thus do they walk by their own ymaginations and intents deceaving, and being
deceaved pretending not to lay sin upon God, when (indeed and in truth) they
directly make God the author off sin. Our best thoughts off them is, that they
do it ignorantly: the Lord give them hearts to repent all whose conversions
should be the joy off our souls.

To deal in this high point and mystery off godliness who more unfit then we:
and to deal with these men off al we are most unfit: but yet to show our
selves Faithful with that talent that God has given us, we have through the
grace off God taken in hand to do our best service unto the Lord herein,
hopeing off his assistance and accepta^ce

And first thus much to these their reasons and conclusions, to show wherein we
differ from them, and they digress From the truth.

We confess that God has decreed all the good that comes to pass, and that
off him, and through him are all good thinghs: and that the Lord is the author,
actor, and moveing cause in, and to every good action: and that his providence
is in every good action. (But God has not decreed that any evil should come to
pass: neither is he the author, actor, or moveing cause, to, or in, any evil
action: neither is his providence over, or in, any action, wherein is evil.
Iam. 1.13 -- 18. Al these forealleged reasons, and collectio^s, (and how many
mo we know not) are brought to maintain that Fair glorious deceaving opinion
off particular Election, and particular reprobation, and so off particular
Redemption: which (to speak to the understanding off the simplest) is, that
God has out off his eternal decre and will, especially chosen and appointed
some particular me^ to be saved, and they off necessity must be saved; and out
off his own Fore purpose and will, he has cast away some to be daned which he
would not should be saved, and they of necessity must be damned: and so has
perticulerly redeamed some, and left others to perish,

To conclude, and utterly destroy, under one ground off truth, a these and al
other distinctions, conclusions, and devices produced to mainteyne this
opinion, we will (by the grace off God) take the most plain, easy, and short
way that by the direction off his Spirit, our hearts can device, which is a way
most fitting our own capacities, and (we hope) will be most profitable for the
vprigt hearted reader.

And to proceed to this, we will first set down what is the cause off
condemnation, and that is showed in these words off th'Appostle. Rom, 5.12.
Death entered by sin and verse 18. by Offense the fault came on all men to
condemnation. Whereby it is proved, that Syn / is the cause off condemnation,
which al will grant that know God. And all that fear God might grant here
and seek no Further, that if sin be the cause off condemnation. then Gods
decree is not the cause, this we know will not give satisfaction. But to give
full satisfaction, we must seek to find out, who, or what, is the first cause
off sin, and this must be found out, by the first sin in the first sinner. In
the which passage (by the grace off God) we will labor, withal our poor
endeavors to show, that the Almighty has cleared himself, by his word and
works. That he did not decre, nor was the author, actor, nor moveing cause, in,
or to the first sin, and then off no sin, which being proved, we hope it will
appear unto al, that do not either willingly, or neclige^tly shut their eyes,
that no man is condemned because God has decreed him to condemnation: man's sin
being the cause off condemnation, as is proved, and the Holy one being no
cause off man's sin.

To prove that God did not decre, nor was the author actor, nor moveing cause
in, or off the action off sin, let us be guided by the holy word and works off
God, both which. will prove this so evidently, as it shall never be gain said with
any cullor or show off truth.

First then to come to a due consideration off Gods work in the Creation off
Adam* which though al men know, yet it should appear few do thoroughly
consider off.

God Created him a perfect man / according to his own image and likeness. Genesis
1.26.27. in righteousness and true Holiness. Ephesians. 4.24. Giveing him free power
over his own will, as is proved when he says. Thou shall eat freely of every
tree of the garden. Genesis 2.16. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil /
thou shall not eat of it: For whenever thou eatest thereof / thou shall dye
the death. Thus giveing him free power over his own will and body, to eat, or
not to eat, yet the Lord restraning him off the forbidden Fruit by his
commandment, and threatening judgment, but not by his omnipotent power.

This perfect Holy work off God: and this perfect Holy word off God, does
show not to be gaine-said, that God did not decree Adam should sin: and then
was God no author, actor, nor moveing cause in, or off the action off sin.

In that we purpose not (because we think we have no need) to stand upon
any otherground, for the whole trial off this great and weighty cause, we
will strive to make it as plain, as possibly we can by Gods assistance that
in these few words it is proved that God decreed not that Adam should sin, thus
then we proceed.

It is proved here that God gave Adam free will and power to eat, or not to
eat, and this al men do confess, how then can it be said, with any
Spiritual understanding, that God decreed he should sin: For Gods fore counsel
and decree, must off necessity come to pass, as the Propheth David shows.
Psalm. 33.11. The Counsels of the Lord shall stand for ever: and the thoughts off
his heart throughout all ages.

The Lord cannot be prevented by men or Angels. but what in his Eternal decree
before al beginings he has decreed, it must off necessity come to pass: Now
therefore it could not be the decree off God, that man should sin, seeing
that God gave him Fre-wil and power not to have sinned: and if man had not
sinned, as it was in his own free choice, then Gods decree had been prevented,
which cannot be. Therefore off necessity it must need be yielded, that God
did not decree that man should sin, except any will deny, that man had not
free will: and that were to speak directly and plainly against the Holiness off
God, which though men do, (in maintayning this opinion, that God has
appointed off his own will, some to condemnation) yet they do it under a cullor.

Is it not then plain, that every one that has an eye, may see. That to give
Adam a Free will not to sin, and an Eternal decree off God that man should
sin: can never stand together in the Almighty / that is one and the same /
with whom there is no variablenes / neither shadow of turning. jam. 2.17. Can
men make Freedom and bondage in one and the same action, all in one man, and
al at one time, how shall men be able with any good conscience to make things
so contrary hang together.

Moreover we see the Lord, by his commandment commanded Adam that he should
not sin, and will any notwithstanding this, say that it was God Eternal
purpose and will, that Adam should sin: does God command any thing against
his Eternal will. In the fear off God let men take heed how they go about (by
subtle arguments) to prove God contrary to himselff, which they Plainly do,
when they say, it was the eternal will off God that man should sin, and yet
God commands he should not sin.

Thus does it appear by the excellent, perfect, and holy work off God in man's
Creation, that God has freed himselff From decreing that Adam should sin: as
also by his holy word, in that he co^maunds him not to sin, and lays death
before his eyes for a judgment, if he sinned What could the Lord do more for
Adam then he has done, He made him a perfect man, in righteousness and true
holiness: he blessed him, and gave him his commandment with power and ability
in himself to keep it. And will me^ for all this say, that God decreed he should
sin, and be condemned, or that God was any actor, author, or moveing cause
in, or to his sin.

And if men will deny, and say, they do not hold, that God has decreed: or
was the author, actor, or moveing cause in Adams sin: then let them also deny
that their opinion that God has decreed, any man especially, to condemnation:
For if God decreed not man to sin, then God decreed not man to condemnation,
in that sin is the cause off condemnation: For if sin had not been, there
had been no condemnation.

This then is the decree off God concerning condemnation, that God decreed,
that if man sinned he should dye the death: but God in no wise decreed that
man should sin, as we have showed both by the word off God, and by the works
off God, which we wish me^ to hold them unto, if they will still contradict, and
not run after vain inventions.

We will now set down the fairest deceaving show, that all the contrary minded
have for their opinion: that God has decreed and appointed some to
condemnation, and they must be condemned, making Gods decree the cause off
their condemnation: But let it always be remembered, that it is proved by the
word off God, that sin is the cause off condemnation, and not Gods decree.

This is the^ the whole substance off that they say. That God has decreed to
forsake and leave those that he has appointed to condemnation, to themselves,
and with holds his grace from them, leaving them to sin, and so to perish
for their sin, we will not put the^ to prove this because we know they
cannot, but we will show by the mercy off God that it is an old conceived
ymagination, and has no ground off truth.

In this their fained ground we must understand the^ that they hold that God
leaves, and forsakes man first. And this we have utterly disproved already in
that we have showed and proved that God did not leave Adam first, who was the
first that fell under condemnation: By whose Offense the fault came on all men
to condemnation: This will seem straing (but let God have the glory) that God
has decreed no man's condemnation no otherwise then he decreed Adams, For both
Gods mercy, and his justice in all things and perticulerly concerning
salvation and condemnation is one and the same to all mankind as it was to
Adam after his fall: For Gods decree was before the World was,

To make this plain, and so by the grace off God to make an end off all: Let
us consider with holy and upright hearts, and with willingness to be informed
From the Word off God, by the meanest earthen vessel that God shall strr up
For the witnessing off any part off his truth. Let us I say consider, the
estate off Adam affter his Fall.

First he was Fallen, and by him all mankind. Roman. 5.12, 18. Under the
condemnation which God had pronounced against him. Genes. 2.17. And can any
man device or ymagine, that any off his posterity, who were yet all in his
loins, and had not yet sinned: affter the same manner off transgression, were
fallen Further under the Condemnation off God then he: It could not be that
any should: Although it may be that some may ymagine that they did fall further
But it could not be that any should fall further under the decree off
condemnation then he, in that he fell under the depest judgment off Gods decree
off condemnacion, which God had, or has declared by his word: For we know no
deeper decree off judgment then the decree off condemnation, and under this was
Adam fallen: And this went over him, and over al by his transgression.

When Adam was thus fallen, and had off his own Freewil first forsaken God,
did God yet leave him? No: such was the mercy off God (everlasting glory and
praise be given to his name) as he would not yet leave Adam, but gives him
Freely off his own grace, deliverance by the promissed seed Genesis 3.15. And as
the Apostle has showed Romans 5.12. -- 21. That by Adams sin the fault came on
al to condemnation, so does he in the same Chapter and verses equally show,
with equal like words and reasons, yea with the selff same words and reasons:
that as by the offense off one (that was Adam) the Fault came on al to
condemnation: Even so by the justifying off one (that is Christ Jesus) the
benifit abounded toward al men to the justification off life. That as sin
reigned unto death, even so might grace also reign by righteousness unto
Eternal life by Jesus Christ. How has the Lord by the unspeakable evidence
off his truth, proved to men's consciences that will believe his word, that he
did not leave and forsake Adam, nor for his sin any mankind under that
condemnation which by Adams offense went over al. But by grace in Christ, has
Freed Adam, and in him al mankind From that sin off Adam.

To make it yet more plain, that as Adam was Freed From that sin, so al
mankind was Freed: And as the promise off Christ the promised seed was made
and sent to Adam, eve^ so was he promised and sent to all the world for the same
end, which was to save him, as the Lord shows by his own words (if he may
be believed, and the Lord give men hearts to believe him) Ioh. 12.47 I came not
to judge the World / but to save the world: And Ioh. 3.17. God sent not his
Son into the World that he should condemn the World / but that the World
through him might be saved. Now let the Godly hearted Reader judge, whether the
promissed seed Christ was not promissed and sent to all the world For the same
end, for the which he was promissed and sent to Adam, which was to save the
World and as he was promissed and sent for the same end to all the World as to
Adam: So was he promissed and sent under the same condition to all the World
as he was promissed and sent to Adam.

The Condition was, that Adam should believe, and under this same Condition was
Christ promissed and sent to all the World, as is showed by Christ's own words.
joh. 12.46. I am come a light into the World / that whosoever believes in me
should not abide in darkness. And joh. 3.16. God so loved the world / that he
has given his only begotten Son / that whosoever believes in him should
not perish / but have everlasting life. Where is now this conceived device that
God should decree to leave and forsake some, that they might perish? Who has
told men off such a decree? that God has or does with hold his grace from
any, and so leave them to sin and to perish for their sin: Where have they
found it out and learned it so perfectly? The word off God has not taught it
them; And the works off God has not showed it unto them thus to teach men:
That the Lords decrees and ways are unequal, either in his justice or in his
mercy: as they do judge and teach, which judge and teach that God has decreed
(for Adams sin) to forsake and leave some, and to withold his grace from
them, that they might perish: and has decreed to save other some, by giveing
the^ Grace. Whereby they would make the Lord more just to some then to other
some in condemning: And more merciful to some then to other some in saveing,
and all For one and the same Sin. The Lord complaynes off Israel, because
they say his ways are unequal. Ezech. 18. The whole Chapter throw, showing
them how unjustly they accused him in vseing that Proverb. The Fathers have
eaten sower grapes / and the Childrens feeth are set on edge. Charging the Lord
herein, to punish the Child, For the Fathers Fault: And the Lord in that whole
part off his word, even strives to prove his ways equal in punishing the
soul that sins: And that the son not shall bear the iniquity off the
Father. Saying Furthermore. That he has no desire that the wicked should dye
/ but that they should return and live.

And if the Lord had great cause to complain off Israel For this so unjust
accusation, which they laid upon him: how greater cause has he to complain
off all you / that charge him to have condemned all the souls that are
condemned From the beginning off the World unto the end thereoff For Adams
sin. Saying, that God decreed to leave them under Adams sin: And not to
give them a Savior: And to withold his grace that they might perish, making
Adams sin the cause off all their condemnation: For it being the cause that
the Lord does leave and forsake them, it is then the cause off their
condemnation. And under this condemnation, to bring so many thousands off
millions off poor infa^ts that dye before they have done good or evil. Romans
9.11. As he Holy Ghost testifyeth, to be be their condition. And our Savior
Christ. Luke 18.16. in commendation off the condition and quality off Babes,
says. Suffer the Babes to come unto me / for of such is the kingdom of
Heaven. And Matt. 18 3. Except ye be converted and become as little Children /
ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. and verse. 4. Whosoever therefore
shall humble himself / as this little Child / the same is the greatest in the
Kingdom of heaven. In all this showing, that the Children off Christ's Kingdom
must be off such humble quality and condition as infants: and I hope none will
deny, but al infants are off one quality and condition, even the infants off
the Turks. Our Savior Christ speaks off al infants generally: and will men yet
judge some infants condemned.

And of such infa^ts the Lord shows his great compassion, when he says to
the Prophet Jonah. Jonah. 4.11. Should I not spare Nyneueh that great city:
where are six score thousand persons / that cannot descerne between their right
hand and their left / and also much Cattle? Whereby the Lord shows that they
had not sinned, neither were guilty off their Fathers sins. And will you yet
charge the Lord to condemn so many infants, and al for Adams sin, are not
your ways unequal thus to say and teach me^ to hold and think off God. Does
the Lord say, that that soul that sins shall dye: And dare men say, that
the souls off infants shall dye / who have neither done good nor evil. Upon
these rocks, and many more does your opinion off particular redemption cast
you: And little do you know the mystery off iniquity in this point. And who
does know the depth off the mystery off iniquity herein. Yet give us leave
to show you some high degrees off the mystery off iniquity in this your
opinion.

First it makes Gods decree / the cause off sin, and co^de^nation: and so
makes God / the author and cause off condemnation, and sin, which is high
blasphemy against the Holy one. And hereby is all the sin in the World, (that
ever has been, is, and shall be committed) laid upon God, which is high iniquity
and the sin off sins.

Secondly it restrains the love off God to the world, in giveing his Son
for a Savior: and whereas our Savior Christ says Ioh. 3.16 God so loved the
World that he has given his only begotten son / that whosoever believes in
him should not perish / but have eternal life. This opinion off particular
redemption says. That God did not so love the World, but he loved some few
particular persons, as he gave his son for them, and they only shall beleve
and shall be saved: and the greatest part off mankind God loved them not, but
has decreed, they shall be damned, and he has not given his Son for them, but
has left them to perish. Thus denying the greatest part off the World, to
have any means off salvation, and that there is no Savior for them. And so
was it to no end, that our Savior Christ commanded his Disciples. Mark.
16.15. Go ye into all the world / and preach the Gospel to every Creature. And
whereas our Savior Christ says. Mat. 10.14.15. Into what City or Town ye
enter / if they receive you not nor hear your words / shake of the dust of
your feet: truly it shall be easier for them of the Land of Sodom and Gomorah in
the day of judgment / then for that City. And were he also says, Ioh. 16.8.
When the comforter comes / he will reprove the world of sin / because they
believed not in me. By all these places and all the gospel through-out showing,
that their judgments shall be increased, that receive not Christ nor his word:
And yet this lamentable opinion off particular Redemption and Reprobation says
they can have no part nor portion in Christ, so is their judgment enlarged for
not receiving Christ, with whom they have nothing to do: and thus do they make
Christ to offer himselff to the^ that he would not have receive him, and which
he has decreed shall not receive him, nor believe in him: and make the words
off the Lord feigned words, and words off dissimulation, Deu. 5.29. Where he
wishes concerning al Israel. O that there were such an heart in them to fear
me / and to keep al my commandments alwaie / that it might go well with them
/ and with their Children for ever. As also those words off our Savior Christ
Luke 13.34. Where he speaks with such unfeigned earnestnes. O Jerusalem
Jerusalem / which killest the Prophets / and stonest them that are sent to thee
/ how often would I have gathered thy Children together / as the Hen
gathers her brood under her wings / and ye would not. What impiety is this
to account these words feigned: and if any shall say they do not account them
feigned, then must they be forced to confess that God would have had al Israel
and al their posterity in vprightnes off heart, to have Feared him, and kept
his commandments, that it might have gone well with them For ever: and so did
not decree any off them, nor off their posterity to be condemned, and if our
Savior Christ's words were not feigned words then would he have gathered the
Children off Jerusalem together which would not be gathered: and so would have
had them believe in him that would not. And yet they that hold this fearful
opinion, hold that God would not have some men, yea the most men to believe,
but has decreed their condemnation And though the holy ghost say Act, 17.30.
That now God admonishes all men every where to repent. Yet they off this
opinion that hold that God has decreed to Reprobate some, say, he would not
have al, but some to repent. And if they would speak plainly, and not halt
betwixt opinions, they must say that God would have some to be unbelievers, and
wicked, and disobedient, and that were the hiest blasphemy, it were above the
wickedness off the Fool* that says in his ^ere their is no God. For it were to
say there is a wicked God that has decreed wickedness.

Furthermore this opinion does excedingly diminish and lessen, that great work
off grace wrought by Christ's redemption, making Christ a particular private
redeamer for some private men, whereby Christ is highly dishonored in that his
great sufferings are not accounted sufficient to take away Adams sin, and so
has he not utterly broken, but only bruised the Serpents head, making Adams
sin, to abound above the grace off God by Christ, overthrowing that word off
God, Romans 5.20. which says. Where sin abounded grace abounded much more
speakeing off Adams sin.

Moreover this opinion, that God has by his decree Elected some perticulerly
to salvation, and that there neither is, nor ever was, nor ever can be
condemnation unto them, works presumption in men, for if me^ ca^ but once get
a perswation in themselves, that God has Elected them then they are secure,
they need not work out their salvation with fear and tre^bling: For God
having decreed the^ to be saved, they must be saved, they need not fear: If
they increase and grow in knowledge and grace, it is well but if they do not it
is al one, for it is decreed they must be saved, and this causes al sloathful
careless, and negligent profession, and these are they which shall say we have
by thy name prophesied / Cast out Devils / and done many great works. Mat.
7-22 We have eaten and drunk in thy presence / and thou haist taught in our
streets: But for all their presumption, it shall be said unto them, I know you
not / depart from me al you workers of iniqujtie. Luke 13.26.27.

And this opinion, that God has decreed and rejected some to be damned, and
that there neither is nor ever was salvation for them by Christ, (for they were
as you say decreed to condemnation before Adam fell) makes some dispare utterly,
as thinking there is no grace for them, and that God has decreed their
destruction: and it makes others desperately careless, holding that if God have
decreed they shall be saved, the^ they shall be saved: and if God have decreed
they shall be damned, they shall be damned, and so in a desperate carelesnes run
headlong to destruction.

To conclude by this opinion, the Fall off Man (in respect off the world, which
hereby is held not to be redeamed) is al one with the fall off the devils: and
then the Gadarens Mat. 8.29. Might have said with the devils. Jesus thou son
of God what have we to do with thee. Here is all Faith in preaching the Gospel
to the World distroyed: For what Faith can a man have to preach the Gospel to
such as (by this opinion) he has more cause to suspect that God has decreed
to condemnation then otherwise: and what faith can there be to preach the
Gospel, when we know not whether Christ belong to the^ or no: Al faith in
praying one for another is overthrown, for how can a man off faith pray for
any man, when he cannot know, whetheer God God have decreed him to
condemnation, and so he pray against God decree. In deed and in truth holding
this opinion, that God has perticulerly by his decree, decreed some particular
men to condemnation, and they cannot but be condemned, does make that a man
cannot have faith in his own salvation, for when he cannot have Faith in an
other man's salvation, that brings forth as good, or better Fruyts then
himself, how should he have Faith in his own salvation, seeing he may as well
fall away as any other, and can no more know Gods decree concerning himself,
then concerning another. And if a man's soul come to distress, betwixt fear
and doubting, as the Holy Prophet David's did many times. In the 40. psalm he
says. My sins have taken such hold upon me / that I am not able to look up:
Yea they are no in number then the hayres of my head / therefore my heart has
failed me. If thou fall under such an estate and condition, (which the most
Godly do) where shall be thy comfort In the mercies off God? Why, thou know
not whether God have decreed to show mercy on thee or no: Will thou say thou
know God has decreed to show mercy on all that believe? so say we: but how
know thou that God has decreed that thou art one off those that shall
believe seeing thou haist much more cause to fear thou art none off them: thou
may ymagine thy selff to be one, but this opinion that God has decreed some
especially to be saved, and some perticulerly to be condemned, overthrowes
thy Faith utterly: For thou can not certainly know it, and then thou can
not believe it. And let, this be well observed off all that have any
understanding, or love off Gods truth that this opinion setts Faith before
knowledge, For thou must first believe that Christ is given a Savior for thee
before thou can know that he is a Savior for thee, which cannot be, that
a man should believe that he knows not: For how shall they believe in him off
whom they have not heard Roma. 10.14. And if a man must first know that God
has sent his Son a Savior For him, before he can believe it, which if men
be not void off all religion, they must confess, then let the mystery off
iniquity the man off sin himselff devise (whose device this particular
redemption is) how any man shall know by the word off God that Christ is given
a Savior For him, but by knowing that he is given a Savior for all men,
except he can show his name especially set down in the Word. They that see
not this (let it not offend) are blind and cannot see at noone day. These are
some off the Fearful proper Fruyts off this opinion, That God has decreed
some particular men to salvation, and they cannot but be saved, and some
particular men to be damned, and they must be damned and cannot be saved,
because God has decreed their condemnation, And thus Far off that.

Now will we endeavor to show what understanding God has given us in this high
mystery and great work off Redemption, and if we can prove by plain
evidence off Scripture, that Christ by his death and sufferings has redeamed
all men, then is this whole cause at an end.

And First to prove that the first promise concerning Christ was general to
all it is evident. Gen* 3.15 Where the promise off Christ is made off Adam and
Hevah, which were al mankind, and in whom were al mankind in whom al had
sinned, and for the taking away off the condemnation due for that sin,
Christ was there promissed and given, and not for a part which is Further
proved. 1. Ioh. 22 And he is a reconsiliatio^ for our sins / (speaking off all the Faithful to whom he writ) and not for ours only / but also for the
sins off the whole world / how is it possible that the holy ghost should
speak more plainly, to show that Jesus Christ is a reconsiliation for the
Faithful which are not off the world, and For the unfaithful which are the
World. Moreover. 2. Cor. 5.15. Thus reasons the Appostle to prove that all
were dead, in that one was dead for all. That if one be dead for all then were
al dead / and he died for all / and verse. 19. God was in Christ and reconsiled
the world to himself not imputing their sins unto them. and 1. Tym 2.5.9.
There is one God and one Mediator between God and man / the man Christ Jesus /
who gave himself a ransom for all me^. Thus we se, Christ is a reconsiliatio^
for the sins off the Faithful, and not so only but also of the sins off
the whole world: and that al were dead, and he is dead for all: and that God in
Christ reco^siled the World to himselff: and that Jesus Christ has give^ him
selff a ransom for all men. This might be sufficient to satisfy every upright
heart, but let us yet see Further.

The Holy Ghost by the Apostle Peter. 2. Pet. 3.9. speaks thus unto those
Mockers which said where is the promise off his coming. The Lord of that
promise is not slack (as some men count slacknes) but is patie^t toward us /
and would have no man perish / but would al come to repentance. Here does the
Apostle show that it is not slacknes in the Lord that he comes not to judgment,
but it is his patience, and the reason off the lords patience is, because he
would have no man to perish, but would al men come to repentance, therefore
certainly he has redeamed al* and. 1. Tym. 2.4. God will that all men shall be
saved and come to thee acknowledging of the truth. Furthermore. Col. 2.20. and
through peace made by that blood of that his cross / to reconsile to himselff
through him / through him I say / al things both which are in earth / and which
are in Heaven.

What shall we need to allege any more grounds of scripture to prove that Christ
has redeamed al men, and that he would have no man perish. These may suffice,
oh that they might suffice what gladness should come to our souls to see men
tractably minded to submitt themselves to the Word off truth which is so
evident in this point: Far be it from any feareing God either off a Froward or
necligent mind to pass by this great point, though hand led by so weak
means, by reason off which exceeding weakness, we are not able to the full
desire off our souls to discover the depth off the mystery off iniquity in
this opinion off particular Election, and Reprobation, and so off particular
Redemption: nor to show forth the great mystery off Godliness in the true and
holy understanding off universal, or the general Redemption off al by Christ:
yet let us in a few words show unto you how greatly the mercy of God toward
mankind, is advanced by Christ's redeaming off all.

In that when man had off his own Fre will, (being tempted) yielded unto the
temptation off the serpent, neclecting the commandment off his God and
Creator, and brought condemnation upon himselff, and al mankind: God of his
infinite mercy, would not leave Adam and in him al mankind to perish under that
condemnation, but has sent a Savior to redeame Adam and al mankind from that
sin showing himself equally merciful, and equally just unto al being no
respecter of persons, not perdoning Ada^ and giveing him a Savior* and
condemning the greatest part of his posterity for that his sin: but has
give^ his son a Savior For all, if through unbelief they deprive not ^ves.

And what a comfortable doctrine is this unto al, when every poor soul may
know, that there is grace and salvation for him by Christ, and that Christ
has shedd his blood for him, that believing in him he may be saved, and that
God would not the death off him, but that he should repent and live. Thus is al
despair taken away, For the grace off God that brings salvation unto al men
has appeared. Tit. 2.11. And al careless presumption cut off. For he that will
not believe shall be damned Mark. 16 16. and Revel. 2.25. That which ye have
already hold fast til I come / for he that overcomes and keeps my works to
the end / to him will I give power over nations. and Heb. 3.14. We are made
pertakers of Christ if we keep sure unto the end that beginning wherewith we
are vpholden.

What gracious heart can ever disaprove off this understanding. That Christ has
redeamed al. It is most straing, that men fearing God shoule be so full off
indignation against it, why should men think much, that Christ should be a
Savior for all men, as well as for them, especially it being agreeable to the
whole word off God, and being a doctrine that does so magnify and set forth
the mercy off God to al man kind, in giveing a Savior, that al believing in
him might be saved: as also adva^cing the justice off God, in condemning
unbelievers seeing he has left them without excuse, in that he has given them
a Savior, in whom because they believe not, they are justly condemned.

Much more might be said for the advancement of the great mystery off Godliness
in this point off Christ's general redeaming off al men, but we especially
desire that the true ground of the cause may prevail with you: and we doubt
not the comfort will follow abounda^tly. If we have in any thing led you from
the first ground we have vttetly gone besides our purpose, for the some off al
we purposed to speak, is this. That Adam having freewill, (which no man that
knows God to be Holy, may deny) then God could not decree any man perticulerly
to be saved, nor any man perticulerly to be condemned for life and death,
salvation and condemnation were in the Freechoyce off Adam, and depended not
upon Gods decree, but upon Adams own will, in that God gave Adam power in and
over himselff, to choose life or death, not decreing him either to life or
death: For if God had decreed him either to life or death, then had his
Freewil been taken away, For Gods decree must needs come to pass: therefore
this most easy and plain to be understood, that Adam having Free Will and
power, not to have eaten off the Forbidden Fruit, and so to have lived for
ever, God did not decree he should dye: And Adam having Freewill and power in,
and over himselff to eat off the Forbidden Fruit and dye, God did not decre
that Adam should lyve. This then is the decree off God (as he has declared in
his word to Ada^) Obey and live. Disobey and dye. This is the Law off works,
which Adam had Freewil and power in him selff From God perfectly to keep, God
not decreeing, (as we have showed) that he should obey or disobey, live or
dye. And let it be well observed, that all the decrees off God concerning life
or death, to man and mankind were made with Adam, and therefore we produce him
for all. And we have showed that as Christ the promissed seed was given and sent
to Adam to be his Savior, for the same end he was give^ and sent to all the
world as also under the same co^ditio^, which was that he should believe in
him: for if Adam had not believed, he must have been condemned, and if all
the world had not believed, all the world must have been condemned, and as Ada^
believing in the promissed seed, was (though the Grace and mercy off God in
Christ) to be saved, even so all the world believing in the promissed seed was
(through the grace and mercy off God in Christ) to be saved.

And whereas the Holy Ghost Roman. 5.14.15. Speaking off Infants, says.

That death reigned also over them that sinned not after the like manner of
thee transgression of Adam / the Grace off God / and gift by grace / which is
by one man Christ Jesus has abounded much more to the^. Hereby also is further
confirmed that al infa^ts are freed by the universal redemption off Christ
From that condemnation, which you (by your opinion off particular redemption)
would cast upon the most off them, as is also before showed,

What else has been spoken, and has the Word of God for warrant thereoff, we
earnestly beseech all that fear God, and love his truth, with the Holiest
thoughts of their hearts to consider off, and the Lord give you all
understanding hearts. And our hearts desire and prayer to God for you all is,
that you might be saved, and come to the acknowledging off the Truth.

It is a custom amongst men to conclude that free will must needs follow this
understanding of universal redemption: and if there meaning were freewill in
Christ / and that we have free power and ability through Christ / to work out
our salvation / and that through Christ we are made able to every good work:
such a freewil we hold: But that man has any freewil or power in himself to
work his own salvation / or to choose life / we utterly deny / having learned
of Thappostli Ephesians. 2.8.9. That by grace me^ are saved through Faith, and that
not off themselves, but off the gift off God not off works least any man
should boast himselff: But this grace of God (which is his mercy by Christ)
has God given to al / but all receive it not as appears. joh. 1.10.11. He
was in the World, and the World knew him not. He came to his own, and his
own received him not. And Act. 13.46. Paul and Barnabas pake boldly and said
it was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken unto you /
but seeing you put it from you and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life / lo we turn to the Gentiles. And Stephen says Act. 7.51. Ye
stifenetked and of uncircumcised hearts and earesryee have always resissed the
holy Ghost.

Thus Christ offering himself / man has power and does reject Christ: Put the
Word off God from him: Resist the Holy Ghost / and freely off his own will
work his own comdemnation: But he has no power at all to work his own
salvation: And so much only to clear our selves from that gross and
fearful error of freewil / from the which the Lord in great mercy has freed
us.

The End.

