THE EDICT OR PROCLAMATION SET FORTH BY THE French King upon the pacifying
of the troubles in France, with the Articles of the same pacification.

Read and published in the presence of the said King, sitting in his Parliament,
the xiiij. day of May, 1576.

Translated out of French by ARTHVR GOLDING.

CVM PRIVILEGIO. Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier dwelling in the
Black Friars.

THE KINGS EDICT UPON THE pacification of the troubles of his Realm,
containing the order which his Majesty purposes and intends to have kept
for the maintenance of the same.
HENRY by the grace of God King of France and Pollande, To all that are present
and to come, greeting.

WE have not desired any thing so much since it pleased God to call us to this
Crown, for the singular good will and love which we bear to our Subjects:
as to bring them to a perfect union and concord, and to set them again in
good peace, quietness and rest. For the bringing whereof to pass, after seeking
of all means expedient for the same, and after advise had thereupon by grave
and great deliberation, with the Queen our most honorable Lady, and Mother,
with the Princes of our blood, with the officers of our crown, and with
other Lords and notable personages of our privy counsel: We have by this our
continual and vnreuocable Edict, said, declared, enacted, and ordained, and
do say, declare, enact, and ordain, as follows.

I.
FIRST. That the Remembrance of all things past as well on the one side as on
the other, during and since the troubles that have happened in our said Realm,
and by occasion of them, shall lie quenched and dead, as things that had never
bin done: And it shall not be lawful ne sufferable for our Attorneys general,
or any other persons public or private what so ever, to comme^ce any action,
process, or suit for them at any time, or for any manner of occasion, In any of
our courts or places of Justice.

II.
WE forbid all our Subjects, of what estate or calling so ever they be, to
renew the remembrance of those things any more, or quarelously to molest, or
provoke one an other in way of reproach, for ought that is past, by reasoning,
tvvitting, quarelling, or greeuing one an other in word, or deed. And we
command them, to refrain the^ selves, and to live quietly together, as
brethren, friends and fellow citesens, under pain of being punyshed, as
breakers of the peace, and troublers of the common quiet.

III.
WE ordain, that the Catholic and Roman religion shall be set up and
stablished again, in all places and parts of this our Realm, and of the
contryes under our governance, where the exercise thereof has bin left of,
That it may be freely and quietly excercised without any trouble or let.
Forbidding most expressly all persons, of vvhatstate, condition or calling
soever they be, under the pain aforesaid, to trouble, vex, or disquyet, the
ecclesiastical persons, in the celebration of their divine seruise, or in the
inioying and taking up of the tithes, fruits, and reuenevves of their
benefices, and of all other rights and duties belonging to them. And our will
is, that all such as in the time of these present and former troubles have
entered upon the churches, houses, lands, and reuenevves, belonging to the
Ecclesiastical persons, and do still hold and occupy the same, shall give up
the whole possession of them, and let them peaceably inioye them with such
rights, liberties, and assurances, as they had before they were dispossessed
of them.

IIII.
And to take away all occasion of trouble, and disagreeme^t among our
subjects, we have granted, and do grant free open and general exercise, of
the pretended reformed religion, through all cities and places of our Realm,
and through all co^tries under our obedience and protection, without restraynt
of time, person, or place, condicionally that the same places belong unto
themselves, or that it be done with the good will and consent of the owners,
to whom they belong. In the which towns and places, the professors of
the said Religion, may preach, pray, singe Psalms, minister Baptism and
the Lords supper, ask the bands of Matrimony, and solempnize marriages,
publicly cathechize and read lectures, use discipline according to the said
Religion, and do all other things belonging to the free and full exercise of
the same. Also they may hold consistories, Sinodes, assemblies or counsels, as
well provincial as general, So they make our officers privy thereunto in
the places where those Synodes shall be called and assembled. And we
enjoin our said officers or some of them, to assist those general and
provincial counsels. Yet nevertheless, we will and ordain, That the
professors of the said Religion shall forbear the open excercyse thereof in
our city of Paris, and in the suburbs thereof, and within two leagues
about the same. Which two leagues we have limited, and do limitte to the
places following: That is to wit, Saint Denis, Saint Maure de Fosses, Pont
de Charenton* Le bourg la Royne, and Port de Nully: In the which places our
meaning is that there shall not be any exercise of the said Religion.
Hovvbeeit notvvithstanding, that the professors of the same Religion shall not
be sowght, or sifted, for any thing that they do in their howses as concerning
the said Religion, nor their children or the teachers of them be compelled to
do any thing contrary or prejudicial to the same. Also they shall abstain
from the said exercise of Religion in our Court, and within two leagues
about it. And likewise in our lands and contries, which are on that side
the mountains, sauinge that in those contryes they shall not be sought or
sifted for aught that they do in their howses concerning the said Religion.
And we hope, that God will grant us the grace, to see all our subjects knit
together again in one faith, Religion, and belief, by the determination of a
free and holy general counsel, which is our desire and chief intent.

V.
Yt shall not be lawful, to sell any books within our Realm and the
contryes, lands and Lordships under our obedience, until they have first bin
perused by our officers of those places, Or (in respect of the books
concerning the said Religion) by the chambers hereafter to be ordained by us
in every court of justice, to judge the causes and controversies of the
professers of the Religion: most expressly forbidding the printing, publishing
and selling of all books, libels and writings of defamation, as well on the
one part as on the other, under the pains contained in our decrees. And we
charge all our Judges and officers to take good heed thereto.

VI.
We ordain that for the burying of the dead among the professers of the said
Religion, being within our city and suburbs of Paris, there shall be
appointed to them the church yearde of the trinity: and in all other cities
and places, our officers and magistrates shall out of hand provide them places
as commodious as may be: And this we command our officers to do, and to take
good heed, that no offense be committed, at or by the said burialles, either
in our said city of Paris or else where.

VII.
WE intend that the professers of the said religion, shall not in any wise be
constrained or stand bound by reason of any abiurations, heretofore made, or
by reason of any promise, oath, or caution by them given in cases concerning
the Religion, nor be molested or troubled by any kind of way for the same.

VIII.
YT shall be lawful for the professors of the Religion, to build and erect
places for the exercise thereof, saving in Paris and the suburbs thereof, and
within two leagues abovvte the same. And the places which have bin builded by
them already, shall be restored unto them in such state as they now be. And
vvheras too serve their own turns they have builded up any Churches or
houses belonging to Ecclesiastical or other Catholic persons: They shall be
bound to restore them again, but yet they shall not be sought nor troubled for
the stuff that they have bestowed upon them, though the same stuff were taken
of the ruins and overthrows made during the present or former troubles.

IX.
AS concerning the marriage of Priests and religious persons that have bin
contracted heertoofore: we another will nor intend (for many good
considerations,) that they shall be sowght or trubbled for them: but we forbid
our Attorneys general and all other our officers too speak thereof.
Nevertheless, we declare that the issewes coming of such marriages, may
succeed alonly in moueables, and in such lands and possessions as their
fathers and moothers have gotten by gift or by purchase. For we will not that
those professed religious folk, shall be enabled too inherit by direct or
collateral descent.

X.
THE professers of the Religion shall be bound to keep the laws that are
received in the Catholic church, for marriages contracted or to be contracted
within the degrees of kindred and affinity, for the avoiding of strife and
suits that may insew of it, to the decay of most of the good howses of our
Realm, and to the breach of the bonds of friendship which is gotten by
marriages and alliances among our subjects. Nevertheless, the professers of the
said Religion shall not be troubled for their marriages made in the third and
fourth degrees, another shall the sufficiency of those marriages be called in
question, nor the succession be barred, nor any quarrel be picked to the
children descending of those marriages already made or to be made hereafter.
And to judge of the sufficiency of marriages made and contracted by the
professers of the Religion, and to decyde vvhither they be lavvfull or no: if
the professer of the Religion be the defendant, then shall the case be tried
before the Kings Judge: but if he be the plaintiff and a Catholic be the
defendant, then the trial of the case shall belong to the Official and
ecclesiastical judge.

XI.
WE ordeyne that Religion shall make no difference nor distinction in receiving
or admitting of Scholars, diseased folks, and poor folks into Universities,
Colleges, Schools, Hospitals, Spittles, and public Almeshovvses.

XII.
THE professers of the Religion shall pay all duties at their coming in, as
is wont too be for the charges and offices whereby they shall be provided for,
without being constreined too be present at any Ceremony, contrary too
their Religion. And if they be called upon their oath, they shall not be
bound too swear otherwyze, than by lifting up their hand, and by promizing too
God that they will say the truth: another shall they be bound too take
dispensation of the oaths made by them in passing of bargains and bonds.

XIII.
WE will and ordeine that all our subjects, as well Catholics as those of the
pretended reformed Religion, of what state or condition soever they be, shall be
bownde and compelled by all reazonable means, too pay and yield their tithes
too Curates and Ecclesiastical persons, and too all other too whom those
things belong, according too the use and customs of the places, under the
pains contained in our former Edictes made in the same behalf.

XIIII.
OUR dear and well-beloved cowsin the Prince of Orendge shall be set agein in
full possession of all his lands, jurisdictions, and Lordships which he has
within our Realm, and within the Countries under our dominion. And likewise
look what rights, titles, records, evidences, and vvritings have bin taken
from our said covvsin, or bin conveyed away by our Liuetenantes general and
other our officers, in the principality of Orendge, we will that the same be
restored to him again, and that they be set and established ageine in the same
state wherein they were before the troubles, to be inioyed henceforth by him
and his, according to the provisions, determinations, and declarations made and
agreed upon in that behalf, by the late King Henry our most honorable Lord
and father whom God forgive, and by other Kings our predecessors, in like
case as he did enjoy them before the said troubles.

XV.
THE professers of the said Religion shall be bound to keep and observe the
feasts appointed by the Catholic and Roman church, and they shall not
work, sell, nor set forth their vvares in their open shoppes on those days:
another shall the Shambles be open on the days wherein the eating of flesh is
forbidden by the said church.

XVI.
IN all public Acts and Actions where any speech shall be made of the said
Religion, there shall be used these words, the pretended reformed Religion.

XVII.
TOO the end too knit the hearts of our subjects the better together according
too our intent, we enable as well the Catholics confederates, as the
professers of the pretended reformed religion, to hold and execute al manner of
states, dignities, offices and charges whatsoever, whither they be of royalty
and Lordship, or of government of the Cities of our Realm, and of the
Countries, lands and seniories under our dominion: and we will that they
shall be indifferently admitted and received unto them, without being bound
too take any other oath, or too be tied too any other inconvenience, than the
good and faithful behauing of themselves in their callings, dignities, charges,
and offices, and in the keeping of the ordinances of them. In the which
Estates, dignities, charges, and offices, whenever they happen too be void*
we as in respect of such as shall be of our own gift or disposition, shall
provide indifferently and without respect of persons* too place such as we may
perceive too be able men too deal well in the service of us and of our
subjects.

XVIII.
AND forasmuch as the administration of Justice is one of the chief means to
mainteyne our subjects in peace and concord: we inclining to the request
that has bin made unto us as well on the behalf of the Catholics co^federat,
as on the behalf of the professers of the said pretended reformed Religion,
have ordained and do ordain, That in our Court of Parliament at Paris, there
shall be erected a chamber of two presidents and sixteen Counselors, the
one half of Catholics, and the other half of the said Religion: The which
officers of the Religion shall be created and erected by us to the said end,
with like wages, honor, authority and prerogatives, as our other
counselors of our said Court have: so as, all pleaes and controversies,
wherein the said Catholics confederate, or those of the pretended reformed
Religion shall be principal parties, either in sevving or in defending, in all
matters as well civil as criminal, whether the said suits be made by
vvriting, or by appeal in words, if the parties think it good, and that any
of them require it, shall be heard and judged by the same chamber, with
souereintie and definitive sentence, excluding all other Courts from dealing
with the same. And the same chamber so made and stablished as is said before,
shall be appointed to our City of Poictiers, there to sit and to minister
Justice to our said subjects, the Catholics confederate and the professers of
the said Religion, in our contries of Poyctou, Angolesme, Aulny and Rochel,
after the same form and fashion, as is used in the sessions of the chamber in
our Court of Parliament at Paris: and this to be done three months together
every year, namelye from the first day of August, til the last day of October.

XIX.
AND for the limitatio^ of the jurisdiction of our Court of Parliament at
Tholouze, there shall be erected a Chamber in the city of Mountpellier made of
two Preside^ts and eighteen Counselors, the one half Catholics, and the
other half of the said Religion. The which Catholics shall be chosen by us out
of our great Courts of Parliaments and out of our great Council: And those of
the Religion shall be created and erected anewe, with the same wages, honor,
authority, prerogatives and preheminences which the Presidents and Councellers
of our Court of Parliament at Tholouze have. In the which chamber shall
moreover be appointed one Advocate, one Attorney general, two Registrers, the
one civil and the other criminal, Ushers, and all other needful officers,
as well for the said chamber, as for the Chauncery that we will erect there.
All which officers shall be the one half Catholics, and the other half of
the said Religion. And the said Chamber shall hear and judge (with
souereintie, pere^ptory judgment, and definitive sentence, excluding all other
courts from dealing any further,) of all pleaes and controversies moved or to
be moved, wherein the said Catholics confederate or those of the pretended
reformed Religion belonging to the jurisdiction of our Court of Parliament at
Tholouze, shall be the chief parties in challenging and defending, in all
matters as well civil as criminal, whether the said pleaes be by writing or
by appeal in words: if it seem good to the parties, and that one of them do
require it.

XX.
THE like Chambers, it is our will too have erected in our Courts of
Parliament at Grenble, Bordeaux, Aix, Dijon, Roan and Britayne, consisting of
the number of two presidentes and ten Counselors in every Chamber, which
shall be the one half of Catholics, and the other half of the said Religion.
And those of the foresaid Religion by us dewly created to the said purpose,
shall every of them in respect of the Chambers where they shall be set, have
like jurisdiction, authority and power, to hear and judge in manner and form
as is said heretofore, as in respect of the jurisdiction of our Parliame^ts of
Paris and Tholouze. And in respect of our Country of Dolpheny, the sitting of
the said Chamber shall be divided, that is to wit six months at Grenoble,
and other six months at Saint Marcellyne, beginning to sit first at Saint
Marcellyne.

XXI.
ALSO we will (by manner of provision, and until such time as other order
shall be taken for it by us in the general assembly of the states of our
Realm, which we intend to hold) That in all judgments that shall be given
upon processes moved or to be moved, wherein the said Catholics Co^federate,
and those of the Religion be in any wise principal parties or maintainers
either by Challenging or Defending: The officers of our Presidiall Courts, or
others to whom we shall have given power in certain Cases to judge with
souereintie and peremptorily, shall in all matters, as well Civil as
Criminal, appeal too the said Chambers newly erected in our said Parliame^ts,
every one within his jurisdiction, notwithstanding all the Edictes that
concern the authority and jurisdiction of the said Presidials, from whom we
have derogated, and do derogate in the respect aforesaid without preiudicing
them in other things. And the said appeal, in matters Civil pertaining to the
Presidialles, shall have effect too the recovery of the Appellants right,
howbeit without stay of execution of the judgment given on his adversaries
behalf, unless it were agreed by the Consent of both the parties, that their
case should be judged peremptorily by the Court of the Presidialles. In the
which case the conteint of this present article shall take no place, nor
likewise in the Courts, where there are a sufficient number of the professers
of the Religion, to judge of the said Cases, which thing they may do (with
equal number of Catholics,) with souereintie, and without appeal in Cases of
Edicts. Nevertheless for certain Causes and Consideracions moving us
thereto, We ordain that the informacion and Judgment of actions Criminal,
commenced or to be commenced in the Seneschalles Court of Tholouze erected in
the said city of Tholouze, wherein the Catholics Confederate, and those of
the foresaid Religion shall be defenders, shall not lie in the said City,
but in the next Court to the said Seneschall, unto whom we have referred and
do refer the same actions from henceforth in way of appeal too the Chamber
of the said City of Mountpellier.

XXII.
THE Prouostes of our right dear and well-beloved Cuszens the Marshalles of
France, the vnderbailiffes, the viceseneschalles, leeuetenauntes, of short
Cote, and other like officers, shall judge according to the laws and
Injunctions heretofore given forth for the correction of vagabundes. And as
touching householders that are browght before the Prouosts, and charged with
matters belonging to their office, if they concern the Catholics co^federate,
or those of the foresaid Religion, The said officers shall be bound to call an
equal number of our officers, of sufficient abillitie, as well of Catholics
as of those of Religion, to the informacion and judgment of the said matters,
from out of the next Presidiall courts, or from out of the Royal Courts in
the provinces where there are no Presidiall courts, if there be so many of
the said Religion there: or else in their steades, they shall call as many
advocates, of the like sort, if they be to be found there.

XXIII.
IT is our ordinance, will and pleasure, That our right dear and wellbeloued
brother in law the king of Nauar, our right dear and well-beloved Cousin the
Prince of Condey, our right dear and well-beloved* Cousin Monsieur d' Amuile
Marshall of France, and likewise all other Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and
other persons, of what state or Condition so ever they be, as well Catholics
Confederate, as those of the foresaid Religion: shall enter again into their
governments, charges, rooms, and offices royal, which they had before the
xxiiij of August. 1572. and be meintained in the enjoying of them, without
driving of them too take new Commissions or Patents, notwithstanding any
sentences definitive, and judgments given against them, and notwithstanding
the Patents that have bin obtained of those rooms by other men. Likewise they
shall enter ageine into the inioying of all and singular their goods, rights,
titles, duetyes and doings, notwithstanding the judgments that have ensewed by
reason of the said trubles: which definitive sentences, Judgments, Patentes
and all other things that might ensew thereof, we have for the same purpose
denounsed and do denounse to be utterly void and of no effect nor value.

XXIIII.
WE mean not by the things aforesaid, that such as have resigned their
auctoritys and officies, by virtue of the letters Patents of us or of the late
King our right dear Lord and brother, should recover the same and take
possession of them again. Howbeit that nevertheless we reserve unto the^ their
actions against the professors and holders of the said offices, for the
payment of such sums as were agreed upon betwixt them for the same
resignations. And as towching those whom private persons have driven by force
to resign their rooms and offices. We give leave to them and to their heirs,
to make suit by order of Law, as well against them that have used such force,
as against their heirs and successors.

XXV.
AND if any commaundaries of the order of S. John of Jerusalem, belonging to
the Catholics confederate, or to those of the foresaid Religion be found to
be seized by the authority of our Judges: or if by occasion and under pretense
of the troubles, they have in any wise bin dispossessed of them by other
persons: we or dayne also, That full and whole surrender of them be made unto
the said Co^maunders, and that they shall be set ageine in the same state and
possession of their Co^mmau^daries, wherein they were before the 24. day of Aug.
1572.

XXVI.
And as touching those as well of the Catholics confederate, as of the said
Religion, which were provided of offices and were not yet admitted unto them:
It is our will and pleasure, That they shall be received into those rowmes, and
that all necessary furderances therein should be ministered unto them out of
hand.

XXVII.
LIKEWISE our will and pleasure is, that the said Catholics confederate shall
enter again into the former possession and inioyment of their benefices,
which they had before the said xxiiij. day of August: and that all such as
have taken up and inioyed the fruits of the said benefices belonging to the
Catholics confederate, upon their own private authority without
commandment or grant from us, shall be driven and constreyned to yield them
up and to restore them back ageine.

XXVIII.
AS for all controversies concerning the fines and raunsomes of such as have
bin taken prizoners on either part during these troubles: we reserve them to
ourselves and to our own person, prohibiting the parties to commence suit
thereof any where else than before us, and also forbidding all our Officers and
Magistrates to call any court upon those caces, or to take upon them any
jurisdiction, intelligence, or information of the matter.

XXIX.
THE Proclamations, bills, and extents for the sales of heritages that are
sewed by decree, shall be made and set forth in places and hours accustomed,
if it may be, according to our Laws: or else in open markets if there be a
market where the inheritances lie: or if there be none, they shall be made in
the next market that is within the division of the hundred where the
adiudgement ought to be made. And the bills shall be sticked upon a post in
the said marketsteds, and at the entry of the mootehall of the same place:
and so shall the said Proclamations be good and auaylable, and pass on to the
preferme^t of the decree, without staying for any bar in law that may be
alleged in that behalf.

XXX.
THE purchaces which the Catholics confederate, or those of the said pretended
reformed Religion shall have made, by authority of any others than of us, for
immovable possessions belonging too the Church, shall be void and of none
effect, And it is our ordinance, will and pleazure, that the said
Ecclesiastical persons shall incontinently and without delay reenter, and be
maintained in real and actual possession and inioyment of the said
possessions so alienated, without rendering the price that was paid for them,
notwithstanding the said bargains of sale, which we have broken and revoked
as frustrate in this case, saving that the buyers may have recours against
those too whom it shall apperteine. And yet nevertheless, we will grant out
our letters patents of permission to those of the said Religion, to charge and
indifferently to lay upon them the sums whereunto the said Sales shall amount,
that the buyers may be repayed the money by them truly and without fraud
disbursed, howbeit that the said purchacers shall not commence any action for
their domages and losses by their forgoing of the said possessions, but content
themselves with the repaiment of the monny which they laid out for the prizes
of the said purchaces, reckening the fruits by them received, as parcel of the
price, if the sale be found too have bin made too cheap and too far under
foot.

XXXI.
ALL disinheritings or dispossessings, be it by conueyance in life time, or by
last will and Testament, done in hatred of religion or of the troubles, shall be
void as well in respect of time past, as in respect of time to come, so as they
shall not prejudice the Catholics of the Union, nor yet those of the pretended
reformed Religion: provided that there be none other cause than the doings of
the same Religion, and the bearing of arms. And our meaning is also, that the
like be performed in respect of the disinheritings and dispossessings done in
hatred of the catholic Religion. Nevertheless, the last wills and Testaments
of souldyers, that have bin made during the present and former troubles, as
well on the one part as on the other, shall stand in full force and strength
according too the order of Law.

XXXII.
THE disorders and outrages committed the xxiiij. of August and the days next
following, at Paris and in other Cities and places of our Realm, happened to
our great greef and misliking. Wherefore, too show our singular goodness and
well meaning toward our subjects, be it known that the widows and children
of all such as were slain the same days, in what part of our Realm so ever
it were, shall be exempted from contribution of any impozitions that shall be
made by reason of lands holden in Cheef or by Knights seruis, (if the husbands
or fathers of them were noble. And if their husbands or fathers were of the
third state, that is too say of the comonaltie, and therefore taylable: We for
the foresaid consideracions do discharge their wives and children of all
tallages and impozitions utterly, for and during the space of six years next
following: forbidding all and every of our officers too levy any thing of them
in prejudice of this our present will and intent.

XXXIIII.
ALSO we do it too be known, that all sentences, judgments, arrests,
processes, seizures, attachements, sales, and decrees, made, given, and done
against those of the pretended reformed Religion, as well living as dead, since
the decease of the late king Henry our most honorable Lord and father, by
occasion of the said Religion, and the turmoyles and troubles thervppon
insewing, toogither with the executions of the same judgments and decrees, are
and shall from hensforth stand reuersed, repealed, and adnichilated: and we
ordeine that they shall be razed and put out of the Registers and Courtrolles of
our Courts as well cheef as inferior. Likewize we will that all signs,
tokens, and monuments of the same executions, and all books and acts of
diffamation made against their persons, names, and posterities, be utterly
taken away and defaced: and that whersoeuer there have bin any pulling down,
breaking, or razing of things upon occasion aforesaid: the same shall be made
up and set in their former state, so as the owners of them may enjoy them, and
dispoze of them at their pleazures. The like do we will and ordein too be
done for the Catholics Confederate, and namely in respect of the judgments
and verdites given against the Lords of Molle, Coconas, and Hay the
Lieuetenna^t general of Poyctou. And generally we have reuersed, repealed, and
disanulled all processes and informations made for any manner of attempts,
offenses, and pretended crimes of high treazon or others: so that as well the
said Catholics confederate, as also they of the Religion, and their heirs,
shall enter agein intoo real and actual possession of all and singular their
goods, notwithstanding any reunion, incorporation, confiscation or forfeiture,
contained in the said processes, decrees and judgments.

XXXIIII.
AND to the intent that by the means of our foresaid declaration, all
sentences and judgments given against the late Lord of Chastilion Ammirall of
France, and the executions of them may stand void and of none effect, as
things never done nor come too pass: We according too the same declaration
do will and ordeine, that all the said sentences, judgments, proceedings, and
acts done against the same Lord of Chastilion, shall be razed, defaced, and put
out of the registers of record, as well of our Courts of Parliament, as of all
other our courts of Justice: and that as well the memorial of the said
Ammirall, as also his children, shall continue vnappaired in their honor and
lands in that respect, notwithstanding that the said sentences and decrees
import reunion and incorporation of the said lands too the demeanes of our
Crown, whereof we will cause a more ample and special declaration to be made
too his said children, if they think good.

XXXV.
WE will the like to be done on the behalf of the Lords of Mountgommery,
Mombrun, Briquemault, and Cauaignes.

XXXVI.
WE forbid the making of any solemn processions, as well in respect of the
death of our late cousin the Prince of Condie, as in respect of the journey of
S. Bartilmewe, and of all other doings that may renew the remembrance of
troubles.

XXXVII.
ALL Processes made, and all judgments and sentences given against those of the
Religion, bearing arms, or being absent out of the Realm, or having
withdrawn themselves out of the cities and contries thereof where they dwelt,
for any other matter tha^ the said Religion and troubles: together with all
bars of pleaes, and all prescriptions as well by law and order as by
custom, and all seizures of fees, and excheats and lapses, happened, done, or
taken during the present and former troubles, shall be esteemed as undone,
vngiuen, and vnhappened, and such have we declared and do declare them to be,
utterly disanulling them, so as the adversary parties cannot in any wise help
themselves by them: insomuch that although the professers of the reformed
Religion have bin heard, and have made their defense by their Proctors or
Attorneys, yet shall they be set again in their former state, notwithstanding
the said judgments and the executions of them: and the possession shall be
given them again wherein they were, as in respect of the things done the
xxiiij. of August. 1572 And the above mentioned order shall take place likewise
for the Catholics of the Union, since they took arms or absented themselves
out of the Realm by occasion of the troubles, and for the children under age
of the same sort whose fathers are dead during the troubles. Also we declare
all processes made, and all judgments given during the said time, against
the same parties for defaults in appearance and for outlaries, toogither with
the executions of the same judgments, to be void and of none effect: setting
the parties in the same state that they were in before, without yielding any
costs or charges of the law, or without being bound too allow any amends.

XXXVIII.
ALL prizoners that are hild in ward, whither it be by authority of Law, or
otherwize, yea even in the Galleys, by occasion of these present and the former
troubles, shall be enlarged and set at liberty as well on the one side as on
the other, without paying of any ransom: and all bonds obligations, and
cautions passed in that behalf shall stand void, disanulled, and discharged.
Yet notwithstanding, our mening is not that the raunsomes which have bin
alredie disbursed and paid by such only as have bin taken prizoners in the
wars, should be redemau^ded of them that have received them. But whatsoever
else has bin done and taken by way of hostility or not by way of
hostility contrary to the public or particular ordinances of the chief
rulers of communalties or provinces that had commission, and have not or shall
not have bin auowed as well on the one side as on the other, within two months
after the publication of this our Edict: they may be pursewed by way of civil
justice.

XXXIX.
ALSO we ordain that punishment be executed upon the crimes and offenses
committed among the persons of the same part in the time of the troubles,
truses, or respite of war: unless the same doings be auowed by the chief
Rulers of either part, within the same time of two months. And as tuching
the leuying and exacting of money, bearing of arms, and other exploites of
war, done by private authority and without commission: pursuit shall be made
thereof by way of Justice.

XL.
The moouable goods, which shall be found in their own nature and not have
bin taken by way of hostility, shall be restored to the owners, if they be still
remaining (at the publication of this present Edict) in the hands of them that
took them, or of their heirs: and the owners of them shall not pay any
thing for the restitution of them. And whereas the mouables, as well of the
Catholics as of the professors of the Religion, shall have been sold and
alienated by order of law, or by other public commission or commandment:
they may nevertheless be claimed, so the price of them be rendered unto the
buyers of them: doing to understand, that the thing which was done at Paris and
in other places the xxiiij. of August 1572. and in the days next following the
said xxiiij. of August, is no deed of hostility.

XL.
AS concerning the fruits of lands and possessions, every man on either part
shall enter ageine upon his own howses and lands, and henceforth enjoy the
fruits that are gathered of this present year, especially the ecclesiastical
persons: notwithstanding all seizures and impeachmentes done to the contrary,
during the present and former troubles. Likewise also every man shall enjoy
the arrerages of rents which have not been taken by us or by our commandment
and grant, or by order of Justice, or by commaundment of the chief Rulers of
either part.

XLII.
THE forces and garrisons, which are or shall be in the howses, places,
towns, and Castles, belonging to our Subjects, of what Religion or sort so
ever they be, shall depart incontinently upon the proclaiming of this present
Edict, and leave them free and whole, too the inioying of the owners, as they
had them before they were dispossessed of the^. Notwithstanding any pretense of
right that ca^ be alleged by such as withholde them. For the which pretenses
they may have further provision, by the ordenary means of Law, after they have
given up their said possession. Which thing our meaning is to have to take
effect, especially in respect of the benefices, whereof the incumbents have bin
dispossessed.

XLIII.
ALL wrytings, papers, evidences, and assurances which have bin taken, shall
be rendered and restored agein on either part, to those whom they belong unto,
Notvvithstanding that the same wrytings and the Castles and howses wherein they
were laid up, were taken and seized, either by our special Commissions, or by
the commaundments of our leeuetenaunts and governors, or by the authority of
the cheef doers of either part, or under any other pretext whatsoever.

XLIIII.
FREE traffic and passaige shall be established ageine through all towns,
Cities, suburbs, bridges and passages of our Realms, Contris, lands, and
Lordships under our obedience and protection, as well by sea, as by land,
rivers, and sweet waters, as they were before these present and former
troubles: and all new tolles, taxes, and subsidies imposed by any other
authority than our own, during the said troubles, shall be taken away.

XLV.
ALL places, Cities, and Provinces of our Realm, and of all Countries, lands
and Lordships under our dominion, shall use and enjoy the same privileges,
freedoms, liberties, fraunchises, faires, markets, Jurisdictions, and courts
of Justice which they had before the present troubles, notwithstanding the
removing of some of the said Courts, and all wrytings contrary hervntoo: and
the same Courts shall be set and established agein in the Cities and Towns
where they were before.

XLVI.
AND forasmuch as we have heertoofore enabled the said Catholics confederate,
and the professers of the Religion too enjoy all manner of rooms, offices,
dignities, and charges whatsoever, either imperial or of the Cities of our
Realm, and of the Countries, lands and seniories under our obedience, and to
be admitted and received too them indifferently: We enable them likewise too
take the charge of Attorniships, and Syndikships of the Countries, Cities and
places, and to be admitted too all Counsels, deliberations, and assemblies, as
well which go by election of states of provinces, as all other functions
depending upon those things, and they shall not be rejected or disabled to
enjoy them, inrespect of their Religion or of the said troubles.

XLVII.
THE professers of the Religion shall not hensfoorth be ouercharged or oppressed
with any ordinary or extraordinary charges, more than the Catholics, above
the portion of their lands and goods. And the parties that shall pretend
themselves to be ouerburthened, may plead for themselves before the Judges to
whom the examination of those caces belongs: and all our subjects of what
Religion or calling so ever they be, shall indifferently be discharged of all
burdens that have bin laid upon the one side or upon the other in their
absence, when they inioyed not their goods by reason of the troubles: saving
that they may not claim agein the fruits that have bin employed upon the
payment of the said charges.

XLVIII.
ALSO our meening is not, that the said Catholics confederate, nor those of
the said Religion, nor any other Catholics that dwelt in the cities and
places by them possessed and invaded, and which were contributaries to them,
shall be sewed for the payment of the tallages, helps, graunts, increaces,
gables, preparations, howseholde implements, and other impositions and
subsidies raized and laid upon them from the xxiiij. day of August 1572. unto
this present time, whether it were by our commandment, or by the advice and
deliberation of the states, of gouerners of provinces, of courts of
Parliaments, or others: for we have discharged and do discharge them thereof,
prohibiting all the Treazurers of France, all the Barons of our Exchequer, all
our Receivers as well particular as general, all their co^mitties, under
officers, and other attendants, and all the officers of our Revenues, to seek
or sifte them for it, or to trouble or disquiet them for it directly or
indirectly, in any wize howsoever it be.

XLIX.
WE protest that we take and accept our right dear and dear beloved brother
the Duke of Alaunson, for our good brother: our very dear and intierelye
beloved brother in law the King of Navarre, for our brotherinlawe and good
kinzman: and our right dear and well-beloved Cowsine the Prince of Condie, for
our kinzman, faithful subject, and servant. Likewize also we hold and repute
our dear and loved cowsin Mounsieur de Da^uille Marshal of France, and all
the other Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, officers, townedwelllers, commonalties,
cities borowes, and the other places of our Realm, and of the countries under
our dominion, that have followed, succored, aided, and favored them by any
manner of means, for our good and loyal subjects and servants. And upon the
heering of the declaration made by our said brother the Duke of Alaunson, we
hold ourselves well and sufficiently satisfied and informed of his good
meening, and that another he, nor any of those that hilde in with him, or
intermedled themselves by any other means with the matter, whither they be
alive or dead, have done any thing but for our seruis. Wherefore we denou^ce all
judgments, informations, and actions done and given in that behalf, too be
utterly void and of none effect, as things never done nor come too pass: and
our will is too have them razed, defaced, and put out of the Registers books
of record, as well of our Courts of Parliaments, as of all other our
jurisdictions wheresoever they have bin enrolled.

L.
ALSO we hold and repute for our good kinzmen, neybours and friends, our right
dear and well-beloved cowsins the County Palatine Elector of the holy Empire,
and Duke John Cazimir his son: and that whatsoever has bin done by them,
has not bin done but too our seruis.

LI.
LIKEWIZE we denounce that the leuying and bringing forth of the Swissers, and
namely of the Earls of New castle and Valangin, and of others of the Cantons
whatsoever they were, was not done but for our seruis.

LII.
WHEREAS diverse have departed out of this Realm since the death of the late
king Henry our most honorable Lord and father, for Religions sake, and for the
troubles: although their children be borne out of this our Realm: yet
notwithstanding our will is that they shall be taken for true French, and as
borne within the Realm, and such have we denounced and do denounce them to
be: so as they shall not need to get them any letters of denizon, or any other
provision at our hands, than this present Proclamation: notwithstanding our
ordinances to the contrary, which we have derogate and do derogate.

LIII.
As well our said brother the Duke of Alaunson, the King of Navarre, and the
Prince of Condie, as the said Mounsieur de Damuille and the other Lords,
Knights, Gentlemen, Officers, Corporations of Cities, Commons, and all other
persons that have aided and succored them, and also their heirs and
successors, shall stand quit and discharged of all sums of money that have
bin leuyed and taken by them or their appoyntments, as well of our receipts and
Revenues, too what sum so ever it amount, as of Cities, Commonalties and
particular persons, or of the re^ts, revenues, ready coin or bullyon, sale
of moveable goods belonging to the Church and Churchmen, and of woodsales of
timber belonging to us, or by other fines, booties, raunsoms, or other kinds
of raizing of money, by occasion of these present and the former troubles:
insomuch that another they themselves, nor those whom they did put in trust too
levy the said monnie. or the parties that have delivered it and furnished
them of it by their appointment, shall not in any wize be sowght, vexed or
molested for the same, either now or at any time hereafter, but both they
them selves and their Deputies, shall stand clear of all use and occupying of
the said money: and in full discharge thereof, they shall within four months
next after the publishing of this our present proclamation made in our Court
of Parliament at Paris, brying in their acquitances made either by our said
brother, or by the King of Navarre, or by the Prince of Co^die, or by the
Marshall Damuill, or by such as have bin authorized by them, to here and cloze
up their accountes, or by some other chief gouerners, and co^moners of cities
that have had commission and charge during the said troubles. Likewize the
inhabitants of the city of Rochell and the rest of the commons shall be
discharged and pardoned of all assemblies of meetings both general and
particular, of establishment of Justice, policy, and orders among them, and of
all judgments and executions of judgments, whither it were in matters civil or
criminal: and also of all acts of hostility, of leuying and waging of men of
war, of coining of monye by the appointment of their heads, of casting and
taking of ordinance and artillery, as well out of our Storehowses as of their
own private store, of the making of Gunpowldre and Saltpeeter, of the taking,
fortifiyng, dismantling, and beating down of cities, Castles, Towns, and
villages, of attempts andenterprizes in doing thereof, of the burning and
beating down of Churches and howses, of voyages, intellige^ces, dealings,
treaties, and contracts made with any manner of strange Princes and
Co^monalties, of bringing in a Strangers into the Cities and other places of
this our Realm, and generally of all things that have bin done, wrought, or
dealt in, as well by the Catholics confederate as by those of the said
Religion, during the troubles present or past, since the death of our late Lord
and father, though the same things be not particularly expressed and specified.
And our intent is, that according too this our present declaration, the Vidame
of Charters and the Vidame of Bewuoyre, are and shall continue discharged: and
we discharge them specially of the treaties and dealings by them had with the
Queen of Ingland in the year 1562: certifying and assuring our selves that
they did nothing in that behalf but for our seruis, howbeeit that no express
mention have bin made thereof in the former Edicts of pacification:
Condicionally that heervpon the said Catholics confederate, and those of the
said Religion forbear and desist from all the confederacies which they have
both within the Realm and without, and from hensfoorth make not any leuyings
of monny without our leave, nor any mustering of men, nor any gathering of
assemblies, otherwise tha^ is granted them heeretoofore, and that without
weapon: which thing we prohibit and forbid them, upon peine of being punished
severely, as despizers and breakers of our laws.

LIIII.
ANOTHER our Officers of the said City of Rochel, nor the Mayres, Shreefes,
Bayliffes, and other inahbitants shall be vexed, molested, or disquietted for
the Commaundments, or for the decrees fo attaching men's bodies as well within
the City as without, or for the executing of their judgments following
thereupon, as well in respect of certain pretensed enterprises made against the
same town, in the mooneth fo December 1573, as also for a ship named the
Roundell, or for executing cuting of justice upon the folk wherewith the same
was manned, or for any other doings: for we have fully acquit and discharged
them of the same as is said before.

LV.
ALL pryzes that have bin taken by virtue of licenses and allowances given, and
which have bin judged by the Judges of the Ammiraltie and other Commissioners
thereunto appointed by the said Catholics confederate and by those of the
foresaid Religion, shall lie dead under the benefit of this our present
Edict, so as no suit may be commenced for them, nor the Capteines, Judges,
Officers, or any others be in any wise troubled or molested for the same,
notwithstanding any attachements, arrests, or seyzures, hanging vnadiudged, but
our will is that they shall have writtes of restitution to set them in full
possession ageine out of hand.

LVI.
THE Cities that have bin dismantled in the time of the troubles past and
present, may repair the same ruins and dismantlings at the costs and charges
of their inhabitants if they think good.

LVII.
SVCHE of the Catholics confederate and of the foresaid Religion, as have
before these present troubles taken to ferme any Offices, Demeanes, Gables,
foreign Imposts or other ryghts belonginge to us, which they could not enjoy
by cause of the troubles: shall stand discharged, and we discharge them of
the things which they have not taken up by their leases since the xxiiij. of
August, 1572, or which they had paid without fraud elsewhere than into the
receytes of our Exchequer: notwithstanding any obligations or bonds passed by
them in that behalf.

LVIII.
AND forasmuch as the greeuousenesse and long continuance of troubles within
this our Realm, have put al things so far out of order, that without
bringing of the^ to a stay ageine, it were impossible to hold our subjects in
so good vnio^ and agreement as ought too be among them, that they may live in
quietness and rest, which has bin always our chief care and endeavor:
considering that to bring the same to good pass, we could not tell how to do
better, than too here the advice of our subjects through all the provinces of
our Realm: we have ever since our coming too the crown, bin minded too call
a general assembly of the States, which thing (to our great grief) we could
not yet do by reason of the troubles. Whereof since it has pleazed God to give
an end, we continewing still in our good and holy purpoze to the welfare of
our subjects, do denou^ce and declare how it is our will and pleazure, that the
said States shall generally be summoned and called together into our city of
Bloys, there to make their appearance according too the good, ancient, and
commendable customs of this Realm, within six months next, accounting from
the day of the publishing of our present Edict in our Court of parliament at
Paris: and to the same end shall writts expedient in that behalf be by us
dispatched: That upon our heering of the informations, complaints and greefes
that shall be made and exhibited to us on their part, we may take such order as
we shall see requisite and convenient for the welfare of our Realm.

LIX.
THE said Catholics confederate, and they of the foresaid Religion, shall be
bound too cause all Garrisons too avoid incontinently after the publishing of
this our present Edict, out of the Cities, Towns, Castles, and houses which
they hold, belonging either too us or too any private person, and namely to any
of the Clergy, and them too leave, yield up, and set agein freely in the same
state wherein they were in the time of full peace, before the present and former
troubles. Nevertheless, for certain good considerations, we have given the said
Catholics confederate and those of the said Religion, the keeping of these
eight cities insewing: that is to wit, Aiguesmortes, and Beaucaire in
Languedocke: Perigueus le Mas de Verdune in Guyenne: Noyons and Serres both
the town and the castle, in Dolphenie: Ysoire in Awuerne: and Seyne le graund
tour and the circuit about it in Province. And our said brother, the king of
Navarre, the Prince of Condie, the Marshall Damuille, and they to whom the
keeping of those Cities shall be committed, shall promis upon their faith and
honor, to keep them well and faithfully too our use. Also there shall no
gouerners nor garrisons be sent by us into the other Cities which they hold at
this present, and are to be yielded up as is said before, other tha^ such as have
bin wont to be there at all times, yea even in the reign of the late king
Henry our Lord and father. Likewise being desirous to eaze our subjects of all
our other Cities: we assure the^ they shall have none other manner of Garrison
nor Governors than were wont too be there in the same time of our late Lord
and father: Another also is it our will that there shall be any other garrisons
in the castles, towns, howses, or possessions belonging too our particular
subjects, of what state or calling so ever they be: than have bin wont too be
there in the time of peace.

LX.
WE prohibit all Preachers, Readers, and others that speak openly, too use
any speeches, discourses, or words that tend to the stirring up of the people
to sedition. And we have commanded and do command them to restreine
themselves and to deal soberly, so as they say not any thing that may not be
to the instruction and edifying of their heerers, and to the mainteyning of the
quietness and tranquillity by us stablished in this Realm: upon the
penalties set down in our former Edictes. And we command our Attorneys
general and all other our officers expressly, too set hand unto the performance
thereof.

LXI.
OUR will, ordinance, and pleazure is, that all Gouerners of Provinces,
Baylifes, Stwardes of Courts, and other ordinary Judges of the cities of this
our Realm, shall incontinently upon the receyt of this our Edict, swear to
cause the same to be kept and observed, every of them in their jurisdiction:
and lykevvyse also shall the Mayres, Shreefs, Headborovves, and all other
officers of Cities do, wither they be continevvall or remouable from year to
year. Also we command all our said Baylifes, Stevvards, their deputies,
and all other Judges, too cause the chief inhabitants of their Cities, as well
of the one Religion as of the other, to be sworn to the maintenance of this
present Edict, within eight days after the proclaiming thereof, so as all our
subjects may be put in too our protection and safeguard, and one of them into
the keeping of another. The like oath shall be made before the Bailiffes and
Stewardes in every of their divisions, by the Lords and Gentlemen, which
shall be bound to repair too them within the said time, in their own persons
or by their Attourneys. And as in respect of officers remoueable, the oath
shall be renewed too them at their several enterances into their charge.

LXII.
AND to the end that as well our Justices and Officers, as all other our
subjects may be clearly and assuredly certified of our will and meening, so as
al ambiguities and douts that may rize by means of former Edicts, may be taken
away: we have denou^ced and do denounce that all other Edicts, letters,
declaratio^s, qualificatio^s, Restreints, Interpretations, Determinatio^s, and
Registers, as well secret as made by deliberation heretofore in our courts of
Parliament, and all other that may have bin made afterward too the prejudice of
this our present Edict, concerning the case of Religion and the troubles that
have happened in this our Realm, are of none effect nor force: the which
together with the derogations in them contained, we have utterly disanulled,
and by this our present Edict do disanull, and from hensforth do repeal,
revoke, and adnichilate the same: expressly declaring that our will is that this
our Edict shall stand sure, firm, and inviolable, and be kept and observed
as well by our Officers and Justices, as by our subjects, without stopping or
having any respect to aught that may be to the contrary, or to the derogation
of the same. And for the better performance of the execution of this Edict, and
for the spedier hearing of our subjects Complaints against the incounterings
thereof: we will that our right dear and well-beloved Cousins the Marshals of
France, shall every of them depart into the Provinces of his division, and
provide with all speed for all things requisite for the maintenance and
execution of the same Edict.

LXIII.
ALSO we command our beloved, trusty and faithful officers of our Courts
of Parliament, that immediately upon the receipt of this present Edict (al other
things set apart and upon pain of the adnichilating of all acts which they
shall do otherwise) they take the like oath as before, and cause this our Edict
to be published and enrolled in our courts purely and simply word for word,
without vsinge any manner of qualificatio^ns, restreynts, declaratio^s, or
secret registers, and without loking for any other bidding or commaundment from
us. And we command our Attorneys general to inquire thereof, and to sewe the
transgressors of this Edict immediately and without delay, after the
proclayminge of the same. Likewise we charge our Lieuetena^ts general and
the Gouerners of our provinces, too cause the same to be proclaimed out of
hand, every of them in his division, throwghout all places and jurisdictions
of their provinces, that it may be kept and observed without looking for any
notification from our courts, to the intent that no man may pretend ignorance,
and that all means of hostility, all leuying of money, and all taking and
beating down of buyldinges on both sides, may cease as soon as is possible.
And be it known, that all such leuyings of money, beatings down of buyldinges,
takinges and catchinges of goods and cattle, and other deeds of hostility,
as shall be done after the said publication and warning made and given by our
Lieuetenants general, shall be subject too restitution, punishment, and amends
making. For performance whereof, it is our will that they shall proceed
against the incounterers of this Edict, according as the case shall needefullye
require: that is too wit, ageinste such as shall use force of arms and
violence in the withstanding and breaking of this our present Edict, to hinder
the effect and execution thereof, they shall proceed by the punishment of
death, without hope of favor or pardon: and as for others whose incounteringe
or withstanding is not with force of arms or by way of violence, they shall be
punished with other bodily peines, banishments, honorable amends, and such
other like, according to the heynowsenesse of the case, at the arbitrament and
discretion of the Judges too whom we have committed the trial of such
caces. And we charge them upon their honors and consciences in this behalf,
to proceed justly and uprightly as becomes them, without respect or
difference of persons or Religion. Also our will is, that all bands of men of
war, as well on horse as on foot, whether they be Frenchmen or Strangers,
both on the one side and on the other, (sauinge the companies of our guard, and
the ordinary garrizons upon the fruntiers of our Realm) shall get them away
homewarde to their own countries and howses, immediatlye after the proclayming
of this our Edict in our Court of Parliament, behauing themselves gently,
soberly, and with as little incomberinge of our subjects as may be, and
without vsinge any force, violence, or raunsoming upon pain of death.
Finally, we command our said keepers of our Courts of Parliament, the
Chambers of our Accountes, the Courts of our Aids, our Baylifes, Stevvardes,
Prouostes, and all other our Justices and Officers to whom it shall
apperteyne, and their deputies, to cause this our present Edict and ordinance
to be read, published and enrolled in their Courts and jurisdictions, and the
same too maynteyne, keep and observe inuiolably from point to point: that
all men too whom these things perteyne, may fully and quietly inioye and use
the same as they be here set down, ceassinge and causinge all incomberances
and lettes too the contrary to cease. For so is our pleazure. In witness
whereof we have signed these presents with our own hand, and cavvsed our
seal too be set and put thereto, that it may be a firm and stable thing for
ever. Given at Paris in the month of May, the year of grace a thousand,
fiuehundred; threescore and sixteen, and the second year of our Reygne.

Signed HENRY.

And somevvhat beneath, By the King being in his Counsel.

FIZES.

And on the side.

Visa.

And sealed upon a lace of red silk and green, with the great Seal in
green wax.

Read, Proclaimed, and Registered in the heering at the request of the Kings
Attorney general, in Parliament at Paris, in the kings presence sitting there,
the fourteenth day of May. 1576.

Signed, DV-TILLET.

Likewise read, proclaimed, and enrolled in the Chamber of Accounts, in the
heering and at the request of the Kings Attorney general, the sixteenth day
of May. 1576.

Signed, DANES.

THe year. 1576. the. 16. day of May the Edict of Pacification hertofore
specified, was read and proclaimed with loud voice and open cry by us Mathurin
de Beynes, John Griffon, Liphard de Canlou, Michel de Pelletier, and Steven
Iacquet called also la Riuiere, Heraults of arms of France under the titles
of Orleance, Alaunson, Angolesme, Guyenne, and Champaigne, by the express
commaundment of the kings Majesty, at the marble table in the Palace at Paris,
at ten of the clock in the morning, at the rizing of the Court: and immediately
after age in at the same instant, in the Court of the same Palace, in the
Chastelet, in the Townehouse, and in other accustomed places, being assisted
by Peter Sudour, Gerault Chauncel, Gerard Madien called also Mountain,
Frauncis Chefdefaux, and Michel Noiret the kings ordinary Trumpetters. And the
same proclamation was made before by us Alau^son, Angolesme and Guyenne by the
co^maundment and in the presence of the Queen his majesty's moother, of my
Lords the Duke of Alaunson, the Cardinal of Burbo^, the Prince of Co^die, the
Duke de Mou^tpensier, the Duke John Casimire, the Duke Memorancie, and many
other Lords and Gentlemen, as well in the place and Town of Etigny, the City
of Sens, and the Camp of my said Lord the Duke of Alaunson: as in the presence
of the bands of the said Lord the Duke Casimire. Made the day and year above
mentioned.

Signed thus. Orleans. Alanson. Angolesme. Guyenne. Champaigne.



