The Way of life.

A Christian, and Catholic Institution comprehending principal poincts of
Christian Religion, which are necessary to be known of all men, to the
atteyning of Salvation.

First delivered, in the Danish language for the instruction of those people,
by Doctor Nicolas Hemmingius, Preacher of the Gospel, and Professor of
Divinity, for the King of Denmarcke, in his University of Hafnia: And about
three years past, (for the commodity of others) translated into Latin, by
Andrew Seuerinus Velleius: And now first, and newly Englished, for the
commodity of English Readers: By N. Denham, this year of our Redemption. 1578.

Imprinted at London by Richard Jones, and are to be sold over against S.
Sepulchers Church.

To the Right woorshipful, Master Henry Sadleyre Esquyer, Son of the right
Honorable, Sir Raphe Sadleyre Knight, (one of her Majesty's, most honorable
privy Counsel, and Chancellor of her Duchy of Lancastre:) And also to
Mistrisse Dorothy, wife of the said Henry: Nicolas Denham: wishes the favor
of God, with the increase of the knowledge of assured salvation, in IESV CHRIST.
Amongst those seven special Sages of the Greeks, there was one, which
beeinge desirous to leave to a certain follower of his sect, some special
token worthy of remembrance: commended unto him (as the speciallest thing yt
he could devise) this Symbol (...) (that is) Follow thou God. Whereby it is to
be perceived, that even the very heathens, endowed only, with the light, and
wisdom of nature, and not able to pearce farther, than their reasoninges, and
arguments taken of the visible creatures, which they saw, and perceived with
their senses) would stretch: did not only conclude, that there was a God, which
was the woorkemayster, and disposer of all those things, and that he was
immortal: but also that he was to be feared, and honored, and the sight,
and presence of him, to be desired.

For whilst that they considered, the globe, and compass of the Firmament,
and the earth, with all the noble, and variable furniture thereof, as the Sun,
the Moon, the Stars, and under them, the variety of the other creatures in
their kinds, and lastly, the excellency of the woorkemanshippe of the frame
of the body of man: they were induced to gather thereof, this conclusion: that
the woorkemayster, of these things, was, not only much more beautiful, and
excellent, but that he was, also, to be honored, and to be wished for, by
presence to be inioyed. Hereof spronge up many contentions, and sundry devises
among them, concerning the way, as well how to woorship him, here upon the
earth, as also to seek some short, and ready mean, to come to the sight, and
beeholding of him. But notwithstanding, in as much as they wanted the direction
of him, which is the leader into all truth: Romans 1.
they tired themselves in their own fond immaginations, and, not only in
stead of the true woorshippinge of him, frequented Idolatries, most horrible,
and execrable: but also, to come (as they supposed) to the sight of him,
attempted means, most pernicious, and dampnable. In so much, that diverse of
them, willinge to hye themselves apace, to be in presence, with that
immortality: could find no better, or readier way, then speedily, to murder,
and kill themselves. Which dooinges of theirs, notwithstanding they were
heinous, and wicked, and missed of the end, and purpose, for which they were
done, (for this is certain, Ihon. 3.
that He which beeleeueth not in the Son of God, the anger of God does abide
upon him: And again the Apostle says: Heb. 11. and Romans 14.
It is impossible without faith to please God: yet it is apparaunte thereby,
what earnestness was amongst the^, both to seek (according to their own
blind judgments) what this God should be: and also, which should be the
way, not only to walk, but rather to make haste, and speed unto him. Which,
if they that do profess the name of Christ, would consider, and but compare
themselves in these circumstaunces, with these men, beeinge but Heathens, and
void, both of the true knowledge of God, the creator, and also of him, Ioh.
which is the only way, and would, but sumwhat considerately confer
together, the blind diligence of the one, with (as it may be very well
termed) the devilish, and secure necligence of the other: their forwardness in
seekinge after that, which by all their toylinge, and tyringe of themselves,
they could not truly find out, with our backwardness, in not keeping, and
embracing that which (without our labors) is freely given us, and said
before our eyes: their feruency, in desiringe to find and run the way, to
that which they wished for, with our coldenesse in walkinge the right way,
which is plainly drawn forth, and delineated before us: to be short,
their persuasions of themselves, by this visible Sun, with our dullness: who,
by that true, and bright shining Sun, which is the brightness and wisdom of
the Father, will not be instructed, nor moved: If (I say) they would with
some earnestnes, consider these things: it were not to be doubted, but as they
do detest, and abhor, the name and conversation of the Heathen: so they
would loathe (in such matters as seem, to be the weightiest of all others) to
be either by others accoumpted, or in their own consciences to be
condemned, for inferiors unto them. But, to leave all other parts of
comparison, and only to speak of one poyncts, which concerns our present
purpose: it was taught amongst them, and practiced by such as were of the best,
and most reasonablest amongst them, as a most necessary, and principal
doctrine: that they should not always here continue, But pass from hence:
and that there was an immortality of the Soul, which beeinge separated by
death, from the body, should, either, for the well, and virtuous walkeinge
here, (according to their accompting of a virtuous life) be gathered into a
certain place of pleasure, with the Gods, or else, for not followinge the
moral precepts in following virtues, and eschewing vices, should not enjoy
the sight of the Gods, but should by them be punished.

This was the Sum of (as I may term it) their natural, and blind religion.
Thus much even nature her self, in that her corruption, had taught them. And
therefore the better to stir up their hearers, to walk virtuously, and with
the more desire, in that path, which they supposed to be the right way: they
uttered, and commended unto them, and their posterity, many pithy, and sauoury
sentences, as: Philosophia continu^ mortis meditatio, that is: the love or
study of wisdom, is the continual meditation of Death: And, Ad Ens Entiu^
semper contendendum, that is: We must ever be walkeinge toward the chief
being of beeinges, (whereby is meant, God himself,) with infinite such others,
to tedious, here to be recyted, as in their books daily handled, are
plentifully to be seen. But we, which do bear the name of Christians, which
live at these days, in which (by the great mercy of God) such infinite
treasures of Heavenly wisdom, and knowledge of Christian doctrine, is powered
forth upon us: yea we which have, for their shadowed, and false, a clear,
and perfect religion: for their crooked, and uncertain by path, a straight
and most assured highway: for wisdom natural, the wisdom Divine: for Plato,
Aristotle, and their Scholars, the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles: for
the doubtful end of the pathe, which they taught, the certain, and assured
end of the way which we are instucted to walk in: are yet notwithstanding,
in respect of them so dull, and so careless of all these things, yea, and so
little ashamed of this comparison with them: that we are little, or nothing
pricked forward, with the consideration of our more plentiful blessings;
little, or nothing consider our own contempt, and ingratitude: seem to make
less account of Christ, his Apostles, and Ministers, then the heathen did of
Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and their Sectaries, and disciples: seem,
neither by the promises of God to be allured, nor, by his threatninges to be
feared: to be short, seem neither to fear to run headlong into that path,
which leads to destruction, nor to regard to walk in that way which guides
to salvation. It is therefore to be feared, least that come to pass, in this
comparison, which our Savior JESUS CHRIST himself pronounces in the 12. of
S. Math. comparinge, the diligence, and regard of the Queen of the South, in
coming from the farthest parts of the world, to hear the wisdom of
Solomon, with the negligence, and contempt of the Jews: in refusinge to be
taught by Christ himself, coming amongst them: and likewise in comparinge
the repentance of the Ninevites, at the hearing of Jonas: with their
obstinacy, and rebellion, in refusinge to hear the Son of God himself:
namely, that as he there concludes of them both: that as well the Queen of
the South as also the Ninevites, being profane people, and heathens: shall
rise in the last judgment, and condemn that adulterous, and obstinate
nation: so that these heathens, shall then also arise, though not to their own
salvation, yet to the condempnation of those, which (glorying in the name of
Christians) have so little regard to walk the right way of eternal salvation.
Which way of Salvation, forasmuch, as it has been, by diverse worthy
instruments, of the Church of Christ, in these our latter times, and ages of
the world: tried, and disseuered from that bypath, which leads to destruction
and is (by the word of God, wherein that right way is set forth, and offered)
sufficiently cleansed, from all brambles, and weeds of incombraunce, which
both for want of good husbandinge, and walkinge in, had ouergrowen, and hidden
the same from many: and is now at the length, made so plain, and visible, that
it may be seen of all those, which do not wilfully either cloase up their
eyes, that they will not see it, or if they do see it, yet will not suffer
their foot once to tread within it: a godly man (considering this) may, with
sorrow, and grief of mind, justly marvel, why there be so many, which will
not know it: so few, that do regard to know it: and why, fewer having found
it, and being set into it, do so sclenderly go forward, and continue their
course in the same. That we may the better conceive the causes of these
things: let us first consider, wherein this way of Salvation does consist. The
knowledge thereof consists, in the right understanding of these two things,
namely of the Law, and the Gospel. Whereas the Law therefore sets forth
unto us the Justice of God, and is set before us, that we may plainly see
therein, as it were in a glass, both what God requires of us, and also how
weak, and unable we be to fulfill the same, that we seeinge our own, both
deformity, and imbecility, should seek for a cleanser, and a stronger, that
may has cleanse us, and fulfill it for us: and by this means to be led to
the Gospel, which sets forth the same unto us: here, the first sort,
having been trained up, and noozeled in another manner of doctrine,
concerning the Law and the Gospel, and having not learned, the true ends,
and right uses of them, for the which they were given: are so obstinately bente
against this true knowledge of the right way, which is in them contained: that
they will suffer themselves by no means, to be brought, once to enter their
foot into it. The second sort of people, are mere Athaeistes, and such as
having been always full fed like Epicures, and thoroughly pampered up, with
all kinds of worldly volupteousnes, and pleasures of the flesh: are so lulled
a sleep in them, by the subtilty of the Devil, who holds them fast snarled:
that they have no leisure, once to bethink themselves, nor to regard, either
what GOD is, or his Law, and Gospel, neither yet, what nor where they
themselves be, nor how they came, or for what cause they are placed in the
world, nor how they shall depart forth of it, nor what shall become of them
after this life, and so neither pass for Heaven, or Hell, GOD, or the Devil:
and therefore, no wonder, though they care not, for the inquiringe, and much
less for walkinge in this way: being (as they suppose themselves, (in such a
way, as there neither is, nor can be any better. The third sort, which do
find it, and do enter, and walk into it, and yet are oftentimes stayed, and
hyndered in their course: are even the most holiest in this life, and the very
elect of God: who having entered into it, and purposing with a good Conscience
to walk forward in the same: are notwithstanding oftentimes, through the
malice of the Devil, (continually warring against them, and seeking to pluck
them forth of that way, into the bypathe of destruction with him, and through
the frailty of their own flesh, and the continual allurementes, and baytes of
the world, are oftentimes so drawn aside, and hindered, yea so bewitched, and
dazeled: that it oftentimes seems unto them themselves: that they need not
so earnestly, and so dilligently regard, to continue still their walking in the
same. Hereof it comes to pass, that, (by the permission of God) they being
either drawn back, or stayed from going forward, or plucked for a season
beside the way: many heinous, and horrible offenses, are by them committed:
which advantage (as long as they heedefully kept themselves, within the
limittes of the right way of Salvation) the Devil could not have of them. When
David demanded of the Lord, Wherwithall, a young man should cleanse his way,
and the answer of the holy ghost within him was this: By rulinge himself
according to the word of GOD, was then no doubt, both mindful of this way,
and diligently troade, and walked in the same: but, being a little stayed
therein, he was drawn aside, and committed the most horrible offense of
Murder, and Adultrie: but God having compassion upon him, and not suffering
him, utterly to loose the right way of his Salvation: joining his Mercy, and
Justice together, and sending them unto him, by the Prophet Nathan, did both
mercifully set him in the right way again (after he had repentauntly
acknowledged his declining from the same) and also therwithal, justly scourged
him for his wandering and digression. The like may be found of Ezechias,
Manasses, Peter, and diverse others: which (in reading of the holy Scriptures)
are almost every where to be found, and here, for expelling of tediousness,
are omitted. So that albeit, the godly man, or woman, be sometimes hindered in
the walking of this course, from goinge forward, or be plucked backewarde, or
seems (as it were) set quite beside the way, whereby (as the examples above
recited do declare) many horrible offenses, and wicked acts, pleasant to the
Devil, are by them committed: yet, this hope they have left them: that God
will not suffer them (with the obstinate wicked, and careless ungodly,) to
perish utterly from the right way, but that he will reatch forth his merciful
hand of direction unto them: which (they heartily repentinge, and taking hold
of) will set them in the straight, and right way again: wherein if they shall
perseauere, and continue unto the end: they shall be sure (as our Savior Christ
himself has promised) to be undoubtedly saved. For, so he himself says in
Math. He that continues to the end, shall be saved: And again: Continue unto
the end, and I will give thee a Crown of life. Thus we see the diversity of
the people, which live, and remain, even amongst us which profess the name,
and religion of JESUS CHRIST, how, and in what manner they be affected, to
the knowledge of this way of eternal life, and Salvation. Whereof, some, (by
means of a former false received opinion deeply rooted in them) be
obstinate, and wilfully will not learn it: some, are negligente and careless,
that they pass not for it: the third sort yet embracing it, and rejoicing to
walk in it: are notwithstanding (through diverse, and infinite impediments,
and hinderaunces) either stayed, or plucked back, or aside from it: and yet
notwithstanding, by the mercy of God, are called back again by earnest
repentance, and are again set therein: wherein they walk here upon the earth,
and continue their course in the same unto the end, depart this life in
walkinge in the same, and at the end of this way, enter into the City of
eternal rest, and salvation. The true doctrine whereof, being in this little
Treatise both learnedly, and also clearly, and plainly set forth, by this
godly learned man, being such a one, as by the judgment, and opinion of
diverse of the best learned of this our time, has deserved, not the least
co^mendacion, of the Church of Christ: when I had perused, and conferred with
my friend, I thought very meet, and profitable, to convert into our vulgar
speech, for the commodity, and comfortable instruction of all those, to whom
it shall please God, to give eyes to see, ears to hear, hearts to conceive,
and feet to walk aright, in the ready way to life, therein set down, and
delivered: as in the diligente reading, and meditating of the same, shall (I
hope) to the comfort and sound instruction of the Christian Conscience, more
plainly appear. For, as the Doctrine therein contained, is, both necessary
(and as touching the substance thereof) is such, that the true Christian man,
or woman, may not be without the knowledge, and practice thereof, in this life,
if they desire to attain to the knowledge, and understanding of their
salvation in the life to come: so is it (as much as is requisite thereunto) both
pithily, very plainly, and also familyarly, as well in plain speech as easy
Method, set down, and delivered: and further, with good aduisement, and
deliberation handled, and diuulged. Touching the Author himself, it is
sufficiently known amongst the learned, what he is: as beeinge such a one,
which has not the lowest room, amongst the best, and most approved
Christian writers of this our age: brought up from his infancy, in the studies,
and exercises of learning, and godliness, notably qualified, and furnished
as well with liberal arts, and languages: as principally in the study, and
profession of Divinity: which profession he has woorthely and diligently
executed (as by his own testimony set down in his Epistle before this book,
is to be seen) by the space, and continuance of thyrtie years: beeinge
thereunto called, by the King of Denmarcke, to supply the place of his public
reader, and professor of Diuinitic, in his university of Hafnia, where with
great fame (as I hear) he at this day continues. Touching the particular
matters, contained, and handled in the book, there are such (as I have already
said, and in the diligente perusinge thereof shall be better perceived) that the
knowledge of them in a Christian, may not be wanting. And I doubt not but the
Christian reader (if he have any desire to aspire to the knowledge of Jesus
Christ) having a while busied himself therein: shall freely in his own
conscience confess, as much as I have here spoken. For, if he desire (in
short sum, and breefely, and yet sufficiently) the perfect, and right
understanding of the Law of God, what it is, how many, and what the true uses
thereof be, to what end it is given unto men: also, what the Gospel is, and to
what end it is given, what we must necessarily believe of Christ, (as it is
consonant to our common faith:) How he is our Mediator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier: by what means he declares and sets forth his benefits unto
mankind, what his benefits be toward us: what is to be considered and learned
of the Sacraments, as well of Baptism, as of the Supper of the Lord: besides
diverse other necessary doctrines, of the right woorshippinge, and service of
God, of prayer, and diverse other places which (as I have said) in the diligent
perusing of the same, shall more evidently appear, to the Christian reader. If
he desire (I say) to be instructed, exhorted, or comforted, in these things,
he may here find them, both soundly, and plainly expounded. All which
poinctes, being by other most godly, and learned pastoures of the Church of
Christ, notably, and pithily in these latter times set abroad unto the
beholding of the world, to no small benefit of the Congregation of Christ: yet
by reason of their buckling with the adversaries of the truth, in refelling
their corruptions, and cauilling objections, they were forced, to write with
greater style of words, and more Schoolelyke, whereby their works became
more convenient (in some poincts) for students in Divinity, then for the
common peoples perceauerance, and Capacity. Which things I speak, not that I
would dehorte any from the reading, and dilygent exercisinge of them: yea I do
rather most heartily exhort them thereunto: but this I say, to the end, to take
away the offense, which (as I my self have heard (some have taken (though
undeservedly) when they perceive the^ in some places (for the causes before
recyted) to write either somewhat longer then they think meet, or sumwhat
more artificially then they do conceive. Which offense, (not given, but
unjustly taken,) they should easily let fall, if they would consider the
causes aforesaid, which violently drew those learned men, and by an inevitable
necessity, enforced them so to do. From which tediousness, (if they will
needs so account it) they are in this small treatise delivered: where so
sundry great occasions were not given to the Author: For as he answers here
but to few objections, so, writing his book for the common sort, he frames
his answers and solutions, both short, and easy. Which work (after sundry
other learned, and fruictfull labors written of Divinity, by him, which are
extant, and set abroad in the Latin tongue:) the said Author wrote, and
delivered abroad, at the first, in the Danish language, for the instruction,
and consolation of the people of that nation, and specially for such of them,
as could not gather ye knowledge of godliness, forth of other languages,
wherein it was written: which being so written, and set abroad, it was, by
diverse learned men of the same Region concluded upon, for the woorthynesse
thereof, to be turned into the Latin speech, to the end, that other
faithful heads, and teachers of the Church of Christ, seeing the same, and
perceiving it to be, both sound, and comfortable, might the sooner convert,
or cause the same to be converted, into their own several languages: and
commend the same, to those porcions of the Church, and flock of Christ which
are to their several charges committed.

Which Treatise being now at the last, converted into our common language, by
me, for the causes above rehearsed: I here dedicate, and present (Right
worshipful) unto you both: beseeching you to accept the same, as an argument,
and testimony of that well willing affection, which (by sundry your
gentlenesses exhibited, and showed) you have, deservedly, raised up in me. And
albeit, I can not justly auouche it, to be any recompense for any part of the
same: neither yet do proffer it to that end: yet rather then I would incur
the compass of that sentence of the Philosopher, Perit quod facis ingrato:
That is lost which is done to an unthankful person: I had leiffer by
proferinge that little, that I may make auoydaunce thereof. I beseech almighty
God preserve you both, and confirm, and increase in you, unto the end, those
good gifts of his grace which he has already beegun in you: and so
illuminate you with the light of his holy spirit, that ye may both see the
right way, and seeing it, you may have a desire to walk in the same: and that
walkeing daily forward in the same, and so continuing unto the end: you may
pass, in at that gate, which leads from the sourginge, and dangerous Sea of
this transitory life, into the Haven of perpetual rest, and quietness, there
quietly, peaceably, and joyfully, to behold the glorious face of JESUS CHRIST
to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be praise and dominion for ever.
Amen.

Your Woorships humble at commandment: N. Denham.
From London this XXV. of October, the year of our Redemption. 1578.
FINIS.
To the Christian Reader.
Whereas in this book (good Christian Reader,) certain faults are committed in
the Printinge thereof, though they be not many: which have come to pass, for
want of directing the Printer, in some such places of the written copy, which
were either blotted, or obscurely penned: and in reading might be some trouble,
or hinderance unto thee: my counsel is, that (before thou setle thy self,
to the diligent reading thereof) thou should look upon these faults here
followinge, and as thou find them here set down, and noted by the Pages,
and lines: so thou should turn unto them, and with thy pen, amend them,
which being done, thou shall read it ( I hope) to thy instruction, and
comfort. I cease here to speak further of the dignity, of the work:
wishinge thee, first to read it, and then after, to report the dignity
thereof to others: and in my simple Judgment thou shall find in thy
conscience, cause sufficient to commend it, and thank God for it.

So fare well.
Faults escaped in Hemmingius his Epistle.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 8. 25. appeerations, apparitions. 9. 3.
Aegypticall, Aegyptiacall. Eodem. 30. varitie, variety. 12. 23. Prophet,
Prophets. Eodem. 26. vnifosme, uniform. Eodem. 31. althefull, healthefull.

Faults escaped in the Book.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 17. 13. admonish, admonished. 19. 23.
Ceremonicall, Ceremonial. 22. 30. native, nativity. 25. 9. first, fifte. 28.
12. as, all. 35. 27. punished, unpunished. 44. 23. clean, cleave.

To the magnificent, and worthy Gentleman, excellent in wisdom, virtue and
godliness, Biornone Kaaes, Lord of Starupgaarde, most prudent Senator of the
kingdom of Denmark, president for the King in the Tower of Malinogien: And to
his well-beloved wife, the noble, chaste and godly Lady Christine Nicolai Fill.
Nicolas Hemmingius wishes grace and peace from God the father, through our
Lord JESUS CHRIST.
OF all the things which are in the world, there is nothing either more
better, or more precious, either yet more profitable: than to know God, and his
will aright, and to worship and reverence the same. For, as this whole world is
momentanie, and shall pass away: so in like manner the treasures thereof, with
how soever beautiful and magnificent titles they be named: Yet (to be all
fleeting and falling away) daily experience may show and teach us: unless we
would suffer our selves to be blinded, or (as it were) to be bewitched of the
same. But, to know God (Aright) and (having gotten the knowledge of him) to
worship him aright, according to his will, revealed in his word: that
continues for ever, and leads man (from the unsteadfastness of this unconstant
world) the right way to eternal life and salvation. Therefore in John, Christ
says: John. 17, verse. 3,
This is eternal life, to know thee to be the only true God: and Jesus
Christ whom thou haste sent. And in another place: What does it profit a man
to gain the whole world, and loose his own soul? Therefore David judges
aright, in Psalm. 84. Psalm. 84.
where he says One day in thy courts, is better than a thousand: I had rather
be (...) door keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of
ungodliness. For the Lord God is a light and defense, the Lord will give grace
and glory: and no good thing will he withholde from them, which walk in
innocence. In these words, David puts a difference between those, which
are without the church, and those (which being within the Church of CHRIST)
have the true understanding of the BEING and WILL of God.

This difference, he places in five things, most specially to be remembered:
by the contraries of which, both do appear the more evident: namely, both
how great, the honor, and high blessed estate of the children of GOD is: and
contrariwise, how great the misery and calamity is, even of the most mighty
of this world, which be not citizens of the Church of God.

The first good thing, and commodity of the children of God, or of the Church
is, That God himself is in her as a most lightsome Sun. For, even as from
this visible Sun, there comes unto the world, Light, Heat, and Shining
beams, whereby al things are quickened and cherished: so, from God, (which is
the Sun invisible) there comes unto the Church, Light, (that is to say) clear
knowledge of GOD: there comes Heat, 1, Cor. 13.
that is, affections burning with Faith, Hope, and Love: and shining beams,
which are the manifold consolations, whereby the faithful soul is relieved,
cherished, and comforted. This Sun, as it rises to such as fear God: so it
sets to the negligent, the wicked liver, and the careless. It is therefore
(with great diligence) to be taken heed of: that the godly (through a
certain sluggishnes of their own, in hearing, or reading the word of God,
wherein this Sun brightly shines) do not suffer this Sun to be, either
darkened, or hidden from them. For, as this visible Sun, if it shall seem to
a sick body in his dream, to be hid, or darkened, there is danger (as
Hippocrates affirms) of most certain death, to the sick body, to be at
hand; so, if our Sun Christ be darkened unto us (his doctrine being either
abolished, or obscured) not only darcknes hangs over us, but also the death
of the soul, and most assured eternal condemnation.

Furthermore, we may hereby perceive, the misery of them, as many as are
destitute of this Sun the word of GOD. For, they being blind, do, both
grope in the darkness of ignorance: and being ignorant of God, are stricken
with dreadful amasednesse of mind, when sin shows forth it self in
their consciences. And albeit, that Conscience seems in many, to be (as it
were with an hot iron) feared, as though it were void of all feeling of sin:
yet notwithstanding it will at sometime be wakened up, at the least in the
extreme agony of death, and will drive the miserable soul into desperation:
than the which thing, nothing may happen unto manne, either more heavy, or
more bitter: as having leather, that he had never been created and brought
unto light.

The second good thing, or commodity of them which know the Essence and will
of GOD, and yield themselves obedient to the same, is: that God is a defense,
or sheeld unto them, wherewith they are compassed, defended, and sheelded,
against the kingdom of darcknesse. Of this sheeld speaks David in Psalm. 5.
Psalm. 5.
when he says: All they which hope in thee shall rejoice, they shall ever be
giving thanks, and thou shall dwell in them: all they which love thy name,
shall rejoice in thee. For thou Lord shall bless the righteous, and with thy
favorable kindness, shall thou compass us as with a sheelde. Item Psalm. 18.
Psalm. 18.
And thou haste given me the defense or sheelde of thy salvation, and thy right
hand does uphold me. In this manner, it is the good pleasure of God, that he
will not only, (with the crown of his favorable kindness) compass his
about: but also, will have them to be happy, with perpetual blessedness.
Paul, when he writes to the Ephesians, thus: (Take unto you the sheeld of
Faith, 1, Tim. 1.
wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked:) Signifying, that
we are the^ compassed about with the sheeld of faith, when we fight a good
fight, holdeing a steadfast belief of the doctrine, with a sure confidence of
mercy, and a good conscience. This sheelde, forasmuch as the enemies of God do
want: what (I pray ye) can be more miserable then they? For in as much as they
be naked and unarmed, they are not able to resist the devil the prince of
darkness: but he obteineth full dominion in them, and throws them headlong out
of one wickedness into an other, until he have brought them to utter
destruction.

The third good thing or commodity, which the godly have by the healthful
knowledge, and fear of the true God: is called of David Grace.

This Grace, is the favor of God, forgiving sin to the believers, for the
death of his son, What this grace is.
and garnishing them with a most pure garment, which is, The obedience or
righteousness of Christ: Roma. 5.
Whereby they are in such wise reputed righteous in the sight of God, as if
they them selves had fulfilled the law. But they which are out of the
congregation, are void of this grace of salvation: and do remain under
sin, the wrath of God, and eternal damnation, for their iniquity.

The fourth commodity which they (that know and fear God) do enjoy: is
called of David, Glory, What this glory is, and wherein it consists.
This Glory is, The adoption of the adopted sons of GOD: The inhabiting of
the holy ghost, and the hereditary Possession of eternal blessedness, by
Jesus Christ. But contrariwise, they which do not know God, are the
bondslaues, and dwelling places of the devil, are moved by his spirit, and to
eternal ignominy, are they reserved.

The fifth good thing or commodity, which God (by the Psalmist) promises unto
the godly, is contained in these words: He will withholde no good thing from
them which walk in innocence. O, how great is this promise? It is all one as
if he should say: They which walk in innocence, (that is to say) they which
by faith do yield obedience unto God, shall be abundantly indewed with all
good things: so, that they may perpetually enjoy them, and shall never stand
in fear of any evil to come unto them. And albeit, that all the Children of
God, shall in this world suffer persecution: yet notwithstanding they are
certain of the good things promised, which here they obtain by hope, and in
the life to come, shall (without all impediment) for ever possess. But
contrariwise, they (which have neither learned to know God by his word,
neither yet to fear him according to his will: unto them ignominies, sorrows,
and calamities, shall never be wanting: but unto the Devil, (whom they have
served) they shall be thrall and subject for ever.

Hereby now every one may easily understand that to be most true which I
propounded in the beginning, namely: That of all things which are in the world
there is nothing either more better or more precious, neither yet more
profitable, than rightly to know the ESSENCE and WILL of God: and that this
knowledge is drawn forth of the word of God, in the which word, he has opened
both him self and his will. But least any man should suffer himself to be
seduced by the devil and his members: it is to be known, that the word of
GOD is not any other where to be sought, than in the writings of Moses the
Prophets, the Evangelists and Apostles, which are beautified with the
testimony of the omnipotent God, which is the eternal verity, and can not
lie, Romans 3.
as Paul speaks. But some may object, or, at the least think with himself
in his heart, (as many do, although they express it not by their mouth) after
this manner: If we were certain, that that word were in very deed, the
word of God him self, doutlesse, it were of all things far the most
preciousest: but, the world, for a great part thereof, is against the same, and
few there be which embrace it, and fewest of those which live according to the
same: yea, there be also very many, which verily with their mouth confess the
same to be the word of God, but yet by their lives and manners (contrary to the
same word, whereof they do so commonly boast) they deny the same. This
(without all dout) is that temptation, which the Devil breathed into our first
Parents, whereby he also seduced them, neither does he at this day cease with
unwearied study, by this his old deceitful subtlety, to circumuent and
destroy very many. It is therefore cheefely necessary for all Christians, to
have in a readiness; (touching the certitude of the word of God) firm
arguments and sure demonstrations, which (in the old and new Testament) are
every where to be found.

There be in general two kinds of testimonies, by which it is co^uinced, that
the doctrine of the church in the books of the Prophets and Apostles
delivered: is verily proceeded and inspired of GOD him self. Of these, the
first is, An outward testimony: but the other is Inward in the hearts of
each of the godly.

I call that the Outward Testimony, which runs into the senses of men,
that it may send to the mind, What the out ward testimony is.
the brightness of the Heavenly verity. Of this, there be six parts, of
which parts, albeit every one by it self, might suffice, to euince the
infallible certitude of the doctrine of the Church: yet not withstanding it
pleased the most merciful God, by so many means to sustain our infirmity.

The first part therefore, of the Outward testimony is, The Divine
manifestation, by the which God him self, (proceeding from his secret seat)
has, (with his own voice) revealed his will, touching the doctrine of the Law
and the Gospel. And, albeit that God has often, and at diverse times
manifested himself, repeating with other, and other words, the self same
doctrine: we notwithstanding, will recite certain of the more selected
appearings of God.

First of all therefore, he appeared to Adam after the fall, and delivered
first with his own voice, the doctrine of the Law and the Gospel. For in
that that he laid punishments upon our first parents, for their rebellion (in
perpetual testimony of his anger against sinners) it pertains to the law:
and in that that he promised: Genesis 3.
The seed of the woman, to crush the Serpents head, it is the voice of the
Gospel.

Furthermore, God appeared unto Noah, and by a wounderful deed confirmed both
the doctrine of the law and the Gospel. For, when with the flood, he destroyed
the unrepentant: he executed the sentence of his law: but when he delivered
Noah believing his word, and (by faith) being obedient unto him, he
established a testimony of the promise of his grace reserved, which is of the
Gospel.

After the flood, GOD appeered unto Abraham ten times, to Isaach his son
twice: and to his Nephew Jacob, seven times. In which app^ritions, was
propounded not diverse, but one, and the same doctrine always, of the Seed of
the woman, (that is to say) of Christ Jesus our Savior.

After these things, God appeered to Moses in Egypt, repeating both the
doctrine of the law and the Gospel, and with wonderful doings confirming the
same. For the just plague and calamity of Pharao, and his ministers, is to be
referred to the Law: but, that glorious deliverance of the people, with Moses,
forth of that Aegypticall house of servitude: is to be referred to the
Gospel. All which things are, figures of the last Judgment, wherein God will
condemn the Devil, with all his train: and receive to himself, into
everlasting Tabernacles, as many, as with a true, and lively faith, shall
constantly cleave unto Christ.

In the new Testament also, the same GOD has sounded his word from Heaven, and
has commended unto us Christ the teacher, with his own mouth, saying; This
is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased: hear him. As if he should say:
In time paste, Matthew. 3.
I promised the Seed of the woman to crush the head of the serpent, and to
repair again my image in man, (the curse of the Law being taken away)
behold, he is here present, hear ye him, which heartily love life, and
salvation: for in him am I well pleased (that is to say) by this my son, am I
reconciled to the world, that is, to all them, which (by faith) shall receive
him. Let us oppose all these apparitions, with many others (in which one, and
the same doctrine is always repeated) against the Devil, and all wicked
Sophisters, Mahometistes, unbelieving Jews, and profane nations: and to
conclude, against our own prudence, and carnal wisdom, ascrybing unto God
alone, the praise of the verity.

The second part of the Outward testimony is, The varitie of miracles, (that
is to say) of the peculiare, and extraordinary works of God, which can not
be done, by any creature. All these things has God done, that he might help
our imbecillitie: that when these outward miracles should present themselves
to our eyes, we should decree in our mind, that to be the doctrine of God,
which (with such manner of works,) as with seals is confirmed.

And, albeit that these miracles (from the beginning of the world, forth
until the times of the Apostles) be innumerable: yet notwithstanding the
scope, and end of them all, is one: namely, that they might confirm the truth
of God, (that is to say) the doctrine of the Law, and the Gospel.

In the old Testament are found miracles done be fore the flood, in the flood,
and after the flood. Likewise in Egypt, and after the gooing out of Egypt,
and in the wilderness, by the space of 40. years. In like manner, in the time
of Joshua, of the Judges, of the Kings, of the Captivity of Babylon, and of the
Macchabees, unto the coming of Christ: all which, did seal the same
doctrine, being oftentimes repeated.

The miracles also, of the new Testament, wrought by Christ, are no less
wounderfull: concerning which, he says to the Jews: If ye believe not me,
believe my works. Chiefly this is worthy to be considered, that Christ the
third day rose again from death, and afterward, in the beholding of five
hundred breethren, did ascend visibly into heaven: and so accomplished the
first promise made unto Adam. Genesis 3.
All these, yea or one of these miracles might be sufficient for us, that we
should believe the word of God: but it so seemed good unto God, by the variety
of these, to sustain our infirmity.

The third part of the Outward testimony, is The most certain fulfilling,
(or accomplishment) of the Prophets: which witnesses, that God himself spoke,
by the mouth of his ministers. For, we have an immovable foundation of our
faith, when (to the foresayings concerning the Messiah, or Christ, prophesied
by Moses, David, Daniell, and other Prophets) we see the History Evangelical,
to answer. The steadfastness of faith (says Augustine) consists in this:
that all things which came to pass in Christ, were told of before. Hereof
our faith concludes on this manner.

He alone, without all doubt, is the true, and only Messiah and Savior of the
world, in whom alone do meet together whatsoever has been foretold,
touching the Messiah, by Moses, and all others the Prophets of God.

In Jesus, the son of Mary alone, meets together, whatsoever has been
(touching the Messiah) foretold by Moses, and all the rest of the Prophets of
God:

Therefore: Jesus alone, the son of the virgin Mary, is, (without al doubt)
the Sole, true, and only Messiah, and Savior of the world.

Upon this foundation, the Apostles of Christ, Peeter and Paul, builded the
faith of the Gentiles: which would never have believed in Christ, unless
they had showed them, this agreemente of the foresayinges, and their
fulfillinges in Christ. Touching this matter, let the 17. Act: and 2. Peter.
1. be read.

In like manner also, the foretellings of the Prophets (touching the most
grievous persecutions of the Church, which at this day, we find that Romish
Antichrist, and Mahomet, to fulfill) are extant. Here, let us comfort and
lift up our selves against the kingdom of the Pope, and the raging of
Mahomet, when we confer the event, with the Prophecies showed long time before.
Of the tyranny of the Roomish Bishop, and Mahomet: Jeremy, and Daniel,
foreshewed: when we therefore do see these things to have come to pass, what
lets, that we should not thoroughly persuade our selves, that those things
shall come to pass, which are foretold of the Aduent, or coming of the
kingdom of JESUS CHRIST, wherein, namely in the last day, he will appear,
and will raise up all people from death, those which have done good, to the
Resurrection of life: but those which have done evil, unto the Resurrection of
damnation, as the whole sacred Scripture, touching this matter, does every
where most plentifully teach us.

The fourth part of the Outward testimony, is, the consent of Moses, the
Prophets Christ, the Apostles, and of the whole universal Church, in
doctrine and worshipping of God. For, all these, with one uniform agreement,
have holden the same doctrine of The Law, and The Gospel, and the same manner
of worshipping God. Neither has the diversity of ceremonies (which for the
consideration of times, have been changed) troubled this agreement, one, and
the same foundation of the true and althfehull doctrine, every where remaining.
But if this doctrine had not been inspired by God, so great an agreement had
never been in these Ministers of God: whom, (both in teaching, and
propounding the same matters, it is convenient, that their successors should
imitate.

Where that thing is accomplished, there must needs be the true Church of
Christ, and without this not else where.

The fifth part of the Outward testimoninie, is, The Induraunce, and
conservation of the Church, from the beginning of the world, unto this time,
and so farther, unto the last day of Judgment. Heerunto appertains that,
which is in Acts. 5. when the Scribes, and Pharisees rose up and went together
to counsel, to suppress the Apostles of Christ: that ancient Gamaliell, a
Doctor of the Law rose up, and said: Acts. 5.
If this counsel, or this woork, be of men, it shall be dissolved: but, if it
be of GOD, ye cannot dissolve it. This is it which Christ him self affirms,
that against his Church, Matthew. 16.
The gates of Hell shall not prevail.

The sixth part of the Outward testimony, is, The bloody confession of many
Martyrs, from Abell unto this present day. For, they are called Martyers,
because they bear witness to the truth of the Heavenly doctrine, not only
with their mouth, but also with their blood. A matter worthy to be remembered,
is reported of Ignatius the Scholar of Saint John: that, when at a certain
time, the Tyrant would by threatenings have constrained him to deny Christ, he
answered: How can I deny him, whose name I do bear written in my heart?
Which thing being heard, the Tirant commanded the body of Ignatius, to be cut
in sunder, and the heart being taken out, to be divided into small pieces:
which thing when it was accomplished, in every piece so cut of the heart, the
name of Jesus was found manifestly discrybed.

The other kind of testimonies, whereby the certainty of the doctrine of the
Church is confirmed, is: The inward certification (or assurance made) by the
holy Ghost, sealing the hearts of faithful people, touching the verity of
the Gospel. Of this thing, Paul 2. Cor. 1. speaks: It is God (says he)
which has anointed us, and sealed us in Christ, and has given the earnest
of the spirit in our hearts. This Certification, the godly do feel,
cheefely, in fervent and earnest prayer unto God. For, when Prayers do
proceed from a true faith: we feel in our hearts the answer of God, whereby
we are made the more assured of the divine promises.

Hitherto, I have numbered breefely, the testimonies whereupon, as upon
foundations, the immovable certainty of the Christian doctrine, is stayed. God
grant, that these things may be effectually confirmed in the minds of He
uses this phrase of speech as S. Paul does when he says, Many became
sinners. Romans 5.
many, that they waver not any more, but that they may daily, more, and more
abound, in all sense, and knowledge. This word of God, being by so sure
testimonies approved: God has commanded to be spread abroad, through the
whole compass of the world, and by the Ministry of the same, gathers out
of all mankind, a Church unto himself: which (through Christ) he has
predestined to eternal life and salvation. Ephe. 1. and 5.
It, therefore becomes godly Magistrates, to promote this self same word,
that it may be purely, and sincerely delivered in Schools, and Churches, and
set over to the posterity. The charge whereof, when the most godly, and wise
Princes, and Kings of Denmark, perceived to appertain unto them: they founded
this noble university of Hafnia, and moreover enriched the same, with most
bountiful stipendes: that in the same, they (which in delivering the pure
doctrine of the Gospel, might in time to come, with fruit, serve their
country) might be instructed and learned.

I, being called unto this University, that with my labors, I might assist
the studyes of Learners: forasmuch as I had hethervnto, both with lively
voice taught, and also committed to open monuments of letters, many things of
the most sacred divinity, in Lattin: it seemed good to me now, by this
writing, set forth in the common language, to set forward the studyes of
godliness in them, which are ignorant of the Lattine speech. I have drawn
together, into this little book, out of the writings of the Prophets, and
Apostles, all those things which are necessary to be known of a Christian man
to the atteyning of salvation. And I will, this same little book to remain in
place of my confession of every article of the Christian Religion, which
hitherto, about the space of 30. years, I have, in the Church and, School of
Hafnia, openly propounded.

That it has seemed best to me, to establish the same (most worthy Gentleman)
under your name: that thing is done, that I might declare my self to be
mindeful of very many benefits, which have been by you, to mewards performed,
these 21. years now together, from that time, wherein, that magnificent, and
gentle Gentleman your brother Nicolas Kaaes, was first committed to my
fidelity, and discipline.

I beseech God, that for his only begotten son our Lord JESUS CHRIST, he
will conserve the purity of his word, in this Kingdom of Denmark, to the
glory of his name, and the salvation of many: and that, with his holy spirit,
he would govern the endeavors of those which, either in the ecclesiastical,
or political estate, which shall go about to set forewarde his Gospel: that
the kingdom of the Devil being destroyed, the Temple of Christ, may in our
hearts be builded, Amen. That ye also, (by the favor, and goodness of GOD)
may long time be preserved safe, and in good health, I wish of God from my
whole heart, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

From Haffnia the feast day of Martin, in the year of our Lord. 1570.
A CHRISTIAN AND Catholic Institution, comprehending, principal points of
Christian Religion, which are necessary to be known of man, to the attayning
of salvation.
THe Princely, and divine Prophet David, in the 119. Psalm, (shows, that al
mankind is so blinded with the darcknesse of ignorance, that he cannot perceive
the right way of salvation, unless he be, of God himself, by his healthful
word, brought into this right path,) in these words: Thy word is a Lantern
unto my feet: as though he would say, even as without thy word (O LORD) I must
of necessity go astray: so by the benefit of thy word, (which I esteem to
be as a Lantern to me, to my salvation) I tread the right way, and as long as
I follow this light going before me, that is to say Thy word, I cannot go
astray or be deceived. Which thing happens alike to al other people in the
world. For which cause also they are not amiss compared unto straying Sheep,
which wandering far from the Shephearde, and sheepfolde, must (if they will be
brought back again) hear the voice of their Shepherd, and (as a burning
light) follow the same.

Forasmuch therefore, as I have determined, in this present writing, to dispute
of the Way of Salvation, it seems good unto me, first of all, to follow
this counsel of David, and to show forth this healthsome Lantern, which
leads all people into eternal joy, and salvation, as many as perseuering
unto the last hour of death, shall follow the same, going before them. And
because this same Laterne, which we call The word of God, is divided into two
parts, namely into the Law and the Gospel: I will in the beginning set down a
text out of the 22. Chapter of S. Matthew, which, (as it were in a Tableture)
shall set before our eyes, these two kinds of doctrines, which are most
specially needful to be known, unto salvation. Moreover I will in such wise
declare these two principal fountains, with the other articles comprehended
under these, (particularly, but yet somewhat plentifully and plainly,) that
nothing at all may be let pass, which is behouefull for them to know,
believe, or do, which desire to be made partakers of eternal salvation.

The words of the Evangelist are these.

Matthew. 22. THE Pharisees (hearing that he had put the Saduces to silence) they
came together, and one of them, a certain Doctor of the Law, The question of
the Pharisie.
asked him a question, tempting him, and saying: Master, which is the greatest
commandment in the law? The answer of Christ.
JESUS says unto him, THOU shalt love the LORD thy GOD, with all thy
heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy soul: This is the first, and
the greatest commandment, and the second is like like unto this: THOU shall
love thy neighbor as thy self: In these two commandments hang all the LAW,
and the PROPHETS. Whilst the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them
saying, The question of Christ.
what think ye of CHRIST? whose Son is he? They say unto him, The son of
DAVID: The answer of the Pharisees.
He says unto them, How then does David in spirit call him LORD saying, The
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies
thy footestoole: If David therefore call him LORD, how is he then his SON? And
no man was able to answer him any thing, neither durst any man from that day
forth, ask him any more questions.

In this text of the Gospel recited, are contained two questions, most chief
and weighty of all others, which may be brought forth of the scripture,
touching the attayning of salvation.

The first question is propounded by the Pharisees, the other by our Lord
Jesus Christ.

The Pharisees, through notable malice of heart, and unmeasurable hatred,
wherewith they pursued Christ, do move a question concerning the law, and
demand of Jesus, which is the greatest commandment in the Law: for in
as much as Christ condemned the Pharisees, which esteemed them selves to live
according to the law, and would bring in Baptism, whereof there was no
mention made in the Law: they thought that he would speak something, rashly
against the Law of Moses, that they, (by this means) might have occasion to
accuse him, and take him out of the way.

CHRIST, on the other side, having compassion on the great blindenes of the
Pharisees, asks the^, what they thought of Christ, and whose son he is? and
that thing he does, with this intent, that an occasion might be given him,
whereby he might instruct, and teach them forth of the Scripture, what they
should esteem of Christ, (that is to say) of him, whom God promised to Adam,
Abraham, and the rest of the holy fathers, to be the Savior of the world.

Furthermore, that these questions of the Law, and of Christ, may the more
co^modiously serve us to the furtheraunce, and instruction of salvation: I will
choose from hence three doctrines, which (the grace of GOD assisting) I will
declare in order.

FIRST, of the causes, by which the Pharisees being moved go about to take
Christ out of the way, and what crafts they use, to bring this wicked purpose
to effect. SECONDLY, of the true understanding, and use of the Law. THE THIRD,
of CHRIST, namely, what we ought to esteem of him: And how we obtain
salvation through him.


The first Doctrine.
THE JEWS, and chiefly the Pharisees, went about this thing with great
endeavor, Matthew. 22.
That they might tangle Christ in his words, and being caught, they might
quarrel with him, and, at the length deliver him to death. Behold therefore how
great the diversity of mind is of the one toward the other, in Christ and
in the Pharisees. JESUS sought this only thing, yt they being delivered from
sin, he might save them: but the Pharisees craftily catch his words, whereby they
might accuse, and oppress him. This waywardnes of minds is at this day (alas
for sorrow) found in many, which persecute those, which wish well unto them,
and show them selves very careful of their salvation. But whereof comes this
so fyery and insatiable hatred of the Pharisees toward Christ?

CHRIST reprehended their great and manifold sins, namely, Arrogancy,
Hypocrisy, Covetousness, and erroneous Doctrine, whereby they led awry both them
selves and others. Arrogant, and proud people, are of such malice of mind,
that they take it grievously, that they should be admonished, and do with great
contention persecute those, which dare be so bold as once to minish or hinder
their false conceived opinion of the great estimation of themselves. Wherefore
it is the less to be meruailed, that these so proud and arrogant Pharisees
do with hatred persecute Christ: which every where, and continually, told
them to their teeth, and condempning them, objected unto them, this their
filthy pride: especially when as they in the mean time, considered not, that
this was done of Christ, for their profit, and salvation. But, forasmuch as
these are Hypocrites, which repute themselves to be righteous before God, and
man, albeit they be inwardly filled with all filthynesse and malice, yea
altogether like unto dead men's graves, which although they show outwardly
whited, and garnished, yet inwardly they abound with poisoned, and abominable
filthynesse: therefore, they do not gladly suffer those, which reprehende, and
condemn them of sin. And, for this cause these Hypocrites, will not grant
unto Jesus Christ this glory, (That he alone is righteous, and that whosoever
will be made righteous, do obtain the same, by this our only Lord Jesus
Christ. Therefore, in the 21. of S. Matthew, Christ says unto them:
Publicanes, and sinners, shall enter into the kingdom of God, before you.

Moreover, if you inquire, why these things be so? the cause is in a redynesse:
for Hypocrites do presume, that they are without all sin, and trust to their
own righteousness which they have not: but Publicanes, and sinners do know
and confess them selves to have sinned, and to have no righteousness of their
own, whereby being vpholden, they may make their boast. When they therefore
do hear sin reproved, they do forthwith very easily (in comparison of
the Hypocrites) acknowledge their sins, and embracing with joy the preaching
of grace, do repent, forsake the conversation of their former life, convert
them selves unto God, by faith in Jesus Christ, and bring forth fruits of
faith. An example of this thing is to be seen in Luke Chap. 18. in the
Publicane, and the Pharisie, of the which two, the Publicane standing in the
Church afar of prayed: the Pharisie with great pride boasted of his own
righteousness. Likewise Luke 7. In Simeon that hooste of Christ, and in that
sinful woman, which, there having washed the feet of Christ with her
tears, wiped them with the heary locks of her head.

This waywardness is moreover very like unto covetousness, for that it
suffers it self to be reprehended of no body, but indeuoureth to cover it
self, with the cloak of wisdom, sedulitie, and sparefulnesse: when as
notwithstanding it is in very deed, (as Paul teaches) mere Idolatry: for,
the covetous man reposeth more hope, in these momentanie goods of the world,
than in the living God. Therefore, it is not to be meruailed, that the
Pharisees hated Christ, and with all their power persecuted him, which justly
reproved their wicked covetousness, and execrable Idolatry. That Christ also
did in like manner reprehende their errors about the heavenly doctrine,
neither did they take yt with quiet minds: For they dreamed that the keys of
wisdom, were in their powers alone, wherewith, every of them supposed, that he
might open, and shut up heaven at his pleasure: whereas they notwithstanding
were, in the mean time, void, both of the true understanding of the Law,
and of the true knowledge of the Messiah: this their blindness, they could at
no hand suffer, to be reproved of Christ.

LASTLY. The Pharisees took this thing also grievously in Christ: that he not
only reproved them of their own wandringe out of the way: but that they
also, (through their erroneous Doctrine) did lead other awrye, from the true
shepherd, and way of Salvation.

Of these so great offenses, Christ accused the Pharisees, that either (amending
themselves) they might be saved: or else (continuing in their sins,) they
should look for, both here in this world, the just punishments of God: as
also after this life, everlasting dampnation. But, how did the Pharisees take
these things of Christ? Even altogether after the same manner, as a mad
man is affected against him: which goes about to deliver him from his disease,
and madness. For, even as a man distraught of mind, does with feet, nails,
and biting, enemylike assail him, which labors to lay medicinable hands
upon him: so the Pharisees with hands, and feet apply to this thing: that
they may sclaunder Christ, and take him out of the way: and therefore they
solempnely sent their messengers thrice unto him, the tuesday next before they
crucified him. In the first Embassage were the Pharisees, with the Herodians,
which demanded whether it were lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not? And
that thing they do with this intent, that if Christ did affirm the question
propounded, the common people might forsake him, and so it might be easily
lawful, to deliver him to death: but if he did deny it, he might fall into the
hands of Herodes servant, who having taken him, might kill him as a seditious
man: But in vain does the craftiness of man weary it self, against the
wisdom of God. Christ answers neither affirmatively, nor negatiuely, but
the coin being showed by them, he says, whose Image, and inscription is this?
They answered him Caesar's: And he said unto them: Give unto Caesar, the things
which are Caesar's, and unto GOD, those things which are Gods: so, that of this
answer of Christ, neither ye Herodians, nor the common people found, why they
might justly be offended.

THE SECOND Embassage was of the Saduces, which deny the resurrection of the
dead. These men thought that (out of the doctrine of Christ, teaching that all
people should rise again in the last day) they might infer some absurdity,
in this manner: There were (say they) with us seven brethren, and the first
having married a wife, deceased: and having no seed, left his wife unto his
brother: likewise the second, and the third, unto the seventh: last of all
the woman also dyed: In the resurrection therefore, whose wife shall she be of
the seven?

They supposed now that Christ would appointe her either to one of them, or to
al of them together, which if he had done, they would have cried out, that
ye could not be convenient, for the coutentions, hatreds, and abominable
filthynesses, that would follow thereof. By this way, they hoped, that they
should confute the doctrine of Christ, and to deliver Christ to judgment,
Matthew. 22.
as gilty of untruth, to be punished. Let us hear what Christ answers unto
them: Ye err (says he) not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God and
are ignorant what is the difference to come, between the condition of this
life, and of the life everlasting. In these words Christ shows three causes
of the erroneous Doctrine of the Saduces.

THE FIRST IS, that they knew not the Scriptures, which alone teaches us to
try the truth, from falshod, in all those matters, which concern the
business of salvation. Therefore David faith, Psalm. 119.
Thy word is a lantern unto my feet.

THE SECOND CAUSE, that they knew not the virtue and power of God, by the
which, he was able as easily to raise up ye dead, in the last day, as it was
not hard to him, to create all things, of nothing, in the first day. Therefore,
when we think upon the resurrection of the dead, reason is not to be admitted
into counsel, which is only occupied about these corporal things: but we
must look back to the scripture, and know that nothing is impossible before
God, the omnipotent creator of all things.

THE THIRD CAUSE of the error of the Saduces, Christ assigns to be this,
that they did not consider the difference of the condition of man in this
world, and in the life eternal. In this life there is need of wedlock: but
in the life eternal they shall neither mary nor be married: for they shall be as
the Angels of God, in heaven. And the love of the other life, does by a
thousand degrees excel the love of this world, yea, that will darken this: even
as the sun rising in the morning, takes away the light from all the other
stars, and alone with his own brightness lightneth the world.

THE THIRD EMBASSAGE was of the Jews, being made unto Christ the very same
day: this is the same, whereof the present text of the Gospel makes mention.

When the Pharisees had heard that Jesus had in this wise stopped the mouths
of the Saduces, Matthew, 22.
they came unto him, and asked him which was the greatest commandment in the
Law?

That was done of them, not because they would learn, but that they might
have some occation to destroy him. For they thought thus with them selves:
because this fellow brings in Baptism, and accuses us, which living
according to the Law, do boast our selves to be righteous by the woorks of
the Law: surely, and without al doubt he contemns the Law, and does far
less esteem it the^ his Baptism which if he do, there will lie a just action
for us against him, as against one blasphemouse against God himself, as one
which has the law of God, in no estimation, which the Lord him self gave
unto us by his servant Moses. To these things Christ answers, saying: the
greatest, and the first commandment is: Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

And the second is like unto this.

Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: In these two Commandments hang
all the Law and the Prophets. Doubtless the Pharisees looked not for such an
answer to be given them, therefore none of them could say any thing against
him. And so we see, that neither wisdom nor prudence can prevail against the
Lord, which brings to naught the wisdom of the wise, and confounds the
understanding of the prudent, as it is in Esaias. Chap. 29.

The second Doctrine.
TOUCHING THE LAW I will explicate these three things.
FIRST, I will speak in general of the two chief Commandments and heads of
the Law, (that is to say) Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind: And: Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self. SECONDLY, of the four principal errors about the doctrine of
the Law. THIRDLY, of the true use of the Law.


Of the first.
THE Law in this place sets before us, the two cheifest commandments:
the first of the loving of God: the other of loving our neighbor. And in what
manner God is to be loved, it expounds saying: Thou shall love the Lord thy
God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind: In what
manner also thy Neighbor is to be loved, it by and by adds: Thou shall love
thy neighbor (As thy self.)

But what is it to love God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind? This word of (LOVE) comprehe^deth three things. Ignoti nulla
cupido.
First, it comprehends a knowledge of the thing that is to be loved: for of
a thing unknown there is no desire. Moreover it comprehends all the
affections and motions of the heart, which do accompany pure love. Thirdly, it
comprehends all works which are required to this love. Therefore the law
of God joins these three together, when it says: Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind: so that
there be in the heart, that is to say, in the understanding of man, a clear
light and knowledge of GOD. Whom (he assuredly persuades him self) to be
the most best, and most excellent, namely the Fountain of all goodness.

Moreover, With all thy soul, that is, all the affections, motions, and
desires of the heart, should tend to this end: that thou may love God,
cleave unto him, and place in him the soundness of thy love, whereby thou
may keep him most sure in thy heart, and, for ever enjoy him.

LASTLY: thou should love him, With all thy mind, or, with all thy
strength: so that thou should convert all thy cogitations, endeavors, and
studies, to set forward, and defend whatsoever things do appertain unto
God, and to fight against those things, which are contrary unto GOD, namely,
by resisting the Devil, Sin, and all their troop, and garrison.

And so we see here, in what manner the three chief natural powers, or
abilities, ingrafted into the soul of man, namely, REASON, APPETITE, and or
Zeal.
ANGER do show forth their strengthes. For, REASON inquireth for the
cheifest good (that is to say.) GOD: APPETITE, desires that same principal
good, and by love joins it self unto it. ANGER (or Zeal) is kindled to
uphold, and defend that principallest good, GOD, and enemy like fights
against the Devil, sin, and the occasions thereof, and all other things what
soever are contrary unto God.

MOREOVER, when thou hear, that thou art commanded, to love God, with all
thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind: here thou must consider
that God does require a love, PVRE, and PERFECT, ETERNAL, and SPIRITVALL, so,
that thy love should be, pure, without spotte: perfect, with out all fault:
eternal, without all intermission: and spiritual, without all affection, and
leven of fleshly concupiscence.

THE OTHER great Commandment is this. (Thou shall love thy Neighbor, as thy
self.) Here God appoints the rule of the love of our neighbor, to be, the
love of our own self. But, that this may be the rightlyer understood, two
things do come to be considered. FIRST, we must discern between two
manners, after which man loves himself: for, of these two, the one is
dampnable, and unlawful, the other is accounted good, and lawful.
Furthermore, we must discern also, between the person of man, and that
corruption which sticks in man. Man is sometime affected toward him self,
with a blind, unwise, and hurtful love, springing from the corrupt and
depraved nature, (that is to say) from the fountain of sin, which by our
sin of heritage dwells in us. This love shall not be the rule of the love
of thy neighbor: for, to love him after this manner, were plainly before God to
hate thy neighbor.

There is besides this, a another manner of loving him self, and the same is
lawful, and granted, which springs from the holy Ghost, and faith in
JESUS CHRIST: when a man directs all his counsels to that end, that he may
do those things which are acceptable unto God and healthsome to himself. This
love being lawful, and lawdable, shall be the rule, of the love, wherewith we
should love our neighbor: so that from the very heart we should rejoice with
him, over all those things, which may redounde, to his profit, and salvation,
by godly desires wishing him, all goodness, and, by faithful counsels,
labor, goods, and prayers, setting him forward: and on the other part, by
turning away studiously with all the mind, and heart, what soever, either to
his life, or soul: or, (to be short) either to his goods or fame: may be
hurtful. In another John. 13. and 15.
place, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, sets before us his own
example, in place of a rule to be followed: Love ye (says he) one another,
even as I have loved you: And therefore Christ calls this, (A new
Commandment.) Whereby he would teach us, that we should help our neighbor,
if necessity require, even with the peril of our life: not having so great
regard of our own commodities, as of the health, and profit of our neighbor.
In what manner Christ has loved us, Paul shows in the 5. Chap. to the
Romans: as hereafter, in the third Doctrine, shall be said more at large.

The second thing, which I gave warning of, to be considered, in this chief
commandment of the love of our neighbor, is, The difference between the
person of the man, and that corruption which cleaves unto him. The corrupt and
wicked man, (as much as appertains to his corruption, and wickedness it
self) it is lawful to hate: but, as much as appertains to the person, as
far forth as it is man, partaker of humane nature with us, the same is to be
loved: so, that what we hate in him, namely sin, and corruption it self,
that we should reprehende: and again, we should love in him, that which
deserves love, that is, yt being man, he might be conserved, as Augustine
teaches. Let these things suffice touching the first member, which I admonish
in the beginning to be observed concerning the law.

Of the second.
ANother thing which I propounded, was touching the errors, which false
teachers sow abroad, about the doctrine of the law. Of these, there be four
sorts. In the first order are they, which flatly reject the law, and utterly
deny it, to be taught in Christian Churches. In the second are they, which in
deed retain the Law: but they teach, that man is able through his own
power to satisfye the law. Next unto these are they, which affirm, that man is
not able to fulfill the whole law: but yet some part thereof. They occupy the
fourth rome, which say, that every religion has her law, which is sufficient
to salvation, to him that fulfilleth it.

These four errors, through their poisoned contagion, are very mischievous:
neither are they stayed upon any other foundation, then upon the deceiptes, and
lyinge subtilties of the Devil, which stirs up men, to seduce one another,
from the puritye of the true Doctrine of the Law and the Gospel. I will
therefore refute these erroures one by one, in the same order as they were
before, of me rehearsed.

THE ANTINOMIANS which flatlye reiecte the Law, and deny it to be taught in
the congregations of Christians, are scant worthy, that their opinion should
be refuted with many words, as against whom not only, true reason of man: but
also CHRIST himself, and his Apostles, and as many as have been faithful
teachers in the Church of Christ, do resist. The Arguments wherewith they
uphold their opinion, are these.

Christians (say they) have nothing to do with Moses: Therefore, neither are
they subject to his Law.



But a man may first demand of these men: Does it beecome Christians, to love
GOD, and their neighbor? I believe, there is none so possessed of the Devil,
that he dare deny this.

Seeinge then that Christians must love GOD and their Neighbor, why shall it
not be also lawful for them to know, in what sort they ought to perform
the same? For, what thing shall the work of love be, unless it be directed
by some certain manner? But, forasmuch as the Law of God, (that is to say,
the ten Commandments) does teach us both: namely, that we should love GOD,
and our Neighbor, and also, in what manner the same should be done of us:
what is he that sees not these men manifestlye to err, which would abolishe
the Law of God, and forbid that it should not sound in the Christian
congregations.

1. Where as they object, and say: Christians have nothing to do with Moses,
that is true, as far as apperteyneth to the ceremoni^all, and forensicall
laws of Moses, the sacrifices, Circumcision, and such like outward ceremonies,
which ought to endure until the coming of Christ only, and afterward to
cease: but it is not true, as touching the law of GOD, that is to say, the
Decalogus, which was given unto man in his first creation, and afterward
repeated, and written in two tables of Stone, that the remembrance thereof
might be perpetual.

I will cease here to speak, how that Christ him self both taught the
law and expounded it at large: as did also the holy Prophets, and their
successors.

2 But, that which the Antinomians affirm in the second place: Christians not
to be under the law but under Grace: I grant this also, so that it be
rightly understood, as Saint Paul himself expounds it: Christians are not
under the Law: that is to say, they which believe in JESUS CHRIST are not
under the condemnatory sentence of the law, because there is no condemnation to
them which are ingraffed into Jesus Christ, Romans 8. But the Christian has
need of the Doctrine of the law, which must be the rule of his life;
showing him what does please God, and what is contrary to his godly will.

Furthermore, where they say: Christians are made free: Therefore, They are not
under the Law.

To that, I answer thus: True it is, Christians are made free, from the
Condemnation of the Law, from sin, and hell: but not so, that in the mean
season, it may be lawful for them to do what they list: they are for this
cause made free, that they should serve God alone, love him, and their
neighbor as much as lies in their whole powers, as the Law exhorts, and
teaches.

If moreover they go forward to say: Christ gave commandment touching the
preaching of the Gospel to every creature: but, touching the Law he commanded
nothing at all: I answer, Christ commanded forgiveness of sins to be
preached, but what is sin, but transgression of the law? Now then, If
Christians have no law, then it must needs be, that they neither have any
sin. Beside this, Christ himself, and the Apostles do exhort all
Christians, to bring forth fruits of repentance, (that is to say) good works,
according to the law of God.

The last argument of the Antinomians is such: The holy Ghost (say they)
teaches Christians: Therefore, They need not the law:

O, how foolish, and frivolous an argument is this? They should rather have
concluded thus: The holy Ghost teaches Christians, Therefore we need
teachers, and the word, namely The Law, and The Gospel. For, the holy
Ghost, does then teach, and move the heart of man, when the word is received
by ye ears, in which word the Holy Ghost will be of force, in those which
hear it, and by faith embrace the same.

We see then, how, not only folishly, but wickedly they do, which dare
snatch away from us the law of GOD, and throw it out of the Christian
congregations, and affirm, that the same is not to be taught. Leaving
therefore, the contagions mischief of this error, let us give thanks unto
God, for communicating unto us his Holy Law, and let us further beseech him,
that he would give unto us his holy spirit, by the which, many things
acceptable, and pleasing unto him, may be done of us. For if the Devil had
obtained this victory of us, that he had spoiled us of the law of GOD, as he
had success therein, in Paradise: what should let, yt he should not again,
make us guilty of death and eternal dampnation? For, he which learneth not to
acknowledge his sins, by the Law, the same, doubtless, knows not how to
embrace, grace by the Gospel. He which can not esteem his sickness, or the
greeuousnesse of his disease: the same, must of necessitye have a negligente
care, of seekinge forth a wholesome medicine.

IN THE SECOND ORDER of those which err about the doctrine of the law; are
they, which, in deed, do reteyne the law, and do rightlye affirm, that it
is to be taught in the Churches of Christians, but this they falsely affirm,
That whosoever will, may by his own power, and mind fulfill the Law: and by
this means attain righteousness before GOD, and merit eternal life. The
falsenesse of this opinion, I will in such wise show by manifest
demonstrations, that every one may easily perceive, that no man amongst all
men (the only man Jesus Christ excepted) is able to fulfill the Law of GOD.

The Condition of humane nature in all men yields unto us, the first argument
of this our asseueration. The same is such, that all men even from the very
nativity, are vnpure, unclean, and thrall unto sin. Forasmuch then, as it is
evident, that from a rotten, and stinking fountain, no water can be drawn,
but rotten, and stinking: it is manifest that man being vnpure and defiled
with sin, cannot yield pure, sincere, and undefiled obedience, unto GOD.
Therefore Solomon says Eccle. Cap. 7. There is not a man righteous upon the
earth, which does good, and sins not.

And Job. Chap. 14. Who can make that clean, which comes of an unclean
seed? truly no mortal man can bring this to pass. For we do all draw our
beginning, from a sinful lump, and an unclean root: and is it possible that
the fruicte should be better, than the Tree it self? therefore, this
demonstration of the proof stands sure.

Whosoever are unclean, can not yield clean, and pure obedience to the law
of God.

But, all men, (only IESV CHRIST excepted, which from the laws of birth
customable, and common to nature, is exempted) are by nature unclean:

Therefore, No mortal man can fulfill the law of GOD.

The second argument whereby it is convinced, that no man can fulfill the law
of GOD, is taken of the universal experience of man. For, there is no man
found in the universal world, who (askinge his own heart, and examining his
own conscience,) shall not straighte way find himself to be far of from
that perfection, which the Law requires.

Who perceives not him self, to have done oftentimes things not to be done,
and again, to have left undone, things to be done? And albeit some dare
boaste much of fulfilling the law, done by themselves, or by others: yet
notwithstanding the judgment of their own hearts, is against them selves,
which although it lie hid from the sight of men, yet it is evident, and lies
open unto God, which sees, weyeth, and tries, all the cogitations, and
affections of the heart of man.

The third argument, whereby it is proved, that no mortal man can fulfill the
law of God, is required, Of the just Judgment of God, who condemns only
the guilty, and the transgressors of his divine law, and commandments.
Forasmuch then, as no man is free, from the judgment of God, and
punishments, namely, sicknesses, adversities, and at the last death it self:
which do all fall in, by reason of sin: (that is to say) for transgression of
the law of God: who does not hereby easily perceive, and without doubt
concludes, that al men are guilty, and transgressors of the law of God, so
that by the works of the Law they can attain no righteousness?

The fourth argument is taken, Of the contrariety of the Law, and the nature
of man. For, the law is Spiritual, but the nature of man is Carnal, which
thing Paul proves Romans 7. where he says: We know that the law is
spiritual, but I am carnal sold under sin: that is to say, I am so subject
unto Sin, that I am never so free from it, that I may fulfill the spiritual
law of God: but I give thanks unto God, by JESUS CHRIST, which for my sake
has aboundauntly performed all that, which I my self could not perform.
This argument Paul handles at large, in the Chapter even now cited of us.

The first argument whereby it is proved, that no mortal man can fulfill the
law of God, The voice of GOD himself does offer us, in Moses, the Psalms,
and the Prophets, and so forth in the whole Evangelical, and Apostolical
Scripture.

Genes. 6. GOD saw, that the malice of man was great upon the earth, and all
the thoughts of his heart were always bente unto evil.

Job. 9. I know for a truth, that it is so, that manne shall not be justified
in the sight of GOD, if he would contend with him, he shall not be able to
answer him one for a thousand. And a little after Iobe says of himself, If
I would justify my self, my mouth will condemn me.

Psalm. 14. They are beecome corrupt, Verse. 2.
and abominable in their doings, there is none which does good, no, not one.

The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the children of men, that he might
see if any did understand, and inquire after GOD.

They have all gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable,
there is not one that does good, no, not one.

Psalm. 130. If thou, Lord, shalt mark our iniquities, (O LORD) who, may
abide it? For this cause David, in the 143. Psalm, prays on this manner:
Enter not into Judgment with thy servant O LORD, for none lyuinge shall be
found righteous in thy sight.

Poruerb. 20. Who can say my heart is clean, I am clear from sin?

Esaye. 64. We are beecome unclean all the sort of us, and our
righteousness is as a steyned Cloth: We have all fallen away as a leaf,
and our iniquities have, as the wind, snatched us away.

CHRIST in the third of John says: That which is borne of the flesh, is
flesh.

Paul. Romans 3. We have showed (causes being rendered) that both Jews, and
Greeks are all under sin.

Ephe. 2. We are by nature the Children of wrath.

Out of these now recyted, and many other testimonies of the Scripture, it is
manyfestlye convinced: That no mortal man can fulfill the Law of GOD.

The sixte Argument of this our asseueration is set down by Paul, to the
Galathians. Chap. 2. In these words: If righteousness come by the Law: then
CHRIST dyed in vain. For, Christ came into the world, to fulfill the Law,
which was impossible for all men in the whole world to perform: But as many
as beeleeue in him, to them shall be imputed the righteousness of the Law,
which, Christ, in his own person, has done, and obtained.

Thus I have proved, by six most firm, and evident Arguments, the opinion
of the Papists to be false, who, in teachinge, writing, and declayming, dare
affirm, against their own conscience, that, man is able to fulfill the law
of God, and so, by works, to be reputed righteous in the sight of GOD.

AMONGST THOSE, which teach not rightly of the Law, they are to be placed
in the third room, which do grant, that man can not in part satisfy the
Law of God: yet notwithstanding he may in many things perform obedyence
to the Law. And therefore (say they) by how much, the more stoare of good
works be done according to the Law, by so much the greater shall be man's
righteousness by the Law, and that which lacks, is to be borrowed by
Prayer, of Christ.

This opinion, although it stick in many, chiefly in politic men, it is,
notwithstanding, false, and contumelious against the son of God, our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, who alone takes away the sins of the world, and iustifyeth
those which beeleeue in him.

And, that this opinion also, was not the least cause of the castinge away
the Jews, Paul teaches Romans 10.

They (says he) beeinge ignorant of GOD his righteousness, and seeking to
establish their own righteousness: have not been obedient to the
righteousness of GOD: for CHRIST is the end of the Law, to justify all that
beeleeue: (that is to say) whosoever believes, has that thing which the Law
requires: namely, Righteousness, which Christ imputes to the believer.
Likewise, Phillip. 3. Paul gives a difference, beetweene the righteousness
of the Gospel, and the righteousness of the Law. The Righteousness of the
Gospel, as the faithful do obtain: but the Righteousness of the Law, none
can atteyne by his own works, Christ only excepted.

Besides this, no man can begin any good work according unto the Law,
whereby he may be able to stand sure before the Judgment seat of GOD:
before he be made righteous, through faith in CHRIST. For, (as Paul
witnesses in an other place,) It is impossible to please God without faith.
Hebr. 11.
Some woorcks (in deed) may be done, which among men have a show of
goodness, and which are also profitable for the life, and conversation of man,
in this world: but, that righteousness should be atteyned unto by them, it is
impossible: for, he which offends against one Commandment, he is made
giltye of all, says James:

Jacob. 2.
Neither can any thing please God, which is done of him, which is not a member
of Christ, and made righteous by the obedience of him.

For, as by the disobedience of only Adam, we are all made gilty of
damnation: so all we, as many as believe in Jesus Christ, are made righteous,
by the only obedience of him. It is evident therefore, that they do err,
which wilbee made righteous, partly, by their own works and partly, by the
merit of Christ, so, that by how much the more, a man does abound with good
works: he may by so mutch the more boaste himself, to bring of his own,
and to seek at Christ, the reside we which are wanting.

THOSE WHOM I have named in the in the fourth place, to err about the
doctrine of the Law, have spronge from the School of Mahomet. Mahomet, (to
the end, that he might the rather keep his disciples and underlings addicted
to his diuelishe subtilties:) did teach, Matthew, 22.
that every man was saved by the keepinge of that law, to which he was a
subject: That is, If the Jew did keep his Ceremonies, and Circumcsiion: he
should by that his obedience, merit salvation. And if the Turcke, or
Mahometist: (says he) does keep his law, by the same reason, he also
shall be saved. So in like case, the Christian, obteyneth salvation, by the Law
of the Gospel. Some politic men there be, which are full stuffed with this
wicked opinion, which neither rightlye consider the heavy weighte of sin,
nor the benefits of CHRIST.

Against all these, which in this manner, do seek salvation, by their Law,
to which they be subject, in what place so ever they lead their lives, I set
these plain words of the immovable verity. John 3. He which beeleeueth
in the son, has eternal life: but he which beeleeueth not in the son
shall not see life, but the wrath of GOD abides upon him.

Of the third.
THE THIRD THING follows which I propounded concerning the Law: namely:
to what end, the law avails, and what ye true use thereof is: among men
chiefly in the Christian congregation? We have heard before, what the law
requires, and, that none is able to fulfill: It is therefore, thirdly
demanded, what the use thereof is? seeinge no man can fulfill it, nor any man,
by the works thereof, can obtain righteousness in the sight of GOD.

The use of the Law is of three sorts: namely, External, Internal, and
Spiritual.

Of the External (or outward) use of the Law.
THE EXTERNAL, (or outward) USE of the Law, is, by discipline to govern ye
people, that in outward honesti of manners, they might live quietly, according
to the Law, and that they should not commit any heinous wickedness, openly,
which is forbidden in the law of God. Here, Parents, Magistrates, Masters, and
Tutors, yea, and the Ministers of the word of GOD also, must dillygently take
heed, that such as be committed to their charge, do live, in outward
honestye of life, soundly, and shamefastly. For, the law of GOD is therefore
called, MORAL, because it is a certain common rule, according unto which every
manne should direct, and frame his manners.

FIRST OF AL, this external discipline of the Law, is commanded unto parents,
that with the same they may instruct their children, and keep them, under
outward honestye of manners. And, that they may the more easily bring that
thing to pass, let them use, doctrine, examples, quiet, and also severe
admonitions, yea, and moreover (if the matter so require) the rod: which
thing whosoever shall not do, let them look for the just plagues of God, as
despisers of the most severe commandments of GOD, which has commanded
Parents, that they should, (according unto the level of the Decalogus,)
godlily, and honestly bring up, and instruct their Children.

First, let them use doctrine, that is so say, let the^ accustom their
children (so sone as they can speak, and use reason) to learn thoroughly, and
with a memorable mind to recite morning, and eueninge all the parts of the
Christian instruction.

Moreover they themselves should walk before their children, with their own
example of an honest led life, so that the life of the parents may be
aunsweareable to the doctrine which they taught, which life, the Children might
afterward follow. For, they which labor with words only in the education
of children, do seem, (in my judgment) to do very foolishlye, and I can not
tell, whether I may call this a teachinge, or rather a hindering of them. For
that thing which by teachinge, by their word, they build up: the same
through evil lyuinge; by their deeds, they pull down. And what a sincke of
myschiefes do follow hereof, as well in the ecclesiastical, as in the
political estate, who is it, which sees not, and has dailye experience.
Besides this, parents should sometime, use gentiller words unto their
Children, that by them, as by entisementes, their minds might the more easily,
be allured, and stirred up to the duties of virtue.

But if the children will not obey the fatherly admonitions, here the parents
must provoke them with more severe speech, and countenance, and with wisdom,
and grauitye forewarne them, what punishments for their disobedience, they
shall at the length sustain.

Fiftlye, when as the parents, can (neither by gentle, or sharp admonitions)
profitte any thing at all, and that no hope of amendment of manners is seen in
the Children: here at the length as the last mean of the fatherly remedy, the
rod is to be added. With the same they shall correct them, when they
accustom themselves to swearing, lying, theeuing, filthy, or, by any ways,
dishonest talkinge. For Syrach says Chap. 30. He that loves his Child, does
often move the rod toward him: that in the last days of his life he may
rejoice. And Salom. Pro. 23. VVithholde not discipline from the child: for if
thou strikest him with the rod, he shall not die: strike him with the rod,
and thou shall deliver his soul from Hell.

They which do overmuch cocker their children, and winckinge at every of their
faults, do suffer them to live as they list: are to be esteemed the authors
of their destruction. Pontanus shows, that a certain wanton being spilled,
through to much licentiousnes granted by the Mother, at the length (being of
ripe age) was, (for a heinous offense committed) adjudged to dye: when he was
brought by the tormentor to the place of punishmente, he, with a loud voice,
mournefully uttered these words: Think not (O ye beeholders) this tormentor
to have brought me to this so infamous a kind of punishment, but rather mine
own Mother. It stands Parents therefore greatly upon, to accustom their
Children, to direct the course of their life, according to the level of the
Decalogus. By this means they shall make a way of more easy instruction for
those, to whose fidelitye, and discipline, they shall afterward commit their
children.

This outward discipline of Moses law, is likewise committed to the
Magistrate: For Paul calls the Magistrate, The Minister of GOD, Romans 13.
to the promoting of goodness, and to the punishing of evil. And forasmuch as
Magistrates are ordained of God: therefore they are bound to set forward the
glory of GOD, and to turn back, whatsoever things are against God: as far
forth as apperteineth to the outward conversation of men. The Magistrate is
also called, a keeper of both laws, because he should with a diligent care,
conteyn his subjects under an honest discipline of ma^ners, according to the
Decalogus: and also trade over the course of his own life in such sort: that
he may be a pattern, and a glass, into which his subjects living godly may
look into. He must also have a diligent care, that his positive laws, and al
his decrees may agree with the Decalogus, and be as walls, and fortresses of
the same. The Magistrate should moreover punish, the manifest transgressions
of the law divine: as are, blasphemings of GOD, Idolatries, periuries, usual
swearings, contempt of the word of God, disobedience, murders, Adulteries,
lying, false witness bearing, theftes, and such like vices, which fight
directlye against the word of GOD: so, that if the Magistrate neglect his
office in these things, he becomes partaker, and giltye of all those
offenses, the not punishment of which he has granted unto others. There is
told an Historye, of a certain murderer, which had slain seven men, when he
was perforce brought unto the Law, and was set before the Judgment seat, and
accused of manslaughter, answer was made, that he only, had killed but one
only man, the other six the Maiestrate had killed, which did not punish that
first murder in him. And verily the Magistrate is gilty before God, when he
punishes not such as stubbornly break the law of God, and by his giving of
liberty, he oppeneth a window to others to offend. It is an unmerciful pity,
to spare one, with the loss, and destruction of many.

To the bringers up of youth, this same care, does also belong, that they
should instruct those which are committed to their discipline, in such sort,
by doctrine, by example, by often admonitions, and corrections, that in their
outward manners, nothing might be seen, out of square, or contrary to the law
of GOD. Which thing if they neglect to do, they sin against God, against the
parents of the children, and the whole common wealth, neither shall they (for
ever) bear this punished. For if (by right) he be hanged, which steals an
Ox, or a Cow from another: how much more is he worthy of a thousand hangings,
which committing this kind of theft, far more grievous: does unfaithfully
instruct the youth, upon good trust committed unto him.

Tutors, or governors also, which are in the steed of parents, should wholly
frame themselves, according to the rule, prescribed before to parents.
Therefore, they should not only have a regard and studious care to keep the
goods of their pupilles, which fall to them by way of heritage: but they should
have a special care, that they might be well, and honestly instructed,
knowing, that they themselves, are as straightly bound, before the judgment
seat of GOD, by the promise which they made to the parents of those children,
as if they had couenaunted with God himself, that they would be faithful
tutors, and patrones of those pupilles. For this cause, GOD calls himself, a
father of the fatherless, and a defender of the Widows. But what is done at
these days by the common sort of tutors, is euidente to all men, and the
miserable pupilles, and widows (alas for sorrow) to their great grief have
experience.

Last of all also, the Ministers of the word of GOD, are bound, to exhort
their hearers to outward honesty of life according to the law of God, by
doctrine, examples, by admonishments together with chastisements set before
them, as Christ himself did, and the holy Apostle Paul. But if they shall
lay aside this due care of their duty, and deceiptfully do the business of
the Lord, they shall not escape the just judgment and punishmente, in that
last day of the Lord. But how many may we see now a days, which follow
that verse of the Poet.

The ravening Crow, is pardoned still:
The simple Dooue, susteynes much ill.
When as notwithstanding, God would have thee to respect the person of no man:
so that thou be moderate, after the example of most excellent Nathan: It is
better for the Minister of the word of God, with John, to be beheaded: then
with Herod to be feasted: for there ought to be had greater regard here,
to the glory of God, and the salvation of man, than to our own lives, and
commodities. Let these things suffice to be spoken, touching, the external
use of the Law, and how far the same stretches.

There be four most weighty causes why, this outward discipline should be
exercised:

First: The commandment of GOD. Secondly: That the punishments might be
avoided. Thirdly: That we might live peaceably, and quietly amongst our
selves. Fourthly: That the same might be an Instruction, making us the more
apt, to hear the healthsome doctrine of ye Gospel of JESUS CHRIST.


Of the Internal (or inward) use of the Law.
AS THE FIRST USE OF THE LAW, is external, and concerns the society of
man, so, that whosoever expresses, in outward conversation, in word, and
deed, the letter of the Law, is Judged of the people, to be good, and
honest: so, the second use of the Law is, INTERNAL in the heart, and
Conscience of man, that he might be stayed before the Judgment seat of GOD,
and render a reason, whether with all his power he has fulfilled the law of
God, or no? Here, if he can boast of the fulfilling of the Law, which is
impossible for all men, (Christ only excepted:) he may then understand, that
unto him belongs, blessinge, and mercy unto thousands, according to the
promise annexed to the Law: but if he perceive himself to be a
transgressour of the Law: he hears the vengeance, and judgment of God
propounded against him, unto the third, and fourth generation.

Deuteronomy. 27.
Likewise, he hears: Cursed is every one which fulfilleth not whatsoever
things are written in this book of the Law. Gala. 3.


This sentence was first given in Paradise, and moreover, in manifest words
expressed by Moses. Besides this, the conscience of each man confirms the
same, and in like manner, all the calamities of this life, and at the last,
death it self proves the same: Lastly, the eternal torments of Hell shall
punish as many, as shall not be delivered, by our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Caine, when he weighed his sin in an even Balance according to the Law,
said: Genesis 4.
My iniquity is greater, than may be forgiven. The same thing befell unto
Saul also, despairinge, 1. Reg. 31.
and throwinge himself into eternal damnation.

But David when he examined his deed, by the Law, and knew his sin, said:
If thou (O Lord) shall mark what is done amiss: O Lord who shall abide it?
But there is mercy with thee, Psalm. 130.
therefore shall thou be feared.

Manasses, likewise, Mary Magdalene, and the Thief upon the Cross, confessing
their sins, repented, and did fly to the mercy of GOD.

And thus we see, what the INTERNAL (or inward) USE OF THE LAW is, namely,
to examine the deeds of our lives, by every precept of the Law of GOD, and, as
often as we find our selves to have offended: so often we should hold for a
surety, that the curse of the Law, and the punishments of God his anger, are
denounced against us. What counsel shall we take in this case? only two
ways are set before us: the one, by desperation, to eternal death, and
malediction: the other, by the throne of grace, to eternal life, and
benediction.

THE THRONE OF GRACE is CHRIST JESUS, which reconcileth us to his father, and
gives life everlasting. For he which beeleeueth in Jesus Christ, obteyneth
by him, both righteousness, and forgiveness of sins, by which righteousness
he enters into everlasting life. For, Christ has fulfilled the law, to
justify all that beeleeue in him. This Faith in Christ, is the foundation of
our salvation, Romans 10.
as all Christians do confess in the Creed, when they say: I believe the
forgiveness of sins: that is to say, although my sins be innumerable, and
the greatness of Gods anger is infinite, and the punishments which fall in,
by reason of sin, be horrible: yet notwithstanding forasmuch as I am under
grace, and not under the Law, I do assuredly believe the forgiveness of
sins, through the merit of the death and passion of Jesus Christ, who, not
only cleanses me from all Sin, by his precious blood, but also imputes
unto me his righteousness: so, that the Law, with her sentence of
condemnation, has no right over me at all.

This faith springs out of the knowledge of the Gospel, which offers to
all the faithful, GRACE in Jesus Christ: Wherefore Augustine says: Christ has
made our sins his: that he might make his righteousness ours. Also, when
Caine said: Genesis 4.
My iniquity is greater, then that I may be forgiven: Augustine answers:
Thou lie Caine, for the mercy of GOD is greater, than the wretchedness of
all Sinners. This is that which John says: Behold the Lamb of GOD, which
takes away the sins of the world: John. 1.
Item: CHRIST is the propitiation, not only for our sins but also for the
sins of the whole world. This faith rests in the obedience of GOD alone,
and trusts to no creature beside, either in heaven, or in earth. But,
concerning the nature of faith, it shall be said more at large, beneath in the
third doctrine: now let us pass to the third use of the Law.

Of the spiritual use of the Law.
THE THIRD USE of the Law which is called SPIRITVALL, has place in the
regenerate, which believing in Christ, have obtained (by the death, and
intercession of Christ) remission of their sins, and are counted righteous
in the sight of GOD, through the righteousness of Christ, imputed unto them.
Where this faith is lively, and void of hypocrisy, there withal dwells the
holy ghost, which both works faith in the hearts of men, by hearing the
healthful doctrine of the Gospel, and regenerateth man, and stirs him up,
to thank fullness toward God, whereby, it comes to pass that man more
esteems the will of God, and his commandments, then all the goods of the
whole world, how beawtifull, and precious so ever they may be esteemed, and
continues in purposing good, keeping faith, and a good conscience. Then,
because the man that is borne anew, would show obedience unto God, 1. Tim. 1.
he looks again into the law, and sets the same as an infallible rule
before him, that he may understand, what he should do, and what he should
leave undone, in ye right serving of God.

And although no man does fulfill the Law by his own woorks, yet
notwithstanding, the obedience of the faithful pleases God, because he is set
free from the malediction of the Law, and is, Romans 8.
(by the means of Christ) under grace. For so Paul says: There is no
damnation to them, which are in Jesus Christ, which walk not after the flesh
but after the spirit.

This obedience is (...) only acceptable unto God, as who of his fatherly
goodness, commands, and wills the faithful, to love him, and, to exercise
charity toward their neighbor: but he also, adds a promise of reward, that
he will recompense all good doings, so, that he which shall give a cup of
cold water, in the name of Christ, shall not be void of his reward.

Hereof it comes to pass, that examples do remain of many of the godly,
which for their obedience performed to God, through faith: have received, both
spiritual, and corporal blessings. But they which say, they do believe, and
yet notwithstanding, purpose not, to eschew sin, but suffer them selves to
be ruled, by their own corrupt concupiscence, and to be drawn away of the
desires of the flesh: these tread not in the steps of Abraham, which had
leiffer kill his only Son, and heir, then by turninge back, to commit any
thing, against the commandment of God. They do also, against the doctrine
of Saint Paul, which commands the believers, and such, as with Abraham
would be made partakers of the grace of God: that they should declare their
faith, by obedience toward God, which has set forth his unmeasurable grace
toward all men, in that, that he has delivered his only begotten Son for
them. But how wicked, and not to be uttered is this argument, which some
(beeinge gone forward unto that state of ungodliness) dare utter.

We are Justified, and made free, freely by faith: to what end then shall we
need to apply our selves to do good woorks?

Hearken what Paul answers to these people, whose damnation (says he) is
just yea, truly, Romans 3.
Just, forasmuch as they, by this error, do draw sins, unto them selves (as
dark clouds). For, first, they are coutemelious against God: moreover, they
tread under their feet. the precious blood of Christ. Furthermore, they
expel the holy ghost. Besides this, they reprove themselves of untruth.
Lastly, by giving offense, they offend many and instraunging their minds from
the doctrine of the Gospel: obedience them foreward to perdition, and
destruction. First of all (I say) they are co^tumelious against God, which by
his infinite mercy desires to have them free from sin and condemnation.
These ^ontruely, are to be compared, as it seems to me, to disobedient
children, which having been sometime; (for their manifold malice and
wickednesses) excluded from all hope of succession in their fathers riches: and
yet notwithstanding, being again beco^e supplia^t, and received into favor,
have returned back again to their former disposition, and contemning their
fathers commandment, have again abused his goodness, and gentleness: what
other thing here shall the father put in practice, but to deal with them, by
extreme justice, even as their stubbernesse requires?

Moreover, these do tread under their feet, the pricious blood of CHRIST,
which was shed upon the cross, for the remission of sins. As though Christ,
had therefore shed his blood, and stretched forth his hands, arms, and feet,
yea and his whole body imbrewed with blood upon the gibbet of the cross: that
it might be lawful for us to prostitute our hearts, our hands, our feet,
and our whole body, to all filthiness, wantonness, tyranny, unrighteousness,
craftines, deceit, subtlety, and (as I may speak in one word,) to all these
together, to the which, the corruption of the world, and the lust of the flesh
provoke us: and yet notwithstanding in the mean time to say: CHRIST is my
savior, I will believe in him, and I will wholly cleave unto him. Who so in
such sort frames his life, is altogether like to an unfaithful traitor,
which does his business hypocritically, unto his Lord, whose wages he
takes: and in the mean time favors his enemy, and labors by all the
means that he may to please him, and with his diligence to serve him. Even in
like manner, to boaste of faith in Christ, and in the mean time, to live
loocely and wickedly: what other thing is it, then to speak outwardely, those
things with our mouths, from which, both the heart it self, and all the
studyes and actions of our whole life do disagree. The Jews boasted them
selves to be the sons of GOD, and the seed of Abraham: but what said
Christ to these things? Ye (says he) are of the Devil, John. 8.
because ye do the works of him, from which Abraham was far of. It is
therefore, an horrible thing, and joined with extreme danger of damnation, to
carry Christ outwardly in our mouth, and privily to hide his enemy in our
heart, and with all our members as well inward, as outward, to frame our
selves to obey him. What is this else (I say) then to spurn with our feet, the
precious blood of Christ, and to set at naught his bitter passion, and death,
which he suffered for our sins, not that there might lie open for us a
liberty to sin: but, that we (by faith) receiving forgiveness of our
sins, might keep him in our hearts: and denying the devil with all his
works, namely, sin, and iniquity, should yield pure, and continual
obedience to this our only Lord and redeemer.

Thirdly, whosoever (by hearing of the healthful doctrine of the Gospel,) are
justified by faith in CHRIST, and do again fall back into manifest
wickednesses, and are led and governed by the rule of the flesh, the world, and
the Devil, these do make sorrowful the holy Ghost, and expel him forth of
their hearts, and admit, and receive into his place, the spirit of the devil,
whose dwelling places they are become again, as they were before. What other
thing is here to be looked for, than that which Christ has pronounced in
the 12. of Matthewe. and in the 11. of Luke: When the unclean spirit is gone
forth of a man, he walks through dry places seking rest, and finds
none, and then he says: I will return into my house, whence I came forth:
and when he comes, he finds it swept, and garnished: The^ goes he, and
takes with him, seven other spirits worse then him self, and they enter in,
and dwell there, and the end of this man becomes worse, then the beginning.

Hereby it may be easily perceived, of how great importance it is, either,
to embrace, and believe the word of GOD: or, in our heart, and life to decline
again shamefully from it, and to expel the holy Ghost being sorrowful,
from his habitation.

Furthermore, whosoever do boaste of faith, and yet do in the mean season
live wickedly: do most impudently, reprove, and convince themselves of
untruth. For inasmuch as they boast those things which they have not, they
are like unto babbling Thrasoos, which stick not with their mouths to promise
golden mountains, when is very deed, they, of all other, be most bare, and
needy.

The error of these people is confirmed by this, that they think, that GOD
does not more inwardely search, and look into the hearts of men, then men
them selves.

But they are much deceived: For man sees only the outward appearaunces, but
GOD sees not those things only, but he also looks into the heart it
self. GOD, therefore can not be deceived, although thy heart thinks
otherwise then thy mouth speaks.

Therefore it is, that James requires an agreement of the word, and thought,
so that the outward works of the life, should be aunswerable the faith, which
is said to be in the heart: even as it is to be seen in the example of
Abraham.

For it is certain, that the heart, and the works do agree, and are
aunswerable one to the other: so, that wheresoever there is an evil heart, the
works of the same must in like case, of necessity follow evil, according
to the rule of Christ: A good tree brings forth good fruits.

We see therefore manifestly, how impudently they reprove them selves of
untruth, which boastinge of faith, in the mean time neither have, nor pass
for good works: doing therein, as if a man had a Crown set upon his head,
he would therefore straightway be esteemed, and called a King. These are
such, whom in name only, (but not in very truth, and deed) a man may call
Christians.

To conclude: who soever boasts of Christ, and will be accoumpted, and
called a Christian, which is baptized, and bosteth his faith, and uses the
Supper of Lord, and notwithstanding does in the mean season live wickedly:
the same does, by open offense, pluck away the minds of many from the GOSPEL
and is unto them an occasion of damnation.

Paul in the 1. Corin. 8. where he entreats of those, which abuse Christian
liberty in things lawful to the offense of others, affirms, that they, by
abusing of their knowledge, and Christian liberty do destroy the weak
brother, for whom Christ dyed.

How much more then shall he be in fault, which, through his corrupt
wickedness gives occasion to others to think euilly, and to speak
blasphemously of the most holy Gospel, and Christian Religion? In Romans 2.
Paul accuses the Jews of the wickedness of their life, and says, that
through them, the name of God is therefore blasphemed among the Gentiles.

And in the 1. Timo. 6. He gives commandment to servants, which are
believing, and regenerate, that they should esteem their masters (not yet
converted, nor believing) worthy of all honor, That the name of God, and his
doctrine be not evil spoken of. And, that there should come such people in
the last times, the holy Apostle Peeter foretold, in the 2. Pet. 2.

Thou feast therefore, how great the heaviness of this sin is, whereby, a
man is author, not only of his own destruction: and also gives occasion to
many, (with the hurt of their own salvation, and blaspheming of the name, and
doctrine of God,) to refuse and contemn the GOSPEL of Christ.

There is no doubt, but many among the Turks, at this day, do for this
cause also, pursue with hatred the Gospel of Christ, for that, they see
Christian people to live so loosely, and and wickedly. And who may doubt, that
there be not many amongst the Papists, which persecute the Gospel of Christ,
or nothing at all esteem it: for that there be so many, which boast of the
Gospel, but so few which live according to the Gospel? But what should I say
of those, which have received with us the pure doctrine of the Gospel, whose
minds are yet weak, and wavering? Doubtless, thou may see many of these,
either to withdraw their minds, or, to prefer the manners, and times, under
which we lived in the Papacy: before the manners of this age, so wanton, and
laciuious. What other thing think thou would these do, if any persecution,
or change of Religion should fall in, then, that (not unwillingly) they would
suffer Idolatry, and the old mockeryes of the Roomish Antichriste to be
again thrust upon us? But through whose fault comes this to pass, but
only of those, which should be as leaders, and lights unto others, and
according to the counsel of Paul, should in all things, (that is to say) in
word, work, and life, set forth the doctrine of the Lord, and our Savior
Jesus Christ. Hereof therefore we conclude, that it becomes all those which
believe in Christ, to set the Law of GOD before them, as the glass of their
lives, according unto which, they should direct al their doings, to the glory
of God, their own commodity, and the edification of others: whereby it may be
brought to pass, that the woorks of the devil might be destroyed, and the
works of God might increase, to the glory of God the father everlasting, who
of his own mere mercy, through faith, without any our deserts, or works,
has saved, and regenerated us, that we should live unto him, and walk in all
good works. Ephe. 2.

The third Doctrine.
THE THIRD DOCTRINE which in the beginning of this little book I proponed to
be explicated is, concerning, Our Lord Jesus Christ, in the true knowledge of
whom alone, consists life everlasting, as he himself says John. 17. This is
everlasting life, to know thee to be the true God, and whom thou haste sent,
JESUS CHRIST.

After that Christ had answered the Pharisees to the question propounded by
them, to him: he again demands of them, what they thought of Christ. This
question he moves, that occasion might be given to them, to search the
scriptures, out of which they might learn, what they should certainly hold,
concerning Christ. Behold therefore with how great diversity of mind these
things are done, on either part. The Pharisees go about this business, not
because they would learn, but with a desire to quarrel, and to destroy: but
Christ, by his question, intends this thing, that he might thoroughly bring
them to the knowledge and possession of assured salvation.

Let us hear therefore, what is done on either side. Christ demands: What
think ye of CHRIST? whose Son is he? They fay unto him, Matthew. 22,
The Son of David: this answer they gave, because they knew yt Christ
should be borne of the seed of David, according to ye promise made unto him.
But forasmuch as this suffised not to the true knowing of Christ: Christ, by
this question infers another, by the which he indeuoreth to lead them into
a fuller knowledge of Christ. Therefore he says: How then does David in spirit
call him LORD? saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand,
until I make thine enemies the footestole of thy feet: If David therefore call
him (Lord) how is he then his (Son?)

As if Christ would say: The father is superior to the son, and, the son
must be subject to the father: And, the Lord is superior to the servant, and,
the servant must be subject to his Lord: How then comes it to pass, that
David acknowledges Christ to be his Lord, to whom with all lowliness of
mind, he wholly submits himself? Here, if the Jews had admitted to
counsel the holy Scripture declaring of Christ, and had a little while
considered with them selves, what the office of Christ should be in the
world: they had easily found this answer: Christ in respect of the humane
nature which he took unto him, is, the son of David: but, in respect of the
divine nature, he is the son of GOD. As far forth therefore, as
appertains to the humane nature, he is in appearance base, and poor: but as
far forth as appertains to the divine nature, he is Lord of Lords, and
King of Kings, to whom David must give place, and humbly bow his knees: yea,
of him only, and by this only one, receive forgiveness of sins,
righteousness, and life everlasting.

Of this CHRIST his Lord, David speaks in the Psalm. 51. where he says:
Thou shall purge me with Hisope, and I shall be clean, Thou shall wash me, and
I shall be whiter then snow.

Likewise, Psalm. 130. If thou Lord, wilt mark what is done amiss. O Lord who
shall abide it? But there is mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be feared.

By this MERCY (or peopitiation) he understands Christ, which after the
humane nature should be borne of him: but after the divine nature, very GOD,
from everlasting.

After this manner, Christ, (by the question propounded by him) would reduce
the Jews, to the true knowledge of Christ, wherein (as I have said)
consists eternal life, and the wisdom of salvation: as Paul teaches, 1.
Corin. 1. where he says: For as much as the world, knew not GOD, through
wisdom: (that is to say through understanding and reason, naturally ingraffed
in man, by God): In the wisdom of God, (that is, in the marvelous woorks of
God, which are wrought by him): It pleased God, by the foolishness of
preaching, to save those which beeleeue. For the Jews require signs, and the
Greeks seek wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews an
offense, and unto the Greeks, foolishness: but unto both Jews, and Greeks
which are called, we preach Christ, the power of GOD and the wisdom of GOD.

Paul in this place disseuereth the wisdom of the world, or man's wisdom,
from the wisdom of GOD. For in that, that GOD sent his son, borne of a
woman, made bond unto the Law, and subject to most bitter passion, and
death: it seemed unto men, not wisdom, but foolishness: forasmuch as GOD, by
his omnipotency, could easily find another way to save mankind. But it
seems far otherwise unto God, yea, that which men esteemed foolishness,
that GOD esteems and accompteth for wisdom.

But, that we may more fully understand these things, let us seek As far as
the holy scriptures set forth the same unto us.
the foundation of this the so wounderfull counsel of GOD, whereupon we may
build safely.

Although, GOD, if we consider the greatness of his power, could do
whatsoever he would: yet notwithstanding, it seemed good to him, to attempt
nothing in this matter, but that which was agreeable to the justice, and
glory of his majesty divine, (that is to say) that, which all Angels,
as well good as evil, and all people, yea, and all creatures should
acknowledge to be in very deed, just, and praise worthy: Luke. 2.
saying: Glory be to GOD on high.

For, even as any King, or Tyrant, when he grants unto one, that which he
has taken away from another, may be said to play, the part, partly of an
unjust, and partly of a lyberall man: Even so, GOD, if using his power only,
he had restored man, it had been, on the one part derogation to his Justice:
and on the other part too much had been granted to mercy: therefore it was
needful to find such a way to save man, that these four properties in GOD,
(without the which GOD could not (BE), or be called GOD), might stand
together, and consent in the highest degrees, namely, MOST HIGH, or PERFECT
POWER, PERFECT RIGHTEOUSNESS: PERFECT MERCY, and PERFECT VVISDOME. Such a
secret purpose, pleases God therefore, That his only begotten son should
take unto him man's nature, and dye: to the end, that who so believes in him
may obtain salvation, and life everlasting. So, that if GOD had used his
omnipotency, and Justice, he had for ever condemned all men, who through
their rebellion, had offended the eternal majesty of God, and were therefore
subject, and guilty of eternal death, and Hell. But what had then been the
praise of his mercy? Where then should the glory of his wisdom have had
place? Man, without all favor condemned, had perished: and the wisdom of
GOD, of the end of his counsel, (whereby, he had appointed manne, being
made according to his own Image, to eternal salvation) had been void, and
frustrate.

That nothing at all therefore might be derogated, from the PERFECT JUSTICE of
God. It pleased him, that even as by the disobedience of one man, we are all
made guilty: so by the obedience of one, many should be made righteous: God him
self should be satisfied: and, we being delivered from guiltynesse, should
be endowed with life everlasting.

Here also shines forth the PERFECT and great MERCY of GOD, which so loved
the world, that he would give his own only begotten Son, that All which
believe in him, should not perish, John. 3.
but have life everlasting. Here withal is also seen the PERFECT POWER OF
GOD, in that, that by the death of his Son, he has overcome Death, Hell,
Sin, and all the power of the Devil. Here also appears the PERFECT
VVISDOME of God: in this thing cheefely, that by his Son, which is the
natural Image of him self, and coeternall with him: he renews his own
Image in us, and gives unto us eternal life, whereunto we being in the
beginning by his eternal wisdom apopoynted) he has created us.

All which things are offered, with this condition. 1. Ioh, 3.36.
IF WE BELIEVE IN HIM. For so says John Baptist: He that believes in the
Son has eternal life, but he that believes not in the son, shall not
see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. This is that wisdom of
salvation, which all the Prophets, Christ himself, and the Apostles, and their
successors, have hitherto taught, and do yet at this day teach: but the wise
of this world, whom fortune fostereth as it were in her bosom, have the same
in derision, and contemn it, to their own damnation.

Forasmuch therefore, as the whole wisdom of the Church of Christ is founded
in this only IESV CHRIST: I will set down, what every one of us ought to
esteem, and know of him, as many as desire to obtain salvation by him. Which
thing that it might the more commodiously be done, these six points, with
their questions and answers, are to be diligently considered.

First, that JESUS the son of Marye, is, that promised Messiah: (that is to
say) CHRIST. Second, That this CHRIST is, very GOD, and, why it was
needful he should be GOD. Third, That this CHRIST is, very Man, And, why it
was needful he should be Man. In the fourth place is, to be considered in
this CHRIST, the unity of Person, wherein, albeit there be two natures, yet
notwithstanding, not two persons, but one only, and why it was needful it
should be so. Fifthly: That this CHRIST is, the Savior of the world, and by
what means he declares him self to be the Savior of the world. Sixth: How
we are made partakers of the benefits


Of the first point or Chapter.
THE FIRST THING which I have set down concerning Christ, 1.
is, that JESUS the son of the virgin Mary, borne in Bethlehe^, is Christ,
and that Savior, which God promised to Adam and Eve our first Parents. The
same thing all Christians do believe, and with one mind confess, when as in
the articles of the Symbol we say: I believe in JESUS CHRIST, the only
begotten son of GOD, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the
virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, etc. Of this our faith we have this
immoouable foundation, against the which, no not the gates of Hell are not able
to prevail: viz.

He only, (without all doubt, and truer than truth it self, and so by the
confession of all) is the true, and only Messiah, in whom all the Prophecies
of the Prophets do meet together, and to whom only agrees, what soever
has been foretold touching the Messiah, by the holy Prophets, Moses, and
others.

In JESUS the Son of the virgin Marie, the Prophecies of all the Prophets
do meet together, and agree, to this JESUS alone, whatsoever has been
foretold touching the Messiah, by the holy Prophets of GOD, Moses, and others.

Ergo: Only JESUS the son of the virgin Mary, is the true and only Messiah,
that is to say, Christ, the Savior, and redeemer of the world.

This is the foundation of the Christian Church, firm, and immovable, whereof
Augustine speaks on this manner. The steadfastness of faith is in this, that
all those things which have come to pass in Christ, were spoken of before.

Of this foundation, Paul disputed with the Thessalonians (as it is written in
the 17. Acts) three days together, and proved JESUS to be CHRIST, whom it
behooved to suffer, and to rise again from death, according to the scriptures.
In which place Luke adds, that a great multitude of the nobler sort as well
men as women, did with great greediness receive the gospel, daily searching ye
scriptures, whither those things were so or not, (that is to say) they
co^ferred together those things, which in Moses and the Prophets were
foretold of Christ, with all those things which came to pass in Jesus the
son of Marye, and proved in every of those things, in both, a most just
agreement. And hereof it comes, that whersoeuer in the history of the Gospel,
we read any thing concerning Christ, it is always added: So was it long
before, foretold of him. If therefore, we have respect to the place, and time
of his birth, to his mother, and to his miracles, to the ingratitude of the
Jews against him, to be short, to his death, resurrection, and ascension, and
to the sending of the HOLY GHOST accomplished in the day of Pentecoste, and to
the state of the church of Christ, and so forth, to the persecution, and
discord in the same: we shall find all these things to be foretold by the
holy Prophets of God, four thousand years back, before that Jesus was borne
in Bethlehem.

Touching which things, who so will know more, let him read our
Commentaryes upon the 84. Psalm. I thought it good to note these things on
this wise, breefely at the least, that every one might have occasion to
confer between themselves, the old Testamente, (that is to say) the
Prophets: and the new, (that is to say) the Euagelicall Historye, of IESV
CHRIST: which thing, who soever shall do diligently, shall, not a little,
strengthen his faith, against the contempners of GOD, the Jews, against the
forsakers of the faith, the Mahometistes, and to be short, against all
Idolatrous nations, yea, against man's own reason, which cannot comprehend,
this so infinite a benefit of Christ, 1. Cor. 2.24
as Paul says: The natural man perceives not the things which are of GOD.
Let us stick fast therefore, with a firm faith unto the word of God, and
captiuing our reason, let us yield unto God this glory, that he is far wiser
than all creatures, and that he is able to perform his promises, albeit to our
reason, it seem otherwise.

A certain man said wisely: That there is a great strife, between FAITH,
and REASON, and that neither of them, will leave of, or give place, before that
the eye of one of them is plucked out. Forasmuch therefore, as faith, has her
eye, of the word of God, and of the holy Ghost: and, Reason has her eye of
the fleshly wisdom: every Christian must endeavor with all study, and
diligence, by the holy Scripture, and by fervent prayer unto God, so to
strengthen his faith: that with the same alone he may see, in the matter of
salvation: and that the eye of Reason might be shut up, least it lead us
away, from the fountain of our salvation, that is, from our Lord Jesus Christ,
our only redeemer, and Savior.

Let these things suffice to be spoken, in the first place, concerning
Christ, whom I beseech with my whole heart, to illuminate us with his holy
spirit, and lead, and keep us in his verity. Amen.

Of the second Chapter.
THE SECOND THING which I proponed concerning Christ our Mediatoure, and
Savior, is, that he is very GOD, and why, it was needeful, that the
Mediator should be God. There be many evident, and firm testimonies, whereby
the divine nature of our Savior is proved. The first of which testimonies, is
taken of the manifest word of God, in which, he is called GOD.

The second is taken, of his divine works.

The third, of the worship, which is deservedly given unto him, by all
creatures. The fourth, of the united consent, and experience of the whole
Church of Christ.

FIRST, by the manifest testimonies of holy Scripture, it is proved, that our
Mediator, and Savior, is, true, eternal, and omnipotent GOD.

Esaie. 54. The Lord of hosts is his name, and thy redeemer, the holy one of
Israel, shall be called GOD of all the earth.

Iere. 23. This is the name which they shall call him, JEHOVAH our
righteousness.

Psalm. 6.8. JEHOVAH is his name, rejoice ye before him.

John. 1. In the beginning was the WORD, and the word was with GOD, and GOD
WAS THE WORD. Here, he calls Christ, the word of God, because the word
of God does sound of him.

Romans 9. Of whom (according to the flesh) Christ came, which is abooue all,
GOD blessed for ever.

1. John. 5. And we are in the truth, in his son, the same is very GOD, and
life eternal.

It is to be noted, that as often as Christ is called the only begotten Son
of GOD: so often he is proved to be very God together with the father, and
the holy Ghost: being three persons, in one divine essence, even as all
Christians, according to the divine manifestation, do confess, one God, and
three persons of the Godhead.

THE SECOND kind of testimonies, whereby the divine nature of our savior is
proved, is taken, of his divine works. For, these are the works of God alone,
viz. to create, to quicken the creature, to contain all things under the hand
of his power, by his own power to raise the dead again, to see ye hearts of
men, to hear the inward mournings, and desires of the heart of man, to be
present every where, and to be, at one, and the same time, in the hearts of all
Christians. These divine works and properties, are in the holy Scriptures,
attributed to Jesus Christ: wherefore, it is hereof rightly concluded, that he
is true and essential God. This argument is of force, by this rule: When
soever any thing, is truly affirmed of some thing, and artributed unto it,
which appertains to our nature only: then, of necessity, the same nature
must be also attributed, unto that same thing.

THE THIRD kind of testimonies, whereby the divine nature of the Messiah is
proved, is required of the honor, and worship, which is given, and ascrybed to
him, in the holy scripture.

God says in the Prophet: My Glory (that is to say) my divine honor, and
worship, which is dew to me alone, I will give to none other.

I only, am that fountain, from whence all good things do flow: I only am
he which wipe out your iniquities: I only do justify, and sanctify the
people: I only am the Savior, in me alone all people should believe, and call
upon me alone: Let all creatures, Heaven, and earth, Angels, and men, honor me
alone, yea, and whosoever are in Hell, let them bow their knees unto me: Such
honor, and worship which is dew unto GOD alone, is in the Scriptures
attributed to our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. Corinthians. 1. Christ is made unto us of GOD, VVISDOME, RIGHTEOUSNESS,
SANCTIFICATION, and REDEMPTION, that he which rejoices, should rejoice in
the Lord, (that is to say) in Jesus Christ.

Hebru. 1. And let all the Angels of God worship him, (that is to say) Jesus
Christ.

Stephen Acts. 7. says: Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

2. Thessalonians. 2. Our Lord Jesus Christ, and GOD, and our Father, which
has loved us, and given us eternal consolation, and good hope, comfort your
hearts in grace, and strengthen you in all good saying, and doing.

Paul likewise in all his Epistles, wishes to them to whom he writes, Grace
from our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Cor. 13. He says: The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
GOD, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with you all.

THE FOVRTH KIND of testimonies, whereby Christ our Lord is proved, very
GOD, is, the united consent, of the Christian congregation, and the sure
experience in the hearts of all those, which with a true, and lively faith, do
embrace Christ, our Lord, and Savior.

Athanasius in his Simbole, speaks on this manner: This is the Catholic
faith, that we worship one GOD in trinity, and trinity in unity:

Neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance:

For, there is one person of the Father, and another of the Son, and another
of the holy Ghost:

But, the Godhead of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost is
one, the glory equal, the majesty coeternall:

Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the holy Ghost:

The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate, and the holy Ghost uncreate:

The Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible, and the holy Ghost
incomprehensible:

The Father eternal, the Son eternal, and the holy Ghost eternal:

And yet they are not three eternals, but one eternal:

As also there be not three uncreated, nor three incomprehensible: but one
uncreated, and one incomprehensible.

Likewise, the father is almighty, the Son almighty, and the holy Ghost
almighty:

And yet, they are not three almighties, but one almighty:

So the father is God, the Son God, and the holy Ghost, God:

And yet, not three Gods, but one God.

So the Father is Lord, the Son is Lord, and the holy ghost is Lord:

And yet not three Lords, but one Lord.

For, like as we are compelled by the Christian verity, to acknowledge every
person by himself, to be God, and Lord:

So, are we forbidden by the Catholic Religion, to say there be three Gods, or
three Lords.

The Father is made of none, neither created, nor begotten:

The Son is of the Father alone, neither made, nor created, but begotten:

The holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son, neither made, nor
created, nor begotten, but proceeding.

Therefore, there is one Father, not three Fathers, one Son, not three
Sons, one holy Ghost, not three holy Ghostes.

And in this Trinity, none is before, or after other, none is greater, or less
then other,

But the whole three persons, are coeternall together, and coequall.

Agreeable to this in all points, is the confession of the universal Church,
set forth in the Nicene Creed:

I believe in one GOD, the father almighty, maker of Heaven, and Earth, and of
all things visible, and invisible:

And, in one Lord JESUS CHRIST, the only begotten Son of God: begotten of
the father before all worlds: GOD of GOD, Light of Light, very God, of very
God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the father, by whom all
things were made, etc.

That addition to the Himpnes, now used many years in the church of Christ:
(Glory be to the father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost: As it was
in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end:) proves the same
thing.

Likewise, the whole Greek, and Latin church, for continual agreement sake,
do use this Greek Prayer: Lord have mercy. Christ have mercy.
(...). And, by this little form of prayer, Christian people, do confess one
GOD, and three persons of the Godhead, therefore all which are truly
Christians, being taught by their own experience: do know, and confess,
Jesus Christ, to be very, and omnipotent GOD. For, in the time of their
praying, they feel the presence, and power of God, by which he comfort
them, and, not only seals the truth of his most holy Gospel in their
hearts: but also makes them courageous, that they may boldly triumph over
Death, Sin, Hell, the Devil, and all his bondslaues, and members.

Of this thing, many examples of holy Martyrs are extant, of whom even many
noble matrons, and virgins, and innumerable others, did, with greater
rejoicing, and desire covet to dye for the name of Christ: than to flow, and
abound, with the delicates, honors, riches, and pleasures of this world. But,
from whence proceeds this so great fortitude of mind, and redines to receive
punishments: but from that only efficacy, of the power of Jesus Christ, which
has manifested his divine strength, present in them.

Let us in like manner at this day keep fast, this same Jesus Christ, which
will always be at hand, so that with a sure faith, we crave his aid,
earnestly, and fervently. And, thus, by sure, and evident testimonies, I have
showed, that JESUS CHRIST our Savior is VERY GOD.

Now let us see, why it was needeful, the mediator should be GOD? That it was
necessary, that the Messiah, and our Savior should be GOD, there be two
most weighty causes.

The first is: The greatness of the evil, wherewith the nature of man, was
pressed down, which, by any creature, could not be taken away.

The other is: The weakness, or infiirmitie of the creatures, to the
restoring again of those good things, which were lost, by sin. Of these two
causes, I will speak somewhat, that the benefits of Christ toward us, might
the more shine forth, and that we may be stirred up thereby, to the honoring of
his name, with due thankfulness of our whole life, and mind.

THE GREATNESS OF THE EVIL, wherewith the nature of man was oppressed, is
perceived in four things cheefely: namely, In the WEIGHT OF SIN, In the
JUSTICE OF THE ANGER OF GOD: In the POWER OF DEATH: and in the MOST CRVEL
TYRANNY OF THE DEVIL.

THE WEIGHT OF SIN was greater, then that any finite, or bounded power,
(such as is the power of Angels, and men) might bear the burden thereof. For,
in as much as ye guiltiness was infinite, by reason of the infinite good which
was offended, namely GOD, whose majesty was offended, by the sin of our
first parents: Ye iusticiaries, and meritmo^gers, note your own abilities,
and the sweetness of your doctrine in this article.
It was needful, that this sin, should, either with infinite pains, be
punished, according to the rule of the divine Justice: or else that
satisfaction, to the divine justice, should be made for the same. But, because
this satisfatio^ must be the price of infinite goodness, and equivalent to the
same: it could not, by any creature, no neither by all creatures together, be
accomplished. It was needful therefore, that the clenser of sin, should be
GOD: for only GOD, as he is infinite, so, he is able to abolish, and overcome
infinite evil.

THE JUSTICE OF GODS ANGER required a proportion of reuengement, according to
the offense. Forasmuch therefore, as the offense was infinite, the anger was
also infinite: which, the first creature, was not able to pacify, nor
sustain: wherefore it was needeful, that the Mediator, which should pacify
the anger of GOD, should be GOD. Of this matter Paul Romans 1. speaks thus:
Romans 1.
The anger of GOD is revealed from Heaven, upon the ungodliness of all men,
etc.

That these things could not be taken away, without the mediator, this saying
of John Baptist, in John. 3. teaches: He which believes not in the Son,
the wrath of GOD abided upon him. And, that this anger of GOD is unmeasurable,
and infinite, by reason of sin (in which these evils do concur, namely,
contempt of the divine majesty: proud rebellion against the law of God,
unworthy of the Image of God, whereunto man was created, defilyng, following
of Satan the enemy of God, filthy declyning from the tents of God, to the
Devil, and intolerable ingratitude) is known by the punishments of our first
Parents, by the punishments following upon all ye posterities of Adam, by the
threatenings of God, by the calamities wherewith mankind is kept under, by the
devils tyranny against man, by the tokens of the anger of God in Heaven, in
earth, in the sea, by the greatness of the pains everlasting, which they shall
sustain, which are not converted: to be short, by the infinite price paid for
the redeeming of the pains for sin. Who sees not here, that it was
impossible that the anger of GOD could have been taken away, but by a
Mediator, whose power should be infinite?

THE POWER OF DEATH was greater, than that it might be overcome, by any
creature, insomuch that Pliny said, (how beit falsely) that it was not
possible unto God to raise up the dead. Now forasmuch, as the cheifest office
of ye mediator is TO DESTROY DEATH, it was needful that he should excel with
a power divine, whereby, as to give life, so he might be able to abolish death:
For with him no word is impossible.

THE MOST CRVEL TYRANNY OF THE DEVIL, (under which mankind was holden captive,
for sin) was also to be suppressed by ye mediator. But how impossible this was
to the nature of man, the history of the world, with the experience of all
people does testify: wherefore it was needful, the mediator should be GOD,
which might suppress the tyranny of the Devil, by his own power. Hereby it
is evident, that to the taking away of the greatness of the evil, wherewith
mankind was oppressed: it was requisite, that the Mediator should be GOD.

Now heerewithall let the greatness of the love, in the everlasting father,
the son, and the holy ghost, toward mankind, be considered: A heavenly
and joyful meditation.
The Father spared not his own son, but would have him subject unto pains,
that he might deliver us from everlasting pains. John. ^.
The Son willing, and obedient to the father, is made a sacrifice, deriuing
the guiltiness of sin into himself. The holy Ghost, himself will dwell
in the hearts of the reconciled, and kindle in us motions agreeing to the will
of God. These things will stir up in us faith, Invocation, and thankfulness
toward God, and will defend our minds against the terror of death, against
the tyranny of the devil, yea, against all things, which are bent to
overthrow the hope of our salvation, which we have in our Lord, and Savior
IESV CHRIST.

THE SECOND CAUSE, why it was needful, that the Mediator should be GOD,
is, THE INABILITY, AND WEAKNESS OF THE CREATVRE to the restoring again of
those good things, which through sin we have lost. And albeit in this one
word of, (THE IMAGE OF GOD,) these good things be comprehended: yet many
things to the reparation of the same, are necessarily required, which Paul.
1. Cor. 1. reconeth up, where he says: CHRIST is borne unto us of GOD,
VVISDOME, RIGHTEOUSNESS: SANCTIFICATION: and REDEMPTION, that he which
rejoices, should rejoice in the Lord,

These four kinds of good things, no creature, or finite power was able to
restore again unto men: as we shall se of every of these things in order.

FIRST, therefore, the Mediator must restore VVISDOME, not such as that of the
world is, which is shut up within certain limits: but such as is hid from
the Princes of this world: which wisdom, is, of Zachary defined to be: Luke.
1.77.78.
The knowledge of salvation, for the remission of sins, by the bowels of the
mercy of our God. Of this wisdom speaks the Evangelist John in his first
Chapter, when he says: No man has seen God at any time: but the son which
is in the bosom of the father, he has declared him unto us.

But some man may say: Could not God have revealed this wisdom unto men, by
Angels, and Prophets? I answer, It is one thing, to give, and to teach
wisdom as Ministers: and another thing to be the wisdom, (that is to say)
effectually to bring to pass, that the hearts of men may receive, Or the
wisdom of salvation.
saving wisdom.

The voice of man strikes the ears of the body: but the Son of God, which
is the wisdom it self, of God, replenisheth the mind of man, with the
wisdom of salvation. For, the word of the Prophets, and of other Ministers of
the word of God, does then at the length, bring fruit: when as God, by the
word, opens the heart, and instilleth the seeds of true wisdom, which
thing doubtless is not in the power of any creature, but of the Creator
alone: whereof it follows, that the Mediatoure must be GOD.

SECONDLY, The Mediator must restore again RIGHTEOUSNESS. For, without
perfect righteousness, no man may come forth into the sight of GOD. But no
man is able to give, Perfect Righteousness, which should be sufficient for all
people, except GOD. For, that man might be perfectly righteouse before God, two
things are required: Of which, the first is, To be set free from
unrighteousness, and sin, which evils men bring with them into the world.
The other: To be endowed and garnished, with a full obedience of the law of
GOD, which is the measure of righteousness, which is before God auaylable.

Of the former we have spoken before, where we showed, the enormitie of sin,
and the justice of the anger of GOD. Touching the other, which is: To be
endowed, and garnished with righteousness, whereby the law of GOD is
satisfied: It is evident, that the righteousness of no creature, forasmuch as
it is (finite): can be sufficient to salvation, for infinite numbers of
people, which thing doubtless in the Mediator is required. For, as he must
with a sufficient sacrifice of clensing, make satisfaction for sins, and so
take away all guiltiness: So must he, by his own obedience toward the law,
set all those righteous in the sight of God, which believe in him. For so
Paul says: Him which knew no sin, 2. Cor. 5.
he made sin, (that is to say, God cast upon him the guiltiness of all
sinners, that he should suffer and die for them:) that we might be made the
righteousness of GOD in him (that is to say) that the righteousness of him,
might be imputed to us, for righteousness in the sight of GOD. Therefore in
another place Paul says: Romans 10.4.
Christ is THE END OF THE LAW, to save all those which believe in him.
Hereby it may be seen, that the Mediator must of necessity be VERY GOD.

In the third place, follows, SANCTIFICATION, which the Mediator must bring.
Which thing, forasmuch as no creature can perform the Mediator must needs
be GOD. For it is the property of God alone, to give the holy Ghost the
sanctifier, without whom our Sanctification, can not be brought to pass.

Moreover, forasmuch as SANCTIFICATION, is set against SIN, and in Sin are
two things, namely, the formalitie, as the guiltiness: and the material
part, as the corrupt qualities, and actions? the Sanctification must be also
double, one, which is set against guiltiness, which is, The cleansing of
sin, by the blood of Christ: the other, which is set against the corrupt
^ualities and actions, which is, as well the separation of man from the
prophanitie of the nations, by the mortifying of the flesh, which is done, by
resisting corrupt cogitations, affections, and desires of the flesh, and, with
the whole power, abstayning from evil works: as also, the joining together
of man with GOD, by the quickening of the spirit, by obeying unto God, and by
following pureness of the mind, of affections, and innocence of the whole
life: breefely, that man, might renounce the Devil, and and his works, and
cleave with the whole heart unto GOD alone.

This Sanctification, is also called of Paul Phillip 3. (SPIRITVALL
CIRCVMCISION.) We (says he) are Circumcision, which serve GOD in the
Spirit, and rejoice in Christ, and have no confidence in the flesh.
Therefore, Spiritual Circumcision, Spiritual circumcision what it is.
is a cutting away of the trust of the flesh, after which succeeds a
rejoicing in CHRIST, and a pure desire to worship GOD. And this, truly, is
that SANCTIFICATION, which GOD, and Man, our Mediator, does bring.

THE FOVRTH GOOD THING, which our Mediator should restore unto us, is PERFECT
REDEMPTION.

This Redemption requires, first, a continual presence of the Mediatoure, in
the Church, (or Congregation:) (that is to say) in all the godly every where
dispearsed, through out the whole world. But who can be together, and always
present, in so many places, except he be GOD?

Secondly, it requires, a preservation of the congregation (that is to say)
that the Mediator should be a keeper, or preserver, not only, of the whole
Church, but also, of every member of the same, against infinite subtilties, and
lyinges in weight, of the Devil, and man.

Thirdly: it requires that, the Mediator should look into the hearts of
men, least he should be deceived, by the outward disguising of hypocrites.
Now, forasmuch as it is the property of GOD only, to look into the hearts of
men, and to behold the inward secrets of their affections: surely, the
Mediator must of necessity be GOD. Furthermore, to the office of the
Mediator, this also appertains: that he do every where, hear the gronings
of such as do call upon him, which, doubtless is the property, of the
divine power alone.

Fifthly: it requires, that, the Mediator, in the last day, should raise up,
all the dead: which work, is above the powers of all creatures. Yea, all the
creatures of God, by their own power, are not able to raise up, a dead Fly
again, muchlesse all people, whose bodies have been by diverse means, and in
diverse places scattered abroad: But, forasmuch as the Mediator must do this,
and that in the twinkling of an eye, he must of necessity, be GOD.

Sixthly, and lastly, it requires, that, the Mediator do give to those which
are raised up, (which in the true faith have departed this life) eternal life,
perpetual glory, and conformity with GOD. But who can bring this to pass,
but only GOD? We have therefore abundantly showed: That our Savior, and
Mediator is GOD: And, why it was needful, that he should be very GOD.

Of the third point or Chapter.
IN THE THIRD PLACE, we have proponed of Christ, that he is VERY MAN, And,
why it was needful, that the Mediator should be man. The whole universal
Church, as it believes, Christ, to be borne, very man: So, that he also, at
this day, is, and for ever shall remain, very man, it does, godlyly confess.

Genes. 3. The seed of the woman, which shall break the head of the Serpent,
is promised. By the name of, THE SEED OF THE WOMAN, without all doubt, the
nature of man, which our Mediator, at the time appointed by the father, should
take unto him, is signified. GOD promised to Abraham, that in his seed, all
nations should be blessed.

He promised also, to David, that his son should sit upon his seat, and
reign for ever.

Esaie. 7. Behold a virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a Son, and thou
shall call his name EMANVEL, (that is to say) which shall be GOD and MAN.

Luke. 1.
With these Prophecies agrees, the whole History Evangelical. The Angel,
being sent to the virgin Marie, says: Behold, thou shall conceive in thy
womb, and shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his name JESUS, he
shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the highest. Which thing when she
had heard, she meruayled, and said, How can this thing be, forasmuch as I
know not man: And the Angel answered unto her: The holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the most highest, shall ouershadowe thee: (that is
to say.) Thou shall conceive, and bring forth, not, by the seed of man, or,
after, the common law of nature: but, by the power and wise counsel of GOD.
And, so the Angel concludes his oration, with this sentence worthy to be
remembered: with GOD, nothing shall be impossible.

The eight day, after his nativity, he was Circumcised according to the law,
after, the manner observed in other Infantes of the Jews. He was brought up,
by Joseph, and Mary, he greewe in wisdom, and in favor, with GOD, and men,
and was he found altogether, a natural man, having body, and soul, and all
condition and properties of humane nature, sin only excepted.

This is the sum of the Christian faith, touching the manhood of Jesus
Christ, as we confess in the articles of the Symbol, when we say: I believe
in JESUS CHRIST, our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of
the virgin Mary. But why was it needful, The second part of the prepostion.
that the Mediator should be VERY MAN. Four causes may be rehearsed, out of
the holy Scriptures, why it was needful, that the Messiah should be man.

1. The Justice of GOD. 2. The restoring of the Image of GOD, in man again,
which, through Sin was lost. 3. The manner of Adoption. 4. The assurance of
our Resurrection, from death.


First, THE JUSTICE OF GOD required, that the disobedience, in our flesh
committed, should be amended in the same. For it was agreeable, to the order
of the Justice of GOD, that in as much as mankind, in one Adam, had first
offended: so some body in mankind, fre from sin, should sustain the paiues,
which should be the price for the rest. Our Lord therefore took man's nature
unto him, and was made man, showing forth, as it were, 1. Cor. 15.
the person of Adam himself, whose name is also attributed unto him: yt he
might thoroughly satisfy the punishment of sin in the flesh, being in flesh
committed.

Therefore Paul Rom 5. says: If, by the sin of one, death reigned, by the
means of one, (namely Adam:) much more, they which receive abundance of Grace,
and of the gift of Righteousness, shall reign in life, by the means of one
Jesus Christ. Item: As by the disobedience of one, (Adam), many, (All men)
became sinners: So, by the obedience of one (of Christ) many are made
righteous.

Item 1. Corin. 15. For, by a man (Adam) came death: And, by a man (Jesus
Christ) came the resurrection from Death.

Hebr. 2. Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of flesh, and blood, he
himself also, in like case took part with them: that through death, he might
abolish him, which had the rule of death, (that is to say) the Devil.

Hereunto also appertains that saying of Irenaeus: It behooved him, which
should begin, to slay sin, and to redeem man, which was guilty of death: to
be made the self same thing, (that is to say) Man.

And Augustine says: flesh, had blinded thee, flesh does heal thee: because
Christ came in such wise: that by flesh, he might quench the corruptions of
the flesh.

The second cause is, THE RESTORING OF THE IMAGE OF GOD, according unto which,
man was created: This thing could by no means be done, but, by the natural
Image of GOD (that is) the everlasting and only begotten son of GOD: which
therefore took man's nature unto him, that he might again restore the Image of
God, in all those, which, through a lively faith, are, into his body, ingraffed
Whereof Athanisius says: It was convenient, that the Son should take man
his nature unto him: that this person which is the substantial Image of the
Father, might restore again, the Image of GOD in us.

The third cause was, that the reason of our ADOPTION did require the same.
For the Son of God, did therefore take the nature of man unto him: that he
might make us the Sons of God. He would therefore, by the society of nature,
be joined unto us, and become our brother: that we, being become his members,
might be made the sons of God. For, we are therefore called, and are the
Children of God: because we are, (by faith) in CHRIST, which is the natural
son of God. For, in him alone, we are beloved, Ephe. 1.
and Sons.

John. 1. To as many as believed on his name, he gave power to be made, the
Sons of GOD.

Gal. 4. When the fullness of time was come, GOD sent his Son, made of a
woman, and made bond unto the law, that he might redeem those, which were
under the law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. Because ye are
the Sons of GOD, therefore GOD has sent the Spirit of his Son into our
hearts, crying Abba Father.

In this sentence also speaks Irenaeus: We could not be (says he) partakers
of the Adoption of his Sons, unless, we had received the same, by his Son,
(that is to say) unless his Son had been made man.

The fourth cause: THE ASSVRANCE, The cause and assurance of the rising again
at the last day.
force, and efficacy of OUR RESVRRECTION consists in this, that our
Mediator is man. For, the only hope and assurance, which we have of the
Resurrection of our bodies, is, that Christ our Mediator, has taken unto him
our flesh. For, the flesh which we do now bear about us, subject to
corruption, is already, 1. Cor. 15.
raised up in Christ, as in the first fruits: and is entered into the
possession of the kingdom of heaven, and is there become immortal. By the
virtue therefore, of that society, which we have with the gloriouse body of
Christ, we shall be raised up in the last day, and shall be endowed Or, in our
flesh.
after the flesh, with immortality: so, that being like unto Christ our
brother, we may enjoy with him, eternal joy, and salvation.

This thing Paul purposes to show 1. Cor. 15. when he says: CHRIST is
risen from the dead, the first fruits of them which sleep: for by a man came
death, and by a man came the resurrection of the dead: for as in Adam all men
dye, so in Christ shall all men be made alive. Therefore when soever
temptation falls in, willing to drive us to doubt of the resurrection of the
flesh: let us lift up our hearts to Jesus Christ, already raised up from
death: he both can, and will raise up us also from the dead, forasmuch as he
is God almighty, and also our brother, fellow of the same humane nature with
us.

Therefore Paul says, Philip. 3. Our conversation is in Heaven, from whence
also we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall
transform our vile body, that he may make it like to his glorious body, by
the mighty workeing, whereby he is also able to subdue all things unto
himself.

Thus, I have recited, four most weighty causes, whereby it is showed, that
it was highly needful, that the Mediator between GOD and man, should have
been Man, and have taken humane nature unto him, and in the same, be made like
unto us.

Let us continually in our heart, bear about with us these causes, that we may
be stirred up to earnest thankfulness toward GOD, which would have his son,
when he was rich, to become man, and verily a poor man: that through his
poverty, we might be rich, in the possession of salvation, and life
everlasting.

Of the fourth point or Chapter.
THE FOVRTH THING which I said, is to be considered in Messiah, is, that HE
IS ONE PERSON, and why this thing was needful.

That our Mediator is one person, (beside many other) these things do confirm.

John 1. The word became flesh: (that is to say) Man. But John adds: And we
saw the glory of it: But if there had been two persons, without all doubt,
he would have said: We saw the glory of (Them): and, not the glory of (It).

In the 3. of Matthew. the voice of God sou^deth upon Jesus ye son of Mary,
being baptized of John: This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. In this place, and (the same god) also in the mount, Mat, 17.
acknowledges this son of Mary, to be his son also, and says: (HEAR HIM,)
but if there had been two persons, without all doubt, he would have said
(HEAR THEM.)

And in the 4. Chapter to the Ephesians, Paul says: He which descended, is
even the same which also ascended above all Heavens, to fulfill all things.

The whole Church also confesses the same thing, even as the Symbol of
Athanasius has, in this manner. The right faith is, that we believe, and
confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, IS GOD, and man.

GOD, of the substance of his father, begotten before the world, and MAN of
the substance of his mother, borne in the world.

Perfect GOD, and perfect MAN, of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh
subsisting.

Equal to the Father, as touching his Godheade, and inferriour to the father,
as touching his Manhood.

Who, although he be GOD, and MAN, yet, he is not two, but ONE CHRIST.

One, not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh: but by taking the manhood
into GOD.

One altogether, not by confusion of substance: but by unity of person.

For, as the reasonable soul, and flesh, is one Man: So, GOD, and MAN, is one
CHRIST.

But, why it was necessary, that the Mediator, should be one person, and not
two, as there be in him two distinct natures: there be many weighty reasons,
certain of the chief of which it may suffice to note in this place.

First, Our Mediator, GOD and Man, must be one person, that he might make GOD,
and Man (ONE): therefore, he is joined to the father, by his true God head, and
unto Man, by true Manhood, that so he might couple both together.

The second cause: The Mediator should bring nothing to pass, between the
parties at variance, if he cleave to the one, and differ from the other:
Wherefore, it was needful, that the Mediator by a certain necessity,
should be joined to both parties.

To GOD therefore (who, by our sin was offended:) our Mediator is joined by
true divinity: And unto MAN he is associated, by true humanity: that through
the society, which he has with both parts, he might join both parts
together: according to that saying of Irenaeus lib. 3. Cap. 2. where he
entreats of the causes, why the word of God became flesh.

It must needs be (says he) that the Mediator between GOD, and MAN, by
reason of the nighe affinity to both parts: must reduce both into
freendship, and concord: and bring to pass, that God should take man unto
him: and man should yield over himself unto God.

And Theodoretus says: Even as he, Dialog 1.
which would reconcile some two persons, joining hands beetweene themselves,
putting himself in the midst between, and holding the one by the right
hand, and the other by the left, brings, and joins them in freendship
together: So he when he had united the divine nature to the humane: made a
peace inviolable, and which cannot be broken.

The third cause: If the Mediator were not one person: then the works of the
redemption, wrought in the humane nature, should not be a sufficient price for
sin, through which the infinite goodness was offended. For, Death was due
debt for sin, but pure GOD could not taste death: neither, Man alone could
overcome death. Therefore GOD became man: that GOD and MAN, both should, and
might make satisfaction for eternal death, which was due to mankind. The
eternal son of God therefore, took man's nature unto him, into the unity of
person: that the works done in the humane nature, might be of infinite power,
and merit. For, through the indivisible union of the divine, and humane nature
in one person, the dignity is infinite, the perfection most absolute, and the
price of the blood, death, and so of all the actions and sufferings of Christ
in his most holy humanity, inestimable. And thereof, is the might, and force
of blottinge out sin, and the power of remitting offenses, of justifying,
quickening, and saving the believers.

And albeit, Christ suffered in the flesh only, as Peter says: yet
notwithstanding, the suffering is attributed to the person, 1. Pet. 3.
by reason of that most stricte union of the two natures in one person. That
these things may somewhat more easily be understood, I will join hereunto a
similitude, which the Catholic deuines in the old Church have used.

MAN consists of two substaunces, of a soul, and of a body: and does many
things by the power of the Soul, as, to understand, to reason, to number etc.
and again does many things, by the strength of the body, as to build, to
write, to walk, and such other like deeds either well or evil. All these
things which in this manner, he does, either by the power of the soul by it
self, or by the strength of the body by it self, or by the work of both
together: are attributed to the person of the man.

Even in like manner, Christ does certain works according to his humane
nature, and certain according to his divine nature, al which notwithstanding
are attributed to whole Christ, which is GOD, and MAN. So, the death of Christ
which he sustained according to his humane nature, is ascrybed to the whole
person, which is GOD and MAN. Therefore Luke rightly affirms, Acts. 20.28.
that GOD has purchased a Congregation to him self, with his own blood: And
again he says rightly, that JESUS the son of Mary has created Heaven, and
Earth: For, Jesus, and the eternal son of GOD, is ONE person.

In the same sentence also, speaks Cyrell: Because (says he) that body,
which he made his own, did suffer: therefore it is said, the word it self
suffered for us.

And hereof it is, that all the works, and benefits of redemption in
Christ, are counted divine, infinite, saving, and so inestimable: that unto
them, nothing, neither in Heaven, or in earth may be compared, as we have
somewhat touched before.

From this fountain, an infinite, and unspeakable consolation, to the
conscience afflicted, tremblinge for the multitude of her sins flows
forth. For, if the death of Christ be so precious, that there is no price of
equal value, which may be compared to it, much less preferred before it: What
should let, that it should not abound far above the heap of my sins,
although Or albeit they exceed in number, greatness, etc. Romans 5.
exceeding. Whereof Augustine says: The mercy of GOD is much greater, then
the misery of all sins.

And Paul says: Where sin did abound, there grace did superabound.

Of the fifte point or Chapter.
IN THE FIFTH PLACE, we have proponed of Christ: that he is, the Savior of
Mankind: And in what manner, he executes the business of Man's salvation.
Although, in the matters before handled, we have oftentimes touched somewhat,
concerning this part: yet notwithstanding, a just explication of each article,
as it was convenient, has not hethervnto been accomplished. Therefore I will
now speak of these things more at large: and, first, I will recite the
testymonyes of the scripture, which testify, Christ to be the Savior of the
world: Furthermore, I will declare, how he is the Savior of the world.

Moses says: Genesis 3.
The seed of the woman shall crush the Serpents head: (that is to say) CHRIST
shall destroy the works of the Devil, and deliver man, from Sin, Death,
dampnation, and Hell, and shall justify, quicken, bless, and bring them into
the kingdom of GOD.

After the same manner, GOD speaks to Abraham: In thy seed shall all nations
be blessed, (that is to say) shall be delivered from all malediction, and
saved.

And, the Angel Gabriell says to Joseph: Thou shall call his name JESUS, for
he shall save his people from their sins.

In like manner, the Angel to the Sheepeheards: Behold, I show unto you
great joy: Luke. ^.
this day is borne unto you a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, in the
city of David.

Paul also, 1. Timo. 1. says: This is a sure saying, and worthy of all
receiving: that Jesus Christ came into the world, to save sinners. And what
should I bring many testimonies? the whole scriptures every where affirms,
Jesus Christ to be the Savior of the world.

But, by what means then, does Christ declare himself to be the Savior of
the world, and the redeemer of mankind?

This thing is seen, cheefely in five benefits toward us, namely:

First, in giving unto us, the true understanding of the wisdom of salvation,
of which we were destitute.

Moreover, in taking away our sins, wherewith we are laden, and oppressed.

Thirdely, in imputing Righteousness unto us, which, of our selves we could
not have.

Fourthly, in sanctifying, and regenerating us, by his holy spirit, so, that
we which were the children of wrath, may become the children of GOD.

Fifthly: in delivering us from the pains of hell, which we had deserved, and
in giving unto us the possession of everlasting life, which he, by his own
death has purchased for us.

Of these five benefits, whereby Christ perfourmeth the whole work of our
redemption, and brings it to perfection: I will breefely, out of the holy
Scripture, adioyne a more plentiful explication.

The first benefit.
COncerning the first benefit of Christ, namely, that he gives unto us the
true understanding of the wisdom of salvation: which, by the sharpness of our
own wit or reason, we are, by no means able to attain unto: the Evangelist
John speaks in these words: John. 1.
No man has seen GOD, at any time, the only begotten son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him unto us. This wisdom Zachary
calls: The knowledge of salvation, for the remission of sins, Luke. 1.
by the bowels of the mercy of GOD. And Christ says: John. 1.
This is eternal life: that they may know thee to be very GOD, and whom thou
have sent JESUS CHRIST.

All the wisdom of the world, compared to this wsedome, is none at all, or,
as if a man would compare one small drop, with the whole Ocean, or a small
gravel stone, with the sands of the whole sea, or the whole world. For what
comparison shall there be of a thing momentany, to a thing everlasting? Or of a
thing humane, to that which is divine? This heavenly wisdom, namely: The most
sacred Gospel, is that Perfect VVisdome, which we boaste our selves to have,
of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ.

The second benefit.
TOuching the second kind of the benefits of Christ, namely: That he takes
away the heap of our sins, wherewith we are oppressed: John Baptist
preaches Ioh. 1. Behold the Lamb of GOD, which takes away the sins of
the world: (that is to say) this JESUS will offer that sacrifice, whereby he will
make satisfaction, for the sins of the whole world.

But, that we may come to a fuller knowledge of this testimony of John,
concerning Christ: I will here under set down the questions, which the words
them selves do minister.

First, Why Christ is called a Lamb: And wherefore he is surnamed the Lamb of
GOD. Secondly, What this Lamb does. Thirdly, For whose cause he does.
1. There be two reasons, why Christ is called A LAMB: The first is, that
John might put the Jews, and us in mind, of both these things, namely of
the shadow, which went before in the old Testament: and the fulfilling of the
promise (which, John calls (The Truth) in the new Testament.

Hebr. 10. Paul says: The law has the shadow of good things to come, but
not the very Image of the things themselves, (that is to say) The truth, or
fulfilling of the promise.

Therefore, the Lamb of the Jews Passover, in the law, was, both, a
putting them in remembrance, of benefits received, and also a warning, and
shadowing of a thing to come. For as it admonished the Jews, that even as the
sacrifice of the Lamb in Aegypte being finished, the people went out of
Egypt, and were delivered from bondage: so it signified, that by the sacrifice
of Christ, mankind should be reconciled unto GOD, and brought unto liberty.

The name of the shadow, (that is to say) of the Lamb, is therefore
attributed unto Christ, the Truth: that it might be known that Jesus Christ
is he, whom the paschall Lamb in ye old Testament did shadow. For, it is a
thing customable in the Scriptures, to give one, and the same names, to the
signs, and the things signified: that by conference of the shadow, and the
truth, we way the more fully be instructed.

So, the Rock, which was a shadow of Christ, is attributed to Christ:
because in him, the truth, which was shadowed by the Rock in the wilderness,
is fulfilled.

The Sacrifice, which was only a figure of the cleansing sacrifice, then to
come, was called, (...), (that is to say) Propitiation, which name, both by
John, and Paul, is attributed to Christ, who alone offered the true
propitiatory sacrifice.

Moreover, when John calls Christ a LAMB, he signifies, that he was to be
killed for sacrifice. And so John, in one word expressed the end of all the
sacrifices of the law, namely, that they should shadow the sacrifice of
Christ: and, which being finished, all the sacrifices of Aaron, should
cease. Therefore, he says: Behold the Lamb of GOD. As though he should say:
ye Jews have hitherto many years past offered the Paschall Lamb, but,
behold this is, that true, immaculate, and pure Lamb, with out all fault:
which is woorthyly called, The Lamb of GOD: because he is a Sacrifice
sufficient, for the sins of the whole world. Therefore, rightly said Bernard:
Who could better take away sin, then he, in whom sin falls not? He
without doubt, is able to wash me, who, as it is manifest, is not defiled: Let
this hand wipe mine eye covered with dyrt: which hand alone, is without dust.

We have said, why Christ is called a Lamb: and cheefely, why he is called
the Lamb of GOD. Now it is to be opened in few words: What this Lamb has
done. Behold (says John) the Lamb of GOD, John. 1.
which takes away the sins of the world: (that is to say) That Lamb of God
this JESUS, namely, which is to be offered: by his death and passion takes
away the sin of the world, (that is) discharges the world from sin, which
he translateth into him self, that, by the mirit of his sacrifice, that is, of
his passion and death, he may abolish the same. And so upon this Lamb of GOD,
our Lord Jesus Christ GOD, and MAN, are east the sins of the whole world:
that as he alone should sustain the guiltiness, so the same should also
sustain the malediction. For albeit that Christ was free from fault: yet
notwithstanding, the guiltines, and pain, he, in very deed, received into
himself. And this is that which Esaias says: He has laid all our iniquities
upon him.

Esaias. 5. 3.
Therefore Paul, calls CHRIST (ACCVRSED,) or (EXECRATION,) when he says:
Galla. 3. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made
ACCVRSED FOR US. Hereunto also it makes that he names him (Sin), when he
faith: 2. Cor. 5. Him which knew not sin, he made SIN FOR US: that is to
say: GOD has so embased his own Son: that he should be counted, in the
sight of GOD, guilty of all sin: that we might be endowed with his
righteousness, whereby we might be reputed righteous, in the sight of God.

By these things already said, it may easily be perceived, what is to be
thought of the death, and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, which in one word
and other, I will show more at large.

CHRIST him self. John 17. with his own voice, (being now ready to suffer,)
explicateth, what manner of work his passion is, when he says: I sanctify
mine own self for them, that they also might be sanctified in the truth. I
sanctify, says he, that is, I being separated from sinners, by perfect
pureness: and joined unto God by perfect love, and obedience, do offer up my
self to the father upon the Altar of the Cross, Heb. 10.
through the eternal spirit, for a sacrifice of pacification, that by the
merit of my sacrifice: the people believing in me, might be separated from the
defiling of ye world, might be joined unto God, through a lively faith, and so
offered, for an holy sacrifice, that they might be truly sanctified for ever.
In this manner CHRIST speaks in this place, of his passion, which he defines
to be a Sanctification: (that is to say) A holy oblation, of himself for the
Disciples: that is, for. All which shall believe: that they by the merit of his
passion may be sanctified, as an holy sacrifice offered unto God.

Let us therefore, in few words conclude, what is to be considered, of the
passion of Christ, namely: That it is a sacrifice propitiatory, What the
passion of Christ is.
wherein, the Son of GOD offered up him self to the Faher: that he might
merit for all which believe in him, eternal sanctification, deliverance from
sin, and death, eternal, and everlasting Salvation.

And so, in this definition is contained, that which may be answered, to every
of these several questions: Who offered? The everlasting Priest JESUS CHRIST.
What offered he? Him self. Where offered he? In the Altar of the Cross, by
his most bitter passion and death. To whom offered he him self? To the
father, whose wrath, (by the merit of his precious sacrifice,) he pacifyed.
For whose cause did he offer him self? For man. Who shall be partakers of this
offering? All, which believe in him.

Because we have heard, what this Lamb has done, namely, that he has
received into him self, the sins of men, and has made satisfaction for
them: Let us now discuss this word, (OF THE WORLD). John says not: John. 1.
Behold the Lamb of GOD, which takes away the sins of man: but, which
takes away the sins of the World: He means, that the passion and
sacrifice of Christ, is (in it self) infinitely precious and profitable,
offered to God the father for all men, extended and proferred to all sinners
and for all sins whatsoever (of his part) indifferently and sufficiently:
though indeed, The elect penitent believer only can, and do receive and enjoy
it effectually and auayleably. According as the Schoolmen say (and the best
learned like, and allow of it) Christus pastus pro omnibus sufficientur, sed
pro electis efficienter etc. To say, Christ suffered for all sufficiently, but
for the elect (only) effectually or auayleably etc. This is the Authors
justified meaning, in many places of his worthy works else where. Though here,
in words, he seems some-deale harshe and hard: and is warely to be readde.
that he might signify, whereunto the price of the oblation of IESV CHRIST,
does stretch it self.

There have been in time past, and are also at this day, two sorts of men,
which by teaching falsely in this place have fowlely offended. Of these, the
first are, which are of opinion, that the passion, and sacrifice of Christ
profits not all men, but a certain few peculiar elected. Another kind of
them is: which suppose that there be certain sins, which, even by the merit
of the death, and passion of Christ, cannot be remitted. These two false, and
erroneous opinions I will in this place breefely refute, and throw down by
manifest testimonies of the word of GOD.

They, whom I named in the first place, are Stoickes, and such, as going about
to fain tables of desteny out of testimonies of the Scripture, not rightly
understood, do teach, that GOD has created men, appointed partly, to
eternal Salvation: partly, to eternal condempnation, howsoever, they either
believe, or live. This perverse opinion, is, not only blasphemous against GOD:
but also seduceth many: that either they despair of the forgiveness of their
sins, or nourish security: thinking it to be a matter of no force, how they
live, forasmuch as they attain salvation, because, that they are elected.
Against this opinion is to be set, The merciful will of GOD, which has made
man, after his own Image, and has promised to Adam, the restoring again of
the same.

Of this will of GOD, the Prophet speaks in these words: As surely as I live
says the Lord GOD, I will not the death of the ungodly, but that the ungodly
should be converted, from his way and live. Therefore, if that these words,
that GOD will not the death of a sinner, be true, of which thing, there is
utterly no doubt: It must, of necessity, be false, that they say, That GOD
has destinated certain to salvation, certain to condempnation, and that, if
we respect the counsel of the creation, and redemption of mankind. For, as
far forth as appertains to the rebellion of man: there it is said, that
GOD has created many to condempnation, whom notwithstanding, he would,
should have been converted, should have sought and obtained salvation.

For, even as an earthly father, is in such wise affected toward his children,
that he would have every one of them, to come to thriftines, and, be honest,
and worthy successors to him of his goods, and substance, and yet
notwithstanding, being made frustrate of his hope, finds the stubbernnesse,
and disobedience of them, whereby they also at the length, do cast them selves
with great ignominy, into destruction, and some infamous kind of punishmente:
Of this father it may be said, that he has brought up children, kept to this
so great mischeef, (not, that the will of his purpose, was not far other) but
that the children through their own rebellion, have called this mischeef unto
them selves.

So, GOD verily, would have all men (made after his own image) to be saved:
but, if any of these being rebellious will not embrace his word, and, by faith,
be converted, but favoring security, and madness, do dye in their own
wickedness: those, God, suffers to perish, that they might sustain the just
punishments, as well of their own offenses, against ye law of God, as also of
their contempt of attayning salvation through Christ. Here we may say, with
the scripture: That God has created such rebellious unthrifts, to eternal
condemnation, not, that he is delighted, with their destruction: but, that,
they through their own malice have drawn ye same unto themselves, preferring
the vanity of this world, before the grace, and mercy of God, in Jesus Christ.
Of this eternal and immovable will of God: Paul speaks on this wise: GOD
would have all men saved, and come to the truth, for there is one GOD, and one
Mediator between GOD, and MAN, even the man Jesus Christ, which has given
himself a redemption for all men. And Peter says: GOD is long suffering,
which would have no man lost, but will receive all men to repentance.

What can be more plainly spoken? And, what shall he be that dare set himself
against this? If God therefore, would have no man perish, but would have all
men, by the knowledge of ye truth to be saved, their untruth is manifest, which
say, God would not have all me^ saved, but has created many to everlasting
damnation. But, that our consciences may the more co^modiously be assured out
of ye word of God, touching this fatherly will of him: I will set down, four
most firm arguments, which may abundantly assure us, of the favor of God,
which stretches it self to all men, in eueryplace of ye earth, without al
respect of persons, regions, sexes, and outward conditions.

The first Argument is, The universal commandment of GOD: unto all men: GOD
himself speaks with his own voice from Heaven, and says: Mattth. 3.
This is my beloved Son, Hear him. And Christ sends forth his Disciples
into all the world, Mar. 16.
with this commandment: Go ye into all the world, and proclayme the Gospel
to every creature, (that is) To all men. Who then is so impudent, that he dare
say, GOD in deed, has commanded all men, that they should hear the
Gospel, but in the mean season, he would certain to be saved by faith, but
certain to be hardened, and condemned? They which do so think of God, do
make him worse, then any Tyrant, which should command those things which he
neither wills nor thincketh: and this is to have two hearts, which GOD him
self, highly detesteth, and hates.

The second argument, is, The free, and universal promise of GOD. Come unto
me (says Christ, Matthew. 11.
) all which labor and be heavily laden, and I will refresh you. Mar. 16.
Likewise, He which shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved: but he which
believes not shall be condemned. And Paul says: Every one which believes
shall not be confounded. Heereunto is to be referred the whole ministry of
the Gospel, which is therefore instituted of GOD, to be in this world, that
by the same, men might be brought unto ye true knowledge of God. Christ him
self confesses, that he came into this world, to save sinners: The Son of
man (says he) is come to seek, and save that which was lost.

The third argument is taken, Of the price of the Passion and death of Christ,
which suffices for the sins of all men: He has given him self, 1. Tim. 2.
a redemption for all men. John says: John 1.
Behold the Lamb of GOD which takes away the sins of the world. And
Christ himself says: I, when I shall be lift up from the Earth, will draw
all men unto me. Therefore Paul says: Romans 5.
Grace abounds above sin: because the precious sacrifice of Christ, is
esteemed of so great force, that it wipeth out all sin.

John says: 1. John. 2.
Christ is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of the whole world.

The fourth argument, which assures us of the will of GOD, is: The sealing of
Grace, which is done by the Sacrament of Baptism.

Go ye (says Christ) and teach all nations, Mar. 16.
baptizing them: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. This sealing he has confirmed with his power, and presence in this
world. Of the first he says: All power is given unto me, in Heaven, and in
Earth. Of the last, when he says: Behold I am with you, unto the end of the
world. If therefore, we look back, to the power of Christ: he is able to
bring to pass all things, what so ever he will, in Heaven, and in Earth:
Again, if we look upon the commandment: Christ wills, all nations to be
baptized, that this might be a testimony, that God will remit sins, to all
those which believe, and turn them selves unto him.

To conclude, if we fasten our eyes upon his presence: Christ himself will
appear here, who, baptising with the holy Ghost, woorketh that inwardly,
which, the water, outwardly applied, does signify.

By four immovable arguments, therefore, we have proved, this to be the will of
God: That he would have all men to be saved, as many as turn them selves unto
him, by faith in Jesus Christ. Whosoever, therefore inwardly regards his
salvation: let him steadfastly rest in this will of GOD, which God has not
only manifested in his word: but also, by many means effectually proved and
showed.

Let us therefore conclude, that they teach falsely, which to the slau^dring of
the death, and passion of Christ: do say, that his sacrifice made for the
forgiveness of sins, is not profitable for all men, but for a certain few
elected.

The second error is, of those, which defend that there be certain sins,
which cannot be remitted, for the mirite of the passion and death of Christ.
To this opinion these words of Paul are contrary: Romans 5.
Where sin did abound: there Grace in Jesus Christ, did superabound.
Likewise John, when he affirms, Christ to take away the sins of the
world: gives to understand, that the sacrifice of Christ is of far
greater force to save: then the sins of the whole world are to destroy.
Therefore let us think, that there is no sin greater: then to think, that
there is any sin greater then the grace of GOD in Jesus Christ.

Such was the sin of Cayne, who being overcome with the conscience of his
wickedness, and dispayring said: Greater is mine iniquity than that it may
be forgiven. Gen 3.
But rightly does Augustine answer him. Augu. Genesis
Thou lie Cayne, for the mercy of God is greater, than the misery of all
sin.

He therefore argues God of untruth, whosoever despayreth of forgiveness,
for the heap, and greatness of his sins: he contemns the oath of GOD, who
by an oath confirms, That he will not the death of a sinner, but that he
should be converted and live. For, when GOD beholds thy sin, he therwithall
considers that an infinite price is paid for the same, namely, the Lords
passion.

From whence also peceedeth that voice of the conscience, rejoicing in
Bernarde, concerning the remission of sins: I hold (says he) a most
strong argument, THE PASSION OF THE LORD: for his voice was of much more force,
than the voice of the blood of Abell, crying in the hearts of the elect, the
forgiveness, of all offenses. For, he was betrayed for our sins, neither is
it to be doubted, but that his death is mightyer, and of more force unto good,
then our sins unto evil.

I have sinned (says Manasses) above the sand of the Sea: but thou, (O LORD)
according to thy great mercy, shall save me though, unworthy.

But here some body may object, and say: I have oftentimes promised amendment
of my life, and yet notwithstanding, wittingly, and willingly, I have again
oftentimes sinned: and done against my conscience.

To this I answer thus: This kind of sin is, in the sight of God, horrible,
and dangerous, and many, for the same are condemned, as Saul and many others,
who, by soudaine death are caught from hence, without repentance: but
notwithstanding: Romans 5.
Grace, in our Lord Jesus Christ, abounds above, both this, and all the
sins of the whole world. For, whosoever do rise again from sin, 1. John. 2.
by earnest repentance: they all, for the death, and passion sake of Christ,
do obtain forgiveness of sins. This temptation did so assault the Iewishe
people, that despayringly brusting forth into this voice, they cried out, in
Ezechiel 33. Our sins, and iniquities, are gone over us, and we are waxed
faint in them, How then can we live? Tell them, says the mighty Lord: As
truly as I live, I will not the death of a sinner, Ezechie. 18.
but that he be converted, and live: Turn ye, turn ye from your most wicked
offenses, O ye house of Israel, wherefore will ye dye?

Whosoever therefore is afflicted with the conscience of his own wickedness:
let him remember the greatness of the mercy of GOD, exceeding all ye works of
God: Let him consider, that the will of God is, not to will the death of a
sinner, but his conversion, and life: Let him behold the ransom, thoroughly
paid by Christ, which is far greater, than the sink of all the sins of
whole world: Let him consider the examples of such as have been turned,
after most horrible offenses: as the example of the Thief, of Manasses, and
of many other. Let him beware, least unto the greatness of his sins, he ad
desperation: whereby, the truth of God is denied: than the which sin
doubtless, none can be more grievous. And so let him approach to the Throne of
Grace, and with an earnest heart, for Christ his sake, ask forgiveness:
neither let him cease, by faithful prayer to knock, before that he feel in
his heart, an answer to be given him, by the holy Ghost: which thing
without all doubt shall be accomplished, so that he cast from him, earnestly, the
purpose of sinninge. When the mind is, by this means strengthened, perceiving
the answer of God, by the consolations of the heart: then, a confirmation by
the voice of ye Ministers of the Gospel, and the use of the Lords Supper, is
rightly required. But, he which asks forgiveness, and nevertheless keeps
still a purpose to sin: is a damned hypocrite, which thinks, God to be
like to himself, as which should be moved, and delighted, or else deceived
through hypocrisy.

To the same as long as he shall be such a one: as well the absolution, by the
ministerye of the Church, as also the use of the Lords Supper, does stretch to
his greater dampnation, so far of it is, that he should hope, that any
commodity shall thereof come unto him.

Of the sin Jrremissible, commonly called the sin against the holy Ghost.
BUt, what is then to be said, touching Christ, which makes mention, of ye
12. of Matt. of a sin not to be forgiven: when he says: All sin and basphemy
shall be remitted unto men: but the blasphemy against the spirit, shall not be
forgiven, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

In like manner Mar. 3. Verily I say unto you, that all sins, and blasphemies
shall be forgiven to the children of men: but he which shall blaspheme against
the holy Ghost, shall never be forgiven, but shall be guilty of eternal
offense.

1. John. 5. He which knows his brother to sin, a sin not unto death: let
him ask, and life shall be given him, for him, which sins, not unto death,
there is a sin unto death, for the which (say I) not that a man should pray:
All unrighteousness is sin, and there is a sin not unto death.

Hebr. 6. It is impossible, that they which have been once lightened, and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been made partakers of the holy
Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of GOD, and of the power of the world
to come: If they fall aaway, (and as touching the^ selves crucify the son of
God again, and make a mock of him) that they should be renewed again by
repentance.

Heb. 10. If we sin wilfully, (that is to say, If any do fall away from
Christ) after the knowledge of the truth received: there remains now no
more sacrifice for sin.

1. Tim. 1. I, which before was a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and reprochful,
have obtained the mercy of GOD, because I did it ignorantly through unbelief.

These testimonies of the holy Scripture, do speak of a certain kind of
sin, which, (neither in this world, neither in the world to come) is forgiven.

This sin is commonly called, THE SIN AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST. Of the same,
diverse, do speak diversely, and do thereby drive many into desperation:
whilst being uncertain, they know not, what they shall believe, or do.
Yea, many supposing themselves to be guilty of this sin, are vexed in their
minds, and being entangled, in horrible sorrows of conscience, do live
without repentance. But, he which shall diligently consider the scripture,
and confer amongst themselves, those things, which in the holy Scriptures are
expressed, touching this sin: he shall easily understand, what the substance,
and difference of this sin is. I will therefore explicate, the places of
Scripture even now cited, and thereout I will conclude, and draw forth, a
plain, and full definition of this sin.

EIRST, the saying of S. John distingwisheth, THE SIN UNTO DEATH, 1. John. 8.
(which is otherwise called, the sin against the holy Ghost) from other
sins.

All unrighteousness (says he) is sin, but not unto death. (...).
Item: If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, which is Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Which two
testimonies, do abundantly teach us, that the Sin against the holy Ghost,
is not, a transgression of the Law of God, (that is to say) of the Decalogus.
For, (...).
the word of (VNRIGHTEOVSNES) which John, in this place, uses: does signify,
what soever is committed against the law, which, John, verily, calls sin:
but, not unto death, that is, not against the holy Ghost.

Therefore, here hence we conclude: That, the sin against the holy Ghost,
is not any transgression of the law of God, neither universal, nor
particular, albeit, otherwise, the least offense which is committed against
the law (through his own nature and malice) deserves death everlasting.

Matthew. 12. Mar. 3. Luke. 16^
But Matthew and Mark do show, that the matter of the sin against the holy
Ghost, is THE CONTEMPT OF CHRIST, AND HIS GOSPEL. But yet in that, this sin
is not finished: For Peter in the day of Pentecost, Acts. 2.
received 3000. men repenting, which, had before persecuted Christ, unto the
death of the Cross.

Paul therefore makes a difference, between two sorts of men persecuting
Christ: One, of those which do it ignorauntly: The other of those, which
know, them selves to do euilly, and wickedly. I (says Paul) was a
persecuter, 1. Tim. 1.
and blasphemous against Christ: because being ignorant, I did it through
unbelief. After this manner, others also, have persecuted Christ, and his
Gospel, and yet notwanding have obtained mercy, because they do it
ignorauntly, through unbelief.

Furthermore, Paul, to the Hebrews shows, Heb. 6, 10.
what goes before this sin, before it be committed: namely, To have been
illuminated by the holy Ghost: To have had the true knowledge of the person,
and office of Christ: To have tasted the good word of GOD: And to have been
partaker of the holy Ghost. The Turk, and the Pope, which otherwise are
execrable sinners: (forasmuch as they never possessed the holy Ghost,) have
no such sin, whereby the testimony of the holy Ghost, by whom the truth of
the Gospel was sealed: is cast forth of their hearts.

Therefore Paul also shows in whom this sin is: so, that he is to be said
guilty thereof, which has not only, been abundantly taught, and lightened in
the true doctrine of the Gospel of salvation: But also, which manifestly
sets himself against Christ, and obiecting against him, the reproach of his
cross despises him, and with all his power persecuteth his doctrine, neither
can abide the name of him: but ascrybeth the works of Christ unto the
Devil, as the Pharisees did, to whom Christ imputes this sin of
blasphemy, against the illumination of the holy Ghost. For the Pharisees,
albeit, they had been taught, concerning Christ, by many prophecies, and were
moreover convicted, by the doctrine, and miracles of Christ: yet
notwithstanding they witting, and willing, did persecute Christ, and his
gospel, which, by the lightening of the holy Ghost, they knew to be of God:
and, that which is more, they being rebellious, did not only oppungne Christ,
by quarrellinges, tyranny, and hypocrisy, setting themselves against his word,
which to be true, their own hearts did testify: but also trusted to their
own righteousness, and heap of sacrifices, rejecting the righteousness, and
sacrifice of Christ, which sacrifice alone, takes away ye sins of the world.

What the sin against the holy ghost is
Hereof therefore, we conclude, that the sin against the holy Ghost, is not a
transgression of the Decalogus, nor the contempt, or persecution of Christ, and
the Gospel, through ignorance and incredulity: but, one is then said to sin
against the holy Ghost: When (through wilful rebellion) he sets himself
against Christ, being truly known before: and departs from the Gospel,
which (by the holy Ghost illuminating him) was sealed in his heart: And
persecuteth the Church: with a confidence of his own righteousness, and
sacrifices, the sacrifice of Christ (which alone is the cleanser of sin)
being FINALLY rejected and contemned.

Why it is called the sin against the holy Ghost,
This is the full definition of the sin against the holy Ghost: which has
therefore obtained this name: because, that the man whose heart was before
illuminated in the true knowledge of Christ, by the holy Ghost: does now set
himself against the holy Ghost, and expels him, from him, and attributes
his works unto the devil. For what cause this sin is not forgiven. Paul
shows to ye Hebrews, when he says: There remains no other sacrifice for
sin: than that of Christ alone. Forasmuch therefore as these have FINALLY
renounced Christ, despising his sacrifice, and trusting to other sacrifices:
It is no merual, though they obtain not grace, which only is given by ye
sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ,

Furthermore: If any man demand, and say: What if a man being guilty of
this sin against the holy Ghost, does again turn him self unto Christ,
and does earnestly repent him of his former rebellion, and with his whole heart
ask forgiveness for the merit of the passion, and death of the Son of GOD.
To this, I answer thus with Paul: Romans 5.
Grace abounds above sin. Neither is the hugeness of this sin so great,
but the grace of GOD in our Lord Jesus Christ, is a thousand fold greater. And
forasmuch as it is most certain, that, GOD would not the death of a sinner,
Ezechic. 28.
but that he should be converted and live. I affirm, this sin against the
holy Ghost to be forgiven, to all those which do earnestly repent, and desire
forgiveness, for the merit of Christ.

But here it may be objected, that Christ does manyfestly teach: this sin
not to be remitted, neither in this world, neither in the world to come:
therefore, this sin seems to be greater, than the Grace of God, GOD forbid,
yea, far of be that: It is most firmly to be believed, that ye Grace of
God, does far abound above the sins of the world. Why then is it not
forgiven?

To this, Paul Hebr. 6. makes answer: Because they cannot be renewed again
by repentance. And that, for this cause: because they have utterly denied the
true foundation of repentance, namely, The sacrifice of Christ: without the
which, neither any healthful repentance, or conversion by faith, can be made
unto GOD: neither is there any other sacrifice, which (without this alone) is
able to take away sin.

Repentance, and Remission of sins (says Christ) must be preached in MY
NAME. Wherefore, whosoever does repent, and, with a sure faith, embrace Christ,
and his sacrifice, does most assuredly by faith, obtain forgiveness.

This sin is therefore called IRREMISSIBLE, because, that they which commit
the same, do, for the most part continue in their wicked purpose, and never
fly to the Grace of God, by Jesus Christ our Lord. For, he which imbraceth the
grace of GOD: has not FINALLY renounced the sacrifice of Christ: which alone
remains the cleanser away of all sin. These things I purposed, breefely to
speak concerning the sin against the holy Ghost, because I perceived, many
in this behalf, to be not rightly instructed: and few, hetherunto to have
rightly judged, and plainly to have written, of this matter.

The third benefit.
IT has been spoken hethervnto, of the second benefit of Christ, namely:
That he cleanses us from all sin: but this suffices not, unless: We
also become Righteouse For, inasmuch as (Righteousness) is, the very way to
everlasting life: no man ever obteyneth the same, but he which is Righteous.
Therefore Christ says: If thou will enter into life, keep the
Commandments. But, to keep the Commandments is, to declare him self
Righteous, according to the Law.

And albeit, no man fulfilleth the law of God, as we, before have showed:
neither obtayneth Righteousness by the works of the law: yet, the will of
GOD remains immovable: That none is admitted to the possession of eternal
life, but he which has that righteousness, which the Law requires.

The Son of GOD therefore, came into this world, and took man's nature of
the virgin Mary, and made himself subject to the law, and fulfilled the same:
so, that he has obtained Righteousness by the works of the law. This
Righteousness of Christ, GOD and MAN, suffices in the sight of GOD, being
imputed to all those, which believe in him.

For as by the disobedience of one, we all are guilty: Romans 7.
so, we all, as many as believe in Christ, by the righteousness of one, are
reputed Righteous.

This is the same thing which Paul says, Romans 10. Christ is the end of the
law, to save all those which believe in him. The end of the law, is called,
THE FINAL VVIL OF THE LAW, that those things may be done, which she wills,
and commands: She wills Righteousness, which, when she has gotten, she
rests: neither condemns she any man, which obtayneth the same.

Christ is the end of the Law, not for his own cause: but for theirs which
could not fulfill the law: so that he imputes his own righteousness, which he
has obtained by the law, to all those which believe in him: that the law can
not by any right, either accuse, or condemn them. Therefore Paul says:
Christ is the end of the Law, to save all which believe: (that is to say)
whosoever believes, has that which the Law requires: namely
Righteousness, which is the way of salvation.

Hereunto it makes, which Augustine says: That which the law commands:
Faith obtayneth. And again: Christ has made our sins his: that he might
make his righteousness ours. Therefore, there is now no condempnation (as
Paul says) in them, which are in Jesus Christ, because in them, satisfaction
is made to the Righteousness of the law. It is therefore diligently to be
observed, that we fulfill the law, but not by our woorks, but by the works of
Christ, which imputes the righteousness of the law to us which believe. For
this cause Paul says: We are not under the law: but under grace. Under the
law, we are not, because, the law finds not in us, what she may accuse:
forasmuch as we are in dowed with the righteousness, which she requires.
Christ has redeemed us from ye curse of the law, first, by deriuing into
himself, the pains, upon the Altar of the cross, which we had deserved.

Furthermore, by fulfilling the law: and imputing unto us his own
righteousness, with the which, we being endowed, may appear, in the last day
righteouse, when Christ comes a righteous judge of the quick and the dead. Of
this Righteousness Paul entreats 2 Cor. 5. Him which knew no sin, God made
sin for us: that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Romans 5.
This Righteousness of GOD, is, The obedience of Christ, whereby, he
satisfyeth the law for us.

Therefore, when we hear, or read, That man is justified by faith, without the
works of the law: in the sight of GOD: that is so to be taken, not, that man
by ye works of the law, done of himself, is justified: but, that by faith he
imbraceth Christ, who, by his own obedience, or works, is perfectly righteous
in ye sight of God, and imputes this his righteousness of the law, to all
those which believe in him. Moreover, this righteousness is called the
Righteousness of faith, because it is imputed to the believing: Of Christ,
because he has satisfied the law: Of GOD, because, with the same, he is
pleased, and contented.

Let these things suffice to be spoken, concerning the third benefit of
Christ: namely, his Righteousness which he imputes to the faithful, whereof
mention is also made before, where we have disputed of the true use of the Law.

The fourth benefit of Christ.
THe fourth benefit of Christ, is, HOLINESS, or SANCTIFICATION. For, when
Christ forgiueth us our sins, and takes us out of the Kingdom of the
Devil, and imputes unto us his own Righteousness, he does also therewith,
sanctify us, and imputes his holiness unto us, which are made ye members of
his body. For this cause it is, that John: 1. John. 1. calls the comany of
all such as believe in Jesus (THE COMMUNION, OF THE SAINTS.) Whereon also
depends the article of the Symbol, when we say: I believe in the holy
Church, The Communion of Saints.

But not idle talkers of Christianity.
Of this Sanctification, Christians may boast, against, the kingdom, and
members of the Devil, so that they may worthyly say: that they have fellowship
with GOD the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, and are separated from the
Prince of darcknesse (that is to say) from the Devil, and his members. We
declare unto you (says John) that ye also have fellowship with us: and our
fellowship is with the father, and with the son IESV CHRIST.

With this Sanctification David comfort him self, Psalm. 86. where he
prays in this manner: Keep thou my Soul, for I am holy: O my GOD, save thy
servant, which hops in thee.

Here, first of all, David affirms himself to be Holy. Furthermore, how
this Santification comes, he shows: namely, when, by a sure faith we rest
in GOD, and trust in him alone.

For he which does this: he is spiritually ingraffed into our Lord Jesus
Christ, of whom he obteineth, perfect, and personal Sanctifycation of the
whole man. For, as I have said, the Sanctifycation of Christ is imputed to the
beleuer, as Christ himself teaches in John. 17. I Sanctify my self (says
he) for them: that they also might be holy. This HOLINESS therefore,
consists, in the forgiveness of sins: in the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ in renouncing the Devil: breefely, in faith it self:
which takes fast hold of Christ, with his RIGHTEOUSNESS, and HOLINESS.

With this holiness of man, is also joined, the holiness of the thing it
self, which, for the measure of faith, has also her increasements, and, in
some is found greater, in some lesser, even as faith it self is greater, and
lesser. For, when man conceiueth faith by the holy Ghost, by whose
woorkmanship he is also borne anew, there forthwith is felt the efficacy of
the holy Ghost, which daily innouateth the mind, the affections, the
heart, and to be short, by little, and little, the whole life of the man. He
delivers the mind, by the word, from the darcknesse of ignorance, from
errors, and corrupt cogitations: and afterward, shines into, and lighteneth
the same, with the true knowledge of GOD, with the doctrine of salvation, and
good cogitations: whereby it comes to pass, that the affections being
purged, do by little and little, free themselves, from the unclean desires of
the flesh, and, by ye effectual working of the holy ghost, are inflamed to
good motions, according, as the mind it self, shall be illuminated.

The heart of man in like case, waxes meek, and begins to molifie, and
putting away that natural stubbernesse, sprung from original sin: it
begins to yield, and obey unto God, according to the knowledge, infused,
into the heart, by the holy ghost. To this obedience of the heart, also, as well
the inward, as the outward works of the man, are answerable. Breefely, this
Sanctification consists, in true repentance, and in a right holy purpose: so,
that the man does to this end direct, all the endeavors of his heart, and
mind, that he might obey God, and not to commit any thing upon knowledge, and
wilfulnes, which is forbidden of GOD: more esteeming the will of GOD, then all
other matters of the whole world.

Furthermore, this Sanctification, is sharply assaulted with most grievous
temtations, as being that thing, which of most mighty enemies, the devil,
The secret help of the holy ghost in our stranglings.
the flesh, and the world, is oppugned: whereby it comes to pass, that
oftentimes in this spiritual battle, of the spirit, and the flesh, the
Christian feels the weakness of his own power, so that sometimes he seems to
fall under, yea rather to be cast down to the ground, and utterly as it were
thrown down prostrate: but, in the mean time, by the aid, presence, and
power of the holy ghost, he is lifted up again. After this manner David being
overcome of ye flesh was subdued: and defiled himself with adultery, and
murder: but when he heard the admonitions of the Prophet Nathan (by the
working of the holy Ghost) he was lifted up. The same thing does in like case
happen to many other the holy ones of GOD: so that Paul said not in vain:
Let him which stands take heed least he fall. 1. Cor. 10.
Therefore he exhorts the Galathians Chapter 5. saying: Walk in the
spirit, and fulfill not the lusts of the flesh: for the flesh lusts contrary
to the spirit, and the spirit, contrary to the flesh. And so, the life of a
true faithful Christian, is nothing else, then a perpetual warfare: Prosper.
as Prosper shows in his Epigrammes, when he says: Unto the good, both
battails sharp,
and dangers great, are always rife:
The godly mind, eke ever has,
with whom to fight, and hold the strife.


The which thing daily experience witnesses, and also Christ himself, when he
commands us daily to pray: Forgive us our trespasses, Matthew. 6.
as we forgive them that trespass against us. Solomon says: The just man
sins seven times in a day, and ryseth again. For this difference is
between, the children of God, and the children of the devil. The children of
the Devil through stubbernnesse do sin, and continue in their sins: but
the children of GOD, do sin through infirmity, and are sometime seduced, by
the world, by their own flesh, and by the Devil: but they rise again, and
apprehende the right hand of GOD the father: that is to say, they embrace,
with a steadfast faith Jesus Christ.

The fifte benefit of Christ.
THe fifte benefit of Christ, whereunto al these former are directed, is,
FINAL, DELIVERANCE, and REDEMPTION, so, that afterward no manner of evil,
either of the world, the flesh, the devil, or any other thing, either in
Heaven, in earth, or in hell, is to be feared. This final Redemption is called
in the Scripture, SALVATION, whereunto, GOD, in the beginning created man, and
afterward, by the death, and passion of his Son, redeemed him. This
Salvation has four conditions.

The first is: That we are utterly delivered, from all misery, adversity,
and evils. The second is: That hereafter, we may not fear of any evil to
come unto us. The third is: That we obtain so great good things, that we are
not able to wish greater. The fourth is: That we inioye these good things FOR
EVER: without all impediment and mutation.


This Salvation with her Conditions, we obtain in Christ alone.

These five benefits of Jesus Christ already rekened: these two names, JESUS,
and CHRIST, do contain. The first name, shows him to be GOD and MAN, and the
Savior of the world. The other shows, by what means he is the Savior. For
CHRIST, that is to say, anointed: shows that Christ, is A PRIEST, A KING,
and A PROPHET. A Priest, which by his sacrifice wipeth out our sins, by his
prayer makes intercession to our heavenly father for us: and by his innocence
sanctifyeth us. A Prophet, which teaches us the way of salvation: And lastly,
a King, which takes us out of the kingdom of the Devil, and leads us into
salvation, and joy of life everlasting.

Of the sixth point or Chapter.
THE sixte thing which I proponed, to be known, of our Lord Jesus Christ,
is, of the applycation of his benefits: namely, How we (being made partakers
of them) are brought unto everlasting blessedness.

Our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, being moved, through his divine goodness
toward us, and with a fervent care of our salvation: makes us partakers of
his benefits: By the Gospel: by Faith, and By the holy Sacraments, with which
the holy Ghost is effectually present, and given. Of these three instruments
ordained by GOD, I will speak in order.

The first is THE GOSPEL, which he has commanded to be promulged through ye
whole circle of the world: by the ministry whereof he is effectual, through
the holy Ghost, and (out of all mankind) gathers unto himself, a church,
which he governs, and conserueth, by the doctrine of the Gospel, the
Sacraments, Discipline, and Ceremonies: so, that whersoeuer these four (the
foundation being vncorrupt) are found sound, and perfect, there must of
necessity, be the Christian congregation, although in that outward company,
certain dead members be adjoined, which do boast of the title of the Church
in vain.

In this his Church, Christ offers, (by the ministry of the gospel) his
Grace to all men, according to this his commandment: Go ye into all the
world, Mar. 16.
and preach the gospel to al creatures. Item: Luke. 24. Repentance and
remission of sins must be preached in my name, to all nations. Therefore, when
thou hear (by this voice of the gospel) forgiveness of sins, and life
everlasting through Christ, to be offered unto thee, think thus in thy mind
with thy self: Here Christ offreth me Grace, and Salvation in his word,
which he himself, by the voice of a man speaks unto me: If I therefore shall
obey unto the same, it turns to may salvation: but if I shall show my self
disobedient to this his voice: this hearing (unless I repent) turns to my
destruction) and condempnation. For, even as a murderer guilty of death,
contemning the favor, which he hears to be offered unto him, of a most
merciful king, calls unto himself ye more grievous punishment: so in likecase
if, any hearing the gospel of grace, imbraceth not ye same, is to himself the
author, of heavier punishment, and condemnation. Diligence is therefore to be
given of all Christians, that with high reverence, and attention they may
hear, the healthful Gospel of Christ, and by faith embracing the same,
declare themselves thankful, toward our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. I
will in this place set down, a brief definition of the Gospel.

The GOSPEL (as I may speak in few words) is, a universal preaching of
Repentance, What the Gospel is.
and remission of sins, in the name of Christ. As he himself says: So it
is written, Luke. 24.
and so it behooved Christ to suffer, and rise again, from death the third day,
and repentance, and remission of sins among all nations to be preached in his
name.

This preaching, Christ calls, The Gopell, (that is to say) A joyful
message, by the which are offered unto all men believing in him, as well Jews,
as Gentiles, these good things: namely, deliverance from the curse of the law,
and the wrath of GOD: Remission of sins: salvation, and life everlasting, and
that without all merit of man, for his death, and passion, that whosoever are
made partakers of these benefits, might with heart, mouth, and life, set forth
the honor of GOD.

This definition of the GOSPEL, contains The universal commandment of GOD,
to all men, which who so will not hear, contemns God, and makes himself
guilty again, of death everlasting.

That as the Gospel does offer unto men, forgiveness of sins,
righteousness, salvation, and eternal life: so they, whosoever shall not
receive the same, do remain in sin, unrighteousness, condemnation, and
eternal death.

That these benefits are offered freely unto all men, without al respect of
persons, nations, and humane conditions. For Christ would have all men saved,
as many as desire to obtain salvation, least any should despair, either for
his own unworthiness, or multitude of his sins.

To whom these good things do come: namely, to those, which in a true faith,
turn them selves unto GOD, as now shall be further said touching the same. Let
these things suffice concerning the first instrument, namely, the GOSPEL, by
the ministerye whereof GOD offers salvation to all men. It is at large said
before, How the law is to us, Galla. 3.
a Scholemaister unto Christ, which delivers us from the curse of the law.

The second mean whereby Christ applies his benefits unto us is FAITH. For,
even as on Christ's part, the Gospel is in stead of a hand, by which he
reaches forth his benefits unto us: so, on our part, Faith is in place of a
hand, which receives Christ, being offered, with all his benefits.

But, that it may be understood, what the true nature of Faith is, I will
first set down so manifest a definition of the same, that doubt may be left
unto no man, what the true, and Christian faith is.

Furthermore, I will rehearce, the natural properties of Faith, by which
every one may easily perceive, whether he has the true, and natural faith, or
no. When John Baptist pronounces him which believes in the Son, John. 3.
to have eternal life, he gives warning, that the same is not else where to be
sought. For he which has the son, has the way to everlasting life. The
son is the Way, as he himself says: I am the way. Moreover, He which has
the Son, has the gate of life, according to that saying: I am the door.
Furthermore, he which has the son, has the merit of eternal life. For,
the son did not merit eternal life for himself, to whom, by right, it was
due: but for his, (that is to say) for those which believe in him. Besides
this, he which has the Son, has, with the Son all things. For, Romans 8.
he which spared not his own son, but gave him for us all: how should he
not also give us all things with him? To conclude, he which has the son,
is one with him: therefore, it can not be, but he is verily, and with the Son
heir of eternal life. He which has the son, has eternal life it self,
as he himself says, I am the life.

Therefore, whether thou seek the way of life, or, the Door, or, the
merit, or, the Fountain, and Lord, or everlasting life it self: thou haste
every one of these in the Son, John. 3.
when thou beleeuest in him. And contrariwise: He which believes not in the
Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of GOD abides upon him.

Hereby we may esteem, what the excellency, and utility of Faith is, which
no man can obtain, but he, which being first admonished (by the Law) of
his sin: does feel the greatness of the anger of GOD, and just
condempnation.

Therefore, the Scripture teaches us to be sorry for our sin, so that we
would, that we had never sinned, or offended GOD: and that we should feel, a
true grief, and sorrow of heart for our sins committed. He which is gone
so far forward, he at the length rightly acknowledges, how joyful that
message of the Gospel is, which offers to the believers, Remission of
sins, the favor of GOD, Righteousness, and life everlasting.

But, what is FAITH? These two manners of speaking, namely: To beeleeue in
Christ: And, To believe in the name of Christ, will plainly declare unto us,
the substance of Faith.

The former sentence, namely, To believe in Christ, shows, Christ only to
be the object of Faith, or sure confidence: so, that Salvation is not to be
hoped for, but in him alone.

The latter, namely, To believe in the name of Christ, shows the quality of
Faith, (that is to say) that our confidence in Christ, should be such, as his
name is in the Gospel, and as his doings are, which testify of him.

When as Christ therefore, is, in the Gospel named the Savior of all which
believe in him, very GOD, very MAN, one true and eternal person, and, the
Lamb of GOD, taking away the sins of the world: And many examples do
testifye, that the dooinges of Christ, do answer unto this honorable name,
(as the example of the Thief upon the Cross, the example of Mary Magdalen, of
Paul, Peeter, and innumerable others) it appears: that, true Faith in
CHRIST is, A lively, The definition of the lively and justifying Faith.
and constant confidence of the heart, whereby it is surely decreede, that
CHRIST is the Savior of all those which believe in him, as he which is
able to bring to pass all things which he will, as GOD: which wylleth the
best unto us, as MAN, by the society of nature joined unto us: which must,
as the Mediator between GOD, and us, appointed of the Father: which has
given himself a price of redemption for us, that every one which believes,
might be cleansed from Sin by his blood, might be justified by his
obedyence, regenerated to everlasting life, by his spirit, through the
unmeasurable mercy of GOD the Father, which so loved the world, John. 3.
that he would give his only begotten Son, that ALL WHICH BELIEVE IN
HIM, should not perish, but have life everlasting.

This fuller description of a constant faith, may be drawn more narowe, and
that out of the words of John Baptist: (He which believes in the Son, has
eternal life): in this manner: Faith is a knowledge of Christ, and a sure
confidence of obtaining eternal life through him.

Such was the faith of the Thief upon the cross, Luke. 23.
which from a sure trust said: Remember me Lord, when thou come into thy
kingdom: To whom it was answered of the Lord: This day shall thou be with me
in Paradise. Such was the faith of the sinful woman in the 7. of Luke, which
heard of the Lord: Thy faith has saved thee. In like manner of the Publicane,
Luke the 18. praying on this wise: God be merciful unto me a sinner: And of
David, Psalm. 25. Be merciful unto my sin (O Lord) for thy name sake. A
general rule.
All these do agree to the rule in Psalm. 2. Blessed are all they which put
their trust in him.

Now, after that we have described FAITH, we will recite five properties of ye
same: by which, as by infallible notes, every one may know, whether he has
the True Faith, or no.

The first property of faith is: That it is felt in the heart. The second is:
That it offers it self to be seen, in the outward deeds. The third is:
That it suffers it self to be tried under the Cross. The fourth: That it
overcomes the world. The fifth: That it perseuereth unto the end, 1. Pet. ^.
which is (as Peter witnesses) The salvation of Souls.


The first property of Faith is this: That it lives in the heart of man, so,
that there may be felt, an unspeakable consolation, against the malediction
of the law, the power of death, and the tyranny of the Devil: that there may
be felt, a joy, unable to be told, of the forgiveness of sins, and a
spiritual security, of the favor, and freendship of God: that the dwelling
of the holy Ghost, and his presence in the heart of the man, may be perceived:
that the force of the holy Ghost, stirring up faith to call upon God, may be
perceived: that a burning desire, to obey the will of God, and to resist the
Devil may be perceived: that a spiritual joy of the beginning of the life
eternal may be felt: that thankfulness toward God, may be perceived:
Breefely, wheresoever a Christian faith is in man, there it must needs be,
that she must show forth her self, by true godliness, by a holy porpose of
living well, and by rejoicing in the holy ghost.

Secondly, I affirm this to be the property of Faith: That in outward works
she offers her self, to be seen: For the outward works do bear
witness of the affections of the heart. Therefore Christ says: By their
fruits ye shall know them. It is therefore impossible, that whersoeuer true
faith florisheth in the heart, by the holy Ghost dwelling in the heart of man,
that there should not therewithal be present, good woorks testifying of the
heart. These works of faith, are in general, to eschew evil, and to do good:
so, that faith be the foundation, the beginning, the leader, and gouernesse, of
all virtues, and good actions. For first of all, Faith is the pillar, or
foundation whereupon is stayed, and upon the which is builded all obedience,
virtue, and every good work. Furthermore, it is the beginning, from which, as
from a living fountain, the rivers of all honest works, and doings, do flow
out. Moreover, It is the leader, which holds man in the right way, least he
should decline either to the right hand, (that is to say) to good intentions
of men (as they call them) which will worship God according to their own
wisdom, and traditions: or, unto the left, that is to say, to the works of
the Devil, whereunto this world, with the members of the Devil, has wholly
given, and bound it self.

Yea, Eayth being the Captain of all virtue, and Christian works, never
rests it self, in any deed objected, or set before it, before yt it hear
this word: So the mouth of the Lord speaks: Therefore David through faith
prays in the 25. Psalm. Show me thy ways (O Lord) and teach me thy paths:
And Psalm. 119. he says: Blessed are the undefiled in the way: that is, they
which through faith show obedience unto GOD, so that they go forward in the
right way, declining neither to the right hand nor to the left. Last of all,
faith is also the Gouernesse, directing the whole life of man, and all his
works, to this mark: namely, to the glory of God, the edificatio^ of the
church, and ye utility of his neighbor. All these works of Faith, already
remembered, may be called back, to these four points following.

The first is, a declaration of godliness in the outward works of this life:
namely, in the congregation, and fellowship of the Christians, to hear the word
of God, and to call upon him, openly to profess thy faith, and use the
sacraments: In like manner with thy counsel, substance, and diligence to set
forward the glory of GOD, in such sort, that thou may be known, to be
earnestly affected in the business, and cause of God. This is that, which
David says Psalm. 122. I was glad, when they said unto me, we will go into the
house of the Lord. Item: Because of the house of the Lord our GOD, I will
seek to do thee good. In which words David shows, that he bent himself
wholly unto this thing, that his subjects might understand, that he went about
this thing, with greatest endeavor: that he might show himself to be a minister
of God, in the public congregation of the godly, Which example of David, it
becomes Kings, and princes, magistrates, and subjects, to imitate, that by
this means, they might declare, their faith and piety, toward God.

The second is: The innocence of the private life, so, that every one of us,
even when he is alone, do think himself, to be conuersaunte in the sight of
God, and therefore, to abstain from all wantonness, and iniquity. Hereof it
is, (...).
that God said to Abraham: Walk before me.

For, God does not only see those things, which are set forth to the sun
light: but, he also looks into the inward cogitations of the heart.

The third is, Justice, and Love, to be exercised indifferently, toward all
men: So that every man do, with a good conscience, the duty of his vocation,
that the inferiors to their magistrate, and to others placed in authority,
do yield due reverence, and obedience: again, the superiors and potentates,
do, with counsel, and diligence, assist their equals, and with a fatherly
care, and discipline defend their subjects: and moreover, as much as in them
is, comfort the afflicted, and relieve, with their plenty, the poores
necessity: yea, doubtless, they should esteem al men, to be members with
them in our Lord Jesus Christ. And, therefore, let them be of this mind
toward others, that whatsoever they would to be done to them selves, the
same they should do to them: and never wittingly, and willingly, by any means,
through injury and injustice oppress others: Breefely: that thou do live in
such wise among men, that thou may have among all men, an honest testimony
of the faith, and life of a Christian.

The fourth is: Diligence in each man's vocacation, whether it be in the
Church, or in the householde, or in the common wealth, or in what soever kind
of office, which being, with fedelitie, and honesty performed, does serve to
the commodity of the weal public, and common society. In this behalf, the
rule of Paul Romans 12 is to be followed, by which he commands every man, to
show in his office, faithfulness, and diligence. And, that no man should
forsake, his lawful vocation, both Paul and John Baptist do give counsel:
the Commandment of Paul is this: Let every man abide in that vocation, 1.
Cor. 7.
to the which he is called. John counsayleth: that every one be just in his
calling: When the Roman soldiers flocked together unto him, that they might
be baptized of him, and demanded, what they should do: he had them not
forsake their offices of warfare, or withdraw themselves into the wilderness,
or, to put a Coule upon them, the common covering of slothful unthrifts: but
he answered unto them: Hurt not, Luke. 1.
nor quarrel with no man, and be content with your wages.

Behold here, what fruits of faith among men, John requires of the
Soldiers? Let every Christian set before himself this example, every one in
his kind of life: neither let them unjustly oppress any man, but rather
bestow their diligence, to do justly the works of their vocation, which may be
accomplyshed, with the commodity and, and utility of others. I will therefore
collect five things, as it were points, to the which every one ought to have
respect, in his vocation, that he wander not out of the way.

FIRST: Let the vocation be grounded upon the word of GOD, according unto this
rule: Every office promoting the glory of GOD, and making to the upholding and
beautifiyng of the states ordained by God, (as the political, oeconomicall and
Ecclesiastical states) is commanded by the first and fourth Commandments.

Secondly: Faith and Charity, are the rules of all actions, in each vocation.

Thirdly: If any adversity chance: we must look back to the word of God,
where upon the vocation is founded, and from thence consolation is to be
required.

Fourthly: let the vocation, be always referred to the glory of God, and the
profit of the common wealth, wherein each man lives.

Fifthly: God is to be continually called upon, for, whether the vocation be
more honorable, or more profitable: without the aid of God, nothing can be
either hapily begun, or brought to perfection. Some read Et victum quere
honest.
All these things David in the 37. Psalm. comprehends, in these words: Hope
thou in the Lord, and be doing good, dwell in the land, and verily, thou shall
be fed.

The third instrument, or mean, whereby Christ applies his benefits unto
us, are, the Sacraments, and seals of his grace, and will. But, before that I
come to ye handling of the sacraments of the new Testament, I will weigh two
things, most necessary to be known. The first is, What the custom of God
has been, in opening his will unto men. The other: Why God has given to the
signs, and sacraments instituted by him, their names.

First, therefore, it is to be known, that God, from the beginning of the
world, has accostomed to make open his will, unto men, by two means, namely,
By manifest Word, and By outward Sign: that by this means, he might assist
the salvation of man.

When God had created Adam, and placed him in Paradise, he opened his will unto
him, by express word, to the which he added, a double sign, namely, the tree
of life, and the tree of knowledge of good, and evil: so that if he did obey
the word, he should not wax old, but should eat of the tree of life, and
live blessed for ever: but if he did transgress the commandment of God, and
eat of the forbidden tree of knowledge, he should die.

To Abraham likewise he proponed his word, whereunto he adjoined the external
sign of circumcision, which he called his covenant. Furthermore, he promised
unto Moses, yt he would bring his people out of the servitude of Egypt into the
land of promise: to this his promise, he added a sign: namely, the paschall
Lamb. Afterward God promised, yt he would give unto his people the land of
Canaan to possess, as long as they should obey him, and keep his testament, and
his covenant: to this his word, he also added an outward sign, namely, ye
blood of the red Cow, wherewith the Priest sprinkled the people, and many other
signs which he named by ye name of covenant. Altogether after the same manner,
Christ in the new Testament, promises to the beleuers, forgiveness of sins,
and regeneration by the holy ghost, and adds an outward sign, which in the
scripture is called The Baptism of Repentance.

He promises also that he would offer his body, upon the Altar of the Cross,
and shed his blood for the remission of sins: and here he also adioyneth an
outward sign, which he names his body, and blood, and the new Testament.
And so it is manifest, what custom God has kept, in opening his will unto men,
namely, BY WORD, and BY SIGN: both which he has set forth, to be
perceived with the mind, and senses, that we might be the easilyer and fullier
of his will instructed.

Secondly: It is to be considered, why God has given to the Sacramental
Signs, the names of the things themselves, for whose cause the Sacraments are
instituted. Doubtless, for this cause: that when we do use the outward
signs, we should lift up the eyes of Faith, to the co^templation of ye
heavenly things, of which the outward signs have obtained their names. When
Abraham circumcised his son, the name set upon Circumcision, by God,
(wherewith, he named the same, his covenant with Abraham, and his seeds,) came
into his mind. And Moses when he sprinkled the people with the blood of the
red Cow, thought upon the name of TESTAMENT: which God had given unto this
sign. So in like manner, our Baptism, is called, The Baptism of Repentance:
that we might lift up the eyes of our heart, from the element of water, to the
promise, wherewith GOD seals unto the repentant, his MERCY and GRACE. For
which cause, Baptism is called, the Fountain of Regeneration: that we might
consider, John. 3.
that those which are baptized, are spiritually borne again, by the holy
Ghost. After the same manner Bread is named, the body of Christ, and wine the
blood of Christ, in the Lords his supper: because they do note forth, that
secret meat, which Christ, reaches forth, under the bread, and wine. To be
short: God of his infintie wisdom has given to the Signs, and Sacraments,
the names of the spiritual things, and gifts which by the Sacraments are
signified: that we should not stick in those things, which are seen with the
eyes only, but in those things rather, which Faith sees, and beholds in the
Sacraments.

After that we have expounded these two things of the substance of the
Sacraments in general: we may now be the easilyer brought unto the knowledge
of the Sacraments of the new Testament, of which I will now speak in order.

Of the Sacrament of Baptism.
THat we may the more profitably understand the reason of our Baptism: let us
here in the beginning, see the cause why our Lord Jesus Christ would be
baptized.

Why Christ would be baptized, as well the voice of the father from heaven upon
him, does show: as also, the appearing of the holy Ghost, done in the shape of
a Dove. Matthew 3.


The voice of the Father upon Christ, now newly baptized, was this: This is
my beeloued Son, in whom I am well pleased. Of this voice, Baptism
witnesses. For, this is the chief, and principal end of baptism: that it is
a testimony, or seal of the favor of GOD, toward the Baptized. It is
therefore to be noted, that we which are clothed with Christ, through
Baptism: are grateful, and acceptable unto God, through Christ. Whereunto
Paul also has respect, Ephe. 1. when he says: We are beloved, Matthew. 3.
in the beloved: Yea, God himself says: In him I am pleased.

CHRIST therefore, would be baptized, and use this outward seal of the grace
of God: that (according to the voice of the father) we which are baptized, and
ingraffed into his body, by Baptism, may know, that we have GOD merciful,
and pleased, through Christ. Therefore all the efficacy of our Baptism
depends on Christ.

The appearing of the holy Ghost, in the shape of a Dove, signifies that
spiritual Baptism, wherewith Christ does inwardly baptize: When the minister
of God works the outward Baptism of water, according to the commandment of
Christ. This is that which John Baptist says: I baptize you with water: but
amongst you stands one, which baptizeth with the holy Ghost.

That the holy Ghost appears in the shape of a Dove: the same is a showing
of peace, and reconciliation, made between God, and the party baptized: that
therewithal we might be admonished, what the Arc of Noah did signifye, out of
which the Dove being sent, returned, bringing a Branch of an Olive. Hereof,
therefore we make up the definition of Baptism, in this manner:

BAPTISM is an outward sign, What Bapt. is.
signifying the inward Baptism, which Christ woorketh by his holy Spirit,
to seal in US, THE MERCY, and GRACE of God.

Furthermore, that we may, with the more fruit, be occupied, in the meditation
of this our Baptism: a threfolde signifycation of the same is to be observed.

The first is: that Baptism is, A testimony of Grace. The second is: that it
is, A Symbol, (or token) of secret and spiritual things. The third is: that
it is the Cognizance of our outward profession, and Christianity. Of this
threefolde signifycation of Baptism, I will speak in order.
First, that Baptism is A testimony of Grace, we have proved before. For,
it is an outward seal of the grace of God, testifying, that the party which
is baptized, is sanctified, and (as a sacrifice) consecrated unto GOD: who
regenerateth us, being cleansed and separated, from the devil, and his
society, that we may be made new men, yea, the sons of God himself, whom
he adopteth in his beloved son, our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly: Baptism is A Symbol, (or token) of things, which by his
proportion, or comparison teaches us. August. Epist. 13.
Whereof Augustine says: If Sacraments had not a certain comparison with
those things whereof they be Sacraments, they were no Sacraments at all. So
our Baptism, in the which, man is dipped under the water, and is drawn forth
again, has his spiritual signification, for which, it is called, A Symbol,
or token of things.

Baptism is A Symbol or token of two things, cheefely: namely, Of the
doings of Christ: And of our duty.

Concerning the doings of Christ, it teaches us four things: namely.

What he has done:

Why he has done:

What he does to them which are baptized:

And moreover, what he will do unto them.

How then, does Baptism teach us, What Christ has done? It puts us in
mind of the history of the three days, Parasceues.
namely, of the day of the preparation, in which Christ suffered: And of the
Saboth, in which Christ rested in the Sepulcher: And of the day of Easter, in
the which, Christ, (having overcome death) rose from the dead.

Therefore, Christ calls, his death, burial, and Resurrection, BAPTISM,
Mark. 10. where the sons of Zebedee, James, and John, required, that the one
might sit on the right hand of Christ, the other on the left, in his glory:
to whom Christ answers: Are ye able to drink of the Cup, which I shall
drink of, and to be baptized with the Baptism, wherewith I am baptized? As
though the Lord should say: ye all aspire to joy, and glory, but ye must of
necessity suffer somewhat, before that it shall be lawful to enjoy this glory,
and gladness. Most bitter death falls in, over whom we must triumph,
before we come unto this glory. Therefore, to be sprinkled with the water in
Baptism, notes forth the death of Christ: to tarry under the water,
shadoweth forth his burial. To be drawn from the water: represents the
glorious Resurrection of Christ. As often therefore, as we remember our
baptism, or be present at the Baptism of others: let us call to mind the
history of the three days, Of the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ.

But if you demand, Why Christ has done this? Paul answers, and in two
words knitteth together the whole matter, in Romans 4. Christ (says he) dyed
FOR OUR SINS, and was raised again, FOR OUR JUSTIFICATION. For, as Christ,
by the merit of his death, wypeth out our iniquities: and by his blood
cleanses our consciences from all mortal, sin: So, in like manner, by his
resurrection from death, he declares himself to be righteous, and in all
respects perfectly pure, according to the law of God. Therefore David in the
16. Psalm. says: Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, neither shall thou
suffer thine holy one, to see corruption. Christ also means the same thing,
when he says in Ioh. 16 The holy Ghost shall reprehend the world of
Righteousness, because I go to the father: that is to say, Herod, Pilate, and
the Jews, deny me to be righteous, and without all sin: but when they shall
see me, not to be overcome of death: my resurrection from death, shall be a
testimony of my righteousness, before them. For that cause Paul says: Romans 4.
He was raised again for our iustifycation: that is to say: that by his
rising again he might declare his own righteousness, which righteousness,
he gives, and imputes unto all those which believe in him.

Furthermore, What Christ does in Baptism John shows saying: He baptizeth
with the holy Ghost, Mat. 3.
and with fire. And Paul, when he says: He cleanses us in the fountain of
water, Ephe. 5.
through the word. Whereas John affirms, Christ, to baptize, With the
HOLY GHOST, and With FIRE: he shows that Christ gives in Baptism, the
holy Ghost: who, by his presence is effectual, in the word, and Baptism.

What the holy Ghost woorketh in the party which is baptized, according to the
commandment of Christ: is showed by the word, Fire: For as the Fire alters
things sometimes by burning out, sometimes by inflaming: So the holy Ghost,
alters man by regenerating, burns out by mortifying the old man: inflameth
by quickening, and raising up the new man. And hereof it is, that Paul says:
Christ cleanses us in the fountain of water, through the word of life. Ephe.
5.


In which words he joins together three things, namely, Outward Baptism,
which he calls The fountain of water. Then, Christ, who cleanses us
inwardly with his blood, and holy spirit: And lastly, The Word, that is, The
promise of Christ, whereupon the whole efficatie of Baptism does depend.

For, Baptism is not effectual, for the water which the Minister of God
sprinckleth, neither for the words, which are recited by him: but all the force
of Baptism flows from the most ample promise of Christ: who (with his holy
spirit, and with fire) baptizeth him, which, with the external element of
water, is sprinkled.

But although this be the institution, and ordinance of Christ: yet
notwithstanding, let us not think, his hand to be shortened, to baptize
spiritually without water, those which are partakers of his promise, (that is
to say) all the Infantes of the Christians: and those cheefely, which
departing in the mothers womb, do not touch the outward Baptism. Therefore
godly Parents should not despair of the salvation of such Infantes, neither
with vncomelynesse, and contempt, bury them in a ground (which the common
people call) not consecrated: but let them surely persuade themselves, yt these
are in the same covenant, with the children of Abraham, as Paul in Gallath. 3.
plainly teaches. Therefore, as Such as came of his flesh.
the fleshely children of Abraham, which departed this life, before the eight
day of Circumcision: were not condemned: but by the virtue of the promise, and
covenant of GOD, were saved: so, also after the same manner, the spiritual
Children of Abraham, (that is to say) the infantes of all the Christians, are
not condemned, if they decease before baptism: but are saved by the efficatie
of the promise of God, and by invisible baptism, wherewith Christ baptizeth
them, who, (by his death, and precious blood) has redeemed them.

With this consolation, let christian Parents lift up themselves, whose
Children, depart hence, either in the mothers womb, or forthwith after the
birth, before they be made partakers of Baptism. Yet, I would not, that any
should hereof take occasion to protract to Baptism of Infants: yea rather, I
am an exhorter, that as soon as they be new borne, they should have a regard
to have them sealed, with this outward Symbol (or token) of salvation, and
therewithal to be assisted, with the prayers of the godly, which shall be
present at the Baptism.

It remains now to be explycated, What Christ will do to those which are
Baptized. This thing he himself shows in his last commandment, which,
ascending unto heaven, he gave to his Apostles in these words: Go, and Baptize
all nations, whosoever believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved, but he that
believes not, shall be condemned. For, even as they which were in the Arc of
Noah, were preserved from the flood: so, whosoever does earnestly stick to the
covenant of this outward Baptism, are delivered from the everlasting flood,
(that is to say) from the pains and torments of Hell, by JESUS CHRIST.
Breefely, as he which is baptized is drawn from the water, so Christ will
take us from all calamities, and bring us into his kingdom, where, with him we
shall reign in all eternity.

After that we have said, How our Baptism, is a Symbol, (or token) of the
actions of Christ: we will now see, How it also admonishes us of our duty
(that is to say) what we should perform unto GOD: what we owe unto our selves,
what we must suffer: And what we must look for: How we must pass from
miseryes to salvation: For of every of these parts of our duty, our Baptism
does admonish us.

But, What shall we perform unto GOD? This Christ teaches us, when he
says: Baptize them, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. In which words, he comprehends the principal end of
Baptism: which, (it were convenient) we should always, and continually have
in remembrance. For, this is the most simple, and plain meaning of these
words: I Baptize thee, in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost: that is to say: I Baptize thee to this end cheefely: that thou
should acknowledge, confess, invoke, worship, and honor, this only true
GOD, namely: The Father, the Son and the holy Ghost: The Father, which so
loved thee, yt he has delivered his own only begotten son, to death for
thee: The Son, which dying for thee, cleanses thee from all sin, by his
precious blood, shed upon the Altar of the cross, for the forgiveness of thy
sins, and, which, moreover clothed thee with his righteousness, yea, makes
thee a member of his own body, so that by his means, thou art called the
son of God. The holy Ghost also, who regenerateth, and sanctifyeth thee unto
life eternal: that, thou being knit unto God, may with him enjoy salvation,
without end. This is the most simple (and plain) sentence, of ye words of
Baptism, which being gathered out of the holy scriptures, I comprehend in
this one little form of speech: I Baptize thee, In the name. For in the word
(NAME) is contained, both, a confessing of GOD: and beside, whatsoever this
Confession requires of man.

By these things it is easy to be perceived, what manner of covenant
between God, and man, baptism is God promises unto man, forgiveness of
sins, righteousness and everlasting life, and this his promise he seals by
Baptism, the party which is baptized, does again, by faith, bind himself
unto God, and promises that he will deny the Devil, with all his works: and,
by a sure faith, invocation, worshipping, fear, and, in all things, by due
obedience, cleave unto GOD. 1. Pet. 3.
For this cause Peter calls Baptism, A COVENANT, wherein a mutual promise is
made, of God demanding, and promising grace to the party baptized: and again
of him which is Baptized, answering and affirming, that he will constantly
abide, in the mutual knot and covenant.

In the second place Baptism warns us, What we should do to our selves.

As we are dipped in the water of Baptism, and tarry under the water, and are
drawn from thence again: so we should mortifye sin, and choke the vicious
affections, desires of sin and corrupt concupiscences in us, and rise again
in newness of life. Of this thing Paul Romans 6. does admonish us, where he
inueigheth against those, which supposed, that liberty to sin was granted,
because that Paul had said, Where sin did abound, there Grace did more
abound: Whom he confuteth with these words: What shall we say then, shall
we abide in sin, that Grace may abound? God forbid. Romans 6.
How shall we which are dead to sin, (that is to say) (whose sin is
dead) live any longer therein? Know ye not, that we which are Baptized
into JESUS CHRIST, are Baptized to dye with him? (that is to say, we which are
baptized do, in Baptism put on Christ, whose death does effectually, kill,
and keep under sin in us, that it should not reign in us.) We are
therefore buried together with him by Baptism, for to dye, (that is, that
sin might be dead in us,) that even as Christ was raised up from death, by
the glory of the father, so we also should walk in newness of life.

For, if we be ingraffed into death, like unto him, so shall we also be
partakers of his resurrection. Knowing this, that our old man, (that is, the
corrupt nature) is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
abolished, (that is, the corrupt affections) that we should no more be
servants unto sin.

And so it appears, how Paul, by the reason of our Baptism teaches us, to
mortifye sin, to destroy the wicked concupiscences, and to walk in a new
life. Whereunto he also directs the scope of his whole disputation, which he
sets down in these words: And so do ye also esteem your selves to be
dead unto sin: But, to live unto GOD, in Christ Jesus our Lord. Let not
sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey thereunto by
the lusts thereof. As often therefore as the corruption of our nature, shall
provoke us to sin, let us call to remembrance our Baptism, which
admonishes us of innocence of manners, and newness of life, to the glory of
GOD, through JESUS CHRIST.

THIRDLY, Baptism teaches us, What we must suffer. For, even as Christ,
(whom, in Baptism we do put on) was baptized with the cross: so we also,
as long as we remain in this world, let us prepare our selves, to the Cross
and adversities.

Yea, GOD will by this means have his adopted sons, to be made like to his
only begotten son: that they may reign together with him in his glory. This
is that which Paul says in Romans 8. If we be sons, then are we also heirs,
Romans 8.
the heirs I mean of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, so that if we
suffer together with him, we shall also be gloryfyed together with him.

And Paul adds there this consolation, that the Cross works for the best,
to such as love GOD. Of this cross of the godly, he also speaks in the
Epistle to Timothy: Whosoever (says he) will live godly, in our Lord Jesus
Christ, Time.
shall suffer persecution.

The history of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, sets before us, three
kinds of crosses, unto which may be referred, the diverse sorts of all
calamities, which may happen unto man in this life.

The first Cross, is the cross of Christ, which is seen in the middle,
between two others. The second, is, of the Thief, hanging on the right hand.
The third, of the Thief hanging on the left hand.
Christ, (as much as concerns his own person) suffered, being innocent: but
both these Thieves, suffered justly, for their offenses. But he which hanged at
the right hand: repented under the Cross, and being converted unto Christ,
obtained comfort, and salvation. The other at the left hand, continued stiffly
in his malice, and dying without repentance was condemned.

After this same manner, it also goes at this day. The greatest part of the
godly Christians, do suffer persecution for righteousness sake, which
happens to many holy Martyrs, whom Christ pronounces, blessed, in Matthew.
5. Blessed (says he) are they, which suffer persecution for righteousness
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: Blessed are ye when men revile you,
and persecute you, and shall falsely say all manner of evil against you for my
sake: Rejoice, and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven: for so did
they persecute the prophets which have been before you.

Many do also suffer, as the thief, upon the right hand. These are they,
which, for their certain offenses are punished of God, namely, by taking away
their goods, Children, powers, health, body: or else do fall into the hands of
the Magistrate, and are drawn unto punishment, as also unto this Thief, it
happened.

These being oppressed with calamities, and punishments, do confess,
themselves to be justly punished for their sins, and flying unto Christ, do
(with a firm faith) desire forgiveness of their offenses. And by this means
they obtain pardon of God, which accepts their cross as a sacrifice
pleasant unto him, through Jesus Christ. The example of this Thief, is, by
the singular wisdom of God, set down before, all wretched sinners, thieves,
murderers, and others whatsoever: which for their evil deeds are punished:
that the same might be an evident testimony of the favor of God, wherewith he
receives al, with howsoever infamous kind of punishment, they be punished in
the sight of the world, so that they, with a constant faith, do fly unto
Jesus Christ.

But, that the wretched offenders, which are to be punished for their
offenses, may know by what mean they may obtain the favor of GOD: I will
set down certain sure Articles according unto which, they may direct their
cogitations.

FIRST of all, the wretched sinner, which is to be punished for his manifest
offenses, shall not hypocritically make sclender his sin, neither by
conferring of his sin, with ye sins of other offenders, deceive himself:
but rather, he shall examine himself, and weigh (not in deceitful balances)
the heuinesse of his iniquity. Let him consider who it is, whom he has
offended, namely, GOD, a righteous Judge, from whom nothing can be hid:
therefore, let him esteem himself worthy, who deservedly, (for the inormitie,
and fylthynesse of his sin) is unworthy, the name of a man.

Such manner of cogitations do breed in man, a knowledge of himself, and
stir up a feeling, and taste, of the bitterness of death, and hell.

SECONDLY: Least (feeling the sorrows of Hell,) he should despair of the grace
of God, for the greatness of his sin: as Cayne, Judas, Saul, and many
others have done: these five things are to be thought upon.

First: The promise, and good will of God, saying: I will not the death of a
sinner, but that he may be converted, and live.

Furthermore: the commandment of God, earnestly commanding repentance, under
the rigor of obedience, which all creatures are bound to perform unto him.
O ye Sons of men (says he) turn ye unto me. Item: Let every one be turned
from his wicked ways. And Christ says: Matthew. 11.
Come unto me, all ye which labor, and be heavily laden, and I will refreshe
you.

Thirdly: Let him set before him, the death and passion of Jesus Christ, who,
with his sufficient ransom, has made satisfaction, for the sins of all
men. Augustine says: The mercy of GOD is greater, than the miserye of all
sins.

Fourthly: Let him set before his eyes, the examples of those, which being
converted, have been received into grace: as Adam, David, Manasses, the
Thief, and as many as ever have required pardon: so, that God has never
rejected any, earnestly repenting.

Fifthly: Let him consider, the testimony of Grace, namely: Baptism: whereby
God testifyeth that he will remit sin to all those, which (by faith) turn
themselves unto him. It is written Marck. 1. that John preached the Baptism of
Repentance, for the remission of sins: that is, he taught, Baptism to be a
testimonye, and seal, by which GOD testifyeth, that he (without all respect
of persons) remitteth sin, to all those (which by faith) turn themselves
unto Jesus Christ.

THIRDLY: the wretched offender being exercised, with these five
considerations, let him now give place to the word of God: by the efficatie
whereof, (the holy Ghost working) the sparkle of Faith, is conceived, in the
heart of man.

FOURTHLY: Faith being conceived: forgiveness of sins is to be desired,
for the precious blood of Christ, which he shed upon the Altar of the
Cross, for the sins of the whole world. In this praying, faith (by little,
and little) increases, and together therewith, man feels in his heart the
answer of the holy Ghost, which brings to pass that he most assuredly
persuadeth himself that all his offenses are forgiven him.

FIFTHLY: Pardon of sin in the sight of GOD, being obtained: let him with a
quiet mind submit himself, to the punishment deserved: and together
therewith, let him desire of God, fortitude of mind, that he may patiently
suffer the pains, laid justly upon him, for his wicked deeds: yea, let him
also give thanks unto God, which has drawn him to tempoporall punishments
in this world: that he should fly from eternal condemnation: and that he
should here in the body be punished, that with the Thief he may commend his
soul unto God.

The third kind of Cross, whereof the history of the passion of Christ
makes mention is, The Cross of the Thief hanging at the left hand. After
this manner they do suffer, which repent not, neither call upon God: but
contemning the grace, and sacrifice of Christ, do dye in desperation, and are
for ever condemned. They which in such sort do suffer for their offenses, and
fly not, by a sure faith, unto God: this temporary Cross, is unto them, as
foreshowinges of the pains eternal, wherewith they shall be plagued, without
all mitigation, and comfort in Hell with the Deuilles, and all the company of
the condemned. Hitherto, we have entreated of the three sorts of Crosses,
whereof the history of the Passion of Christ, makes mention.

Now, let us moreover join hereunto, a general admonition: which may profit
all the godly, in what soever manner they shall be afflicted in this world.

Whosoever is oppressed with the cross or calamity, let him respect these
four things in order.

In the Devil, let him consider, Lying and Murder. In himself let him weigh,
Sin, and VVretchednesse. In GOD, let him reverence, Judgment and Mercy. In
the Gospel let him seek counsel, and help.


First: Let him consider in the Devil, Lying, and Tyranny, who as by lying he
slew our first Parents: so now every moment, with lying, and tyranny, he
lies in wait for all mankind.

Peter.
For, (as Peter says) He goes about like a roaring Lion, seking whom he may
devour. He verily seeks all, but he deuoureth only those, who^e he intangleth
in his snares of Lying. For this unclean spirit continually indeuoureth, to
make all other unclean with him. He infecteth the mind with lying, and
erroneous doctrine: He shakes the heart, with the tempests of corrupt
desires: He bewitcheth the will, with the shadow of commodytie: to conclude,
he indeuoreth to defile, with wicked acts, the whole life of man, that he,
that he at the length might have man (being spiritually slain) fellow, and
partaker of eternal damnation. This consideration of the study of this wicked
spirit, the enemy of GOD, and mankind: should stir up an hatred of sin,
and breed in the minds of men, an abhorring of the filthynesse thereof.

Secondly: Let him weigh Sin, and wretchedness in himself, in even
balances, and let him think that the misery which he suffers, is a
deserved punishment, for his sin. And, by the greatness of the misery, let
him esteem the enormitie, turpitude, and multitude of his sins. Let him
consider, that he by his sin, has offended the cheifest, and infinite
goodness: where of let him conclude, the present calamity, to be away to
everlasting misery, unless he be otherwise helped. In this cogitation the
whole man treembleth, of which thing we may see many examples, in many
Psalms, cheefely in those, which they call, the Penitential Psalms, in
which, David plainly expresses, the great dolors, and vexations, wherewith,
as with tempests, he is ouerwelmed for his sins.

Thirdly, Let him reverence in God, Judgment and Mercy. It is the part of the
most just judgment of God, to punish sin in all men: but of his Mercy to
punish, not to destroy, but yt he might save: so that we do not contempne the
Medicine. Whereof Esaie says: Trouble gives understanding. Item: The
distress wherein they cry, is a doctrine unto them. Breefely, God punishes By
IVDGEMENT, that he might save By MERCY: as it may be seen in Psalm. 51.

In the word of ye Gospel, Let him seek counsel and remedies. The Gospel
sends all afflicted sinners to this only Physician Jesus Christ, which
calls unto him, and saves all offenders. This counsel is most excellent,
because neither in Heaven, nor in earth, any is found, which is able to heal
the wounds of sin beside this only Jesus Christ.

Furthermore: this very word which gives us counsel, does also minister
help unto us, and heals the wounds of sin, in such wise, that we may be
helped by Christ, so that we believe in him, and with a constant Faith, pray
with David, saying: Heal me Lord, and I shall be whole. In this place again,
are to be called back into our minds, the five Articles, of whom mention is
made a little before.

The Final causes, wherefore GOD will have his Church to be subject to the
Cross, are many, of which these are the chief.

First, that we may learn, that those good things which God has promised to
his Children, are not to be looked for in this world: but that we should think
of the true country, to the which we are called: so that we might ease all
the adversities of this life, by the meditation of the joy to come, and life
everlasting. For, if all things should succeed unto the godly, in this life,
according unto their desires: they would not be affectioned with the desire of
the good things promised by Christ.

Secondly: that, man, (by the Cross, as by a bridle) may be restrained: who,
through the corruption of nature, is otherwise prone to sin. Hereof the
Psalmist says: Hold their chawes with bit, and bridle, which draw not nigh
unto thee.

Thirdly: that the Cross might be a sensible preaching of repentance. For,
even as the conscience assenteth to the law, reproving sin: so also by the
Cross, we are admonished to repent, that we may be saved.

Fourthly: That the cross may overthrow al man's presumption, and confidence
of the flesh, and teach us to cleave with a firm faith unto GOD alone, and to
call upon him, Psalm.
according to his Commandment: Call upon me (says he) in the day of
tribulation, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Let these
things suffice to be spoken touching the Cross or calamity, of which our
Baptism does admonish us.

IN THE FOVRTH PLACE Baptism teaches us what we should look for. For even
as the party Baptized, (being sprinkled with the water) is drawn from the
water, and as Christ himself (after his passion and death) entered into his
glory: so we also do take our journey from the strange wandering of this
world, unto salvation, and life everlasting: a most evident testimony whereof,
Christ has given, namely Baptism, to all the believers.

IN THE FIFTH PLACE, Baptism teaches us, that our life in this world, is
nothing else than a Pilgrimage of three days. We suffer, we are buried, and we
shall rise again, at the sound of the last Trumpet, when Christ shall say,
Arise ye Dead.

THE third signifycation, of Baptism, whereof we have made mention above, is,
that it is a Souldierly marcke (or Cognizance) whereby the Soldiers of
Christ are known, which have given their names unto him, and taken an oath,
that they will fight under his standerde, against the Devil, and his kingdom,
namely, Sin.

The Soldiers of Christ, are discerned, by four notes, cheefely, from those
which are in wages under their Captain, the Devil.

The first, and most surest note of the Children of God is, Faith, invisible,
and only known unto God, with her privy, and inward fruits in the heart of
the man.

The second is, The open profession of Faith in the mouth, before all the
world.

The third is seen, In Godliness, and Honesty of life, when the Christian
does so order his life, that ye same may be a manifest testimony of the faith
which lies hid, in the heart of man.

The fourth is, the note of the body, namely, Baptism, whereby we profess our
selves, to be the servants of Christ. Hereunto also makes the sacrament of the
Lord his Supper, whereof we will now speak a few words.

Of the supper of the Lord.
I Have said before, that the Sacraments of the new Testament, do occupy the
third place accommodating, or applying of the benefits of Christ. Forasmuch
as we have hitherto spoken of Baptism, it remains now that we entreat of
the other Sacrament, namely of The supper of the Lord. God grant that it may
be to the glory of his name, and the wholesome instruction and profit of all
the godly. I will remove all, unprofitable questions, and diversities of
opinions, which do more hurt, then profit: and set down only those things,
touching the most holy Supper of the Lord, which I have learned, and drawn
out of the fountains of the sacred Scripture. And that the same may be done to
the greater fruit, and profit of the christian Reader: I will comprehend this
whole doctrine, in a few, and certain assured points, and Articles.

The first, and cheifest thing, that we must know, concerning the Supper of
the Lord, instituted of Christ himself, under the visible Symboles of Bread
and Wine, is: That Christ, (in the same night in which he was betrayed) did
institute this Sacrament, that the same might be (amongst all his) an
everlasting monument of his Passion, in which he delivered his body to death,
and shed his blood upon the Altar of the Cross, for many, for the remission of
sins, as he himself says: This is my body, which is given for you: This is
my blood, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins. Item: Do ye
this in REMEMBRANCE of me.

Secondly: The Supper of the Lord testifyeth, that they which use the same
rightly, are united, and as it were incorporated into Christ, and that
spiritually, according to the words of Paul. 1. Cor. 10.
The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the partaking of the blood of
Christ? The Bread which we break is it not the participating of the body of
Christ? That is to say, whosoever does eat the body of Christ, and drink his
blood, he (so that a living faith be not wanting) abides in Christ, and
Christ in him.

Thirdly: the Supper of the Lord teaches, a spiritual education in the body
of Christ, which is accomplyshed, whilst we use his Supper. For even as we
are, by the blood of Christ, cleansed, and, by the holy Ghost in Baptism,
regenerated: so we being cleansed, and regenerated, are spiritually fed, and
nourished, by the benefit of the body, and blood of Christ: rightly using the
Supper of the Lord, according to his own institution.

Fourthly: the Supper of the Lord is, a testimony of the new Testamente, (that
is to say) of A NEW COVENANT, between God, and man, touching remission of
sins, whereby God testifyeth that he will receive into favor, and forgive
sinners, (for the merit of the death, and passion of Christ) to All which
believe in HIM. Therefore he himself says: This Cup is the new Testament in my
blood: that is, This Cup is a firm, and immovable seal of the most ample
promise of god concerning ye forgiveness of sins.

Whosoever therefore, (with a true, and lively faith) uses this Sacrament:
receives the testimony of God himself: whereby he testifyeth, that he has
delivered his son, shedding his blood upon the Altar of the Cross, for the
remission of sins, that through him, as many as believe in him, may obtain
salvation.

Fifthly: The Supper of the Lord, admonishes us of the secret, and spiritual
communion, whereby we, which do partake this Sacrament together: are united,
(as it were) into one body. Of which thing Paul says: 1. Cor. 10.
Because we being many, are one bread, and ONE BODY: inasmuch as we are all
partakers of one bread. This knitting of the Christians into one body,
depends heereon: that we all, (as it is already said) are united to the body
of Christ, by the partaking of his body, and blood.

Sixthly: The Supper of the Lord requires, mutual love between the
Communicantes: whereby the mystical members of the same body, (as we have
said) should, with heart, word, and work, perform duetyes one toward the
other. This Love of Christian people, which, (from the head CHRIST) flows
into the rest of the members (that is to say, the Citizens of his Church) does
not take away the degrees of persons, but rather confirms the diversities of
callings in the Congregation: of all which, there is one mark, namely, The
Glory of God, and the commodity of thy neighbor. Whosoever feels, not in
his heart, the sparckle of this mutiall dilection, and, (without a purpose of
well doing to his member, (that is to say to his neighbor) comes to the
Supper of the Lord: it were better for him, to abstain utterly from the
Sacrament. For who would not affirm that manne to be mad, and out of his
mind, which would set his own members at strife one with another amongst
themselves, so that the hands might pluck, out the eyes, or cut of the feet?
I would to GOD, that Christians could, after the same manner, mark their own
madness, which they do manifestly betray, and show forth, whilste (through
mutual hatreds, and contentions of mind,) they set themselves, one against
another.

Seventhly: The Supper of the Lord is a pledge, and signification of our
resurrection, life, and eternal salvation, and that by the power of Christ
risen again from the dead. For, whatsoever has been hitherto spoken, of the
Supper of the Lord, are al to be referred to this principal end: that they may
be unto us in stead of a pledge, and sealing of life everlasting through
Christ, whose members we are made. And so that is fulfilled which Christ
says: John. 6.
He which eats my flesh, and drincketh my blood, has eternal life, and I
will raise him up in the last day.

By these Articles, which we have brought abroad out of the holy Scripture, to
the declaring of this doctrine of the supper of the Lord: every man may easily
understand, how needeful it is (with a high godliness of mind, and reverence)
to approach to this supper, and to prove him self, before he eat of this
bread, or drink of the Cup of the Lord. For, 1. Cor. 10.
(as Paul says) He which eats, and drincketh unworthily, eats and
drincketh his own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords body. Mar. 16.
Christ affirms the same thing of the Gospel: He which believes not (says
he) shall be condemned.

And Augustine says of Baptism: Even as he which unworthily eats the body
of the Lord, and drinks his blood, eats, and drincketh his omne damnation:
so he which receives Baptism unworthily (which thing many Jews do at this
day) receives to himself damnation, and not salvation.

Furthermore, Least any man should communicate the Supper of the Lord,
unworthily, let him follow, the counsel of Paul 1. Corinthians. 11. Let a man
prove himself, 1. Cor. 11.
and so let him eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup, for he which
eats and drinks unworthily, eats, and drinks damnation to himself, not
descerning the Lords body: (that is to say) he calls unto himself the
punishment, and Judgment of GOD.

What therefore is the true manner of proving himself? The same Paul
prescrybeth, 2. Cor. 13. when he says: Try your selves whether ye be in faith
or no, prove your own selves. Know ye not your selves, that Jesus Christ is
in you? Hereby it appears that the true trial of proouing consists in
this, that a lively faith be truly felt, and the presence of Christ in us,
by the virtue of his spirit, stirring us up to the study of godliness.
Breifely: he is truly proved, which (reverently in the fear of GOD, in true
repentance, in true confidence, and with an holy purpose,) comes to this
Supper. And contrariwise, he which is without the true fear of God, and
earnest repentance, and wants lively faith, and an holy purpose: the same
eats, and drinks judgment to himself both temporal, and eternal,
unless he be again (by faith in Jesus Christ) converted. And I nothing
doubt, but the greatest part of most heavy calamities, every where reigning
in many places, is therefore sent: because they be so common which
participate the supper of the Lord, without true, and earnest repentance.

Paul writes, that the Corinthyans were plagued, because they touched
irreverently the holy Supper: 1. Cor. 11.
For this cause (says he) many are feeble and weak among you, and many are
fallen a sleep: For if we had judged our selves, we should not have been
judged: but when we are judged of the Lord, we are instructed, that we should
not be damned, with the world. I would to God, that many at this day, would
not build upon a feeble foundation, and be much deceived with their own
opinion: which then suppose themselves to come woorthyly to the Supper of
Christ, when they have confessed their sins before the priest and obtained
absolution of him. He which believes, him God absolueth for the death, and
passion of Jesus Christ. For, he which believes (says John) has eternal
life. John. 3.
If therefore the believer has eternal life, he is also (without all doubt)
absolved from all his sins. For, Absolution, is no other thing, than a
deliverance from sin, which is in the power of GOD alone.

Therefore, the Ministers of the word, cannot absolve him, (which is without
the fear of God, a lively faith, and a purpose of good living) from the least
offense. And he which is such a one, and yet notwithstanding, dare require
absolution of the Minister of the word: to him (forasmuch as he is before God
a liar, and before the Minister of God, and hypocrite) the absolution turns
unto damnation. For, this outward absolution answers to the faith, and
purpose of the innermoste heart. The Priest is the minister of God, therefore
let him behave himself according to the commandment of his Lord, neither let
him arrogate greater power unto himself, then he has received of the Lord.
He has power to show forth, as well, remission of sins to all the believers,
as also everlasting condempnation to those which turn not themselves unto
God. These are the keys of the Church of Christ, so that if any Minister of
the Gospel, should go beyond these bounds, he shall not carry this rashness,
unpunished of God.

What is then to be thought, of private confession, and outward absolution?
There be many, and weighty causes, why the holy fathers did institute this
talk, or Colloquie, which is had between the party confessing, and the
Minister of the word.

The first: that the rude, and ignorant, might be the more profitably
instructed, being demanded, Meaning as well the hearing of the holy
Scriptures, as the interpretation of them.
of every principle of the Christian Religion. For, when as many, do many
years, hear the holy preachings, and yet do very little or nothing at all
profit: such, verily shall with greater profit, talk together with the learned,
and godly minister of the word, which may inquire of what matters they
stand in doubt, and may teach them those things, whereof they be ignorant.

Secondly: That in this talking together, the profiting of the youth, and
young persons might be tried. For it is the part of a good Pastor, not
only to teach openly: but also (according to the example of Paul,) to make a
trial at home, how far every one of his hearers have gone forward in the
course of godliness.

Thirdly: that a reason of the faith might be required of those, of whose
Faith, and Religion, just doubt might be had: and that unto such as in any
heresy were stubbernely obstinate, the Supper of the Lord should be prohibited.

Fourthly: that in this Colloquie, the doubtful consciences, and such as for
the scruple of their sins were unquieted, might by doctrine, counsel, and
consolation, be relieved.

Fifthly: that in this private talk, they might hear the voice of the
Gospel, pronouncing forgiveness of sins to those which believe in Christ.
For in as much as Christ says: He that hears you, hears me: it is much
auayleable to hear the Minister of the word, (in the name of Christ according
to his commandment) showing forth the remission of sinnnes.

Private Absolution may be made in this manner.

Because (my Brother) thou do not only confess thy self to be a sinner,
and guilty in the sight of God, And art sorry that thou haste offended God, but
also beleeuest the promise of the Gospel, concerning forgiveness of sins,
namely, That unto the believer is given eternal life: I declare unto thee (in
the name of Christ) the forgiveness of thine offenses, In the name of the
Father, of the Son, John. 8.
and of the holy Ghost, Amen. Go in peace, and sin no more. Hitherto we
have heard, of the last thing, which I propounded was to be considered in the
Messiah, our Lord IESV CHRIST, namely: How we are made partakers of his
benefits But because there be many found, which protract repentance unto the
last breath of life, I will yet ad hereunto, and declare two things.

First: touching the causes, which should inuit us, to the ripening (or
hastening) of Repentance.

The other, by what mean a Christian may persevere unto the end, that he
loose not faith, and the benefits of Christ.

What then shall inuit us to the hastening of Repentance. Albeit there be
many, and most weighty causes, which should move us, that we should not
delay repentance, which (alas for sorrow) many do at these days with great
security: yet notwithstanding, I will at this season bring forth ten
Arguments at the least, whereby every man may woorthyly be moved, betymes to
repent.

The first is, The uncertain end of this life, For, no man knows in what
hour, in what moment, or in what manner he shall depart from hence. This
uncertainty should woorthyly move us to hasten repentance. Christ going
about to exhort his disciples to watchfulness, takes an Argument hereof,
when he says: VVatch, and pray, because ye know neither the day nor the
hour. And in Luke the 12. the Lord propounds a Parable of a rich man being
careless, and delaying Repentance.

The ground (says he) of a certain rich man, Luke. 12.
brought forth plentiful fruits, therefore he thought with himself saying,
what shall I do, because I have not rowme wherein to gather my fruits
together? and he said, thus will I do, I will destroy my Barnes, and build
greater, and thither will I gather together my fruits and my goods, and I will
say unto my soul: Soul, thou haste much goods laid up in store for many
years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him,
Thou fool, this night will they require again thy soul from thee, whose then
shall those things be which thou have prepared? So is it with him that
hoordeth up riches to himself, and is not rich toward GOD. Hereof
afterward the Lord infers this: But rather seek ye the kingdom of GOD,
and the righteousness thereof, and afterward all other things shall be given
unto you.

Item: In such an hour as ye think not, will the Son of man come. And
Augustine says: God gives thee a space of amendment, but thou more love
delayment, than amendment: Thou drawest the time a long, and of the mercy of
GOD, thou promisest unto thy self many things: as though he which has
promised thee salvation through repentance, had also promised thee long life,
How know thou what the morrow day will bring forth? Thou say well in
thine heart, when I shall amend me, God will forgive me all mine offenses: We
cannot deny, but that unto the amended, and converted, God has promised
favor: But in what Prophet read thou, that because God has promised
favor to the amended, do thou also read, that he has promised thee long
life?

This uncertainty therefore of the term of this life, should admonish us of
the ripening (or hastening of repentance, least sooner then we think, we
fall upon the darcke mountains, as Jeremy speaks, and so be overwhelmed
with the just Judgment of GOD. There have been many which hoped, that they
might continewe forth their life unto old age: but in the middle flower of
their age, they have fallen down flat. Many have looked for a quiet end of
life: but have perished in exile. Many have purposed to have the comforts of
their friends and acquayntaunce in the agony of death: but they have
miserablye perished among enemies.

Many have promised to themselves a time, in which, (lying in their bed they
would mourn, and repent: but they have been soudainly taken forth of this
life. Seneca very notably admonishes: when he says: Trust not to this quiet
calm, for the Sea is turned back again in a moment: and in the same day,
where the ships have played, they have been drowned. Briefly: seeing no man
knows whether he may call back again the breath sent forth of his
nosethrils: they do very foolishly, which (with the contumely of God) do
procrastinate repentance, as if they had the momentes of time in their hands.

The second is: A most pernicious heap of wicked offenses, of the anger of
God, and of punishments, is, (by delaying of repentance) gathered together.
Whereof Paul Romans 2. says: But thou after thy hardness, and heart which
cannot repent, heapest unto thy self, wrath, against the day of vengeance.
For, the sin, which is not suppressed by repentance, forthwith, by the
weight thereof, draws into another, and again from that into another: until
an infinite heap of sins be laid together.

And as a most naughty root, beeinge not plucked up out of the ground, does
continually grow, and budde, more, and more: Even so sin, when thou
cherishest it, does get daily new strength unto it, until a monstrous flood
of sins have overcome thee.

For he which in this sort abuses the mercy of GOD: is wicked against GOD:
as he which has purposed to serve the Devil a longer time, than GOD. By this
his security he also offends the Angels of GOD. For as they do rejoice at
the repetaunce of the ungodly: so with out doubt they are sorrowful for their
vnrepentaunce. It greeueth them that so noble a Creature of God should perish
through her own fault.

He is also cruel against himself. For he will rather be evil than good,
or rather be sick than sound, or rather be the bondslaue of Satan, than
the freeman of Christ, or rather be a beggar in heavenly good things, than
rich: Briefly, he will rather perish, than be saved, than the which cruelty,
doubtless none can be greater. I cease to speak, that he is injurious
against the creatures of God: Romans 8.
Whereof Paul affirms, that the creatures do mourn, because the wicked do
abuse them, and do wait for the freedom of the glory of the Children of God.

Oedipus perceiving the incest committed with his own mother, plucked out his
own eyes, that by this means he might at ye least, avoid the sight of the
Sun, and all the creatures. For he saw that all the creatures of God, were
beholders of his unspeakable, and most filthy wicked act: and that they all,
with one consent did condemn him. In like manner at this day whosoever do
live wickedly, do perceive themselves to be accused of all the creatures
before the tribunal seat of God.

The third is: The enstraunging of the mind from God, And final Induration.
For by how much ye longerrepenta^ce is differed: by so much is it become the
harder. For even as the matter goes in the diseases of the body: so is it also
in the disease of the mind, which is sin. For, by how much the longer the
medicine of the body is differed: by so much the disease is made the more
dangerous, and is the hardlyar cured, yea sometime, through continuance it
becomes incurable, as it appears in the disease of a Canker: where if the
malady be not forthwith in the beginning kept under by fire, or iron: it is
to be feared, least by little, and little, it will grow so strong, that it
will utterly take the man away. This is the same thing which Solomon says: A
young man walking after his own ways, when he is old, shall not go back
from the same. And Jeremy says: If the man of India may change his skin,
and the Cat of the Mountain her spots: Consuetudo diuturna, altera fit
natura.
ye also may do well when ye have done evil. For daily custom is made
another nature. This danger of Induration should woorthyly move us to the
ripening, (or hastening) of repentance.

The fourth is: An evil conscience, than the which, there is nothing more
grievous, nothing more heavy, nothing more miserable. They which are delighted
in the mire of sin: are compelled, to bear about with them, this witness of
their own wickedness. An evil conscience (says Bernarde) is her self a
witness of our offenses, she is the Judge, she is the tormentour, she
accuses, she Judges, she punishes, she condemns. Albeit the same be cut of
for a time, and as it were, seared with an hot iron: yet notwithstanding she
will sometimes show forth her self, and (if not before) yet (at the least)
in the agony of death, she will be present as a thousand witnesses: she will
accuse, she will condemn, she will punish. For, an evil conscience is a
certain divine testimony, imprinted in the minds of men, of the Judgment
hereafter to come upon the obstinate, and of the punishments which they shall
justly sustain.

The fifth is: Offense, and guiltiness of the sins of others. For in an
offense given, there is a double evil, namely, The deed, and the example. As
through the fact by it self, the law of God is violated: so by the example
thy neighbor is hurt, for immitation, or following thereof. Hereof proceeds
that lamentable exclamation of Christ: VVo be unto the man, by whom the offense
comes. And again: He which offends one of these little ones, which believe
in me: it were better for him, that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and
that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. Paul pronounces those to sin
against Christ, and to destroy the weak brethren, which use indifferent
things with offense. But what is to be thought of him which (either through
erroneous doctrine, or wicked life) leads many into destruction? That so
great wickednesses do abound in the world at this day, comes it not
hereof, that one thincketh that lawful for him, which he sees another do?
whom by and by another immitateth, and him another, until (through the
scabbednesse of one member) the whole body almost of the Church being
infected is deformed.

The sixth is: The privation of spiritual riches, of which, only the holy in
the Church of Christ are partakers. For, so long as manne lives without
repentance, he is without the joy of the holy Ghost, he is destitute of the
peace of conscience, he is deprived of spiritual consolations, in his misery:
neither is he partaker of the prayers of the godly Christians.

The seventh is: The delicates (or daynties) of the Devil. For, as the Angels
in heaven, do rejoice over man when he repents: so the Devil is thoroughly
imbrewed, with highest delights, and (as it were) with most pleasant
pleasures, when he sees men, (specially those which have given their names
unto Christ) to live without repentance. For, the sins of men are (as
certain of the fathers say) the delicate dishes of wicked Devils.

The eight is: (...).
The consideration of the tragical examples of many men, which, for their
contumacie have been cast, of GOD into pains eternal. In the number of
whom, are Cayne, Pharao, Saul, Achitophell, Judas, Iulianus, and infinite
others. We see also how many nations, which have heard Christ, and his
Apostles have perished: being turned away to pernicious errors of the Devil,
the Turk, and the Roman Antichriste.

Ninthly: Let this cogitation also enter into thy mind: That Repentance is
not so the work of man, as the the gift of GOD: which if thou contemnest,
whiles it is, (day from day, and often) offered unto thee, of God: it is to be
feared, that he does oftentimes cast his precious pearls before swine.

The tenth is: The condition of late Repentance: For it is oftentimes rightly
said: Sera peenitentia raro vera.
Late Repentance is seldom true. He is not to be judged to repent, which
after he is not able to sin, does feign repentance. And Augustine says:
The repentance which is required of him, only which is about to dye: I fear
me least that same repentance do also dye. I say this, (not that I do deny
the mercy of God to be given unto those, which being about to depart forth of
this life) do repent: but that we may consider how dangerous it is to
protracte repentance unto the last gasp of this life.

It seems good unto me to collect breefely, these reasons: the consideration
of which, will keep every of us in the fear of God, that we abuse not the
greatness of his mercy to our own destruction.

Almighty GOD bend our hearts unto true, constant, and healthful
Repentance, that we may be the Children of God: and that we may all, and
singular (with old Symeon, from the botom of our hearts, when we shall
depart forth of this life,) joyfully sing: Now Lord let thy servant depart
in peace, according to thy word, etc.

How shall a Christian persevere unto the end, that he loose not Faith: and
the grace obtained in our Lord Jesus Christ. Wise, and prudent Physicians,
being called to the sick patient: do apply themselves to do two things.
First, they bend all their diligence, (by their art, and counsel) to take
away the present disease. Furthermore, that (unto the patient restored to his
former health,) they may prescribe an order of living: least they fall back
again into their disease, and so become the authors of their own
destruction. The examples of these, will I follow: and because I have hitherto
brought (forth of the word of God, the word of salvation) remedy against
sin, death, and damnation: I ^^al now also bestow counsel, by what mean it
may be accomplished, That he which has received Christ with his benefits,
may also continue, and obtain those everlasting good things, which Christ
has merited for all those which repose their confidence in him. If I shall
therefore say with Paul: (Fight thou a good fight, holding faith and a good
conscience: 1. Tim, 1.
) I have comprehended the whole matter. But if any man go forward further, to
say: Now is Faith and a good Conscience to be retained?

I answer: The Scripture names The fear of God, The hyeste, and cheifest,
Eccleae, 1.
wisdom of the Children of God. For, this fear contains us in duty, and
obedyence toward GOD: in whose sight we walk. It has four conditions.

First: It is heedeful, least it should offend God.

Secondly: It does diligently execute the things which are commanded it.

Thirdly: It carefully auoydeth all lyinges in wait, deceiptes, and subtilties.

Fourthly: It seeks and imploreth aid, against his enemies.

First of all, he which fears God, does busily take heed, that by any means,
he offend not GOD. For this cause The fear of the Lord is called in the 19.
Psalm; PVRE: because that he which fears God, considers what evils he was
subject unto by reason of sin: he considers, ye Christ has suffered his
most bitter death, to take a way sin: he considers that whether he wake,
or sle^ ^o, or walk, eat, or drink etc. he is co^uers at harthe sight of God.

Furthermore he remembers that infinite glory, whereby he is adopted into the
society of the Sons of God, that he might show himself in all things
obedient, to his most loving father: he considers that sin is the mark of
the Children of the Devil: he considers himself to be a member of Christ,
and partaker of that holy fellowship with GOD the father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, and so forth with all the elect of God: he considers that
Sin is spiritual Adultery, breaking the marriage knotte, which is between
the Soul of man, with her Bridegroom our Lord Jesus Christ: he considers,
that it is not comely, that he should turn the Temple of GOD, into the
habitation of the Devil: neither that he ought to expel the holy Ghost
forth of his heart, whose benefits so exceeding, and many he has
effectually proved: He is at a point, that he will not deal traitorously
against his Lord and redeemer Christ, to gratify the Devil: He considers
that he must so trade over his life: that (through any manifest wickedness)
he be not an offense to any, or that through him, the Gospel be not evil
spoken of.

These, and such other considerations will breed in the heart of man, the
fear of God, and a study to avoid sins, and fallinges against the
conscience. GOD grant that every one of us, may continually bear about with
us, in our hearts, these considerations.

Secondly: He which fears GOD, Obeys the Commandments of the Lord: For,
as the Psalm says: He has great delight in his commandments: (that is to
say:) He yields due reverence, and obedience unto GOD, acccording to his
Commandments, with his greatest pleasure of mind. From this true worship,
(or service) of GOD, the Papists have many years hither unto, fowlye erred:
which do rashly teach, that God is to be worshipped with the precepts of
men: and do bind all the worshipping of GOD, to the Priests, and Monckes of
their order: whom (with manifest deceiptes, notwithstanding and for lucre sake)
they do bouldely affirm, to serve God aright, only: and to have also saleable
works of supererogation.

I will therefore add somewhat concerning this matter, whereby every man may
learn, rightly to frame his judgment: touching the true worship (or service)
of God.

Of the worship (or service) of GOD.
The definition of the true service of God.
THE WORSHIP, (or service) of God is, A work commanded of GOD, wrought
through Faith, (principally) to the setting forth of the glory of God. In this
definition, there be three things, which in the true worship of God, are
necessaryly joined together.

First: The matter (or material part) which is, A work commanded of God.
Secondly: The cause namely, That the same work be done of faith, in Jesus
Christ. Thirdly: The end, namely, The glory of God, which the worker
respects, that by this means he may declare himself obedient, to his
heavenly father.


That this worship must be, A work commanded of God, The proof of the
definition.
he himself in the 20. Chapter of Jeremy teaches us: Walk ye in my
Commandments, and not in the Commandments of your Fathers. And Christ
when he says: In vain do they worship me, teaching the doctrines, and
Commandments of men. That is to say: They think me to be worshipped, when
they go busily about those things, wherein man judges the worship of God to
consiste: but they wander far wide, and loose all their labor.

And Paul manifestly condemns all will worshippings, Collo. 2.23.
that is to say, all those worshippings, which men invent, of a good intention,
as they call it. Hereby, this rule is established: That no worship, (or
service) is acceptable unto God, A general rule to be observed.
but that which GOD himself, in his own word, does ordain, and commend unto
man. For, on the word depends the pureness, and holiness, of each work.

Furthermore, that Faith is necessaryly required, to the substance of this
worship, is evident heerby: because God requires a pure, and sincere worship:
which cannot be yielded of any man, whose heart is with all abominable
filthynesse defiled and corrupted in the sight of God. Paul affirms, the
hearts of the unfaithful to be unclean, and defiled: therefore it must needs
be, that their works (albeit they appear fair, and beautiful in the sight of
the world) are abominable in the presence of God. Romans 15.
Wherefore, to the Romans Paul says: Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.
And to the Hebrews. It is impossible, without Faith, to please God. But, Heb.
11.
what then woorketh Faith? Faith purifyeth the heart of man: for so says the
Apostle: By Faith purifying your hearts. But this thing comes to pass,
(not that Faith of her own nature obtayneth that efficatie:) but that the
consciences of the faithful (as the Apostle speaks) are sprinkled with the
blood of Jesus Christ: 1. Pet. ^
wherewith they are cleansed from all their deadlye offenses,

Moreover, that the worship (or service) must (principally) respect the glory
of God: Paul teaches saying: Do ye all things to the glory of God For,
inasmuch as we are created, and also moreover redeemed, that we should worship
God: doubtless it becomes us to yield due worship unto God, for his
commandment sake. A work therefore which is done after this manner,
(According to the commandment of God,) (proceeding from Faith) and (unto the
glory of God): is called a holy, a pure, and so a worship, (or service)
pleasing God. Whether therefore, this sort of work, be inward, or outward,
a high kind of work, or a base: it is notwithstanding judged a spiritual
service of God, because it proceeds not from the flesh, but from the spirit
of faith, which has respect to ye glory of God. But wheresoever any one of
these three is wanting: there the work of man deserves not to be called a
service, or worship grateful, and acceptable unto God. That Pharisie of whom
the Gospel makes mention, and that Courtior Cornelius, of whom it is written
in the Acts of the Apostles, gave alms: by the benefit whereof, many were
relieved and comforted. Here, both of them do one and the same works, yet
notwithstanding of ye almose of these twain, ye difference is great. The
almose of the Pharisie, were not ye worshipping of god, because they neither
proceeded from Faith, neither tended to the glory of God.

But Cornelius, albeit he was not fully instructed in the knowledge of Christ:
yet notwithstanding, forasmuch as he believed, and hoped for salvation, and
bestowed his alms through the commandment of God, unto God his glory, and
the comfort of the poor): his alms were, a pure, holy, and acceptable
worship, (or service) unto God. Therefore the Angel says, to Cornelius Acts.
10. Thy prayers and thy alms are come up into remembrance in the sight of
GOD. David, and Scipio, do both fight against their enemies: the war of
David was a worship, or service of GOD, but not the war of Scipio.

For David having the Commandment of God, believes, and holds battle, to
the glory of God, and the defense of his people. But Scipio (inasmuch as he
wanted both the commandment of God, and Faith, neither sought the glory of
God) his battails were only wicked, and cruel butcheryes of men, in the sight
of God.

After the like manner two Maidens (of the which two, one fearing God, the
other indewed with no fear of God (albeit they two be occupied about one, and
the same work, as cleansing of garments, yea, or wyping of shoes, or doing
any other commandment of their Maistresse: yet notwithstanding, only the
works of the maiden which fears God, are the worshipping or services of God,
forasmuch as they are done of faith, according to the precept of God,
commanding obedience of servants toward their Masters: but the works of
the other, being the woorks of a wicked life, (albeit they do outwardly
appear more excellent) are not the worshippings (or services) of God,
forasmuch as they are defiled, with the uncleanness of the heart, and inward
filthynesse.

The like judgment is also to be had of other doings. And verily, no work
(albeit it be glorious, and beautiful) may be called The worship, or service,
of God, unless, the same be 1. Commanded by GOD, and 2. be done of him
which believes, and fears God, 3. unto the honoring of his name. Let this
suffice to be spoken concerning The woship (or service) of God: whereby it is
easy to understand, what is to be thought of the Masses, Vigilles, Rosaryes,
and many such innumerable trifles, and inventions of that Antichriste of Rome:
which he dare utter, under the title of holiness, and the worship of GOD,
against the manifest verity of the whole Scripture.

THE third condition of The fear of God, is, that he which fears God, Does
studiously beware of deceipts, and lyings in wait for him. Hereunto makes
that saying of Syrach, Chapter. 33. No evil shall come against him, that
fears the Lord, but in the time of temptation, GOD will uphold him, and
deliver him from evil. Amongst many enemies, with whom a Christian must have
conflict, there be three chief, which bend themselves to hinder his salvation,
namely, The Flesh, The world, and the Devil.

The Flesh, (that is to say) The prudence, and wisdom of man, will take in
hand, either to reform God himself, and prescribe a manner of worshipping
him: or else by her concupiscences, and pleasures, goes about this thing, yt
she may utterly turn away the whole man from God.

Flesh, and Blood is said, to will to reform God, and to prescribe an order
of worshippinge him: when man appoynteth any woorship for God, which is not
commanded of God, as it is done in the papacy: and will have this to be
observed, as a rule immovable. (That whatsoever is done of a good intent,
pleases GOD. A common rule of the Papists.


Against these, the fear of God does set it self: and considering such manner
of suggestions, to be deceipts of the Devil: acknowledges GOD to be wiser,
than that he needs, or will be taught of duste, and ashes. He therefore,
which fears God, thinks thus, of good intention, as they call it: If so
be, that good intention be directed by the word of GOD, it proffiteth: but
if not, it is dangerous, and if it fight against the word of God, it is
then, plainly hurtful, and pernicious. Whosoever therefore instituteth a
woorshippe, (or service) diverse from the commandment of God, he sins
four fold.

First, he becomes guilty of declininge away from God, because he forsakes
the rule of the true woorship of God, namely, the word of God.

Furthermore: He incurreth the fault of rashness: for that he dare be so
bold, to bring in a woorship not commanded by God.

Thirdely: He imprinteth into himself a note of horrible presumption: in that
he supposes himself to increase the woorship of God, beeyond that which god
himself has commanded.

Fourthly: He sins in giuinge example, whereby others are invited to the
like superstitions. If any man does require examples of of this matter: he may
find great plenty, not only among the Papists, but also, peradventure, among
our selves. Let every man therefore take heed, that he attempt not, or
institute any thing, without the commandment of God.

Furthermore, Flesh, and Blood do also use the Counsel of their inward, and
household guest, and the sundry delights, and pleasures of the body.
Intemperantie, and Incontinentie indeuoureth to turn away the whole man from
God.

But against these things, THE FEAR OF GOD opposes it self, and on the one
part, repeateth often the examples of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his holy ones,
and on the other part reconeth up the unhappy falls, and miseries of those
which have declyned from God: of which matter, we have even at these days
manifest examples.

THE WORLD in like manner, lies in wayt for the Children of GOD, whom, (by
wicked counsels, and examples, by honors, pleasures, riches, and
prosperity of things) it goes about to seduce from God: and vpbraydeth to the
Church of Christ, not only her Cross, and tribulations: but also
persecuteth, and kills as many as do confess Christ.

Against the privy deceiptes, and open injuries of the world: the fear of GOD,
sets, The Counsel of GOD, The example, and will of Christ, Efficatie, and
joy in the holy Ghost, The heavenly riches of life everlasting, The
Consolations of the holy Ghost, under the Cross, and the victory of salvation
in Christ Jesus: which all the godly shall fully obtain, when Satan with his
members shall be cast into the pains, of Hell, everlasting.

Moreover THE DEVIL, with lyinge, and murder assayleth Christian people.

Against him fights the fear of GOD, with the swearde of the Spirit, namely
the word of God: beeinge assured to obtain the victory through our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, as in this fourth member shall now further be said.

THE FOVRTH Condition of the fear of God is, That it requires aid against
these his enemies, The Flesh, The World, and the Devil.

Of this matter Syrach: in Chapter 40. makes mention: The Fear of the Lord
(says he) wants nothing, neither needs it any help. The most notable,
and chiefest refuge against all the enemies of the Christians, is earneste, and
feruente invocation of the true, and omnipotent GOD. Which thing Solomon
confesses, when he says: The name of the Lord is a most strong Tower, the
righteous flies unto it, and shall be exalted. And GOD himself in the Psalm
says: Psalm. 50.
Call upon me in the day of tribulation, and I will deliver thee, and thou
shalt glorify me.

Because therefore the cheifest forte of Christians, in all adversities is,
faithful Prayer: I will show in few words, what is to be esteemed of
CHRISTIAN PRAYER. Neither do I think it to be needful to refute that
deuelishe error, which the Pope has brought in, of the Invocation of
Saints, which is nothing else, than a mere blasphemy of Jesus CHRIST, the
Son of GOD. For inasmuch as GOD in his word, has expressly commanded,
that we should trust unto him alone, and call only upon him, and that we
should not give this honor unto any creature: doubtless they which do
otherwise, do grievously offend, and suffer themselves to be fowly seduced,
by the instigation of the Devil, from the true Mediatoure, and Intercessour,
IESV CHRIST. But he which fears GOD, Ihon.
obeys the commandment of GOD, (whereby he charge, that he himself
only, be called upon,) and trusts to the promyses of God, and first of all
to that of Christ, promising that Whatsoever we shall ask in his name, we
shall receive it, so that we ask in a sure faith, nothing at all doubting of
his promises.

Of Christian Prayer.
What then is Christian Prayer?
CHRISTIAN PRAYER (is not a bablinge of many words, The true definition of
Christian Prayer.
or much talk, as Christ in Math. 6. shows, that the hipocrites falsely
supposed:) but, It is an inward groninge of the heart, whereby the mind of man
is lifted up unto GOD: And either gives thanks unto him, for benefits
(through Christ) received: Or requires somewhat in the name of the only
Mediatoure Jesus Christ, surely perswadinge himself to be heard of God.

Moses prays, his hands beeinge lifted up unto Heaven, no moving of his
lips being seen. For, he cried in heart, and the Lord answered him saying:
Why cryest thou unto me? And David says: Unto thee (O Lord) have I lift up
my soul. By these two examples it appears, that true prayer is not a vain
noise of the lips: but a fervent groninge of the heart, requiringe help of GOD.

To what end then do we use a recital of words, we bend the knees,
knock the breast, and in the time of praying, lift up our eyes unto Heaven?
We use these outward gestures, that the heart of man may be stirred up to
pray earnestly: that our cogitations may be the more bente, to the requiring
of the things: that GOD, with soul, and body together might be honored: and
that publicly, (with body, and mouth) we might profess our faith in GOD.
Whereof Augustine says: Although the invisible will of him which prays be
known unto God, neither needs he any tokens to open the mind of man unto
him, which knows the speaking of the heart: yet notwithstanding, man uses
the voices, and members of his body, that by prayinge in such sort, the
affections of man may grow the more humbler, deuouter, and feruenter.

How is the heart of man in the time of prayinge lifted up unto God? That is
done (as it were) by two wings: of the which two, one is THE CONSIDERATION
OF THE MERCY OF GOD, The two wings whereby we are lifted up in prayinge.
the other is, THE SVRE CONFIDENCE IN THE MEDIATOVRE our Lord IESV CHRIST.

The Consideration of the Mercy of God consists in this, that GOD himself
has commanded this woorship of Invocation, and has promised, that he will
hear them which call upon him: and also (after his hearing, and delyueraunce)
requires thankfulness.

These three poinctes are joined together in the saying of the 50. Psalm: Call
upon me in the day of tribulation (that is the Commandment) And I will
deliver thee, (the promise of hearing) And thou shalt glorify me, (whereby
thankfulness is required). Therefore, when we pray, we must not only have
respect to the Commandment, and promise of GOD: but we must also think upon
thanks geuinge, which consists in yielding obedience unto God.

Hereby it is euidente, that whosoever prays, keepinge a purpose to sin:
the same may not think, that he shall obtain any goodness: but rather, by
his prayer to call upon himself the plagues of God, for his unthankfulness.
For so says the Psalm. 66. If I had inclined unto wickedness with my heart,
the Lord had not heard me.

And in the 1. John. 3. 1. John. 3.
If our heart reprove us not (that is to say, if we be free from an evil
conscience and purpose of dooinge evil,) We have trust to Godwarde, and
whatsoever we ask, we shall receive of him. James t^ (...) Ye ask, and
receive not, because ye aske^ ^^e, even that ye may consume it upon your
c(...) ^^^scences.

Therefore, let the Christian w(...) about to pray, follow the rule given of
Paul in the 2. of Timoth. 2. viz. Let every one which calls upon the name of
the Lord, depart from iniquity.

THE OTHER VVINGE whereby in the time of prayinge, the heart of man is lifted up
unto GOD, is, ASVRE CONFIDENCE, in the Mediator our Lord Jesus Christ, which
has Or laid down, viz. in the 16. of John.
given unto his Disciples this most sweet promise: Whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my name, he will give it you.

In this most ample promise of Christ, two things are chiefly to be
observed namely, the universal sign (WHATSOEVER) and the manner of
Invocation, (IN MY NAME.)

The universal promise is to be restreyned, to a certain kind, that the
sentence of Christ may be this: Whatsoever ye shall ask, (that is,)
Whatsoever ye, being the Children of GOD shall ask of your heavenly Father,
(that may be proffitable for your salvation, and Commoditye) the same he will
give unto you. So S. Ihon also declares the same, in the 1. Ihon 5. when he
says: Whatsoever we shall ask ACCORDING TO HIS WILL, he hears us. For,
it beeseemeth not good Children, to require any thing of their Father, which
might be contrary to the fatherly will. For, if a son does require of his
Father a Scorpion, or a serpent, or, a thing any way hurtful, surely it is
against the will of a father, neither will the father give that thing, which
the son requires. Let the Children of God therefore, keep these two rules:
The first is this: When we require of GOD, those good things, which we may
use either well, or ill: let us ask those things, with Condition, saying:
Grant me (O Lord) this, or that thing, (if it be, auayleable for me,) and
if it hinder not, those things, which are far more better, and excellent. So
in times past, the holy Martyrs prayed, and we also at this day, after the
same manner, do submit our selves to the divine pleasure: when we pray
against, either pestilence, war, or other punishments of GOD: or beseech God,
for the obteyning of health, and the necessaries of this life.

The second rule is this: When we desire of GOD those good things, which
we can not abuse: those things are to be required without all Condition. Of
this sort of good things, are, The knowledge of God, the increase of faith,
true godlynes, patience under the Cross, and other gifts like unto these. The
foundation of this rule, is, the knowledge of the will of God, who would have
al men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, 1. Tim. 2.
as it is at large showed before.

THE OTHER THING which I said was to be noted, in that most sweet promise of
Christ, is, THE MANNER OF INVOCATION, which is expressed when he says: (In my
Name,) that is to say, Whatsoever ye shall ask in the knowledge, and
Confidence in me: the same, the Father will give you, for my sake, which am
your advocate, intercessour, and Mediatoure, with my Father, and your Father:
yea, the Father loves you, for my sake, because ye are my members, yea
rather, my brethren, and his adopted sons.

Furthermore, of what sort the knowledge of Christ should be, and what
manner of Confidence, our confidence in him should be, we have declared
before: therefore, I will now, only give admonition of this thing, namely, How
we should be affected, as often as we do hear this promise of Christ:
(Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you:) For
it conteyneth, both, manifold doctrine, wholesome admonitions, and effectual
consolations.

The Doctrine is manifold: For, first, it teaches, that all immagination of
our own woorthynesse, is to be excluded from our prayers. For, when, we
pray in the name of Christ: we acknowledge, Christ to be only worthy, for
whose sake we are heard of God. Moreover, we learn a difference, between a
Christian Prayer: and the prayers of all other sects. For, Christian Prayer is
grounded upon the Confidence in the Mediator: whom, forasmuch as profane men
do not confess, their prayer is void, and destitute of al foundation.

The admonitions are these: that this manner of prayinge, admonishes us, of
our blindness. For, when we must ask in the name of Christ: it is not to
be doubted, but, that those things are very great, which must be asked. We
must therefore open our eyes, and look diligently about us, what things
publicly, what privately, are grievous unto us: what inward, what outward,
what Corporal, what spiritual things are lackinge: that in all these
things, we may lift up our hearts to our most merciful Father, and ask of
him, in the name of our Mediator IESV CHRIST surely, and without doubt,
trusting, that he will give us those things which are necessary for us (so that
we pray in a firm faith,) and that those things which we require, may be
wholesome for us, as it is already said.

The Consolations are: that this manner of praying comfort those which
pray, against two most great impedimentes of Invocation: namely: Fleshly
Distrust: and, Our own unworthiness. For, unless when we pray, we were
stayed upon the confidence of the Mediator: our Fleshly distrust, (which the
remembrance of the manifold sins of our whole life, does augment) would
fear us away from praying, and we should all the sort of us, be easily
subdued, beeinge thrown down prostrate with the consideration of our
vnwoorthynesse, who of our selves are unworthy to come into the presence of
GOD, but the confidence in the Mediator, heals these maladies. For, it both
overcomes fleshly distrust, and boasts not her own woorthynesse, but the
woorthynesse of Christ. Hereunto apperteyneth that saying of Paul Romans 5. By
faith we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we
have access, through faith, unto this grace, wherein we stand. etc

With these things notably agrees, the answer of our Lord, given to the
Woman of Samaria, in John 4. For, so he says: The hour comes, and now it
is, when the true woorshippers, shall woorship the father, in Spirit, and in
the truth, for such the father seeks to woorship him. The Woman of Somaria
thought, that the efficatie of Prayer, depended upon the dignitye of the place:
for, (says she) Our Fathers woorshipped in this Mounteyne, and ye say, that
at Jerusalem is the place, where men ought to woorship.

From this opinion, Christ calls back the Woman, and propounds unto her,
the true manner of woorshippinge, namely: That she must worship the Father, in
Spirit, and in the truth. When he says, IN THE SPIRIT, he makes a
difference, beetweene that prayer, which proceeds, only from the mouth, and
that which proceeds from the Spirit: which Spirit works faith in the
heart of man, whereupon depends and from which proceeds, true adoration.
When he says IN THE TRVETH: he interprets two old figures: the former of
the mountain, in which Jacob prayed: the latter, of the place, which was at
Jerusalem and was called THE PROPITIATORY. For, that Mountain of Jacob did
put us in mind, that when we pray, we should not respect any dignity of
places in the world: but, that (from all the low valleys of this world) we
should lift up our hearts, unto the Hills, that is to say, unto Heaven. And
Christ wills the same thing, when he commands those that pray, to say:
Our Father which art IN HEAVEN.

The latter figure Christ expounds, when he says: They shall woorship the
Father IN THE TRVETH. This Truth is set against this place at Jerusalem, which
was called THE PROPITIATORY. For this place was a figure of the true
propitiatory Jesus Christ our only Mediatoure, without whom, there is no
entrance open for any to enter into the Holy of Holyes, that is to say, into
Salvation, and life everlasting. By this reason is also excluded from Christian
prayer all hypocrisy, and therewithal is necessarily required, true, and
fervent Zeal of mind in the time of prayer: so that there must be a
consonancie, and agreement of the heart, and mouth, that the one say or speak
not otherwise tha^ the other thinks.

Thus it is showed, that THE FEAR OF GOD, is the best keeper of faith, and of
a good Conscience in us: as being that thing, which studiously auoydeth
Sin, obeys the Commandments of God, dilygently bewareth the deceiptes of
the flesh, the world, and the Devil: and, (before all things,) seeks (in
these manifold dangers of the world,) help at the hands of GOD, by
earnest, and Christian prayer: and, by this means, perseuereth constaunt unto
the end, (that is to say) endures so long until GOD calls us from this
vale of misery, and receives into Heaven to himself, the souls of the godly,
which depart from hence, in the invocation of Christ: their bodies in the
mean season restinge in the duste of the earth, subject to corruption, in
testimonye of the just Judgment of God: which shall raise up again our
bodies in the last day, and (beeinge again restored to their souls) shall
quicken them, that we his Children may enjoy eternal life: and beeinge finally
taken away from all chaunges, and dangers of this world, may remain in
perpetual joys, with the Lord, and our only Savior IESV CHRIST, to whom, with
the Father and the holy ghost, be praise, honor, and glory for ever, and
ever, Amen.

These things I purposed to write, of the principal poinctes of our religion,
for their sakes which do understand, our common Language. Which I also will to
remain, in place of the Confession of my faith, and doctrine, which I have
taught, and professed in this School of Hafnia, about the space of 30. years.
I beeseeche the Christian Readers, that of this, and other my writings, they
would judge, not by the quarellings of unlearned, and proud spirits, but by
the word of GOD.

GOD be merciful unto his Church, and with clemency turn away the
dissentions, and corruptions of the pure Doctrine; and assist us all with his
holy spirit: by whose assistaunce, we may in such sort daily increase in the
knowledge of the true God, in faith and newness of life: that in the last day
we may be found in the number of the elect children of God, through JESUS
CHRIST our Lord. Amen.

A small form of Daily Prayer, to be daily used.
A Thankesgeuing for all God his gifts, and Benefits in general.
O Eternal God, and merciful Father, I give thee thanks, by thy well-beloved
Son our only Mediator, Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, for all thy gifts
and benefits, as well Corporal, as Spiritual, temporal, and eternal, which
are more, and far greater, than that they may be, either in mind conceived,
or with words expressed.

For the preservation of the Church, or Congregation of Christ.
I I beeseeche thee, most merciful God, and heavenly Father, by the name of
thine only begotten son, to defend thy Church, and Congregation in all
parts of the world, and conserve the purity of thy word: that the kingedome
of thy Son may be increased throughout all the world, and that many may
declare thy goodness, and mercy for ever.

For the Realm, Prince, Counsayllours, and every estate of life.
O Almighty God, and heavenly Father, give unto this Land, safe, and peaceable
governance, under thy protection: govern with thy holy spirte, 1. Tim. 2.
our most merciful Sovereign, the Counsayllours of the Realm, and every one
in his estate of life: that we may lead a quiet life, in all godliness, and
honesty, to thy glory.

For the forgiveness of sins, and obteyninge of grace.
WIpe out (O Father of mercies) all mine iniquities, through, and for thy Son
his sake, crucified and raised up again for us* (with the righteousness of
thine only begotten Son) make me righteous: cleanse my heart with thy holy
Spirit: teach me thy ways, and lead me in thy truth: make clean my mind,
that all wicked cogitations, corrupt affections, and unhappy counsayles,
careless stubbernes, and (to conclude) all wicked factes, may depart far
from the same: illuminate the same with the light of thy grace, that it may
covet, will, desire and do those things only, which are pleasant unto thee,
and wholesome, and proffitable for the Church of Christ.

For the aid of God in the needful businesses of our vocation.
Give me understanding (O Lord) and assiste mine indeuoures, that I may
faithfully, and diligently perform the works of my vocation, to the glory
of thy name, the edification of thy Church, and the commodity of my neighbor.

For the grace of God to live well, and dye well.
Grant mercifully (O Lord) that, (by thy assistance) I may persevere in
holding fast a lively faith, and a good conscience, unto the last breath of
this life: that when my hour shall come, I may quietly sleep in the Invocation
of my Lord Jesus Christ, and that I may obtain eternal life through him: in
the which life, I may (with all the elect) for ever, honor, and glorify
thee: To thee alone be honor, praise, and glory with thy Son, which lives
with thee in the unity of the holy Ghost, one God, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

