ANSWER MADE BY THE KINGS HYGHNES TO the Petitions of the rebels in
Yorkshire.



ANNO. M.D.XXXVI.



FIRST AS TOVCHYNGE the mayntenance of the faith, the terms be so general,
that it would be very hard to make certain answer to the same, but if they
mean the faith of Christ, to the which all christen men be only bound, We
declare and proteste our self to be that prince, that does entende and has
always minded to live and dye in the mayntenaunce defense and observation of
the purity of the same, And that no man can or dare set his foot by us in
proving of the contrary. We marvel therefore much, that ignorant people
woll go about to take upon them, to instruct and teache us, which have been
noted somthynge learned, What the feyth should be, and also that they being
ignorant people, be so presumptuous (saying that we and our hole clergy in
convocation have in articles declared it) to take upon them to correct us all
therein: or that they would be so ingrate and unnatural toward us, their most
rightful king and sovereign lord, without any our deserte, upon falls
reports or surmyses, to suspect us of the same, and give rather credence to
forged light tales, than to the very truth by us these.xxviii. years used,
and by our deeds approved.

TO THE second, which towcheth the mayntenance of the church and the lyberties
of the same, we say, It is so general a proposicion, that without
distinctions no man can well answer it. For first the church, which they
mean, must be known. Second whyther those things, which they call
lyberties, and say they would maynteyne, be things lawful and beneficial to
the prince and common welthe, or otherwise. And these known, we doubt not, but
they shall be answered according to goddis laws equity and Justice.
Nevertheless for all their generalite this we dare affirm, that meaning what
church they list, we have done nothing, that may not be abyden by, both by
goddis laws and man's laws: or that is prejudicial to the common welthe, if
our procedynges may be indifferently wayed and considered. And in our own
church of England, whereof we be the supreme heed in earth, we have done
nothing so onerous and chargeable to them, as many of our predecessors have
done upon much less grou^des. For did not king Edward the third, of most
noble memory our progenitour, suppress all the monasteries of one hole
religion, that were within this realm, and converted them holly to his own
use, saving a certain of the same, that he gave to his noble men and gentle
men, as we have at this time like wise done? Did not king Henry the.v.
suppress above one hundredth monasteryes, taking the great benefit of the
same to his own propre use and behoufe? And what act did he again within
this realm, that could be noted to the prouffite of the common weal of the
same, onles it were the erection of Syon, and the house of the Charterhouse at
Shene? Did not king Henry the.vi. semblably suppress a good nombre of
monasteries for the making of a college in Cambridge, and yet nevertheless but
a very few of them were converted to the use thereof? Did not our Grandame in
like manner, for the edifieng of two colleges in our university of Cambridge,
procure the suppression of a great many houses of religion? Did not bishop
Alcock, being noted a good man, procure the suppression of certain monasteries
for the building of an other college within the same vninersitie? Did not the
cardinal of york lately for the erectio^ of a college in Oxforde, compass
the suppression of thirty monasteries? How many bishops besides, as of
Canturbury, Wynchester, Rochester, Lyncolne, and others, have procured the
putting down of abbeys, for the buylding and endowementes of diverse Colleges,
which sundry of them have made within diverse vnyuersities, and also for
sundry other purposes and fu^dations? Wherefore sythens this article perteynith
nothing to any of our commons, nor that they bear any thing therein, we can
not but reckon a great unkindness and unnaturalness in them, which had leauer
a chorle or twain should enjoy those profits of their monasteryes, for the
supportation and mayntenaunce of abhomynable life, thanne that we their prince
should receive the same, to wards our extreme charges done and daily sustained
for their defense against foreign ennemies.

The third article touches three things. The first is the laws: The second
is the common wealth: The third the directours of the laws under us. Touching
the laws, as it becomes not blind men to judge any colors, ne to take upon
them to be judges in the same, so we dare expressly and boldly affirm, as a
thing that may be easily and duly proved, that there was never in any one of
our predecessors days, so many holsom commodious and beneficial acts made
for the commonwealth, as have been made in our time, and sythens some of them
had credit and doing in our affairs, that would now perchance feign
pycke them thank without deserte: for our lord forbede, that both we and our
counsel should have lost so much time, as not to know better now, than we
did in the beginning of our reign, what were a commonwealth, and what were
against the good and commodity of the same, saying we have been a king
these.xxviii. years, and by experience learned the perfytenes thereof. and all
though the folly and unkindness of some wol not percase so knowledge it: yet we
trust and doubt not, but the most part of our loving subjects, specially
those which be not seduced by falls reports, do both think it, accept it,
and find it so.

Now touching the common welthe, what king has kept his subiectis so long
in wealth and peace, so long without taking or doing wrong one to an other,
so indyfferently minystred Justice to all estates both high and low, so
defended them from al outward ennemies, so fortified the fronters of his
realm, to his no little and in manner inestimable charges, and all for their
welthes and sureties? What king has given among his subjects mo general
or free pardons? What king has been lother to punysh his subiectis, or showed
more mercy among them? These things being so true, as no true man can
deny them, It is an unnatural and an unkind demeanor of you our subiectis,
to believe or deny the contrary of it, by whose report so ever it should be set
forth against us.

And touching the beginning of our reygne, where it is said, that so many
noble men were counsaylours, we do not forget, who were then of our
counsel. For of the temporaltie, there were but two worthy to be called
noble, the one the treasorer of England, the other the high Steward of our
household, others, as the lord Marney and Darcy, but mean borne gentylmen, ne
yet of any great lands, till they were promoted by the king our father of most
noble memory, and by us, and so made knights and lords. The rest were
lawiers and prestes, saving the two bishops of Canturbury and Wynchesire. If
these then be the great number of noble men, that is spoken of, and that our
subjects seemed at that time to be contented withal, why then be they not now
much better contented with us, which have so many nobles in deed, both of
birth and condition, of our counsel. For first of the temporaltie, in our
priuye counsel, we have the Duke of Norfolk, the Duke of Suffolk, the
Marquis of Excester, the lord Steward, whenne he is present, the Earl of
Oxforde, The Earl of Sussex, the lord Sands, our Chamberlayne, the lord
Admyral, treasorer of our house, sir wyllyam Poulet Comptroller of our house,
sir Wyllyam Kyngston our vicechamberlayne, And of the spirituality, the
bishops of Canturbury, Wynchester, Hereford, and Chichester. And for because
it is more then necessary, to have some of our pryuy counsaylle learned in our
laws, and acqueynted with the polycies and practices of the world, we, by
thaduise of our hole counsel before named, did elect and chose into our
priuye counsel, and also into their roumes, sire Thomas Audeley knight, our
Chancellor, and the lord Crumwel, keeper of our privy seal, thinking them
men in all our opinions most mete for the same roumes. And we with our hole
counsel think it right strange, that you, which be but ignorant and
inexpert folks, should take upon you to appoynte and limitte to us, who be
mete to be of our cou^sayl, and who be not. Mark therefore now, how these
sedicious persons, which so wrongfully have borne you thus in hand, have
falsely abused you, that reaken, there were then moo noble men of our privy
counsel, then be now. But yet though of our great clemency and princely
goodness, we declare now the truth, to pull you our subjects from that error
and blindness you be trained and brought into, by false and untrue surmyses, and
reports: we would again, that every of you know, that it apperteyneth not to
any subject, to presume to take upon him, to appoynte his king and
sovereign lordis counsel, ne for our part we wol take any such thing at any
of our subjects hands. Wherefore we would, that from hensforth, they should
better remember the duities of good subiectis toward their natural liege
lord, and medel not with these and such like things, as they have nothing
to do withal.

To the.iiii. article, where the commons do name certain of our counsel to be
subuerters both of goddis law and the laws of the realm, we do take and
repute them, as just and true executours both of goddis laws and of ours, as
far as their commissions under us do extend. And if any of our subjects can
duly prove the contrary, we shall proceed against them, and all other
offenders therein, according to Justice, as to our estate and dignity royal
does apperteyne. And in case it be but a false and an untrue report, as we
verily thynk it is, then it were as mete, and stands as well with justice,
that they should have the self same punyshement, which wrongfully have
objected this to them, that they should have had, if they had deserved it. And
one thing among others causes us to think, that this sklaunder should be
untrue, because it proceeds from that place, which is both far distante
from that, where they inhabyte, and also from those people, which never hard
them preach, nor yet knows any part of their conversation. Wherefore we
exhort you al our commons of those parties, to be no more so light of credyte
in the beleuynge of evil things, spoken of us your natural prince and
sovereign lord, nor of any of our counsailours or prelates, but to think,
that your king, having so long reigned over you, has as good discretion,
to elect and chose his counsaylours, by thaduyse of his counsel before named,
as those what soever they be, that have put this into your heads, and much
better then you, being but ignorant people, and out of al experience of
princis affairs, can have. And as unto the last article, and also unto the
matter of the hole dyscours of your peticions, we verily think, that the rest
of all our hole commons, of many countries, to whom you be in manner but an
handful, will greatly disdain, and not bear it, that you take upon you, to set
order to us and them, and specially to us being soueraygne lord to you both:
and that you being rebels, would make them as bearers and parttakers of your
mischief, willing them to take pardon for insurrections, which verily we
think and doubt not, they never minded, but like true subjects, to the
contrary have both with heart and deed been ready at our call, to defend both
us and them selfs.

And now for our part, as to your demandes, we late you wit, that pardon of
such things, as you demand, lyethe only in the will and pleasure of us
your soueraygne lord and prince: But it seems by your lewd proclamations and
saufe conductis, that there be among you, which take upon them both the
parts of kings and of counsaylours, which neither by us nor by the general
consent of our realm, have been admitted to any such rome. What arrogance is
then in those wretches, being also of none experience, yt wol presume to reise
you our subiectis without commission or authority, ye and against us, under a
cloked color of your wealth, and in our name, and as the succession and end wol
declare, if we should not be more mercyful unto you, than you have deserved, to
your own utter confusions? Wherefore we late all you our said subjects again
wit, that were it not, that our pryncely heart can not reken this your
shameful insurrection, and most ingrate and unnatural rebellion, to have been
done of malice or rancour, but rather by a lightness of credit given in manner
by a naughty nature to a comminaltie, and a wondrous sodayn surrection of
gentylmen, we must needs have executed an other manner of punyshement, than if
you will humbly knowledge your fawte, and submytte your selfs to our mercy, we
entende to do, as by our proclamations, we doubt not but you be informed. And
now therefore note our benignity, now considre how much we desire the
preservation of you our subiectis, and thaduoydynge of theffusion of christen
blood, and now consider, what hurt you have in this little time done unto
your selfs, and learn by this gentyl refourmation, to avoid a greatter yuell,
to love honor and dread your prince and sovereign lord, that thus tendreth
you, and from hensforthe to live like true subjects to us, and to believe no
moo such falls and light tales.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI RECII IMPRESSORIS.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


