THE RIDDLES OF HERACLITVS AND Democritus.

Printed at London by Arn. Hatfield, for John Norton. 1598

PRophesies, predictions,
Stories and fictions,
Allegories, rimes,
And serious pastimes
For all manner men,
Without regard when,
Or where they abide,
On this or that side,
Or under the mid line
Of the Holland sheets fine,
Or in the Tropicks fair
Of sunshine and clear air,
Or under the pole
Of chimney and seacole:
Read they that list, understand they that can,
Verbum satis est to a wise man.
The Riddles of Heraclitus and Democritus.
1
IT seems that Tunis is an ancient town
Near to the ruins of Carthage once so proud,
Whose stately buildings now are clean pulled down,
And calmde her bruit, that sounded sometime loud:
But room, that is their ancient far away
Does hold, and shall, though cities all decay.
Room is more large, then spacious Millaine fair,
Or Venice or the Tartars great Camball,
Boeams three Prages, or Egypts rich Alcaire,
Or Quinsei in Cataie, biggest of them all,
And more I say, after the day of doom
Hell shall be no where, unless it be in room.
2
Room is a taker, Poets say,
And lawyers are so too, you see
Room is a taker by my faie,
No learned man can disagree,
And room shall take, believe well me,
At least till something, no where be.
3
MAny a man does speak of me,
But no man ever shall me see,
For all in one, do full agree
That no where must my dwelling be.
4
NOt Mark, but Mercury keeps her warm,
And Neptune hugs her in his arm
Infertill, fertile of all good things,
Her Lord her servant her children kings.
5
SAy what it is and if you can,
That neither was by God create,
Nor framed by the hand of man,
Nor by the fiend that does him hate;
But caused it was for tyrants strong,
As things are many of great worth,
Which made it straight and woondrous long
When at the first, they brought it forth:
And good it does, and none ill deeds,
Feeding upon green grass and weeds.
6
A Prince, for his delight, erected a spacious forest, which bears even in
the coldest months of the years, store of sweet flowers, wholesome herbs, and
fair trees, some blossoming, and some bearing fruit. The forest is divided
into five parts, every one of them containing birds, beasts, and fishes of
diverse kinds and qualities.

A keeper has this forest in charge, that in a wonderful sort attends
over it, to the preserving, refection, creating and recreating of every thing
vegetant or sensitive. A wife or sister he has that is as diligem as himself,
who with a sconce in the one hand, and a watering pot in the other, goes about
continually watering the herbs. The keeper has no residence or abode, but
taking with him his footeman, and the blackesmithes wife, they cross the
forest continually, traveling from one Inn unto another. And when he comes
once to the sign of the Dolphine, the Phoenix begins to die, which first
begun to live, when he entered, at the sign of the Ram. The true Phoenix, of
which we have never but one at once, and in every of her wings are 182 feathers
at the least, so that she flies fast, and dies quickly.

7
Believe me now I tell it for notale,
There is a Queen, or else a Goddess the one,
That without help of man, or any male
Conceaueth daughters by her self alone:
But at their birth, be it by night or day,
Some skillful man, the midwiues part does play.
When they be borne, and perfectly brought forth,
Both old and young do greatly them desire;
Their beauty and their power is of such worth,
That all men's hearts, therewith are set on fire:
And in all times, they bear as great a sway
As if on earth, there were no queens but they.
8
A Creature is that humane flesh deuoures,
From out whose howels fatness may be taken,
That being dried by fire, a certain hours
Will wax as hard, as crust of bread well baken,
Which fat dissolved, and with the lean confused
Of that body, from whom you must it take,
May be with skill and industry so used,
That a confection thereof we do make
Greatly helping, though it be held no wonder
Against all tempest, lightning and thunder.
9
HAndsome she was, and well beseene,
As fresh as any of them all,
Her raiment for the most part green,
Her stature good and meetely tall.
Mounsier did take her by the arm
And friendly entertained her,
His countenance said he meant no harm,
But well I wot he strained her,
That (as lamenting her mishap)
She cried, perhaps she cracked too,
Yet Mounsier would not leave her lap
For any thing that she could do,
This was a scholar by S. Anne,
A civil, sober, honest manne.
10
I Wrinkled am and passing old
But gallant is my motion,
Abhorring aie to be controulde
By any ones devotion.
Come all that list on me to mount,
Sure I will not forsake them,
But let them make their just account,
That finely I shall shake them.
Ne do I ask men ought for hose,
For shoes, for drink, or meating,
Come all that list with me to close
Sans paying or entreating.
And they may chance find in my womb
To make them wish they were at home.
11
WHilst Phoebus lodges in his southern Inn,
His ancient Inn, at sign of Capricorn,
His northren less, her raiment waxes thin,
And for her Lord she seems to pine and morn,
I mean the less that many brings to scorn,
And makes men often reveal their proper shame,
Her maker once, took to himself her name.
12
A Female, produced first in a rude lump, as they say a young bear is, not by
licking, but by pressing, became beautiful. For she has as many friends as
the Queen of England, As many subjects as the King of Spain, As many rulers
as Athens ever had, or Venice has. And though she can neither write nor
read, yet is she lettered, a Physician, a Rhetorician, and a Chronicler.

13
AS Pallas was engendered from her fathers brain,
So was one other guest, that I see men do entertain,
She sprang from neither grift, nor plant, nor egg nor seed,
Ne is she fish, or flesh, or grain, or pulse or herb or weed,
With Ladies and great Lords, she is both day and night,
And clergy men, and prelates grave, sometime in her delight.
Some think that the devil, begat her on his dame,
Because that he much evil does, and mischief by her frame:
I think not so, but wish, she soberly were used,
That neither she nor men by her, might henceforth be abused.
14
A Virgin fair, betwixt whose milk white
Paps I sometime lay,
When I was borne, the midwiues part
And nurses too did play,
To whom I spent, my foremost age
Working both day and night,
And recompensed her taken care
With profit and delight,
Until by fate, without my fault
In prison I was cast,
And held in gives, which I had made,
From which breaking at last:
Such change and chances has the world,
A dotage made me blind,
In amorous sportes I killed my self
Fool: propagating kind.
15
Upon some pale, or perch,
Or stond, or rotten tree,
In watrie lowes and fennie grounds
Where store of fishes be:
There will he gazing stand,
And fish be feign would eat,
Bur he disdaines to touch a fish
If that it be not great.
Right good ones he lets go,
For better still to stay,
Till that the sun is welnigh set,
And gone almost the day:
Then down unto the ground
In stately sort he hies,
Where he a hungry supper makes
On worms and butterflies.
16
THe welkin is welnigh, out of our seeing,
Our eyes and thoughts are on the ground remaining,
On the earth or no, where is our happy being,
Yet there we ever grudge, and are complaining,
But turn us so, that heaven hang in our spying,
And straight we leave, our murmur, and our crying.
17
ONe rips the earth, another cuts the seas,
And runs the world in circuit round about,
All for my sake, I do all men so please,
That all do seek, which way to find me out.
In Diadems in scepters, and in Crowns,
In robes, in rotchets, in a Cardnals hat,
In scarlet, silks, in costly furred gowns,
In stones and pearls, and in I wot not what,
In horses, hawks, bounds, harlots, and in books,
One flies for me, up into the skies,
Another down to Plutoes reign he tookes,
Where all this glistering Or and argent lies.
This search declares, how greatly men do leeke me,
But they are mad so far from home to seek me.
18
A Never wearied, but ever bearing mother, was delivered of children, all (in a
manner) of stature equal: which though they were (being young) very like one
unto another, yet by diuer sit of bringing up, they were transmuted so, that
uneath they might be discerned to be of one lineage Some of them were made
carters and plowmen, some served in cities, as porters, sergeants, and hangmen:
some became mariners, and served at sea. Some were fine lier trained up, and
for their delicacie, waxed in favor with fair virgins great matrones,
gentlewomen and great Ladies. To all which they were so inward and nearly
conjoined, that scarcely brother or husband was permitted to be with them of
equal trust. Many of these waxed so skillful, and stored with all manner of
learning, that more of them became divines, lawiers and statesmen, then are to
be found in Paris, Padua, Bononia, Venice or Vienna. Of this last sort, sundry
which grew to be ambassadors, secretaries, and intelligencers, were finally
brought to violent death by fire, or interred in so foul a fashion, that not
knowing with what terms to express it, I must of force leave it, to be
deuined at.

19
AFter midnight, ere it was day
His eyes he did unclose,
And striving for to get away
From prison he arose,
With bodies two as cold as Lead
He wrought so fine a feate,
That other two which seemed dead
Received life and heat.
Then dead men came about him round,
I wot not who they were,
But of much thing deep and profound
With them he did confer.
20
WE are in number not five times five,
No one of us two handful long,
Nor any of us takes care to thrive,
Yet all together we do so throng,
That if a man would list to strive
T'extinguish or to do us wrong,
Were he the greatest prince alive,
We should be found for him too strong,
And could make him infamous in time to come,
Though most of us been deaf and dombe.
21
BY help of five, and six, and seven
And lines and distances between,
A scale is made that brings from heaven
A virgin sweet that nere was seen,
Nor any man ever see her shall,
Though heaven and earth together fall.
Unseen, of lovers she has choice,
That are not led by wanton eyes,
But they do love her Angels voice,
And he that rules above the skies
Does daine a listening ear to lend,
Her earnest prayers to attend.
22
I Am not, but am said to be,
And many things are told of me,
As first for sooth that I am blind,
And bushed before, and balde behind:
And that I halting come to one,
And fly when as I will be gone:
With fools my godhead is not small,
With wise men it is none at all.
23
SVch as the company is, such am I,
And I think some other folk are so too,
To two Ladies great I ever am nie,
And we with the world have much to do:
It Is hard for a lowte to tell ye my name,
And shame for a clerk if he hit not the same.
24
IT is not more fabulous what Prometheus did, then ridiculous what Paracelsus
promises: yet there is one (to no man of great understanding unknown) that
not only makes persons at her pleasure, but also brings them from hell or
heaven to life again when they be dead. Yea she makes pillars, walls, or any
thing to speak, not by sorcerie, witcherie, or imprecation of devils, but by
fine art to the face of judges, for justice, she has heretofore practiced her
skill, and of her property, a long time borne special denomination.

25
THis is the age that I would have,
These times for me are woondrous fit,
Each Lady that is fine and brave,
With me delights to go and sit.
My living lies not in my lands,
Yet I am dainty, fine and sweet.
The Ladies take me in their hands,
Their lips and mine full often meet.
Their paps, their cheeks I well may touch,
In smiling sort with me they play,
Their husbands thereat think not much,
No: though I down with them do lay:
In sooth it is a foolish sin,
When foolish husbands jealous bin.
26
TWo forward went, and one did seem to stay them:
Four after ran, and five did ouerlay them,
Of which one dead, four quick was comprehending:
And all these twelve unto one mark were tending.
27
FIrst I was small, and round like a pearl,
Then long and slender, as brave as an Earl,
Since, like an hermit, I liude in a cell,
And now like a rogue, in the wide world I dwell.
28
THere is a body without a heart,
That has a tongue, and yet no head,
Buried it was, ere it was made,
And loud it speaks, and yet is dead.
29
Far in the west I wot not wheare
Are trees men say which oisters bear,
I wonder how that comes about
Those oisters she not, out of doubt
And fall straight like a swarm of bees
At home here on our apple trees.
Grow they on trees, those oisters? fie:
Me thinks it sounds like a lie,
A kind of trees, I know it is true,
In purpoole lane bear oisters new
And fish and flesh, and now and then
They bear (I tell you) honest men.
30
THe new world, is environed with a deep ditch, whereinto many rivers do fall
continually: in so much that it would ouerflow the whole world, were it not
that from the water of this ditch, there rises and is engendered great store of
barnacles and other sea foul of diverse colors and proportions, some of them
being bigger by great ods, then is any crane, bustard, swan, camel, elephant,
whale, or whirlepoole. And even as flies will sticker in the night season,
about a torch or great light, till sometimes their streamers be sindged: so
assuredly these which I tell of* and which never fall to the ground, till their
death, or dissolution, even from their first naisance, making toward the sun
and stars, are enforced to shed their feathers in such abundance, that
thereof are yearly made beds, a hundred times as big again, as the great bed
in Ware. If I said a thousand times, it were no more then a thousand, which
have seen them as well as I, might maintain and verify.

31
I Saw one stately stalking like a crane
Strike at a stripling, something like a man,
At the first stroke, he gave the wretch his bane,
Threw him in the dirt, and with him ran
Unto the water, where he washed and beat him,
And at a mouthfull at the last he eat him.
32
A Murderer, a prisoner, barelyfed
Was first of all deprived of the light,
And then straightwaies unto the gallows led,
Which did belong to him of very right:
Where hanged he was something against my will,
Though some good folk could wish him hanged still.
But one of power, the power of law to stay,
That ere this time, did a companion make him:
The prince himself came passing by that way,
And from the gallows graciously did take him:
The best is though he did enjoy this favor,
He stands bound unto the good behavior.
33
WHen one by one, men fearful are
They quickly are affrighted,
And wanting weapons fit for war,
Not daring be united:
Whether it be in town or field
To the enemies forces soon they yield.
A simple soldier God does know,
In Norfolk bloody wars does make,
And heaps of foes, does overthrow
Alone: and often does prisoners take:
Yet they have fortes, so has not he,
Marry fearful, and ill armed they be.
34
Allow bred squire
Borne in the mire,
That never knew who was his sire,
Being armed light
After midnight,
(No remedy) would needs go fight.
In corslet bad
The youth was clad,
And sarcenet sleeves for sooth he had.
But at a word
He had no sword,
Nor other weapon worth a etc.
Newas he strong,
Nor large nor long,
But forth he came with a hideous song.
And Tartar leeke
He me did seek,
Lighting at first full on my cheek.
This thing of naught,
At face still raught,
As Caesar once his soldiers taught
When they should fight,
Against that knight,
Pompey defending countries right:
So in like case,
This varlet base
Was ever poring at my face.
I could not rest
Within my nest,
The rascal did me so molest.
I had the Jack,
Soon brought to wrack,
Had he not ever retired back.
But he comes, he goes,
He fell, he rose,
He bit me by the very nose.
It made me swear,
And God to tear,
I could not for my life forbear.
That such a knave
Should be so brave,
Would make (I trow) a Saint to rave.
But clod or stone,
Or stick or bone,
Or gunne or crosbowe had I none.
That truth to show,
I did not know,
Which way I might him overthrow.
So that at last
I waxt aghast,
And longing to have the combat past.
I hid my head
Within a bed
And slept like one that had been dead.
35
A Target bearer to a gallant man of war
Was bidden by his Lord, to attend him at a door,
Whilst he should get him in, about to appease a jar,
That lately risen was, betwixt him and his whore:
And hear ye (said he) Sir: if any body come,
Or stirring be this way, alowde see ye cry hum.
The scutiger had tarried but a little while,
Ere Morpheus began upon his forehead for to creep,
His stomach vapors sent, which did his brains beguile,
And ere he was aware, he falls fast asleep:
The Master hoping well, that well his man did watch,
Accorded with the girl, her husbands coat to patch.
To kissing first they fell, and after that to play,
Soldiers fight sometimes, ye wot it well in sport,
And I can tell no more, what they did do or say,
God knows I have no skill of warring in this sort:
But as the neighbors told, such war the soldier maked,
That at the lock they lay, and both of them were naked.
Tacitum petiuit, my captain falls asleep,
One in at window looks, where close he them espied,
And tarrying not a whit, either to laugh or weep,
He backward with the news, unto the husband hied,
Which calde his friends unto him, these pigeons for to get,
And soon he had them both, caught fast within his net.
The lookers on did laugh, the captain was ashamed,
The husband was as angry, as any man could be,
And though the wife by friends, and by her man were blamed,
Yet made she her defense, and chid as fast as he:
Thou have (said she) ere this, thy slouens armefull borne,
By stealth as we did now, of many a neighbors corn.
She prays to be divorced, but he would not agree
To hear that motion made, it made his heart full sore
To set them in a sheet, alas why should it be,
They had been sheeted now three hours and somewhat more.
Forgiveness, that was best, the soulder him reuested,
The goodman kissed his wife, all quarrels were digested.
His squire still at the door, this while lay fast asleep,
His helmet clapped close unto his drowsy head,
He dreamed that he saw, a lovely less to weep,
Inchained with his Lord upon a feather bed:
And in this dream he lay still in a mischiefs name,
Until his captain came, and found him in the same.
By shoulders he him took, he quickly made him wake,
What was to him befalne, he did describe and tell,
His angry look and noise, did make the wretch to shake,
Villain he cried, how say, have thou not serude me well,
Thou varlet base, thou ass, thou drunken headed ape,
I thee conjure straight way, leave of thy soldiers shape.
His spurs to bodkins turned, his lips convert to horn,
His beard turned all to flesh, gone was his manly face,
His shirt of maile and helmet, that he long had worn,
To plumes and cockscombe turned, this was a foul disgrace:
Behold and see, what it is, an angry one to serve,
That for a toy forgets, what serving did deserve.
He lives still, and still retains a soldiers mind,
With Switzers he will go, when they are waged to fight,
Unto a less he is, more then his captain kind,
And five or six at once, do lodge with him all night:
Remembering still the fault, that did him overthrow,
He cries at peep of sun, Look to your windows hooe.
36
SInce the rebellion in the North, an host of light horsemen, issued, as from
Scotland and inuading England, came as far as Northampton shire, where they
hurt and killed many, sparing neither age nor sex. At last they environed a
worshipful knights house, and had assuredly won entrance into it, had not his
servants been, who with such wonderful resistance, stopped their passage;
that no one of them, were he much less then a Pigmei, could make any
irruption, yet left they way for a friend, which got in, of stature greater
than ever was Atlas, or the goodly son of Grandgosier.

37
WIth cords they haled her from the ground,
And did about them lay,
Like lusty ringers of the bells,
Upon some holiday.
Her legs and arms close to a tree,
She tottered up and down,
Cla^^^^g her iron lined breech
Close to a lubbers crown:
Whom she struck down into the ground,
Full twenty foot and more,
And yet he never did complain,
Or felt that he was sore.
38
WHilst I was young, I dare well say,
I was as fresh as fairest May,
And like a malapert young elfe,
As proudly did I bear my self.
But pride men say, will have a fall,
Even so had I, and therewithal
To servants servant I became,
And every puzzell is my dame.
When that I once have done my work,
I am enforced in hurnes to lurk,
Expecting when for want of meat,
My fellow servant should me eat.
39
I Lovers had, had words been true,
As many as fair Corinna had,
Yet when my foes me overthrew,
My friends looked on, and were right glad.
When he that erst did me defend
Until the day of dreadful death
Did hasten most unto mine end,
Striking the stroke which reft my breath,
And from my grave men me remove,
Pretending still they do me love.
40
A Coniurer was circling in the air,
With nimble eyes attentive on the ground,
Where walking spirits, nousled many a pair,
Making a search the harmless to confound,
They wrought to reaue poor wretches of their breath,
Which never in life did ought deserving death.
I said to an abettor looking on,
Those innocents were worthy of some pity,
He answer made, and swear by sweet S. John,
In pitying them, I showed my self not witty:
What skils (said he) the shedding of their blood,
They do me harm: but do they any good?
41
MOunsier Monoculus, with that one eye,
Its not for his personage or his sweet face,
That wheresoere I go, I do him epsy,
With maidens and wives in special grace,
He is a surgeon, he can let blood,
His prick is a thing that does them good.
42
BEfore many months be expired, there shall be borne of parents base and
simple, a more silly offspring, blind, deaf and dumb: which after incision in
the head, and drinking a certain liquour, shall become great tellers of men's
thoughts. Not only revealing the deceits of love, stratagems of war, and
policies of states: but they shall have also power of uniting or setting at
variance: maintaining in England a war, which shall cost many their livings,
and some their lives; without ceasing, unless all things grow so common, that
ioyners and locksmithes give over their occupations.

43
I Do agree with sister and brother,
But I love neither father nor mother,
If she embrace me, she makes me die,
If he do but touch me I crack and cry,
And surely it is a preatie thing,
^o see how he makes me fart and fling:
Marvel you sirs, who I should be,
On sunday before noone you may me see.
44
I Have in the country seen at a fair,
Of brethren and sisters many a pair,
That being coupled like man and wife,
Went yet to service for term of life,
But they could neither wash nor wring,
Nor brue, nor bake, nor play, nor sing,
Nor pipe, nor dance, nor any such thing:
All that they can, is well to keep
All things, except great flocks of sheep.
45
Our parents are ever besmeared with dust,
Our sisters and brethren in very good trust:
Our chaps ever gaping, or if they meet just,
Some one thing or other in sunder must.
46
LEt never wonder fill your head,
For sure the case is plain and clear,
By sluggish keeping of my bed,
I lost a thousand pound a year:
My brother rose, and did it get,
And I am to his keeping set.
47
THe Miller, and the Millers wife,
That they might merry make,
Were set down with a dish of fruit,
A cake, and half a cake,
The parson of the town with them,
His sister and no more:
Now have you heard of all the guests,
And of their bread the store,
Yet did they use the matter with
Such cunning, skill, and art,
That every one eat half a cake,
Before they did depart.
48
THere are two sisters, one fair and cheerful, the other black or brown.
The first for her beauty, is of all desired, loved and longed for: The second
(with good reason) is to be liked for her humility. Supping all winter with
the poorest, and making beggars (during her reign) more happy oftentimes then
mighty monarchs. Before Phoebus shined, or Cinthia borrowed light, they were
and ever since, striving for the worlds governance (of which either of them
has ever one half under her) they have chased continually one another, more
swiftly than any ship sadeth on the sea. Long has this contention lasted, and
cease it shall never, till the Turk be overthrown, the Pope have resigned his
triple crown, and all be brought to one sheepefolde, under one shepherd.

49
THat which a sheep did inward hide,
I use to wear on my out side,
And that which a tree did outward wear,
Within me always I do bear:
By drowning first I took essence,
And hanged was since for none offense:
Still ready by a blast of breath,
To find a life causing my death.
50
AL day leeke one that's in disgrace,
He rests in some secret place,
And seldom puts forth the head,
Until day light be fully fled,
Then in the maids, or goodwiues hand,
The gallant ginnes first up to stand:
Whom to a hole, they do apply,
Wherein he will both live and die.
51
ON an evening as cold, as cold might be,
With frost and hail, and pinching weather,
Companions about three times three,
Lay close all in a pound together:
Yet one after one, they took a heat,
And died that night, all in a sweat.
52
A Remnant of a soul, the water did enclose,
That staide by one, from fire, which did repair,
That fenced by one, which from the earth arose,
And all kept warm by one, which grew up in the air:
The goodwife out of these, did deal about her dole,
Till one did put his nose, even right into her hole.
53
IF Lords of the land esteem me not a fly,
If dainty nosed doctors, cry fie on me fie,
If Ladies at Court, none account on me make,
If citizens wives, do me all forsake,
Then Ioane in the country, for a friend I will take:
What though from my youth, I have had a white head,
My tail will be green, until I be dead.
54
A Poor Alcumist, out of straight prison, accepted to service, fell presently
on eating, and of a starueling, in short time, became goodly. But such was his
gormandize, and quick digestion, that had he not been excellent, not only in
transformation of metals, but also in preserving, conseruing, candying,
distilling, extracting of oiles, balmes, quintessences and spirits, with many
other things, no man would have entertained him: for he could eat doing little
work, but not work, unless he were eating. Having devoured to some
scarcity, things grown and nourished upon the earth, he was brought to feed
on viler achates, taken from the bowels thereof. But still he eats, bringing
profit by his service, comfort by his presence, and in his chaps destruction.
He has therefore allowed him, room from his trade, and habitation by
himself, wherein he never rests, but when he is wrapped up in his own
excrements, and were not that he is in danger of death, by too much fasting, or
too much drinking, ye might judge him to be immortal.

55
AN idle brain, and wanton eye,
Breeds in the heart, sometime a goose,
That's often kept full hungrily,
Whilst lechery, iugling fast and loose,
Does gain his bushel for each oate,
That comes into the gozlings throat.
56
Envy and love, together hatched a beast,
Or hag of hell it rather seems to me,
That pines if other comes but near her feast,
And willingly would ever watching be,
Things that are not, this enuies bird would see:
This parricide, this error whelping sprite,
This Sibill false, seldom divining right.
57
THere is a thing, some call it sport,
(That young and old, and all will prove)
It Is music in a kind consort,
On tuned instruments of love,
The fashion something bagpipe like,
With poke and pipe the minstrels play,
And if the bommes just measure strike,
It Is pastime for a wedding day:
Maids that to this their minds apply,
For Lute and harp care not a fly.
58
A Tree, a beast, an angel, all in one
Lives, and has rule over both beast and tree,
That often, is after goatishnesse so gone,
That there is no beast, beastlier than he.
Bridle the beast, monster, misshapen thing,
Least tree, beast, angel, to the devil fling.
59
TO the earth from highest heaven,
Four virgins were descended,
Sent down from him that unto men
All goodness has intended.
And here they staide a while,
And many things amended,
But they were forced back by those,
That should have them defended.
Since then the golden age,
The happy days were ended,
And vice has reigned most in them,
That virtue most pretended.
60
IN a town, where the Praetor is wise, the Counsel witty, is a slouenly
citizen, to whom many are so indebted, that they have much to do, to pay for
the forbearance, and no man can get a general quietus est at his hand till he
be dead; which yet is longed for of very few. For both the principal agents in
the corporation, receive maintenance from him: and the Maioresse, with the
other good wives, do so fancy him, and the fore man of his shop, Bawdie
Brian, that there is many times much misgouernance thereby in the whole town:
notwithstanding any edict, proclamation, or reclamation that the magistrate can
make.

FINIS.
The solutions.






Mercury is fained to be god of merchandising, which is the trade that
beautifieth the glorious city of Venice. Neptune inuironeth her, and her Duke
is servile or of very small authority. For the majesty and supreme
commandment, is in the senate and magnificoes.



Asia, Africa, Europa, America and Magellanica. The keeper is the Sun: his
wife or sister the Moon, that brings always with her light and moisture.
The footeman is the planet Mercury: the Smithes wife Venus. They cross the
Zodiac continually attending on the Sun. The Phoenix is our year, which
begins when Sol enters into Aries, and ends when he goes out of Pisces.

Tellus, which conceiueth in her womb, the resplendent metals of gold and
silver, the unworthy burnished regents of the earth.

adeps terrae, the fatness of the earth, mixed with sand (the leanest earth)
is made mortar, for buildings to defend us against all wind and weather.













Perdigiornata, the daywaster: of this quality. And some men are of the like,
that let go, all small offers, to expect better employments.

Plutarch, to whom nature has not given a look, up to the skies, are the
most crying beasts in the world, ever grunting and complaining. But tie them by
the heels, and carry them on a staff whither ye will: so long as they see
the clouds, they are quiet and silent. And if men could learn to leave
wrooting in the earth, and place their cogitations in heaven, their
tranquillity should be the greater.



id est, letters of love and other missiues. They come very often to the fire,
or else to wipe where it is seldom cleanly, and never sweet. But see you not,
how many transmutations here are, before we can have paper? Well fare he that
taught us the goose neck. But a quick ducke had no fellow: for he could wash
himself clean for a new piece of service.

Ambrose, S. Augustine etc. or if ye will Plowden and my Lord Dyer.







Mercury, placed mean betwixt Venus and Luna: being (say the Astronomers)
eiusdem naturae, cum planeta cui coniungitur.

Paracelsus, in his book de natura rerum teaches an artificial generation of
an homunculus, or little man. Prometheus, the son of Iapetus, was the first
maker of images, and thereupon, was fained to make men. This riddle is meant by
Rhetorike, or the figure Prosopopeia, that to stir and move affection,
attributes speech to dead men, or to walls and such like.









arbor reuersa, then the shril oister queanes in Graies Inn lane, are trees
and plants: though not so sweet to plant upon, as be in other groves about
London.

America, is compassed in with the sea. And were not the multitude of
barnacles, viz. clouds, which are drawn out of it, (says one author) the sea
must needs drown all the earth. It is the sun and stars, that draws up
those clouds and vapors. Which when (by coldness of the air in his midde
region) they convert to snow, fall down again and make feather beds bigger
then any which be in Ware, though not altogether so wholesome, to lie long in.

Aesope be a story, the blocks successor, the worthy king of frogs. Viz. a
storke, devouring one of his subjects, in Claxton garden.





aenigma well enough. A gnat is an ill chamber-fellow.

Lucians dialog, betwixt the shoemaker and his cock, ye shall find that Mars,
when he went to lie with Venus, left his man captain Gallous or Gallus, to
attend at the door. Master Cock fell in a nap, Phoebus looked in at the
window, and discried the adultery etc. Ever since that day, every cock at
peep of sun (thinking Mars to be at his old occupation, or martialistes to
be at their venerious exercise) croweth to give them warning.













meum and tuum be overthrown, and coffers and locks be out of use. For until
then shall the common law last, as prophesied old Master Barton.



















goodwiues glass, then possessorily though not naturally the glasses mouth,
whereunto one smelled, was the goodwiues hole.

















The Maioresse is mistress Libido: and the good wives, the foolish affections
of man: which will favor the belly and Brian, let reason say what he can.

Oremus.

