A True Discourse of the most happy victories obtained by the French King,
against the Rebels and enemies of his Majesty. With a particular declaration of
all that has been done between the two Armies, during the months of
September and October, and part of November. 1589. Also of the taking of the
Subburbes of Paris by the King.

Faithfully translated out of French into English, according to the Copy
imprinted at Tours. By T. D.

LONDON: Printed by I. Wolf, and E. White. 1589.

To the right Honorable Lord Robert Deuorax, Earl of Essex and Ewe, Vicount
of Harryford, and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Burchier and Louaine,
master of the Queens majesty's Horse, and Knight of the most honorable order
of the Garter: Luke Wealsh wishes all heavenly happiness, and increase of
honorable virtue.
THe view of Scipio his valiant exploites (right Honorable) was no less
admired amongst the hardy Carthagenians, then the report of his conquestes
were joyful among the Senators and Citizens of flourishing Rome. But if they
in regard of Heathen honor, and only forworldly causes conceived such
felicity in their victories, yielding their grave ears to the discourse thereof,
then need I not fear to present to your honors hands, the undoubted truth of
these happy victories obtained by the most noble and Christian French King, who
for the recovery of his right and advancement of Gods glory, is enforced to
maintain wars against them. Wherefore in respect of your honorable and
magnanimious mind, your wisdom and virtuous inclination, your hardiness in
wars, and hatred to rebellion sondrie times manifested to your eternal and
well deserved praise, as also to declare my well affected heart to your honor,
I have chosen you the Patron of this warlike discourse, that the noble
exploits herein mentioned may be the better regarded, and the more esteemed by
the name of so honorable a personage, whose love as it is generally planted in
the hearts of all the Commons of this land, so it is every day augmented through
hope of your never dying fame. Thus shielding my self under your honors
protection, with hope of your honorable favor and pardon for my bold
attempt, in most humble manner I take my leave.

Your Honors most humble at command Luke VVealsh.

Certain verses written by master Wealsh as a thanksgiving unto God, for the
prosperous success of the King.
Our mighty God in highest heavens does sit,
And yet behouldes all things on earth below:
How godles men applies their chiefest wit,
With might and maine his truth to overthrow.
But praised be our God of greatest power,
Who can confound their doings in an hour.
Though all the Princes of the earth conspire,
Against the Lord and Christ his only son:
They shall be scattered in his furious ire,
And be constraind to leave where they begun.
For praised be our God of greatest power,
Who can confound their doings in an hour.
By him alone all royal Kings do reign,
By him they rule and sit in Princely throne:
Then fly you Rebels with your traiterous train,
Your sin and shame throughout the world is known,
And praised be our God of greatest power,
Who did confound their doings in an hour.
In Pharaos sight the stout Egyptian King,
The Lord by Moses many wonders wrought:
His chosen flock from bondage great to bring,
But all his threats he leaudly set at naught.
Yet praised be our God of greatest power,
Who did destroy his army in an hour.
And thou O France whose fame in former days,
Did glorify the pleasant Western parts:
How often in thee did God his wonders raise,
Which never yet could mollify your hearts?
But praised be our God of greatest power.
Who can confound his foes within an hour.
What grievous tumultes in thy towns are wrought?
What rage and bloodshed by thy City wales?
What wrongful broils and causeless wars are sought?
What great Rebellion on thy people falls?
But praised be our God of greatest power,
Who can confound his foes within an hour.
Jerusalem that City of renown,
By diverse tokens warned was of sin:
And thou O France did lately see a Crown
Plast in the sky, by God over the King.
As many men affirm and plainly shoe,
A wondrous thing if that the truth be so.
Then cease your iarres obey your sovereign Lord,
Whom God from Heaven affirms your loving King:
Whose heart, whose hand, does seek with one accord,
Your health, your wealth, and Realm in peace to bring.
And blessed be our God of greatest power,
Who can confirm these blessings in an hour.
FINIS.
A true discourse of the most happy victories obtained by the French king,
against the rebels and enemies of his Majesty. With a particular declaration of
all that has been done between the two Armies, during the months of September
and October and part of November. Also of the taking of the Subburbes of Paris
by the king.
IT is too common and manifestlye known with what pomp and vanity the Duke de
Main and all those of his side, had vanted in every place, of the supposed
success which they assured themselves to obtain in the voyage which they
enterprised in September last past, against royal Majesty in the parts of
Normandy. But it is more manifestly known how those vainglorious brags given
out both by words and writing were gain-saide by God in the effects which
followed, for it pleased him clean contrary to their Imaginations, and
published boastinges, to turn their glory into shame. As by the following
discourse most plainly shall appear to the comfort of all such as wish the
aduancemente of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ.

His Majesty hearing that the enemy approached very fast intamped himself at
Arques, a good league from the town of Dieppe by the prudent counsel of the
Lord Marshall de Birron. And viewing the place, he by and by judged, what the
enemy was able to do against him: whereupon he caused certain trenches to be
made on the top of the hill, in most substantial manner as far from Arques
as a cannon can shoot. A devise so excellent and pollitickely framed, that
all the Army (for a need) might be covered therewith, out of all danger,
upon which trenches, his Majesty planted four pieces of great Artillerye,
this being done in sight of a fair plain, where he supposed the enemy would
come to fight, whether also we might come without any danger, this Camp of
the Kings was pitched close almost after the fashion of the Romans in old
time. All the companies were quartered in villages round about according as
his Majesty had ordained their lodginges. The mean while the enemy approached
more and more very fast, and on Friday the fifteenth of this month of
September, he came and lodged his vantgard within a league and a half of the
town of Diepe, whether his Majesty was gone that morning to mark the enemies
intent, who saw plainly by their present dealing, that they minded utterly to
spoil the suburb called le Paullet, before he came to Arques.

The king therefore with all diligence fortified the said suburb, but
especially the milles which stood must open to the enemy. Which being done,
his said Majesty would once again as near as he could with small company mark
and see, how the enemy was lodged, and perceiving through the occasion of some
one that they were to forward, commanded five or six of his company to give
them a charge, which was done to the loss of seven of the enemy upon that
place, his Majesty retourning at night lay in his quarter of Arques, doing
nothing all that night. But many before day marched out of the subburbs of Diepe
to the field who made against the enemy most hot skirmiges, where mounsier de
Chastilion commanded over the footmen, who showed himself more and more a
most skillful and valiant leader, in so much that our Arquebuzers never
discharged bullet in vain. The horsemen also were so set and placed by the
king, who behaved themselves so well, that no person could pass to the enemy,
without his express commandment, otherwise there had been great disorder
among us, so earnest were our soldiers to the fight.

Among other his Majesty permitted certain English Lords well mounted and
armed, and most sumptuously attired, I knew among the rest the noble gentleman
master d'Euerax, brother to the right honorable Earl of Essex, who was one of
the foremost and forwardest in the fight.

Who employed themselves so valiauntly and with such hardy courage that they
five many of the enemies, and in less then the turning of an hand, threw them
to the ground and took prisoners all that incountred them. About ten of the
clock this forenoone, we saw above the milles, how the enemy in great troops
came down the hill, to continue their passage after some of their company
which had already passed the brook which separated their army and ours, and
being entered in the medowe, they purposed to assault a village called
Boutielle, where the kings white cornet was, At what time we saw coming
against them the very same instant six gentlemen, well armed whom we knew
not, but the King was since certifyed, two of them were the Lords of Saint Mark
and Sturbe, which took their swords in hand to such purpose, with two
Arquebuzeirs on foot, that the enemies being in number thirty or thirty five,
which before had passed the brook, were constrained to turn their backs and
wade again through the same brook, to escape their hard pursuit, flyinge with
great fear and sorrowful countenance. Upon this accident it is greatly to be
considered, that if the enemy might have had their wiles without expulse, and
that their whole Army might have got over the water as those few did, our little
host had been soon separated in the half, by their mighty and huge Army,
which would have been very hardly joined together again.

His Majesty had sent the two companies of light horsemen of Mounsier de Lorges
and Harambres to the medowe. Notwithstanding they had by and by a contrary
commandment to go to Arques to meet Mounsieur de Birron: but all the while
there continued this day great skirmiges at the milles of Paullet. And his
Majesty aduainicing himself always to see their doings, a Harquebuze shot
came and struck in the thigh of his horse, but many more bullets passed on the
contrary side of Arques.

Now those two companies of light horsemen, (of which one part belonged to my
Lord the Prince of County, conducted by Mounsieur d'Armillie his lieftenant)
whom the king had before sent to Monsieur de Birron, had commandment of the
said Monsieur, to go and spy out the lodging of the enemy, who lay in a
village called Martinglize beyond the river, where also was the Duke, and
Cheualliers d'Amall, of Nemoures and Sagonne, but our men being come to the
place, ran upon the enemy so fiercely, that they had no leisure to carry word to
Monsieur de Birron of that they had seen, and with so great fury they did it
being eager in fight, that they broke down on horseback all their rampires
or barrycades, and slew of the enemy more then an hundredth and fifty, some
held the Marquis De menelaye to be in the number, besides diverse Captains and
many good prisoners which they took.

The Cheualliers d'Aumall and Sagonne were the first that fled, with four
regimens of footmen, who found more safety in their feet, then in their
swords. His majesty which was on the side of Diepe, perceiving by the enemies
doings that they determined some secret mischief, came into his quartor,
where he found how those of his side had most faithfully served in that
encounter latelye made, which was done so manfully, that if he had had those
three ha^dred horses ready which afterward came, we had brought away their
chiefest forces. Notwithstanding we were very sorrowful for mounsieur
d'Armille, who had received a dangerous wound through the body by a sword, but
we have good hope of his recovery. On Sunday the seuenteeth of that month,
his Majesty caused a Cannon to be discharged against the enemy, on the side of
Arques, while mounsieur de Chatellon made a most valiant skirmige, winning
many prisoners that day, from the enemy, without the loss of any one man, and
but few of his soldiers wounded. Which was done while those of our side
recovered a village where they flew thirty men at the least. Every day of that
week they spent in the like skirmishes, by the means whereof an infinite
number of gentle men and soldiers came of their voluntary goodwil, and
yielded themselves and service to the King, part whereof were the troops and
regiment of Mounsier de Rubempree which before was taken of the enemy at
Gornay, who followed ye enemies army for the safeguard of their arms. On
Tewesday the one and twentieth by break of day, about five of the clock in
the morning, the enemy marched out from the said Martinglize in battle ray,
so well ordered as might be, their faces set against Arques and against the side
of our Swizers, the most part of their horsemen in sundry troops wonderful
strong and thick, their footmen in their wings excellently well placed. Then
the Lord de Billin with two thousand shot, was chosen to give the onset upon
us. But his majesty who was a horseback until midnight, perceiving that the
einimies intent was to win the river, and to pass the same, for which
purpose they had made certain bridges of wood to be cast over, he presently
set such order in every place, that they could do him no hurt without great
loss to themselves. And now having seen the order of their battle
incontinent he sent forth his light horsemen: And the company belonging to my
Lord, the Prince (governed by Mounsieur de Montater) and his majesty's own
Cornet, wherein were my Lords le graund prior, le graunde Esquier, le count
Rochfoucaue, le count de Rousye, le count de Rochford, with diverse other
gentlemen which were nearest to the person of his majesty. And these he placed
by those that were his footmen, dividing his Swizers in two parts. And in
this order he set against the enemy, knowing that God could as well vanquish
with a small as a great number, having earnestly desired his aid, as well by
his public as private prayers. Then marched he against his enemies with such
resolved and princely courage, that the encounter and charges which he gave
against his enemies (being in number twenty five thousand men of war, and
himself but nine thousand) was most wonderful. The enemy lost at that time
nere hand five hundredth men, beside prisoners and wounded soldiers: And the
rest were in such fear, that eighty of our men chased and put to flight a
thousand horsemen of the enemies, following the pursuit most courageously, and
crying, God save the King. But they were so astonished, that the help which
the Duke de Maine had provided to send to succor them, standing in a raye
behind, were so disordered by their own men whom we had in chase, who
mingled them selves among the rest for safegarde, that they were all brought
into such an horrible confusion, that had his Majesty received the forces
which afterward came, it had surely been the end of our miseries, for we had
not left one of them living. But our lives are not yet sufficiently amended,
that we should receive so great a blessing of God. But when his Majesty's
forces were refreshed, the launce-knights of the enemy, to the number of
fifteen hundred presented themselves in a little trench that was nearest to
the enemy (which was kept by part of our two hundred launce-knights) who
lifting up their hands, protested unto them, and desired to yield them selves
to the King, condicionally that every one of us might put up our weapons. This
was esteemed such good news among us, and so credibly believed, that we made
no other account but to receive them with great joy, and thereupon we were
commanded that we should put up every man his weapon: so we mingled our
selves among them without any suspicion of treason, shaking one another by the
hand, then two of the Captains of the said launce-knights went to meet with
the King: but being examined suddenly, faultring in their words, and scant
knowing what they said, named themselves servants to the Duke de Maine. The
mean while they fed us with fair words, only to delay the time till their
whole troops of horsemen might come to sustain them, desiring much to see the
King. But to come to the effect of their treason, the King having no confidence
in them, commanded us to march down the meadows from them. And the while these
villains passed toward the Switzers; as though in deed they would yield
themselves wholly to the King. But on a sudden they seized upon Mounsieur le
county de Rochford: and seeing no more our horsemen before them (and
contrariwise theirs approaching still) they began to set upon us with all their
might, while fifteen hundredth more of their horsemen came marching along the
Meadows in battle raye, very strong and close to chase us. We being no more
but two hundred and fifty, or three hundred horsemen at the most. The Cornet
of Mounsieur de Monpancier, and the Cornet of the great Esquier going before us.

This notable and subtle treason astonished us so much, that the most part of
our company maugre our chiefest commanders, went back toward our Switzers,
which Switzers never moved or shronke for all that, but stood still most
firmly, showing such a manly countenance, that the enemy suspected our
shrinking was but for a policy to bring them within the danger of the
Switzers, as was a great likelihood: for retyring in such good order as we did,
we put our selves in two parts: our Arquebuzers very well placed, so that if
the enemy had passed a little farther (which he durst not do) they had surely
had their payment,, and the whiles our Cannons played upon them and killed
many. And they seeing, that by the diligence of the King, we which were before
in great disorder, were so soon set in fair and good order, who in this
extremity being on the other side, to gather the troops together, to the end
he might expulse these traitorous launce-knights (which he did) he showed
himself both King, Captain, and soldier, al at one time, bearing himself
with such a princely courage that thereby he became the only myrror to
encourage the Switzers them selves, as they have since confessed. But his
magnanimious and hardy exploites was not done without perrill of his royal
person, for one of his boots was pierced, and his horse was hurt with a
Caliuer shot at what time his Majesty fought both on horsbacke and on foot,
with the assured assistance of the Marshall de Birron, and so much prevailed,
as though the enemy had had the lesser, and his Majesty the greater number.

The enemy then retired himself very shamefully, and sore scattered, leaving
their dead and ours, in the field behind them, seeking to shroude themselves
in the village of Martinglize, marching about by the hill to escape from us. On
the side of Dipe to paullet, Mounsieur de Chastelon, and Mounsieur de Guittery
had a good number of footmen, of the which mounsieur de Chastillon brought five
hundred good Calleeuers, who came very fitly, the very instant that the treason
was discovered. His Majesty stayed yet in the field and commanded that
certain pieces of Ordenance should be brought to our little trenches, to be
discharged against Martinglize where the enemy lay. Which being done, he after
commanded all persons in most solemn sort to render thanks unto God for
their deliverance, even as he had before desired his aid in his just cause.
Then greatly did his Majesty commend the service of the Switzers in the
presence of their Captains, and in drinking, he drunk unto them for the
valiant exploites performed that day by them.

And to the end you may know all things that has passed, that nothing may be
forgotten here worthy the noting, we are most credibly informed that Saga
colonel of the light horsemen on the enemies side dyed that day, who was since
buried in Roan with mounsienr Saint Vidal chief master of their Artillery,
the Lord of Saint Andrew brother to the County of Saux, mounsieur de Vuiuille
younger son to the Marshall of Vienele, the Chiuallier de Picart and many
other of name and account whom I can not remember, we took prisoners ye Earl
of Billin, Marshall of the Camp. Tremblecourt, le count de Loraine who had the
first regiment, and mounsieur Sauelack with diverse other Captains for the
fight was so heat that nothing could be heard, which was the cause that many
died which would gladly have yielded themselves to our mercy. And although we
deserved no such favor at Gods hands, yet he blessed us in such sort that we
lost but seven and twenty men in all this fight: nevertheless we were very
sorrowful for the death of Mounsieur the Count de Rousy (brother to the Count
de la Rouchfoucaue) and Mounsieur de Bacqueuille whose virtues were most
commendable among all men but especially the valiant and hardy service which
they performed in this fight, wherein they declared their wonderful courage.
Neither can I forget Mounsieur le graund Prior who seeing Monsieur Sagonne, (a
most proud and ambitious enemy, and one that boasted himself over all men,
for the opinion he conceived in his manhood and strength of arms) he called
him to the fight, and so near they joined together that when they parted,
Sagonne bore away his marks: And see the judgment of God upon this unhappy
man, lighting down from his horse he broke his neck.

The next day after, that is to say, on Saturday the three and twenty my Lord
Stafford (Ambassador to the most Noble Queen of England) arrived at Deep,
bringing both money and victuals, but he saw not his Majesty till the next
day. About midnight the same Saturday we perceived that the enemy changed his
opinion, and that he would raise his army (which in deed he did on the Sunday
morning very early without any sound of Driumne or Trumpet in sight of his
Majesty and all his army) which were for the most part in battle raye on the
otherside of the hill, where my Lord Ambassador met him: this remoouing of
theirs was done with such great fear and so cowardly, that they left their
wounded men in their villages behind them, leaving by the way both their
victualles and munition for war, and to their greater shame, they stayed not
so much as to give their Sentriles warning to retire or save themselves. They
took their journey as though they went to a Town called Ewe, but we pursuing
them took some prisoners, who being demanded the cause of their soddaine
retire, were found in diverse tales concerning the same, for some said it was
because of the coming of the English ships which lately arrived there,
wherein they doubted great aid to be sent to his Majesty. Some other said it
was upon occasion of placing of new Governors among them, in steed of those
which had been slain, whereupon great strife grew among them, some allowing of
one man, some choosing an other: but we must refer that unto God, who can
work confusion among his enemies when it pleases him. Then the enemy went
past the forest and river, to S. Vax, Quinqueuille, and Bures, and lodged
himself on the otherside of the town of Deep, where he spredde his troops
all about, intrenching himself in the nearest Villages, as Ianuall, Boutiles,
Apeuiell, and others. The king seeing that caused his battle to be pitched in
the plain near Arques, and sent the regiment of Monsieur de la Guard into the
Castle of Arques (but the day before he brought all his army into Deep and the
suburbs of the same, with three pieces of great ordinance) and being come, all
that night he caused great and large trenches to be made in a place called the
Mount of Cattes, on the side of the enemy, so that he had a fair defense in
the morning, in which place he lodged a part of his footmen, under the
Government of Monsieur de Chastelon, with thirteen ensigns of Suitzers: the
rest of his army he placed in the town, and in the fort of Paulet, but in the
fort of the Mount of Cats on the side of Ianuell the King caused two double
Cannons to be planted, which were shot off upon the enemy without any shot
in vain, because they were all on an heap, and their horsemen could not come
into their quarter, but by the favor of the Cannon.

The first day of October the enemy planted six pieces of ordenance upon the
top of the hill by Ianuall shootting five or six vollies of shot into the
town, wherewith was slain one of the Kings Cooks, a woman, a maiden, and a
boy, doing also great hurt unto two ships which lay at Anchor in the haven.
But they withdrewe soon after their Cannons from that place, because by our
Cannons their master gonner was slain, and two pieces of their ordenance
dismounted, which was done by a skillful English Cannoneir, who was presented
to the King by my Lord Stafford, Ambassador to the Queen of England. The
fourth day of October the enemy broke down all their Rampires or Gabions,
because our men visited them more then they desired, making them to forsake
them every foot, And seeing they could no better prevail the enemy retired
himself again with great shame and loss of men, and the utter ruin of his
army (after he had used all the cruelties that might be) taking his way toward
Picardie, not daring to fight against the help which was coming toward the
King. His Majesty little thinking of the enemies sudden departure, saw how
he raised his camp on a soddaine in sight of them all, whereupon he presently
imagined that he went to fight against the helps which were coming toward
his Majesty, (which were brought by the Earl of Soysson, the Duke de
Longeuiell, and the Marshall d'Aumont before they could join with his
Majesty. And the more his highness mistrusted the matter by their shifting
into three several places and never far off from his Majesty's army. But
his grace knowing that these helps were come within seven or eight leagues,
he determined with three or four hundred horsemen to go meet and join with
them, leaving the Marshall de Birron in Deep with all the rest of the army.
And although the enemy was but five leagues off when his Majesty joined with
his new forces, yet in sight of them all: his highness took parforce the
town and Castle of Gamasche, and since he took in like manner the town of
Ewe, which was as great an occasion as might be to procure the Duke de Maine to
the fight. But in steed thereof, and fearing he should be constrained
thereunto, he most cowardly went over the river of Some, into Picardie, seeking
to excuse this shameful retire with a greater disgrace, for he published
abroad that he was constrained to come down into Picardie to take him self
possession of the towns of that Province, which matter was before entreated of
by his Deputies, in the town of Aras at what time the said Duke de maine had
bound himself to the Spaniardes to deliver all those towns into their hands:
but the Spaniards would not come to aid him, before he had performed what he
was bound to do, unto which composition he was in doubt the people of those
towns would not easily censent. The King which had a special desire to bring
the enemy to an open battle: seeing he would not do it so long as he was on
this side of the river of Some, and now being the first that had passed the
said river, he thought it now impossible he should be brought thereunto. His
Majesty therefore resolved himself to stay for the enemies return back
again, not caring much for his passing into Picardie, for that he knew the
people would never yield unto him. And although the Frenchmen in their heat
and natural hastiness, sell sometime into sedition and rebellion, yet he knew
their anger lasted not long, and that they are not so far degenerated from
the opinion of their Ancestors, that they would (to please another man's mind)
subject themselves to a strange Government, having so many examples before
their eyes to beware, knowing also that there is no Dominion in the world more
sweet unto them, then their own Country.

So his Majesty staying yet a while in the town' of Deep, as well for the
affairs of Normandy (where he left the Duke de Monponcier) as also to
receive the four thousand Englishmen, sent unto him by the most renowned
Queen of England. He departed from the said Deep the one and twentieth of
October, taking small iourneyes on this side the river, keeping himself still
on the enemies side until he came to Meulan, ten leagues from Paris, whether
the king with all speed purposed to go, thinking that the enemy for his
credits sake, and in respect of the promise which he made to al those of his
side, hereafter to perform, would come to their aid at the least, and what he
would not do to win Deep, he would do without fail for the defense of
Paris. In consideration whereof the king thought good to go over the river of
Seinne at the bridge of Mullin, which done he came presently to Paris, for two
causes: either to compel the enemy to the fight, or to make him retire from
Picardie, where by treason he sodeinly took the town of Far, and he might
well do the like by others, especially because the most part of the nobility
of that country came to meet the king. His Majesty a mile from Paris lodged
his army in the nearest vilages round about, and the very same day his Grace
went all about to suruaie the trenches along the suburbs on the other side of
the river. And sodeinly by the advice of the Princes and Marshals of France,
with other expert Captains, his Majesty determined to assault the said
suburbs the next morning by break of day, by three several troops, and in
three sundry places, whom, he divided himself into this sort. In one of the
troops were the four thousand Englishmen, under the government of my Lord
Willoughbie their general, with two regiments of French men, and one regiment
of Swisers, with the Marshall de Birron accompanied by the Baron de Birron his
son, and Monsieur de Gettrie, with diverse other noble men, who had
commandment to assalt the suburbs of Saint Marcel and Saint Vidor. The second
troop was of four regiments of French men, two regiments of Swisers, and
four companies of adventurers with the Marshall of Aumont accompanied with
Monsieur le Grand Esquier, and Monsieur de Rieulx Marshall of the field, and a
good number of Nobles and Gentlemen, who had in charge to assault the suburbs
of Saint James, and Saint Michael. The third troop with ten regimentes of
French soldiers, one regiment of Lanceknights, conducted by Monsieur de la Noe
and Monsieur de Chastellon assaulted the suburbs of Saint Germain Bucie, and
Nele, each troop having a good number of Gentlemen on foot well armed, to
sustain the footmen, if any extreme resistance should be made. Moreover, on
the rereward of every troop, two Canons and two culuerings were planted. He
also had separated all the horsemen of the army in three companies, his
Majesty commanding over the first, Monsieur le Count de Soyson over the
second, and the Duke of Longueuill over the third, each of them appointed over
one of the three sides of the suburbs. And in this order the first of November
by break of the day, the said suburbs were so shaken by the Kings power,
that in less then an hour they were all taken, with the loss of fifteen
hundredth of the enemy or there about, winning also the same time fourteen
Ensigns and thirteen pieces of ordinance great and small. And with such fury
we followed the chase of our enemies yt our men were mingled among them, even
within the very gates of the city. And had the Kings great ordinance come so
soon as it was appointed, the gates of Paris had bin surely beaten down
before they could any way have strengthened them. So his Majesty came into
the suburbs of S. James about seven or eight of the clock in the morning,
the people crying along the streets with a loud voice, God save the King, with
more show of joy, then any fear at all. Beside, the King observed so good an
order among his soldiers, that no man started from his company for any
pillage, till the quarters were appointed what they should do. The enemy
about an hundred and fifty shot, took for their defense the Abbie of Saint
German, showing them selves as though they would hold it perforce, as they
might very well do by reason of the strength thereof. But about midnight
being by us charged to render the same, they gave over their hold, and then
was his Majesty master of all the suburbs beyond the water, which are
esteemed almost as big as the City of London within the walls. All that day
we employed about the intrenching of our selves before the gates of the City,
and in setting Warders in every place. His Maistie was advertised about
midnight, that the Duke de Maine came into the City of Paris with his forces.
Whereby the King had part of his wish, because the enemy was now retired from
Picardie. He would therefore try if he would fulfill the other part of his
desire, that is to make battle against him, that he might not altogether
execute his justice against the walls of the City, and his own subjects who
were greatly seduced by the bad persuasions of his enemies, whereupon he stayed
all the Thursdaie to see if they would come forth to the fight. But seeing they
showed not any feeling of their loss received the day before, the king came
forth of the suburbs the Friday morning, and set himself in battle raie
offering fight to the enemy, but staying in the field from eight of the clock
in the morning, until eleven, and seeing all that time no man appearing, he
marched quite from thence, contenting himself for that time, to have
enterprised and executed upon that City, that which heretofore was never done,
leaving his enemies a perpetual reproach among all men, that being offered the
fight, durst never come thereto. Which may serve for a special warning
hereafter, never more to believe the great brags and baunts which they have
and shall publish of their great valor and courage, which was a manifest token
to the inhabitants, how near they were brought to their utter ruin and
confusion, and as for the help which they had, it was almost worse unto them
then the loss of all their substance. And I cannot think but they did at this
time sufficiently learn to their cost, that they cannot stand in safety,
without the keeping of a great and mighty army, the charge whereof would be
worse unto them in the end, then if they were taken by the surie of the enemy.
And no doubt but it would be the universal desolation of that fair and
wealthy City, which is the chief and principal ornament in the Realm, of
whose welfare and safety his Majesty has plainly showed he has more tender
care then themselves.

FINIS.

