This Heav'n-aspiring Tree's The Imperial State,
Whose Branches, shaken by the Hand of Fate,
Let fall their rip'ned Monarchs, which appear
The same in Vrns, as on their Thrones they were;
Herodian observed, and having took
Their several Lives, he weighs them with his Book;
He finds them weight; Then recommends their Story
To Fame; Fames Trumpet sounds their Shame; their Glory.
HERODIAN'S IMPERIAL HISTORY
engraved title page depiction of Herodian depiction of Fate shaking the tree
of state depiction of Fame with her trumpet Non ficti pravique tenax

London printed for Hen: Taunton and are to be sold at his shop in St. Dunstons
Church yard Fleetstreete. 1635



HERODIAN OF ALEXANDRIA His HISTORY OF TWENTY ROMAN Caesar's, and EMPERORS (of
his time.)

Together with the most Solemn Deification of the Roman Emperors and Empresses.

Interpreted out of the Greek Original. LONDON, Printed for Henry Taunton,
and are to be sold at his shop in St Dunstons Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1635.

THE APPROBATION OF THIS HISTORY, by diverse Authors of Eminent place and
esteem.
PHOTIVS the Patriarch, in the 99. Chapter of his Greek Bibliotheke. HERODIAN
neither swells with Superfluity, nor omits ought that is Necessary: In a
word, he is not inferior to any, (...)
for all Historical perfections.

HENRY STEPHAN in his Latin Dedicatorie Epistle to Sir Philip Sidney (of
glorious memory) prefixed before Herodians Greek History. THe reading of
HERODIAN'S Historical Work, will be a matter of singular profit and pleasure
to the Nostri Temporis Aulicis.
Courtiers of this Age; for he represents (as in a glass) the Emperors of
that age, and their Courts; with their Comedies, Tragedies, and Tragecomedies.
It is most certain, that he was both an Eyewitness, and an Eare-witnesse of
many things which he writ. No Roman History did ever comprize such Tam
mirabiles vicissitudines.
wonderful changes happening in the Roman Empire, in so small a circle of time.

POLITIAN in his Epistle to Pope INNOCENT the 8. HAving bethought my self
which of all the Hstorians I should translate (according to your H. Command) I
resolved at last on HERODIAN that Excellens rerum scriptor, and qu^ diu in
Palati^^ versatus Aul^^* affect eque eque ^t^t^^, ^istorian ^^ suis (...)
e^^^^* etc.
excellent Writer, who having long continued in the Emperors Court, and being
very aged, undertook to write the History of his Time: which he has
p^rformed, not only eloquently, but withal most frankly and faithfully. Your
Holiness shall find in him great variety of Persons and Actions, many strange
things, and frequent Examples of Fortune, Vacillantis
reeling (as it were) sometime one way, sometime another: as also wonderful
wise Counsels, accompanied with unexpected Events; and sage Precepts,
delivered in a Style full of Majesty and Sweetness: lastly, a very Magazin of
Morality; and (as it were) a Mirror of humane Fate: whence all men may select
choice Documents conducing to the Weal and advancement of a private and
public Estate.

M. D. WHEAR, the public Professor of History in the most noble University
of Quam semper amatam, semper honoratam (sic D^voluistis) habebo.
Oxford, in his Book, De Ratione and Methodo legendi Historias. page 35.
HERODIAN, a most polite and judicious Author, has with singular Eloquence
described the Acts and Lives of many Caesar's and Emperors.

THE NAMES OF the Roman Caesar's and Their gold, silver, and copper Coins
(with their Images and Inscriptions) are in the custody of that noble Antiquary
Sir R. C.
Emperors, whose Acts and Lives are recorded by HERODIAN.
Anno Dom. 163. MArcus Aurelius There is yet extant at Rome a stately Columre
erected by him. In his time Britain received the Christian Faith. Beda Eccl.
Hist l. 1.
Antoninus, Lucius Verus his son in law.
The two first Co^sorts in the Roman Empire Anno Dom. 182. His naked Statue (as
he played the Gladiator) is extant at Rome in the F^rnesian Palace. See the
Transumpt o^ it in M. ^. Sandys Iournall, page 271.
Commodus. Anno Dom. 195. So called because he pertinaciously refused to
accept the Empire offered her by the Senate. X(...)
Pertinax. Anno Dom. 195. Julian. Anno Dom. 196. Niger, in Asia, at once. His
Triumphall Arch is yet extant at R(...) No marvel if three stood for the
Empire; for (once) there were thirty Princes elected ^one time, by several
Armies ( Zenob^a was one of them.) Vid Bed.
Severus, in Italy, at once. Albinus. in Britanie, at once. ^ Rep. l. 6. ^. 5.
and P. Mexia in Galten.
Antoninus, Geta, Brothers and Colleagues.
Anno Dom. 219. Macrinus, and Diadumenianus Caesar (his Son.) Anno Dom. 220.
Antoninus, or rather Pseud-Antoninus Anno Dom. 224. Alexander. Maximinus.
Quartinus.
Anno Dom. 237. Gordian the Father. Gordian the Son.
Anno Dom. 239. Maximus, In the Greek, Balbinus (sed in Fast^ Siculis and
Capitolinis, Albinus.)
Albinus, Colleagues. Anno Dom. 241. Gordian, Nephew to the Elder Gordian.
HERODIAN HIS IMPERIAL HISTORY.
The first Book.
The Contents.
HErodian's Historical faith. The rare and choice Occurrents here recorded. A
brief Character of the Emperors ensuing. A Summary of the Emperor Marcus his
Life and Reign. The education of Prince Commodus. How Marcus bestowed his
Daughters. His Princely Qualities. Herodian a great Statesman. Marcus misdoubts
Commodus. His speech on his deathbed. He dies and is generally lamented.
Commodus succeeds. His speech to the Army. His bad Courtiers. Pompeianus a
grave Counceller. Roman Triumphs. Commodus poasteth to Rome. The Romans
dearly affect him. His Description. His Entry into Rome. Perennius a
Favorite. Lucilla, Commodus his Sister, conspires against him. Perennius his
Treason. Jupiters Festival. Roman Priests honored. Perennius discovered and
beheaded. Maternus rebels: his Plot detected. The Mother of the Gods: her
Holiday; and History. The strange river that made men geld themselves. A Plague
and Famine at Rome. Cleander a Favorite. His Treason. He is generally hated.
He arms the Soldiers against the Commons. Fadilla detects him. He is
beheaded. Commodus his Cruelty and Credulity. Strange Prodigies. Rome fired.
Commodus debauched and infatuated. Liberty, a Goddess. Commodus, an excellent
Archer. He fights naked with Fencers before all the People. New-yeares-gifts.
New-years-tide solemnly kept. Marcia, Commodus his chief Concubine.
Philo-Commodus. Marcia and others conspire Commodus Death. He is poisoned and
strangled.

HERODIAN'S Induction.
OF those which have hitherto bestowed their pains in compiling History, and
recording the Acts of ancient Time, diverse affecting the reputation of
Learning, and covering by wel-tuned language to eternize their Fame (lest by
silence they should be lost among the Vulgar) have been more careful to gild
and embosse their Discourse, than to mine and search out the Truth: supposing
(belike) though they Truth, the Soul of (...)
delivered many fabulous Narrations of things done so long since, they could
not easily be controlled; and yet nevertheless, their neat and spruce
Compositions should be highly applauded.

Others again, transported Passionate Historians censured.
with spleen against some particular People, or with hatred against Tyrants;
or else too much addicted to glorify Princes, Cities, and private persons, have
not perfectly delineated the Image of Truth.

For my own part, I have Herodians Historical Faith.
here undertaken to write such a History as is not grounded on vulgar Aires,
and vain Noyses, or on the uncertain Credit of foreign Relations; but of
such recent Occurrences as I have (...)
faithfully and industriously collected, and cannot be unknown to the modern
Readers: and I doubt not, but the intelligence of so many ra^e and memorable
Accidents, which have fallen out in so short a time, will be both useful and
delightful to After-ages. For if we reckon from Augustus, who reduced the
State of the Roman Commonwealth to a Monarchy, we shall not find in all
those two hundred years (for thereabouts it is to Marcus the The rare and
choice Occurrents here recorded.
Emperors Reign) either such change full Successions in the Empire, or such
various chances and events of civil and foreign Wars, or so many Cities of
our own and of the Barbarians conquered: beside earthquakes and pestilences,
and the lives of Princes and Tyrants so strange and uncouth, that all the
Records of Antiquity can hardly parallel: some whereof enjoyed their
Principality for a longer time, others but a very small while; yea, many of
them having scarce accepted the Imperial Title, the very same day they were
elected, were like wise rejected, and deposed from their Imperialitie.
Whereupon, the City of Rome having in 60 years more Emperors than for the
proportion of the time, there happened many variable and admirable Occurrents:
for those Princes ^ (...) Character of the Emper^^^s en(...)g.
which were of riper years, and could manage their Affairs with Wisdom and
Judgment, did govern themselves, and their People with great honor; but the
younger sort of them, for want of Education and Experience, ran many wild
courses. Thus disparitie of Years and Conditions, was accompanied with
diversity of Manners and Actions. The particulars whereof, exactly observing
the Concurrence of the several Times and Princes, we come now to specifi^.

A Summary of Marcus his Life and Reign.
THe Emperor A^reli^s.
Marcus had many Daughters, and but two Sons; whereof the younger (called (
Vertssimus) dyed in his childhood; the other, (named Commodus) he The education
of Prince Commodus.
was very sollicitous to bring up well: to which purpose, he sent far and
near for many noble Philosophers, giving them great pensions to train him up
in virtue and learning. His Daughters, The Emperors prudent choice of his Son^
in law.
as soon as they were marriageable, he bestowed on the best men he could
find among the Senators: For in the choice of his Sonne-in-lawes, he had not
so much respect to ancient Nobility or great wealth, as to their Excellence in
all Moral and Intellectual Endowments: rightly esteeming the Goods of the
Mind to be the only permanent and durable Riches. His Princely qualities
He was endued with all Princely virtues, and of such rare and exquisite
knowledge in Antiquities, that he was not inferior to any of the Greeks or
Romans in that kind; witness his many wise Speeches and Writings yet extant.
He was also a Prince of so sweet a temper, and debonaire behavior toward all
men, that he would give (...)
his hand to every one that came to him, commanding his Guard to put back none
that came to see him. In a word, he was the only Emperor that showed himself
a wise man, not only in Words or Edicts, but in Gravity and Continency of
life. Whereby it came to pass, that many famous Men for Wisdom and Learning
flourisht in his time. For Men are very apt to imitate their Princes, for the
most part. Now whatsoever he did in peace or war remarkable, or attempted
against the Northern or Eastern Barbarians, is already committed to writing
by many excellent learned Men. But those Occurrents, which all my time (after
Marcus decease) I either saw or heard of (most of which I knew experimentally,
in regard I bore diverse (...)
high and honorable offices in the State) it is now my Task to relate.
Herodian an Officer of State.


Marcus being now weakened with Age, and worn out and spent with incessant
Toil and Care, suddenly fell (while he was in Now Austria and H^aga^^e.
Pannonia) into a grievous disease. When he saw himself past recovery, he was
sore Marcus misdoubts ^^s son Commodus.
afraid, left his son, who was then but About 18.
young, should in the first heat of youth, through his uncontrollable Imperial
power (when he was gone) abandon good arts and exercises, and betake himself
to drunkenness and intemperance: for Youth is too forward to shake off the yoke
of Discipline, and devote it self to the bewitching blandishments of sensual
(...) calls S(...)^lity these ^^aigne good of ^east^. ^p. 93.
delights. Being also a man of (...)
high wisdom, and profound judgment, he was much terrifyed at the
remembrance of many Princes, which came to their sovereignty when they were
young and youthful: as, of Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant, who was such an
Epicure in his Diet and manner of living, that he richly rewarded them that
could invent any new kind of pleasure: as also of Alexanders Successors, which
were so exorbitant and irregular in their Government, that they were a great
blemish and dishonor to the Empire. For See Justin lib. 24.
Ptolom^y so shamefully exceeded the bounds of modesty, that contrary to the
laws of the Macedons, and all the Greeks, he made love to his own Sister.
And Antigonus, who would needs personate Bacchus; in stead of the Macedonian
Coronet and Diadem, did usually wear a Wreath of I^ie, and carry a T(...)
spear dressed with green boughs in stead of a Scepter. The good Emperor was
also much troubled with the late Examples of In him the (...)
Nero, who slew his own mother, and made himself the s^^ff^ of the Vul^^r;
and of Demitian, who was a most horrible cruel Monster. Revolving therefore in
his mind, these Images of Tyranny, he was grievously tossed twixt Hope and
Fear. Moreover, he much distrusted the bordering German Nation, which (yet) he
had not wholly at his Devotion, but p^rtly had Confederated, partly Conquered:
whereof many (notwithstanding) had withdrawn themselves from his Obedience,
and were only held in awe with the presence of the Prince. He was therefore in
great doubt, lest despising his sons Minority, they would presently fall to
rebellion; it being the usual gu se of Barbarians, to raise Tumults upon the
least Occasion. In these perplexities, he commands his Kinsemen and principal
Lords that werethere, to come unto him; who being assembled, he sets the young
Prince before them, and lifting up himself a little on his Couch, makes this
Speech unto them.

The Emperor Marcus his Speech on his Deathbed.
IT is no mervell, if you bemoane and lament my present Case; for Men are led
by Nature, to compassionate their Kinsmens miseries: and those doleful things
which we see before Object^ praesenti^ movet potentism
our eyes, do most excite our commiseration. But between you and me there is
a more special bond: for knowing how dearly I have loved and respected you, I
may justly challenge your love again. And now is the fittest (...)
season for me to judge, whether I have deservedly honored you thus long, and
taken all occasions to prefer you; and for you to show your selves grateful
and mindful of those Innoblements. You see here my son (your Pupil) is now
entering the April of his Age; and withal, into such broken Seas, and surging
Waves of business, that if he have not good Pilots, he may soon, by
mis-governement, steer a wrong course, and make shipwreck of his Fortunes. Be
you therefore as so many Fathers unto him, by your grave Counsels and
Instructions. For no Treasure in the World can so assure a Prince, nor the
strongest Guard so well preserve him as the Good Will and love of his Subjects.
The way to reign long and securely, is not to purchase Fear by Cruelty, but
to win Love by Mildness and Clemency. For they are the best servants to
their Sovereign, and furthest -- peragit tranquilla potestas Qu^d violent a
nequit.
from Jealousy and Flattery, not which are compelled by necessity, but which
are gently led by their own loving inclinations, nor will they ever stand out
in any thing he shall require of them, unless they be unjustly and violently
oppressed. And it is a point of great difficulty, for a Prince, that may live
as licentiously as he list, to moderate himself, and bridle his own app^tite.
Wherefore if you by your prudent Admonitions shall plant in him a care to live
well, and often remember him of what he has now heard, you shall render him a
worthy Prince both to your selves, and others; and you shall (thereby)
propagate my memory; which this only way you may make immortal.

No sooner had MARCUS ended his Speech, but he swooned, and became
speechless; being so sick and heart-sunke, that he fell back into his bed.
Which lamentable sight, so moved all there present, that many of them cried
out, as they were distracted. But he lived only a day and a night longer,
Marcus dies
and then April. 17. An. Dom. 181. Aetat. 59.
deceased: leaving to the present Age, an infinite love to his Majesty, and to
the future, an everlasting memorial of his Virtue. As soon as his death was
made known, it is incredible what weeping and wailing there was in the Army,
and among all the Communalty: yea And is generally bewailed.
there was no nation throughout the Roman Empire, but with many tears
received the message, and deplored their incomparable loss in him: some
calling him their good Father; others, their good Emperor: some their most
valorous Commander; Others, their virtuous and temperate Prince. Nor indeed,
were any of them deceived in him. Somefew days after the celebration of his
Funeral, it was thought fit by the Lords, to present the young Prince to the
Army, that he might speak to them, and (as the manner of new Emperors was)
bestow a Largess of money upon them, to press them (as it were) to his Love
and Service. Proclamation therefore was presently made, that all the Army should
assemble together: which done, Commodus comes forth, Commodus succeeds.
and having sacrifised to the Gods, ascends a high Throne erected in the midst
of the camp; where, being accompanied with his Fathers Kinsmen and
Counselors, which were very many, and excellent learned men, he speaks to
this effect.

Commodus his Speech to the Army.
I Make no doubt, but both you and I are alike sorrowful for our late
Calamity; and that you are no less grieved than my self. In my Fathers time,
I never bore my self among you as your Superior: for he loved us all, as if
we had been all one; and did more willingly call me Fellow-souldier, than
Son: esteeming this, to note a participation of Nature; that, of Va^our: yea,
when I was an Infant, he would often carry me in his arms, and deliver me into
your hands, recommending me (as it were) to your tutelage and fidelity. I am
in good hope therefore of all your loves, seeing the elder sort of you may
repute me for your sosterchilde, and my equals I may well term my
Schoolefellowes in Arms; so dearly did my Father love us all, as if we had
been but one; being careful to train us up in all kind of Virtuous
exercises. And now after him, has Fortune The Roman Emperors kept the Image
of Fortune in their chambers with great veneration.
made me your Prince, not by faction (as some of my Predecessors) nor by
usurpation. For I only was borne and bred in the Court, and as soon as I came
into the world, was received not into a private cradle, but vested in Imperial
purple: so that at the same instant, the * Hinc Porphyrogeniti
Sun saw me a Man and a Prince. Which, if you duly consider, you will love
me not as a Dative, but a Native Emperor. And now that my Father is translated
to Heaven, into the Society and (...)
Consistory of the Gods; the Rule of the World, and care of humane affairs, is
devolved unto Us: which, what powerful effects, or good success it may
produce, rests wholly in you. For if you make a brave end of the War, and
extend the Roman Empire to the Ocean, you shall puchase immortal honor, and
crown the Memory of our common Father; who (as you ought firmly to believe)
both hears what we say, and sees what we do. How happy then are we, that
shall have such a Witness of our worthy Acts. And whereas the Honorable
Services which you performed hitherto, with such prosperous success, may be
attributed to his Providence and Governance; your magnanimous Achievements
under me your Young Prince, will purchase you a p^culiar Trophie, and most
noble Testimony of Loyalty and Valor. Thus shall you procure to my tender Age
a glorious esteem, by your valiant Exployts; and the Barbarians being curbed
in the beginning of our Reign, shall for the present not dare to insult, in
contempt of our Minority; and being terrifyed with their own harms, shall
ever hereafter stand in awe of Us.

Having thus said, and assured the Soldiers by a Magnificent Donative of Money,
he returned to his Palace. For a short time, he was in all things directed by
his Fathers Friends, who daily assisted him with their prudent Counsels,
permitting him only so much recreation, as was conducible to his health. But
after a while, diverse of his (...)
Court winding themselves into favor, sought by all means possible to corrupt
this hopeful young Bad Courtiers.
Prince. These fawning Pa^asites, placing their felicity in Belly-cheere, In
Ventre and Vene^e.
and brutish lusts, did ef-soones put him in mind of the Delices of Rome,
sometime recounting to him what brave things were there to be seen and heard;
otherwhile, extolling the great plenty and abundance of all things there.
Further, they showed how incommodious it was, to reside on the banks of The
greatest River (after Nilus) in all the Roman Empire Au. Gel. (^ Sa^^st.)
Ister, which were both barren and unfruitful, and perpetually subject to Cold
and Rain. Will your Majesty (said they) still drink such frozen and muddy
waters; while others enjoy the warm Bathes, cool Rivers, and dainty Air of
Italy? With these, and the like sugared Allectives, they inflamed the young
Emperor with the love of Pleasures. Whereupon calling his Council together, he
told them he had a great desire to see his Native Country: but being loath to
show the Reason of that sudden resolution, he said he was afraid, lest some
of the chief Nobles should seize the Imperial Palace at Rome, which being a
strong Castle, he might easily of the (...)
Traine-bands and others, raise a great Army, and proclaim himself Emperor.
They hearing him allege these U^^brages, in great fear and amazement looked on
the earth, and knew not what to say* at last, Pompeianus the most ancient of
Pompeianus a grave Statesman.
all, who might best speak, because of his affinity, having married Commodus
eldest sister, said.

Pompeianus his Speech.
MY dear Sovereign, it is no marvel if you long to see your Country: for
there is in all of us a vehement desire to be at home; but yet we check it not
withstanding, because the Business in hand does much more import us: th^se
domestic contents may with more security hereafter be enjoyed. As for Vbi
Imperator, ibi Roma.
Rome, it is there, where the Emperor is. But if we abruptly break off the
War, it will be both dishonorable and dangerous: for so we shall animate the
Barbarians, who may think that we dismarched for fear of them, rather than
any other respect. Now if your Imperial Majesty will proceed ^^ your
Conquests, and extend this North part of your Empire unto the Ocean, in what a
glorious Triumph may you enter the City, with the chained and captived Kings
and Princes of the Barbarians In the Roman Triumphs, The Captives went before
the triumphant Chariot. Vid. s. Amb. Ser. 62. de Pentecoste.
before you? For thus the Romans in ancient Heroical times, attained so great
renown. Fear not therefore any domesticke Usurpers: For the prime Senators
are here with you, and all the Military Forces are here ready to defend you.
Besides, here is all the Imperial Treasure. Lastly, the memory of your Father
has confirmed to you, the eternal Love and Loyalty of all Estates.

This strong Disswasive of Pompeianus, did (for a while) somewhat abate the
edge of the young Emperor, who revering his words, and having nothing to reply
with his Honor, dismissed the Lords, saying, he would better consider of it.
But his Courtiers still pressing him with continual importunity, he advised
no further with his Council, but instantly sent Letters to Rome, and commanded
all to prepare for the Journey, giving order to certain Troops to guard the
Banks of Ister, and keep off the Ba^barians Incursions. They having received
their Charge, did soon subdue many of them; and others, by rewards they won
unto them: which they might casily do: for the Barbarians being naturally
greedy of (...)
cash; and not caring what dangerous Adventures they undertook, lived
altogether by spoiling and forraging; or by selling Peace at a dear rate:
which Commodus well knowing, and having a huge Mass of Treasure; to the end to
leave all things in security, gave them whatsoever they demanded.

As soon as it was proclaimed through the Army, that they must all go home,
there was a mighty hurly-burly in the Camp, every man desiring to quit the
Enemies Country, and to taste the Delights of the City. And when it was
certain ly known at Rome, that the Prince would come, all the Roman People
were ravished with Joy, every one conceiving excellent hopes of their young
Emperor, and firmly believing he would tread in his Fathers steps.

He presently took his Journey Commed^s posteth to Rome.
with high speed, posting in youthful bravery in his Chariot through every
City, (as he passed) being To ally received, and ^^^ertained, with great
Magnificence, and general Applause: But when he drew near to Rome all the
Roman Peers and Commons (every one striving to b^ foremost) went out to meet
m^n with (...)
^aurels in their hand^, and all kind of Flowers, (as the Season afforded) to
welcome their Noble young PRINCE: whom (in truth) they loved most dearly and
cordially; in regard he was borne and bred among them, being of the most Noble
The Romans dearly affect him.
and Imperial Blood, from three descents. For by his Father, he was descended
from the most Honorable Senators: and his Mother Faustina, the Empress,
daughter to Antonius Pius, and Niece (by the Mothers side) to the Emperor
Adrian, derived his Pedigree from Trajan her Great Grandfather. Thus Nobly
descended was Commodus, who was not only (...)
conspicuous for his youthful Prime, but also for his lovely Feature; being of
a His Description.
fine Constitution of body, of an amiable and Majestique Presence, bright and
(...)
sparkling Eyes, yellow and curled Lo^ks, insomuch, that when he walked in the
Sun, his Hair would glister l^ke Flames of Fi^e, which made many suppose it
was powdered with Gold. Others conceited, it was a sign of some divine
Excellence, and that he had that glistering Luster (on his head) from his
birth. Moreover the silken down of his Cheeks began to blossom, and bud
forth like Roses in the Spring. This hopeful and Illustrious Emperor did the
Romans congratulate with passing hearty and affectionate Acclamations,
strowing all the way before him with Flowers and Garlands. Having His Entry
into Rome.
made his entry into the City, he went first to the Temple of Jupiter, and
then to the Fanes of the other Gods: Lastly, having solemnly thanked the
Senators and Pretorian soldiers, for their singular fidelity, he reposed
himself in the Built on Mount Palatine, otherwise called Palatium. See Aur^l
Victor* de Orig. Gent. R^m.
Imperial Palace.

For some few years he gave all due honor and regard to his fathers friends,
being content to be rul d by them in all matters of weight. But afterward
committing the Government of the Empire to others, he made Perennius an
Italian (a Perennius a Favorite.
good Soldier) Captain of the Pretorian Bands: who suffering the young
Emperor to follow his Pleasures, and wallow in all manner of sensuality,
undertook all the Affairs of the Empire, and (in effect) ruled alone. The man
was insatiably covetous, for being never content with what he had, he still
gaped for more. Yea, it was his daily practice to calumniate the ancient
Counselors of the Emperors Father, and to being within compass of
Misprision, the most Wealthy and Noble Persons, that the young Prince being by
false fears and feigned surmises induced to put them to death, their Goods and
Estates might be confiscate to his use. Yet for a while, was the Prince more
temperable, out of respect to his Fathers memory, and his Counselors
Gravitie: but by the malignity of Fortune, that good Temper and Disposition was
soon altered and perverted. The occasion was this. Lucilla, Commodus eldest
Sister, Lucilla, Commodus his Sister.
was first wedded to Lucius Verus, whom Marcus had associated in the Imperial
Government, having obliged him in the strongest bond of love, by bestowing his
Daughter upon him. After Lucius decease, she still retayning her former State
and Dignity, was by her Father affianced to Pompeianus, and permitted by
Commodus to enjoy the same Honors. For as an Empress she had her Chair of
State erected on the Theater, and Fire likewise (after the usual manner)
carried before her. But when Commodus had married Crispina the Empress.
Crispina, who then as the PRINCES Wife, was to have precedence, Lucilla
stormed at it, and interpreting the others Honor to be her Disgrace, yet durst
not impart her Design (of surprising the Empire) to her husband Pompeianus,
because she knew he loved Commodus entirely: Howbeit, opening her mind to a
Noble young Gallant, called Quadratus, with whom ^u^illa and others con(...)
against (...)
she was suspected to play the Adulteress* she grievously complay^ed to him
of the indignity, and at last persuaded him to such a Course, as was pernicious
to himself, and all the Senators. For among others of the Nobility which were
of that Conspiracy, there was one Quintianus a bold and desperate youth, whom
he inveagled, and suborned to watch some fit opportunity to kill Commodus with
a (...)
Stilletto (which he might hide in his bosom) which done, he undertook to
salve the matter with Money.

Shortly after, Quintianus standing in a blind corner in the Entry to the
Amphitheater, as Commodus passed by, offered to stab him; proclayming aloud,
that the Senate sent him that: which as soon as he had spoken, intending to
follow his thrust, he was seized by the The Conspiracy detected.
Guard, and received condign punishment for his Madness: the Emperors
Safety being wrought by his own discovery. This was the prime and maine
Ground of the Princes hatr^d against the Nobility. For his Mind was so deeply
wounded with those words, that he took them all for his capital Enemies, and
could never forget the speech of the youth which assailed him.

Perennius laying hold of this occasion, counseled him to root ou^ all the
chief Nobles and Gallants, whose Estates being confiscate and given him, he
suddenly grew to infinite wealth. For himself sitting as Judge, The
Cons^irators executed.
Commodus his own Sister, and all that had a hand in that Conspiracy, or were
but lightly suspected for it, were put to death.

Thus Perennius having made away those whom the Emperor feared (which indeed
did bear a Paternall Affection to him) took him into his own tuition: and
now being in the height Perennius his treason.
of Authority, he cast about how to usurp the Empire: to which end, he
persuaded Commodus, that his Sons (which were (yet) but youths) might be
made Commanders of the Imperial Forces in After called Dalmatia, now Solavonia*
Illyria. Whereupon he provides a mighty mass of Treasure to win the good
wills of the Pretorian Soldiers. The Sons also secretly levied great numbers
of Soldiers, that as soon as their Father had slain Commodus, they might
invade the Princedome.

This Treason was strangely detected in this manner.

The Romans use to celebrate a The Royal Festival of Jupiter.
sacred Agon or Pageant in honor of Jupiter Capitolinus, to which there is
extraordinary resort of people, as is usual at the Solemnities of that royal
(...)
City. Now it is the custom for the Emperor also to be there present and
President, together with the Priests, which Honor of Roman Priests.
yearly wait in their courses. The Emperor being set in his Throne to hear
those famous Actors, and the Theater full of spectators (which with singular
decency (...)
were seated according to their Degrees) before any thing was said or acted on
the Stage, suddenly there starts out one, in a Philosophers habit, wi^h a
staff in his hand, and a Scrip on his shoulder, (half naked) who running to
the midst of the Stage, stood still, and beckening with his hand for silence,
said; This, O Commodus, Perennius discovered.
is no time for Sports, Shows, or Festivals: Perennius his Sword hangs over
your Head, and if you do not speedily avoid the present danger, you are
undone: That same Man there has raised both Men and Money against you, and his
Sons likewise solicit the Illyrian Army: whom if you do not instantly
prevent, you are a dead man.

The fellow having thus said, whether moved thereto by some Divine Instinct; or
to purchase himself a Name (being an obscure Plebeian) or because he hoped to
attain some great Reward of the Prince for his discovery, certainly Commodus
was mightily astonished. Others, though they believed it might be true; yet they
seemed not to credit it. Perennius commands him to be apprehended, and as a
seditious frantic to be burned. Thus suffered he for his mis-timed
boldness. Howbeit, diverse that made semblance to regard the Emperors safety,
and bore Perennius upon the spleen, for his intolerable haughty and
disdainefull carriage, taking this occasion, spared not to accuse him: in so
much, that Commodus (thereby) evaded mischief, and Perennius with his children
smarted for it. Soon after there came They were British Soldiers (as our
writers say)
Soldiers unknown to Perennius son, and brought coins stamped with his
Image, which they secretly showed to Commodus, (unawares to Perennius though
he were Prefect:) and detected all the Treason: for which service they were
exceeding richly rewarded. Whereupon the next night the Emperor sent for
Perennius his head, who little Perennius beheaded.
dreamt he was discovered. He sent also Posts to his son; which by their
speed prevented the rumors of what was done at Rome, and delivered to him very
loving Letters from the Emperor, requiring him to hasten forthwith to Rome,
for his extraordinary advancement. The messengers also told him it was his
Fathers desire he should come; but writ not himself, because he knew the
Emperors Letters were sufficient. The young man utterly ignorant of his
Fathers disaster, or of the plot against himself, believed this to be true;
and though he were much troubled that his designs were thus interrupted, yet
relying on his Fathers puissance, (whom he thought to be safe enough) he set
forward on his journey, and as soon as he arrived in Italy, he was slain by
the Emperors appointment. This was the end of them.

Then Commodus made two Pretorian Praefects, supposing it not safe, to delegate
so great power to any one, which being divided betwixt two, might be the
weaker and less dangerous. But ere long another treason broke out against him
in this manner.

There was one Maternus a Maternus a Rebel.
Soldier, that had committed many villainous outrages: whereupon for saking the
camp, he associated diverse Renegadoes like himself, and quickly rallied
together a great Rabble of Roarers; wasting and spoiling Villages and Fields.
Having got much booty, there resorted to him a far greater number of Rogues,
whom he promised great rewards; and having made them Sharers with him, he was
so followed, that now they seemed not to be a pack of Thieves, but an Host of
men, or a full Army. For they took great Cities, and breaking up Prisons
every where, set all Prisoners and Malefactors at liberty; which all turned
Soldiers, in hope of Pillage and Impunity. Thus did they ramble over all
Gallia, and Spain, sacking and burning all the great Cities they took.

When Commodus heard this, he sent to the Vicegerents and Governors of those
Countries, very sharp and minatory Letters, charging them with base
cowardlinesse, and commanding them to levy an Army against them. Which when
those Free-booters understood, thinking those Countries but hollow ground for
them, they dispersed themselves, and slinking through unused Bywayes, made their
Rendezvous in Italy: where Maternus began now to look big, and take more upon
him: consulting with his companions, how he Maternus aspires to Sovereignty.
might rise to be a King. For seeing his former adventures succeeded beyond
his hopes, he resolved to undertake some gallant Attempt; or (since he had
run so great a hazard) not to die a vile and dishonorable Death. But
considering withal, that he had not Forces sufficient to give battle to
Commodus, who was (yet) beloved of the Roman people; he resolved to try by a
cunning slight how the Praetorian Band stood M^^ernus his plot.
affected to him. And this was his Stratagem. In the beginning of the spring,
the Romans celebrate a great Anniversary Festival to the Cybele.
Mother of the gods, in whose honor they likewise set forth a stately show: at
what time, all the most sumptuous and precious stuff of the Citizens, and the
choicest Jewels and Singularities of the Emperors, are solemnly carried before
the Image of the Goddess; all men having liberty to revel and mask at
pleasure, and to disguise themselves in the habits of what Magistrate or
Officer they fancy (be they never so great) so that a man can hardly discern
the true from the counterfeit. This, Maternus imagined would be a fit time to
color his treason, and to act his Design, which was, to arm himself and his
Followers, in all points, like the Emperors Guard: whereby they might thrust
in among the Spears and Halberds, as part of his train, and suddenly dispatch
him, ere any were aware. With this purpose he privily entr^d the City with a
select Troop; but some of his companions disdaining that their Fellow-thiefe
should He is detected by his fellows and executed.
become their Prince and Sovereign, discovered all to the Emperor: whereupon
before the solemnity, this king of Rakehels and his Accomplices, were apprehended
and executed according to their demerits. Commodus having sacrificed and
rendered thanks and supplications to the Goddess, for his deliverance, kept
her holiday with great devotion, honoring the Show with his own presence,
which made all the people so glad, that they celebrated the day with great joy,
for the Emperors safety.

The Reason why the Romans have this Goddess in such high veneration, I have
thought good to declare out of their Histories, because it is not commonly
known to the Greeks.
THey say, that her Image The History of the chief Roman Goddess.
was let fall by Jove, and that it is unknown who made it, or what it is made
of; and they firmly believe it is no humane handiworke. The tradition is, that
it fell in old time from Heaven, into a Field of Phrygia, called Pessinus, by
occasion of that fall of the Image (it being there first discovered.) Others
report, that a Battle was there fought betwixt Ilus the Phrygian, and Tantalus
a Lydian, the Quarrel being, either about a way, or for the stealing away of
Ganymede: and when they had long fought on even terms, and many were slain
on both sides, the Place had that name of the great Slaughter there made. There
likewise they say, that while Ganymedes brother strove to rescue him from his
Lover, he was pulled in pieces betwixt them: but to salve the matter, it was
given out, that Jove took him from them both; whereupon he had divine honor
ascribed to him. In this See plinl. 5. c. 32.
Pessinus the Phrygians in old time celebrated their Orgia upon the banks of
the River Of which river whosoever drank, became so m^d, that he gelded
himself
Gallus (whence the gelded Priests of the Goddess, are called Galli.) But when
the Roman State began to flourish, the Oracle telling them that their Empire
should continue and overtop all others, if they could get among them the
Goddess of Pessinus, they dispatched Ambassadors into Phrygia, to desire the
Goddesses Image, which was easily granted them, because they alleged that
they were their cousIns of the whole blood, and descended of Aeneas the
Phrygian. When the Image was brought by Ship to the mouth of Tyber (which was
then the only Port the Romans had) suddenly by some divine power the Ship stood
still, and could not be moved with all the haling or pulling of the Romans. At
last a Vestall Nunnne, that was falsely accused to have lost her Virginity
(which she had vowed to keep inviolate) fearing she should be condemned,
besought the people to make the Goddess Pessinuntia her Judge: which being
admitted, she untied her Girdle, and prayed in the hearing of all, that if the
Goddess knew her to be a Virgin immacula^e she would command the Ship to
remove. Then tying her Girdle to the Ship, she pulled, and it followed her: the
Romans admiring both the Divinity of the Goddess, and the virginity of the
Priestesse. And thus much of the Story of the Goddess Pessinuntia; which
though it be somewhat long, yet I trust will not be unpleasIng to them that
are not versed in Roman Antiquities.

Commodus having escaped the Treason of Maternus, doubled his Guards, came
seldom abroad, retired himself to his Houses of Pleasure in the Suburbs, or
to his Mannours far from the City, and gave over all Exercise of Imperial
lurisdiction.

It happened about the same time, that all Italy was infested with a furious
Pestilence, but especially the City of Rome, which A Plague at Rome.
of it self was wonderful populous, and had (besides) a great number of
strangers in it, that resorted thither from all parts of the World. By reason
of which Confluence, there was a strange Mortality of Men and Beasts. Then was
Commodus persuaded by his Physicians, to retire to Laurentum, which had a more
cool and temperat air, and many shady groves of Laurel (from whence it took
the name.) For they said, that the sweet smell and pleasant shade of Of
Antidots against the Plague, and groves of Bays, See L. S. Al^ans Natural
History, Centur. 10. Experiment 913. and 936.
Bay-trees, did much avail against the Contagion: For which purpose also, the
Citizens (by advice of Physicians) anointed their Ears and Nostrills with
precious Ointments, and continually used Perfumes and sweet Odoraments, that
their senses (as they said) being prepossessed, the infected Air might not
enter, or if it did might be over-mastered. But notwithstanding, the Plague
still raged, and Men and Beasts were every where found dead, on heaps: There
was also a grievous A Famine at Rome.
Famine in the City, upon this occasion: One Cleander a Phrygian, having been
publicly sold for a Slave by the common Crier, became the Emperors Page: and
being bred in Cleander a Favorite.
the Court, grew at last into such favor with (...) prefer^'d him to gre(...)
Honor and Authority, as first to b^^ Squire of the Body, then Gentlem^n of his
Bedchamber, lastly, Captain of the Guard. This fellow was so puff^ up with
pride and too much rankenesse of prosperity, that he also had a mind to the
Empire. And having got a huge Mass of Treasure, he monopoliz'd and engrossed
great store of Corn, His treason
which he had locked in Granaries; intending when the City was pincht with
want, suddenly to win the good wills of the Commons and Soldiers with
magnificent Donatives. He also erected a stately An Act^vity-Co(...).
Gymnasium, and a public Bath. These were his bayts to catch the people.

But the Romans having long borne him a grudge, and ha^ed him for his
insatiable Avarice; said that he was the only cause of their Calamities. And
first they publicly traduced him in He is generally hated.
the Theaters: but at last, all in general ran to the Emperors Palace in the
Suburbs, crying out against Cleander, and demanding Justice upon him. All the
Suburbs being in an uproare, while Commodus lay wantonizing in the innermost
rooms, and knew not of the tumult without (for Cleander looked to that) on a
sudden (ere any wist) there rusht among the people the Emperors armed Horsemen;
who by Cleanders command, wounded and He arms the Soldiers against the
Commons.
overthrew all before them. The Citizens being all Footmen, and unarmed, were
not able to resist: Whereupon they fied amain into the City, but being
followed by the Corners of Horse, great numbers were slain and trampled under
the Horsefeet, or thronged to death: for the Lanciers pursuing them to the
Gates (without any stay) killd them outright. The Citizens which kept home,
understanding what slaughter was made of their friends and neighbors, shut
their doors, and from their House-tops threw Stones and Tiles at the
Horsemen. And now the Commons had the better: for, not fighting hand to hand,
but darting and throwing every where aloft (out of their reach) they wounded
many of them, and put them to flight: some were slain by the continual
throwing of stones; others were thrown to the ground by their Horses, which
stumbled on the Stones that lay on heaps.

Also the Bands of Foot, which were billeted in the City, and hated the
Horse-troops, suddenly came to the aid of the Citizens. A civil War being
thus begun, yet durst none tell Commodus, for fear of Cleander. At last,
Fadilla (his Fadilla Commodus his sister.
eldest sister) running to the Emperor (for they could not deny access to
her) with her hair dishevild, and in mourning weeds, prostrated her self at
his feet, and said; Your Majesty She detects Cleander.
here pursues your pleasures, and little know in what danger you are. We your
flesh and blood are ready to be slaughterd. Your City of Rome, and a great
part of your Army is overthrown; and those outrages which Barbarians would
not offer, your own servants have acted; yea they, on whom you have heaped
greatest Honors, are your chiefest enemies: Cleander has armed the Commons,
and Soldiers against you; and being hated of one sort, and loved of the other;
both sides are up in Arms, and are now killing one another, and filling the
City with blood. And we anon shall smart for this Geere, unless you
presently make an end of that your wicked Servant, who is the Author of all
this mischief, and will instantly be your ruin. Having thus said she rent
her garment and diverse there present, taking heart at the words of so great a
Lady, put Commodus into a terrible fright. And now fearing the instant danger,
he sends hastily for Cleander, who knew nothing of what was told the Emperor,
but suspected somewhat. Being come, he commands him to be arrested; and
having struck off his head, and fastened it to a Spears point, he sent it to
the Commons; to whom it was a most pleasant and welcome Spectacle.

Thus was that bloody broile extinguished, and the fight on both sides ceased.
For the Soldiers seeing him slain, in whose quarrel they fought, feared the
Emperors displeasure: for it was now apparent that he was abused, and that
what was done, was without his warrant. But the Commons were well satisfied
with his death, that was the cause of all the mischief: And now Cleanders two
Sons (all the children he had) and all that had been his Flies and
Familiars, were murdered, to a man; whose carcasses were dragged through the
City in most opprobrious sort, and lastly, thrown into the Iakes. This was
the fatal end of Cleander, and his Accomplices: Humanity (as I may say) having
ambitiously showed in one man, that as Fortune can upon small occasion, raise
from low degree, to high dignity; so in unexpected manner, She can likewise
praecipitate whom she has advanced.

Commodus being now afraid, left the Commons would rise, and attempt some new
matter against him; was persuaded notwithstanding by his Courtiers, to enter
the City: where being received by the People with great Applause and
Magnificence, he reposed himself in the Imperial Palace. And now having past
so many sharp Pikes, he wa^ jealous of every one, killing first one, and
Commodus his Cruelty (...) ^re^^^ity.
then another; for he gave creditto all (...)
Accusations, though never so false. Moreover, he was so enslaved to sundry
sensual pleasures, which took him up wholly day and night, that he abandoned
all honorable Studies and Exercises, and banished from his Court, as infidious
Persons, all that had the least measure of Honesty or Learning. But Buffons and
Debauched Miscreants, were (as his chief Minions) most powerful with him. He
was excessively given to Coach-races, and fighting with wild Beasts: more than
became the modesty or Majesty of a Sovereign Prince: yet his Flatterers extold
him as a brave Champion, for those Feats. (...).


At this time there appeared in the sky diverse fearful signs. Stars were
seen continually in the Daytime, and blazing Comets of a huge length, hanged
(as it were) in the midst of the air. All sorts of Creatures contrary to kind,
brought forth monstrous and deformed births. But that which most grievously
afflicted the City for the present, and amazed them with the ominous Presage,
was this most hideous disaster; that the Temple of Peace (the stateliest and
daintiest Monument of Rome) was on a sudden, without any Storm or Tempest
preceding (but only a little Earthquake) quite burnt to the ground: whether
by lightning, or fire (which might burst out, by the shaking of the Earth) is
uncertain. That Temple was the richest of all other, because of its strength;
being ^uriously adorned with (...)
Don ries, of Massive Gold and Silver: yea, every person of Quality, had stored
there his principal treasure. But the fire happening in the night, made many
rich men poor. All therefore deplored the public, and every one his private
loss. When the fire had consumed Rome fired.
that Temple, it burned also many of the most beautiful buildings of the
Cirie: among which was the goodly Fane of Vesta; insomuch that the Image of The
Pall^dium; the sacred ^ire, etc. ^ere in the V^^^alls Charge. L. ^l^^. l. 1. ^.
2.
Pallas, which the Romans kept in secret and sacred veneration, and was brought
(as they say) from Troy into Italy, was now first seen in public: For the
Vestall Virgins carried it through the Sacred Street, and conveyed it into
the Emperors Palace. Most of the fairest Pieces in all the City, perished in
these flames, which raged many days together, and could not be quenched but
with sudden showers which fell: whereupon, it was wholly reputed a Celestial
Work; all men being fully persuaded, that the fire began and ended by the
Decree and Power of the gods. Diverse also conjectured that the burning of the
Temple of Peace was a Prognosticke of Wars to ensue: which Conceit was
verified by the sequel, as in the succeeding books we shall declare.

The Roman Citizens being thus surrounded with direful mis-haps (one in the
neck of another) begaune to look sour upon Commodus; imputing all their
miseries to his illegal Executions and dismal Deeds: For his Excesses were
notoriously known to all; neither did he seek to veil them: being ambitious
to exhibit in public those base things which he formerly acted in secret.
Commodus his prodigious vanity.
Yea to such drunken dotage he was now grown, that he refused his Fathers
name, commanding himself, in stead of Commodus the Son of Marcus, to be
styled Hercules the Son of Jupiter: and accordingly he forsook the Roman
and Imperial Habit; and in stead thereof, thrust himself into a Lions skin,
and carried a great Club in his hand; and (which made him extremely ridiculous)
he put on also purple Amazonian Robes, embroydered with Gold; expressing in one
and the same Garb, a Feminine Delicacie, and a more than Masculine Austerity.
This was his daily Attire. He gave also new names to the Months of the Year,
abolishing the old, and calling them after his own As August, Commodus:
September, Herculeus: December, Amazonius
Sirnames: most whereof, referred to Hercules, as to the most valorous Hero.
Further he commanded his Statuaes to be erected in all parts of the City, and
One before the Senat-house, in form of an Archer ready to shoot; to the end
his very Images might strike a terror into the beholders. But after his Death,
the Senate took it away, and placed there the Image of A Goddess among the
Romans.
Liberty. And now could not Commodus any longer contain, but needs must he
make himself an Actour in public Shows: proclayming that he would with his
own hands kill the Wild Beasts that should be presented, and likewise fight
at sharp with the bravest Swordmen. When this strange News was blazed
abroad, there flocked innumerable people out of Italy, and the Countries
adjoining, to see that spectacle which they never saw, nor heard of the like
before. For he was generally reputed Commodus an excellent Darter and Archer.
such an excellent Marke-man, as, whatsoever he aimed at, he could hit with
Dart or Arrow: and though he had about him most expert Parthian Archers, and
Numidian Darters, yet he far exceeded them all.

When the day of that grand Solemnity was come, the Amphitheater was thronged
with Spectatours. Now there was a Tarras set up for Commodus; wherein to run
round about it; and thence fight (aloft) with the Beasts, without indangering
his person (which showed rather his skill in Shooting, than his Valor.) He
slew in Chase, Buckes, Does, and other horned Beasts (except Bulls) not one
escaping him: But from the Tarras he darted at Lions, Panthers, and other of
the Nobler sort of Beasts, with that rare dexterity, as that he never threw the
second time, nor gave them any wound but was mortal. For when the Beast was
rowzed, he presently hit it in the Head or Heart, aiming at no other part of
the body; so that as soon as it was struck, it fell dead. For this purpose,
all kind of wild beasts were brought far and near; and then did we first
see those, which before we admired in their pictures. Thus did he (to the
Amazement of all) at once both show and slay whatsoever strange beast was
brought from India, Aethiopia, North or South; so steady and ready a hand he
had at his Weapon, to the Astonishment of all men.

Once did he shoot Forked Arrows at Moresco Estriges, which were wonderful
swift of foot, using their Wings as Sails in running. These did he hit so pat
in the neck, that their heads being struck off, they ran awhile See the
reason her^ of, in that noble L. of S. Albans, Not Hist. Cent. 4. Exp. ult.
headless, so furious was the blow.

Another time, a Panther having seized a man (that was brought into the Lists)
with such vehement speed, that all made account she would instantly tear him
in pieces; he darted at her with such lucky speed, as that he killed the beast
and saved the man, preventing the dint of her teeth, with the point of his
Weapon. He slew also 100 Lions with so many Darts; their bodies falling in such
order, that they might easily be numbered (not one Dart miscarrying.)

These Feats of Activity, though unbeseeming a Prince, yet because they were
proofs of his Valor and Dexterity, were not unpleasing to the people. But
when he entered the Amphitheater naked, and began to play the Gladiator; O
Commodus plays the Fencer.
it was a direful sight to see a most nobly descended Emperor, after so many
Trophies of his Father and Ancestors, not to fight like a Soldier against
Barbarians, nor to arm himself like a Roman Prince, but to prostitute so
glorious a Dignity to so sordid a profession. He easily vanquished his
Antagonists, and attempted no further than to draw blood; every one yielding
him the Mastery; as acknowledging him rather an Emperor than a Fencer. In this
mad humor he ranged so far, as that he purposed to forsake his Palace, and
live in a Fence-Schoole: and now being weary of the Name of Hercules, he
assumed the Name of a famous Sword-Player, deceased. And whereas the Romans
had the Colossus or Image of the Sun in great veneration, he took the head
from it, and set on another, representing his own; inscribing in the Basis,
not his Fathers Titles, or any Imperial Style (as he was wont) but in stead of
Germanicus [or Conqueror of Germanie] The Vanquisher of a thousand Gladiators.

But now was it high time for him to leave his Foolery, and the City to be
freed from his tyranny; which fell out in the beginning of the year, on that
day which the Romans keep holy to Ianus the most ancient Ianus his Feast.
God of Italy, who entertained Saturn, expelled by his son Jupiter; from
who^e concealment, it had the name of Latium. Wherefore to this day they first
celebrate the Feast of Saturn, and then of Ianus: whose Image has two heads;
alluding to the beginning of the new, and end of the old year. Now whereas the
Romans were wont on this prime Festivity, to congratulate each other, and
Newyeresgifts.
to send to their friends pieces of Gold and Silver, and diverse other gifts
interchangeably, in token of mutual love and observance and the chief
Magistrates of the City vested themselves in rich Purple, in honor of that
great Solemnity; Commodus then determined to issue forth, not out of the
Imperial Palace (according to the ancient custom) but out of a Fenceschoole;
and to show himself openly to the people, not in his Robes and Princely
Purple, but armed like a Master of Defense, with a train of Gladiators
following him.

This his determination, when Marcia Commodus his Concubine.
he had imparted to Marcia his most honored Concubine, who as if she were his
married Wife, had all the honors of Empress, except that of FIRE; She fell
down on her knees, and besought him with tears, not to profane the Majesty
of the Roman Empire in that sort, nor to hazard his person among such lewd and
desperate Ruffians. But when after much entreaty, she saw there was no hope of
prevayling, she went away weeping. Then he sends for Latus, the General of
his Armies, and Electus his Chamberlain, and commands them to prepare a
lodging for him that night in the Fence* school, that he might the next
morning go from thence to sacrifice on that solemn Festival, and show
himself in Arms to the Romans. They humbly desired him to desist from that
purpose, and not to do an act so unworthy an Emperor: whereupon, in great rage
he commands them out of his presence; and retiring into his bedchamber, to
repose himself at Noone (as he was wont) he took his Table Book, and writ
down those which he doomd to death that night. Among which, were Marcia,
Latus, Electus, and a great number of Nobles, and Senators; for he was fully
resolved to cut off all the ancient Counselors, and others, which were his
Fathers friends; lest his black deeds should be checked by their grave
centures; intending to divide their Goods and Estates among the sould^ers and
Swordplayers; that the one sort might defend him, the other delight him. Having
thus done, he laid his Table book on the Pallet, not imagining that any would
enter his Chamber. Now there was a little Boy that could scarce speak; such as
those, which being half naked, are decked with gold and precious stones; and
are the ^^^ysest delights of the noble^^ Romans. This boy (...) (...)dus so
extremely (...)
love, (...) often l^y in (...) (...) hi^, and w(...) Ph^lo-Commodus, that
Ph^lo-Commodus.
is, Commodus h^s D^iling; his name she wing how he loved him. The child being
fuli of play, went (as he usually did) into the Bedchamber (while Commodus
was bathing and revelling with his Minions) and taking the Book to play with,
went forth, and as some Divine Power ordained, Marcia met him; and catching him
up in her arms and kissing him (for she dearly loved him) took the book
from him; fearing l^st by his childish dalliance, he might blot out some
matters of weight. As soon as she perceived it was Commodus own hand, she
had a great appe^ite to read it, But when she found the deadly Contents, and
that she before all others was to be slaughterd, and that Laetus and Electus
were to follow, with such a number of noble persons, she sighed and said thus
to her self: Is it so, Commodus? Marcia and others conspire the Emperors death.
do you thus reward my love? Have I deserved this at your hands, for enduring
your ignoble and debauched conditions so many years? You shall find that a
sober woman is able to dash your drunken Designs. Immediately she sends for
Electus (as she was wont) in regard he was Lord Chamberlain; who (as it was
thought) was over-familiar with her; and giving him the book, said; See (
Electus) what a banquet we are to have this night. He, as soon as he read it,
being amazed (now he was an Egyptian borne, a bold and daring fellow, and
very choleric) sealed up the book, and sent it forthwith by a trusty
messenger to Laetus; who being likewise startled, instantly repaired to Marcia,
pretending he was to speak with her about dressing the Fence school for the
Emperor. Under this color they resolved that now they must instantly do or
suffer without delay or procra^ination. They concluded to dispatch him by
poison, which Marcia undertook to effect very easily, in that she still used
to give him the first Cup, which from her hand he would take most kindly. As
soon as he returned from his bathes, she presented him a poisoned Cup of
Aromaticall Wine. Commodus being exceeding thirsty with much bathing and
chasing of wild beasts, quaffes it off as he was wont. Whereupon his head
being very heavy, he fell into a slumber, by reason of his vehement exercise
(as was supposed.) Wherefore Electus and Marcia commanded all to be gone and
depart the Court, lest they disturbed his rest. Thus was it ever with him in
his drunken fits: for when he bathed or banquetted, he had no set times of
Repose: being ever distracted with several sorts of pleasures, which still
enthralled him. Having rested Commodus poisoned and strangled.
a while, and the poison now working in his stomach and belly, his head grew
light, and now he fell a vomiting extremely; either by reason he had formerly
over-glutted himself with feasting, and carowsing (which might happily expel
the poison;) or else because he used (as Princes do) to take some antidot to
prevent poison. When he had long vomited, the conspirators fearing, lest
disgorging all the poison, he should come to himself, and put them all to the
sword, they promised a great reward to o^e Na^c^ssus a tall desperate youth, to
strangle him as he lay. And this was Commodus end, having reignd 13 years
after his Fathers decease; the most Nobly-descended of all the Emperors before
him, and the goodliest person of his time. And to speak of his dexterity in
Darting, inferior to none. But he b^spurtled his life with foul Vices and
ignoble Exercises, as has bin declared.

HERODIAN HIS IMPERIAL HISTORY. The second Book.
The Contents.
PErtinax his description. His magnanimity. His worthy esteem. Laetus* his
Speech to the Army, Pertinax proclaimed Emperor, and confirmed by the Senate.
His Speech to the Senators. His rare Government. Embassies congratulatorie.
Pertinax a Father to the Commons. Informers punished. Pertinax his love to
Learning. The Pretorians mutine. His Speech to them. He is murdered, and
extremely lamented. Pretorians make Port-sale of the Empire. Julian buies it.
The Commons curse him. He is debauched. Niger commended. His Policy to get
the Empire. Stage Plays and Revells. Nigers Speech. He is elected Emperor,
and visited by Ambassadors. His Security and Error. Severus described. His
strange Dream. His de^pe Policy. He is elected Emperor. His Speech. His
Expedition to Rome. Italy surprised. Julian amazed. Alps. Elephants trained.
Severus his Stratagem. Julian deserted and slain. Severus takes the Pretorians
by a train. His Speech to them. They are degraded. He enters Rome. He courts
the Commons and Nobles. His warlike Preparation against Niger. He fears the
Britans. Their Elogie. Albinus their Governor. He is declared Caesar by
Severus. Herodian writes a History of 70 years.

COMMODVS being In the Night.
slain as has been related in the former book) the Conspirators (careful to
conceal the Fact from the Soldiers which watched the Emperors Palace)
caused his Corpse to be wrapped and wound up in a course Coverlet, and gave
order to two of their trustiest Servants to carry it forth, as some void stuff
sent out of the Bedchamber. They which conveyed it away, passed easily through
the Guards, which were either so drunk or drowsy, that they could scarce hold
their Halberts; or else gave small heed to that, which (they thought) little
concerned them. Thus was the Emperors Corpse closely car^yed out of the Court
Gates, and sent (by Coach) that night to Arisl^um.

Laetus, Electus, and Marcia, having debated what was best to be done, resolved
to give out, that he dyed suddenly of an Apoplexy; which they thought would
easily be credited, his excessive Epicurisme and Intemperance being so
vulgarly known. But their first care was, to elect for Emperor some ancient
and temperate man, both for their own safety, and that all might have a
breathing time, after so bitter and wanton a Tyranny.

After consultation, they held Pertinax his description.
none so fit as Pertinax, who was an Italian borne, famous for many noble acts
in Peace and War, and renowned for many victories over the German and
Eastern Barbarians; and the only able man that was left of all those
honorable persons which Commodus was recommended to by his Father Marcus, who
reposed greatest confidence in him, above all his Nob^es and Commanders; whom
Commodus either revered for his Gravitie, or spared for his Poverty: for that
also was part of his praise, that whereas he took greatest pains in
governing the State, yet he was the poorest of all the Nobility. To him
therefore at midnight, when all were asleep, Laetus and Electus, with a ^ew
others of that faction, address themselves; who finding the Gates shut, call
up the Porter, who opening the Gate, and perceiving the Soldiers, and Laetus
the General, ran in great affright and amazement to tell his Master, Pertinax
bids him bring them to him, saying, that now that mischief would betide him,
which he had long expected. They say, that such (...)
was his undaunted spirit, that he neither forsook his bed, nor changed his
countenance, but with a bold courage, and unappalled visage, spoke thus to
Laetus and Electus (whom he supposed to be sent to murder him:) This indeed
is the end that every night I have a long while expected, being the last of all
his Fathers friends; and I have often wondered that Commodus was so slow to
dispatch me. Why then forbear ye? Do as you are commanded, that I may be
rid from continual fear and anxietie. Laetus replied: Speak no further of
these things, which are so far beneath your merit: Our coming is not for
your destruction, but for the safety of our selves and the Roman Empire* For
the Tyrant is dead, and has his due reward, having suffered that which he
intended to inflict on us. Our coming therefore is to invest you in the
Empire, His worthy (...)
whom of all the Nobility we know to be, for Virtue, Authority, Age, and
Gravity, most loved and honored by the people; not doubting, but this our
choice w^ll be acceptable to them, and most safe for us. Pertinax answered; I
am too old to be deluded in this sort. Why do you offer to abuse me as a
Coward, and so to slay me? Then said Electus; Since you will not credit us,
read this Book (you know Commod^s his hand, having been so long used to it)
and then you shall perceive what danger we have escaped, and that we speak
not this to try you, but truly to inform you. Which when Pertinax had done,
knowing them also to be his ancient friends, and understanding all the
business, he yielded himself to their dispose. First then it was thought fit
to send to the Army, to know how the Soldiers would take it: but Laetus
undertook to get their goodwill, being their General, and therefore of some
authority with them. Wherefore the night being far spent, and the next day
the Feast of the New-yeare, they hastened to do all before it were day. They
sent also some of their trustiest servants, to disperse the news of Commodus
death, and Pertinax his going to the Army to be made Emperor. Which when it
was divulged in the City, all the people in an ecstasy of Joy, ran through the
streets to bring the happy tidings to their friends that were of any note Who
in greatest danger of Tyrants.
for wealth or worth; (for such were in greatest danger of Commodus.) Wherefore
they ran to the Temples and Altars to give thanks to the Gods (for their
deliverance.) And now some cried out, the Tyrant was dead; some, the Fencer;
others, worse than all this: For that which before they durst not mutter for
fear, they now proclaimed with impunity. But the most part of the people
posted to the Army, being much afraid, lest the ruder Soldiers accustomed
(under the former Tyranny) to ravine and spoil, would not admit for Emperor,
so mild a Prince as Pertinax: which to the end to persuade them to, the more
forcibly, they went thither in great numbers. Laetus, Electus, and Pertinax
(with the multitude) being entered the Camp, and the Soldiers called together,
Laetus spoke thus.

Laetus his speech to the Army.
Laetus his speech to the Army.
COmmodus our Emperor is dead of an Apoplexy. There is no other cause of his
death but himself: and though we endeavored to reclaim him to a better
course of life, yet all was but lost labor: For carrying himself as you know
he was wont, he has killed himself with Gluttony and Drunkenness. This was
his fatal destiny; for all die, not by the same means, but by different ways
come to their common end. But in stead of him, We, and the people of Rome,
here bring you a man venerable for Age; Gravity, and Integrity; and of approved
skill in martial affairs, whose brave Pertinax had done honorable service in
Britain, and was therefore surnamed Britanni^^^.
exployts you which are Veterans, experimentally know; the rest cannot but
acknowledge, that he has these many years governed the City with singular
honor and admiration. Fortune does therefore tender you not only a Prince,
but a Parent most indulgent: whose government, as it will be pleasing to your
selves here present, so it must needs be acceptable to your fellows in Arms,
which guard the banks of the Rivers, and defend the Marches of the Empire; in
regard they well remember his noble acts. And now we shall not need to win the
Barbarians with money; who will be sufficiently awed with the experience of
what they suffered under his victorious Arms.

Laetus having thus said, while the Soldiers pawsed, and were demurring on the
business; all the people with joyful Acclamations, proclaimed Pertinax
Emperor and Father of their Country. So also did the Soldiers, though not
with the same Alacrity: for the Multitude being every where mixed among them who
were unarmed because it was Holi-day, did after a sort constrain them to it,
being but few (in comparison of them.) All therefore having sworn Fealty to him,
and been present at the Sacrifice, the Soldiers and Commons with Laurel
branches in their hands, conduct him ere it was Daylight, to the Imperial
Palace: whither being come, he was exceeding pensive. For though he wanted
neither spirit nor resolution, yet did the present action much distract and
dismay him; not that he doubted so much his own safety (for he had despised
greater perils) but considering with himself the sudden Change of the
Tyrannical Government, and the Noble descent of some chief Senators; he
supposed they would not suffer the Empire to be invested in a man of a mean
and obscure Family, after an Emperor of so Princely a Lineage. For though his
Life was much commended for his temperate carriage, and for deeds of Arms he
were most famous; yet was he far exceeded in birth by many of the Senatorian
Order. Wherefore as soon as it was Daylight, he went to the Senat-house, not
suffering Fire to be carried before him, nor admitting any other Symbol of
Sovereignty, till he knew the pleasure of the Senators: but they, when they
saw him, did with one accord joyfully receive him, stiling him Augustus and
Emperor. Which high and envious Title (as he termed it) he disavowed at first,
excusing himself, by reason of his Age, and desiring them to pass by him, and
elect some of the prime Nobility, which might better beseem the Empire. Then
taking Glabrio by the hand, and Glabrio a noble Roman.
pulling him forth, he placed him in the Imperial Throne; He was the most
Nobly descended of all the Peers, and derived his Pedigree from Aeneas, son
to Venus and Anchises, and had been twice Consul. Notwithstanding he spoke
thus; I whom you judge most worthy, do here render you this Princely honor;
yea, all this noble Assembly adjudges you the Sovereign Rule. Whereupon
Pertinax confirmed by the Senate.
being irrresistably importuned, and almost compelled by the Senate; after much
reluctation, he seated himself in the Chair of Estate, and spoke as follows.

Pertinax his Speech to the Senators.
YOur singular Zeal, and incomparable Love, in preferring me before so many
excellent Peers, being so far from the least suspicion of flattery, that it
is a pregnant proof, and clear demonstration of your Fidelity; might happily
make some other more bold and cheerful to accept this Offer; and to imagine,
he might easily undertake so great a Charge, that should be supported with your
Friendship. ^ut these rare and high ^avours amaze me with their very
sublimity; at the sight whereof, I am extremely intimidated. For it is no easy
m^tter for a man, condignely to requite great Benefits. Among Friends, if
greater Courtesies be returned* than were exhibited; not so much the Gratuity
it self as the Gratitude is respected. But when a man's Friend has (first)
obliged him by signal Offices; if he show not all vi^issitudinary Expressions
of a thankful Heart, it may well be thought to proceed rather from blockish
Dullness, and brutish Ingratitude, than any other defect. I see therefore what
a hard Task I shall undergo, to render my self worthy of this great Henour,
which you have conferred upon me. For the Glory of Sovereignty consists not in
a (...)
chair of State, but in such royal Arts as are wellbeseeming a Prince. Look
how much Men abhor the Evilis which are done and past, so much more are they
apt to hope for better times Great Injuries are ever remembered* and Injuries
and Benefits.
Grievances are very rarely forgot: but Good turns perish as soon as they are
done, together ^ith their M^morie. Thus are we not so sensible of the
sweetness of Liberty, as of the bitterness^ of Bondage and Slavery Nor do men
take it as a Courtesy, that they may securely enjoy their own; For that, they
hold, belongs to them as their proper right: But he that that is spoiled of
his Good^o. Fortunes, can never forget so heinous a Wrong. Neither do men much
esteem the best Change that can happen for the public Good (for common
Benefits are little regarded of private persons.) But if they be d^mnifyed in
their own particular estates, th^n are they touched to the quick. Moreover,
they which have been used to* the profuse Prodigality of Tyrants, if a man go
about to reduce them (when Money fails) to a more frugall and regular course,
they will be ready to impute it rather to miserable baseness, than prudent
moderation: not considering, that such excessive Donatives (as heretofore)
cannot be given without Oppression and Rapine. But he that with Discretion
gives to every one according to his Merit, is so far from dispoyling others
unjustly, that he teaches all (by his Example) to be provident Husbands.
These things if you take into consideration; you will (I trust) lend me your
helping hands, and assist me in the Administration of the Empire: for seeing
you are not like to live under a Tyranny, but rather an Optimacie, you have
Cause to hope well, and persuade others also to the like Confidence.

Pertinax having with this speech exceedingly cheered the Senators, was with
general acclamations, and great honor and reverence, conducted to the Temple
of Jove and the other Gods, where having sacrificed for his good success in
the Empire, he went to the Imperial Palace.

When it was voyced, how graciously he had spoken to the Senate and written to
the Commons, all men were infinitely pleased; hoping that now they should have
a worthy and temperate Pertinax his rare government.
Governor, and a Father rather than an Emperor. For he made an Edict, that
the soldiers should no more wrong the Commoners, nor abuse any Passingers;
intending to plant every where good order and civility. When he went abroad,
or sat in Judicature, he showed what a me^ke and sweet spirit he had. And by
his zealous imitation of Marcus his Government, he did exceedingly content the
elder sort, and attract the Affections of all, who being delivered from the
cruel Thraldom of Tyranny, lived now in great peace and security.

The fame of his Princely virtues, moved the Nations, Armies, and Confederate^
of the Roman Empire to Deifi^ him. Yea, the Barbarians which had revolted, o^
purposed to rebel, overawed with the Remembrance of his Militar Virtue in
former times; and calling to mind his singular Integri^y, Justice, and
Clemency, did willingly sub^it themselves unto Ambassadors.
him. Ambassadors also came from all pa^ts, to congratulate the Romans, for so
Nobly qualifyed an Emperor.

But that, which was such a general Rejoicement, was much The Pret^ri^ns
Malign him.
resented by the soldiers in Rome which were the ordinary Guard of the
Emperor. For being forbidden rapine and outrage, and recalled to a civil and
regular form of life by the Emperors Edict, they reputed his mild and
moderate government to tend to their great Dishonor and Disparagement: and
because it bridled their licentiousness, they resolved not to endure it. For a
while, they did but grudge and grumble at his Commands; but at last, when he
had not yet reigned two months (having given pregnant hopes, in that shorttime,
of many excellent good acts) the malignity of Fortune overthrew all, and quite
dashed his noble and admirable designs for advancement of the Weal public.
For be first enacted that all the wast Ground Pe^tinax a Father to the Co^mo^s.
in Italy, and other Countries (though of the Princes demes^e) should be
planted and improved and freely given to them that would cultivate and manure
it: to which purpose, he granted to Husbandmen, ten years immunitie from all
Taxes, and security from all further Trouble during his Reign. As for the
peculiar Goods of the Emperors, he permitted not his name to be stamped on
them; saying, that the Propriety thereof pertayned not to the Emperor, but to
the Roman State in general. He released all Tolls and Imposts exacted in the
time of Tyranny, at the Banks of Rivers, Ports of Cities, Highways, and
Rodes; asserting them to their ancient Freedom. Many the like good Deeds he
intended; which showed his firm Resolution to benefit his Subject^. Informers
p^^isht.
He banished Informers out of the City, and commanded them to be punished where
ever they were found, to the end none might be endangered or ruinated by their
forged Criminations. Hereupon the Nobility and Co^munaltie promised to
themselves an assured happy Estate. For he was so moderate and (...)
fellow-like, that he would not admit his son, a young Youth, into the Court,
but caused him to live a private life. He frequented Pertinax love to learning.
the public Schools and Lectures, repayring also to the usual Places of
Exercise, where he demeaned himself as an ordinary man, without any Princely
pomp or State.

Pertinax thus ruling with singular good order and decency, the Praetorian
Soldiers (not enduring to be restrained any longer from their accustomed
rapines and outrages) consulted and agreed (at a drunken Feast) to make him
away (who was so great a grievance to them) and to substitute another that
would impatronize their lawless and licentious misdemeanors. Whereupon, on a
sudden, no man suspecting any tumult (for all lived in peace) in a great fury
and Brutish rage they hurry at Noonday (in a The Praetorians mutine.
Military March) with drawn Swords, and Pikes advanced, to the Emperors
Palace: where the Courtiers and Officers of State, affrighted with that sudden
and unexpected Alarm, and not able (being few and unarmed) to resist so many
men at Arms, forsook their several charges within the Verge of the Court,
and fled. Howbeit, some few that were well affected told Pertinax of the
Soldiers Mutiny; persuading him to avoid them by flight, and to desire the
peoples aid. But albeit he knew it were a safe course to follow their
counsel, yet holding it an extreme Inde^o^um, der^gatory to Imperial Majesty,
and unworthy his former glory, to fly, or conceal himself; he resolved to
affront the danger, hoping he should persuade them, and appease their
causeless Commotion. Going therefore out of his Chamber, he met them, and asked
the reason of that sudden Impression; dissuading them, without any show of
amazement: For, composing himself in a grave and venerable fashion, suitable
to his Princely (...).
State, without any sign of submission, fear, or intrea^y, he spoke thus.

Pertinax his speech to the Praetorian Soldiers.
IF you take away my life, it will be no great matter of gain to you, or
loss to me, being arrived to this Age, with so much honor. For this humane
life must of necessity determine at last. But if you, to whom the preservation
of your Prince is concredited, and which, by your oath, are to guard his
Person, should be the first that marther him, and so pollute your selves with
spilling your Countreymans and Emperors blood; (it were in present) a fact
most heinous; and might prove (in future) no less dangerous to your selves. My
conscience tells me, I have not wronged you at all. If you are sorry for
Commodus death, it was no strange thing for a man to die: but if you think he
was made away by treason, it was none of my fault: For you know, I was not so
much as suspected with it, but was altogether as ignorant as your selves of
what was then done. The suspicion (if any be) must light upon others. And
though he be dead, yet shall you want nothing which is agreeable to reason and
your estate, and not clogged with violence and ravine.

With this speech diverse of The like effect of Majesty in Q(...)as, see in
lo^t^^ lib. 14.
them were persuaded, and many retreated, being daunted with the Reverend
Majesty of their Prince: but others flew upon him and slew the old Emperor He
is murdered.
while he yet spoke, which exec(...) act as soon as they had done, purposing
to decline the f^^y of the multitude, who (they knew) would take it most
grievously, they ran to their Camp; where immuring themselves, they placed
Armed men on the Battlements, to keep the people from the Walls. This end had
that renowned Pertinax.

When this Massacre of the Prince was divulged, all places were full of
uproars, and doleful Outcries; the people ran up and down like Frantickes,
And extremely lamented.
in a great hurly burly; searching for the Actors, and not wotting where to
find them, or how to be revenged on them: but especially the Lords and
Senators took it most to heart, as a common calamity, wanting now their
indulgent Father, and most gracious Governor: all men fearing a relapse into
Tyranny; which they knew, the Soldiers so much delighted in. After a day or
two, the people were calmed with their own fears, and the chief Nobles and
Magistrates retired to their remotest country houses, avoiding the danger that
might ensue, by being present at the el^ction of the next Successor.

The Soldiers perceiving that the people were quiet, and that none durst
undertake to revenge the Princes death; kept themselves close within the Camp,
appointing those that could speak lowdest, to proclaim from the top of the
Wall, that the Empire was to be sold, and he The Empire se^ to sale.
that would give most Silver for it, should be invested in it, by force of
Arms; and safely conducted to the Imperial Palace. When they had made this
Outcry, none of the worthier or nobler sort of the Lords or Senators, nor yet
any of those wealthy Citizens, which were the small remains of Commodus
Tyranny, would go to the wall, to traffic with them, as scorning the Empire
[OF THE The braverie of the Roma^^s spirit
WORLD] on such base and dishonorable terms.

But when In^ian, a man of Consular dignity, who was reputed a great monied man
(but of little honesty) had notice late in the Evening, being at supper (in the
midst of his cups and jollity) of the Soldiers Proclamation, he was persuaded
by his wife and daughter, and a number of Parasites, to rise from his (...)
(for the Romans sat not at Tables.)
Pallet, and hie him to the Wall, to see what was done. All the way as he
went, they counseled him to lay hold on the Empire, now it was proffered; for
having store of coin, he might easily outvie all, in magnificent Donatives,
if there should be any competition. As soon therefore as he got to the
Campewall, he shouted to them, promising to give whatsoever they desired: for
he said, he had a mighty Mass of money, and Treasuries full of gold and
silver.

At that same instant, Sulpitian Julian and Sulpitian offer for (...).
Provost of the City, who had also been Consul, and was Pertinaxes Father in
law, came thither with an intent to buy the Empire. But the Soldiers were
jealous of him, because of his alliance to Bertinax, mistrusting, he went
about to entrap them, and to revenge his death. Wherefore rejecting him, they
put down a Ladder, and t^ok^ up Julian to the top of the Wall, yet admitted
him not into the Camp, till the sum he should give were agreed upon. Being
entered the Camp, he promised to renew the memory, and restore the honors and
Statuaes of Commodus* which the S^nate had abrogat^d; to afford them as much
liberty, as ever they had under him; and to give to every Soldier, more silver
then they demanded or expected, and that without delay, in regard he had it
ready at home.

The Soldiers allured with I^lian elected.
such fair Hopes, proclaimed Julian Emperor, sirnaming him Commodus. Then
slourishing their Ensigns (which they had garnisht with his pictures) they
resolved to bring him into the City. Julian having sacrificed in the Camp (as
new Emperors were wont) issued forth with a stronger Guard than formerly had
been accustomed. For having forcibly seized the Soveraignety against the
Peoples mind, by foul and shameful means, he might justly fear a
Commotion. But the Soldiers arming themselves completely. put themselves in
Battalia, that if need were, they might be ready to fight; placing their
Emperor in the midst, and covering their heads In form of a Testudo. Vid.
Lips. de Milit. Romans
with their Pikes and Targets, to prevent the Peoples throwing stones up on
them from the House-tops (as they marched.) Thus they conducted him to the
Palace, none of the Commons daring to resist, nor congratulating him (as was
usual at the Election of Emperors.) But on the contrary, they stood a far
off, cursing and banning him for purchasing The Commons curse him.
the Empire with money.

Here first of all, did the Soldiers fall into extremity of Debauchednesse,
and by their ravenous and insatiable Desire of Money, the Imperial Majesty was
blasted with Contumely. For there being none to vindicate the cruel massacre
of the former Prince, nor to withstand the base Brocage of the present Usurper;
it was the chief cause of many Insolences and Mutinies which afterward
happened: their Greediness of Money, and Contempt of Sovereignty, still
inducing Murder and Blood shed.

Julian having thus ravished the Empire, plunged himself presently into all
Riot and Disorder, little regarding State business; being wholly devoted to an
Unprincely and voluptuary life. And now it was discovered, that he had cogged,
(...)
and cheated the Soldiers; and was not able to keep up his Credit with them:
for he had not so great store of Coin as he vaunted. As for the Excheq^er,
Commodus had long since exhausted it, with his vain luxury, and vast
prodigality. The Soldiers therefore falling short of their hopes, were
extremely offended with him, and the Commoners, who knew their minds, utterly
scorned him; railing at him, when he came abroad, and taunting him for his lewd
and lascivious behavior. Yea, in the The Circus (or Horse-race) was built in
an Ovall form of great length, with rows of Seats one above the other, able
to contain above an hundred thousand Spectators. (...)
Cirque or Raceyard (where was the greatest Concourse of people) they decryed
Julian; calling upon Niger, the chiefest Officer of the sacred Empire, to
vindicate the Roman State, and hasten to free them from that propudious
Governor.

This Niger had been Consul long before, and at that time was Praesident of
Syria, which was then the highest and most eminent Dignity in the Empire; for
the Phaenician Nation, and all the Regions as far as Euphrates, were under his
Command. He was now well stepped in years, and having gone through many weighty
Affairs, had got a very high esteem for his Moderation and Sufficiency: and
was reputed to imitate Pertinax; for which Cause the Romans did chiefly
affect him. And now in all their Assemblies they still cried aloud for him;
reproaching Julian to his face, and universally calling upon Niger, with
acclamations (...)
Imperial.

When Niger understood the Romans inclination, and what Out cries they made for
him in their ordinary meetings; considering withal, that Julian was contemned
by the Soldiery, for falsifying with them, and condemned by the communalty,
for his Mercenary Purchase; h^e persuaded himself that the business would
easily be accommodated, and made no doubt of obtaining the Soveraignety.
Wherefore imparting these Roman passages and intelligences to somefew Tribunes,
(...)
Coronels, and Captains; he sent them home one after another, that these
Aires might (by their relations) be dispersed among all the nations and Armies
of the Orient: for by that course Nigers Policy.
he assured himself, that all men would most readily incline to him, when
they saw that he did not insidiously invade the Empire, but was wooed to accept
it by the ardent votes, and humble suit of the Romans. And according to his
expectation, they flocked to him from all parts, beseeching and importuning him
to take upon him the Sovereign rule. Now the The Character of the Syrians.
people of Syria are naturally light, and prone to Innovations; and were
infinitely devoted to Niger, both in regard he had ruled with singular
Clemency, and had also entertained them with Shows and Enterl^des.
Stageplayes and Revels.
For the Syrians are by natural Inclination, great lovers of sports; insomuch,
that the inhabitants of Antioch (a mighty and flourishing City) spend (in a
manner) all the yea^e in sportive Recreations, either in the City or Suburbs.
Thus Niger by continual cour^ing them with Bals, Masq^ies, Shows, and other
pleasurable pastimes, had chained their affections to him. Which he well
knowing, appointed all the Soldiers thereabouts, to come together at a day
prefixed; What time a great number of people being likewise assembled, he thus
spoke to them from a high Seat purposely erected.

Niger's Speech to the Army, etc.
With what a gentle hand I have ruled among you, and how circumspect and
punctual I have been in undertaking Actions of great import; I suppose is
well known to all here present. Neither have I here assembled you of my own
head, out of ungrounded Hope or flattering Desire. But the Romans call upon me
with incessant Clamours and Solicitations, to lend them my (...)
helping hand, and not permit so ancient, excellent, and glorious an empire to
be basely merchandized. Now as it were a high point of Folly and Presumption,
to attempt so great an Enterprise, without just Occasion intit^ling: So to
refuse to ^yd them which implore our help, might breed an imputation of
Cowardice and Treachery. The reason therefore why I have convened you at this
time, is to know your Mind; and what Course you think were best: being
desirous of your Advice^ and Assistance in this weighty Affair; which if it
prosper well, will redound to your benefit, as well as mine. Nor are they vain
or mean Hopes which solicit us; but the Roman people, whom the Gods have
made Lords of the World: and the Imperial Dignity, which is yet wavering and
unsettled in the person of any man. Now the Certainty of this Design is
apparent, both by the forwardness of them that crave our succor, and for that
there is none to make Opposition or Resistance. For they which are come thence,
assure us, that the Soldiers which sold the empire to the Usurper, are not
like to stick to him, because he has broke his Credit with them; and was not
able indeed to perform his Bargain. Show therefore (I pray you) how you stand
affected.

At which Words, the whole Army proclaimed him Emperor Niger elected.
and Augustus. Then vesting him in Purple Robes, and other Royal Abiliments
(as that sudden Preparation would afford) they conducted him (with Fire carried
before him) first to the Temples of Antioch, and then to his own House; which
now honoring as the Princes Palace, they adorned on the Outside, with all
Imperial Ornaments.

Niger glad at his heart, of this good success, seeing the Romans and all
others conspired to advance him, made no doubt of carrying the Soveraignety.
When this News flew abroad, presently all the Nations bordering on Europe,
willingly submitted to him: sending their Ambassadors.
Ambassadors to Antiech, as to their rightful Emperor. Also the Kings and
Princes beyond Euphrates and Tigris, sent to congratulate him, promising their
ayds, if he needed. He returned them many thanks, richly rewarded the
Ambassadors, and rold them he needed no supplies, for he was sufficiently
assured of the Empire, and would reign without bloodshed. In which Confidence
reposing, he began to be mo^e remiss and negligent; Nigers security.
solacing himself and the Antiochians with all variety of sports, and
Theat^icall delights; And Error.
not regarding (which most concerned him) to take his journey to Rome, nor yet
acquainting the Illyrian Armies; which he ought first of all to have solicited
and gained. But he persuaded himself, that as soon as they heard of it, they
would side with the Romans, and Eastern Forces. While he thus demeaned
himself, and anchored on these Shallowes, and Uncertainties; the Bruit of
these Occurrents was fresh among the Pannonians, Illyrians, and all the
Garrisons which were quartered on the Banks of Ister, and the Rhine, to defend
the Roman Empire from the Incursions of the adjoining Barbarians.

The President of the Pannonians Severus described.
(for they all ^ad but one Governor) was Severus, an Aff^ican by Descent, a
brave active man, but of a violent spirit, inured to a strict and austere life;
easily enduring labor and travel; of a nimble Apprehension, and quick
Resolution to execute what he determined. When he perceived by the Messengers,
that the Roman Empire hanged like a (...)
Meteor in the Sky, and was exposed to him that could catch it; he contemned
Julian, as an abject Fellow: and Niger as a dull Flegmaticke. He was also much
animated by certain Dreams, Oracles, and Presages; which are then best
credited, when they are verifyed by the event: most whereof himself recorded
in the Book which he writ of his own Life; and presented them also to
public view, in Statuarie Representations; but his last and chiefest Dream,
which raised him to the highest hope, I may not omit. What time Severus His
dream
received intimation of Pertinax his Instalment in the Empire, having
sacrificed and sworn Allegiance to him; coming home at night, he fell
asleep, and dreamed he saw Pertinax mounted on a gallant Co^rser, adorned
with Impe^iall ^^^pp^rs, which car^i^d him through the sacred Via sacr^
Street at Rome. But when he was to enter the Foru(...), where the people, in
time of Popular Rule.
Democracie, had their most solemn Assemblies; the Horse seemed to throw
Pertinax (with a terrible fall) to the ground; and gen^ly to suffer him (who
^tood next) to back him; carrying him safely and st^adily through the midst of
the Forum; lif^ing up Severus on high, so that all the people saw him, and
adored him. And there remains to this day in the very same place, a huge
brass Image of that Dream.

Severus hus enc^u^aged, and p^rswaded he was called to the Empire by Divine
Providence, resolved to try how the So^ldiers were inclined: and first he
convented a few Coronels, Tribunes, and Commanders; and taking occasion to
speak of the Roman Empire, showed how vilely it was prostituted; and that none
of spirit or worth, went about to vindicate it. He inveighed also against the
Pretorian Bands at Rome, as Traitors; for violating their oath, by spilling
their Emperor and Countrey-mans blood; saying, that it was fit they should
pursue Pertinax his murder with a sharp revenge.

Now he well knew that the memory of Pertinax was still fresh in the Illyrian
Armies; which under his command (in the Emperor Marcus time) had got many
glorious victories, over the Germans: and when he was President of Sclavonia.
Illyria, he carried himself very bravely in the wars; and ruled with such
wisdom and moderation, as well showed his rare sweet spirit, and generous
disposition. Wherefore they highly honored his memory, and were enraged
against his Assassinates: Severus embracing this opportunity, did easily draw
them to his bent, by the luster of his fair and winning Propositions;
pretending that he affected not the Empire, nor any Principality, but was
only desirous to* revenge the blood of that famous Emperor. For the Natives
Illyrians described.
of that Region, as they are a Race of men, mighty of body and limb; tall
Soldiers and good Sword men; so are they but of slow wits; not easily
discerning the plot, if a man deal sub^illy or Spalato was an Illyrian, and
Gondomar (they say) did Severely overreach him.
politickly with them. Wherefore Severus having solemnly vowed to pursue
Pertinaxes murderers; they believed him, and submitting themselves, styled him
Emperor, and conferred upon him the Sovereignty.

Having thus assured the Pannonians, he presently sent to the bordering
Nations, and to the Presidents of the Northern Provinces, which were under the
Roman Regiment; whom he easily gained by great hopes, and fair promises. For
he was the most cunning Dissembler in the world, and of a most winning
behavior; Severus a dark and subtle Prince.
not regarding to falsify his oath, to serve his turn. He knew how to cogge
for his own advantage; and would readily utter that with his tongue, which he
never meant in his heart. Thus by his courtly Letters he won all the Illyrians
to his lure, and likewise the Provincial Presidents. Which done, he levied
great numbers of Soldiers from all parts; assuming for his surname Pertinax;
which he thought would make him gracious both with the Illyrians and Romans
(for their worthy esteem of him.) His Army being assembled, he thus spoke to
them from an high Throne.

Severus his speech to the Army.
YOur zealous veneration of the Gods (by whom you have sworn) and your singular
devotion to your Emperors, do well appear by your detestation of those
heinous crimes of the Pretorian Soldiers at Rome; which are men, rather for
Show, than Service. For my own part, having never till this present,
entertained such high hopes (for you know how loyal I have ever been to my
Liege Sovereigns) it is my chief care and (...)
Prayer to pursue and effect such things, as may sort to your general
contentment, and not permit the Roman Empire, which has heretofore been
administered with so great glory and honor, to be thus embased. For albeit,
under Commodus it suffered much, by reason of his youthfulness; yet the
errors of that Prince were shadowed with his high Nobility, and his Fathers
memory. His faults deserve rather commiseration, than execration: since (for
the most part) they were not to be imputed to him; but to his flatterers,
corrupt Counselors, and Ministers of State. But when the Empire was invested
in that grave Pertinax.
Senator (the memory of whose valor and virtue has taken so deep root in
your (...)
souls) the Praetorians not enduring it, most cruelly butchered that brave
(...)nd now (forso^th) there is (...)
(...) bought the Empire of (...) but such a one, as is mor(...)ed of the
Commons (as you (...)) and not beloved of the Soldiers, whom he has deluded.
But admit they were willing to undertake his defense; they are not comparable
to you for number or valor. Besides, you are better exercised in the Wars.
For by your continual skirmishes with Barbarians, you have learned to endure
all manner of toyl^ and travel; to scorn heat and cold; Prop^r^^^^ of good
Soldiers.
to wade through frozen Rivers; to drink puddled waters; and to practice your
selves in hunting. In a Hunting a Military Exe^c^^e.
word, you have attained to such rare perfection in Martial Discipline; that
if any Would; there is none Able to stand against you. The glory of a Soldier
consists in labor, not in laziness or No Ezcellencie has foundation in
Delicacie.
delicacie; wherewith the Stall-^ed Pretorian Guards, being over-pampered, will
never be able to abide your Military (...).
Shout, much less the Shocke. But if any misdoubt the Syrian Under Niger's
command.
Forces; he may clearly collect, how im-puissant, and dejected they are, that
have not dared to stir out of their own Country; nor have had the heart to
enter into consultation of an Expedition to Rome; but love rather to sit still,
and entertain Fortune by the day: as holding it a sufficient Gu^rdon of an
unsure Sovereignty. The Syrians are better scoffers than Soldiers, and more
M^n^icall than Martial. But the Antiochians (they say) are chiefly devoted to
Niger. As for the other Countries and C^ies, which as yet see none appear,
that is worthy the naeme of an Emperor, or able to govern the state with
wisdom and courage; they do merely temporize and collogue with him. But
when they shall understand that the Illyrian Army has made another Election,
and shall hear of my name (which is neither unknown, nor inglorious among
them by reason of our exployts there, when we were there President) you well
know they will not charge me with sloth, or irresolution: nor will they offer
to make proof of your brave (...)
courage, and martial fury; being so far your Inferiors, (...)odlin^sse of
person, and excellent skill at your weapon, when you come to handstrokes.
Wherefore let us instantly advance, and seize Rome, and the Imperial Palace.
Then may we with greater facility pursue our other (...)
designs, taking our rise from thence; and reposing all our confidence in the
Divine Predictions; and event in your victorious Arms, and unmatchable.

Severus having thus said, the Severus proclaimed Emperor.
Soldiers with great cries of joy, proclaimed him Augustus and Pertinax; making
all possible expressions of Loyalty and Alacrity.

Severus without further procrastination, His Expedition to Rome.
commands all to Arm themselves as lightly as they could, and proclames his
Expedition to Rome. Then giving them Donatives, and distributing to every one a
competent Portion for a Viaticum; he marches with high speed and haughty
courage, resting no where, nor s^arse suffering his weary troops to breathe
them a little. Himself took as great pains as any, using as course Lodging,
and hard Fare, as the meanest common Soldier; without any show at all of
Imperial pomp or delicacie; which made the soldiers much more af^ect him. For
taking such infinite toil in his own Person, it did so indeare him to them,
that they readily did whatsoever he commanded.

After he had marched through Pannonia, and was come to the Mountains of
Italy, preventing Fame it self, by being seen as Emperor among them, before
they had any Intelligence of his coming; all the Cities of Italy were in a
fearful Fever, at He surp^izes Ita^y.
the approach of so great an Army. For the Italians having long since left all
us^ of Arm, and Military Discipline, dev^ted themselves to Agriculture, and a
peaceable course of life. While the Romans were a free State, and Generals
were elected by the Senate, Italy was still in Arms, and having conquered the
Greeks and Barbarians, became Lords of the world; there being not an Angle of
Earth, or Climate under Heaven, whither the Glory of the Roman Arms extended
not. But when Augustus came to the Monarchy, his pacificall Government induced
a general laziness and desuetude of Martial Exercises; for he kept only a
certain number of Mercenary Bands in Pay, to guard the Roman Empire, at the
utmost bounds thereof, which were naturally fortifyed with great Rivers, deep
Ditches, craggy Mountains, and vast Deserts and Wildernesses. Wherefore a^
soon as it was known, that S^verus was coming with so mighty an Army, they
were sore aghast at that strange news, and ^ot daring to stir against him,
went to meet him with Law^els in their hands. But he making no longer stay at
any place, than either to sacrifise to the Gods, or speak to the people,
posted away for Rome. When Julian was advertised hereof, he made account he was
utterly undone. For understanding what a numerous and potent Army the Illyrians
were, and having no hope in the people (to whom he was odious) nor much in the
Soldiers (whom he had gulled) he made Julian in great* care.
all the money he could, by himself or his friends* r^bbing the very Temples,
and public Treasuries, and gave all to the Soldiers to purchase their good
will. But they returning small thanks for his great largess, took it rather
as a due debt, than free gi^t. Iulians friends counseled him to advance with
his Army, and preclude the Alpine Straits. (Now The Alps.
the Alps are exceeding high Mountains (such as we have none in these parts)
circuli^g Italy like a wall; nature adding to the felicity of that Region, this
impregnable fortification; extending from the North to the South Sea.) But
Julian not daring to budge forth of the City, sent to the Soldiers to beseech
them to take arms, and exercise themselves, and make trenches and rampires
before the City; wherein he prepared all military ammunition, and caused
Elephants trained.
all the Elephants (which he kept for show and State) to be taught to endure
Riders: supposing the Illyrians and their Horses would be skared wi^h the
strange shape and bulk of those Beasts which they never saw before. All the
City was now busy in providing Arms and Warlike Furniture. But while Iulian's
Soldiers go slowly to work, and scarce prepare for War, Severus is
reported to be come already; who having appointed many of his Soldiers,
several Severus his Stratagem.
ways to disperse themselves, and enter secretly into Rome, they arrived by
sundry passages into the City (by night) covering their Armours with Rusticall
habit, as if they had been plain Countrymen. And now was the Enemy in
Iulian's bosom ere he was aware. When the People perceived this, being all
amazed, and greatly dreading Severus power, they began to incline to him,
condemning Julian for a Dastard, and Niger for a Slugge, but commending Severus
who was now at hand. Whereupon Julian being at his Wits end, and not knowing
what to do, assembled the Senate, and sent Letters to Severus, desiring to
contract a League with him, and to be made his Consort in the Empire. But when
the Senators Julian deserted.
which had agreed on that course saw how basely timorous and dejected he was,
they rejected him for a Recreant, and wholly revolted to Severus. Two or three
days after, when News was brought that Severus was now come in person, all
the Citizens utterly forsaking Julian, assembled in the (...) Authority of
Consuls.
Guild Hall, by command of the Consuls (who in such doubtful times have charge
of the Roman State) where they entered into Consultation, what was best to be
done in that Exigent: Julian abiding (the while) in the Palace, deploring his
Infortunity, and humbly begging that he might abjure the Sovereignty, and
resign all his Imperiality to Severus. But when the Senate understood, that
Julian was in such desperate Horror, and that his Guards No receipt against
Fear. (Dictum Mariae illustrissimae Scotorum Reginae.)
(for fear of Severus) had quite forsaken him; they decreed his Death, and
declared Severus sole Emperor. Then send they (as Commissioners) diverse of the
chief Magistracy, and prime Nobility, to render to him all Imperial Honors.
The Execution of Julian was committed to one of the Tribunes, who finding ^he
wr^tc^ed old Man (that had bought his own Ruin with his Money) wholly
deserted and forlorn; slew him, Julian slain. (...).
as he was tearing his hair, with abject Lamentations. When Severus understood
the Senates Declaration, and that Julian was slain; he hoped to do greater
matters; and laid a Train to catch all the Pretorian Soldiers that had
murdered Pertinax. He sent therefore secret Letters to their Coronel^ and
Captains.
Tribunes and Centurions, promising them great rewards, to persuade their
Companies in the City, to submit to his Mandates. Mean while, he makes
Proclamation, that all of them, leaving their Arms in the Camp, should come
forth like Severus his Train to take the Pretorians.
peaceable men, in such Habits as they used when they attended the Emperor at
solemn shows and Sacrifices, that they might be sworn to Severus; and that
they should come cheerfully, because they were to be his Guard. The Soldiers
crediting this Edict, and being also persuaded by their Officers, lay aside all
their Arms, and issue forth with laurel branches in their hands, in such
Equipage as they were wont in some great Festivity. When they drew near to
Severus Camp, and it was told him they were all come, he commanded them to be
brought to his presence, as if he meant to welcome and entertain them with
all honor. But when they came before his Throne (with joy full acc^^^nations)
upon a signal given at the instant, they were all apprehended. For Severus
commanded his Soldiers, that when they saw them assembled before him expecting
some high favor, they should presently wheel about them in martial manner;
yet not wound nor strike them, but only make a Ring, and hemme them in;
presenting their Iavelins and Pikes toward them, which they being unarmed, and
but few in comparison of them, durst not resist so many men at Arms. When
Severus had thus impounded them, with a strong voice, and furious spirit, he
thus spoke to them.

Severus his speech to the Praetorian Guards.
You see now by experience, that we far exceed you in policy, power and
number. You are easily caught, and as easily held. Now are you all at my
devotion, to do what I please with you. Here you stand like a herd of beasts,
ready to be sacrifised at my beck. If you expect a Doom, or Death,
responsible to your black deeds, and detestable villainies; the World cannot
afford it. You have barbarously butchered that venerable Father, and Excellent
Emperor, whom, as his Guards, you ought to have defended. You have most
shamefully truckt for silver (as if it had been some of your own goods) the
most glorious Roman Empire, which was anciently the Guerdon of Nobility, or
Militar (...)
virtue. And now like base (...)
Poltrones, you have betrayed him that was your Mercenary Sovereign; not
daring to guard or protect him. For these inexpiable crimes you deserve a
thousand deaths, if you had your due. Now you see what you are worthy to
suffer. But I scorn to imitate you, or to pollute my bands with your blood.
Neither justice nor equity permit, that you should any longer be the Emperors
Guard; that thus have violated your oath, distained your selves with your
natural Princes blood, and betrayed the trust and confidence reposed in you.
Your Souls and Bodies (of my Nobleness) I am content to besto^ upon you. But
I command my Soldiers to ungirdle you; and divest you of all Military Attire,
and Accoutrements; and send you away stripped: which done, I charge you all to
get you packing, far from Rome: for I here decree, vow, and swear, that if
any of you be found within an hundred miles of the City be shall die for it.

Having given this charge, The Preto^^ans degraded.
the Illyrian Soldiers presently ran to them, and disarming them of their
short Swords, (which were curiously wrought with gold and silver, and
customa^ily worn at solemn sh^wes) they took from them their belts, scarffes,
and other military ornaments, and rasht off all their clothes; leaving them
stark naked.

When they saw themselves Traytor^ betrayed.
thus betrayed and taken with a Wile; there was no way but patience. For what
could a few naked men do, against so many armed? They departed therefore with
heavy cheer; yet glad their lives were given them; shrewdly repen^ing, that
by leaving their Arms, they had subjected themselves to so foul and
disgraceful a Doom. Severus used also another policy; for doubting lest
being degraded, they would desperately run to their Camp, and resume their
Arms; he had sent before some Troops of his choicest and trustiest Soldiers,
by secret ways and passages, commanding them suddenly to seize their vacant
Camp, and with their own weapons to keep them out, if they attempted to
return. Thus were those Assassinates of Pertinax punished.

Forthwith Severus with his Severus enters Rome.
Army arranged in Battel-array, makes his entry into Rome; the Romans being at
first sight terribly afraid of him, for his daring and speedy Enterprise.
Howbeit, the Peers and Commons received him with Laurels, who of all Men and
Emperors, was the first, that without blood or sweat, effected such rare
Enterprises. Indeed, His Elogie.
all things in him were admirable; especially his high wit, piercing judgment,
indefatigable industry, happy-hopefull audacitie in great and Heroical
Attempts.

After the people had wellcomed him with their Acclamations, and the Nobles
saluted him at the City Gates, he repaired to Jupiters Temple; where having
sacrifised, he did his Devotions at the other Fan^s (as the E^pe^^urs were
wont) and lastly, betook himself to the Imperial Palace. The next day he
went to the Senat-house, where he made a smooth and plausible Speech; and then
gave his (...)
Hand to all the Company, professing, That his maine End in His Plausibility.
coming to the City, was to revenge Pertinaxes Death, and to lay the Plo^ and
Foundation of an Optimacie: promising that none but those which were condemned
by Law, should lose Life or Goods: that he would not tol^erate Informers:
that he would make a happy and flourishing State, and in all things imitate
Marcus; and not only assume the Name, but the Mind of Pertinax. With these
fair Promises he stroked the Senators; most of them inclining to affect and
believe him: but some of the elder and sager sort, that better knew his
disposition, told them in their ear, that he was a right His Censure.
Politician, full of tricks and trains, and an exquisite Dissembler and
Temporizer, for his own ends: As afterward it proved.

Severus intending but a short stay in Rome, gave to the Commons a magnificent
Donative of Corn, and a great Largess to his Soldiers; selecting the ablest
among them for his guard (in steed of those which were degraded.) And now he
prepares an Expedition to the Orient; where Niger lay rusting (all this while)
and revelling at Antioch; whom he hasted to surprise ere he were aware, and
take him unprovided.

Commanding therefore his His preparation for War.
Soldiers to make ready for that Voyage, and recollecting all his Forces, he
adjoined to them all the flower of the Italian Youth; and gave order, that the
rest of the Army in Illyria should come down to Thrace, and meet him on the
way. He provided also, a great sleet of ships, and pressed all the galleys of
Italy, which he filled with Men at arms, and sent them a way: having amassed
together, with incredible speed, a mighty magazin of all manner of provision
and ammunition. For he well knew, he needed more than ordinary Forces against
the Nations bordering on Europe, which were all under Niger's command. Thus
Severus (...)
gallantly prepared for the war. But withal, like a wise and provident man, he
shrewdly He is afraid of the Britains
misdcubted the British Armies, consisting of great and bravetroops of mo(...)
excellent (...)
Soldiers; whose General was Albinus; of Albinus Governor of Britain.
very noble and honorable descent and born to exceeding greatwelth and
possessions. Him he resolved to win by policy* lest otherwise being excited
by his riches, noblenes, forces and renown (sharp and piquant motives to aspire
to Sovereignty) he should attempt to overtop him and seize on Rome (which is not
very far distant from Britain) while himself were engaged in the Eastern
wars. Now his bait to catch him, was by a glittering show of honor; for being a
credulous man, and none of the deepest Politics* he presently believed the
oaths and protestations which he sent him by Letters: wherein he styled him
Caesar, anticipating He is stil^d Caesar by Severus.
his ambition, by communicating the sov^raigne dignity. In the said cou^tly and
complementall lines, he besought him to be Protector of the Empire, which stood
in great need of so noble and brave a young Gallant; as for himself, he was now
grown old and gow^ie, and his children were but infants. Albinus easily gave
credit to him, and willingly took the honor upon him; being glad he attained
his desire without battle, or further danger. To give the more gloss to his
intentions, Sev^rus acquainted the Senate with the passages; comanding also
Coins to be stamped with his image; as also his statues to be erected; with
all other Imperial honors; the better to blanch his designs. Which having
with high wisdom performed, and so looked Albinus in Britain, that there was no
fear of him; he gathered all the Illyrian Forces into one body, and now all
things being in readiness, he leads his Army directly against Niger. What were
his Stations by the way, what speeches he made to every city, what frequent
prodigies N. B. (...).
by divine providence appeared; a^ also what countries he marched through, what
conflicts he had, and how many were slain on either side, many Historians
have related, and Poets especially have largly dilated; making Severus acts the
argument of their works. But my intendme^t is to compile a History of the acts
of many Emperors reigning in the compass of 70 Her^d^^^ writes a History of 70
vea(...)
years, which I certainly (...)
know to be true. I shall therefore deliver part of the chiefest and choifest
actions of Severus, not flattering, or faining more tha^ was performed (like
the Writers of that time) nor yet suppressing ought that is worthy to be known
or recorded.

HERODIAN HIS IMPERIAL HISTORY. The third Book.
The Contents.
Niger prepares for War. He fortifies Mount Taurus, and Byzantium. Aemilianus
his General, defeated Severus Policy. He assaults Mount Taurus. Moors
described. Alexandria. Battle betwixt Severus and Niger Niger beheaded.
Severus Plots against Albinus. His Speech against him. His strange
Winter-m^rch, Albinus sails out of B^ita^ie, and fights with Severus. The
Britai^^^ fight bravely, and beat Severus off his Horse: They win the first
B(...): They di(...) and (...) Albinus beheaded* (...) (...)us Elogie. He
makes two Vicegerents in Britanie. His cruelty and covetousness. Secular Games
every three hundredth year. Severus his Expedition into the East. He besieges
Atrae, and is repulsed. His strange fortune. He surprises the Parthian King. He
enters Rome in triumph. His Sons Dissensions. Plautian a mighty Favorite.
His Treason, strangely detected. He is cut in pieces. Severus instructs his
Sons. News from Britanie. Severus his Expedition thither. Description and
Elogie of the Picts or Scots. Severus dies for grief. Antonine's Cruelty.
Severus Relics, Antonine and Geta sail out of Britanie.

IN the former Book, we have related the Murder of Pertinax, the Slaughter of
Julian, Severus his Expedition to Rome, and lastly his Preparations against
Niger. As soon as Niger (who little expected Niger prepares for War.
such ^ewes) understood that Severus had seized Rome; that the Senate had
proclaimed him Emperor; and that all the Illyrian Army, and other Forces were
coming against him by Sea, and Land; being extremely startled, he warnes all
the Vicegerents of the Provinces, to set strong Guards at all Ports and
Pas^ages; and sends for Aid, to the Parthian, Armenian, and Atrenian Kings. The
Armenians answer was, that he would be Neutrall, and reserve his own Forces
to desend himself if Severus assailed him. The Parthian promises to write to
his Nobles, to levy Soldiers (as his manner was in time of War.) For the
Parthians have no ordinary standing Armies, nor any soldiers in continual pay.
From the Atrenians came a Band of Archers, sent from King Barsemius, who then
reigned in those Parts. The gross of his army he made up of the Soldiers
which he had with him; most of the Country youths, but especially of the
Antiochians, either out of their Levitie or Love to Niger; more boldly than
wisely flocking unto him. The Straits and Precipices of Mount Taurus, Mount
Taurus fortifyed.
he fortifyed with strong Walls and Munitions; accounting that impassable
place, would be a Barricado to block up the Way to the Orient. For Taurus
lifting up his Ridge between Cappadocia and Cilicia, dissevers the Eastern and
Northern Nations. He put also a Garrison in Byzantium, the chiefest Byzanti^m
n^^ Con(...).
and mightiest City of Thrace, flo^ishing at that time in strength and wealth;
for being situate in the narrow Proponticke Sea, it ^eaped equal benefit by
Water and Land; from the first, Impost and Fish; from the latter, Corn and
Fruit; as having a large and fertile Territory. This strong City he
preoccupates to prevent the passage of Severus Flee, which was to sa^le out of
Europe into Asia, through that narrow Channel. The City was compast with a ^uge
strong wall, of squared Milstons, so curtously cemented that it seemed to be
an in ^re work made by Nature, rather than Art: yea* the very Ruins and
Rubbish (which yet appear) show the mavelous skill of them that buil^ it,
and the stupendous strength of those that dismantled it.

In this mannet did Niger order his Affairs, with singular Prudence and
Providence (as he imagined.) Severus on the other side, slacked not, but
incessantly marched with his Army. And being advertized that Byzantium was
well manned and strongly fortifyed, he turns his Aemilianus Nigers General.
course to Cyzicum. Aemilianus Lieutenant of Asia, to whom Niger had committed
the Manage of the War, and chief Command; hearing that Severus was
marching, leads all the Forces which he had leavied, or were sent by Niger,
directly to Cyzicum. When the Armies met on both sides, after diverse bloody
battles in those parts, Severus at last was Master of the Field; a great number
of Nigers Soldier being routed, slain, and Defeated by Seve(...).
pu^ to flight. Which Success mightily encouraged the Illyrians, and the (...)
Easterlings. ^ut many were of opinion, that from the beginning, Niger was
betrayed by Aemilian; for these reasons. Some say, he envied Niger, disdayning
that he, who was but his Successor in Syria, should now be his Superior,
Emperor, and Sovereign. Others suppose, that he was thereto persuaded by his
Childrens Letters, who besought him to take care of their safety: for Severus
having found them at Rome, put them in hold, out of deep policy, and early
providence. And it was Commodus his manner to retain with him their Children,
whom he sent to be Lievtenants of Provinces, as Pledges of their Allegiance
and fidelity. Wherefore Severus (like a vigilant man) Severus his Policy.
at his first Designement to the Empire in Iulians time, sent secretly for his
children out of the City, lest they should be afterward seized on. And at his
coming to Rome, he instantly apprehended all the Children of the Presidents,
and other chief Captains and Commanders that ruled in Asia, or the East,
carrying the^ with him as Prisoners, thereby to induce their Fathers to revolt
from Niger (for their preservation) or if they continue firm to him, to let
them know, that by killing them, he could be revenged on them at his pleasure.

Nigers Soldiers being overthrown at Cyzicum, fled amain; some to the
Armenian Mountains; others through Asia, and Galatia, hastening to Mount
Taurus, to get into that strong Hold. Severus Army marched through the Country
of Cyzicum, to the next region of Bithynia. When it was famed that Severus was
victor suddenly all the Cities in those Parts, fell to deadly Feud; not so much
for Love or Hate to either Emperor, as out of a mortal Antipathie, and
implacable Enmity one to the other. And this was anciently the fault of the
Greeks, who by their intestine broils and consp^racies, to ex^irpate the most
eminent men, have utterly undone Greece: whose Inhabitants (by their old
grudge, and civil disasters) first became Vass^l^s to the Macedons; and then
Slaves to the Romans: the same heartburning, and spightfull emulation,
continuing in the best Cities to our time. Wherefore after these things happened
at Cyzicum, the Citizens of Nicomedia in Bithynia, revolted from Niger to
Severus, promising him (by their Ambassadors) to receive his Army, and assist
him in all things. But the Citizens of Nicaea, out of their malignity to them,
took Nigers part, and entertained his Soldiers, which either fled thither, or
were sent to detend Bithynia. Out of these two Cities (as several Camps) the
Armies of both sides issuing, fought again; but after a terrible battle,
Severus got the Victory. From thence the Remains of Nigers Forces fled to the
Straits of Mount Taurus, to def^nd those Fortifications. Niger having left
there as many as he thought sufficient to make good the Place, returns to
Antioch, to raise more Men and Money Meanewhile, Severus Army p^ssing through
Bithynia, and Galatia, marched into Cappadocia* and there began Mount Taurus
a^^ayle ^.
to assail the Fortification But they met with no small difficulties; for the
passage was extreme rough and craggie, and the Enemy which was on the Walls,
and over their heads, tumbled down Stones upon them, and fought bravely; a few
men serving to repel a great Number. For the Ascent was exceeding strait,
being defended on the one side with a huge steep Mount, on the other with a
wonderful Precipice, down which fell continual Cataracts from the top of the
Mountains. Niger had also made there a strong Fort to bar their Entrance on
every side. During this Assault in Cappadocia there arose Mutinies upon the
like Grounds and Grudges as asoresaid. For Laodicea in Syria (in despite of
Antiochi^) and Tyrus in Phoenicia (repining at the Berythians) when they heard
of Nigers Discomfiture, defaced his Images, and proclaimed Severus Emperor:
which Niger (then at Antioch) understanding, though (otherwise) of a mild
disposition, yet stung with those opprobrious Injuries and Defections, sends
against both the Cities all the Mauritania, now F^^ and Mo^occo.
Mauritanian Darters that he had, and part of his Archers, charging them to
kill all before them, and to sack and burn the Cities. The Moors The Moors
described.
(who are naturally bloody and desperate, regarding neither death nor danger)
suddenly invading the Laodiceans, put them all to the Sword, and destroyed
their Town. Thence marching to Tire, they first pillaged it, and then cruelly
slaughtering the Inhabitants, set it on a bright blaze. While this passes in
Syria and Niger is levying new Supplies, the Severians persist in their
assailment of the Fort of Mount Taurus, but with much wan hope and great
discouragement; for it was an impregnable Work, and naturally defended with
the Mount, and Precipice. Being quite wearyed, and their Enemies now secure;
extraordinary Storms and Snowes fell suddenly in the Night (for in Cappadocia,
and especially at Mount Taurus, Winters are ex reame rough) accompanied with a
vehemen and imp^tuous Torrent; which being check^ by the Fortification, became
more fu^ious and violent. At last, Nature vanqui hing Art, and the Wall
yielding to the deluge, the flood (having sapt the Foundation, which was made
in haste, and not so carefully as wa^ requi-site) bore down all before it, and
made an exceeding great breach: which the Defendants perceiving, and feating
that when the Waters were down, they should be surprised by the Enemy, they
all quit the place, and fled. With this Accident, the Severians were infinitely
cheered and animated (as lead by divine providence) and seeing also the
Guardians of the Mount were fled, they easily scaled it, and entered Cilicia.
When Niger heard these Tidings. he gathered a vast Army of undisciplined and
inexpert Soldiers: and marching with maine speed, was followed with huge
numbers of people, and almost all the Youth of Antioch, who expressed great
alacrity, but were not comparable to the Illyrians for Valor or Experience. A^
the Bay of A City called by Alexander Ni^opolis, for his Victory there.
Issus, the Armies met, in a goodly spacious Plain, which lying under a row of
Hills, Theatre-wise, is extended all along the Seacoast; Nature having here
made (as it were) a Stage for a battle. In the very same place they say that
Darius was overthrown and taken by Alexander in the last great Battle; the In
Nature the Northern Regions are most Martial.
Northern Men then also vanquishing the Eastern. The City Alexandria (built
on a Hill) the Trophie Alexandria.
and Monument of that Victory, yet remains; and the brazen Image of him that
so named it. Now it fell out that the Hosts of Sever^ss and Niger did not only
encounter in the said place, but also with like fortune [to the other:] For on
both sides were they ready to fight in the Evening, not sleeping all Night for
Care and Fear. At The Battle betwixt Severus and Niger.
Sunrising, the Generals encouraged their Soldiers, who assailed each other
with incredible fury; as accounting that the last Fatal Conflict; and that
Fortune would there design the Emperor. After a long and grim Fight, there
being on each side so great Slaughter, that the Rivers which ran through the
Plain, sent much more blood than water into the Sea; at last the Orientalls
turned their backs and fled, the Illyrians pursuing them to the Sea (where they
thrust them in with wounds) and to the Hill-tops, where they flew them,
together with a great number of people, assembled there out of the adjoining
towns and villages, as Spectatours of the battle; supposing they were safe in
that high ground. Niger being bravely mounted, poasted with a few of his
Followers to Antioch; where the people flying every way, and piteously
bewayling their sons and brethren; he also grew desperate, and be took
himself to flight; but being found hid in a Suburban house, by the Hor^emen
that pursued him, his Head was struck off. Niger beheaded.


This end had Niger, being brought to that Disaster, by his dull protracting of
time; though otherwise he were (as they say) in his public and private
carriage not culpable.

Niger being slain, Severus presently put to death all his friends and
Partisans, whether Voluntaries, or compelled to assist him. Yet he pardoned the
Soldiers which were fled (for fear) to the Barbarians beyond the River
Tigris; and received them into favor. For great numbers of them retired into
those parts, whereby it came to pass, that the Barbarians were afterward more
able to encounter the Romans in set battle; their manner of Fight, before
that time, being only with bows and arrows on horseback, without complete
Armor; having no skill to use Sword, or Lance; but clad with thin loose
Garments, they shot their Arrows (most part) backewards, flying from their
Enemies. But when diverse Roman Soldiers, and (among them) many Armourers,
which fled thither, had set set up their Rests there; the Barbarians learned
not only to use Arms, but also to make them.

Severus having settled the Affairs of the Orient to his own contentment, had
a strong desire to invade the Dominions of the Atrenian and Parthian Kings, who
were both Nigers Confederates. But deserriug that till another time, he cast
about, how he might now establish the Roman Empire on himself and his Sons.
For Niger being taken away, the only Rub that remained was Albinus, whom he
held to be altogether unprofitable for his Purpose, and incompatible to his
designs. Besides, the Report was, that his Caesarian Title had so puffed up his
spirits, that he began to fare like an Emperor; and that many of the chief
Peers of the Senate had secretly writ to him to hasten to Rome, while Severus
was absent, and elsewhere engaged. And indeed all the Nobles were most devoted
to Albinus; who was very honorably descended; and reputed to be of a sweet and
generous Disposition. Of all which passages Severus having got intelligence,
resolved not instantly to make open war against him; or proclaim him his
enemy (there being no just cause or color for it) but to try if he could make
him away by treachery. Wherefore he dispatches Severus plots against Albinus.
to him diverse trusty persons, which (as Poasts) used to carry the Emperors
Letters and Missives, giving them in charge, that after they had publicly
delivered the Packets, they should desire him to understand some further
secrets in private; and when he was apart from his guard suddenly to fall upon
him, and kill him. Moreover, he delivered to them diverse sorts of poisons, to
be min^stred to him by some of his Carvers or Cup bearers, if they could
persuade them. But Albinus his friends mistrusting Severus, gave him many
caveats to beware him as a fraudulent and insidious person: For his fame was
foully blasted by his ill dealing with Nigers Captains; whom having under
wrought by their Children (as we formerly showed) to betray Nigers Affairs,
when he had made use of their Service, and attained his own ends, he slew
both them and their Children. By these Actions of his, they manifested to him
his dangerous disposition. Albinus thereupon doubled his Guards, and admitted
not to his presence any messenger from Severus, till he had laid by his
military Fauchi^, and was also searched, lest he had any other Weapon in his
bosom. And now were Severus his poasts arrived at Albinus In Britain
Court, where delivering their Letters openly, they besought him to step aside,
to hear some special Secrets. Albinus suspecting them, commands them to be
apprehended. Then, secretly torturing them, he learnt out all their treachery,
and put them to death; and made preparation against Severus, as a professed
Enemy. Which Severus understanding, being of a violent spirit and irefull
nature, he no longer concealed his Enmity, but assembling all his Army, spoke
thus.

Severus his Speech against Albinus.
LEt none, reflecting on my former Actions, tax me of Levity, Treachery, or
Ingratitude, toward my reputed friend. I could do no more than associat him
(by a firm League) in the Imperial Government: which some man would hardly
do to his own brother. Yea, I communicated to him that, which you conferred on
me alone. But Albinus unworthily requites these extraordinary Favors which I
have heaped upon him. For he is now up in Arms against Us, contemning your
valor; and not regarding his League with me. For he seeks with insatiable
Desire, to ingrosse, that with his own peril, which he securely enjoyed by a
peaceful Participation. Neither does he revere the Gods by whom he has so
often sworn; nor respects he your travells, which with so great glory and
courage you have undertaken for Us both. For the fruits of your happy success
extended likewise to him. Yea, had he continued faithful to us, we had done
him greater honor, than was yet imparted to him. Now as to do ill (...)
Offices, is an act of Injustice; So, not to redress a Wrong, is (...)
unmanly. In our Wars against Niger, our Quarrel was not so just, as
necessary. For he sought not to embrace the Imperial dignity invested in our
person; but the Empire lying then at stake, and being yet litigious, both of Us
with equal Ambition, fairly wrestled for it. But Albinus violating Leagues
and Oaths; makes choice rather to be an Enemy than a Friend, and to wage War
rather than continue in amity; being advanced by our mere bounty to that
eminent Title of Caesar employed H^^^e apparanc^.
Honor, which anciently appertayned to the sacred Branches of the Imperial
Stem. Wherefore as we have formerly ennobled him with great and glorious
Advancements: So now we hold it meet, to chastise his ignoble Treachery by
force of Arms. As for his poor Army of Britains.
Ilanders; it is impossible it should resist your Puissance. For since you
alone, by your own Valor and admirable Prowess, have won so many Battles,
and conquered all the Orient: who can doubt but that now by access of so many
gallant men at Arms (for here are almost all the Roman Forces) you shall
easily rout a small Number, led by One that has neither Wit nor Courage? For
who knows not his Voluptuary life, fitter for a Swine than a Soldier? Let us
therefore (...)
bravely advance against him, with our wonted alacrity and magnanimity: having
the Gods for our Guides, whom he has dishonored with Perjuries; and calling
to mind the many Trophies we have erected, which he so highly scorns.

Severus having thus said, the whole Army proclaimed Albinus Traitor, but making
full Demonstration of their loyal zeal to him, by their Acclamations; they
mightily encouraged him, and made him wondrous confident. Whereupon rewarding
them with magnificent donatives, he took his Journey against Albinus. Withal
he sent certain Troops to invest Byzantium, B^zantium invested.
which was yet held by Nigers Soldiers that fled thither. Which City was
afterward taken by Famine, and razed to the Ground; insomuch that the Theaters,
Therms, and all the splendour and glory thereof being quite defaced, it was
reduced to a mean The Fate of Roch^^: now, S. Mary Village.
Village, and given in vassalage to the Perinthians, as Antioch in like sort to
the Laodiceans. Further, he consigned great sums of money for the reedifying
of the Cities spoiled by Nigers Soldiers. And now marching without any Severus
wa^^^wo^d was Laboremus
Intermission, or regard to holi-dayes, or workedayes, heat or cold (all being
alike to him) he would often in that His Winterm^^^h.
stormy season, go bare-headed on the tops of Mountains, when it sharply
snowed; to excite his Soldiers to Patience and Alacrity, by his own Example;
so that they cheerfully endured all difficulties, not so much for fear of
law, as in a generous emulation of their royal Chief. He sent also a strong
Army to seize the Alpine Straits, and to forelay the passages into Italy.

Albinus, who (this while) pursu^d his pleasures, and was supinely negligent,
when he heard that Severus was marching with such expedition; being startled
with the horror of the news, presently sails out of Britain, Albinus (...)
out o^ (...).
and disbarkes his Army in the opposite Coasts of Gallia; where he lend, his
Mandates to all Governors of the adjacent Provinces, to furnish him with Money
and Victuals. They which did so, dealt very unadvisedly, for they were plagued
for it, when the War was ended; but they that refused (rather by good hap
than fore sight, saved themselves: the Event and (...)
Fortune of the War determining who were the wiser.

Severus Forces being entered Gallia, there were first certain light Skirmishes
in diverse parts; but at last, they fought a pitched Battle bet^ixt Severus and
Albinus.
Field, near the great and rich City Lugdunum; where Albinus immuring
himself, sent forth his Army to fight. The Encounter was exceeding fierce;
and doubtful it was a great while which way the Victory would Britains Elogie.
incline; For the BRITAINS were no whit inferior to the Illyrians in (...)
Manhood, or Martial fury. Both Armies fighting with equal bravery, it was
hard to say, which would get the better. Diverse Historians (of that Time) which
more regarded verity than partiality, report that Albinus his Army was (...)
far superior in that Part, which was incountred by Severus in Person, with
his Battalion; insomuch, that Himself was put The Britains beat the bravest
Martialist of the world.
to flight, and beaten off his Horse, yea forced to throw off his Imperial
Cloak, and hide Himself. While the Britains follow the Chase, chanting out
their Hymns s^ng to Mars before Battle, to Apollo after Victory.
Paeans, as Victors; Laetus one of Severus Commanders, suddenly charges them
with fierce and fresh troops. He was harshly censured, as if he purposely
kept aloof, and reserved that choice Regiment to get the Empire to himself:
intending then to take the Field, when he heard Severus was slain. Which
suggestion was fortified by the event. For when Severus had settled all things
to his own mind, and secured his estate, he richly rewarded all his other
Chieftaines; but remembering how Laetus had served him, he put him to death, as
he deserved. These things were done afterward. Now when Laetus ^ame in view
(as a^oresaid) with a new supply; the Severians took heart again, and
remounting Severus on Horseback, put on his Purple A military Mantle.
Surcoat. The Albinians, that (presuming they were Masters of the Field) had So
the dis-ranking of the English lost all to the ^^^mans.
disbanded themselves; being suddenly and furiously charged by fresh Companies;
after a short resistance, fled; the Severians following the execution to the
City gates. The Number of the slain, and captives, on either side, is
differently related by the Writers of that Age. The City Lions in France.
Lugdunum was sacked and burnt by the Severians; who having took Albinus, struck
off his head, Albinus beheaded.
and presented it to Severus.

Thus raised he two most stately * Monuments of Victory usual in those p^rts.
Trophies; One, in the East; and Another, in the North; so that Nothing is
comparable to Severus conflicts, or conquests, either for multitude of Forces,
commotion of Countries, number of Battles, length of Iourneyes, or speed in
Marches. I confess, Caesar's Acts against Pompey (the Soldiers being Romans on
either side) were very great; as also that of Augustus Severus the greatest
Conqueror of the World.
against Antony and Pompey's Sons; and likewise the Exployts of Sylla and
Marius, in the civil and foreign wars. But for One Man to have the killing
of Three Enthronized Emperors; to surprise the Pretorian Troops at Rome by
finenesse of Wit; to kill One Emperor in the Palace Royal; to defeat
another, that reigned in the Orient, and was elected Emperor by the Romans;
and to vanquish a Third, that was a Caesar, of great Nobility and Dependencie;
you shall hardly find the like. To this End came Albinus, having enjoyed his
Fatal Dignity but a short time.

And now was Severus full charged with wrath and indignation against Albinus
Friends at Rome; whither he sent his head, commanding it to be publicly affixt
on the Gallows. And in the Letters which he writ to the People of his
Victories, he added this Postscript; that He there sent them his Head,
strictly charging, that it be publicly set on the Gibbet, to the end, they
might perceive by that Token of his Wrath, how highly he was offended with
them.

Having Ordered the State of Britain, and divided the government of the
Province into two (...)
President-ships; and having Two Viceroyes in Britain.
likewise composed the Gallicke Affairs to his own mind, and slain all
Albinus Friends and Partners, whether voluntary or forced; he set forward
toward Rome; leading all his Army thither, to strike the greater terror. His
Journey being ended, with extraordinary speed (as his manner was) and being
full of fury against Albinus Friends that survived, he enters Rome. The
Commons met him with Laurells, and received him with all honor and joyful
acclamation. The Senators also congratulated him, though many of them were
extremely afraid that he would not pardon them; being so apt by reason of his
Natural Immanity, to oppress Men on the least Occasion; and having now so
probable pretenses to question them.

Severus having visited Jupiters Temple, and performed other (...)
Sacred Rites, went to his Royal Palace, and in honor of his Victories,
bestowed great store of Corn on the Citizens, and much Coin on his Soulders,
to whom he granted many Privileges which formerly they had not. For he first
augmented their proportion of Wheat, and permitted them to wear Gold Rings,
and cohabit with their Wives; all which were reputed utterly dissonant from
Military austerity, and Martial dispositions. But he was the first that
altered their strong and manly Diet, and subverted all Order, Discipline, and
Obedience to Governors; by teaching them to hunt after Money, and using them
to delicate Fare. Having made these Ordinances (after his own fancy) he
entered the Or, Parliamenthouse.
Senat-house, where ascending his Royal Throne, he made a bitter Invective
against Albinus Friends, producing the secret letters of some of them, which
he found in his Cabinets; and objecting to others, that they had honored him
with the richest Presents; to these, that they had favored his Eastern Niger.
Enemies; to those, that they were Albinus Favorites. Then he put to death all
Severus cruelty and covetousnes.
the chief Peers of the Senate; and slew without mercy all that were of
great Estate and Nobility in the Provinces: pretending to suppress his
Enemies; but spurred on (indeed) by extreme Avarice; wherein he exceeded all
the Emperors. For, as in Haughtiness of Spirit, hardness to endure labor,
and Skill in Martial affairs, he was equal to the worthiest: So was he an
unmeasurable Lover of Money; which he accumulated by cruel Slaughters, upon
the least Cause or Color; ruling his Subjects rather by fear than love.
Nevertheless, he affected popular Luster, by frequent His Popularity.
exhibiting most stately Shows (of all Sorts) where were often slain an hundred
beasts brought from strange countries. He distributed also magnificent
Donatives to the people, and ordained a Triumphall Game, or Exercse of Manhood.
Agon, sending for Actours and Champions from all parts. I have seen (in his
Time) Shows of all kinds of Pageants in all the Theaters at once; as also
processions and vigils (like Ceres mysteries.) Secular Games.
These were then called Secular Solemnities, because they V. Alex. ab Alex.
Genesis dier. l. 6. c. 19.
were celebrated (as they said) after the Term of three Ages or Generations.
What time, Bedles went through Rome and Italy, to invite All to come and see
those Instituted in honor of Apollo and Diana (the Sun and Moon)
Shows which they had never seen before, nor should ever after see:
Intimating thereby, that the inter-space betwixt the past and present
Celebrity, exceeded the longest Age of Men,

Having stayed a sufficient time at Rome (where he associated his Sons in the
Sovereignty, and declared them Emperors) considering that his former Victories
were over his own Contrymen and the Roman Armies (for which cause he
forbore Triumph) he determined to get himself honor by a glorious Conquest of
the Barbarians. His pretext was, to be revenged on Barsemius the Atrenian King,
for his Confederacy with Niger. Whereupon he lead his army into the Orient,
and as he was about to enter Armenia, the Severus his second Expedition into
the East.
King of the Armenians sent him Money, Presents and Hostages; humbly entreating
to contract a League of Amity with him. Severus seeing all things happen to
his mind in Armenia, marches against the Atrenians. But Augarus King of the
Osroens submitted himself to him, and having assured his Homage, by delivering
his children for pledges, sent to his Aid a goodly Band of Archers. Severus
having passed the Region lying betwixt the Rivers and the Archers.
Country of the Albenians, made a Rode into Arabia Felix, where grow those
odorate Herbs which we use for Spicerie and Frankincense. Having destroyed
many Cities and villages, and wasted the Country, ^e entered the Land of the
Atrenians, and Siege of Atrae.
beleaguerd Atrae, a City mounted on the top of an exceeding high Hill,
strongly, walled and fortifyed, well manned and full of excellent Archers.
Severus army incamping before it, made many furious Assaults, striving with all
their strength to master it; to which purpose, they assailed the Walls with all
sorts of warlike Engines; pretermitting no kind of Invasion. But the Atrenians
made abrave Resistance, and with Shot and Stones from above, did much hurt to
the Severians. They filled also Earthen Vessels with small Fowls and Venomous
beasts, which being cast among them, and lighting on their Faces, and other
open parts of their bodies, crawled all over them, and secretly stung and
tormented them. Moreover, they were not able to endure the stifling Air of
that extreme hot Clime, which cast them into strange Calentures; so that the
most part of the Army dyed rather by that means, than by the Enemy.
Whereupon, the Soldiers growing desperate at that luckelesse Siege (where the
Romans lost more than they got) Severus discamped, and departed without Effect,
lest all his Men should perish: being much grieved that the success of the
Siege was not answerable to his desire. For having been wont to get the
Victory in all incounters, he now reputed himself overcome, because he could
not overcome. But Fortune soon after smiled on him, and advanced his Designs;
so that he lost not all his labor, but fared better than he expected. For
his Army being imbarqued was not brought to the Roman Territories (as he
intended) but was hurried by the violent Stream to the Parthian banks; not
many days journey from Ct^siphon; where was the royal Severus strange fortune.
Palace of the King of Parthia, who lived there in peace; esteeming Severus
wars against the the Atrenians, to concern him nothing at all. In which
security he little thought of any Disaster. Severus Host arriving there Si vis
securus esse, time securitatem. S. Bernard.
against their wills, by the violence of the Current; presently landed, and
immediately fell a syoyling and ravaging the Country; driving away all the
Cattle they met with, for Provision; and burning all the Towns (as they went,)
Then marched they to Ctesiphon, where the great King Artabanus was resiant, and
King of K^^thia surprised.
finding the Barbarians ubpro^vided, they slew every man they found, pillaged
the City, and led captive all the women and children. The King, with a few
Horsemen, escaped: but they rifled his Treasures, and taking all his Ornaments
and Jewels, returned to their Ships. Thus got Severus the victory over the
Parthians rather by chance than choice. And now having sped so happily beyond
all hope, he sent Dight with Laurel, as Conquerors used.
Letters to the Roman Peers and People, containing a glorious Relation of his
Acts; accompanied with painted Tables, representing all his Battles and
Conquests. Hereupon the Senate decreed to him all triumphant Honors, and the
Sirnames of the Nations he had vanquished.

Severus having composed the Oriental Affairs, took his way toward Rome,
bringing with him his Sons, who were now big Youths. Having ended his
Journey, ordered the Provinces (as was requisite) and visited the Mysiae, now
Servia and Bulgaria.
Mysian and Pannonian Armies, he entered the City in Triumph; the Romans
receiving him with great Acclamations Severus Triumph.
and glorious Ceremonies. He again entertained them with Feasts, Sports,
Spectacles, and Pageants; giving them Royal Donatives, and solacing them with
Triumphall Shows. He abode many years in Rome, where he wholly gave himself
to Matters of Judicature, and State-affaires; endeavoring to train his Sons
in all noble Studies and Exercises. But they being well-growne Youths, had
their Dispositions corrupted by the Roman Diet and Delices; as also by the
excessive frequenting of Stage Plays, Charriotsports, and Revells. Moreover,
His Sons diss^^tions.
the Brethren fell at variance, one with the other; their first quarrel being
about the childish desire of Victory at Quaile-fights, Cock-fights, and the
wrestling of boys. Yea whatsoever they saw or heard in public, they were
still divided; never affecting the same thing; but what the one applauded, the
other scorned, Which Discord was fomented by both their servants and
slaiterers; who (...)
collogued with them for their own ends, Severus understanding their
differences, assaled to reco^cile them and reduce them to better temper. The
elder of them (whose (...)
Genuine Name was Bassian, before his Advancement to the Imperial Family)
Severus after his Inauguration in the Empire, named Antonine; which was the
Surname of Marcus. To him he gave a wife; hoping that (...)
Marriage would make him a stayed man. She was the Daughter of Plautian,
Captain of the Pretorian Ba^ds, who was (as they say) but of mean estate in
his youth, and proscribed for Sedition, and other Crimes. He was Severus his
Countriman (an African borne) and (by report) his Kinsman: and (as some have
taxed him) in his younger years his Catamite. Him Severus advanced from very
low degree, to great dignity; enriching him exceedingly with the Goods and
Lands of condemned persons, and almost sh(...) Of Severus (...) p^ss^g(...) the
(...) Ess^y of Friendship.
pire with him. (...) Fortunes he ab(...)ciousnesse; omitti(...) cru^l^y or
outrage, to comp^sse his designs; being more Tyrannically stern, than all the
Princes that ever were. To his Daughter did Severus match his Son, and unite
his House to his.

But Antonine taking small joy Forced Marriage.
in those Nuptials, whereto he was forcibly yoaked, without any prae-election
of his own, infinitely hated both the young Lady and her Father; scorning to
lodge or cohabite with her; yea, he so loathed her, that he daily menaced to
kill her and her Father, as soon as he were sole Emperor. Which when she
still told her Father, showing him how he abhorred her, he mightily stomackt
it. Plautian therefore considering that Severus was now grown old and
diseased, and that Antonine was a bold fierce Youth, he feared his Threats, and
resolved to do some Exployt, rather than suffer himself to be made away.
Plautian the mig^ti^st Favorite of the World.
Moreover, he had many provocatives to aspire to Sovereignty: such excessive
wealth, as never any Subject had the like: Martial men were all at his beck:
the whole Roman State highly honored him: yea his ordinary Garb made him
very gracious with the people; for he still wore the Senatorian robe, Vid.
Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. cap. 18.
purfled and embrodered with Golden Studds, and was ranked with the prime
Nobility. A Sword was borne before him, and he alone represented the Emperors
Person. He walked abroad with such terrible Majesty, that none durst come
near him; and if any met him (by chance) they stepped aside: his Gentlemen
Vshers making Proclamation, that None should stand in the way, nor look at
him; but turn aside, and look downwards. When Severus understood this, he
disgusted it, and began to think harshly of him; insomuch that he clipped the
Wings of his Authority; commanding him to leave that insolent Demeanor.
Plautian taking this as an intolerable Affront, fell roundly to His treason
surprise the Empire: And this was his Plot: There was one Saturninus that had
a Tribunes The command of 1000 soldiers.
place under him, and was exceedingly devoted to Plautian; and though all were
entirely his, yet he by his singular veneration, had won his Affection more
than the rest. Thinking him to be a most trusty fellow, and the only Engine
for his secret Designs; he sends for him in the Evening; and all being
commanded to void the room, spoke thus to him.

NOw is the time for you to make a brave Consummation of the love and
observance you have professed, and for me likewise to render to you according
to your Merits, and to make cond^gne retribution. I put it to your choice,
either to be as you see me now, and to succeed me in this eminent place; or
instantly to suffer death for refusing my Command. Let not the greatness of
the Enterprise affright, nor the Name of Emperors amaze you. When it comes to
your turn this Night to relieve the Watch, you may go alone to the
Bedchamber, and what you are to do, you may secretly effect without any let.
Go your ways therefore to the Court (without any more ado) as if you had
some special secret Message from me: and as soon as you come at them, kill
them. Be resolute (Man) you may soon dispatch an Old man, and a Boy. And as
you partake the danger; so shall you participate the greatest honor, for so
galland an Exployt. At this Sp^ech the Tribune was not a little confused; yet
recollecting himself, and being a notable shrewd pated Fellow (for he was a
Syrian borne, and your Eastern Men are generally wise, and of quick In warm
Climates people are generally more wise.
sent) he considered, that to reject the motion of so mighty a Potentate, being
in so great rage, were present death: wherefore pretending that he infinitely
liked the Business, he adored him as Emperor, beseeching his Warrant for the
Execution: (For it was the manner of Tyrants, when they commanded any to be
slain (without Judicial Process) to sign a Warrant to that purpose, for the
Actors discharge.) Plautian, blinded with ambition, delivers his Warrant to the
Tribune, strictly charging him, that as soon as he had killed both the
Princes, before it were noysed abroad, he should send some to call for him,
that he might seize the Palace and Empire, before any man dreamt of it. With
this charge and commission, the Tribune departs, and as he was wont, walks the
Round through all the Emperors Palace; and knowing how difficult a thing it
were for one man to kill two Princes in several Lodgings, he intends to
disclose all to Severus; and desired the Door keepers to let him in, for it
concerned his Life. They delivering the Message to Severus, he commands them
to bring him in. Being entered in, he thus said: Sir, I am come (as he that
sent me Saturninus detects Plautian.
makes full account) to kill you, as your Deaths man; but as my self resolve
and vow to be a Preserver of your Life. Plautian traitorously aspiring to the
Empire, has commanded me to murder You and your Son, not only by Word,
but also by Writing; (Witness this Schedule.) And accordingly I undertook to
execute his Command, lest, upon my Refusal, some other should have attempted
it. This I come to certify your Majesty, that you may avoid him. The Tribune
having done, fell a weeping. But Severus could not instantly credit it: For
Plautian's Love had taken deep root in his heart; and he suspected it to be a
mere Illusion, and cunning Imposture; imagining that his son [the Prince] out
of his hatred to Plautian and his daughter, had devised this stratagem and
deadly (...)
slander. wherefore instantly sending for him, he sharply rebuked him, for
plotting such things against his dear bosome-friend. Antoninus swore deeply he
knew nothing of it. The Tribune producing Plautians Warrant, Antonine
encouraged him to detect the Crime. The Tribune perceiving his own Danger, and
well-knowing how gracious Plautian was with the Emperor (so that if now he
made not good his Charge, he should be put to a cruel death) said thus; Sir,
what clearer proof or stronger Evidence can you desire? yet if you will give
me leave to go out of the Palace, and send a trusty Messenger to him, to let
him know that I have done his Command, he will presently believe it, and
repair hither to seize the Palace. So may you learn out the Truth. Only
command all in the Court to be quiet, that there may be no intelligence given
to prevent the Plot. This being agreed, he sends a special friend to Plautian,
to bid him come quickly (now both Princes were slain) before it were blazed
abroad; that possessing the (...)
Castle, and seeling himself in the Empire, he might get the Sovereignty in
despite of all men. Plautian believing the Message, was full of hope, and
putting on a Cuirace (for defense) under his Garments (the night being well
spent) he poasted in his Caroach to the Court, taking but a few with him, that
supposed the Emperors had sent for him about extraordinary Affairs. Being
en^^ed the Royal palace, without any stop (the Corpse de guard knowing nothing
of the business) the Tribune meets him, and (of set purpose) salutes him
Emperor; Plautian the Traitor betrayed.
then taking him by the hand in friendly sort, he leads him to the Chamber,
where he said he had thrown the dead bodies of the Emperors; ( Severus
having appointed some of his Guard, as soon as he entered the room, to lay
hands on him.) But Plautian (who little expected such a banquet) perceiving
(when he was come into the Chamber) both the Emperors standing there, and that
he was taken in the manner, being horribly afraid, fell on his knees, and
sought them not to misdeeme him; saying it was a mere Gull and Trick put upon
him. Severus exprobrating his Ingratitude, in rewarding his many Honors and
Favors in that sort; and Plautian on the other side remembering him of his
ancient love and approoved Fidelity, the Emperor began by little and little
to incline to believe him; till his Cuirace was discerned by the opening of his
Garment. Which Antonine espying, being a bold chollericke Youth, and bearing a
grudge against him; Sir (quoth he) what colorable answer can you make to these
two points? First you come to Us (thus late) unsent for. Next, what is the
meaning I pray of this Cuirace? who uses to sup or banquet in Armor? With that
he commands the Tribune, and the rest that were present, to dispatch him with
their swords, as an open enemy. Plautian slain.
They (without dilay) did as the young Emperor bade them, and threw his
carcass into the Highway, to be the scorn of them that ha^ed him.

This end had Plautian, answerable to his exorbitant Life and Insatiate
Ambition. Severus henceforth made two Pretorian Prefects, and spent most of his
Time in his Royal houses in the Suburbs, or in the Seacoast of The Region
betwixt Rome and Naples.
Campania, ministering Severus was a good Lawgiver. S. Aur. Vici. de Caesar.
Justice, and attending State-Affaires. He was also exceeding careful to have
his Sons at Rome, bred in honorable fashion. For he perceived they were more
addicted to Plays and Games, than was agreeable to their Princely estare. The
pursuit whereof, and their eager desire to win, being st^ll accompanied with
different success, and vehement altercation, distracted the Brethrens
affections, and inflamed them with Firebrarnds of enmity and discord. But
Antonine especially (now Plautian was made away) began to be intolerable in
his behavior, and formidable to all; using all possible means to destroy his
wife, daughter to Plautian. But Severus sent her away with her brother into
Sicilie, assigning them sufficient Maintenance to live plentifully (imitating
Augustus, who dealt in like sort with Antonius sons, when he became his
Enemy.)

And now he mainly labored Severus Instruction to his Sons.
to reconcile his Sons, and reduce them to Unity and Unanimity (...)
: Remembering them out of old Stoties and Tragedies, of the disasters which
befell to Brothers that were Princes, by such Dissentions. He showed them how
full of Money the Treasuries and Temples were, so that they needed not to seek
for Wealth and Riches abroad, that had such abundance at home, whereby they
might bountifully reward the Soldiers at their pleasure: That the Roman
Guards were quadrupled; and so puissant an Army lay before the City, that
considering the Number of men at Arms, Hugenes of their bodies, and great
store of treasure, no foreign power was able to come near them: And yet all
(he said) would come to naught, if they jarr'd and warred one with the other.

Thus did he daily school them, and by sharp reprehensions and fair
speeches, strove all he could to bring them to sobriety and temper. But all in
vain. For these unbridled Gallants, being in those first heats of youth,
flesht in all kind of Pleasures (by reason of their Imperial State) became
worse and worse, and were more at ods than ever, by the practices of their
Parasites, who did not only base offices in serving their Lusts, but were also
still projecting new Quarrels and Debates betwixt them for their own sinister
ends. But Severus finding out diverse of those bad Instruments, severely punished
them.

The Emperor being in great anguish of spirit, by reason of his Childrens
unseemly and unprincely Demeanor, received News from Britain.
Letters from his Viceroy of Britain, cerifying, that the Barbarians there
were risen, and had ranged over the Country, pillaging and wasting all before
them: that he needed therefore greater Forces to defend the He means the
Provinciated part of Britain.
Place; or rather, that his Imperial Majestly should come in person.

Severus was glad of this news as naturally desirous of honor, and ambitious
(after his Eastern and Northern Victories and Sirnames) to make a Conquest of
the Britains. Joyful also he was of so fair an occasion to take his Sons
from Rome, and weane them from the Diet and Delights of the City, by inuring
them to a sober military life. He proclaimed therefore his Expedition Severus
expedition into Britain.
into Britain, being now old and gowtie, but of more vigor and alacrity, than
any in the flower of youth. In his Journey, he was carried (for the most part)
in a Siegetta: and rested almost in no place. Having ended his Land travells,
he imbarks (with his sons) for Britain; where he arrived sooner than any
thought or expected. Presently he commands a general Muster, and raising a
great power, prepares for the War.

The Britains much troubled at the Emperors sudden Omnia repentina terrent.
arrival, and understanding that he meant to bring all those Forces against
them, sent Ambassadors to crave Peace, and excuse their Faults. But Severus
seeking to protract time (lest he should return to Rome as he came) and being
very eager of the Conquest and Surname of Britain, dismisses their Ambassadors
without (...)
dispatch, and provides all warlike Ammunition. And to the end his soldiers
might stand firm in fight, and bestirre themselves nimbly, and on sure ground;
he gave strict charge to make Causies and Bridges over the Marish land: For
the most part of that Region of the Britains, being surrounded by the Oceans
continual Irruption, is Fenny and Moorish. In those Bogges the The Romans
styled all Barbarians, but themselves and the Greeks.
Barbarians use to swim and run up and down, plunging themselves to the
middle; for being halfe-naked, they care not for Mire or Mud. They use not
Vestures, but wear about their Description of Picts or Scots, a branch of the
Britans.
wastes and necks an Ornament of Iron, which they esteem a rare accoutrement,
and rich abiliment (as other Barbarians do Gold.) They pownce and paint their
bodies with curious pictures, and the shapes of all sorts of Creatures; in
which regard, they are not clad all over, lest Their Elogie.
they should hide that brave Embroderie. They are a most Martial (...)
people, and very furious in fight: wherein they use only a Sword and Pike the
King and Queen of Weapons.
narrow Shield, a Pike, and a Sword hanging at their naked sides. As for
Cuirace or Caske, they use none at all; deeming they would but hinder them in
traversing the pools and fennes; out of which the foggy vapors continually
arising, make the sky in that Coast always cloudy.

Severus having all things in readiness that he desired, which might further
the Romans, or hinder and annoy the Barbarians, left his younger son Geta in
that Viz. at York
part of the I Will, which was under the Roman obedience, to minister Justice,
and govern the State; appoynting (for his Assistance) his most ancient Friends
and Counselors; but took Antonine with him to the War against the
Barbarians. The Army (having past those rivers and Rampires which disterminate
the Frontiers of the Romans from the Barbarians) made certain petty
Skirmishes and Excursions, wherein they had still the better. But the enemies
retreated at their pleasure into their Fastnesses among the Woods and Fennes
(so familiar to them;) wherein they hid themselves; which being no small
Severus lost fifty thousand in that Service. Dio.
detriment to the Romans, did spinne the War to a great length. Meanewhile
Severus, being now very aged, fell into a languishing Disease, which forced him
to keep home, and send Antonine to prosecute the war. But he little
regarding the Barbarians, bended all his endeavors to win the Soldiers,
persuading them to make him their Chief. For he vehemently aspired to sole
Sovereign; to which purpose, he still depraved and disvalued his brother. He
was also much vexed that his Fathers Disease was so lingering, and had not made
an end of him; wherefore he solicited his Physicians and Attendants to dispatch
the old man, and mischief him (by any means whatsoever.) At last Severus
departed this life, being consumed and pined away, rather Severus dies for
grief.
with Heart-griefe, than any other malady; having been the most famous Warrier
of all the Emperors. For none ever got so many Victories over Civil and
Foreign Enemies. He deceased At York, April. 4. An. Dom. 212.
in the eighteenth year of his Reign, leaving to his young sons which
succeeded him, such a Mass of Treasure, as never any did; and so puissant an
Army, as was unmatchable.

Antonine (after Severus death) Antonines Cruelty.
being now in supreme authority, instantly began to bathe himself in blood:
putting to death the Physicians for not hastening the old Emperors death (as he
commanded) and killing his own and brothers foster* fathers, because they had
mediated an Accord between them: not sparing any that either honored his
Father, or was honored by him. He solicited also the chief Captains and
Commanders (with large gifts and promises) to persuade the Soldiers to
proclaim him sole Emperor: using all possible Trains and Mines against his
brother. But the Soldiers would in no wise yield to it; for they well knew,
that Severus had from their Infancy trained them in the same degree of honor;
and therefore they were resolved to love and honor both alike. Antonine seeing
he could not prevail with the Army, made a League with the Barbarians; to
whom having given peace, and received their Pledges, he departed in all haste
to his Mother and Brother. Being come together, their Mother [the Empresse] and
all the great Lords and Counselors of State assaied to make them friends:
whereupon Antonine, when he saw that all opposed his Designs, of constraint
rather than willingly, yielded to a dissembled atonement. Then both the
Brothers, ruling with equal Authority, sailed out of Britain, and took their
Journey to Rome; carrying with them their Fathers Relics. Severus his
R^liques.
For his body being burned, the Ashes (mixed with sweet Odours) were bestowed in
an Vrne of Alablaster, which they took to Rome, to place it in the (...)
sacred Sepulchers of the Emperors. They lead the Army (as Conquerors of
Britain) and Antonine and Geta sail out of Britain.
landed in Gallia. Thus have we showed in this Book, the manner of Severus
Reign and Death, and how his Sons succeeded him in the Empire.

The End of the third Book.
HERODIAN HIS IMPERIAL HISTORY. The fourth Book.
The Contents.
THe two Emperors enter Rome in State. What Roman Emperors Deifyed. Their
solemn Obsequie and Funeral Triumph: Severus Deified: Wrestling: The
Partition of the Empire: The Empress Dowager hinders it: Antonine kills Geta:
His Prodigality and savage Cruelty: His guilty Conscience: His Exercises and
Military Austerity: He acts Alexander and Achilles: He is royally entertained
at Alexandria: He offers at Alexanders Shrine: His Quarrel to the
Alexandrians. A fear full Massacre: He pretends to be a Suitor to the King of
Parthia's Daughter; under which color, he massacres the Parthians: He
consults with Magicians, and commands them to conjure: He is slain: Macrinus
succeeds: His Speech: A terrible battle betwixt the Romans and Parthians:
Heralds make a sudden League betwixt them.

THe Acts of Severus the Emperor during the Eighteen years of his Reign, we
have related in the precedent book.

His Sons, who were yet The two Emperors take their Journey to Rome.
young, hastened with their Mother toward Rome: but by the way, they fell to
such Iarres, as that they neither lodged in the same house, nor eat together;
being extreme jealous, lest they received poison one from the other, in their
Meats or Drinks; either secretly from themselves, or otherwise, by suborning
their Servants. They made therefore the more haste in their Journey, as
supposing they might both live more securely at Rome; and that the Imperial
Palace (which The Magnificent Palace of the Emperors.
for Numerous and Gorgious Edifices, was larger than all the City) being
disparted betwixt them; there would be room enough for each of them to have
his several Court, and live as pleased himself.

Being come to Rome, the people They enter Rome in State.
received them with Laurels, and the Peers welcomed them. The Emperors
themselves went foremost; vested in Purple Robes of State. Next after them
followed the Consuls, which supported the Vrne, wherein were Severus Relics.
The Nobles having saluted the new Emperors, passed along, and adored the Vrne:
which having honored with great Pomp and Ceremony, they shrined it in the
Temple, where the Sacred Monuments of Marcus, and the Emperors (before him)
are to be seen. After the Divine Rites and Offices were celebrated, (as is
accustomed at Imperial Inaugurations) the Princes went to the Palace Royal;
which dividing betwixt them, they dwelt apart, making fast all the secret
passages; and using only in common, the public Courtgates. They chose also
several Guards, and came not together, but for some small while, when they
were to show themselves to the people.

Yet had they special care to Severus Funeral.
solemnize their Fathers Funeral with Glorious Ceremonies. For it is the
manner of the Romans to Deifie those Emperors, which at their Decease leave
their Sons to succeed them. This Solemnity they call, placing of the^ among
the gods.

Over all the city there is a semblance The Ritual magnificence at the
Funerals and Deifications of Emperors.
of Mourning intermixed with that Divine Celebrity. For the dead corpse is with
sumptuous Exequies, buried as others usually are. Then in the Porch of the
Palace, is erected on high, a stately bed of Ivory, spread with coverings of
cloth of Gold; whereon is laid an Image of Wax, made very like to the Defunct.
This Image lies like a sick person, pale and discolored. On both sides of the
bed, there sit most part of the day, on the left hand, all the most Honorable
Lords, in black Vestures; on the right hand, all the Ladies of Honor ennobled
by the Splendour of their Parents and husbands. None of which are adorned with
gold or Jewels, but are vested in thin white Raiment, after the guize of
Mourners. This they do seven days together Meane-while, Physicians come
often to the bed, as if they visited a Patient, saying still, that he grows
worse and worse. When he seems to be departed, the most noble young Gallants,
among all the Senators, and (...)
Order of Knighthood, lift up the bed on their shoulders, and carry it through
the Via sacra: It reached from the Palace to the Forum, which was the chief
Place of public Meetings and Pleadings.
Sacred Street, to the old Forum; (where the Roman Magistrates use to resign
their Offices.) On both sides are Scaffolds erected: On the one part, is a
Quire of Boys of most noble birth and descent: opposite to them is a Quire of
Ladies of prime Nobility: all which sing Hymns and Or Paeans
Lauds over the defunct, with solemn mournful Melody. Which done, they take up
the bed again, and carry Cam^us Martius.
it out of the City, to Mars his field; in the broadest place whereof is erected
a Frame, of a Quadrangled Aequilaterall Form, made like a little (...)
House, consisting of no other Materials, but The Funeral Pile, or Deificatory
Throne.
huge pieces of Timber compact together. Within, it is filled with dry wood:
without, it is decked with Tapestry embrodered with Gold; with Ivory Statuaes,
and Exquisite Pictures. In the lower part, is placed a lesser Structure, framed
and beautified like the other, with little gates and doors set open. There is
also a third, and fourth room; still lesser, and lesser: and then, diverse
other; till you come to the last, which is least of all. Which kind of
Edifice, may be resembled to the By these Arabian Spices and Odours, and there
seems to be in this supreme Solemnity, an Allusion to the Phoenix, etc.
(...)
Light-Houses, which by fire in the night, direct ships to a safe Harbor
(vulgarly called Pharos.) The bed being brought into the second room, they
throw in (by heaps) all sorts of Spices, and sweet Odours, that the earth
affoords, and all kind of fragrant and odo^ate Fruits, Herbs, and Gums: for
there is not a (...). ((...) which sen^e the Author uses it per totum.)
Province, or City, or any Person of Honor and Authority, which is not
ambitious to send these last Presents, to the Honor of their Prince. When a
mighty Pile of Aromatickes is amassed together, so that all the place is full;
then, all of the Order of Knighthood, The Funeral Dance or Triumph
gallantly mounted on horseback, ride round about the Frame; wheeling to and
fro, and prancing in great bravery the Dancing in Armor inve^^ed by ^.
^^rr^us. P^in H^st. lib. 7. ^. 56.
Pyrrhick Measures. In the same stately manner, there ride about the Frame,
Purple Chariottiers, representing the Persons, and bearing the Images of the
Noblest Roman Worthies and Emperors. Which Celebrity performed, the Successor
in the Empire takes a Torch in his hand, and puts it to the Frame, Then, all
the ^^^titude set fire to it on every side, and presently the whole Frame,
filled with such combustible and odoriferous stuff, is al on a bright blaze.
Immediately, from the top of the least and highest Turret (as from a Pinnacle)
an Eagle is let An Eagle let fly.
fly into the Air, at the instant of the firing; which (as the Romans
believe) carries the Emperors soul from earth to heaven. And ever after, they
worship him among the other Gods.

The young Emperors, after Severus Deifyed.
the solemn Deification of their Father, returning home, the flames of discord
burst out again; which growing to a deadly Feud, they plotted all manner of
ways to surprise and entrap one another, each attempting all possible means
to make away the other, that he might be sole Emperor. Yea the minds and
affections of all the Citizens of greatest Power and Dependencies were
infinitely distracted, both the Emperors sending (in secret) their different
Letters, and seeking to win and wedge men to their several factions, by fair
promises. But the mayor part inclined to Geta, because he showed The Character
of Geta and Antonine.
some sparks of Noble Honesty, and was mild and affable in Conversation, and
used Honorable Studies. For he had still about him Learned men, and was
frequent at Wrestling, and other Wrestling a Princely Sport.
ingenious Exercises. He was also full of Humanity and Courtesy toward all*
and of so graceful and Princely behavior, that the fame and good opinion of
him drew most men's affections to him. But Antonine bore himself in a harsh and
rugged fashion; and being altogether averse from the things before recited,
affected the reputation of a Martialist and Man of War. Whereupon, doing all
things in Choler and Fury, he sought rather to win men by Threatening than
Entreating, and by Fear than Love. Their mother seeing them so discordant in
all their Actions (even of least Consequence) assayed to reconcile them, but in
vain. Whereupon, they (once) resolved to share The Empire divided
the Empire betwixt them, least residing still at Rome, they should be
circumvented by each other. Wherefore having assembled their Fathers Kinsmen
and Counselors of State, they debated (in their Mothers presence) how to make
the Partition: Where all Europe was adjudged to Antonine, and all the opposite
coast called Asia, was assigned to Geta: (for so has it pleased the Divine
Providence to disterminate both Continents by the Of this Vid. Strab. lib. 2.
and the Travels of that noble learned Gentleman M. George Sandys, page 27. --
quem pulcher Apollo, Omnes per montes, atque antra per omnia auxit
Propontick Gulf.) It was also, agreed that Antonines Camp should lie at
Byzantium: and Getaes at Chalcedon, a City in Bithynia: that the Armies facing
each other (in those Frontire Towns) might guard the Dominions of both, and
forbid the Passage by Sea: [ Chalcedon being situate over against Byzantium, in
the mouth of Pontus Euxinus.] It was likewise ordered, that the Senators and
Nobles which were Europaeans, should reside at Rome; the rest should follow
Geta; who destined Antioch or Alexandria (which were not much less than Rome)
for the chief seat of his Empire; and was content to leave to Antonine the
Provinciated Moors and Numidians of the South (with the bordering nations of
Africa) taking to himself the Countries (beyond) toward the Orient. While
they were thus parting the Empire (...)
by the Map, all the Lords being much grieved at it, their Mother Iulia thus
interrupted them; O my Sons, you have The Empresses Speech to her Sons.
found the way to divide Sea and Land; and the Ponticke Gulf (as you say)
parts both Continents: But how will you divide your Mother? How shall I
(Wretched Woman!) be torn and mangled betwixt you? First therefore kill me
outright, and divide me (each of you taking his part) that I also (with Sea and
Land) may be divided between you. Having thus said, with many tears, she
caught hold of them both (with a loud shrieke) and clasping them in her Arms,
with great violence of affection, endeavored to reconcile them. Which piteous
sight struck such a horror into all; that the (...)
Counsel was dismissed, the Proposition quite dashed, and the Princes returned to
their several Palaces. Yet was there no hope of Reconcilement, but still their
irrelenting Fury increased. At the Elections of Vice-Royes and Presidents, each
preferred his Friend; and when they sat in Judgment, they were of different
Opinions; to the infinite loss of those which had Causes to be heard; for they
more regarded Partiallity, than Justice or Equity. Yea, at Sports and Games
they were still of contrary sides. Neither did they forbear any sort of
Treachery; but dealt eftsoons with their several Cooks and Cup-bearers, to
poison each other. Which not taking effect, because of the ordinary care and
caution of both at their Table; at last Antonine having lost all patience, and
resolved to reign alone, intends to murder his brother. For seeing his secret
plots succeeded not, he determined in despite of all danger, to break through
all difficulties. Wherefore rushing into his brothers Chamber (who thought not
of him) he slew him in his Antonine kills Get^
mothers arms, who was all embrewed with his blood. Which done, he leaps
forth, and running through all the Court, cries out, he had like to have been
murdered, and hardly escaped. Then he commands his Gaurd to convey him
presently into the camp to save his life; saying, he should instantly be
slain, if he stayed there. They believing what he said, and not knowing what
was don within, ran along with him. The City was extremely terrified He fles to
the Camp.
at the Emperors running through the City in the evening. As soon as he got to
the Camp, he went to the Chapel, where the Ensigns and Images of the army
are kept with religious veneration, and falling flat on the earth, thanked the
Gods for his great deliverance. Which when the Soldiers heard (that were then
either bathing, or gone to their Rest) they all flockt thither in amazement.
Antonine going among them, confessed not presently what he had done, but cried
out amain, that he had escaped a dangerous plot of his Capital Enemy
(meaning his Brother) and that with much ado, after a long Conflict, his
Adversaries were overcome: in which fight, both being engaged, himself at last
(thanks to his good Fortune) remained sole Emperor: By which dark and
intortled Speeches, he meant they should rather guess at what was done, than
directly understand him. Then (to secure himself and the Empire) he promised
to every Soldier, two 80. li. ( aut praeter-propter.)
thousand five hundred Attique Drachmaes, and double the His Prodigality.
Wheat they were wont to have: bidding them go themselves immediately and take
the Money out of the Temples and Treasuries. Thus did he in one day squander
away all the Coin that Severus had raked out of others ruins, in eighteen
years. The Soldiers allured with such a Mass of money, and understanding how
the world went, (the murder being now divulged by them that fled out of the
Court) Proclaimed him sole Emperor, (terming Geta a traitor.) Antonine stayed
that night in the Temple, and taking heart (as having by these Donatives
assured the Soldiers) he repaired (the next day) to the Senate House, with all
his Army, which was better armed than in the usual Attendance on the Prince.
Having sacrificed, he mounted the Imperial Throne, and thus spoke:

Antonine's Speech to the Senate.
I Am not ignorant how odious and subject to calumny the Murder of
Domestickes is at the first Bruit: for Men are apt to pity them that suffer,
and to malign the Actors: so that he which is vanquished may be thought to be
wronged, and the Victor to have done the wrong. But if Men look into the
Matter with clear judgments, not clouded with favor to the defunct, but
rightly weighing his cause and ballancing his purpose, they will soon discern
that it is far more reasonable and necessary to revenge, than receive an
Injury: (the Party slain being (withal) so egregious a coward, and the
Victor so bravely valorous, as appears by the Event.) What perilous Plots he
had on fo^t against me, both by Poisons, and all sorts of treacherous
practices, you may soon find by the torture of his Servants, whom I have
therefore commanded to be brought hither, that you may know the truth. Diverse
of them have been examined already; whose Confessions you may hear. The truth
is, I being with my Mother, he and others rusht in upon me, with drawn swords:
but I shrewdly suspecting it (my mind misgiving me) prevented it, and slew him
as a Traitonr: for certes he had not the affection or disposition of a
brother: Now as it is an act of Justice to be revenged on such dangerous
persons, so are there good Precedents for it. Romulus, the first Founder of
this City, would not endure his own brother, Vid. Live. and Aurel. Victor. de
Orig. Gent. Ro^^.
that did but jest at his endeavors. I omit Germanicus, brother to Nero; and
Titus, brother to Domitian. Marcus himself, that made such afaire Flourish of
Philosophy and Humanity, would not suffer the affront of There was a Report
that Marcus Aurelius poisoned him, but (as Aurelius Victor says) none but lewd
persons believed it.
Lucius, his Son in law; but secretly dispatched him. And so have I
anticipated (by a just Vindication) the Poisons and Sword of an Enemy: (for so
his Deeds style him.) You are therefore to thank the Gods, that have reserved
you such a Prince, under whose sole Regiment you may now live quietly and
securely, without Distractions: For as Jupiter is the only Emperor among the
Gods, so has he decreed that there shall be but one Emperor among Men.

Having thus said with a loud Voice (in great rage) and casting His Savage
Cruelty.
a terrible frown on his brothers friends, he leaves the Senators (most
whereof looked pale and trembled) and hurries to the Palace: where he instantly
slew all his brothers servants and friends, not sparing any Officers that were
found in the House, nor any other, no not very Infants: All whose Carcasses
being despightfully thrown into Carts, and carried out of the City, were cast
by heaps (at random) into the They had not the honor of a decent Funeral.
fire. He spared none that had the least acquaintance with Geta; but put to
the sword, even Wrestlers, Charriot-drivers, and all kind of Players and
Actors, that had any way delighted him, by seeing or hearing them. He slew also
the most eminent and opulent Senators, upon the least suipicion or suggestion,
that they were friends to his brother. He put to death Commodus his Sister (who
was then an old woman, and had bin much honored of all the Emperors, because
she was Marcus his Daughter;) imputing it as a crime, that she wept with his
Mother at her Sons Murder. Nor did he forget his quondam Wife ( Plautians
Daughter) that lived in Sicily; nor his Couzengerman, named Sevecus; nor
Pertinaxes Son; nor the Son of Lucilla (Sister to Commodus) but cut them
all off, together with all the Imperial Kindred, and the flower of the
Nobility and Gentry. Then sent he into the Provinces, and massacred all the
Presidents and Procurators, as Geta's Favorites. Yea, whole Nights were spent
in such Tragical executions of all sorts of people. He buried the Vestall
Virgins quick, pretending they had lost their Virginity. Lastly (which was
never done before) when at the Circensian Instituted in honor of Neptune. Vid.
Al. ab Alex. Genesis Die. lib. 6. cap. 19.
Sports (where himself was a spectator) the people cast some scoff at a
Charriotier which he favored, he taking it as an affront to himself, suddenly
commanded his Men at arms to rush among the Multitude, and kill all that had
scorned the Charriot-driver. Upon this Command, it being impossible to find out
the Delinquents, in so great a throng (no man confessing himself guilty) the
Soldiers spared none that they light upon, but either slew them, or took away
that they had in lieu of Ransom. After all which heinous Acts, his conscience
His guilty Conscience
recoyling, and shrewdly stinging him, he was weary of the City life, and
resolved to leave Rome, upon color to reform the Legions, and visit the
Provinces. Departing therefore from Italy, he came to the banks of Ister, and
the Northern parts of the Empire; where he exercised His Exercises.
himself in Coach-races and combating with all kind of Wilde-beasts. Sometime
he sat in judgment (though very seldom) where, after a few words on either
side, he presently gave Sentence. He much affected the Germans, and made them
his His affection to the Germans*
Confederates and Associates in war; choosing from among them, the most
valiant and personable, to be of his Guard. Yea, he often laid aside his Roman
habit, and put on Germane attire, going abroad in their Cassockes trimmed with
Silver; and wearing a yellow Periwig, l^ke the Germane bush. Which affected
Garb infinitely indeared him to the Barbarians. And the Roman Army was well
pleased, by reason of his profuse Donatives, and because he descended to the
performance of all Military His Military Austerity
labors in his own person; for he would first dig (when need required) and
if a bridge were to be made over a River, or a Rampire to be cast, or any
Manuary work or toil to be undertaken, he would be the first that should put
his hand to it; contenting himself with a spare Diet, wooden cups and
platters, and any bread whatsoever: for his manner was, to take so much wheat
as would suffice one man, which he grinded himself, and then kneading it into
Cakes, and baking it on the Embers, eat it. Brief, he left off all manner of
Iunkets and delicates, faring no otherwise than the poorest common soldier.
Moreover, it pleased him better (as he pretended) to be called
Fellow-souldier, than Emperor; accustoming himself to travel on foot (as the
rest did) and rarely using Horse or Caroach; carrying also his own Arms, and
many times, the Great Imperial Standard; which being marveilous weighty, by
reason of the rich and Massy Gold-worke, was not easily borne by the strongest
Ancient-bearer. For these and the like observances, the army loved him as a
good Soldier, and honored him as a brave Commander. And indeed it was a
wonder, that so small a timberd man, was able to do so great matters. But when
he had visited the Legions upon the banks of Is^er, and went down into Thrace,
which borders on Macedonia, he then began to play Alexander; He acts Alexander.
reviving that Kings Memory, by all means possible, causing his Statues and
Images to be erected in every City, and filling Rome it self, the Capitol,
and all the Temples with them. I have seen also diverse ridiculous Images, which
had one entire Body, and one Head, which had two halfefaces, to wit, Alexanders
and Antonines. His ordinary Wear, was the Macedonian Habit, a (...)
Turban on his head, and Pantofles on his feet. He had a select troop of young
Soldiers, which he styled the Macedonian Phalanx, commanding his Captains to
call themselves by the names of Alexanders Captains. He sent for Youths from
Sparta, and termed them the Laconicke and Of the City Pitane in L^^onia.
Pitanite Band. After this, having made the Towns and Cities tenable, he went
to Pergamus a City in Asia, to take Physic of Aesculapius; where having done
as his Fancy led him, he marched straight to Troy.
Ilium, to view the Ruins of it, and visit Achilles Tomb; which having bravely
decked with flowers and garlands, he then would needs act Achilles: He acts
Achilles.
but wanting a Patroclus, he played this Pranck. He had with him one Festus,
his most beloved Freed-man, and the Imperial Remembrancer, who died while he
was at Ilium, being (as some say) poisoned, that he might have such a Funeral
as Vid. Hom. ^^^ad ^. 23.
Patroclus: but others say, he dyed naturally. However, he commanded his corpse
to be brought forth, and a great Funeral Pile to be made; whereon having cast
the dead body, and killed of all manner of beasts, he set the Pile on fire, and
lifting up a Vial, sacrifised Wine, and prayed to the Winds. But when he was
to cast his hair This was an ancient Funeral ^^^^. Vid. (...). Iph. (...) in
(...) pat
also into the flame, having a very thin Bush natural, all the Company laughed:
yet he made a sorry shift, and cut of all the hair he had. Of all Generals, he
comm^^^ed chiefly the Roman Syll^, and African Annibal: Sylla and Anniball.
whose ^mages and Statues he erected.

Departing from Ilium, and passing through Asia, Bithynia, and other Provinces
(where he settled his Affairs) he came to Antioch; where being honourarably
entertained, and having stayed a certain time, he sent to Alexandria,
pretending he had a great longing to see the City which Alexander founded; as
also, to consult the God which the Citizens so much honored. Upon these two
Pretexts, to wit, the Adoration of their Deity, and Veneration of that Heroes
Memory, he gave order that Sacrifices of an hundred Oxen.
Hecatombes and Sacrifices (of all sorts) should be prepared against his
Coming. Which Message being delivered to the Alexandrians (who are naturally
Cocke-brain'd and lightheaded) they were almost beside themselves for joy that
the Emperor was so devoted to them: They made therefore such royal
preparations for his Entertainment, His royal entertainment at Alexandria.
as the like (they say) was never made for any Prince. All manner of exquisite
Music and curious Melody was heard over all the City: All his Passages were
perfumed with all sorts of precious Odors and Aromatickes. Torches were
lighted, and all the way strewed with Gelsomines and Musk roses. The Emperor
entered the City with all his Army, and first went to the Temple, where having
sacrifised Hundreds of Beeves, and burnt Heaps of Incense on the Altars, he
visited His Offertory at Alexanders Shrine.
Alexanders Shrine; where he offered his Purple Robe, his Rings set with
Paragon Stones, his Belt, Scarf, and choicest Jewels he had about him: all
which he laid upon his Tomb; whereat the Alexandrians being (...)
overjoyed, revelled and feasted day and night, little dreaming what a banquet
the Emperor would shortly make them. For all this P^ausibilitie was merely
colorable; his Intendment being to make a general Massacre among the^. The
cause of his secret ^ancour His secret (...) ell to (...) Alexandrians.
was this: It was told him a Rome in his brothers time, and after his death,
that the Citizens of Alexandria had spoken disgracefully of him. Indeed they
The Alexandrians described.
are naturally a very scurrilous People, and much given to gibing and giering
of others; casting out against the most eminent Persons, many cutting Quips,
which themselves think are fine conceits; but they against whom they are
spoke, take them as great Indignities. For those jests are most biting, that
have most relish of truth. Having therefore much traduced him for his brothers
murder, nicknamed his mother Iocasta, and scoft him, for that being such a low
Grig, he would presume to personate such High and Mighty Or Semi-Gods.
Heroes as Alexander and Acchilles; they did so enrage Antonine, who (by
nature) was of a fiery and sanguinary disposition, that while they thus sported
themselves with their Squibs and Flashes, he intended to la^^ them with a
terible Revenge. Wherefore the Festival Celebrity being ended; he perceiving
what an infinite number were come together into the City, out of the Regions
adjoining, made Proclamation, that all the Youths should assemble themselves in
a certain Plain; that as he had already a Macedonian and Spartan Phalanx; so
also he might (in honor of Alexander) have another Phalanx; named (after him)
Alexandrian. He willed therefore that the young men should be so ranked that a
Lane might be left for him to walk and take a View, which were fittest for
Age, Strength, and Stature, to serve in the wars. This being believed (as very
probable (...) regard of the high honor he had so lately done to Alexander, all
the yonkers accompanied with their Parents and Couzens, me^ at the place
assigned, with great joy and alacrity. Antonine passing through all the Ranks,
and perusing them severally, commended first one, and then another; protracting
the time, till his whole army had rounded them (ere any observed it or thought
of it.) As soon as he wist that they were all circuled by his men of war, and
taken (as it were) in a toil, he presently departs (with his Guard) and makes
a signal to the Army; Alexandrians massacred.
which instantly rushing in on every side, make a furious slaughter of the
unarmed Youths, and all the rest that were enclosed; some of the Soldiers
employing themselves only in killing, other in throwing the dead bodies into
huge deep Pits, whereon casting much earth, they made a huge great Mount. Many
were thrust in half dead; and not a few were buried quick. There perished also
many of the Soldiers: For they which had any breath left in their bodies, and
had not lost all their vigor, caught hold of the Soldiers that flung them in,
and haled them with them into the graves. So great was the slaughter, that
streams of blood gushing through the Plain, died the Month of Nilus, and the
shore about the City with Purple gore. And now affecting the Surname of
Parthicus, and the honor of Conquering the Oriental Barbarians (though they
lived in (...)
profound Peace) he lays this Plot. He sends Letters to Artabanus the King of
Parthia, and Ambassadors with stately Presents; An embassy to the Parthians.
Certifying them, that he was desirous to have his daughter to wife; that he
was an Emperor, and Son to an Emperor, and was not minded therefore to be
Son in Law to any Subject, or mean person, but rather to espouse a Queen,
or some great Princess; that the Roman and Parthicke Empires were the two
greatest in the world, which if (by affinity) they were united, and their
powers conjoined, (without any Bar or Let by Rivers or otherwise) they would
become absolutely Invincible; that the Barbarian nations subject to both
Empires, would be more mannageable, if every several Country and City had
governors of their own Nation; that the Roman Infantery and Pike-men excelled
all others in set Battle, that the Parthian Cavallery and Archers, exceeded for
number Parthian Archers.
and Skill. Both which concurring with correspondent Military valor, and all
Warlicke necessaries, would easily reduce the whole World to an entire Monarchy
under one Diadem. And whereas those Countries yielded Spices, Odours and the
finest Silks; and the Roman dominions abounded in all kind of Mineralls, and
Manufactures, which (in the division) Merchants imported but by stealth, and
very seldom; were this Union effected, on one sole Empire constituted, there
would follow by mutual Traffic and Amity, a happy intercourse, without
impeachment, or impediment.

The Parthian having read these Letters, refused the offer at The Parthians
Answer.
first, saying; That it was very inconvenient for the Roman and Barbarian
Princes to match together, for what concord could there be in so different
Language, Diet, and Habit? that the Emperor might find at Rome, many of
great Nobility, and Extraction, not unworthy his Affinity; as himself had
likewise among his Peers and Princes of the blood descended of King Arsa^es.
Arsacidae, and that it was not fit that either of their Races should be
Mungreliz'd in that manner. This was his first answer to the Emperors
proposition: but Antonine reinforcing his suite, and by many gifts and solemn
oaths confirming his zealous affection and desire of Marriage; The Barbarian
King yielded (at last) and promising to give him his Daughter, called him, His
son in law that should be. Which news being divulged; all the Barbarians
prepared to entertain the King of the Romans; and rejoiced in hope of an
eternal Peace. Whereupon Antonine Antonine enters Parthia.
passing the Rivers without opposition, progressed over Parthia (as if it had
been his own Country) the Natives every where entertained him with Sacrifices,
crowned Altars, and most exquisite sweet Odours; which he made show to be
exceedingly affected with. Approaching after a long March to the Court of
Artabanus, the King goes forth to meet the Bridegroom (his Son in law) in a
fair Plain before the City, attended with a wondrous company of Barbarians,
wearing Chaplets of flowers and diverse colored Vestures of wrought Gold;
frollicking and dancing to the Music of Flutes, Pipes, and Timbrells; for
with these Revells they are marveilously delighted, especially when they are
well tipled. Now when the greatest concourse of people was come together, and
the Barbarians (having left their horses, bows, and arrows) were feasting and
carowsing (at random) and misdeeming nothing, thronged and crowded together to
see the royal Bridegroom; Antonine made a sign to his soldiers to fly upon
them and murder them. The Barbarians amazed at this, gave The Parthians
massacred.
back and fled; the Roman, following the Chase, killing and wounding them.
Artabanus himself being ^^^ued by his Guard, and set on Horseback, had much
ado to escape with a few of his Courtiers. The Remainder of the Barbarians
were put all to the sword; for they had neither horses (which they most needed)
having turned them to pasture; nor could they run away, being hindered by
their loose Garments, which reached down to the foot, nor had they with them
their Bows and Arrows; for what should they do with them at a Wedding? Thus
after a mighty Massacre of the Barbarians, Antonine taking magnificent Spoils,
and many Pri-soners, departs without any resistance; burning Towns and Cities
as he went, and licensing the Soldiers to take what pillage and booty they
listed. This blow the Barbarians received ere they looked for it. Antonine
having harried and wasted the Parthian Country (till his soldiers were weary)
retreits into Mesopotamia, and from thence certifies the Roman Senate and
People, that he had conquered all the Orient, and reduced all those Kingdoms
under his obedience. The Senate, albeit they well knew how things went ( (...)
for it is impossible that a Princes actions should be concealed) yet out of
fear and flattery they decreed to him all Triumphall Honors. And now did
Antonine keep his Court in Mesopotamia, wholly devoting himself to
Charriot-races, and Combats with all sorts of Wild beasts. He had two
Generals of his army; the one was very aged, and though no great Statesman,
yet a good Martial man. His name was Audentius. The other (called Macrinus)
was well seen in points of State, and an excellent Lawyer. Him the Prince did
often shrewdly check and taunt (in public) as a man of no spirit or valor,
giving him very contumelious terms. For understanding that he kept a good
table, and loathed the course Viands that himself delighted in (like a
soldier) and that he used to wear a short (...)
Cloak, and other City attire; he called him an effeminate Coward, and
continually threatened to kill him. Which Macrinus taking to heart, was mightily
enraged. Now there fell out this Accident (for at last Antonine was to leave
the Stage.) Being naturally curious and inquisitive to know not only the
secrets of Men, but of Gods also, and Demons; and suspecting that all intended
Treason against him, he consulted all Oracles, and sent Magicians consulted.
far and near for Magicians, Astrologers, and Wizzards: not one escaping
him, that professed those Curious Arts. But misdoubting that they all lied, and
prophesied falsely (to sooth him in his humor) he writes to one Maternianus,
to whom he had committed the Government of the State at Rome; and (as to his
most confident friend) he had imparted all his secrets; willing him to inquire
out the chief Magicians and Conjurers that Conjuring.
were to be found, and to demand of the Spirits that were raised, how long he
had to live; and whether any intended to surprise the empire. Maternianus
obeying his Command, (whether the Spirits signified so much, or whether he
plotted so against Macrinus;) writes back to Antonine, that Macrinus (...)
insidiously aspired to the Empire, and that therefore he should make him away.

Having sealed these Letters (among others) he delivers them (as usually he
did) to the Posts that knew nothing of the Contents. They with wonted speed
arrive at the Emperors Court, at the very instant of his beginning his
Charriot-race, (for he was now entering the Chariot) and deliver him the
Packet, wherein the Letters (touching Macrinus) were. But Antonine's mind
being wholly fixed on his present * Sports, he bids Macrinus Charriotraces a
great sport in those days
take the Letters and peruse them, and if there were any matters of Weight, to
certify him; otherwise to attend his Charge as he was wont, (thus he often used
to do:) And so he hurries away in his Chariot. Macrinus retiring himself,
broke up the several Letters, and fell upon that which aimed at his
destruction. Perceiving therefore that his danger was great and impendent; and
well knowing Antonines ferall Cruelty (especially having so fair a Pretext) he
reserves that Letter to himself, and (as his manner was) acquainted the Prince
with the Contents of the rest. But fearing, lest Maternianus should write
again of the same Business, he resolved rather to do than suffer; and thus
he plots: There was one Martial, a A Captain of an hundred men.
Centurion, and one of Antonines Guard, that still waited on him; whose brother
was a few days before, executed by the Prince, upon bare Information (without
proof or proceesse) who had also called Martial himself, Base Coward, and
Macrinus his Favorite (in scorn.) This man being infinitely grieved at his
brothers death, and enraged with those reproaches, Macrinus (who knew all the
Passages) sends for; reposing in him, as having been formerly his Servant, and
obliged to him by many singular Favors. Him he persuades to kill Antonine,
upon the first Opportunity. Whereupon allured with Macrinus Promises, and
instigated with his own Quarrel, and his brothers Revenge, he undertakes to
effect it, as soon as was possible. Shortly after it fell out, that Antonine
lying at Carrae in Carrae in Mesopotamia.
Mesopotamia, went from his Palace to visit the Temple of the Of Luna and
Lunus see M. Sslden, de Dijs Syris.
Moon, (a good distance from the City) which Goddess is honored by the
Natives with great Devotion. Taking with him but a small Troop of Horse (not
troubling the whole army) he went on his Journey, purposing (when he had
sacrificed) to return to the City. In the Midway, commanding all to stand off,
he went aside to his E^s^ment, taking but a Pag^ along with him. Whereupon all
turning their faces, and going a great way off (for Honors sake) Martial, who
watched every minute of opportunity, as soon as he perceived the Prince was
all alone, runs instantly (as if he had beckoned to him to do somewhat)
Antonine slain.
and stabs him behind with a Stilletto, (as he was uncovering himself.) The
wound being mortal, he was suddenly slain without recovery. Which done,
Martial takes horse and flies. But the Germane Horsemen which Antonine much
delighted in, and used for his Guard, being next at hand, and the first that
saw what was don, pursued him, and thrust him through with their Iavelins. When
the report hereof was brought to the Army, they all ran together to the place;
where Macrinus was the first that sell a weeping and wailing (dissemblingly)
over the dead body. The Soldiers took his Death very heavily, accounting they
had lost a dear friend and companion rather than a Prince: and not conceiting
any thing of Macrinus his ^reason, they thought Martial had done it in his own
quarrel: and so they all returned to their Tents: Macrinus having burnt the
corpse, sent his Ashes in an Vrne to his mother to bury it. She was then at
Antioch, and for grief of her childrens disasters, slew her self; whether
voluntarily or by compulsion, is uncertain. This End had the Emperor Antonine,
and his Mother Iulia, having lived in that manner (as I have related) he
having reigned six years alone (without his Father or Brother.)

Antonine extinct, the Soldiers being all in a Maze, were two days without an
Emperor, debating who was fittest to be elected: For they had Intelligence,
that Artabanus was marching with a mighty Army to be revenged on them, and to
Sacrifice them to the Ghosts of them they had treacherously slain in the time
of Peace and Festival Solemnity. They proceed therefore to Election: and first
they make choice of Audentius, a man bred up in the Wars, and a good
commander. But he alleging Audentius refuses the Empire.
he was super-annate, refuses the Empire; whereupon they elect Macrinus, by the
persuasion especially of the Coronels or Serjeant-Majors.
Tribunes, who (after his death) were susspected to have been accessory to
Antoni^^s Murder, and of Macrinus Council, (as in the Sequel shall be
declared) Thus was Macrinus made Emperor, M^^rinus Elected.
not so much by the Soldiers Love and Fidel ^ie, as by urgent Necessity.
Presently after, Artabanus approached with his forces, leading a huge Army,
consisting of great troops of Horsemen and A^chers, as also Riders on Camels
(in complete Armor) with extraordinary long Lances. Whereupon Macrinus
assembling his Soldiers, made this Speech:

Macrinus his Speech to the Army.
IT is no marvel that you all grieve so much for the death of so gracious a
Prince, or Companion rather. But it is the part of Wise men to take humane
Chances and Calamities patiently. His memory shall be ever de are and precions
among us; and his brave and noble Acts, and singular love and respect to you
(with whom he so familiarly conversed) shall to his eternal Glory be
recorded to Posterity* And now having duly henoured his memory, and performed
his Funeral solemnity, it concerns us all to look to our selves, and prevent
the present danger. The Barbarian (you see) is at hand with all the Power of
the Orient, having (in his own conceit) a just Cause and Quarrel against us.
For we first provokt him by infringing the league, and Warring on him in time
of public Peace and Security. And now all the Roman Empire depends on your
valor and fidelity: For we are not to fight with this Great King about the
Borders or Skirts of the Empire, or about Rivers; but for all our fortunes; he
being come to revenge his Children and Kinsmen which we (as he opines) have
slain unjustly, and contrary to our Oaths. Let us therefore take arms and (as
Romans are wont) keep our R^^k^s; for this confused Barbarous rout, being not
well murshalled nor trained, is like enough to be us own overthrow. But your
good Order, Discipline, and Martial skill in fight, will has preserve your
selves, and def^^t the E^^^ie. Wherefore charge courageously, like worthy
Romans, and as you are wont; so shall we vanquish the Barbarians, and win
great Honor; for them will it go curant with the Romans, and all the world;
that we did not pilfer the former victory, by fraud, treachery, and perjurious
violation of the League, but by force of Arms, and true valor.

Having thus said, the soldiers seeing in what a The Romans feared the
Parthians more than any other nation: Rende the letter in the beginning of the
next Book.
straight they were, put themselves in Battalia, and were [all night] in arms.
At Sun rising, they descry Artabanus and his huge host advancing. When the
Barbarians had done their devotions to the Sun (after their usual guize) they
ran upon The Battle betwixt the Romans and Parthians.
the Romans with a terrible shout, and riding close to them, discharged their
arrows among them. The Romans having arranged their battles in such exquisi^e
order, that the Cornets of horse, and Moresco Darters, flanked each side, and
the light armed soldiers had lanes made between the several Maniples, to
sally forth as occasion served, with great courage received the charge of the
Barbarians. Nevertheless, they were extremely galled with continual shot of
Arrows, and gored with the long Lances, of the armed horsemen, and camell-men.
Yet when the Romans fought hand to hand, they did easily put them to the
worse. But finding themselves overpressed by multitudes of horses and Camels,
making semblant to retreit; they strewed the way with calthropes, and other
sharp poynted Iron engines, which being covered with sand, and not discerned,
did great hurt to the Lanciers, and camel riders. For the Horses, and
especially the camels (which are tender ho^^t) as soon as they trod on them,
halted downeright, and ca^t their Riders. The Barbarians, while they are
mounted on ^orses or Camels, fight grimly. But dismounted, they are soon taken,
for they dare not come to hand-strokes; and if they be driven to fly, or pursue
the enemy, their long loose garments are a maine let to them. Thus all the
first and second day they fought from morning till evening. Night parting them,
both sides retired to their camps as victors. The third day, they joined
battle in the self same plain; where the Barbarians (being the greater
number) assayed to wheel about, and Or take in a Net. (...)
enclose the Romans; who perceiving their purpose, exte^ded not their army in
length, but dilated it in Front, and so prevented their circumvention. Now
there fell such an infinite number of men and beasts, that all the field was
covered with them, insomuch, that huge heaps and piles of carcasses (but
especially of camels) lay one upon another, so high, that the Soldiers could
not come together to fight, both the Armies being hindered from passing one to
the other, by a mighty and almost impassable Barracado of carcasses; whereupon
they retreated to their several Camps.

Macrinus understanding that the only cause why Artabanus fought so fiercely
and obstinately, was because he supposed he warred against Antoninus; (for the
Barbarians were wont, if they prevailed not at first, to droope and grow
faint-hearted; but at that time they were more resolute, intending to fight
again, as soon as they had taken away and burnt the dead bodies, not knowing
that the Author of all those embroilements was slain) sends Heralds with
letters to the Parthian; certifijng him, That the Emperor was dead, and had
received condign punishment for the violation of his oath and league; that
himself was now elected to the Empire, by the Romans (to whom it belonged) and
that what was formerly done, did much displease him; that he was therefore
willing to restore all the captives that were remaining, and all the spoils
that were carried away; and that he also much desired to make him his friend,
and to co^firm the peace by oath and sacrifice.

Which letters Artabanus having read, and being fully informed (by the Heralds)
of Antoninus Heralds.
murder; conceiving also, that he was sufficiently plagued for his
persidiousnesse; and satisfying himself with the rendition A sudden league.
of the captives and spoils, (without more effusion of blood) he concludes a
peace with Macrinus, and returns home. The Roman Emperor marched likewise with
his Army out of M^sopotamia, and went to Antioch.

HERODIAN HIS IMPERIAL HISTORY. The fourth Book.
The Contents.
MAcrinus his Letter to the Roman Senate and People. The Senate confirm his
Election. Informers punished. Macrinus his Error. Maesa a poluicke Lady. Temple
of the Sun. His Image and Priest. Bassian made Emperor, and called Antonine.
Julian beheaded. Battle betwixt Macrine and Antonine. Macrine flies, and is
beheaded. Diadumenianus Caesar. Antonines Devotion at Nicomedia. He sends his
Picture to Rome. His Acts at Rome. He dances about the Altars. His Crueliy and
Luxury. He writes to the Senate to excuse his ravishing of a Nun. He marries
his God to Minerva, and after divorces them. He marries the Sun and Moon
together. He inthrones his God in a new Temple. His strange Donatives.
Alexander made Caesar. Wrestling a princely exercise. Stage Players highly
preferred. Antonine slain.

We have treated in the former Book of the Reign and End of Antonine, and of
the treason wrought against him, and of his Successor. Macrinus remaining at
Antioch, sent Letters to the Senate and People of Rome, to this effect.

Macrinus his Letter to the Roman Senate, etc.
FOr as much as you well know my manner of life from the beginning, how mild my
Conversation has been, and what great moderation I used in my former Office,
which is not far from Sovereignty (seeing the Emperor puts himself into the
hands of the Or G^ne(...) of hi^ Ar^^^^s.
Pretorian Prefect) I hold it needless to use many words. You may remember
how much I was grieved at his Misgovernment, and not a little endangered for
your sakes, when he giving ^are to all Delators did extremely tyrannize you
Wherefore he still rayled at me, and publicly taxed me for my mildnes and
lenity, which he scorned, and termed baseness and Pusillanim^^y: For
delighting in fawning Sycop^a^s, he esteemed them his trustiest Friends and
Counselors, which did whet his cruelty, and spur his ingenerate ferity, by
exasperating Calumnies, whereas ^ever highly prized modesty and humanity. I
have therefore so ended the dreadful Parthick war (wherein the whole N. B.
Roman Empire was hazarded) as having regard to our honor, we have not
yielded a j^t to the Enemy (in valor) yea we have made that great King (which
brought so huge an Host into the Field) of an Enemy a Friend, by ratifying a
firm I ague. As for my government in the Empire, it shall be so free and
unbloudy, that you shall rather judge it an Optimacie than a Monarchy. Nor let
any deem me unworthy so great honor, or blame Fortune for making me of a
Knight an Emperor. For what is Nobility Quid gens? fine meat.
without Virtue and Civility? External fortunes may befall the unworthiest;
but a Man's own solid Worth is that which begets true Glory. Nobility, Riches,
and the like, are reputed to make men happy, yet deserve not much to be
commended being derived from others. But Courtesy and Affability, as of
themselves they are lovely, so do they also give a singular instre to the most
praiseworthy. What good did you reap by Commodus his nobleness? or Antonine's
succeeding his Father? Such as they, attaining the Rule by hereditary right,
abuse it at their pleasure (as their private Patrimony) to all licentiousness.
But they which receive it of your bounty, are eternally obliged to express
their Gratitude by all good Offices. Moreover, it is often seen, that the
native Splendour and Nobility of Emperors does so puff them up with pride, that
they scorn all men as their Vassalls. But they which get the Sovereignty by
moderate actions are more careful to retain with sobriety what they attained
with difficulty; and to give all due honor and respect to others, For my own
particular, I have determined to do nothing without your approvement whom I
desire to associat as my Counselors and Assistants in the mannagement of the
State. The liberties and Franchises which you lost by the tyranny of those so
nobly descended Emperors, and which Marcus and Pertinax (raised to the Throne
from a private estate) indeavored to restore, you shall fully enjoy. For it is
more honorable for a man to give the first luster to his Family by his own
noble Achievements, than basely to contaminate (by degenerat and debauched
behavior) the Nobility received from his Ancestors.


The Senate having read this Macrinus election confirmed by the Senate.
Letter, gave him all their votes, and decreed to him all Imperial honors. Yet
was not the Senate so joyful at Macrinus succession, as all ^he commons were
glad at Antonines destruction. For there was not a man of any ^a^ke or quality,
but thought he had now escaped the sword which hung over his head. And now
Sycopha^ts
Promoters, and all servants that had appeacht their masters, were trussed on
gallowses; all the city of Rome, and almost all the Roman world being well
weeded of those wicked wretches, by their death or exile. And if any of
Informere punished.
them sculked so close, that they were not apprehended, yet was their poison
kept in, for that one year that Macrinus reigned. For it was his maine error,
that he did not presently dissolve the army, (by commanding the soldiers to
their several homes) and repair to Rome immediately; the people still crying
and calling for Macrinus. But he (unwisely) staid Macrinus his Error.
at Antioch, trimming his Beard, and stalking in State with a solemn ^low
pace, and scarce vouchsafing to speak to any that came to him; or with so low a
voice, as (often) could not be heard. In which garb he imitated Marcus the
Emperor; not resembling him otherwise in any sort. For he daily gave himself
to a more delicate course of life, and was more addicted to Stage Plays,
Masks, and Revels, than to the Administration of the Empire. When he went in
public, he was decked with jewels, and a Or Baudricke.
scarf embroidered with gold and precious stones of inestimable value* which
excess, the Roman army much disliked, holding it fitter for Women and
Barbarians, than Princes. Considering therefore his e^^eminate and unmartiall
conditions, they began to disvalue him, and were still paralelling his riotous
loosnesse, and Antonines military skill and prowess. They also took it very
hainously, that they were forced still to live in tents far from home, and many
times without provision of necessaries, and not permitted to return into their
several countries, a peace being now concluded, while he fared plentifully,
and lived deliciously. Wherefore abandoning all respect to him, they watched
every opportunity to make an end of him. Thus did the Fates decree, that
Macrinus having reigned but one year in such delicacy, should lose his life
and Empire at once; Fortune ministering to the soldiers a very small and
slight occasion to effect their desires, in this manner: There was one Moesa,
a woman of Moesa.
See M. G. Sands Description of it in his Iournall, p. 207.
Phenicia, borne in the City Emesa, whose sister Iulia was wife to Severus, and
mother to Antonine; who in her sisters lifetime, had lived many years in
Severus and Antonines Court. This Maesa, after her sisters decease, and
Antonines murder, was commanded by Macrinus, to take her goods, and remove
into her native country. Now she had great store of coin, which she gathered
all the while she lived in so flourishing an estate. And being now old, she
returned to her old home. She had two daughters, the elder named Soaemis, the
younger Mammaea, that, had a son called Basstanus; this, another, called
Alexianus* both bred up with their mothers and Grandmother. Bassianus was upon
the point of fourteen years, and Alexianus of ten: both Priests of the Sun,
which is worshipped (as a god by the Phoenicians, and t^armed (in their
language) Heliogabalus: to whom they built a stately Temple, The Temple of the
Sun.
bravely adorned with gold, silver and precious stones. Nor is the Sun only
adored by them, but also by the bordering Princes and Kings of the Barbarians,
which yearly strive who shall send him the most costly Donaries. This god has
no Image to represent him, that is made with hands, after the Greek and Roman
fashion; but there is only a V. IO Seldom (...) de Dis Syris. Synt. C. 1.
huge great* stone, all round from the bottom, and sharp toward the top, like
a Or Spire.
Cone. The stone is of a black color, and they confidently affirm that it
fell from heaven. Some shining spots there are in it, and diverse figures. This
(they say) is the Suns Image, not The Image of the Sun.
made by human art. To this god was Bassianus sacred, as being the Bassianus
elder Son; and therefore did he execute the Priests Office, being vested
(after the Barbarian Rites) with gold-embroidered coats, with hanging sleeves
reaching down to the foot. His undergarments, which covered him all over from
his hands to his legs, were like wise cloth of gold tissued upon purple: his
head was adorned with a rich crown of precious stones. He was a delicate
graceful youth, and of so sweet an aspect, that he was held the wonder of his
time. So that his beauty, age, shape, and costly habit corresponding, he might
not unfitly be compared to the dainty Images of Bacchus. This brave young
priestling as he sacrificed, and caperd about the Altars, to the music of
flutes, pipes and all kind of instruments, was curiously eyed of all, but
especially of the Roman Soldiers, either because they knew he was of imperial
lineage, or because his attrative beauty drew all their eyes upon him: for at
that time a great army was quartered near to that Emesa.
City, for defense of Phenicia; being soon after lead thence, as we shall
herafter show. The soldiers therefore daily repairing to the city and temple,
under color of devotion, were ravished with the sight of so rare a creature.
Now many of them being Roman fugitives, were familiarly acquainted with oesa:
who (when they extold his favor) told them (whether tru^ly or no, is
uncertain) that he was son to Antonine, (though he were reputed another) who
lay with her young fair daughters in the time of her abode with her sister at
the Emperors Court. Which when they heard, and had told their fellows, the
bruit of it flew through all the arm^. It was also reported, that Moesa had
great store of treasure, and would give it all to the Soldiers, if they would
render the Empire to her nephews. Whereupon they promising to receive her and
all hers, and proclaim Antonines son Emperor, if she would come secretly in the
night to the camp, the old woman resolved to undergo any hazard, rather than
live a private obscure life. Wherefore, issuing privily out of the city in the
night with her children and nephews, she was conducted by the troop of
fugitives to the army; where all the soldiers welcomed her, and proclaiming
the Boy, Antonine, clothed him in a ^assianus a young Priest proclaimed Emperor.
purple robe of State. Then fetching into the camp all her provision, together
with her daughters and their husbands, and whatsoever goods or cattle she had
in the fields and villages, they victualled and fortified the camp, that (if
need were) they might hold out a siege. When this news was brought to Macrinus
lying then at Antioch, the army there, understanding likewise (by report that
Antonines son was found out, and that Iuliaes sister had given great store of
silver to the Soldiers, they believed all to be infallibly true, and began to
waver, and take new resolutions, being excited thereto, both by the grudge they
bore Macrinus, and commiseration (as it were) of the memory of Antoninus but
especially for the hope of cash: insomuch, that many presently fled to this new
found Antonine.

Macrinus scorning all this, as (...)
Boys play, and being as joviall as ever, stirred not himself, but sends one
of his Captains with certain companies, which he thought sufficient to ^ame
the rebels. As soon as Julian (so the Captain was called) approached the Cam^e
walls, instantly the soldiers that were within, showed the Boy to the adverse
army, from the Turrets and Pinnacies, proclaming him to be Antonines son, and
holding up their purses full of money (as a bait to betray Macrinus.) Whereupon
the soldiers without, believing he was Antonines son, and persuading
themselves, he did exceedingly resemble him in face and lineaments, struck off
their Captain Iulians head, and sent it to Macrinus. Julian beheaded.
Which done, the camp gates were opened and all let in. Thus were their numbers
increast to a competent Army, not only to hold out a siege, but also to fight
a battle, being augmented also by the access of others, that in great troops
revolted to them. Which Macrinus understanding, rouzes up his spirits, and
leads forth all his Army to aslaile the Camp. But Antonines Soldiers, not
intending to endure a siege, march into the field. Both the armies met on the
borders of Syria and Phoenicia; but Antonines fought The battle betwixt
Macri^e and Bassian, or Antonine. ^
more fiercely, as knowing they should be sou^dly punished if they were
overco^e: on the other side, Macrines was more faint and remiss, and many of
them fled to Antonine. Which when Macrinus saw, fearing lest all leaving him to
the 4 winds, he should be taken prisoner, and villanously entreated: when it
grew toward the evening, he stripped himself of his Purple (...)
surcoat, and other Imperial ornaments (while his Army yet stood firm) and
being attended with a few of his trustiest Captains, betook him to flight:
shaving his berd close (lest he should Macrinus fl^es.
be known) and shrowding himself in a Riding cloak and hood (poasting day
and night to prevent the fame of his misfortune.) For his Captains every where
took up Coaches, as if Macrinus still being Emperor, they were sent from him
about extraordinary affairs. Thus he escaped by flight. Mean while, both
armies fought; Macrinus his guard (termed the Praetorian Band) (...)
bravely maintaining fight against the whole Power of the enemy; for they were
the tallest and choicest men that could be found. All the other multitude
fought for Antonine. But when Macrinus his men, after a great while, neither
saw him, nor any sign of sovereignty, not knowing whether he were slain, or
fled, or what was become of him, they were in a great maze; for they determined
to engage themselves no longer for him that was not to be seen; and yet they
feared to come into their ^^^mies hands by yielding (...)en prisoners. When
An(...) ^^derstood by the Rene(...)hat Macrinus was fled, (...)eralds to
certify the^, (...) not to fight for an (...)
unmanly fugitive; that he pardoned them all that was past, and would confirm
the pardon by oath, and the better to assure them, would make them presently
his Guard. Thus all giving credit to the Heralds, yielded. Instantly Antonine
sends to pursue Macrinus that was now gotten a great way on his journey: he was
found at Chalcedon, Chalcedon, a Sea-City, situate in view of Byzantium Strabo
l. 12. Macrinus beheaded.
a City of Bithynia, grievously sick and over-toiled with travel, being hid in
the suburbs, where they struck off his head. It was said that he made such
haste to Rome relying on the peoples love, but as he was passing into Europe
over the Proponticke Gulf (being come near to Byzantium) he was driven back
by contrary Gusts, as if the Winds themselves had conspired to his punishment.
Thus Macrinus not being able to escape his pursuers, came to a miserable end
(through his improvidence) determining to go to Rome at last, which he should
have done first of all; having neither good fore sight, nor good fortune: his
son Diadumenianus Diadumenianus Caesar
(whom he had made Caesar) being slain also with him. When all the army had
saluted Antonine Emperor, and he was now established in the sovereignty, the
oriental affairs being ordered (as was requisite) by his Grandmother and
friends (for he was very young and of no experience) he made no long stay
there, but prepared for his journey to Rome. Maesa longing to return to the
Palace, where she had so long flourished. When intimation hereof was given to
the Roman Peers and people, it was heavy news to all. Antonine marching out
of Syria, wintered at Nicomedia, Antonine winters at Nicomedia.
(the season so requiring.) There he fell to his hiddygiddy (...)
veneration of his country Deity (whose Priest he was) with antique dances;
attired in rich Sacerdotall vestments of gold, tissued on Purple; adorned with
jewels and armelets: and wearing coronets of gold and precious stones, made
like a Persian diadem. The fashion of his habit was betwixt the long robe of
the Phoenicians, and the apparel of the Medes. For he scorned the Greek and
Roman attire, as made of wool, that is (as he termed it) of base stuff; not
daining any other wear* but Syrian silks and going (...)
abroad usually wi^^ a noise of flutes and shalms, as at his sacrificing
solemnities. Which Moesa much distasting, humbly besought him to put himself
into the Roman habit, left entering the City and Parliament house
Curia in that exoticke and barbarous garb he should be an eyesore to the
beholders not used to such gaudy and garish dresses (...)
, which they would judge fitter for women than men. But he rejecting her as an
old doting fool, and refusing all good Counsel (for he would have none about
him, but such phantasticks as himself, which soothed him in his vicious
humors) resolved to wear no other fashion, and therefore meant to try a
conclusion, how the Roman Senate and people would like it. Whereupon he sent to
Rome his He sends his Picture to Rome.
own picture (at large) in his superfine Pontificalibus, and withal, the
Image of his patriall god, whose Priest he was; commanding them that carried
it, to place it on high, in the midst of the Curia, over the Image of victory;
that when the Senate assembled, all the nobles might burn Incense, and
sacrifice wine before it. Also he made an Edict, that all the Roman
Magistrates, and Sacrificers, should, before all other Gods that they remembered
at their devotions, pray to the new God Heliogabalus. Wherefore when
(afterward) he entered Rome in the aforesaid Habit, he was no Novelty to them,
having bin used to his Picture. Giving therefore great Donatives to the people
(as new Emperors are wont) His Acts at Rome.
he exhibited all kind of stately Shows; and erected to his God a most
gorgeous Temple, wherein were many altars, on which every morning he sacrificed
hundreds of Beeves, and great numbers of Sheep. Burning also huge heaps of all
manner of redolent Odors on the Altars, he powered out [in Sacrifice] many
Rundlets of the daintiest old Wines, so that streams of wine and blood
intermixed, ran over all the Temple Then fell he to By these dances, the
Gentiles intimated, that every part of their body was to be implo^ed in the
service of their Gods.
dance about the Altars, to a Consort of all kind of Instruments, diverse of
his Country-women capring and skipping with him, as they played on Cymballs and
Timbrels; while all the Nobility and order of Knighthood, stood gazing at these
Gambolls (as Spectators in a Theater.) Moreover, the entrails of the
Sacrifices, and Aromatickes, laid on Golden Plates, were borne not by Servants
and mean Persons; but by Generails of Armies, and the chiefest Officers of
State, vested in long Robes with Hanging sleeves (after the Phoenician fashion)
and shod with Linen shoes, like Syrian Prophets. Whom he admitted to these
Mysteries, he accounted to have highly honored. And though he seemed wholly
devoted to Dances and Sacrifices, yet he kept more tragical Revells; executing
many Antonines cruelty.
wealthy and noble persons, which (as he was informed) took small pleasure in
those things; and now and then scoffed him. He took His marriages.
to wife the most illustrious of all the Roman Ladies; whom he called
Augusta, yet soon after divorced her, and stripping her of all honors,
sequestered her to a private life. After, pretending he was in love, and
intending now to show his manhood, he violently took out of Vestaes sacred *
Pomp. L^tus says, they might marry after 30 years of age. Lib. de. Sacer. Romans
nunry at Rome, a Vestall Virgin (who by the Divine Laws was to continue in
chastity and virginity to her end) and married her. And when he heard that the
Senate was much aggrieved at that sacrilegious act, he sent them a consolatory
Letter; certifying them, That it was but a humane sin; Antonines Letter to the
Sena^^^.
That he was enchanted with the magic of her beauty, and that it was no
incongruitie, for a Priest to marry a (...)
Priestesse: which was therefore a most sacred match. But this wife he kept not
long, but cashiering her, took a third, which was said to be of Commodus
Lineage. Nor did he thus play at fast and loose with human matrimonies, but now
his God also (whose Priest he was) wanted a wife. He took therefore into his
bedchamber the Image of Three cubits high, holding a Spear in the right hand,
and a Sp(...)le in the left.
Pallas, which He marries Gods together.
the Romans kept in secret veneration, unseene of any; and till that day had
never been removed since it was brought from Troy, but only when the Temple
was It ^ost the H^g^ priest Met^ll^s his Eyes, to rescue it out of the flames.
fired: and so he married that Go^desse and his God together in his Palace.
Soon after, giving out, that his God liked not such a Martial wife, that was
ever in arms; he commanded the Image of Urania to be brought: Which having bin
exceedingly adored by the Carthaginians and Africans, was erected, as they say,
by Queen Dido (the Phoenician) what time she reedified Carthage, by cutting an
Dido bought of the Lybians so much Ground as an Oxehide might compass: then
cutting it into small thongs, she enclosed 22 furlongs, and there built
Carthage.
Oxehide. This goddess the Africans call Urania, the Phoenicians, Queen of
Stars. Vid. Seldom de Dis Syris.
Astroarch, or the Moon. Antonine said, it would agree bravely, to marry the
Sun and Moon together. He sent therefore for the Image, and all the treasure
and gold in the Temple; giving it to his God, for a Portion with her. When the
Image was brought and set near to Heliogabalus, he commanded all the people of
Rome and Italy to use all public and private feasts and exhilarations for joy
of the gods wedding. He married the Sun and Moon.
He erected also in the Suburbs a mighty and magnificent Temple, into which
every year (about mid summer) he brought his God; recreating the people (as he
thought) with Chariotraces, stage-plaies, feasts and nightshewes Masks.
. He brought his God out of the city into the suburbs, placed in a Caroach
adorned with gold and most precious stones, and drawn with six goodly white
steeds, decked with rare gold-worke and rich caparisons. There was no man in
the charet, The inthronization of Heliogabalus.
but al attended about it, as if the God had driven it. Antonine running
backward with his face toward the Image, went before the charet, leading the
horses by the reins; going all the way back-ward (in that sort) still looking
on the God. Lest he should fall o^ stumble, the way was strewed with filings of
gold; and h^^ guard supported him on each side for his more safety; the people
running along with torche, and throwing flowers and garland* This pompous show
was honored with the Images of all the Gods, and the most sumptuous Donaries
that were in the Temples; as also with the Imperial (...)
jewels and ornaments: All the nobility, gentry, and soldiery accompanying it.
When he had shrin'd his God in the Temple, he solemnized the above mentioned
Sacrifices and Festivities. Then he ascended exceeding high turrets purposely
made for him: whence he threw A strange largess.
(as a largess) among the people, gold and silver plate, and all kind of rich
apparel and fine linen: also all manner of tame beasts, This was done by
throwing little balls or tickets, which were warrants for receipt of the
largess.
except swine; which he (as all the Phoenicians) abhorred. Many there perished,
being either trod to death, or thrust through with the soldiers pikes: so that
it proved a fatal festival to many. He often used his charret-sports and wild
dances in public, not caring who saw his unprincely pranks. He walked abroad
with his eyes painted, and cheeks purpled, disfiguring his fair face with
foul tinctures. Which His Grand mother.
Moesa perceiving, mistrusted the soldiers dislike; and fearing if ought came
to him, she should be remanded to a private life, she persuades the vain young
fondling to adopt for his son, and declare The title of the heir apparent.
Caesar, his cousen Germane and her Grandchild by her other daughter Mammaea:
speaking him fair, and finely instilling into him, That it was most meet, that
he being dignified with the sacred Title of a Priest, should attend only on
matters of Religion, and the celebration of divine Orgies and Offices; and that
some other should be substituted to manage humane affairs, and be as his
Viceroy, to free him from all cares and encumbrances of State: yet no stranger
or alien, but rather his Cousen German to be so honored by his princely
favor. Alexianus was he, then named Alexander, his old name being changed into
that of the Macedonian kings: for that famous king was much honored by Antonine
(son to Severus) who was both their father, as the old beldam pretended: not
sparing to vaunt of both her daughters dishonesty, to make their sons more
gracious with the soldiers. Alexander Alexander made Caesar
therefore was proclaimed Caesar, and made Consul (or Associat) with Antonine:
the Senate ridiculously decreeing what he commanded; to wit, him to be the
father, that was 16 years old, and Alexander the son, that was 12 years old.
After that Alexander was made Caesar, Antonine assaied to train him to his
courses, as dancing, revelling, sacrificing, and the like rites, and robes, and
ceremonies. But his mother Ma^maea weaned him from those vain and unseemely
exercises, and trained him up in honorable fashion, secretly sending for
professors of the Mathematics, and all liberal sciences, and using him to
Wrestling a princely exercise.
Wrestlings and such manly activities: instituting him also in Greek and Roman
literature. Whereat Antonine much repining, repented that he had adopted him,
or made him his colleague in the Empire; and expelled all his tutors from the
Court, putting some of the chief of them to death, and banishing others:
alleging ridiculously, that the pedants spoiled his son, not suffering him to
dance and revell, but teaching him to be modest, and use manly exercises. Yea,
he was so besotted, that he preferred all sorts of Stage- players preferred.
theatricall Actors and Players to the highest honors and most eminent
dignities; making Lord General of his Armies one that in his youth was a
public dancer on the theater He appointed one Stage Player, trainer and
guardian Or master of the Wards.
of the young Lords and Gentlemen; another, to be Lord President of his
Council; and a third, general of the horse. He advanced to the chiefest places
of trust in the Empire, charret-drivers, comoedians, and histrionicall Iesters;
bestowing on his servants and Bondmen set free.
libertines that were most extremly debauched, the Procuratorships of
Provinces. At this mad and drunken distribution of so many honorable offices,
all men murmured, but especially the soldiers stormed, and scorned him, as
being more effeminate than an honest woman would be; and detested him for
prostituting the Imperial Majesty to contempt, by his capricious dresses,
golden gewgawes, and public Revels. They were therefore more inclinable to
Alexander, conceiving fair hopes of him for his noble and virtuous education;
and conserving him diligently from the insidious practices of Antonine. His
mother Mammaea suffered him not to taste any meat or drink that he sent. His
Cooks and Cup-bearers were not those that waited on the Emperor, but such
trusty servants as his mother made choice of* She gave him also much money in
private, to bestow on the Soldiers secretly; to win them to him with that
bait, which she knew would soonest catch them. Which Antonine understanding,
plotted to destroy him and his mother; but his plots were prevented by their
common Grandmother Moesa; a subtle woman, and a politic A Politic Lady.
dame; as having lived many years in the Imperial Palace with her sister
Iulia, wife to Severus, whereby she was well read in State affairs. For she
knew all the designs of Antonine, who was naturally a blab, and would
ordinarily lay himself open, and divulge all his intentions. When he could
not surprise him by treachery, he determined to strip him of his Caesarean
dignity; not permitting him to be saluted, or go abroad. Then the soldiers
enquired for him, and were much discontented, that he should be deposed.
Whereupon Antonine disperses a fame, that Alexander was like to die, to try how
the Soldiers would take it. They, when they could not see the young Prince,
were cut to the heart with the report; and being infinitely enraged, sent not
the usual guards to Antonine, but locked themselves the Camp; demanding to see
Alexander in their Temple. Antonine startled at this, takes Alexander, and
places him with him in his Imperial Caroach, richly adorned with gold and
gems; and hies to the Camp. The soldiers opening the Gates, received them,
and conducted them to the Temple of the Camp; exceedingly congratulating and
welcoming Alexander, but coldly saluting Antonine; which he storming at, after
he had lodged all night in the Campe-Temple; was so incensed at the soldiers
for doing such special honor to Alexander, that he commanded the chief and
most noted (for it) to be apprehended and executed as Authors of sedition and
mutiny. Whereat all the Soldiers being exasperated, and having formerly hated
Antonine, they resolved to rescue their fellows, and put away that abominable
Prince. Judging this therefore to be a just occasion, and fair opportunity;
Antonine slain.
they presently slew Antonine, and his mother Soaemis, who was with him (as
Empress) with all their Privadoes, and Instruments of lewdness that came with
them into the Camp. Then delivered they to the people, the Carcasses of
Antonine and Soaemis, which being disgracefully dragged a long time over all the
City, and lastly dismembered, were thrown into the public jakes, which are
voided into the River (...)
Tyber. The Soldiers proclaiming Alexander Emperor, conducted him to the
Royal Palace; being very young, and yet in the tuition of his mother and grand
mother.

The End of the Fifth Book.
Appendix to Herodians fifth Book of his History.
To the Readers.
HErodian having lively drawn (in little) that Monster of Ethnicke Priests and
Princes, Pseud-Antonine, I have thought good to adjoyne (for your further
satisfaction) this ensuing Delineation of him, extracted out of diverse ancient
and principal Authors.

HIs Apparel was extreme brave and gorgeous: yet he never wore one Garment
twice. His Shoes were embellisht with Diamonds, See an Antiquity of a Roman
Bath or Stove (lately discovered near Leicester) related in the Description of
that County, by that worthy Patrio^ and judicious Antiquaty Will. Burton Esquire.
and Oriental Pearls of the most Caracts. His Seats were strewed with Musk^
and Amber. His Beds were covered with Cloth of Gold tissued on Purple, and
imbossed with Gems of inestimable value. His Way was strewed with Filings of
Gold and Silver. His Vessels, even of basest Use, were of Obryze Gold. His
Lamps burned with precious Balms and Gums of India and Arabia. His Fish Ponds
were filled with Rose Water. His Ships in his Theatricall Sea Fights floated in
Rivers of Wine. His Bathing was as ordinary with Romans, as eating and sleeping.
Bathes, most magnificently built, when he had once used them, were still
plucked down, and new built. His Plate of refined massive Gold; but never served
twice to his Table. His Rings and lewels infinitely rich, yet never worn
twice. His Concubincs numberless, but never lain with twice. Every Supper in
his Court cost 1000 pounds sterling. When he lay near to the Sea, he would
eat no ^ish: When he was farthest in the Continent, he would eat no Flesh.
Whole Meals were furnished with Tongues of Singing Birds, and Brains of rarest
Creatures. All Europe, Asia, and Afric, with the Islands adjacent; in a word,
the Globe of Earth and As far as was the^ discovered to the Romans.
Sea (whereof he was Lord Paramount) was not able to fill this Gulf. In his
Progress, he was attended by 600 Charriots fraught with Concu^ines, Catamites,
and Pandars: for whom be built a Seraglio in his Court; where himself (in the
habit of a Curtezan) used to make solemn speeches to them, terming them his
brave Fellow Soldiers and Companions in Arms: [What gallant Instructions he
gave them, I sorbeare to mention.] He caused to be gathered in Rome Vid. Lips.
de magnit. Romana.
ten thousand weight of Spiders, ten thousand Mice, and a thousand Polcats;
which he exhibited to the Roman Peers and People, in a Public Show and
Solemnity: Professing, that now he perfectly understood how mighty a City Rome
was. Lastly [to omit other more strange prankes] his summoned a Senatum
Parliament of Women, to consult about Tires, Fashions, Dresses, Tinctures, and
the like weighty and important Affairs.

FINIS.
HERODIAN HIS IMPERIAL HISTORY. The sixth Book.
The Contents.
ALexander Emperor. The Religion and State reformed. Maesa Deified. Alexanders
Elogie. His Marriage. Persians invade the Romans. Alexander writes to the
Persian; who scorns his Letters. General Muster in Italy. Alexander marches
against the Persian. An Embassy. Another braving Embassy. Ambassadors punished.
Alexanders Policy, Archery. Armenian Mountains. The Romans defeated. Alexander
retires. Best Physic for Soldiers. Germany rebels. Alexander comes to the
Rhine. Archers. Heralds. Maximine described and elected Emperor. Alexander
slain.

We have formerly declared Alexander Emperor.
in what manner Antonine (the elder brother) ended his days. After him
Alexander had the title and ornaments of Emperor; but the management of
affairs, and regencie of the Empire rested in Moesa and Mammaea Regents.
Maesa and Mammaea; who labored to reduce all things to better order and
moderation,

And first they selected out of the Senate 16. ancient, grave, and honorable
Peers, for assistants and counselors to the Prince: without whose suffrage
and consent, nothing was to pass as an act of State. Which manner of
government was wondrous pleasing to the People, Soldiers and Senators; the
Empire being thereby reduced from an injurious Tyranny, to the form of an
(...)meant of the principal men.
Optimacie.

Their prime care was to restore the Images of the Gods Religion first reformed.
(removed and displaced By Antonine) to their own ancient Temples and
Oratories. Next, Next, the State.
all that he had advanced to honors and offices, either without N. B.
desert, or for their lewd prankes, they discharged and degraded; commanding
every of them to follow their former trades and professions. All civil and
judiciary offices they bestowed on famous learned men and excellent Lawyers:
and all places of martial command they gave to brave noble Captains, and
Soldiers, expert in (...). In w^^^ch words the excellent author has couched
both the parts of war: viz Tactick and Strat^gematick.
Marshalling of Moesa dies, and is de^f^^d
Armies, and Military Exploits.

The Empire being thus administered a long time, Maesa being now very old,
deceased; and was buried like an empress; being after the Roman fashion, At a
Woman's deification, they used a Peacocke (into which they supposed her soul to
s^^t:) as an Eagie at a M^^s See this supreme solemnit described in the
beginning of the 4 book of this H(...).
deified.

Mammaea being now sole Regent and Guardian of her Son, followed still the same
tracke of government. When he came to his age, to manage the state himself,
she fearing lest his unstaid youth might in that height of liberty and
sovereignty, p^^c^^i^ate him into the vices and vanities incident thereto; set
a strong Watch about the Court, prohibiting allewd and loose persons from his
presence, lest his good nature should be corrupted, and his mind provoked to
lust by bewitching Sirens, and fawning Parasites. She persuaded him also to
attend matters of Judicature (...)
the best part of the day; to keep him from Idleness, the Mistress of all
lewdness. Alexander (indeed) was naturally adorned with Affability, Clemency,
and other Princely graces (as was afterward apparent in the course of his
life.) For in 14 years, his Alexanders Elogie.
Empire was not stained with blood: not one being put to death (by him) all the
while. And though diverse were convict of haynour crimes, yet he spared their
lives: which you shall hardly find to have bin done by any Emperor since
Marcus. None can remember that in all the time of his Reign, there was any
executed without Judicial Process. He much blamed his Mother, and was very
angry with her, for her greedy covetousness of money, and accumulating of
riches. For Mammaea pretending to hoord up Coin, to supply Alexanders bounty to
the Soldiers, got a great Mass of Treasure to her self. Which, although it
were much disliked in her, and condemned by the Emperor; yet did her (...)lent
practices in spoiling (...)their good and estates, (...)him, to his obloquy and
(...). She gave him a wife of a noble Family; whom he dearly loved: but she
soon after banished her the Court. For, arrogating to her self alone the title
of Empress; and maligning her Daughter in-lawes honor, she proceeded to that
outrage, that the young Empresses Father, though in great esteem with
Alexander (his son in law) not able to endure the many wrongs she did him and
his Daughter, fl^d into the Camp: prosessing he was much obliged to the
Emperor for doing him that honor, but accusing Mammaea for her opprobrious
injuries. Whereat, she being the more exasperated, commanded him to be slain;
and having expelled the young Lady from the Court, confined her to Afric. All
Which was done without Alexanders consent, and merely against his will: for his
Mother carried a high and imperious hand over him, and he tenderly reuer'd and
obeyed her in all things: so that his main error was too much softness, and
over great obsequiousnes to his mother, in things which himself disapproved.

Having thus ruled the Empire thirteen years, without any grievance (in
regard of his own particular) suddenly in the fourteenth year, there came
letters from the Presidents of Syria and Mesopotamia, cetifying; That
Artaxerxes King of Persia having The Parthian king ^laine.
conquered the parthians, and slain Artabanus (who was the first that was
called, The great King, and A double (...)m.
wore a double Diadem) did likewise subdue and make Tributary the bordering
Barbarians: and not containing ^^e Persi(...) inv^de the Romans
himself within the River Tygris, had transpassed the banks and bounds of the
Roman Empire, and made a rode into Mesopotamia, the eatning to invade Syria,
and challenging the The lesser^ Asia.
opposite continent to Europe (limited by the Aegean Sea, and Propontick Gulf,
and called Asia) as the ancient Patrimony of the Persians: in that, from Cyrus
(who first translated the Empire of the Medes to the Persians) until Darius the
last Persian King (deposed by Alexander) all those countries, as far as Ionia
and Caria, ^ere ruled by Persian Vice-royes: and therefore, he held himself
bound in honor to recover all that which was anciently under the Persian Scepter
When Alexander received this d^^mall news from the Eastern parts, he was not
a little perplexed and troubled, having been ever trained (from a child) in
peace and tranquillity, and nuzled in Citydelights: advising therefore with his
Council, he first resolved to send Ambassadors with letters to stop the
Barbarians proceedings. The letters were to this effect: That he ought to
contain himself Alexanders Letters to the Persian.
within his bounds: and not in vain hope of new Conquests, raise wars and
stirs. That every one ought to rest content with his own estate, That he would
find great difference in fight betwixt Romans and his fellow Barbarians.
Lastly, he put him in mind of the victories which Augustus, Trajan, Lucius and
Severus had obtained against them. With these letters Alexander persuaded
himself he should overruled the Barbarian and make him quiet. But he scorning
them, and holding it The ^^rsian scorns them.
his best course to fight rather tha^ talk, was now more rampa^t than ever:
ranging over al Mesopotamia, taking great booties, and assailing the Roman
camps that were pitched on the river banks, to defend the limits of the Empire.
Being also naturally of a high spirit and haughty mind, which by this sudden
success was much more elevated, he thought he should conquer all before him.
He had great encouragements to enlarge his Dominions, being the first that
attempted the Parthians, and recovered the kingdom to the Persians: for after
Darius, whom Alexander the Macedon conquered, the Macedonians and Alexanders
successors for many years divided among them the principality of the oriental
Provinces over all Asia. But when by their civil wars and discords, the
Macedonians and the rest were weakened, Arsaces the Parthian did (as they say)
first persuade the barbarous people of these countries to revolt from the
Macedonians: and being crowned King by the Parthians and adjoining Barbarians,
he held the kingdom: and left it to his posterity, which enjoyed it until the
reign of Art^banus (in our time) slain by Artaxerxes, who reunited that
kingdom to the Persian Monarchy, and having brought in subjectio^ the adjacent
Barbarians began to trench on the Roman territories. Which Alexander
understanding, and knowing it concerned him in a high degree of justice and
honor, not to suffer the insolent Barbarian any longer, (his commanders
earnestly importuning him to come in person) with much ado, at last he
prepares to set forward (against his own inclinations) and now there were
General musters through all Italy, and the Roman Provinces, of the A general
^^ster.
strongest and ablest persons for the wars; great hurliburlies being in all
parts of the Empire, about training the choicest that might be found, to
encounter the barbarous multitude. Alexander assembling into the field all the
Soldiers which were quartered near the City, spoke thus to them from his
Throne:

Alexanders Speech to the Army.
I Could wish (my brave Fellow Soldiers) that I might as heretofore speak such
things to you, as were to my applause, and your content. It may be that after
so long peace, an unexpected war may somewhat dismay you. But it is the part of
generous and temperate men to pray for the best; and be (...)
content with that which happens; for as those things which we perform with
pleasure, are delightful: so valiant Exployts necessarily undertaken, are most
glorious: And as he that first offers wrong deserves small favor; so he that
redresses a wrong is more confident, as having a good conscience; and more
courageous, in that he offers not wrong but repells it. Artaxerxes the
Persian, having traitorously slain his Sovereign Artabanus, and translated his
Kingdom to the Persians, has presumed also to bid us Battle, and in
despite of the Roman majesty, has begun to invade and destroy our Provinces.
At first, I thought good to write to him, to desist from that insatiate fury of
coveting other men's Estates: But he in his barbarous pride is so far from
containing himself in his own Limits, that he challenges us to fight. Let us
not therefore refuse the Challenge, nor foreslow the War; but you, which are
Veteranes, make him know, that you are they that under the conduct of Severus
and my Father Antonine, got those famous Victories over the Barbarians. And you
which are young Soldiers, must strive for honor and glory, that all may know,
you are not only well disciplined to obey in time of peace, but that also in
time of war when need requires, you are able to make full demonstration of
your Valor. The Barbarians are very fierce against them that shrink, or come
on slowly: but if they be furiously charged, they are soon calmed. For it is
not their manner to attempt the Victory by pitched Battles: but to make sudden
praedatory Excursions, and then run away; thinking they have gained
sufficiently by forraging the country. But we, with our fair and wel-ordred
armies, have put them to the worst, and returned conquerors.

Alexander having thus said, the soldiers by their general cry expressed their
alacrity and readiness to march: wherefore giving them large pay, he commands
them to prepare for the voyage, and having made another speech (of like effect)
to the Senate, he appoints a day for his departure: which being come, and the
usual sacrifices and ceremonies performed, (all the Senate and City attending
him) he departs from Rome, often looking back toward the City, and weeping.
Neither Alexander beloved o^ all.
was there any of the people which parted from him with dry eyes: so dearly
were they devoted to him, being bred amongst them, and having reigned so many
years with such rare moderation. With speedy journeies he visited the Illyrian
Nations and armies, and taking great forces from thence with him, he marched to
He marches to Antioch.
Antioch, where he made diligent preparation for all warlike necessaries, still
attending the training of Soldiers and other Martial exercises. Here again
(hoping to end the war by Treaty) he sent another Embassy to the Persian
king, to conclude a peace, and contract An Embassy.
a league with him. For being come so far in person, he was in hope either to
persuade him, or at least to terrify him. But the Barbarian prince proudly
rejects the Roman Ambassadors, and sends 400 of his tallest Persians in brave
and rich attire as Heralds or ambassadors, mounted on goodly coursers, with
their gay bows and arrows, thinking the Romans would be danted with the sight
and habit of the Persians. His embassage was this, The great King Artaxerxes
commands the A braving Embassy.
Romans and their Prince, to depart out of all Syria, and Asia Asia minor.
that is opposite to Europe; to permit the Persians to rule as far as Ionia and
Caria, and over all those countries which are divided by the Aegean and Pontick
sea, and by patrimoniall right belong to the Persians. These 400 Ambassadors
Alexander commanded Ambassadors punished.
to be apprehended, and stripping them of their Persian gallantry, banished
them into Phrygia, assigning them certain villages for dwelling, and fields
for tillage: contenting himself to punish them by debarring their return into
their native country; it being (as he thought) an (...)
unholy deed, and unmanly act to put them to death that fought not, but only
executed their Sovereigns command. This done, Alexander being about to pass
over the rivers, and lead his Army into the Barbarians country, many Egyptian
soldiers revolted from him; and others began to make a commotion in Syria: but
they were soon suppressed and punished. Alexander also sent some Forces into
other countries, to prevent the Barbarians incursions. All Alexanders policy.
which things being set in order, and having now a great army, not inferior to
the enemy, he divided it (by his councels advice) into three Battalions,
commanding one to march Northward through Armenia (which seemed to be in
friendly terms with the Romans) and that way to invade the Borders of Media;
another likewise, to pass by the North through the Barbarian countries, where
Tigris and Euphrates mere, and are drowned in great Marshes and lakes; whence
it is unknown how they are dis-emboged; the third, being the best part of the
army, himself undertook to lead against the Barbarians, and assail them in the
midst. By this means he thought to take the^ unprovided, invading the^ several
ways, and that the Persian forces would be much distracted and weakened, and so
less able to resist the Romans by being dispersed to encounter them in places
so far disterminated. For the Barbarians have no mercenary bands (as the Romans
use) nor any set Camps or veterane Armies that are still exercised in Martial
discipline: but all their men (and women too sometimes) are mustered together
at the Kings command: and after the war, return to their houses, taking (for
their pay) all the booties they get. They use shooting and riding, not only
Archerie
(as the Romans) in war, but (even from their childhood) in hunting for their
food: using their bows perpetually on horsbacke, whether they follow the wars,
or pursue wild beasts. This plot of Alexander, though it were plausible proved
not fortunat: for the army that marched through Armenia, having with great
difficulty climbed over the extreme steep and craggy Mountains of that The
Armenian mountains.
Region (which they did the better, in regard it was Summer) entered Media,
where they burnt many Villages, and got much pillage. Which the Persian King
understanding, hastened against them with all his power. But they could not
impeach the Romans, by reason of the hillinesse and roughness of the country,
which was more firm and p^ssable for footmen: but a maine hindrance to the
Barbarian horse. Then came other news to the king that another Army of the
Romans had entered the Parthian dominions Eastward, and wasted the Country.
Fearing therefore, lest having soon conquered the Parthians, they should invade
Persia, he left as many troops as (he thought) were sufficient to defend
Media, and posts with a puissant host to the East parts. The Roman Army when
they saw none come against them, began to be more negligent in their march;
supposing that Alexander had with the third part of the Army (which was the
strongest) invaded the Barbarians in the middle. Resting therefore and reposing
themselves, they supposed there needed no have; as not doubting, but that all
the Army did come on, according to the first determination; to which purpose a
place was assigned as a rend^zvous for themselves, the prey and prisoners which
they should take. But Alexander disappointed them: for he neither went himself,
nor sent the Army: whether for fear of losing his life in defending the
Empire; or whether his mother out of a feminine fear and fondnes detained him,
is uncertain. Undoubtedly she did much abate his noble courage, persuading
him rather to expose others to danger, than himself to the fortune of war. By
which means, the Roman army that had entered the Barbarians Country, was
merely betrayed. For the Persian king leading all his forces against The
Romans defeated.
them ere they were aware, and taking them as it were in a net, gave the^ an
absolute defeat: for being few, they could not withstand so many: but guarding
as well as they could the open parts of their bodies (with their Arms) against
the shot of the arrows, they supposed they acquitted themselves well, if
making no resistance, they escaped safe. But having for some space defended
themselves by joining their targets together, as with a wall, and being like a
city assaulted on every side, and grievously wounded, at last, after a long and
brave resistance, they were every man slain. The loss of which great Army
(which might well be compared to any of the Ancient, for valor or fidelity)
was a mighty and unspeakable calamity to the Romans. But the Persian puffed up
with so good success, bare his Crest aloft, and aspired to higher matters.
Which when Alexander heard, being then very sick (either for grief of mind, or
unwholsomenesse of the air) he took it exceeding heavilie: and all the Army
was grievously offended with the Emperor: in that by disappointing his men, he
had so foully betrayed the^. But Alexander not able to endure hi^ sickness,
nor that hot clime which afflicted all the army and especially the Illyrians
(who having been used to a cold and moist ay^e, fed more plentifully than
re^^) purposed to disma^ch to Antioch* and send for th^se few Soldiers that
remained of the^ that perish (amongst the Mountain ^ by extremity of the Winte^
season. The companies that ^lexander had wi^h him, he brought back to Antioch:
having lost many of them also: to his infinite dishonor, and his soldiers
coffeehouse: Fortune failing him every where. For the most part of his
threefold army (for so he divided it) perish diversely, either by sickness,
sword, or cold.

Alexander being come to Antioch, Alexander retires to Antioch.
and having soon recovered his health by the change of air ( Mesopotamia being
extreme hot, but Antioch much cooler, and well watered with dainty fountains) he
refresh^ his army and revived their drooping spirits with great store of Coin
(for that he held to be Pilula ^^^^eae, the best physic for Soldiers.
the only preservative to assure the soldiers love.) Here he raised new
Forces, as if he meant to lead another Army against the Persians, if they were
further troublesome, and desisted not from their enterprises. But he received
intelligence, that the Persian king had dismissed all his Soldiers to their own
homes. And though the Barbarians seemed to have got the upper hand, yet were
they excedingly wasted with those frequent skirmishes and battles in Media and
Persia* and they which survived were (forth most part) grievously wounded and
much weakened. For the Romans which fell, sold their lives full dearly, and ^lew
not a few of their Enemies, tho they were but a handful in comparison of them:
insomuch that there were almost as many slain of the Barbarians as of the
Romans, who were not inferior to them in valor, but number. And this was a
certain sign of the Barbarians great loss, that they took not arms, nor
offered to stir for 3 or 4 years after.

Alexander thus advertised, during his abode at Antioch, and being disburdened
of the irksome care of War; he was much more free and frolic, and gave
himself to the City-pastimes and plesures. And now while he was confident that
the Persians would be quiet, or at least, that they would not (in have)
re-assemble their Forces, which are rather a confused multitude, then a
welordered Army (for they have no other provision, the^ what every man brings
from home for present use; and are also very loath to leave their wives,
children and possessions) there came posts with letters from the Procurators of
Illyria, which troubled Alexander and perplexed him more the^ ever: for they
certified him, That the Germans The Germans rebel.
having past the Rhine, and Isther, had invaded the Roman Frontiers, assaulted
the Armies upon the Banks, and made great havoc in the Cities and Villages: to
the great hazard of the Illyrian Regions adjace^t, and abutting on Italy: that
his Presence therefore was mainly necessary, together with the whole Army.

This news amazed Alexander, and grieved the Illyrians, being twice miserable;
by their late discomfiture in the Persian expedition, and the slaughter of
their countrymen by the German incursions. They were therefore exceedingly
enraged at the Emperor for betraying the affairs of the East by his fear or
negligence, and for delaying to succor the North, being so earnestly called
upon. And now Alexander and his Counsel began to misdoubt Italy: which was in
greater danger of the Germans then the Persians. For the remote Nations of the
Levant, so far disjoined by Sea and Land, scarce hear of the name of Italy:
but the Illyrian Dominions being of small extent, and consisting but of a few
Provinces, are the only bar betwixt Italy and Germany. Being compelled
therefore by necessity, he much against his will proclaims his Expedition:
and leaving as many Companies as he thought sufficient to guard the Roman
frontiers (having well manned and fortified the Camps, Sconces, and other
praesidiary places) he hastens with the rest of the Army against the Germans.
Having ended his Journey with Alexander come to the Rhine.
great speed, he encamped on the banks of the Rhine, and there made provision
for the German War. He made a bridge of ships and barges for the more easy
passage of his Army over the river: Rhenus and Isther being the greatest rivers
of the North: the one running through Germany, the other through Pannonie. In
summer they are navigable, by reason of their deep and broad channells: but in
winter they are so frozen, that they are ridden over, as if they were Plains:
the Ice being so firm and thick, that it bears not only horse and man, but they
also which want water, bring not with them Pitchers or other vessels, but axes
and hatchets, wherewith they hew out water, and carry it thence like stones.
Alexander had in his Army diverse Regiments of Moors, and a goodly band of
Archers, which he brought out of the East; some from the O^roenes Country;
others, that were Parthian Fugitives, or Stripendaries, which he sent against
the Getmans, who were much infested Moors gene^^lly n^^^lefooted.
by them: for the Moors cast their darts at a great distance, and are very deft
and nimble in running Archers.
to and fro: and the archers standing afar off, easily hit the naked heads
and vast bodies of the Germans; being fair ma ks to shoot at. Sometimes also
they came to hand-stroks; wherein the Germans were (often) not inferior to the
Romans. While these things were on foot, Alexander sent ambassadors
Ambassadors.
to them to treat of peace, and to assure them that they should want nothing
that they needed, and that they should be well furnished with money. For the
Germans are soonest persuaded with that, being very greedy of Ghelt, and ever
ready to chaffer peace with the Romans for gold. Alexander therefore assayed
rather to buy a league, than to hazard himself in the war. But his Soldiers
were much discontented, that they spent their time vainly and were not led to
some brave Service or gallant Enterprise. Alexander (as they said) caring more
to follow his Charretting and Revelling, than to pursue or punish the
presumptuous Germans (as concerned him.) Now there was in the army one
Maximine, borne in an obscure Maximine ^ described
Village of the innermost part of Thrace, a Semi barbarian; and which in his
younger age had been bred a Shepherd; after, being at man's estate, he was for
his bulk and strength appointed to serve in the wars among a troop of horse;
soon after, Fortune leading him by the hand, he passed through all Military
preferments, to the command of Armies and Provinces. Thus Maximine, was for his
singular skill in the exercise of arms, made Captain by Alexander, over all the
young soldiers; to the end to train and make them fit for Service. Who
performing his task with care and diligence was very gracious with all the
army. For he did not only teach them what they should do, but himself did by
his own example, daily instruct them: whereby they became not only his
Scholars, but also (...)
zealous imitators of his valor, being obliged to him by Donatures, and all
manner of honors. These young Soldiers (whereof many were Pannonians)
applauded Maximine for his prowess; but scorned Alexander, as being still Ward
to his mother, and wholly subject to the authority and will of a woman, which
made him so slowly and unmanly to prosecute the wars: whereby the oriental
expedition miscarried: and nothing (in effect) was done against the Germans.
And now being naturally prone to Innovation, and wearied with the long reign
of the Prince, which was but little beneficial to them (there being no
competitors for the Empire) hoping also that if some other were made Emperor
(beyond his expectation) it would be more for their profit and preferment, they
resolved to kill Alexander and elect Maximine Emperor, who was their comrado
and fellow in Arms, and for his Martial skill and valor fittest for the
present war. Assembling therefore into the field in Arms, when Maximine came
(as his manner was) to train them, they invest him with Purple, and salute him
Emperor, Maximine elected Emperor.
which whether it were so complotted, or he were ignorant of their intentions,
it is uncertain. At first he refused and threw away the Purple. But when the
Soldiers brandisht their Cymiters, threatening to kill him if he yielded not,
he chose rather to avoid the present then future peril; and accepted the
Honor; which (he said) had been often foretold him by Oracles and dreams:
protesting withal to the Soldiers, that it was much against his will, yet he
would submit to their importunity: and seeing they would needs have it so, he
wished them instantly to take arms, and before the rumor were blazed* to
surprise Alexander that knew nothing of it, that his soldiers and guard being
astonished with the news, might either be drawn to their party, or being taken
unprovided, compelled to yield. Then cheering all the Army, with promising them
a double portion of Corn, extraordinary Donatives, and remission of all
punishments and penalties, he leads the^ straight toward Alexanders Pavillion,
not far thence; who, when he heard of it, was mightily amazed, and leapt forth
of his royal tent like a mad man; weeping and trembling, and accusing Maximine
as perfidious and ungrateful for all the honors he had done him; and the
young soldiers as perjured and disloyal for conspiring with him. Lastly, he
promised to give what they would have, and amend whatsoever was amiss.

The Soldiers that were with him, comforting him for the present said they
would stand for him to the uttermost. When the night was past, and it was now
day, news coming that Maximine was at hand, that a great dust was seen, and
a huge multitude heard not far off, Alexander went again into the Plain, and
assembling the soldiers, besought them to protect and defend him that was bred
up by them, and had reigned 14 years without harming any: whereat, all
commiserating him, he commanded them to take arms and charge the enemy. But
the Soldiers, though they gave him good words, yet slipped away one after
another, and would not fight. Some wished the Praetorian Prefect and Alexanders
Courtiers might be executed, imputing the mutiny to the^. Others laid all the
blame on his mother, which by her insatiable avarice and base niggardice (in
scanting the soldiers) had made Alexander odious. Thus for some while they
parlied and argued, but marched not. When Maximines army came in sight, and
began to persuade them to leave that wretched woman, and puny Prince, that was
still under his mothers wing; and adhere to a valiant Soldier and brave
commander, that was their own companion in arms, and an excellent Master in
the Art Military; they all presently revolted from Alexander, and with one
voice proclaimed Maximine Emperor. Alexander Extreme calamitires confound the
spirit.
in great fear and distraction returns to his Pavillion, where hanging on his
mother and (as they say) bemoning his infortunity, which happened by her
means; he expected his deathsman. Maximine being saluted Augustus by all the
army, commanded the Knight Marshalls and O* Tri^^n^
some Centurions, to put Alexander and his mother to death, and all that
resisted. Whereupon they Alexander slain.
rusht into his Tent and slew him with his Mother, friends, and counselors:
except them that a little before escaped by flight or concealment: which yet
soon after were all apprehended and slaughtered by Maximine. This end had
Alexander and his Mother, having reigned 14 years without (...)
blame or blood. For he abhorred murder and cruelty, and was so mild and
temperate, that he suffered none to die, but those that were condemned by Law:
and had not his miserable Mother blasted his Honor by her ^ordid demeanor,
there had been nothing wanting to have rendered him a most excellent Prince.

The End of the Sixth Book.
HERODIAN HIS IMPERIAL HISTORY. The seventh Book.
The Contents.
MAgnus. Quartinus made Emperor against his will. Macedon a base Traitor.
Germans good swimmers and soldiers. A terrible battle in a Poole, betwixt
Romans and Germans. Informers and Catch-poles ^omented by Maximine. His
Covetousness, Cruelty, and Sacrilege. The Romans Devotion. Afric revolts.
A Speech to Gordian; elected Emperor. Vitalian slain. Insurrection at Rome.
Sabinus slain. Maximines Flies and Spies. His Speech to the Army. His
Expedition to Italy. Capellian defeats the Carthaginians. Prince Gordian
elected and slain. The Emperor Gordian strangles himself. The Romans solemn
Parliament in Jove's Temple. Maximus and Albinus elected Emperors by the Senate,
and rejected by the Commons. The Commons deluded. Gordian Caesar. Soldiers
slain. A Commotion at Rome. Fencers slain. A Conncel of war. A general pardon.
A Stratagem. Rome fired.

WE have showed in the former Book, how Alexander demeaned himself in his 14
years reign, and how he died. Maximine having attained the Soveraingty, there
followed a strange alteration. For he carried himself in such rough and
terrible sort, that the Empire was now fallen from a fair calm rule, to a
stormy blustering Tyranny. Knowing now he should be generally prejudged, because
he was the first that was raised from the lowest step, to the highest State;
and being also a Barbarous caitife and villain of birth, and by education,
custom, and condition, given to blood; his chief care was to settle himself
in the Empire by cruelty: supposing he should be (otherwise) contemptible to
the Roman Senate and subjects, who would not so much consider his present
fortune, as the baseness of his parentage: for all men knew that (first) he was
a Shepherd in the Mountains of Thrace: and that after, being (for his
vastness and activity) pressed for a soldier among his poor countreimen, he was
led by the hand (as it were) of Fortune, to the Roman Empire: wherefore he
instantly (...)
discomposed all Alexanders counselors and assistants that were chosen by the
Senate; sending some of them to Rome; and depriving others of their offices,
upon pretense of misgovernment. Which he purposely did, that being rid of all
which were his betters (in birth) he might the more freely and uncontrolably
practice (in his Army, as in a strong Arcenal) al kind of Tyranny, without
regard to any. He banished also from the court, al Alexanders servants, that
had so many years waited, and put many of them to death upon misprision of
Treason, because they mourned for their old master. But that which set a keen
edge upon his Tyranny, was an information, that many Captains and all the
Roman Senate conspired against him.

There was one Magnus, a very Magnus.
noble Gentleman, that had been Consul; who was accused to the Emperor that he
raised a faction against him, and dealt with the Soldiers to make himself
Emperor. The Plot was said to be this: Maximin had built a bridge over the
River to go against the Germans; for as soon as he came to the Sovereignty, he
presently applied himself to the wars. For being elected to the Empire for
his huge bulk, approved valor, and skill in military affairs, he intended by
deeds of Arms to confirm the Soldiers in their good opinion, and to make the
world know, that Alexanders fear, and (...)
retardation of the war, was justly to be condemned. Wherefore he spared no
pains to muster and train the Soldiers, and being still in arms himself, he
mightily encouraged the Army Having made the bridge, he purposed to pass into
Germany. But Magnus was reported to have persuaded many of the best soldiers
(who had the charge of guarding the bridge) that as soon as Maximine were
passed over, they should cut it down; and so (preventing his return) betray
him to the Barbarians. For so deep and broad was the river, that it was
impossible he should retreat (there being no ships on the other side.)

This was the rumor, but whether true, or feigned by Maximin, is uncertain; for
it is hard to determine any thing therein; all that were suspected, being
suddenly apprehended, and cruelly slain, without Judicial Process or
Pleading. But now the Osroene Archers began to revolt. For being much grieved
at Alexanders murder, and meeting (by chance) Quartinus
with Quartinus one of Alexanders friends (dismissed but a little before by
Maximine) they laid hold on him, and utterly against his will made him their
Chief, and honoring him with the fatal Ornaments of Purple, and Fire carried
before him, they proclaimed him Emperor, that neither knew of it before, nor
thought of it: howbeit, soon after sleeping in his Tent, he was suddenly slain
by one that had been his companion, and (as some say) his affied friend: whose
name was Macedon, Macedon.
the Captain of the Osroens, and the first mover of their revolt from Maximin.
And though he had no cause nor quarrel at all against him; yet he slew him,
whom himself had compelled to take upon him the Empire. Then, thinking he
should be wondrous welcome to Maximine, he brought him Quartinus head for a
Present. Maximine being glad to see it, and rejoicing that his enemy was so
easily made away; whereas the Actour expected great thanks and preferment; he
put him to a most cruel death; as a Ringleader of Rebellion, a murderer of
him that he had persuaded (against his will) to that enterprise; and a
Traitor to his dearest friend. These and the like occasions whetted Maximine
to all immanity, that (of himself) was exceeding bloody. He had a horrible
ugly countenance, and such a Cyclopicall Bulk, that no Greek nor Barbarian
Champion was comparable to him. Having thus ordered his affairs, he leads all
his army with great courage over the Bridge, and makes war upon the Germans. A
wondrous multitude of people followed him; almost all the Roman forces, the
Moresco darters, and many Bands of Archers of the Osroens and Armenians:
(whereof, the first are Vassalls to the Romans; the latter their Allies and
Confederates) as also the mercenary and fugitive Parthians, and the Captives of
that nation that served the Romans in the war. Which confused Mass, having
been first raked together by Alexander, was after augmented and well trained by
Maximine. These Darters and Archers are very serviceable against the Germans,
because they nimbly sally forth upon the enemy (ere they are aware) and easily
retreat into the Gross of the army. Maximin being entered the enemies country,
and finding none to resist him (for all the Barbarians were fled) spoiled all
the country, (the corn being now ready to reap) leaving all the villages to be
burnt and pillaged by the soldiers. Their cities and buildings are very apt to
take fire, for the Germans rarely use to build with stone or brick, their
houses being like sheds made of bords and timber fastened together. Maximin
progressing in this sort, burning all the fields, and giving all the cattle to
the Soldiers, could yet find no enemies. For they had left all the Champaigne
and plain Country, and betaken themselves to the woods Woods and Bogs.
and bogs, where they skulked and watched their advantage to make an irruption
upon the enemy: as knowing that the trees which grew so thick would hinder the
enemies Darts and Arrows; and the depth of the bogs would be dangerous for the
Romans that knew the^ not: but easy and accessible to them that well knew where
they were passable, running daily through them, up to the knees. The Germans
also are very skillful The Germans good swimmers.
swimmers, using to wash only in Rivers. In these difficult places began the
battle, the Roman Emperor himself most bravely giving the onset. For being
come to a mighty great Meare or Marish, whither the Germans had fled, the
Romans fearing to follow them; Maximin was the first that entered with his
horse: where A terible battle in a Poole.
plunging above the horse-belly, he made a great slaughter of the Barbarians
that very stoutly resisted. Whereat the Soldiers being abasht lest they should
seem ^o betray their Emperor, leapt boldly into the Mear, where many on both
sides were slain (but the Barbaria^s were almost cut of) the Roman prince most
valiantly fighting in person: insomuch that the poole being filled up with
carcasses, and the fennes all purpled with blood, it represented a ghastly and
hideous sight of a sea fight (as it were) on land. This battle and his other
Martial acts, the Emperor did not only certify by Letters to the Roman
Senate and People, but commanded also the Portrait of them (at large) to be
publikly set before the Councel-house, that the Romans might not only hear,
but behold also his brave Exployts. Which Table (with his other honors) was
afterward taken down by the Senate. Other skirmishes there were, in all which,
he fought in the head of his troops, and with his own hands hewed out his
honor. Winter approaching, he retreated (with many prisoners, and mighty
booties) into Pannonia Where, in Sirmium (the greatest City of that Country)
he lay in Garrison, preparing for a Spring* War; and often saying (which he
seemed to intend) that he would exterminate and subdue all the Barbarous
nations of Germany to the very Ocean. Such a famous Warrior he was! And
surely great Glory he had got, had he^ not been more bloody and cruel to his
own subjects than to the enemies. For what thanks to kill Barbarians, if far
more were murdered in Rome it self.

FINIS.

