THE Famous Hystory of HERODOTVS.

Containing the Discourse of diverse Countries, the succession of their Kings:
the acts and exploytes achieved by them: the Laws and customs of every
Nation: with the true Description and Antiquity of the same.

IMP. IVSTINVS. IVN. AUGUST


Divided into nine Books, entitled with the names of the nine Muses.

AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Marshe. 1584.

To the right excellent and virtuous Gentleman Master Robert Dormer, son to
the noble Knight Sir Wyllyam Dormer, B. R. wishes increase of worship, with
the favor of GOD.
PRetily was it aunsweared of Praxiteles (right worshipful) who being
demanded which of both were most to be esteemed the Paynter or the writer of
Hystories: whether of the two would you choose (quoth he) to be dumb and make
a sign aptly, or to have the use of your tongue, and tell your tale fitly? So
that himself being a Paynter, and the science so greatly regarded as then it
was, yet being made a judge of two notable sciences, he thought meeter to
derogate something from his own art, then to defame a better. Such were the
days then, and the people so far enamoured with the Art of Paynting, that
to have skyll in the draught of shadows, and the apt framing of pictures, was
deemed the best quality that could rest in a Gentleman: touching which, we
may well say as did Parrhasius, who paynting one that ran in a race, and not
able to make him sweat, added this for a note, No farther then colors. So
that Praxiteles with his pencill shall make the sign, and being not
understood, Herodotus shall tell his tale, by means whereof, that which
wants in the one, shall be so plentifully supplied in the other, that
dyspising the Paynter for setting down to little, we shall suspect the writer
for alleging to much, finding fault with one for obscurity, and in the
other fearing flattery. So lively in many things, and so evident in all things
is the pleasant discourse of hystories, that a better cou^terfayte may be
drawn with two penfull of incke in Herodotus tale, then with two potfull of
colors in Apelles table. But to leave the Paynter to his colors, it was
fitly said of Cicero, that to know no more then that which was done in his
own time, were still to be a child, meaning that the chiefest part of
wisdom by the which we farthest surmount the bounds of childish ignorance,
is to be well seen in stories, out of the which, whether more profit or
pleasure redounde to those that read them, it is hard to say. For what greater
commodity may there be, then to fit our-selues with sundry sorts of examples,
to direct our wits, to frame our manners, to govern the course of our whole
lives, an infinite number whereof are offered in stories to the singular
profit of the posterity. Virtue blased with excellency, vice defaced with
infamy, famous cities utterly destroyed, small towns highly advanced, ancient
friendship turned to enmity, mortal hatred converted to amity, free cities
brought under tribute, and such as were tributarie, restored to freedom,
briefly, all things in stories, that may either for profit avail the reader,
or for pleasure delight him. It is left to memory of Scipio Africanus a noble
Gentleman of Rome, that seeking to ensue the example of Cyrus which was feigned
by Xenophon, he achieved that fame of wisdom and valor as few had attained
before him. The like happened to Selimus prince of the Turks, whose auncetours
hating stories, he caused the acts of Caesar to be drawn into his mother
tongue, and by his example, subdued a great part of Asia and Africa. And
Caesar himself had never aspired to the type of so great renown, but by
following of Alexander, reading whose victories, he brast out into tears,
for so much as at the same age whereat Alexander had subdued the whole world,
himself had done nothing worthy memory. The delyghte we receive by readyng
hystories, is every way singular, a sovereign medicine for the cares of the
mind, a speedy remedy for the griefs of the body. So that Alphonsus King of
Spain, left by Physic as incurable, recovered his health by readyng Lyuy.
In which kind of delightsome vein, sithence of all other Herodotus most
excels, both for the pleasant course of the story, and the plentiful
knowledge contained therein, I thought him not unfit at his first entry into
England, to grow in favor with so noble a Gentleman, by whose countenance
gaynyng credit, he may with less shame and greater acceptaunce adventure
into the hands of such as shall read him. I leave him therefore in your
worships hands to entertayne as a stranger, and as he deserves to make him
familiar, not forgetting to wish him good fortune as a forreyner, and to your
self increase of fame, and the favor of God to your lives end.

Your Worships most duty full to command, B. R.

To the Gentlemen Readers.
RIght courteous Gentlemen, we have brought out of Greece into England two of
the Muses, Clio and Euterpe, as desirous to see the land as to learn the
language; whom I trust you will use well because they be women, and you can not
abuse them because you be Gentlemen. As these speed so the rest will follow,
neither altogether unwilling to forsake their own Country, nor yetouerhasty
to arrive into this, reposing the end of their counsel in the proof of
your courtesy. If you like them not for the attire they wear, yet bid them
welcome for the news they bring, which I confess are in many points
strange, but for the most part true. The first of these has traveled
through three Countries of ancient fame, Lydia, Persia, and Assyria, making
report of all such things as in the same are either memorable for antiquity,
or famous for excellency. The second either less able to travail far, or
more pleasuring in that Country, kept resyaunce in Egypt, where she found
the people so witty, the country so wonderful, all things so strange, and
differing from the common course of nature, that abiding there, she thought
Egypt to have greater store of miracles, then all the world beside. Wherefore
traveling to no place but to Egypt, she tells no news but out of Egypt,
howbeit, in such exquisite manner, that for the country, the people, the
princes, the laws, the course of all antiquity, hearing her, ye will desire
no more. Neither of these are braued out in their colors as the use is now
adays, and yet so seemly, as either you will love them because they are
modest, or not mislike them because they are not impudent, since in refusing
idle pearls to make them seem gaudy, they reject not modest apparel to
cause them go comely. The truth is (Gentlemen) in making them new attire, I
was feign to take example by their old array, cutting out my cloth by another
man's measure, being great difference whether we invent a fashion of our own,
or imitate a pattern set down by another. Which I speak not to this end,
for that my self could have done more eloquently in english then our Author
has in Greek, but that the course of his writing being most sweet in
Greek, converted into English, loses a great part of his grace. Howsoever
the case stands Gentlemen, if it be not so well as it might be, I would it
were better than it is, wishing the best albeit I can not attain to the best,
yet least I condemn my self before I need, I will stay upon the censure and
opinion of others when the time shall come. Till when, and ever, leaving you to
God, and the good success of your affairs, I end.

Your very friend. B. R.

HER ODOTVS HIS FIRST BOOK ENTITLED CLIO.
HER ODOTVS being of the city of Halicarnassus in Greece The country of the
author.
wrote and compiled an history to the end, that nether tract of time might
ouerwhelme and bury in silence the acts of humayne kind: nor the worthy, and
renowned adventures of the Grecians and Barbarians, (as well other as chiefly
those that were done in war) might want the due reward of immortal fame. The
Persian writers witness ye first cause of debate and controversy to have comen
by ye people The first cause of discention between the Grecians and Barbarians.
called Phaenices who sailing from the red sea into this of Greece, and
inhabityng the self same regions which at this time also they hold and
retain: gave themselves to long vagaries and continual viages by sea. In
which season by trade of marchaundise brought from Aegipt and Assyria, as in
many other countries, so also they arrived at Argos. Argos at the same time was
the most noble and famous city in Greece. Whither the Phaenices directyng their
course, after they were come, and within the space of four or five days, had
made a good hand and riddaunce of their wares. It fortuned certain women (in
whose company The rape of Io. and her ariual into Aegipt
was the Kings daughter, whose name was Io. borne of Inachus) to approach the
shore, in mind to suruay and contemplate the wealth and substance of these
outlandish Merchants. Now in the mean season whiles the women were busye and
attentive in praising such things as their fancy lead them, the Phaenises
ran violently upon them and having caught Io with some others, they rest
exceedingly affryghted, and flying through fear, incontinently wayghed anco^re
and sailed into Aegipt. By these means the Persians record that Io first came
into Aegipt, not as ye Phaenices report, and that this was the first cause and
beginning of iniuryes. It chanced afterward that certain Greeks whase names
they knew not taking shore, and lauding at Tyrus, in like manner made a rape of
the kings daughter named Europa. These were the people of Crete, Europa stolen
by the Greeks in revenge of Io.
otherwise called the Cretenses. By which means yt was cards and cards
between them, the one being full meet and quit with the other.

But in process of time, the second trespass was also made and committed, by
the Grecians, who passinge in a galley by the river Phasis to Aea, a city of
Colchis, and having finished the affairs and business for which they came,
carried away Medea daughter to the King, whom the noble Medea carried away by
Iaso^, at what time, he vvonne the golden fleece at Colchis.
gentleman her father eftsoon reclayminge by an Harold of peace, and
demanding punishment and revenge on the trespasser: the Grecians made
answer, that as by themselves no correction was done for the rape of Io. even
so would they also in this cause go void of smart and escape scotfree.

After this in the second age ensuing Alexander the son of Priamus having
notise and aduertisme^t of these things The rape of Helen vvherof arose the
Troyan war.
was greatly desirous to steal and puruay himself a wife of the Grecians,
notfearyng the rigor of Justice, or any manner pey, or chastisment, which
they before had utterly refused to bear and sustain.

Having therefore gotten Helena, and conuayed her away it seemed good to the
Greeks, to claim by embassage, restitution of the rape and justice on the
rauisher, unto whom the stealth of Medea was objected and answer made that it
was not meet for them to require either loss or law, which in former time
would be ruled by neither.

Thus the time hitherto passed on by mutual pillage between them. But of
those things which ensue and follow. Upon these ye Persians affirm, the
Grecians to have been the chief authors, who first invaded Asia by the power
of war then ever themselves attempted the rule and domiminion By so much the
greater is their folly that fight for women, by how much the greater their
liberty is to be well rid of them.
of Europa. Reputing it the point of rude and gross injury to steal away
women, and the sign of a greater folly to pursue the loss of them: since no
wise man would set ought by those that without their own assent and free will
could never have been stolen. For this cause the Persians allege how lightly
they valued the loss of their Ladies, whereas the Greeks on the other side,
for one silye danie of Lacedemonia, furnished a huge navy and coming into
Asia, subverted and brought to ruin the kingdom of Priamus. Since which time
they have always thought of the Grecians as of their heavy friends, esteeming
themselves somewhat allied to Asia and the nations of Barbaria, but the
Grecians to be strangers, and alyens unto them.

And as touching the course and proceeding of these things, the Persians report
on this manner, adding hereto that the first cause of tumult and contention
between them arose by the overthrow and destruction of Troy.

With whose assertions the Phaenices agree not about the Lady Io. Whom they
flatly deny to have been carried by them into Aegipt in manner of a rape,
shewinge, how that in their abode at Argos, she fortuned to close with the
master of a Ship, and feelynge her self to be spedde: fearing and
doubtinge greatly the feueritye, and cruel tyranny of her Parents, and the
detection of her own follye, She willynglye took ship and fled straight
away.

Such are the records of the Persians, and Phaenicians, of the truth whereof I
mean not to discuss.

Only whom I find to have done the first harm and iniurye to people of
Greece of him I determine to speak proceeding orderly with the declaration as well
of small cities and towns of meaner fortune as of those that are populous and
well frequented, for so much as many cities which former ages have known right
ample and well peopled, are now fallen to a low ebb: and contrariwyse, those
which in the compass of our memory were great have heretofore been much
less: wherefore knowing the tenor of humayne felicity to be eftsoon varyable,
and never at one stay, my purpose is to use the examples of either kind.

Craesus a Lidian born descended of Halyattes, was King of those countries,
that lie within the river Halis, which The pleasant history of Craesus son
of Haliattes the first of the Barbaria^s that conquered any part of Greece,
flowing from the South part of the world, between the Syrians and the
Paphlagonians, right against the North wind breaks into the sea called
Euxinam. Of all the princes Barbarian of whom we have understanding this same
Craesus was the chief that made some of the Greeks tributary and other his
friends, he subdued the Jones, Aeoles and Doors that dwell in Asia: concluding
with the Lacedaemonians a friendly league of amity. Whereas before him Greece
consisted of four kind of people the Jones, Aeoles, Dorus Laccdemonia^s
none of the Graecians were ever thrall, or in bondage to any. For as touching
the voyage made by the Cymmerians against Ionia, it happened long before the
time of Craesus: wherein was used no sacking of cities, no dispoylinge of
towns: but secret invasions and seysing on the pray. And albeit in the
country of this noble King Craesus the soueraygnty and chief rule were
peculiare to the stock of Hercules The right Aeres apparent to the crown of
Lidia were the Heraclidans Mernade were the family and succession of those
kings vvherof Cresus came.
which were called Heraclidae, yet was it in this order translated to the blood
of Craesus whose names were Mernadae Candaules (whom the Greeks call Silos)
was king of Sardis coming of the line and progeny of Alcaeus the son of
Hercules. The first king of the family of Haeraclidans that raygned in Sardis
being named Argon son of Niuus nephew of Belus son to the nephew Alcaeus
and the last Candaules the son of Mirsus. Before Argon his raygne, they which
governed the country, were the offspring of Lydus the son of Atis, of whom
the whole people The royal family of the kings of Lidia before the
Heraclidans came of Lydus of who^ the country was named Lydia. The Parents of
the Heraclidans. Hercules, and Iardana.
took the name of Lydians being before time called the Meonyts, of these were
the Heraclidans brought up, being borue of Hercules and Iardana a bondmayd.
Unto these (by virtue of the oracle) was the seignory, and supreme government
translated, who held the same for term of five hundred and five years, the
son eftsoon succeeded his father, even unto Candaules the son of Myrsus.
This Candaules was passing well affectioned to his wife, in so much By what
means the empire came to the stock of Crae^ns.
yt for the singular love he bare her, he thought her to excel al women in the
comely feature of the body. And hereof being himself fully persuaded, he
fortuned to fall in talk with Gyges son of Bascylus, one of the chief and
principal of his guard (whom also he especially favored, and not seeldome
employed him in matters of great weight) aduauncing unto him the seemly shape
of his wife above measure. In short space after (for the evil hap haunted him)
meetinge with the aforesaid Gyges, he began thus.

My faithful servant Gyges, whereas thou seem not to credit the large
vauntes and often bragges which I make of my Ladies beauty and comlynesse (the
ears of men being much more incredulous then their eyes) behold I will so bring
to pass, yt thou shall see her naked. Whereat the pore Gentleman greatly
abashed, and in no wise willing to assent thereto, made answer as follows. My
Lord The best point of a Woman to be unknown
(quoth he) what manner of speech is this which unadvisedly you use in
persuading me to behold my ladies secrets. for a woman you know, the more in
sight the less in shame. Who together with her garments layth assyde her
modestye, honest precepts have been devised by our elders which we ought to
remember, Whereof this is one, that every man ought to behold his own. For
mine own part I easily believe you, that of all women in the world, there is
none comparable unto her in beauty.

Wherefore I beseech your grace, to have me excused, if in a case so heinous and
unlawful, I somewhat refuse to obey your will. Gyges having in this sort
acquitted himself, fearing the danger yt might ensue. The King began a fresh
to replye, saying, My good Gyges, take heart at grace, and fear not, least
either my self do go about to examine and feel thy meaning by the colored
gloss of feigned speech, or that the Queen my Lady take occasion to work thy
displeasure hereby. Pull up thy spirits, and leave al to me: it is I that
will work the means, whereby she shall never know any part of her self to
have been seen by any creature living. Listen then awhyle and give ear to my
counsel.

When night is come the door of the chaumber wherein we lie being wide set
open, I will covertly place thee behind the same: straight at my entrance
thereinto, her custom is not to be long after me, directly at her coming in,
there stands a bench, whereat vnclothing herself, she accustometh to lay her
garments upon it, propoundinge her divine and angelical body, to be seen
and viewed for a long space, this done, as she turns from the bench to
bedwarde, her back being toward thee, have care to slip privily out of the
doors least happily she espy thee.

The gentleman seeing himself taken in a trap, that in no wise he could escape
without perfourma^ce of his Lords folly, gave his assent, and at an hour
appointed stood in a readiness, whom Candaules closly brought into his chaumber:
and immediately after came the Queen: whom Gyges having beheld at his pleasure,
when her back was turned crept out of the door, yet not so secretly, but yt the
Queen had a glymse of him, and perceived, who he was.

The Lady seeing the fond and indiscreet treacherye of her husband made little
ado, and seemed as though she had seen nothing. Albeit fully mynding to be
revenged of the shameless foolish fact of her espoused Lord.

For with the Lydians, and welnygh also with the rest of the Barbarians, it is
a great reproach even for a man to be seen unclothed. How beit for the
present time she kept silence, making no semblaunce of my displeasure.

The day following, having assembled certain of her household servants, in
whom she had especial affyaunce, Gyges was sent for, who suspecting nothing
less then that his deceit was known: spedely and with all diligence,
adressed him to come: being wont also at other times to come to the Queen as
often as yet pleased her to send for him. Being entered the chaumber she began to
assail him in these word. Now Gyges of two present ways I give thee free
choice which of them both thou will take: either to slay the King Candaules and
enjoy me with the Kingedome of Lydia: or thy self presently to leese thy
life. Lest in obayng thy Lord in that thou ought not, thou be he^seforth
priuye to that which thou should not.

There is no remedy ye one of you both must to the pot, either the master or
the man, either he which led thee hereunto, or thy self that saw me naked,
and did those thinks that were unlawful to be done. Gyges herewith amazed
began first to beseech her humbly, entreating her not to bynd him to so hard
a condition. Nevertheless being not hable to persuade her, and saying it
necessary either to murder his Lord, or to be murdered by other, he deemed
it the better choice to live himself, addressing his speech to the Queen in
this wise. My Soueraygne Lady (quoth he) Since of necessity you compel me to
become guylty of the blood of my King, let me hear by what means we shall
set upon him: of a truth (said she) our treason shall proceed from the same
place from whence he bewrayed my shame. The assault shall be given when he is
a sleep. The wretched Gentleman driven to so hard a straight, that either he
must slaye or be slain, made no delay but followed the Queen into her bed
chaumber, whom with a naked dagger in his hand, she privily placed behynd the
same door, from whence Gyges afterward arysing A due revvard of doting.
bereaved Candaules of his life, and obtained both his wife and his kingdom.
Whereof also Archilocus Parius who was living at the same time makes mention
in a verse named lambie. Trimeter. To be short Gyges proclaimed himself king,
and was established in the government The diuil in old time a diposer of
kingdoms and since the Pope.
by the oracle from Delphos. For when as the Lydidians greatly disdayning at
the heavy lotts of Candaules, arose, and were all in armoure, they came to
agreement with them that mayntayned the cause of Gyges, that wherehe was
pronounced king by ye oracle he should raygne in peace: if otherwise the
supreme authority should be restored to ye blood of Hercules. Counsel being
demanded of the oracle: Pythia a vvoma^ that served the devil in his temple at
Delphos and gave out oracles to such as demanded them.
the government and principal authority was assygned to Gyges. Albeyt Pythia
mi^gling honey with gall threatened a revenge to come upon ye son of Gyges nephews
nephew: or fifth in line all descent from himself: which sayng neither the
Lydians, nor their princes any thing regarded until such time as the end had
confirmed it. Gyges being in full possession of the kingdom, sent many gifts
to Delphos to the Temple of Apollo, whereof the greater part were framed of
silver, and besides the silver, a mighty sum of Gold. How beit among
diverse his presents one is most worthy memory: to wit, 6 dishes of gold
offered by him wayghing thirty talentes, which were safely guarded in the close
treasurye of the Corynthians. Albeit (to speak truth) the treasure we speak
of, was not proper to the people of Corinth, but rather to Cypselus the son
of Aetion. Delphos a city in the country of Phosis one a mountain of Greece,
called Pa^nassus, here


In this manner was Gyges the first king of the Barbarians (of whom we have
notice) that presented any gifts at the temple of Delphos save only Mydas
son to the noble Gordius, and king of Phrigia. For Mydas also consecrated a
sumptuous chair of estate, wherein he was accustomed to was the famous temple
of Apollo vvher the devil gave craracles. The Acts of Giges wrought by him in
time of his raygne. The years of his raygne. 38 Ardyis son of Gyges second
king of the stock of the Mernadans The time of his raygne 49. years.
Sadiat^es 3. king raygned 12. years. Haliattes king 4. The acts and
adventures of Halyattes.
sit and administer justice very princely and beautiful to behold, which was
kept and co^serued in the same place where ye golden dishes of Gyges lay. The
gold and silver offered by Gyges was termed by the people of Delphos Gygeum, or
Gygades, taking the name of the geuer. Being settled in his imperial dignitye
he warred against Myletus, and Smyrna, and took the city Colophon by force of
arms. neither any other act besides this was achieved byhim, albeithe reigned
thirty eight years, we will therefore pass from him to his some named Ardyis,
who as heir apparaunt to the crown, succeeded his father in the state royal.
Ardyis conquered the Prienensis and invaded Miletus in the time of whose raygne
the people called Cymmerians dispossessed of their own seats by the Scithians,
surnamed Nomades came into Asia, and adue^turing upon Sardis the seat of
prince Ardyis took the City excepting only the tower and chief castle of
defense.

Ardyis having ruled the kingdom forty nine years, then left yt afterward
unto his Son and Heir, called Sadyattes, who governed the same the space of
twelve years.

After him the Scepter descended to Halyattes, who joined battle with
Cyaxares son of Beioces and his people the Medes, banishing the Cymmerians
out of Asia. Moreover by the same was the City Smyrna surprised, lying near
unto Colophon, likewise the famous City Clazomenae valyauntlye assailed,
wherefore (notwithstanding) his noble courage was daunted, and he was forced to
depart destitute of his hope, other things also were done by him in time of
his warfare very worthy of memory: which are these following. In his war
with the Milesians left unto him by his father, he practiced this means in
be^ieging the City.

In time of harvest the grain being ready for the sickle, he sent in his army
marching with the sound of fluites and pypes: which being comen into the
fields of the enemy, their houses they left untouched, only wasted the
trees and fruictes of the region, which done, they eftsoons retired to the
place, from whence they came. For the Milesians having intelligence of their
enemies approach, forsook their city and dwelling houses, and fled to the
Sea, so that it behooved not the ennemy to stay there: his dryft and purpose in
not spoiling the mansion places of his adversaries, was onele this, that the
Milesians having place wherein to dwell, might return again from the Sea to
till and sow the ground, which might give him occasion to r^enter with his
power, and bring their labors to none effect.

In this manner he invaded the country, for term of xi. years, wherein the
Milesians suffered two notable foyles.

The first in Lemeneium, a place so called in their own country. The second
in a certain field named Meander. Six of these eleven years did Sadyattes
the son of Ardyis raygne in Lidya, and beginning the Milesian war, troubled
his enemies by perpetual invasions, and often conflictes. For other five years
his son Halyattes main tayned the quarrel received of his father. In all the
time of this war, none of the people of Ionia gave succor to the Milesians,
save only the inhabitauntes of Chios, who having before time been aided by
them in the battle which they fought with the Erythaeans, showing mutual
goodwil, sent them now a supply in their like extremityes. In the xii. year
Halyattes despoyling the fields in like sort, as before it chanced that while
the corn was on fire, a great tempest arose and carried the flames violently to
ye temple of Minerua surnamed Assessia, and burnt ye pallaice of ye Goddess
welnigh to the ground. Which thing at that present was lightly regarded of him,
but being with his army returned to Sardis, he fell sick, and being much
enfeebled with the vehemence of his maladye, whether of his own head, or by
the counsel of others moved thereunto, sent to Dephos to the God for the
recovery of his health and welfare, when the messengers were come, Pythia
refused to give them answer, before they had repaired the temple of Miuerua,
which the fire had consumed at Assessum. This I heard with mine owneares at
Delphos, while I there soiorned. Hereunto ye Milesians add besides, ye
Periander the son of Cypselius, hearing what answer Haliattes had given him
by the oracle, in all have possible dispatched a messenger to Thrasibulus the^
King of Miletus his faithful and familiar friend to admonish him to workesome
deuyse, how to deliver himself and his country from the perpetual molestation
of his enemies. Halyattes having received these nowes, sent incontinent to
Miletus for composition of a truce till such time as the temple was renewed and
erected again. The ambassadoures being arrived Thrasibulus which knew the cause
of their coming and understood the purpose of Halyattes framed this devise,
what Corn soever was in the city either of his own, or in the possession of
others, he commanded it all to be brought into the Market place and there to
be laid in one heap. This done he gave in especial charge to all the city at
a priuye sign to fall to feasting, tippling and quaffing between themselves
above measure. Which thing he devised, to the intent the Sardian ambassadors
beholding so great plentye, and abundance of grain and vewing the people in
such wise to disport them selves with all kind of pleasure and delight, might
make report thereof to ye king his sovereign which fell out accordynglye. For
the ambassadors taking diligent view of all things they saw, and dispatching
their embassage to Thrasibulus made speedy recourse to Sardis. And as I am
given to understand, hereof only proceeded a conclusion of peace between
them. For Halyattes supposinge the Milesians to be oppressed with great want
and penury of grain, at the return of his legates hard other news then he
looked for. After this, a league was established between them of mutual
hospitality and fellowship, and in steed of one temple, Halyattes, caused 2
other to be sumptiuously built at Assessu^ being after restored to hysful and
perfect strength. Such was then the manner of the war, that Halyattes
mayntayned against the people of Miletus,

Periander the some of Sypselus who advertised Thrasibulus of the oracle, was
king of Corinth, in whose reign The Story of Arion.
there happened by report of his people, with whom also ye cityzens of Lesbos
do justly accord a miracle right strange and wonderful, Arion Methimnaeus
sitting on the back of a Dolphine by safe and easy conduite, arrived at
Taenaros, having the name to be the most excellent and skylfull musition on
the harp of those ^yme^^, by whom also chieflye was invented, named, and
taught the kind and form of verse called Bi^hyrambus. The fame is, how this
Aryon having a long time been resident in the court of Periander, was greatly
desirous to pass the Seas into Italye, and Cicilie, where being grown in
wealth, and flowinge with infinite sums of money, was lead by a desire of
retyring back into his own countreye, and determyne to in ship himself at
Tarentum, for the special credit and good lyking he had to the men of his
own nation, hired a Corinthian barck to return in: which having a gall of
pleasant wind, and being now without kenne of Land, the Maryners were all
in mind to have borded Aryon, to enjoy his money: which thing ye pore harper
perceiving freely offered to depart from his wealth, if therewith satisfied they
would show mercy on him self and spare his life. How beit finding the^ cruelly
bent, and not to be moved with any tears, but yt either he must kill himself,
and be buried on ye la^d or fling himself hedlo^g into ye mids of ye sea: he
besought the^ ^sibly yt since it seemed them best to deal so roughly with him
they would grant him liberty in his richest array, to sing a song, whereto they
gladly yeldi^g, as being not a little joyful to lend their ears to the
chiefest and most famous musitio^ then living on the earth. He went from them
apart into the midst of the ship, where having decked his body with most
precious and costlye furniture he framed his voice to the sweet and melodious
verse named Orthium, which no sooner had he brought to an end, but al his pomp
and glorious arayment, he threw himself headlonge into the Sea: the shipmen
held on their course to Corinth. Arion received by a Dolphin, was in perfect
safety landed at Taenaros from whence so arrayed as he was he framed his steps
toward Corinth to the seat and palace of the king: where having entered a
discourse of his strange case and incredible fortune, ye king supposing him to
over reach, committed him immediately to close ward where no man might have
access unto hi^. After that diligent search was made for the mariners, who
being apprehended and curiouslye questioned with about Arion, made answer that
his abode was about Italy and how at their coming from thence, they leaft him
in flourishing estate at Tarentum, at which words Arion presently appearing,
drove them into such a quandarye: that having no color of excuse, they were
compelled perforce to confess the truth. These things are verifyed by the men
of Corinth, and Lesbos. There is yet to be seen at Taenaros a huge and massy
monument wrought of brass, Arion sitting on ye back of a Dolphin. Howbeit,
Haliattes prince of Lydia having entered the war with the Milesians, and
governed Haliattes rayned 57 years.
the kingdom 57 years finished his days: who second of that lineage, after
the due recouerye of his strength offered at Delphos a piece of silver plate of
value incomparable, and a small dish of iron curyously wrought, a thing no
Glancus Chius the first that invented to work in iron
less wonderful to behold then ought that has been dedicated in the temple of
Apollo being the handy work of Blaucus Chius, who first found out the mean to
work in iron.

After the death of Haliattes, the sceptor descended unto Craesus his son,
being then at the age of thirtye and three years. This King mynding to have a
fling at the Grecians began first of all, and encountered with the people of
Ephesus, who being inuyroned by him with a siege: gave their City to the
Goddess, tying a rope from the temple of Diana to the walls of the Town.
Between the old city that was besieged and the Temple was the space of 7.
furlonges. These were the first that Craesus began to quarrel with among the
Grecians. After this he began by piecemeale to be doing with the several
cities of Ionia Aeolia, pretending against each diverse and sundry causes some
very weighty and of due regard, other meeretrifles and very frivolous.

Now when he had subdued the Grecians in Asia, and made them tributory to his
seat, he determined to furnish a navy against the inhabitauntes, of the Isles.

To the framing whereof when all things were in readynesse, some say that Bias
Prienaeus: other that Pittacus Mitylaeneus coming to Sardis, was demanded of
the King what news in Greece, who shaped him such an answer, that it gave
him small courage to proceed in his enterprise.

The people of the Isles, O King (said he) have made provision of a thousand
horses, in full purpose to come against thee and thy city Sardis. Craesus
thinking he had spoken truth: Would God (quoth he) it might once take them in
the brain to war on horseback against the sons of the Lydians, who taking
his talk by the end, proceeded saying.

Most noble Prince, it is thy desire to meet with these Sea fishes flooting on
shore: and what do thou think they more greedy wish and long after, then to
take thee and thy Lidyans waueryng and tossing in the water, to gleike the one
the other side, for so many Grecians become subject, and pentionarye to thy
kingdom. Wherewith Craesus very much delighted, (for that he seemed to have
spoken wisely) changed his mind, and made a friendly league with the people of
Ionia that held the Isles: in process of time he became conqueror of al
those which are within the river Halis. For besides the Cilisians, and Lisians,
all the rest were subject to the Empire of Craesus, which were these. The
Lidians, Phrigians, Mysians, Mariandyns, likewise the Chalibes, Paphlagonians,
Thrasians, Oetimans, lastly the Bithynians, Carians, Jones, Doors, Aeoles,
Pamphylians, which being all subdued and the Government of the Lydians greatly
amplified by Craesus, there repaired to Sardis, being then in ye flower of her
fortune, as well other wise men out of Greece, termed Sophisters, as also the
Solon trauayling from Greece came into Lidia to the court of Craesus, of whose
wealth and felicity he gave judgment as follovveth.
most famous Solon, one of the city of Athens, who at the instant prayers of
his citizens having tempered the common wealth, with good laws, under color
of visittinge strange countries, willingly for term of years abandoned his
natyue soil, that he might not be forced to break the Laws which he before
had made, the Athenians them selves standing bound with a solemn and religious
vow for ten years space to observe these statutes which Solon had invented,
as well then for the maintenance of his laws as to view and see foreign
nations, he undertook a pilgrimage into Aegipt to King Amasis, and from thence
to Sardis to the court of Craesus, where in gentle and courteous manner being
entertained by the King at the third or fourth day, after his arrival he
was lead about the treasuryes to view the wealth and riches of Craesus,
beholding all the inestimable and blessed jewels that were contained in them.
After he had attentively beheld and with curious eye surueyed them at his
pleasure. Craesus began to board him on this manner. You Gentleman of Athens,
for as much as we heard great good words of your wisdom, being for
knowledge and experience sake a pilgrim from your country, we have deemd it
convenient to ask you a question, whether at any time you have seen the
happiest man alive: not mistrusting, but that the lotte would have fallen to
him self to have exceeded all others in blessedness. Solo^ not mynding to
double, as one altogether un acquaynted with pleasing phrases, delivered his
mind in free speechin form as follows.

I have seen O King (quoth he) Tellus, one of my cou^triemen of Athens, a man
surpassing all others in happy The example of an happy Tellus
life, whereat Craesus wondering, earnestlye required what cause made him think
so highlye of Tellus.

For as much (said he) as in a well ordered common wealth, heehadde children,
trained up in unity, and honesty, every of which had likewise increase of
his own body, and yet all living. And having spent the course of his age, as
well as a man might, Fortune crowned his end with the perpetual renown of a
most glorious death. For the Athenians joining in battle with their next
neighbors, Tellus coming with a fresh supplye, and putting his ennemies to
flight: ended his life in the field, whom ye people of Athens in the self same
place where he had shed his blood, caused to be entombed with immortal honor,
Solon going forward in a large discourse as touching Tellus was cut of by
Craesus with a second demand, who asked him the second time, whom in
conscience he thought next unto him, in full hope, that at the least his part
had been next: to whom he answered in the next degree.

Most mighty Prince, I have always reputed Cleobis, and Biton two young men
of the Country of Argos, of body so strong and active, that in all games they
wanne the price, of whom these things are left to memory.

The feast of Juno being kept at Argos, the mother of these two young men was
to be drawn to the temyle by a yoke of bullocks, which when the hour came
being strayed and gone out of the way, the two young youths yoked themselves
and halyng the chariot forty five furlongs they came to the temple: which after
they had done in the sight and view of the whole multitude in a lucky hour
they dyed, whereby ye Goddess gave us to understand how much better it was for
man to die then live. For when as the people flocking about extolled them to
the heavens: the men praising ye good nature and intent of the sons? the
women commendinge the blessed chance of the mother, whom nature had endued
with two such children: the good old mother almost outof her wits for joy,
what for the kind deed of her sons and the goodly speech of the people,
aduauncinge their virtue: as she stood before the image of Juno, besought the
Goddess with earnest prayers to reward the kindness of her children with the
chief and most precious blessing that might happen unto man. Her prayer made,
and both the sacrifyce and feast ended: they gave themselves to rest in the
temple, but never after awaking, in the morni^g they were found dead, whom the
people of Argos by two carved monumentes placed at Delphos commended to
everlasting memory: for men of rare and excellent virtue. To these men did
Solon attribute the next step to perfect happiness.

Craesus now being throughlye warmed and beginning to storm: why then (quoth
he) thou foolish stranger of Athens is my wealth so base in thine eyes that
thou demest me not worthy to be compared with two private men of Argos. Certes
(...) king (said he) you demand of me a question as one not altogether
ignorant yt the highest clymers have the heauiest falls, the term of man's
life be threscore years and ten, which years consist of twentye five
thousand two hundred days, omitting to speak of that month which is given to
some years in addition for the just compass and revolution of the time.
Howbeit if in every other year we increase a month: for the due concordaunce
and even course of times: to threscore and ten years we must add 35 months
containing in themselves 1500 days.

Be it then in all these days (which in full co^putation are twenty six
thousand two hundred and fifty) what thing do we see like unto other? what
rather not flatly unlike, strange and disagreyng from the former? so ye man (O
Craelus is altogether wretched and miserable, not wtstanding, thy self art in
wealth flourishing and a prince of many people: all this I deny not, and yet I
cannot call thee him whom thou would be, til such time as I hear of thy
fortunate death. For wherein is the rych man better then a beggar, unless the
course of his happiness continue to his grave.

There are many rych but few blessed, and many of a mean patrimony, yet very
fortune. Two things there be wherein the unfortunate rich excels those who
in meaner substance have fortune their friend: by whom contrariwyse, they are
excelled in many. The wealthy has to glutte his desires: and to pay for his
default when it happens. Both which though fortune have denied him yt in
baser wealth lives well, yet in this he goes beyond the other, ye want of
substance keeps him from riot, and care of well doing from security in
offending: the same having no small thanks to yield to Fortune, yt he has his
health, that he is gauled and grieved with no calamity, that he is a father of
verteous children, that he is garnished with the beauty and comelye shape of
the body. Besides al which if his end be lucky: this is he whom we seek for:
a man every way worthy to be counted happy. Nevertheless till the last gasp I
deem him not blessed, but fortunate. Al which things I think it impossible to
attain to in this life. For as one country cannot supply unto it self all
things, but flowing in some one thing it fayles in an other: or as the body of
a man can not in every point be absolute, but happily being fair in ye face is
deformed in the foot, so stands it also with the life of man. Yet who so in
every kind comes nearest the mark and seals up his fortune with a seasonable
death, shall in manner of a king be renowned with the famous title of felicity.

The end of every thing is to be regarded what issue it is like to have,
because riches are lent by the Gods to many, The Gods offended at the insolency
of Craesus bereaved him of his dear son Atis
whom afterward they bring to wrechednes.

Solon having thus freely and unfeignedly laid open his opinion, within short
space after departed ye court, and truly was accomted an unwise man, in yt he
counsayled every one not respecting his present estate, to behold his end:
After whose departure ye heavy anger of the gods fell upon Craesus, for yt he
was so puffed up and exalted iu the vain and inestimable confidence of his own
felicity. Who not long time after fell into a dream, which rightly foretold
and showed unto him ye The dream of Craesus as concerning his sons de(...)
great misfortune and misery was to light upon his son. This noble Craesus had
2. sons, one of the which was dum and impotent, the other surpassing al of
his age in what soever he betoke himself unto, whom he called Atis. This Atis
(as his dream gave him) being sore wounded with an head or point of yro^,
should so perish and come to his end. The king awaking out of his sound sleep,
began to grace upon the meaning hereof, and sorely aghast at so strange a
vision, sought without delay to join his son in marriage with some beautiful
lady of the country, and whereas his accustomed manner was to employ him in ye
field as a ri^gleader of his host from that time forward he never used him in
ye like affairs. And for the more assurance he caused al darts, spears and
such like weapons of war that honge in his galeryes to be removed into by
romes and close lodgings of the court, that happily if any thing should
chance to fall, his son might be out of the reach and compass of mishap.

In the mean while when the king was solemnizing ye nup Adrastus for killing
his brother was exiled his country.
tials and marriage of his son, there came to Sardis a certain young man very
pore and miserable, defiled with bloodshed, a Phrigian borne, and descended of
princely race. Enteryng ye Palace, he besought the king that it might be
lawful for him to purifye himself after the manner of his court: which
granted, and in due order accomplished, Craesus asked him whence he came and
what he was on this manner. My friend, what are you? from what place in Phrigia
are you come to my court? what man or woman have you slain. To who^ he
answered. My Father (mighty prince) is Gordius comen of the line of Midas: my
name Adrastus: And for that unwittingly I slew my Brother, I am cast out and
exiled, from Country, Parents, and goods. Craesus replying, said: Of a truth
Adrastus thou art borne of our friends, and art now comen to thy friends: abide
in my house and thou shall want nothing. No doubt but the present smarte of thy
calamity will redounde to thy future gain. Now whylst he made his abode in
the kings palaice. It chanced that at Olympus in the country of Mysia there
haunted a wyld bore of an huge and incredible bigness, which coming A vvylde
Bore haunting in Mysia.
from the mountain made wast, and spoil of the labors of the inhabitaunts.
Whom the people sundry times indenouring to take did no hurt to him at al, but
rather received harm by him. Till at length dispatching messengers to the
court of Craesus they framed unto him a suit in these words. There rangeth in
our country (most famous and noble Prince) a wyld bore, straungely dismeasured
and ouergrowne by whom our tyllage and husbandry is piteously wasted and
dispoyled. Neither can we by any means possible (seeking all means we can)
remove or rid him from our borders. We humbly therefore beseech thy soueraygne
highness to aforde us thy some with a company of choice and valiant youths,
with houn des and other necessaries to acquyte and deliver our region of this
pestilent beast. To which their ardent supplicatians Craesus calling to mind
his former vision shaped this reply. Of my son to make any farther mention
it were in vain for I am not determined to send him with you, he is newly
espoused to a wife so that in so short space he may not without some griese
estraunge and alienate himself from the amorous embraceme^ts of his Lady.
Otherwise for the most tried and picked out men of yt Lydians, and such as are
skilful in the chase of wide beast accompanied with hounds for the purpose, I
will cause to return with you with especial charge yt they let pass nothing that
may make to the speedy conquering of so cruel a monster. This answer given
they seemed therwt greatly discontented, when as in the mean space ye kings son
coming in presence, and hearing both the request and humble suite of the
Mysians, and the grievous repulse given the^ by the king his sire, brake
silence and said, dear father. Such things as before time were commendable and
glorious unto us Whom destenies vvil have die he shall be the busy wor ker of
his ovvue peril.
to make proof and trial of our selves, either in exploits of chiualry, or in
exercise of chase, you have clean deprived me of both, nether for any show of
sloth, nor defect of courage. With what eyes will the people behold me going
and coming through ye streets? your subjects and citezens what will they judge
of me? lastly what a one shall I seem to be unto my Lady? will she not think
herself to be coupled with a cow: for which causes either permit me to hunt and
make one in y^ voyage, or allege some more wayghty and seryous reason why you
retain me. To who^ the king his father made answer saying. Mine own good
son, not for want of stomach, nor for any dispeasure toward thee do I thus:
but being moved hereto by the strange terroure of a vision, which foreshewed
to me yt thy days were short and suddenly to be ended by y^ pytiful dint of an
yro^ head. For this cause my son have I hastened thy marriage, and restranyed
thee of the sport and pastime which is now in hand: for yt my care is, while
I am living to preserve thee from peril. Thon art mine only child sweet Atis,
for so much as of thy deaf* brother I make non acou^t, thy life is my
happiness, thy death my misery. To which words the young prince answered. Dear
father I hold you excused, if provoked by a dream so rare you be much more
diligent and watchful over me: yet in my fa^cy you conceived it not aright. It
is needful then yt sithe^ce your grace has mist the blanke, I lay open unto
youth true meaning and sense of the dream.

This sleepy fantasy (say you) has manased my death, by y^ point of iron. But
why, in this voyage there be no hands whom I need to dread: neither any head of
iron which you ought to fear, had I either been to dye by a touth, or such
like some cause there were of doubting the worst, how beit, yt is the iron head
that denounces my death. For as much the^ as we have not to deal at this time
with men there seems unto me no just cause of absence, but yt together with the
rest I may enter yt chase. Thou have won me my child (quam Craesus) I can no
longer resist, wherefore as vanquished by thee I frankly yield and leave it in
thy power to proceed with them on hunting, which when he had spoken, he called
for Adrastus the Phrygian who appearing in presence was in these words assailed
by hi^. Sir Adrastus at what time you were afflicted with misery and defiled with
impurity, I yielded supply to your wa^ts and repurged your wickedness having
received you of a stranger into mine own house. which things, I do not object
you as unthankful for my bountye, or unmindful of my curtesye: But in that it
behooves you to deserve well of me, yt have dealt so friendly with your self.
I am in mind to commit unto thy tender care the safeconduit and diligent guard
of my son, who is going to hunt, least by fortune you encounter with any
thieves or robbers that mind your destruction. Besides it is thy part to
atchieue renown by valiant and worthy adventures, as a thing natural to thy
lineage, and convenient for thy strength. To who^ Adrastus answered, were it in
my choice O king (quoth he) I would not move one foot out of thy court: for yt
I deem it not meet for one in my case so miserable to keep company with the
happy and fortunat, from doing whereof, I have hitherto always refrayned my
self. But for as much as it seems good to your gracious highness, whom I ought
to gratify and show my self thankful for so great and infinite benefytes
received, I am ready her in to obey your will.

And for that you have put me in trust with the health and welfare of the noble
gentleman your son, I avouch and undertake his safe and prosperous return.
Adrastus having ended his talk all things being in a readynes, with approved
men and youths of syngular courage: likewise, hounds and chaunters of the
best kind, they marched on their way.

Now when they were come to the hill Olympus, they began to tract and sent the
beast, whom having spedily disloged Atis s^ayne by Adrastus.
they flocked about him like bees, and with their darts on every side threatened
his death. In this gredy assault, y^ stranger lately cleansed from blondshed,
whom they called Adrastus, discharged his dart at the Bore, and deceived of his
aim, in stid of him struck the son of Craesus, who being wounded to death by
y^ iron point fulfilled his fathers vision. Immediately one of the route retired
spedily to the court, and in short space arryuing at Sardis, declared unto y^
king the great misfortune and death of his son: wherwt the woeful father
greatly affrighted, yet much more sorrowed for this that his son was slain
by the hands of him who by his means had been lately sanctified and cleansed
from slaughter. And in the mids of his anguish calling upon the sanctifyinge
God Jupiter, made a piteous complaynt of the wrong done unto him by a stranger.
Inuocating like wise the Gods of hospitality and friendship. The one for
because he entertained a guest not knowing that he nourished the manqueller of
his son: the other because he had found him who^ he appointed to be yt tutor
and defender of his child a most pernicious and deadly enemy. Scarsly had he
ended his prayers, but the Lydians were at hand with the dead corse, after whom
immediately followed Adrastus who being comen in presence, and standing before
the wan, and ghastly carcas of Atis stretching forth his arms besought yt king
to slay him prese^ly upon y^ body of his son, alleadgi^g yt what for his
former distres and evil misfortue in slayng his cleanser there was no cause why
any longer he should live. Craesus albeit in great dolor and vexation of
mind, yet maued with pity toward Adrastus, said thus. Thou have abundantly
satisfied me (O stranger) in that by thine own voice thou have craved death.
Neither art thou ye cause of this heavy chance (save that unawares thou have
done it) but some one of the Gods which foreshewed unto me, what was to come.
After this Craesus caused his so^ to be honorably and magnificially buried.
But Adrastus Adrastus slew himself upon the tomb of Atis.
son of Gordius nephewe to Mydas the fatal enemy of his brother and his
friend, when all was hush at the sepulcher, and every man had yielded him pardon,
yet being grievously afflycted and gauled in conscience slew himself miserably
upon thecoffine.

For ye cruel mishap and destenie of his beloved Atis, Craesus bitterly wailed
and lamented ye space of 2 years, which grief he aftewards ended: at what
time the government of the Medes whas translated from Astyages son of
Cyaxares, to the valiant king Cyrus sprung of Cambyses, and that the state of
the Persians began to increase. Reuoluing and castyng with himself what means
he might use to atchieue ye government of Persia, before it grew to be bigger.
In this qua^dary it came into his brain to make trial of ye profecies as well of
those in Greece, as ye other in Africa, dispatchi^g messe^gers every way, some
to Delphos, others to Dodona, thyrdly to Amphiaraus and Trophonius. There were
also yt put themselves in voyage to Bra^chidae in ye borders of Miletus. and
these were the oracles of Greece: whereunto Craesus sent for counsel: others
trauayled into Africa to the oracle of Ammon, to the same intent and purpose.
Al had this end to require ye sentence and advise of ye Gods, yt if they were
found to accord and agree in truth, nextly he might solicit then as touching
his own affairs: whether they thought it expedient for him to go in
expedition against ye Persia^s. Herevpo^ being fully resolved, he gave his
ambassadors stratly in charge yt taking a note of the day of their egresse,
and setting forth from Sardis, they should keep just account of the time
following: and every day question with the oracle, demanding of it what Craesus
son of Haliattes king of yt Lidyans did yt day, and giving diligent head to
their aunswers: to tell him at their return, what answer was made by ye
other rest of the oracles no man reports: but at Delphos the Lydians having
entered the temple to ask of the oracle according as was given them in
commandment by the king incontine^tly Pythia began to salute the^ in these
verses.

The depthe of raginge Seas,
The number of the sand,
The minds intent (set words assyde)
I easly understand. Apolloin these verses tells the ambassadors what their
king did that day.

A sauoure rank that comes
from hedgehogges flesh I smell,
Which jointly with the fat of Lambs
is boylde in brazen kell.
And as it bubbleth up,
and breathes in burning flame.
There lies thereon a lidd of brass,
that ouerwhelmes the same.
Which verses given by Pythia, and written of the Lydians, they made speedy
retire to Sardis. When yt rest also were come that Craesus had sent about: he
took view of every man's notes and liked none of the^: till at lengch hearing
the oracle given by Pythia he greatly allowed and worshipped it: of opinion
that the only true prophecy and divination was at Delphos, which had hit him
so pat in all things he did. For after the departure of his messengers The
meaning of the oracle.
one day above ye rest he set his head a work about yt finding out of some
devise yt might be hard to tell, and most difficult to discry. Wherefore having
shred the flesh of an vrchine, or hedgehog together with the fat of a Lamb, he
caused the^ both to be boiled in a brazen pot: the cover or lidde whereof was
also of brass. Such was the answer which Craesus received from Delphos, what
words were given by the oracle of Amphiaraus, and what sentence he returned.
I cannot affirm, for as much as no other speech goes thereof, save that this
Prophecye also was deemed by Craesus to very true.

In short time after he determined to do honor to the God of Delphos by great
and magnificall sacrifyce: making The sacrifice of Craesus to A pollo and his
gifts also which he dedicated in the ^a^ple.
oblatio^ of three thousand choice cattle, such as might lawfully be offered.
Moreover, he caused a great stacke or pyle of wood to be made, wherein he
burnt bedstyds of silver and gold, likewise golden maysors with purple raiment
and coats of exceeding value, hoping thereby to purchase to himself the
gracious favor and goodwill of the God. The like charge also he laid upon ye
Lydians, that every man should consecrate those jewels which they possessed
most costly and precious. From which their sacrifice when as streams of liquid
and molten Gold distrayned in great abundance, he caused thereof to be
framed half slates, or sheardes, the longer sort as he entytled them, of six
handful, the shorter of three a hand breadth in thickness, amou^ting to the
number of an hundred and seuentene. Whereof four were of feigned gold wayghing
two talents and a half, the rest of whighter gold, in wayght two talentes he
made also the similitude of a Lion in tried and purged gold, waying ten
talentes: which Lion at such time as the temple was on fire fell down from the
half slates whereon it stood, and is now reserved in the treasury of Corinth,
poysed at six talents and a half being molten from him. All which things when
Craesus had finished and brought to perfection he sent them in way of
dedication to Delphos together with other gifts and presents, which were
these: two books very fair and stately to see to, the one framed of gold the
other wrough of silver. Whereof ye first at the ingresse or entry into the
temple was placed on the right hand. the other on the left, which at ye same
time that the temple was surprised by fire were taken down, and the best and
fairest of them being of Gold, and wayghing 8. talents and a half, with a
superplus and addition of 24 pou^des was curefully guarded in the treasury of
the Clazomaenia^s. The other of silver being kept under the eues of the temple
at a certain corner of the church containing 600. Amphorae, wherein wine was
mingled for the feast of Theophanius wrought (as the men of Delphos testify) by
Theodorus of Samos: which opinion I easily ascribe also for the singular
workmanship thereof. He presented besides 4. silver tons preserved by the
Corinthians, among their treasury. Furthermore two drinking cups the one of
gold, ye other of silver, of the which two the most principal of Gold has
engraven in it a title whith does argue yt to be ye gift of the Lacedaemonians,
albeit contrary to truth, being given and dedicated by Craesus, howbeyt some
one of Delphos (whose name though I very well know, yet I will not descry it)
willing to gratify the Lacedaemonians, caused this posie to be entytled. True
it is that the image of the boy, through whose hands the water powers down in
a tricklyng and gentle stream, was given to the temple by the Lacedaemonians,
but neither of the two cups are belonging to the^. Other gifts also of no
small price did Craesus send at yt same instant, to wit, silver rings, with
the shape and form of a woman 3. cubits in height, which ye inhabitants of
Delphos witness to be ye image of her whom Craesus in his court employed ye
office of baking, herewith also were offered the chains of the Queen his
wife, not spari^g so much her girdles and wastbands, al which he caused to be
dedicated at Dephos. in like manner to ye oracle of Amphiaraus, of whose ma^hod
and misfortune he had jointly bine informed, he gave a shield and spear of
mere and solid gold, a quiver also of the same metal, well stored and
replenished with dearth, both which, even to our age were reserved at ye city
Thebes in ye temple of Apollo Ismenius. They which were summoned to this famous
embassage and conueyance of ye gifts to Delphos and Africa, had this in Items
to inquire of yt Gods: whether hemight direct an army against Persia or not,
and in so doing to associate and join unto himself y^ aid Craesus demau^ ded
of the oracle whether he might make war a gaynst Persia or not.
and fellowship of forrayn nations. The Lydians dismissed, went their way, and
having attained to their journeys end, and made oblation of the presents sent
by the king, they demanded ye oracle on this wise. Craesus king of the
Lydians, and chief lord of many regions, beside esteeming these to be the
only true and infallible prophecies among men, has sent you gifts worthy your
divine godhead: requiring you counsel and advise, whether it be safe for him
to lead a power against y^ Persians using therein the help and company of other
people. This question being framed both the oracles agreed in sentence saying:
that if so be he addressed an army against the Persians he should subvert and
overthrow a mighty kingdom: counsayling him moreover to seek and procure the
A doubtful answer the meani^g vvherof is expounded in the next page.
aid of the most puissa^t and coragious people of the Graecia^s. These
answears given and received, Craesus was so puffed up and exalted in courage,
yt already he swallowed and devoured in hope the whole government and empire of
Cyrus. Wherefore he returned a messe^ger with a fresh present to Pythia, and for
every one their abiding, (whom he had intelligence to be very many) 2.
ounces of Gold.

For which his magnificent bounty the people of Delphos to show themselves
thankful again, yielded him the chief preheminece in counsayling the
oracle, the principal place in sitting and a perpetual privilege of a voice
and suffragie, for any man that should be adopted into the society of Delphos
on this manner. Craesus powered out his present He is somevvhat to hasty that
leaps over the st^le before he comes at it.
upon the temple of Apollo, soliciting the God by a third demand: for that
having tried the oracle to be true, he now took his pentworthes in advise and
counsel. His question at this time was dyrected only to know how long he
should enjoy the kingdom of Persia.

whom Pythia answered in these words.

When seat and Scepter of the Medes
upon a mule shall light,
To stony Hermus valiant lyde The meaning of this oracle is expressed.

address thy speedy flight.
It shall be then no shame to fly
And yield to such an enemy.
With these verses Craesus was much more delyghted then with the former,
assuredly hoping that ye time should never be wherein a Mule should govern the
Medes in stid of a man and for the same cause neither he nor his heirs should
at any time be driven to forsake the kingdom. His next care was how make
friends and copartners of those which among thee Greeks were of greattest
might, and noblest mind, who^ by curious enquyry he found to be the
Lacedaemonia^s and Athenians? yt one being yt most excele^t among y^. Doors, y^
other in the Nation of the Jones, without comparison chefest. Of these 2
nations there has been an ancient and grounded opinion as concerning their
virtue. Whereof the one took their beginning and original of Pela^gos, the other
of Helen, or Greece. The later of these two never altered The original of the
Lacedae monians, and Athenians.
their soil, but always kept the same place of abode The other making often
charge wandered very much.

For in the time of king Deucalion they held a coast called Phthiotis and
under Dorus the son of Hellen, a certain region bounding upon the
mountains Ossa and Pyndus by name Istyaeotis, from whence being cast out and
chased by the Cadmeans, they inhabited a place in Pyndus, which theycal
Macedonus. How beit fleeting again from thence into Driopis, they came at
length to Poloponesus, and were surnamed the nation Doricke. What tongue or
language the Pelagians used, I cannot certainly affirm but by guess yt seems
to have been the very same that those Pelasgians use, which somewhat above the
Tyrrhenians possess yt city Crotona in time neighbors to them whom the now
call Doors: at what time they peopled a region in Thessalye, the like may be
gathered by those Pelasgia^s, that built the city Plaecia and Sylax, and were
in league and fellowship with the Athenians. By these I say we may rightly
conjecture, that ye language which was then in use which the Pelasgians was
very gross and barbarous. For the Cretoniatae and Platiens differ in speech
from those that lie next them: but between themselves they use both one tongue,
and evidently declare, that they kept the self same phrase and manner of
talk, since their first coming into those countries. So that if all the people
of Pelasges were such, they also that dwelt in Attica, and the rest of the
Pelasgian cities whatsoever that changed their name at their first arriual
into Hellen, forgot also and let slip out of memory their mother tongue. But
the Greeks themselves (as I judge) have without change from the beginning
retained The miracle of the Greek nation.
the same kind of language, and whereas being severed and distinguished, from
the Pelasgians, they were very weak and feeble in might, of a small and tender
beginning: they grew to great increase, by concurse of many nations, and huge
multitudes of the Barbarians repayring thither. In like sort I suppose that the
people of Pelasgos being barbarous remained at a stay without amplifyinge and
augmenting their strength and gouermnent.

Craesus therefore had notice that the country of Attica was inhabited by these
people and at that time injuriously Pi(...) a (...) rauntin Athe^s by
vvhatdeuise he attay(...)d the gouern^e^t
dealt withal, and kept in subjection by Pisistratus the son of Hipocrates who
ruled then as a Tyrant at Athens, his father being a private man and bearyng no
rule in the common weal, whilst he beheld the games at Olympus, yt chanced
him to see a very strange and most wonderful miracle.

For having prepared sacrifyce to the Gods, the chalderne filled with flesh
and water, without any fire under it. boiled and played in such sort, that the
water ran over the brymmes of the vessayl which thing Chilo^ a Lacedaemonian
vewing who then happily was present, gave him counsel in no wise to marye a
wife that was a breeder or of a fruitful womb: and if so be he were already
married, he willed him to forsake and renounce his wife: thyrdlye if by her he
were endued with a man child to make ryddaunce thereof and convey it away. But
Hipocrates giving little care to his tale begat afterward Pisistratus, who in
the broyle and controversy between the inhabiters of yt shore (chief whereof
was Megacles son of Alcmaeon) and the people of the plain (who had to their
captain Lycurgus sprung of Aristolades) made a third tumult seeking and
affecting a tyrannical and unlawful government, and gatheryng together a
company of rebellions and seditious persons under pretense of ayding the people
of the mountains, wrought this subtiltye having wounded him self and his mules
he came flynging amayne into the market place with The subtilty of of Pisistratue
to attain the kingdom.
his charyot as on new escaped from his enemies, whom they (as he fained)
taking his journey into y^ country, sought for to have slain. For this cause
he made humble suit and petition to the peoplefor y^ guard and defense of his
body, having tried himself to be a valeaunt Captain in the voyage, and
setting forth against Megara, at what time being general of the army he took
Nysaea and achieved other famous and valiant acts. The people of Athens
induced to believe hi^ appointed for his sauegard and custody certain choice and
tried men of the citezens, who being armed not with spears but with clubs, were
always waiting and attendant on him: with who^ Pisistratu^ giving a violent
assault to y^ town, and chief hold of the city, took it and by yt means
usurped yt empire of y^ Athenians. Nevertheless without change or alteration of
magistraties or laws, observing still yt same form of government, he adorned
and beautified the City in excellent manner.

But he had not long enjoyed yt when as the soldiers of Megacles and Lycurgus
came to a truce and conspiring Pisistratus deprived of his kingdom.
together cast him out of the city. In this manner did Pysistratus, first
aspire to the chief rule of Athens, which he was eftsoon constrained to
leave, before his tyranny had taken root. They time was not long after but
his adversaries renewed their quarrel, and fell at varyaunce and debate a fresh,
wherewith Megacles being tired, dispatched an harrold of peace to Pisistratus
offering him his daugher in meryage with condition of the kingdom. Which he
not refusing, they devised a means to restore him again (in myfancy) very
fond and ridiculous, especially if these men (being of the number of the
Athenians, who had the name to be the most wise and prudent people of the
Graetians) pleased themselves only with a devise so foolish and base.

There lyeued in the Trybe of Paean a woman named A devise made by Pisistratus
to recover the kingdom.
Phya of stature four cubits high, wanting three fingers. furnished with
seemly beauty, whom having arrayed in co^pleite harneis, they placed in a
Charyot gallantly attyred to the show, in which habit as she passed through y^
streets of the city, there ran some before her cryinge: ye people of Athens
receive willingly Pisistratus again, whom Minerua esteeming worthy the
greatest honor amongst men, has in her own person brought back into the
tower. The citezens supposing it had been the Goddess indede, bowed themselves
and honoring her admitting again Pisistratus for their liefe soueraygne.
Pysistratus having in such sort recovered the kingdom upon a covenant made
with Megacles took his daughter to wife. But having 2 yosig youths to his
sons, and hearing moreover the whole lineage of Alcmaeon to be atteinted and
guilty of an heinous crime against y^ Goddess: unwilling for that cause to
have any children by his new wife, accompanied with her unlawfully and against
nature which being a long time by her concealed and kept secret: at last,
either upon demand, or of her own free will, she revealed it to her mother,
who also made her husband acquaynted with the matter. Megacles taking in ill
part the slander and contumely done him Pisistratus bani shed out of Athe^s
the se^d time.
by Pysistratus, brought him in displeasure and hatred with y^ soldiers:
which thing he perceiving fled y^ country, and came to Eretria to ask
counsel of his sons. Amongst whom the sentence of Hyppias seeming to be
the best where by he was incited once again to lay claim to the kingdom, they
made a gathering throughout all cities, with whom they had any small
acquayntance: many of the which made liberal contribution, and especially the
Thebans. In fine to comprise the matter in brief, ye time was come, and al
things were in a readiness for his return. For ou^ of P^^oponnesus there
resorted to him certain Arguies marching under pay: and a captain of Naxos
named Lygdamis, who of his own accord made offer of his service being very well
furnished with men and money: which gave the^ great alacrity and encouragme^t to
go forward in their attempts. In so much as setting forth from Eretria the II.
year after his flighte from Athens, first of all he took the city Marathon in
Attica, where having inca^ped his army, there repaired to him diverse seditious
fellows out of the city, and out of al y^ tribes very many who liked better a
tyrannical empire the^ a free state. Whlst Pisistratus levied many for his
affairs, and held himself at Marathon y^ Athenians which kept within the
city, made light of the matter, until such time as hearing him to be dislodged
from thence, and to draw toward ye city, they put themselves in array, and
went forth to encounter him. Wherefore with might and main they valiauntye set
forward to maintain and defend their liberty against the enemy. Likewise
Pisistratus and his confederates came fiercely against the city till both the
armies met ioyntlye in one field, where approachinge near unto the Temple of
Mynerua Pallenis, and disposinge all his Army in order there came unto him
Amphilytus Acarnen a prophet, who being inspired with a divine motion, uttered
this oracle in verse.

The bayte is laid, the nets are cast,
The fish inclosde shall play apace A prop^^cy of Pisistratus ^^s victory.

When Phoebe from the glistring Skies
In view reueales her golden face.
Which Pisistratus perceiving to be a prophecye of his good success
immediately gave the ^^cet and encountered y^ Athenians which were come forth
of the city, who having then newly dyned, and being partly set to dice, partly
taken with sleep, welny without resistaunce he put them to flight and wanne
the field. Nevertheless in the pursuit he found out a way how nether the
Athenians might be spoiled in such sort, neither yet join themselves and come
together again to his further trouble. Wherefore having caused certain of
his servants to mount on horseback, he sent them spedely after the people to
bid the^ be of good courage, and every one to depart to his own house.
Whereunto the willingly obaying, Pisistratus raygned the third Pisistratus the 3
time king.
time in Athens, establishing and fortifyi^g the tyranny as well by supply of
forrayne power, as by revenues of his money which he leuyed partly from his
own country men, and in part also from the river Strymon. In like manner the
children of those men that yielded not the first, but bare the brunt of the
battle, he took in hostage and sent them over to Napos: which Isle after he
had conquered and brought in subjection he committed the government and
administration thereof to Lygdanus: having heretofore also hallowed and purged
the Isle Delos according to the oracle, which he cleansed in this sort. Out of
all those places that wear with in the view and prospect of the temple he
caused the corses and dead Bodies to be dug up and buried in another place
of the Island.

In this wise some if the Athenians being slain in battle, other fled away
together with the household and family of Megacles. Pisistratus obtained yt
seat roial: whom Craesus understood at the same time to bear rule in Athens.
He heard moreover that the Lacedaemonians, having escaped a scowring, were
triumphant conquerous over y^ Tegeates. For in the raygne of Leon and
Hegesicles princes of Sparta, the Lacedaemonians having right good event in all
their enterprises and affairs, were commonly repulsed and failed by the
Tegeates. The self same before time were the most disordered and lawless
people of the Graetians, using no co^munity or fellowship either between
themselves or with strangers.

Notwithstanding they were reduced to a more orderlye Lycurgus the lavvgeuer of
the Lacedaemonians.
kind of government by Lycurgus a man of approved virtue amongst the people of
Sparta. Who coming to the oracle at Delphos and being entered into the temple,
Pithya saluted him in these terms.

VVelcome unto my palace noble knight,
Beloved of Jove and those that rule above:
For God or man to blase thee out aright An oracle in the praise of Lycurgus.

In doubtful waves my wandering mind dothmoue.
Yet to the first by force I do enclyne,
And deem thy state not earthly but divine.
Some are of opinion yt the laws and statutes which are now in force with the
Lacedaemonians, were uttered and told him by Pythia. Howbeit themselves affirm
that Lycurgus being both tutor and vucle to young Leobotu^ King of the
Spartans brought these ordinances out of Crete. For no sooner was he instituted
governor to the young prince, but he changed all the laws and established
new, making a diligent prouiso that no man should break them. He made also
decrees for war, ordayning the society of the twenty magistrates, likewise
the college or fellow of the thirtye men, so called. Lastly he distributed and
divided the Citizens into trybes and companies, not omitting the appointment of
certain protectours in defense of the commons against the noble named Tribuns
of the people, erectinge moreover y^ senate and counsel of the Ephor, with an
order of other sages and wise men. By this means the state of the
Lacedaemonians was reformed by Lycurgus: whom after his death by the buildi^g
up of a famous temple in his name, they honored and reverenced as a God. And
being resident in a country very populous and plentiful, they made an
inrode and invasion into other regions with very good fortune and lucky
success in battle. Wherefore as professed enemies to peace, supposing
themselves to excel the Arcadians in might and courage they were in mind to
denounce war against Arcadye askinge in that case the advise of the oracle.

To whom Pythia made answer.

You seek to conquer Arcadye,
Your suite is great, but all in vain:
Where many men contented lie,
By acornes swage their hungars pain.
As hott as fire, as hard as oak
Unfit to bear a foreign yoke:
Yet since I cannot say thee nay,
I freely yield into thy hand
A fertile coast and fit for pray A deceyptful oracle that fell out otherwise
the^ the words import.

The compass of Tegea Land
Where thou shall measure by a rope
The fruits of thy desired hope.
This answer given, the Lacedaemonians leaving the other parts of Arcadie
levied a power against the people of Tegea, carrying with them chains and
fetters, in full hope (albeit deceived by the double meaning of the oracle) to
have brought them into captivity. Notwithstanding, having coped in fight with
the enemy they were forced to forsake the field and take themselves to their
fete. Such of them as were taken in the chase alive, fast bound and inchayned
in the same gyues which they brought with them, were constrained to measure out
their dwellinges in the plain of Tegea with a rope there to inhabit. The
fetters wherewith they were clogged endured welny to our age, being hung up in
the temple of Minerua Alea in Tegea. Thus in the former conflictes and
battayles the Lacedaemonians, had always the worst hand of the people of Tegea
sa^e in the time of Craesus, and under their rulers Anaxandrydes and Ariston in
whose raygne and dominion they ga^e the better of their enemies in this sort.
Aggreeued at their often foyles and continual repulces received by their
adversaries, they went in embassage to Delphos to wit, of the Oracle, which of
all the Gods they might please, to become conquerours over Tegea. The question
propounded Pythia willed them to search out the bones of Orestes son of
Agamemnon, and translate them into their country.

But being ignorant in what par(...)he world to make inquirye they e^tsones
returned (...)essengers to require of the God where, or in what place Orestes
lay.

Whereto answer was made on this manner.

In Arcady there lies
an ample coast Tegea hight,
Where two wyndes use to blow, An oracle describing the place where Orestes
was buried.

and breath their blastes with raging might.
Where form to form is foe,
and blow to blow an enemy.
Here does Orestes lie,
whom find and take the victory.
Which the Lacedaemonians hearing were never y^ wyser: who albeit they had made
curious search about him nevertheless they found him not. Till at length one
Lyches a Spartan of the number of those which are called free knights, by
good fortune escryed the Tomb. These free Knights, are five soldiers of the
Spartan horsemen, well stricken in years, which annually have a release from
the field: who being in this wise by the common consent of the horsemen
priuileged and dismissed, may in no wise for that year remain idle, but are
employed in iourneys and voyages, some one way, some another.

One of these was the forenamed Lyches, who by the help as well of a current and
ready wit as of a gracious and prosperous hap, came to knowledge where Orestes
lay. For this being the year wherein the people of Tegea and The means how
the tomb was diseried.
Sparta, had intercourse of marchaundise one with an other, by fortune
coming into a smiths forge he beheld the smith himself working on iron, who
on the other side perceauing Lyches to be very intentyue and in maruailing wise
to view his work: a li^^e pausing, said.

Thou stranger of Lacedaemon, if this base work in iron seem so rare in thy
sight: thou would much more have wondered to have seen that which I did.
For going about in this little court to dig a well or pit for water, yt was my
chance to light upon a sepuicher 7 cubits long. Which when I saw, supposinge
that men were never of greater stature then they are at these days. I opened
the C^ffyne and found theriu a dead Carcass of equal length: whereof having
taken measure I covered it again. Lyches liftening to the discourse of the
Smith, coniectured by the oracle that it should be Orestes: construinge the
smithes Bellows for the two mynds whereof the oracle spoke, the hammer and
anuyle he thought to be the two forms to each other foes: and one blow en^^y
to an other he t^ke to be the iron wroughte and beaten by the stroke of the
hammer, considering that iron was found out to yt h^^t and damage of men.
Pouderyng these things with himself, he returned to Sparta and opened the
matter to the Lacedaemonia^s who perceiving the case to be likely, wrought this
pretense, causing of set purpose a quest to proceed upon their cicizen
Lyches, they condemned him for some offense, and banished him the soil, who
incontinently retyryng to Tegea, and lamenting his miserable case to the smyth,
couenaunted with him for the hyre of his base court, for as much as he refused
altogether to alienate it from himself, and sell it outryght. Where having
made his abode for certain days he discovered the sepulcher, and taking out
Orestes bones, stale privily away and came to Sparta. From that time forward
the Lacedaemonians joining battle with Tegea, remained victors, and always
after obtained the glory of yt field, having besides a great part of
Peloponnesus in their power and dominion.

Of al which things Cresus not ignorant, furnished an The story of Craesus
being interrupted.
Embassage to Sparta with great gifts, to desire their aid and fellowship in
war, whither being come they used these words. We are sent from Craesus king
of the Lydians and lord of other nations, who says thus. Ye noble
Lacedaemonians, whereas I am provoked by the Gods to enter league and friendship
with the Graetians, amongst whom you have the report to be the most warlike and
valiant. I deemed it convenient (without fraud or gu^ile, to desire your aid
and assistauuce in the enterprise which I have in hand. The Lacedaemonians
right glad and joyous of their arryuall and gentle entreaty, having also
intelligence of the oracle, entered bands with them of perpetual hospitality
and friendship. Being also not vnmyndful of the bounty of king Craesus showed
before time toward their nation. For having sent to Sardis for provision of
gold, to make the image of Apollo, which is situated in Thornax a part of the
Lacons country. Craesus without counterchaunge freely bestowed the gold upon
them. For which cause, the Lacedaemonians in that also principally above the
rest of yt Craecians he had made choice of their amity, willingly assented and
declared themselves to be ready at all assayes. Likewise to avoid ingratitude:
in lue of his presents they returned unto him a brazen Vessel, wroughte about
the brymmes which the pictures of diverse wild beasts, containing the measure
of 30 Amphorae, which for one of these causes that we shall allege, was never
brought to Sardis. The Lacedaemonians testify, that the vessel being in voyage
to Sardis, was intercepted by yt people of Samos, where they lay at rode. The
Samians assayling them by a fleet of galleys. Contrariwise they of Samos
affirm, that the Lacedaemonians being in the way to Sardis, and hearing
news that Craesus was taken, and the whole city sacked by the Persians, sold
the vessel to certain private: men of Samos, who made dedicatio^ thereof in the
temple of Juno. But immediately returning to Sparta, they feigned themselves to
be robbed by the Samyans, and the vessel to be taken away by force.

To make brief, Craesus deluded by the oracle, prepared an army against
Cappadocia, in hope to subdue Cyrus, and The wise counsel of Sardanis given
to king Craesus in his settinge forth against Persia.
the whole power of Persia.

Whilst he was busied in these affairs, a certain Lydian named Sandanis a man of singular regard for his wisdom, and for this sentence and advise
much more esteemed then before, cou^sayled the king on this manner. Thou
determinest a voyage against those (O king) which are wrapped and clothed in
beasts skynnes: not farynge as they would, but as they can, abiding in a
region unfruitful and barreyne. Their drink is water not wine, their chief
food is figs: besides the which they have nothing good. From whom as thou
can take nothing if thou conquer, so consider I beseech thee how much thou
shall leese if thou be conquered, if once they taste of our sweet, then they
will daily swarm about us, and will never be driven from us. Truly I thank the
Gods that they never put into the heads of yt Persians to invade the Lydians.
By which words, notwithstanding he little prevailed with Craesus. True it is,
yt The riot ofth Persia^s vvhe^ce it came.
the Persians before they vanquished Lydia, were far from all elegancy and
sumptuous dayntines. Furthermore the Capadocians were called by the Greeks,
Syrians. Who before the empire came to the Persians, did homage to the Medes,
but at that present acknowledged Cyrus for their King. The dominion of the
Medes, and Lydyans is divided and sundered by the river Halis, which taking his
The limits of Media and Lydia.
beginning from the hill Armenus first washes the Cilicians, and secondly the
Maciens lying on the right hand, lastly the Phrygians declyninge toward the
least, after this, wynding to the North pole, that flows between the
Cyrians, Cappadocians, and Paphlagonians, waterynge the coast of Cappadocia on
the right hand, and the borders of Paphlagonia on the left. In this sort the
flood Halis does part and distermine all the^ high places of Asia, from the sea
Cyprian, unto the waters of the Euxine sea the back, and hinder part of this
region is in length five days journey for a light and spedy footeman.

Craesus therefore speeding himself toward Cappadocia, was greatly desirous
both to join unto his own kingdom a land so battle and plentiful, and then
also to Th. causes of Craesus his voi age against Persia.
revenge Cyrus in the behalf of Astyages son of Cyaxares king of the Medes
his nere kynsman: whom Cyrus issued of Cambyses had taken captive in ye field.
The means whereby kynred and alliance grew between the two kings Craesus and
Astyages, were these. The grasiers of Scithia and such as were conversant in
reysing and breeding cattle A pretty discourse shevvi^g the means how Craesus
and Astyages came to be of a kin.
falling to debate and sedition between themselves, a certain company of them
fled into the land of the Medes, at what time the Scepter was held by
Cyaxares, son of Phraeortas nephew of Deioses. To whom the Scythians humbling
themselves were at the beginning much made of, and grew in credit and
favor with the king, in so much that he committed to their charge certain
young ympes to instruct in the Scithian language, and to train up in the art
and facultye of shootinge. In tract of time the The Scythians excellent in
shoting.
Scythians being accustomed daily to hunt, and for the most part wont to bring
home some thing with them for a pray, notwithstanding otherwhyles returned
empty: which the king perceiving (who in his rage was very fierce and ceuell,
sharply rebuked them) and in reproachful and tauntynge words took them up very
short, whereat the Scythians stomachs being moved supposing themselves to be
hardlye dealt withal by the king, took counsel together, that having stayne
some one of the children whom they taught, they might serve him up to the king
in lieu of (...) or some other wild and savage pray: which done, they would
put themselves to flight to Sardis and become supplyaunts to Halyattes son of
Sadyattes for their defense and safetye, which fell out accordingly. For as well
Cyaxares as others that were present at the Table, tasted of the flesh, and the
Scythians having committed the villanye, iucontinentlye fled to Haliattes,
whom Cyaxares rechalinging, and Haliattes refusing to surrender and yield them
up, there arose war between the Medes and Lydians which endured yt space of
v. years. In the which their broyle and discord the Medes sometime atchieuynge
the conquest, it happened them to encounter in a night battle. For in the sixth
years the armies coming to the close and the fight being equal: sodeinly the
day became night, which change and alteration The day turned into night
of the day. Thales Milesius foretold to the people of Ionia presining the
self same year wherein it should happen. The Medes and Lydians perceauing the
day to be ouercast with darkness, abandoned the field: and by means of
Syennesis of Cilicia, and Labynetus of Babilo^ were brought Labynetus son of
Nitocijs.
to accord and composition of peace, who hastening to have them sworn, and to
establish their agreement by the bands of affinitye, they decreed that Astyages
son of Cyaxares should espouse and take to wife Ariena daughter of Halyattes.
supposing the condition would not long remayn sound and inuiolate, were it not
confirmed by the sure and infolluble knot of alyaunce. In stricking league and
concluding peace as well other things usual to the Greeks, are observed The
manner of maki^ga league between the Lydians and Medes The meaning of this
place of Astyages his captivity is declared more at large.
by these nations, as also cutting their arms till yt blood issue out, which
each of them lycke up and suck together.

This Astyages grau^dfather to Cyrus by the Mothers side was by him held
prisoner and went under custody, for such cause as in the sequel of this
history shall be declared: Craesus therefore moved with displeasure, required of
the Oracle whether he might proclaim war against Persia, and having received a
double and deceitful answer, deeming it to make with him, went out with his army
to assail and fight against a certain part of the Persia^ dominion. And
approaching near to the River Halis (as I judge) he trailed and convewed over
his army by brigges built upon the water: but as some of the Graecians
affirm, he passed the river The deuyse of Thales Milesius to pass the river.
by the means of Thales Milesius who devised another way. For Craesus standi^g
at a bay, uncertain what way to pass the water (for as much as the brygges
which are now made for passage as then were none at al) Thales Milesius being
then in the camp, invented a means to change the course of the water, and
cause the river that ran on the right side of the army to flow on left. He
made therefore to be dygged a mighty deep trench or dytch, beginning above
the tents, and procedinge in compass like a Moan on the backside of the host,
whereinto the water having issue from the proper chanel, became so low and
fleet, that the river on both parts was passable, and easy to be waded.

Some hold opinion that the old course of the river was hereby wholly altered
and became dry, from whom I dissent. For by what means the regresse of
Craesus into Lydia could the army have retired over. Craesus having recovered
the other side of Halis came into a part of Cappadocia named Pteria, safely
situated and near adjoining to the city Synopis that lies to the sea Euxinum,
where having encamped his whole power, he spoiled, and foraged the mannours
and ferme places of the Syrians, subduinge also and sacking the city Pteria.
More over he vanquished many other cities round about, casting out the Syrians
that never offended him: whereof Cyrus having advertisement gatheryng an army
of the myddle part of his country, and came out to meet him, notwithstanding,
first he solicited the Jones to revolt from Craesus, which they refusing, he
Compare with this place the apologi of Cyrus to the ambassador of Ioma.
marched on forward, and encamped against the Lydians.

Where the Armies being in view, the one Army to the other, and having given
signs of defyaunce, they joined in force and cruel battle, wherein many
being slain on either side, and Night drawyng very nere, they blew the
retrayte, the victory remaining on neither part. But Craesus laying for his
excuse the small number of his men (as far exceeded by Cyrus in multitude of
Soldiers) the next day following (the Persians abstaining from battle) he
moved his camp and repaired back to Sardis, in mind to summon and call out
the Aegiptians according to covenant, with whose king Amasis he had concluded
a league before ever he attempted the Lacedaemonians, purposing besides to
challenge the help of the Babilonians promised and auowed to him by league and
composition. Not forgetting also to claim the assistaunce of the
Lacedaemonians, appoynting them a day to be present at Sardis: that having
made a general assembly of all his power, and taken his ease that winter, he
might ymmediatlye at the beginning of the next spring lay charge to the
kingdom of Persia by a new and fresh assault. Whilst he leueled at this mark,
he sent abroad heroldes to his league fellows and friends, with earnest
request that the fifte month after they would come together, and mete at
Sardis. Like wise the soldiers stipendary, which he hired, and conducted to
aid him against the Persians, he disseuered and sent away: nothing doubtinge
least Cyrus (with whom so short time before he had fought even hand and with
out disuantage) should adventure to come nere and approach to Sardis. In this
sort reasoning the case and debating with himself yt fortuned that all the
suburbs and places conterminate A miracle forshevving the destruction of
Sardis.
to the city were filled with abundance of Snakes, and Adders: which the horse
leaving their pasture and food swallowed greedily and in moustruous sort eat
up and devoured. Which Craesus adiudging (as it was) to be a toke^ on
premonstration of some (...) to come, sent to the Southsayers and (...). The
messengers y^ went were (...) y^ sense, and signification of (...) they never
brought news thereof to Craesus, who before their return to Sardis was taken
captyne. The wise men Telmisses declared The meaning of the miracle.
unto them, y^ Craesus should be set upon with a forrayne army, which should
vanquish and subdue the town borne and natural people of the country,
alleging that y^ snake was the child of the earth, properly bred and ingen:
dred of the ground, but the horse, an enemy, and a forrainer. This meaning and
exposition the Telmisses sent back again to Craesus but now captive,
altogether ignorant of these things which befell unto him, and also to his
City Sardis.

Cyrus a certayned of the determination of Craesus that presently after the
conflict at Pteria he was in purpose to disperse and scatter his army, thought
it expedient in all have possible to remove his host to Sardis, to intercept and
prevent his ennemy, or ever he could assemble the Lydians again, which advise
he altogether allowed, and put in practice and spedely arryuing into Lydia
with his power was himself a messenger unto Craesus of his coming. Craesus
cast into a great pensiuenes, and anguish of mind, to se himself so far
deceived of his account: notwithstanding put the Lydians in array to battle.

At that time there was no nation in the world, neither The Lydians courageous
in battle and expert in ridi^g.
in value and might neither in haughty courage and magnanimity equal and
comparable to the Lydians, who commonly warred on horseback as most expert and
nymble in ryding: weaponed with spears of a marvelous length.

The field wherein the fight was committed lies before the city Sardis:
through the which, both other ryuers have a pleasant and delyghtsome course,
and chieflye the famous river Hellus, flowynge into the main stream called
Hermus, which taking his issue and first head from the sacred Mountain of the
holy mother Dyndimena, is carried wholly into the Sea, not far from the City
Phocyas. In this field Cyrus beholding the Lydians prepared to the battle,
and greatly dreading the prowess and puissaunce of their horsemen, determined
by the counsel of Harpagus the Mede, to put in execution this strange
devise. having A singular devise of Harpagus to vanquish the Lydian ryders.
gathered together all the Camelles that followed the Army, and disburdened them
of their loades of corn and vessels wherewith they were charged, he caused
certain me^ to sit on them apparelled in a robe accustomably worn of of the
Persian Horsemen. Whom in this sort attyred he gave in charge to march in
the forefronte of the battle aagaynst the horsemen of the Lydians. After
these incontynently followed the footmen: and in the last rank were placed
the horsemen, into which order and array having directed and contryued his
Army, he straightly commanded them to spare none of the Lydians, but
whomesoeuer they found to make resistaunce, him to dispatch and slay presently:
Craesus only excepted, toward whom he warned that no violence should be
showed how peruerslie soever he behaved himself.

This charge given, he caused his Camels to proceed forward against the Lydian
ryders, to this end: for that a horse is very much afraid of a Camel, and can
neither away A horse very fearful of a camel.
with the sight of him, nor abide his smell. Which policy he found out to
defeat Craesus of his greattest hope, whose chiefest confidence he knew to be
placed in the strength and virtue of his horsemen. Asigne of battle being
given, and the armies coming to the close: the Lydian coursers what with the
sight and sent of the camels, fledd back and retired violently: which clean
discouraged Craesus, and put him out of hope. But the Lydians nothing abashed
thereat as having learned the cause, alyghted spedily, and buckled with the
Persians on foot, till at length many falling on either side, they were forced
to fly and guard them selves with the walls of the city, being inuyroned by
the Persia^s with a siege: which siege Craesus supposing to put of and delay
for a long time, sent other messengers from ye walls to his freyndes and
confederates: having by the first set down and prefyned the fifth month
ensuinge for the time of their assembly. Contrariwise by these he requested and
desired mature and speedy aid, being held at a baye, and enclosed within the
walls and gates of his city. The messengers undertook a speedy course, as
well to other nations as to the Lacedaemonians his assured friends.

It fortuned that at the same time, there fell a strife A ariefe discourse of a
co^bat fought betveene the Argyues and Lacedaemonians for a piece of ground.
and contention between the men of Sparta and Argos, about a certain field
called Thyrea, which ground, albeit properly belonging to the Arguies, was
unlawfully held back and retained by the Spartans. For what land soever in
the main bends and inclyneth toward the West, as far as Malea is peculier
and appertinent to the Argiues with the title also and dominion of certain
Isles, in the number whereof is reckoned Cythera. Therefore the people of Argos
gathering an army for the recouerye of their own territory and freedom: they
fell to condition for the matter to be tried out by co^bratry of three hundred
choice men on either side consenting and agreeing that the right of the land
should follow the victorers.

Providing moreover that both the armies should forsake the field and retire
home: least being present they might be moved to succor ye part that was
most distressed The covenant ratifyed and confirmed between them, they departed
each to their own cities.

The parties syngled out, and delected from both armies, remaining behynd, gave
byter assault each to other, and continued the combat til such time as of six
hundred, there were left but three men alive the battle being interupted and
broken of by the nere approach and coming of the evening. The remayne^tes were
these. Two of the Argyues, Aleinor, and Chromius, who in manner of conquerours
hastened their steps to Argos one of the Lacedaemonians named Othryades who
dispoyling the dead bodies of the Argyues, carried their weapons to his tents
keeping himself in his due order and array. The next day the cause being known,
the people of both Cities were present in ye field laying equal claim to the
victory. The Argyues, for that the men on their side escaped, and remayninge
alive were more in number. The Lacedaemonians, for that the Argyues fled the
field, and their men only abode behind, taking the spoil of his slain
enemies. Incontinently falling from sour words to sad blows, many were lost
on both parts and the conquest achieved by the Lacedaemonians. Since which
time the people of Argos shauing their heads (whereas of necessity before time
they nourished their hair) made a law with a solemn and religious vow, never
to suffer their locks to grow, or their women to wear gold before they had
recovered the field of Thyrea. On the other side the Lacedaemonians decreed
from that time forward to go long headed contrary to their former use and
custom. But Othryades the only suruiuour of 300. Spartans, moved with shame
and grief, that the rest of his company were vanquished by the Argyues with his
own hands ended his own life in the field of Thyrea.

While these things were fresh at Sparta, the Lydian herald arrived to
entreat aid and help for Craesus, who^ they having heard, thought meet
without delay to assyste, and succoure him. Wher^^ore putting themselves in a
readiness and being at the point to take shipping to Sardis: there came another
messenger with news, that the wall and bulwark of the Lydians was scald, and
Craesus himself taken alive. Whereat the Lacedaemonians greatly grieved
esteeming themselves to have suffered no small loss, altered the intent of
their purposed voyage.

Furthermore the conquest and winning of Sardis, was in this sort. Thevvynni^g
of thcitye Sardis.


Cyrus having layne at a siege the space of 14. days, sent coursers about his
army, and propounded a great reward to him that first scaled ye city wall,
which being oftentimes in vain enterprysed by the whole army: when the rest
were quiet, a certain Mardane by name Hyraeades, sought speedy means to ascend
and clymbe the wall on that part which was naked and undefended of the Lydians:
never fearyng or suspecting least the city should be taken on that side, which
for the roughness and craggines thereof was demed invincible. On which side
only Meles first king of The cause why the walls of Sardis were invincible.
Sardis had not lead his bastard son Leo: The wise men of Telmisses holding
opinion that upon what part of the walls soever this Leo passed, they should
become inexpugnable, and not to be vanquished. Meles therefore by all parts of
the city walls whereby any dangerous assault might lay to the Town, lead
and trained his unlawful son: omitting that side only which lies toward
Tmolus, for that he thought it to be of power and strength sufficient against
the vyolent charge and counterpease of the enemy. From this part the Mardane
Hyraeades having marked a Lydian descending the day before to recover his
helmet thither tombled down, considered with himself, and began to attempt
the like. After whom followed other of the Persians, who consequently were
pursued by the rest in great routes and multitudes. By which means ye city
Sardis was taken and sacked.

Amids this distress and (...)eame misery there chanced to Craesus a very
rare and strange miracle: having a dumb son of whom we made mention
before, he took great care and wroughte all means possible, while his
kingdom flourished to recure his malladye, approuinge and trying as well other
things, as also the advise and sentence of the oracle. To whose demand Pythia
made this answer.

Thou unadvised Lydian King
what makes thee take such care
To yield unto thy silent son
the freedom of his tongue?
The gain God wot is not so great
thou may it well forbear:
The day draws on when he shall speak,
for which thou needs not long,
Now the walls being taken a certain soldier of ye Persians came vyolently
toward Craesus to have done him to death, not supposing him to have been the
king. Whom he perceyuinge, nevertheless regarded not the danger Craesus his
dumb son spoke to save his father.
making no difference whether he perished by sword or otherwise. The dumb
son seeing the imminent peril of the King his father, and fearing his
death, brake out in these words saying.

Hold thy hands (Good fellow) slay not king Craesus. Which being the first
words that ever he spoke, he had always after the ready use and practice of
his tongue. Thus Craesus and his city Sardis, after he had raygned 14. years and
abiden so many days siege, fell into the hands and power of the Persians:
having lost a great kingdom, according The oracle verifyed. Fol. 15.
to the voice and sentence of the oracle, being in this sort apprehended, he
was brought to king Cyrus, who causing his hands and feet to be clogged with
great and weighty gives of iron, set him in ye midst of a woodpile, made for
the nonce accompanied with 14. children of the Lydians: determini^g to offer
these first fruits to ye Gods either for perfourma^ce and acco^plishment of
some vow or for proof or trial whether any of the Gods (unto whose honor and
service he understood Craesus to be greatly addicted) would save and deliver
hi^ from ye fire. These things are commonly spread and reported of Cyrus.

In this most yrksome and lamentable case whiles ye king Craesus acknovvlegeth
now the sentence of Solon to true, that no man is perfyte happy that may be
miserable.
of ye Lydia^s stood on ye heap or pyle of fagots he bethought himself of the
words and saying of Solon: who lead by the divine instinct of some heavenly
influence, had told him before that in the number of the living, there was no
man so singular that might be named happy. Whereof being admonished in his mind,
and fetching from the bottom of his heart a deep and streyning sigh, by report
wept bitterly, and three sundry times cried out aloude upon the name of
Solon, which Cyrus hearing willed the interpreters to ask him whom he called
upon. To whom Craesus made no an swear at all, until such time as being
compelled by constraynt, he said. I named him whom I had rather then all the
wealth in the world, he had likewise talked with all those who being placed
in the highest degree of honor have the chief government of the kingdoms on
Earth, which words for that he uttered not half plainly, and to the clear
and perfyt understanding of those which were attentyue, and listened unto him,
they urged him a fresh to make a recytall thereof again. At whose instant and
importunate halinge being now constrained to begin his speech anew, he told
them how a long time since Solon an Athenian, arrived at his court: who
beholding his infinite treasure and abundance of wealth made very light
account thereof as a thing of small and base value, in so much that whatsoever
he had spoken and pronounced of him, the same in due measure had fallen out and
comen to event. Which things nevertheless, were not peculiarly spoken by him
but generally of the whole nation and company of men: and chiefly of those
which please themselves here on earth in a pleasant dream and singular
co^tentment of happy bliss. Whiles Craesus spoke these things, and the
fagottes had taken fire on every side: Cyrus understanding by the expositers
The wisdoms and merciful nature of Cyrus in yeldinge Craesus pardon.
of the Lydian tongue what he had said, was moved with compassion, knowinge
himself also to be but a man who was now in hand to frye another to death by
fire, that of late days was nothing inferior to himself in power and
prosperity. And fearing vengeance for the same and consydering the instable
course and fickle flower of man's affairs, commanded with all diligence the
fire to be extinguished and Craesus with the rest of his company to be set
free. But they strove in vain the fire having taken such Apollo by a shovvre of
rained delivered Craesus from the fire.
vehement hold, that it seemed unquenchable and not to be overcome. In this
place the Lydians recounte that Craesus knowing king Cyrus his mind to be
changed and seeing every man endeavor to abate the rage and fury of the
flame howbeit nothing at all profiting: he lyfted up his voice and cried to
Apollo for succor: that if ever any gifts offered by him had been pleasant in
his sight, he would acquit and deliver him from this present danger As he was
pitifully shedding his tears in plainte and lamentation to the God, suddenly
the sky being fair and the weather smoth and calm the day was ouercaste and
shadowed with the dark vale of dim and duskie clouds, which breaking out
into maine showers clean put out and quenched ye fire: Herby Cyrus perceiving
that Craesus was a virtuous man and reverenced the Gods he saved him from the
fire: and demanded him the question saying. Tell me now O Craesus whose
counsel was it to invade my country, and became of my friend mine enemy:
Certes (quoth he) G King I have done this to mine own great loss and thy
gain the God of the Graecians incyting and leading me hereto, who was the
cause that I warred against thee. For no man is so frantic to desire war
rather then peace: when as in time of concord the sons bury the fathers: but
in war the father carries the son to his grave. Howbeit it seemed good to
the God to bring these things to pass, which A reason why peace is more to
be desired. then war.
having said. Cyrus placed him by, and had him in great honor and
reverence, and stedfastlye beholding him greatly wondered with the rest of his
company. All which while Craesus in a deep muse and profound study sat still
without speaking any word.

But suddenly lifting up his head and vewing the Persian soldiers spoiling and
ryflyng the city. Whether shall I speak my mind (noble Cyrus said he) and
utter that I think, or hold my peace at this present and say nothing: But
being lycenced to speak freely and without fear, he asked him saying. Wherein
is all this company so busily co^uersaunt: or what seek they to do: of a truth
(quoth Cyrus) naught else but to pole, and dispoile the city, and make a hand
of thy riches and treasure. To whom Cresus answeryng: neither do they wast my
city mighty prince (said he) nor consume my goods, (for the right of these
things is no longer mine) but they are thy goods which they trayle and lugge
about, and all this wealth pertayueth to thee: upon which words the king
aduysinge himself drew Craesus aside from the company, and demanded of him
what he thought meet to be done in this case. Who replied saying. For as much as
it has pleased the Gods to make me thy ser(...). I hold it my duty whatsoever
I shall perceive more then thy self to make thee privy and a counsel thereto.
The Persians (quoth he) are a crooked generation, and of nature perverse and
stubburne: yet nevertheless, very bare and beggarly, whom if in this sort thou
securely permit to ryg and ransacke cities, and recover store and plentye of
wealth, I fear me that as every one grows to greattest abundance, he will
sonest slipp the collar, and become of a true subject, a traiterous rebel.
Wherefore if thou will follow my counsel do this. Place at every gate of the
city certain of thy guard with precise commandment that no goods be carried out
of the City, pretending of the tenth part thereof to make an oblation and
sacrifice to Jupiter: which doing thou shall neither purchase their displeasure
by taking away the wealth: and themselves acknowleging the intent to be good,
will easily condescend, and be pleased therewith.

This counsel greatly lyked king Cyrus: wherefore having in like sort
disposed and settled, his Guard as Craesus had warned him, to him self he
speak in terms as follows.

My good Craesus, whereas thou art-a king, and by nature Craesus seeing to
what pass the oracle had brought him desires leave of Cyrus to chide with
the devil.
framed both to do well and speak wisely, ask of me what seems thee good,
and it shall be given thee.

My soueraygne Lord (quoth Craesus) I shall esteem my self hyghlye benefyted
by your Grace, if by your maiestyes leave and sufferaunce I may send these my
letters to the Gods in Greece. Demaundinge whether it were lawful for him in
this order to double with his freyndes.

But Cyrus requesting to know the cause yt set him so far out of favor with
Apollo: he brake out, and rypt up the matter from the beginning, declaryng
unto him the Oracles which were given, and chiefly his offeryngs whereon he
presumed to denounce war against Persia.

After a large rehearsal made as touching all these things, he returned to his
former suit, requestyng the King that it might be lawful for him to challenge
the God for these matters, and cast them in his teeth. To whom Cyrus smylyng,
said. Not this only (O Craesus) but what else soever shall be gaunted to thee,
and not at this time alone, but as often as it shall like thee to make petition.
Leave obtained) he forthwith dispatched certain men of the Lydyans to Delphos,
with charge, that laying the gyues at the entry of the temple, they should
question with Apollo if he were not ashamed to delude and cousyne Craesus,
with his fraudulent and deceitful Oracles: making him to assault the Persians
in hope to vanquish the power of Cyrus, of which his hoped victory, these were
the first fruits: commanding them therwt to show him the manacles, with the
which being first captive, he had been chayned. Moreover to ask him, whether
the Grecian Gods had a privilege and peculiar liberty, above the rest to be
ingrate and unthankful to their friends. The Lydians arrived at Delphos, and
declaryng their message, Pythia made them Apollo his answer to Craesus his
accusation.
aunsweare on this manner. The necessary event of fatal dedestiny, it is
impossible for the Gods themselves to avoid. Craesus lays the disloyalty of
the fifth age before him, yt is to say, of his great grau^dfathers father: who
being squyre of the body to ye Heraclidans was induced by the fraud and Craesus
is punished for the fact of Gyges that slew Candaules his master.
deceypt of a woman to kill his Lord, and was after invested with his dignity,
which nothing appertayne^ to him.

Notwithstanding Apollo by all means endeuouringe to cause the fall of Sardis
to light on the posterity of Craesus, not upon himself: for all this could not
prolo^g or alter the inchaungeable race of destenye: but dispensinge therewith
as much as might be, in some part he requyted his curtesy by deferryng the
battery and conquest of Sardis for term of three years. It is meet therefore
that Craesus know, how his seat imperial came three years later to ruin then
was determined and appoincted by fatal necessity. Again it was no small
benefit that he saved him from frying at a stake, for as touthing the oracle
he has no cause to co^plain being forewarned by Apollo that furnishinge an
army against Persia he should ouerturne and destroy a great Empire. Of this
saying if in case he had been better aduysed it was his part to have inquired
of Apollo what empire he meant, whether his own government, or the kingdom
and principality of Cyrus. But the prophecy being neither sufficiently pondered
by himself nor sought to be discussed, if any thing happened otherwise then he
would and wished for: let him thank him self and not blame the God.

Now for that he aleageth besides the sentence of Apollo as concerning the
Mule: it was better said by the God, Apply to this place theoracle given fol.
25.
then considered by him. For by the Mule was king Cyrus understood, whose
parents were of diverse nations, and his mother of a more noble progeny and
lineage the^ his father. The one being a Mede, daughter to Astyages, king of
ye Medes. The other a Persian, and in homage and subjection to the Medes, who
being a man of base account, and very mean regard, nevertheless crept into
favor, and wedded the daughter of his soueraygne liege.

The Lydians thus aunsweared by Pythia, made their spedy regresse to Sardis
declaring to Craesus what they had heard. Whereby he came to confess that the
blame rested in his own folly, and was unjustly and without cause imputed to
Apollo. It suffyceth therefore to have spoken this of the dominion and rule of
Craesus, ann by what means he first vanquished and subdued Ionia. Furthermore
besides those which before are mentioned: many other notable presents were
offered by this king which are yet apparent, and to be seen in Greece. For at
the City Thebs in Boaetia there is a table of three feet all of Gold
dedicated unto Apollo Ismenius. Certain young heighfers also wroughte of Gold,
with sundry pillars of the same kind. Likewise in the entrey and porch of the
temple there is to be seen an huge sheyld of solid gold. All which were
extant, and remaining even until our age. Albeit, by length of time many were
consumed and brought to decay. As for the gifts he bestowed at Branchidae (as
far as we can learn) they were nothing inferior to them in value which
were sent to Delphos. Notwithstanding as well those which he presented at
Delphos, as also the other that were given to the temple of Amphiaraus were of
his own propre and hereditary substance, the first fruits of his fathers
possessions: as for the rest which in like manner he consecrated were of the
wealth and substance of his enemy: who before Craesus aspyred to the crown
was of the sect and faction of Pantaleo^ Craelus his brother by the fathers
side sought to defeat him of the kingdom
Pantaleon. For this Pantaleon also had to father Halyattes and was brother to
Craesus but by sundry women, the mother of Craesus being of Caria, the other
of Ionia. no sooner was Craesus endued with the soueraygntye but he took his
enemy yt constantly withstode him, and drawing him aside into a fullers shop,
he bereft him of his life: whose goods before hand vowed to the immortal Gods
he made consecration of in those places wherereof we spoke before. And thus
much as concerning his liberality and magnificency used toward the Gods.

Now as touching the country of Lydia, there is nothing thereof recounted
worthy admiration like as of other Of the country of Lydia, a brief narratio^
of such things as therein are worthy memory Halyattes his tomb in Lydia.
regions: save that only out of the hill Tmolus are dug small pieces of gold
in manner of grauel. There is also a monumente by them erected the straungest
that ever was heard or seen (only excepted the maruaylous works done by the
Egyptian^, and Babylonians) to wit, the tomb of Halyattes father to Craesus.
The foundation or ground whereof is of mighty great stone, the rest of the
sepulcher of earth and mould cast up and heaped together in form of a mount,
finished and brought to perfection by the toil and pain of certain day men,
and hired laborers, being helped therein and assisted by maids of the country.

In the top or highest part of the Tomb there appeared in our days five
limits or several precinctes and borders declaryng by letters therein engraven
how much every one had wrought and done, whereby it was evident by measure taken
that the greatest part thereof was built up and framed by the labor and
handyworke of the maids. For ye daughters of ye Lydia^s, are al prostitute and
common until such time as by the use of their bodies they have gained and
collected The maids in Lydia get their own dov^^ye by continual whoredom.
a dowry wherewith they be placed out, and given in marriage, which is at their
own choice and arbitrament. The compass of the sepulcher was six furlonges
and two acres about, the breadth 13. acres, nere unto the which there passes a
main river, which the Lydians hold opinion to be perpetual, named by them
Gygaeus, and thus much of the tomb. The laws which the Lydians use are almost
The laws of the people of Lydia.
all one with the statutes and ordinances of the Grecians save that they set
their virgins to open sale and cause them to keep public stews and brothel
houses. These first of all (to our knowledge) brought in use the coin of
silver The first coyners of silver and gold.
and gold, instituting shops of mercery, and marchaundise, and setting up
Tauernes and vittailinghouses. They challenge also to themselves the first
invention and deuyse of plays and games, which are jointly in use and
observation with the Grecians, alleging that together, and at the same time
they devised these things: and made a drauft and sequestration of their
countreimen whom the sent to inhabit and possess a part and portion of
Hetruria The means also and occasion they affirm to have been these.

In the time of Atis son of king Manes there was a great scarsity and dearth
of vittayles, throughout ye whole A famine in Lydiacontinuing the space of 18
years.
land of Lydia. In the beginning whereof the Lydians iustained themselves by day
labor, and continual toil, but after fyndinge the famyne to increase, they
sought other shifts and devised means whereby to allay and diminish the
great distress and intolerable rage of hungar, whereof arose the gallaunt
devise of playinge at Chesses: also dyce Chesse play, dice, and te^^se devised
by the Lydians.
playing, tenise, and such like, which the Lydians claim and vendicate as
proper to themselves, obseruinge this order to delay and forget their hungar:
one whole day they spent in play and gami^g, never seeking after any meat,
another (leaving of to disport and recreate themselves) they made provision of
food for the maintenance of their bodies. In which manner they lived the space
of eyghtene years.

But having no release of their miserye, and perceiving the dearth and penury
nothing at all to surcease: the king divided A colonye drawn and seen into
Hetruria
his people into two parts: one of the which he allotted to abide and stay in
their own country, commanding the other to abandon the land. Over those
that remained still in Lydia, and departed not the listes of their native
country, the king himself held the chief rule and government: placing over
the rest his son for their Lord and principal whom he called Terrhenus.
Furthermore they unto whom the lot fell to relinquish and leave the region,
held their way to Smyrna: where having built ships such as were fyttest and
most conueniente for caryage: they took the sea to seek both seats and
sustenaunce. Until such time as having passed many nations, they came to the
Vmbrians, where founding and building up cities they made their abode, and dwell
their to this day The people Tyrrheni in Vmbria spro^g of the Lydians.
Changinge the name of Lydians, with the name of their kings son whom they
had their prince and guide, being after called Tirrhenians.

But suffices it us to know that the Lydians were subduediand brought in
subjection by the Persians. It rests The genology of the kings of Media from
Deioces to Cyrus.
now that we declare and express who that Cyrus was, which vanquished the
power and subverted the kingdom of Craesus. Consequently by what means the
Persians achieved the principality and rule of Asia, wherein I will allege that
of which the Persians themselves are authors: who set down unto us a plain
and evident truth, not seeking by the vain florysh and pomp of words to
augment the noble and valiant acts of their famous king. Cyrus. Right well
knowing that alother historyans which make report of the same king are found to
vary in three sundry tales.

The Assyrians having held the dominion of Asia ye higher for term of 520
years, the first that made insurrection Media held by the Assyrians.
and rebelled against them were the Medes, who behauing themselves manfullye
and couragiouslye in the behalf of their liberty shoke of the yoke of bandage,
and delivered them selves from the slavery and servitude of their gouerners,
whose example also other nations immediately followed and attempted the like, in
so much yt all the people of the main The policy of of Deioces to get the
kingdom of Media.
land became free, were ruled and governed by their own laws. Til at length
they were made thral agayu by these means. There lived in ye country of the
Medes, a man of rare and singular virtue named Deioces son of Phraortes: Who
determining to atchieue ye supremisie framed in his head this conceipte.

The Medes dwelling here and there, scattered by villages, Deioces in very good
credit beforetyme began more strictly and seuerelye to observe justice, and
follow equitye then erst he was accustomed: for that he saw the Medes
universally addicted to liberty and licentiousnes, and assuryng him self that
injury and wrong were flatly contrary and repugnant to right. The people that
dwelt in the same village taking diligent heed to his manners, appointed him
a judge to decide their controversies. But he (as having an eye to the seat
royal and kingdom of the Medes kept the sincere rule of Justice and swarued
not one ynche from law and equity. Which doing, besides that he reaped no
small praise of his neighbors and acquayntance, he had resort also and repair
to him by those that dwelt in other places, and in time welny from all places
of ye realm, who moved with the good report, and fame of his Justice, came in
flocks, adhibiting Deioces for an arbitratour in Nothingvvin^e: heredite so
son asiustice and upright dealyng.
their causes, having been foiled and put to the worst, by the false sentence
and injurious verdite of others, and admitting no man to the like office and
duty.

When the numbers of his Clientes were increased, knowing all causes to be
justly determined and taken up by him Deioces perceauinge himself to be the
only man for the whole country, precisely refused either to abide any longer
there where erst he was wont to administer justice, or at all to intermedle
and deal with any causes, alleagynge ye it was smally to his profit to spend
whole days in determination and arbitrament of other men's causes, omitting the
care of his own household, and private affairs.

Wherefore robbery spoil, vyolence, and all kind of villainy being now more
freely and with greater impunity in eeuery place committed then ever before:
the Medes assemblyng a general counsel, began to deliberate and consult as
touching the state and condition of theircommon weal. Where (as I am brought
to think) the friends and familiars of Deioces consideratlye and ofset
purpose, spoke in this sense. It cannot be (say they) that in this corruption
and lewdnes of manners we should long enjoy and abide in our country. Go to
then let us appoint and ordain over us a king, that our laud may be
governed by good laws: whereby it may be free for every man quietly to dispose
of his own affairs and have no cause to fear lest by the a^homination and
outrage of wicked and pernicious manners we be cast out and dispossessed of our
own seats. By which words the Medes endured to couch and submit themselves
to a king: they began to consider whom they might elect and chose for the
soueraygne lord of their liberty. Which there doubt the name and remembrance
of Deioces, straight ways cut of, who by general consent and one voice of the
whole multitude was named and approved king. And being advanced to the
chiefest dignity, he commanded forthwith a palace to be erected and built up
seemly for the majesty and magnificient estate of a prince. Moreover ye choice
should be made of strong and likely men for the guard and preservation of his
body. Which the people of the Medes (willing to gratify him by their prove and
ready obedience) immediately performed raising a mighty and sumptuous court
notably fenced and garnished for his safe abode: situated also in ye part of
the country which he best fancyed, leaving it free and his own liberty to
select and pick out of the whole country of ye Medes such as he thought meet
for the defense and care of his health. Deioces in full authority and power of a
king compelled them also to found a city, which being by them accordingly
furnished and fortifyed, they might have ye less regard of their small and
homely cotages, which thing the people willingly agreeynge to The buildinge of
the famous city Ecbatana.
he enuyroned and fensed in a city with strong and mighty walies, which is
now called Ecbatana, where one wall ^oundeth upon an other in such manner that
the only compass of the one clean encloseth and whollye conteyneth the other
every one in like manner exceeding each other in height.

Whereunto the nature of the place gave no small advantage, as having his
reise and rearynge toward the pitch of a hill. How be it, far more great
was the help of art and industry of man, having wrought seven several closurs
and countermures nere adjoining the one to the other. In the last circuit
whereof was the palace of the king together with the treasure of the city. The
scope and compass of the last and greatest incloseth welny as much, space or
more as the wall of Athens. The batlement of the first wall is colored with
white: the second with black, the third with read, the fourth also with
blew: or sky colored, the fyft with yellow, the two last being coped with
battlementes, the one of silver the other of gylt. The palace of the king
being (as we have heard) strengthened and corroborated with defense and
munition, he commanded the rest of the people to dwell assyde on every part
round about providing moreover that no man at any time should have access or
entrance to his person but that all things should be done by messages to and
fro: in so much, that the king seldom or never came under view or sight to
any. Above this, it was held neither seemly nor lawful for any man to laugh or
spit in presence of the prince or any other. These things are therefore
practiced and observed by the Medes: that those which were his equalles before
of approved courage and valiancy: might not have any cause by seeing him to be
grieved at his dignity, and consequentlye to The reason why no man might have
access to the king of the Medes.
brew treason against hisperso^: but co^trarily being abridged of his sight and
company yt might come into opinion yt the king was no part of his people, but a
man singled and sequestredfro^ ye rest of the multitude. ^erewt Deiocos having
garnished and set forth his majesty, and in perfyte manner autorized, and
settled himself in his empire, he ministered justice with great rygor and
severity. They which were in plea and controuersye one with an other put their
causes in wrytinge, and by a messenger sent them in to the king, which when he
had determined he subscribed his judgment, and sent them back again,
executing justice on this manner.

In other things he held another order, if happily he had intelligence of any
that had done wrong or injury toan other, sending for him he put him to a pain
accoring to the measure of his offense: to which end he had dispersed diverse
espyalles to prye and watch throughout the whole Realm. Thus the whole nation
of the Medes fell to the rule and government of Deioces, whereof himself was
the only principal. Appertinent to the title and seat of the Medes are thus
many several peoples. The Busans, Paratacenians, Struchates, Arizantyns,
Budyans, Magians. All which The several countries of Media are these 6.
Deioces raiged ^3 years. Phrao^^es the 2. King. The Persians made subject to
the Medes by Ph^aortes: restored to their liberty by Cyrus.
were under the sovereignty of the Medes. After ye decease of Deioces, whose
raygne continued the term of 53. years his son Phraortes took upon him
the gouernmente. Who not content to be king of the Medes alone, moved war
upon the Persians, and made them subject to the power of Media, and having the
rule and dominion of both nations the people of the which were mighty and
valiant he subdued also Asia, muadynge diverse other countries, now one and
then another, till at length he came to give assault to the Assyrians, I mean
those that whylom were chief of all the rest, but at that instant renounced and
forsaken of all their Subjects by rebellion. Nevertheless of themselves in
very good estate. Against whom Phraortes under taking a voyage the 22. yerre of
his raygne, was Phraortes slain by the Assyrian^ the 22 year of his raygne.
C^axares 3.
slain in battle and the most part of his army put to the sword.

After whose death Cyaxares his son and Nephew to Deioces came to the crown,
who had the name to be of greater prowess and might in war then any of his
ancestors. Wherefore he distinguished into ^andes and trowpes the people of
Asia, and first of all arranged his army into an order of Spearemen: horsemen
and bowmen, whereas The day turned into night
before all were confused and out of array. This is he who warred with the
Lydians, at such time as the day was turned into night: and who having
purchased the favor of all Asia that lies about the river Halis, mustered a
power of men against the city Ninus, as well to take revenge of his fathers
death as to vanquish and destroy the city.

But in the mean time while he foiled the Assyrians in the field, and held
them at bay within the city, he was of a sudden incountered with an huge
army of the S^ythians lead and guided by Madyis their king, successor to his
father Protothias. Who having driven the Symmerians out of Europe brake from
thence into Asia, and being in quest and persute of those whom they had
flighted in battle came into Media.

The distau^ce between ye two rivers Maeotis and Phasis eue^ unto the
countreye of Colchis is 30. days journey for a light footman: but between
Colchis, and the land of the Medes the way is short, and the travel easy, one
only region lying between them, which is the country of the people called
Saspires: which after we have passed, the next stepp is into Media.
Notwithstanding the Scythia^s took not this course but fetched a compass about
another way, toward the upper regions leaving the mount Caucasus on their
right hand. The Medes entering battle with the Scithians. were by them
vanquished, and lost the title and superiority of all Asia. Wherefore the
S^ythia^s surprising ye dominion of Asia, went from thence the next way into
Aegipt, but arryuinge in Siria Palaestina they were met by Psammiti^hus Prince
of the Egyptians by whose gentle entreaty and great rewards they were stayed
from going any further, wherefore retyring back again after they were come
to ye city Ascalon in Syria, many of them passed by quietly, without offer of
damage or injury, howbeit some drouping behynd rifled the chapel of Venus
Urania, being of greatest standing The most ancient temple of Venus.
and antiquity, among all the temples that were ever erected to that
Goddess: for the Palace of Venus in Cyprus took oryginal of this, as the
Cyprians themselves testify. The temple also extant at Cythera was built by ye
Phaenicians, which were a progeny and offspring of the Syrians. But the Goddess
moved with wrath against those that wrought the spoil and pillage of her
temple, punished both themselves and all those which came of them with the
feminine sickness. Which thing the Scythians also grant: who are easily brought
to confess that the cause was such, and none other why they are tainted and
infected with this disease. Neither is it hard for those that travail into
Scythia, with their own eyes to behold them, which are thus diseased, whom the
Scythians call Enareas, that is, execrable and accursed. Asia therefore was held
by this people 28. years, for which time proudly and injuriously exercysing
Asia held by the Scythians 28. years.
government they made wast and havoc of al. For beside the ordinary pension
of tribute, they exacted so much of every one severally as their pleasure was
to rate them at.

Wherewith also hardly satisfied they committed spoil and robberye throughout
all the country. Wherefore Cyaxares and his people the Medes, intertaining the
most part of them with sumptuous feasts, and all sorts of delicious and
dayntye fare: watching their time when the Scythians were ouerladen with
drink, they set upon them and flue them. By which means recoueryng the
empire with all that they had before, they took also the city Nynus. The which
in what sort it was by them taken, and how they brought under their rule all
the Assyria^s, save only Babylon, it shall else where be declared.

Now when as Cyaxares had raygned 40. years and Cyaxaresraigned 40. years.
Astyages 4. un.
reclaymed the kingdom from the Scythians, he ended his life, and Astyages his
son ruled in his stead: of whose loins issued a goodly gentlewoman named
Mandane: whom her father on a night dreamed to have let her vryne in so great
der whose raygne is contained the famous story of Cyrus. The 2. dreams of
Astyages conce^ning his daughter.
abounda^ce, yt to it filled the whole city, and covered Asia with a maine
flood. The meaning whereof after he had learned of the Magi (who had skill to lay
open and interpret dreams) atteynted with exceeding fear, he resolved to
marye his daughter (being now of ripe years) to none of the noble blood of ye
Medes which might seem worthy of her person: but to a certain Persian named
Cambyses, who^ he knew to be of a good house and of nature remiss and quiet.
Albeit with him self in far less account then a mean man of the Medes. The
same year he had placed his daughter with Cambyses, he saw another vision no
less strange then the former: wherein there seemed unto him out of the womb
of his daughter to grow a vine that ouerspread and shadowed all Asia, and
having knowledge what it meant, immediately sent for his daughter from Persia,
where she abode: to whom being great with child, and near the time of her
delivery, he assygned a straight and diligent watch, in full purpose to
destroy that whatsoever she had brought forth into the world: being given him
to understand by the wise Magi, the interpretors of dreams, that the issue of
his daughter should raygne in his ^leed.

Which thing Astyages carefully noting, presentlye at the birth of Cyrus, sent
for Harpagus his most familiar and faithful counsayler, and the only
solicitor and dealer in all his affairs. To whom he said on this manner: My
good and trusty servant Harpagus, I straightlye warn thee not to neglect ye
charge I shall lay upon thee, nor in any wise to delay the speedye dispatch and
accomplishment of the same. Beware thou do not deceive me, and take heed,
least reposing thy trust in other to do it for thee, thou be a cause unto thy
self of grievous revenge.

Take this little bratte of my daughter Mandane, and, tarry it home with thee to
thine house, and slay it: which done, take order also by some secret means to
see it buried: to whom he answered. Most noble Prince, your majesty at no time
enjoined ought to Harpagus that he scorned to do, and shall he from
henceforth neglect your hestes?

Be it your will and pleasure, I shall do it: it is my duty and deuoyre to
perform it.

Which having said, the young infant was delivered into his hands in a rych
and coastlye mantle whom he receiving departed home to his own house the
tears trickling down his cheeks for sorrow. Whether being comen he opened
to his wife all the words that had passed between himself and the king, who
began to demand him in these words. And what then my lord are you minded to
do?

Certes (quoth he) albeit I am commanded by Astyages: yet while I live will I
never be brought to commit so detestable a villainy: be he never so madd, and
ten hundred times more enraged then he is at this present, both for that this
pore seely brat is of mine own kyndred and alliance, and then because Astiages
himself is now old and without issue of a man child. After whose whose death
if by fortune his daughter should aspyre to yt crown (whose son I am charged
to bereave of his life) what else could I hope for but the most cruel and
miserable death that could be devised? Nevertheless, for mine own safetyes
sake, I hold it necessary this child should dye, yet not by any of mine,
but by some of the kings own servants. His talk ended, forthwith he sent a
messenger to yt heardman of Astyages whom he knew wost conveniently to be
resident in such pastors and hills as were haunted and frequented with wyld
beasts. The heard man's name was Mitradates: whose mate in bed and fellow
in service was a poor lay woman named in the Greek tongue Cyno, which
signifies a Bytch: in the Median lauguage Spaco, Spaca, in the common use of
their speech being the right name for a vitch

The pastors where he grased his cattle were borderyng to the foot or
bottom of a desert mountain, lying to the North side of Eobatana, and to the
Euxine sea: all that coast of the land of Media which tends toward the
people Saspires, being very high and full of hills and forrestes, but the rest
much more low and plain. The heardman receiving the message, and repayring to
the house of Harpagus after he was comen thither, he began to salute him in
these words. Gentle syria (quoth he) it is the kings will you take this little
infant and lay him in the most wild Harpagus delivers the child to the
kings neatheard to lay out in the desert.
and desert place of the woods where he may soonest be devoured. Which words
his majesty commanded me to say unto you, with this greeting moreover, that if
in case thou make not speedy dispatch of it, but by some means save it and
keep it alive, thyselfe in sted thereof shall dye the death. Which thing also
that it might be done without deceit, he gave me in precyse charge with mine
own eyes to behold the child dead, with which words the poor soul took the
babe, and returned the same way he came to his base and simple cottage. Now it
fortuned that all that day his wife lay in traueile of childbyrth, and (as the
Gods would have it) in the mean space while her husband went to the city, was
delivered of a son: being very sollicitous and careful one for another:
Mitradates for yt safe deliuerye of his wifet Cyno for the good success of her
husband, who besides custom was sent for by Harpagus. Being returned home, and
with great joy received of his sorrowful wife, she curyously demanded of him
what the cause might be, that in such post have he was summoned by Harpagus to
come to the city. To whom he said (my dear wife) at my coming to the city I
both heard and saw that which I would to God I had never seen, nor it had
been done by our Lords and masters. All yt house of Harpagus resounding with
tears and yellyng with most pitiful outcryes and lamentation. Wherinto after
I was entered all aghast and astonished for fear I beheld a comely young child
lying in the mids of the house quaking and cryng wrapped in a rich mantel of
gold and diverse colors, whom Harpagus (having espied me) commanded me to
take by and by, and cast it out in the main forest for a pray and spoil to
the savage and ravenous beasts: adding moreover yt Astyages charged me so to
do, with great threats and men^cinges if I should do otherwise. The child I
took and have brought with me supposing it to belong to some one of the court:
for that I would never have thought it to have been of the kings own blood.
Notwithstanding I maruayled much to see that so rychly arrayed with gold and
sumptuous attire: as also what it might mean that Harpagus and all his family
so bitterly wayled in extreme wae and heaviness. Now in the way I was
acertay^ed of all the matter by a servant that brought me out of the city, and
delivered the child into my hands: who told me it was the son of Mandane our
kings daughter, begotten of Cambyses son of Cyrus,, and that Astyages
commanded it should be slain: and this is he. Wherwithall he vnfolden the
mantle and showed the child to his wife. The selye woman beholding the young
babe to be fair and beautiful and of body large and well proportioned, fell
down on her knees, and bathinge her husbands feet with her lukewarm tears
she besought him in no wife to imbrue his hands in the blood of an infant so
goodly and well favored. Who alleging that it could not be otherwise, because
that Harpagus would send his servants to see it dead, and that himself
should be miserably tormented to death. The woman which by this time had set
abroach a new devise began a fresh to counsel him saying. If there be no
remedy but needs thou must lay it out: yet hear me once again and follow my
counsel how thou may craftily dispense with the kings commandment and
save the child. This day have I brought forth a young infant which was still
borne and dead in yt womb. Take yt therefore and saying it out in the desert:
let us keep and foster this in the steed, so shall it neither be known yt thou
have disobayed the king, and our selves shall gain the heavenly joy of so
goodly an infant. By this means (my good husband) both our dead child cast out
in this kynglye vesture shall enjoy a royal and princely sepulcher: and this
poor seely innocent that is assygned to dye shall be preserved Mitradates
moved by his wife laid out a dead child of his own in s^eed of Cyrus.
and kept alive. Which deuyse fytted the neatheardes humor so well that
without any longer deliberation, he put it in practice. Wherefore giuinge to
his wife the child which he was minded to have slain, his own bratte that
was still borne gallantly decked in the others array, he took and laid out in a
most wild and wast mountain. Which done the 3. day after he had cast it forth
(leauyng another to ouersee the neat) he posted him to the city to the house
and mansio^ place of Harpagus, giving him to understand that the child, was
dead, and that for more assurance he might behold it where he lay: who sending
with him certain of his servants in whom he reposinge geatest affyaunce
willed them to take view thereof, who fyndyng it to be so (as they thought) in
steed of Mendanes son took the heardma^s Cyrus brought up by the grasiers
wife.
child, and buried it. Now the other young brat yt was after called Cyrus was
brought up and cherished by yt grasiers wife who notwithstanding, as yet did
not call him Cyrus, but by some other name. The child arryuing to the age of
ten years, descryed his progeny, and opened himself by this deed, and
sportyng in a village where the heard grased, and being at sport and play
with his equalles, he chaunsed by the other children his playfellowes to be
chose^ king.

The boy incontinentlye limittynge to every one his Cyrus descryeth his
progeni and causes himself to be known.
propre charge, took upon him like a young Prince in deed, ordaining straight
some of them to build housen, and others to guard his Body, and to attend
upon his person, one for the steward of his court, another for his legate and
ambassador to foreign countries: lastly such a one as might control and
ouersee the rest: bynding every man with a several duty. Among this company
of little wagges there used to play a young boy the son of Artembares, a man of
great calling and principal respect among the Medes, who^ Cyrus for that he
refused to obey his authority, and do as he bade him, caused the other boys
to take and lay hold on, which they doing, he beat him spightfully and without
measure. The boy taking it heavily to be thus abused, was no sooner escaped from
them, but he ra^ne home crying to the city where his father dwelled and
complained of the wrong and vyolence done to him by Cyrus: albeit not calli^g
him Cyrus (for as yet he had not that name) but the son of Astyages heardman.
Artembar es transported with choler, in a rage took his son by the hand,
and lead him to the king, where declarynge the intolerable misusage of his
child, opened his coat and showed his shoulders, sayng. Is it meet (O king)
that we be thus abused by the wretched brat of thy heardma^? Astyages willing
to gratifye Artembares and do him honor by revenging his sons quarrel, caused
the heardmas boy to be sent for: who bring come, Astyages castyng toward him
a sterue and frowning look, began in this wise: why syrra (quoth he) you little
punion, is it for so base a brat as thy self, borne of a beggarly vassal, to
scourge and whip in such sort a child sprung of a noble house, whose father is
one of the peers and chief men of my realm? The boy beholding the king with
a bold and steadfast countenance aunsweared thus. Why my Lord (quoth he) that
which I have done I have done by justice, for our town boys, in whose crew
this Cyrus his bold answer to Astiages.
was, appoynting me their king, as the meetest of them all to bear rule, this
fellow would not obey me, and thought scorn to do as I bad him: for which
cause according to his due desert I sharply punished him, and if I for so doing
be worthy to be beaten, here I am do with me what thou will. Whiles the boy
spoke these words, Astyages his heart began to rise: for he seemd to himself to
acknowledge the countenance of the boy, calling to mind the form and signs
of his face, besides, his stately and liberal gesture: the term also of his
years hit so pat with the time of his casting out, that he verily thought him
to be his young nephewe. Whereat some what astonished he remained silent for a
space, and hardly at the length returning to himself (being desirus to send
away Artembares, to the end he might talk alone with the heardman) he spoke
thus. My meaning is O Artembares (quoth he) in such sort to deal in this
matter that you shall think your self satisfied, and your son have no cause
to complain. With which words Artembares taking his humble leave of the king,
Cyrus was lead into an inner par lour. Astyages being now alone with the
heardman, began to parle with him where he had the boy, or how he came by him.
Who thinking it best to stand to his tacklinge affirmed stoutly that he was his
own son, and that his mother was living with him at home at his house. To
whom the king castyng an angry smyle: Certes (quoth he) good fellow thou art
not thine own freynd to run wilfullye into the briers, and to be cause unto
thy self of a terrible death: and presently making a sign to his guard to lay
hold on him they took him in purpose to have lead him away. But the miserable
neatheard oppressed with extremity and driven to so nere a straight, resolved
with himself abandoning all feigned allegations to seek refuge by confessing
the truth: wherefore openyng the whole matter from the first head and beginning,
he fell down on his knees, and humblye craved pardon of the king. Astyages
hearing him without gloss or color to speak as it was, made light of his
fault and let him go, sending certain of his court for Harpagus against whom
his stomach was inflamed with great wrath and indignation, to whom appearing
in prefence he spoke as follows. Tell me Harpagus in truth (quoth he) by
what death did thou murder ye child that I gave unto thee begotten and borne
of my daughter Mandane: who seeing Mitradates the heardman present, thought it
not best to disse^ble Harpagus examined about Cyrus.
and conceal the matter by fayning, least he were taken up for triping and
convicted of a lie: but framing this answer: he said. My sovereign lord and
King, after I had received the Infant at your graces hand, I cast in my head
the best way and fittest means to obey and fulfill your will: and that in such
sort also, that auoydinge your Maiestyes displeasure, I might neither be a
minester of bloodshed to your princely self, nor to your noble daughter. For
which consideratian I wrought thus. Sendinge for this heardman grasier of your
majesty's Neat, I gave into his hands the newborn brat, with a weighty and
precise commandment from your gracious highness to put him to death: and in
so saying I spoke no more then truth, for so much as your pleasure was it
should be so. In this sort I committed unto him the babe with an earnest and
careful charge to lay it out in the desert chases of the wild and inhabitable
rocks and mountains, adding a hundred thousand threats of the most cruel and
pestilent death in the world if in case he should let, or in ye least point
refuse to perfourm it with diligence. Which done by him and the infant being
dead, of my most assured and trusty servants I sent some to behold the child
having now expyred and breathed forth his last blast who fynding it cold, and
without sense, laid it in the earth and buried it. This stands the case O king
and by this death the child perished. Now as touching this discourse of
Harpagus his talk was directed and grounded on a flat and sincere truth.

But Astyages making no semblaunce of anger of that which had happened, began
and told him first of the heard man's confession procedinge orderlye with the
rest, till at length he came to say thus. For that the child lives and by the
benefyte offortune and favor of the Gods has escaped death I greatly rejoice
as being disquieted with no small anguish and torment of conscience to consider
the villainy and wicked treeson wrought agaynstyt, and being often challenged by
my daughter, for the privy murder and concealed death of her child, I was not a
little gauled and astlicted in thought. But in that fortune has turned all to
the best: send me hither thy son to be a playfellow and companion to my
little nephew, and see thou come thy self back again and accompany me at
supper. For the truth is I am in purpose to do sacrifyce to the Gods immortal
for the safe recovery of the child, to whom the honor and chief praise of
this gracious and fortunate hap does esspecially belong.

Harpagus hearing this, did his humble reverence to the king, exceedynge
joyous at the favorable issue and good event of his fault, and not a little
glad besides that as a fellow and companion of the kings mirth and comfort he
was inuyted to supper. Wherefore departing home he no sooner entered within the
doors but with all speed he caused his son to be sought out, whom being of
the age of 13. years he sent to the court willing him to do whatsoever he was
commanded by the king. Himself as one ready to leap out of hysskynne for
joy, with merry coun teuaunce and smyling cheer declared to his wife imediatly
the whole course and tenor of his happy success. His Harpagus his son
slain and^ dressed in a barket.
son arrived at the kings palace: Astyages incontinently slew, and cutting
and dismembringe him into small pieces: part thereof he commanded to be
roasted, and other part sodden: both excellently well seasoned and relished, to
be kept in a readiness. At supper time ye guestes being gathered together, and
among them Harpagus the king himself with the rest were served with messes
of mutton wherewith the board was generally spread, save only Harpagus, before
whom were set the parts of his torn and mangled child, except the head, the
hands, and the feet, which were severally kept and set aside in a basket.

Of these lamentable deintyes, after Astyages judging his guest to have well
fed, he demanded him the question Harpagus feeding of his own child.
how he lyked his chere: who having avouched himself greatly delighted
therewith as the sweetest and most delicat meat that ever he tasted: certain
appointed for the nonce drew nere with the basket containing thehead, hands,
and feet, who willing him to open it, and choose of those things which were in
it what liked him best, he discovered ye mau^d and beheld the residue of his
murdered child: wherewith somewhat abashed, yet patiently kept him self from
open outrage. Now Astyages askyng him whether he knew ye head of that beast, of
whose flesh he had fed so freshlye, he made him answer, yea, and stood
contented with that, whatsoever his majesty should do at any time. Immediately
he arose from the table and taking the remnauntes of his unfortunate and
wretched bratt, framed his steps toward his own house, in mind (as I judge)
to interre and burye the remnauntes of that accursed and boucherlye act. On
this manner did king Astyages take revenge of his faithful and beloved servant
Harpagus. After which entringe into deliberation of Cyrus, he called for the
wise men named Magi, by whose means he came to knowledge of his dream, to
whom after they were come he moved a question about the true construing and
exposition of his vision, who yeeldyng the same answer that they did before,
that it behooved the boy if he were living to reign and be king. Astyages Cyrus
by the counsel of the wise men was senthome to his parents
took immediatlye their talk by the end, and goinge forward: Of a truth
(quoth he) it is most certain that the Child is living, and fares very
well. And when as in the Country where he was brought up, the children of
his own village in wayof pastime had made him a king look what they do that
are kings indeed, the selfee same in like manner did he. For appoynting his
wayghters, his porters, his messengers to go to and froe with other such like
duties and offices, he bare himself among them like a young prince.

Now tell me therefore you that have skill, what think you of this? If the child
live (say they) and have already borne rule and that not aduysedly or of
premeditate purpose but by chance and destinye. Be of good courage then (O
king) we warrant you he has taken his leave and shall rule no more. For some
of our prophecies, sothsayinges, and conjectures come to small effect: and as
mere fantasies, and idle dreams prove very light and fall to nothing. Surely
(quoth the king) and I think no less being of this opinion also that for
as much as he has once been named and held for a king, my dream has his end,
and that we have no more need to fear him any longer. Nevertheless I leave
it to your wisdom carefullye to consider what may befall, and give me such
counsayl and advise as may be safest both for the maintenance of my scepter
and for the co^tinuaunce of your own estates, to whom they answered. It is
greatly to be wished and desired of us (O mighty Prince) that thy kingdom
perpetually endure, for otherwise if it should descend or be translated to this
boy, which is a Persian what could we look for that are Medes and aliens, then
to be held and kept under in bondage and slavery. Whereas on the other side
under thy government (whose natural subjects we hold an account ourselves)
we are in manner princes over them, and with thy self in great credit and
honor. By how much ye rather we ought to have diligent respect of thy
prosperous raygne, and at this time also to advertise and warn thee if we
saw, or were priuye to ought that might be prejudicial to thy royal
person, but for as much as the vision is comen to so slender proof, that in
event it seems a tryfle, both our selves are in good hope, and will your grace
also not to despair, but to send home the child into Persia, to his
parents: whereat Astyages greatly rejoicing, calling for Cyrus said unto him:
My son, albeit heretofore by means of a fond and frivolous vision, I did
thee injury: yet by thine own good fortune and happy desteny, thou art kept
alive. Now thefore joyfully get thee home to the Persian* with those whom I
have appointed to be thy guydes, where thou shall find a father not like to the
heardman Mitradates, and a mother much better then thy nourse Cyno. With which
words he took his leave of him and sent him away.

When they were come to the house of Cambyses, Cyrus was received of his
parents, who having knowledge that Cyrus received of his parents.
he was their son, kyssed and embraced him a myllion of times, holding
themselves the most happy and fortunate people in the world, for the sudden
and unhoped recovery of their sweet son, whom they never thought to have
seen alive. And curiously demanding of him how, and by what means he
escaped, he made them answer, that til this time he never knew: being
altogether ignorant of his kyndred and lineage, addyng moreover yt for ought
he knew he was the very natural and lawful child of Astyages his heardma^,
save that only in the way he had intelligence of his whole misfortune and
strange hap by those which were given him of Astyages for his safe conduct
into Persia. He declared therefore in what sort he was nourished, and kept up by
the field man's wife, whom in all his talk he greatly praised and commended, in
so much yt always at one end of his tale was his sweet and dearly beloved
Cyno: which The cause of the fable that Cyrus was said to be brought up of a
Bytch.
name his parents hearing, to the end yt deliverance of their son might
seem more strange and miraculous, they blazed abroad y^ Cyrus was brought up
and cherished of a bitch: whereof consequently sprang and arose a feigned tale.

Cyrus growing in years and approaching nere to ma^s estate, waxed of all
equals the most valiant and hardye, and in passinge favor and goodwill with all
men, who^ Harpagus often times urged by sundry gifts and presents to take
revenge of his graundfather Astyages. For seeing that by himself being a
private man there was no way to repay the injury done him by the king (Cyrus
being now at ripe and mature age) he thought good to make him, who had all one
cause to have all one quarrel. Furthermore, he wrought this, at what time
Astyages through the peuishnes of age dealt very cruelly, and like a tyraunte
with the Medes. Harpagus clawing favor, and insinuatynge himself with the
Peers of the realm, persuaded the^ to depryue Astyages of the supreme
dignity, and make choice of Cyrus for their high and sovereign Prince. And
seeing his pretended treason pretily well to fadge and go forward, willing to
make Cyrus of counsel (which thing for that all the ways into Persia were
intercluded and guarded by watch and ward, was hard to be done) he came in mind
of this conceit: having finely and cunningly drawn out the garbedge of an
hare, he conveyed into her belly a letter wherein Harpagu^conuayghed a letter to
Cyrus in the belly of an hare.
was set forth and declared his whole mind: which together with the hare and
nets deliuerynge to an huntsman, one of his own housholdseruauntes, whom he
especially trusted, he sent into Persia, geui^g him in charge to deliver it
into Cyrus his own hands, and to request him to cut up the hare secretly by
himself and without company. The fellow faithfully executing his masters
will, took ye hare to Cyrus, who opening her belly found the letter enclosed,
which he unfolded and read in these terms.

Thou son of Cambyses (whom no doubt the Gods The letter.
tender and regard, for otherwise thou had never mounted to so great
estate) take vengeance now of Astyages, the seeker of thy utter spoil and
destruction.

For by his desire thou had dyed the death, but by ye favor of the Gods
and by means of me, thou remaynest alive. All the course of which thy bagicall
and unhappy fortune I doubt not but thon know of old: as also the villanye
and execrable wickedness done to me by Astyages, in that my self refusinge to
kill the gave the ouerinto the hands of his neathearde.

Now therefore if thou will liste^ to me, the whole kingdom of the Medes shall
be subject to thy power. Seek first of al to allure the minds of the Persians
to slip choler, and rebel, which done put thy self in voyage against the
Medes, in full hope and assurance to enjoy the crown. For be it my self or
any other of the nobles of Media whom ye king shall assygne to come forth
against thee and give the battle, we have all given hands with one consent
to rebate the power of the Medes, and ioyninge auncientes to march under one
banner, to the utter overthrow and deprivation of that cruel and malicious
tyrant. The account is cast, the reckning made, and nothing wantinge, but
that which we earnestly with for, and shortly for, thy quick and speedy
arrival. The letter read and perused, Cyrus cast with him self what slight or
art he might now use to induce and move the Persians to sedition and fynding
The deuyce of lying to move the Persians to rebellion.
one not altogether unfit for his purpose, he determined to make trial
thereof, indytinge a letter in such words as he thought best, after this he
summoned a general concourse and meeting of the Persians, where opening the
letter he signified to them that Astyages had appointed him lieuetenaunt or
principal of Persia. For which cause you Persians (said he) I will and
command you, to resort hither every man furnished and provided of his hook
or bill, which charge given he brakevp the assembly.

Now it is meet we know that many sorts of people are contained under the
general name of Persians. Certain whereof Cyrus calling together intysed them
to rebel, which were such that of them all the rest depended.

The names of the people be these.

The Arteatians, Persians, Pasargadians, Meraphians, Masians: of which number
the Pasargadians are the most noble and renowned: among whom is the stock
and familye of the Achaemenides, out of the which the kings of Persia are
always chosen and elected. There be also other Persians besides these, as the
Parthelians, Derusians, Germanians, addicted to the trade of tillage and
manurynge the ground. Other also that have principal regard of grasinge and
feedyng cattle, to wit, the Dayans, Mardians, Drophicians, Sagartians. All
which ready pressed with their sicles and hedging bills, Cyrus took and lead
into a field of 18. or 20 furlonges exceedyngly ouergrowen and pestered with
bushes, which in one days space they clean cut up and carried away. Wherefore
the next day following he commanded them to be present again every man
handsomely and well arrayed. Himself in the mean season gatheryng together
whole herds of goats, sheep and oxen, all that his father had, he slew them
to make provision of a sumptuous and magnificent banquet wherewith to feast and
entertayne the whole host and company of the Persians. The next day ensuing
when (as Cyrus had commanded) the Persians were assembled and comen together,
he caused them to sit down in a great and large field, where as merry as
crickets, they fell freshly to those chats which in great plenty and abundance
were set before them. At after dynner Cyrus demanded of them whether of the
two they rather wished, the labor past, or the pleasure present. To whom they
replied that there was no comparison or equality between them: for as no pain
and misery was absent from the one: so no pleasure and felicity was wanting to
ye other. Which their answer Cyrus taking hold of presentlye went forward
saying. My friends and countriemen of Persia, even so it fares with you, and
at such choice and election you now stand. For giving your consent to obey and
follow me: both these and many other infinite co^modityes shall redound unto
you, without the toylsome yoke of servitude and slauerye, but refusing my
counsel, a whole sea of miseryes do daily threaten you, not unlike the toil
and wretchedness that yester day you abode. Be ruled then by me and attain
your freedom, for both I my self am provided by deuyne lotte and appointment
of the Gods, by whose means you should enter into this paradise of
blessedness, and you in nothing (especially in martial courage) were ever
accounted inferior to the Medes. What rests the^ but that in defyau^ce to
Astyages and the title of the Medes, you cast of the yoke of servitude, and
become free.

The Persians long since moved with disdain to see themselves ouertopped and
kept under by the Medes: having ye The Persians rebel.
opportunity of a captain, with hands and feet (as they say) vowed themselves
to obey Cyrus, and recover their liberty. These things sounding in the ears
of Astyages: Cyrus by a purseuant was cyted up to appear at ye court: whom he
returned back again with this answer, that his meaning was to come very
spedily and somewhat to sone for his purpose. At which news Astyages
imediatlye prepared a power of the Medes, over who^ in an ill hour he placed
Harpagus general, not mynding the iniurye he had done unto him. The army
prepared, and the Medes and Harpagus leading the army of the Medes joins his
whole power with Cyrus against Astyage^.
Persians meeting in the field: they which were not priuye to the purpose of
Harpagus, began to fight and bicker with the en^emy: the rest without offer of
violence joining with them. Other there were, that with small resistaunce
turned their backs to the Persians and fled amayne.

The host of Astyages being in this wise dispersed and shronke in the wetting,
news was brought thereof to the king, who in a great heat of choler and
outrage, menacing Astyages hangs the wise men for counsayling him to let
Cyrus go.
Cyrus said. Let the traitor be assured he shall not thus escape. How be it,
first of all apprehending the wise men Magi, by whose counsel he was brought
to let Cyrus depart, he hanged them up every man, not leaving one alive. After
this he put in armor the rest of the Medes, yt were in the city both young and
old: with whom being present in the field. After that for a while he had
abidden the might and power of the Persians, he was driven to fly, and
Astyages taken captive
in the flight was taken alive, with the loss and perdition of his whole army.
Over whom being now captive, Harpagus his counsaylour greatly insulted, with
open scoffs and reproachful tauntes, omittyng nothing yt might gaul and
grieve him to the very heart: laying in his teeth the supper wherein he had
caused him to seed of his sons flesh. For which cause he had now made him
of a king a vassal. Why then (quoth Astyages) do thou now challe^ge the dead
of Cyrus to thy self, who alleaginge on the other side that it was his deed
and done by him, for that Cyrus was moved there unto by his letters. Astyages
aunsweared that of all men he held him most void of wit and goodwill to his
country. The one, for that having power to be king himself, he had yielded it
over to an other: the other in that for malice of one supper he had brought his
own country into perpetual thraldom. For had it been necessary to have put
over the kingdom from himself to an other, it had been much better to have
chosen a Mede then a Persia^ whereas now the Medes being nothing giltye of that
fact, were become of rulers, slaves, and ye Persians that hitherto had lived in
bondage were now come to be lords themselves.

On this manner king Astyages having the space of 35. Astyages raygned 35.
years.
years borne rule in Media: was depryued of his seat: by whose cruelty and
sore dealing the Medes came in subjection to the Persians after they had held
the supremisye of all Asia above the flood Halis an hundred twenty eight years,
sauinge the ^yme that the Scithians obtained the empire. Afterward the Medes
repenting themselves of that they had done, revolted from Darius, but being
overcome in battle, they were again perforce driven to obedience.

The Persians by whose means Cyrus vanquished his graundfather Astyages,
having the chief rule and dominion of Asia. Cyrus doing no violence to
Astyages, kept him in his house to the hour of his death. Such therefore was
the birth and education of Cyrus, and the means whereby he achieved the
kingdom: who not long after tryumphed over king Craesus his professed enemy,
of whom we spoke before: by which his victory he wan the full title and
possession of all Asia.

Furthermore the rytes and customs which the Persia^s use I find to be these.
First for images, temples, and aulters, they never build any, and account it
great follye and madness in those that do build them. For this cause as I judge
they think not the Gods to come of the progeny and lmeage of men, as the
Graetians do. Wherefore making choice of the kighest and most lofty hyls of the
country on the tops of them they do sacrifyce unto Jupiter by which name
they understand the whole cope and vaute of heaven, giving also like honor and
reverence to the Sun, the Moon, the Earth the Fire, the Water, and the
Wyndes: imputing to these alone a deuyne nature and deity, which from the
beginni^g they have had in honor. Notwithstanding in course of time they began
to buckle and pray to Urania: which manner they drew from the Assyrians and
Arabians. Venus of the Assyrians is called Militta, in Arabia Alitta, by the
Persians Metra. The ceremonies ordained by them to be kept and observed in
time of sacrifice are these. They neither set up any altar, or kyndle any
fire at all, omitting also to say or taste of the sacrifyce before the
immolation. Pypes, Myters, saltcakes, they never use. But as every one is
purposed to make oblation to the heavenly powers, so leadyng his host or
sacrifyce into a fair and cleane^ place, he humbles himself in prayer to
some one of the Gods having his head decked with a nightcap vsuallye worn of
the women of Persia, bound about for the most part, and enuyroned with
myrtle. Being always provided that the party which makes the offering hold it
not lawful to pray for himself only or to make supplication for any private or
peculiar commoditye of his own, but universally for the whole realm and
multitude of the Persians, and chiefly for the king. The sacrifycer himself
being a part and parcel of the whole number: so that in praying for all others
he prays for himself. This also: cutting and hewing ye hallowed beast into
small and slender pieces, they incontinently boyld it: which done making
diligent inquisition for the softest and smothest grass they can find, and
especially trifolly or three leaued grass, they spread thereon the sodden
flesh, over which a Magician yalpeth out a song of the beginning and childhod
of ye Gods, whichthey account a most forceable and valerous incantation.
Without this Magitian: They hold no sacrifice lawful or rightly performed.
After this the sacrifycer takes the flesh, and applies it to what use it
seems him good. Of all the days in ye year they observe with greatest joy
and solemnitye their birth The celebration of their birth day in Persia.
day. Wherein, then at other times, they use larger dyete with greater plentye
and abundance of meat: in so much that the richer and wealthier sort set
whole oxen, camels, horses, and asses upon the board, prepared and roasted in a
furnace. Such as are of meaner ability and substance celebrate their nativity
with beasts of less quantity. Little meat suffices them: the greatest part of
their provision consisti^g in choice chats and iunkettinge dishes. And those
not very tothsome and daynty. Hereof it comes that the Persians object to
the Grecians their short meals and quick dinners, for that (say they) they
have nothing pleasant, dilicate, or worth eating, whereby they may be allured
to sit long at meat. Which if they had (no doubt) they would quatt their
Stomakes to the full and seeldome or never arise hungrye.

Moreover the Persians generally are very much given to wine. Being
notwithstanding forbidden by the law to perbreake or vomit in company, or to
make water where they The regard of good manners
may be seen, which manner and custom they keep as yet. Commonly when they
have typled so long they see a piece of the devil, they by and by fall into
question and consultation The manner of their consultation.
of grave and serious matters: and look what is agreed upon among their cups
the same thenext day following is propounded by the host of the house where the
Senate was held: and if in like manner they allow and think well of it being
sober, they use it, if otherwise, they refuse it. On the other side what soever
in time of sobriety has been determined by them, the self same they ruminate
and run over a fresh, being well mostned with wine.

If they meet one an other in the way it is no hard matter to know whether
they be equalles or superiors each to other. For being of like reputation they
kiss each other on the mouth. If the one be somewhat the others superior,
after a more modest and bashful fashion they kiss on the cheeks. If much
more set by and of far greater regard the base and unnoble falls flat on
the earth in honor and reverence to the other. Behauinge themselves with all
dutiful demeanor and courteous usage toward them, which are next dwellers,
and neighbors unto them.

In the second degree embracing and making much of those who dwell nere also
and border upon their neighbors, and so consequently the nerer every one is
in place to them ye greater he isin friendship and familiarity, esteeming
themselves of all men the best.

To those which are furthest separate and disioyned from them in distaunce of
place they disdain to show the least point of ciuility, in full account that
of al men living there is none like unto them selves in any thing, and as
every man has nerest propinquity to them in place and neighborhood so they
deem him to excel others in virtue and good living, making least account of
those that dwell furthest of and most of themselves.

Furthermore in the time of the Medes empire, certain familyes exercised
mutual government, that is, were rulers over some and ruled by others, for the
Medes generally wear rulers and chieflly over those that dwelt next them: who
in like sort had the oversight of such as bordered upon them: to whom also in
order was permitted the rule and moderation of others. Like to this manner of
government was the love and familaritye that was also of the Pesians, always
louinge those best that were their nearest neighbors. Of all countries in the
world ye Persians are most delighted with forrayne and outlandish manners:
wherefore leaving their own country vesture, they put themselves in Medish
attire, deeming it better and more seemly the^their own, wearyng upon their
hands a kind of placars or stomacher used of the Egyptians. Moreover they are
drawn with all kind of pleasure and delight which they can either invent
themselves or learn of other: learning of the Grecians to be in love with
beautiful boys. They wed many virgins, and woo more co^cubynes. In the next
place to strenght and valiant courage, they make most of him yt has most
children, who^ anually ye king indueth with a great reward as though he had
atchined some notable act. Their children from 5. year old til they come to 20.
they train and bring up in 3 principal things in ryding, in shoting, and
speaking truth The child never comes into the fathers sight before he ^e 5
year old, but is brought up privily among the company of women, to the end yt
if the child dye before he aspyre to that age the father may conceive no grief
or sorrow for ye same. Which custom truly I greatly commend: as also this yt
it be not lawful for the king for one offense to bereave a man of his life:
nor for any of yt Persians to practice cruelty upon his family being moved
thereto by one only transgressio^

But breathing upon the cause if by good aduysemente he found more and
greater faults committed then duties^ performed: then to give the bridle to
his anger and work his will. Besides they are in opinion in yt country, yt no
man at any time slew his own father: but that the child so doing upon
examination and trial had of his birth is awaies found to be a bastard and
changling.

Thinkinge it a thing impossible that the natural child should ever
adventure to brew the destruction of his own and lawful sire. Whatsoever is
dishonest to do that also they esteem unseemly to speak. But of all things
they account it most abominable to lie: and next to that to be much in debt:
both for many other respects, and chiefly because they think it skarse
possible for him that owes much not to dissemble and lie much, if any one be
infected with leprosy, or otherwise di^^eined with uncleanness of the body, he
may not come within the city, or use the company of any Persian, alleging
that for offense and transgression against yt sun they were punished and
attaynted with such diseases. And if happily it befall a stranger or forreyuer
to be taken with such like sickness, they banish and expel him the country:
for the same reason also chasting and skaringe all Pigeons and doves out of the
circuit and compass of their region. It is open blasphamy with the same
people, (not only repugnant to good manners and ciuility) to piss or spitte
into any brook or river, likewise to wash his hands therein, or any such
like, whereof the water may conceive any manner fylth or corruption: very
deuoutlye and with great religion, yelding worship and honor to yt floods and
rivers. This also is peculier to yt Persia^s, which not marked by them, is
known of us, yt all the words in their language which co^^ist of 4 or more
sillables do commonly end in one letter: which letter the Doors call San the
Jones Sigma. And if we look more narrowlye into their speech, and note that
well we shall find not only some but all the names of the Persians to have their
termination and endinge alyke which for yt I know it assuredly I am not afraid
to a^ouch it constantly, being in half a doubt in like sort to awarrant and
bear out the truth of those things which the same people are said to observe
about the dead bodies of their countrymen, whom (as the rumor is) they never
b^ryeor intumulate before such time as either by dogs or fowls of the air,
they are drawn and haled about. Which things that their wisemen do, whom
they call Magi, I dare vndoubttedly affirm, because they manifestly do them.
The Persians therefore inrowling and wrapping yt dead body in wax they
afterward interrupt and lay it in the grave. The Magi do much dissent and
differ from other men: being also unlike and diverse in their customs from the
priests of Aegipt. For the Egyptian Priests refuse to defyle and pollute
themselves with the slaughter of any creature, saving of those which they
sacrifyce to the Gods. But yt Persian Magi are not squemish or dainty to imbrew
their hands in the b^^^d of any living thing what soever, only excepted a man
or a dog esteeming it in manner of a conquest to be noted for a common kyller
and destroyer of Ants, Serpents, birds, worms and such like, wherein they
greatly glory. Suffices it now of the Persian fashions and order of living to
have spoken hitherto, eftsoon making recourse to that from the which we have
somewhat digressed.

The people of Ionia and Aeolia hearing y^ Lydians with so small endeavor and
welny without blows to be conquered The people of Greece offer themselves to
Cyrus todohomage.
by the Persians put in embassage to Cyrus certain of the chief pears of
either country offering to stand at y^ same co^ditio^s to him as they did
before time to Craesus. To whose suite and humble petition Cyrus made answer
by this similitude or apology. A certain fisher (quoth he) beholding in the sea
great plenty of fyshe began to play very pleasu^tly on his pype su^yosing y^ at
the sweet sound of his harmony y^ ^ish would have leaped out to the land: but
frustrate of his hope, in a great heathe cast his nets into y^ sea and iuclus^g
a geate number drew to shore where seeing them leap and play upon the dry
ground: Nay now (quoth he) you dau^ce to late, seeing yt when I pyped before,
you refused to come. Which speech he used for that having before time disdayned
his gentle offer being solicited by him to revolt from Craesus to the
Persians: Now when they saw the world changed, and the event of things not
answearable to their expectation, they made offer of their service, and
signified themselves ready pressed to do his commandments: wherefore moved with
displeasure against them with this brief answer he sent the^ away. The
people of Ionia hearing this, repaired every one to their own cities, to
fortify and make strong their walls. Having before by a general counsel or
Synod assembled themselves in Panionium where they all met saving the
Milesians whom Cyrus received into favor, under the same condition as he had
taken the Lydians, to the rest of the Ionians it seemed best by common consent
to send legates into Sparta, as well to certify the Lacedaemonians of their
present estate as to crave and implore their assistance. The people of Ionia
unto who^ the temple of Panionium does belong, have their places of residence
and abode so pleasant and delectable, that what for the excellent temperature
and myldnesse of the air and deuyne benefyte and commodity of the mountains,
there is no people in all Greece comparable unto them. For neither the higher
region nor the lower, nether ye East comes, nor ye west approaches any thing
nere to ye excellency thereof, ye one being for ye most part very could or to
much ouergone with water: ye other (that is to say ye higher coast) burnt up and
pestered with heat, and dust. The language used in Ionia is not all one, but
reduced and brought to 4 sundry propertyes and forms of speech Myletus ye
chief city amongs the^, bounding to the south, and after yt Myrus and Pryene
situated in Caria use all one tosig. But ye cities in Lydia (to wit) Ephesus,
Colopho^, Lebedus, Teos, Clazomenae, Phocaea: albeit they agree not in speech
with the places forenamed, yet between themselves they speak alike. The residue
which are three: two are Isles, Samus and Chios: one in the main called
Erythrae, do differ much in phrase and manner of words. Chios and Erithrae
iumping in one, the other which is Samus challenging unto it self a diverse
and strange form of language from the rest: wherbyit is evident, that their
speech is qualifyed by 4 sundry differences.

Of these people were the MILESIANS who under color and pretense of fear
came to league and covenant with Cyrus. As for those cities that were
encompassed by the sea, they had less cause to fear and more to live in
greater security then the rest. Both for yt the Phaenecians were not yet
tributory to the seat of Persia, and the Persians themselves were unaccustomed
to sea battles and used no ships. The same for no other cause then that they
knew the Graecians to be weak and mightles, and of all the rest, the Ionians
to be of least power and smallest valor, withdrew and alienated themselves
from the other cities in Ionia. For As much as setting Athens aside there was
noe city of principal fame in all that toast. So yt both other regions there
inhabitaunt, and also the Athenians flatly renounced to be called Ionians many
of them being ashamed of the name. whereas co^trariwysethe 12 cities are not
alitle proud thereof greatly vaunting themselves under the title of Ionians
wherefore having once called them selves Paninoi, they built also atemple,
intytling it after their own name Panionium, decreeyng and consenting never to
admit any other to the society and fellowship of the same. Neither was there
any very desirous to be made pertakers thereof saving the Smyrneans. The like
thing happened to the Dorienses The difference of speech in Ionia.
that inhabit Pentapolis which before was called Heya polis, who by the
general decree and ordinance of the rest, arenot suffered to enjoy the
libertyes of the palaice Triopium.

Excluding therefore certain of their own natyue people For the violation and
breach of a law or privilege belongi^g to the temple. For in the games of
Appollo Triopius certain three footed stools being appointed for him that
wan the price (which nevertheless it was not lawful to carry out of the temple,
but in the same place to make dedication thereof to the god) one Agasicles of
Halicarnassus attayning the victory strayned cursye with the law, and taking
away the stole with him carried it home to his own house: For which deed ye 5
other cities, Lyndus, Ialissus, Cameirus, Cos, and Cindus. sequestered
Halicarnassus being the sixth from the right and freedom of the temple: leuiyng
a mucle or peine upon the whole city, for the bold enterprise of their
valerous champyon Agasicles howbeit the Ionians seem upon good ground and
just consideration to have parted their country into 12 cities refusing to
amplify and augment the number being just so maney parts of Peloponnesus,
wherein that time they dwelt, even as now also the Acheans, who drove and
expelled the Jones out of their proper seat are iustlye divided into so many
parts. The first and principal whrerof is named Pallena: after which are
recounted Aegyrae and Aagae perpetually washed and moystned with the pleasant
stream of the river Crathis which is also called Italicus. In the next place
are reputed the cities Bura and Helice, whether ye Ionians discomfited in
battle by the Achoeans fled for succoure, next unto Helice are these Aegion
with the people called Rhypes, also the Patrenses, Pharenses, and the city
Olenus, by the which scowreth the swift and maine river Pyrus. Last of al Dyma
and the Trytaeenses that dwell in the middle tracte of the region. These are
the 12 several and distinct parcels of Achaea: which before time were held and
possessed by the Ionians, who for the same cause only, and none other kept the
number of twelve Cities, without desire to multiplye or increase the same. Whom
precipuallye notwithstanding and above others to call Ionians yt were great
madness, since the people Abantes also are of the proper lineage and natural
stock of Ionia, which nevertheless have estranged themselves from the name of
Jones Likewise the Minyans intermedled and mingled with the Orchomenians, the
Cadmaeans, Dryopians Phocenses, Molossians, Arcadyans, Pelasgians, Doors,
Epidaurians, and many other nations confused and joined one with another. Of
which number they that went out of the court or castle of Athens named
Prytaneum and reputed themselves the noblest and most principal of the Jones
(at what time, being singled from the whole multitude of the Athenians they
went to dwell in an other province) had with them no wives of their own: in
steed whereof they used certain women of Caria, whose parents they had before
time slain. By reason of which slaughter ye dames of Caria, took a solemn vow
(which they likewise caused their daughters diligently to observe) never to sit
at meat with their husbands, nor call them by their own names. For that having
cruelly murdered their fathers, their first husbands, and their sons: they
had also haled the^ poor widows much against their wills, to their unchaste
and fylthy couches.

All which things were done at the city Miletus in Ionia.

Furthermore the kings of Ionia and such as wear advanced to the sumpreme
regiment of the countreye: were partly of Lysia comen of the line of Glaucus
son of Hippolochus, and partly selected and chosen out of the City Pylus,
drawing their progeny from Codrus son of Melanthus. Notwithstanding the name
and title of the Ionians, they most willingly hold and embrace, of whom we
spoke before: and in very deed are naturally so: how beit not they only, but
all the rest which coming of the Athenians keep and solemnize the festival
days called Apaturia, are subject to the self same name. Which custom of
celebration, is universally held and observed of all besides the Ephesians and
Colophonians, who by means of a murder committed, are prohibited and restrained
therefro. Now it is meet we know that Panyonium is a certain holy and
religious place in Mycale inclyninge to y^ North dedicated by the whole
country of Ionia to Neptune, syrnamed Heliconius. Mycale is a promontory or
high place lyinge in the firm land toward the sea, the wa^e side whereof
pertayneth to the ys^e Samus. To this mountain the people called Jones
assemble and gather together, to perform the ceremonies of immolation and
sacrifyce, which they call by the name of the place Panionia. It is to be noted
also, not only in the solemnity of Ionia, but in the feasts and religious
days of all the Graetians, how like unto the name of the Persians they end all
in a letter.

We have heard then of the cities of Ionia, what and how many in number they
are, it follows, that we speak of Of the cities of Aeolia
those that are in Aeolia which are these Cumae, which is also called
Phryconis, Larissae, Newalle, Teuus, Cylla, Notium Aegyroessa, Aegaea, Myrina.
Crynia. And these eleue^ were the ancient cities of Aeolia. Hereunto was added
in in time past Smyrna, a city belonging to this regio^, which now hangs as
it were between the Ionians and Aeolians, and is reckned for part of neit her.
Otherwise (as we see) both the nations had been equal in the number of cities.
All the towns of Aeolia are spread in the main in power and dominion going
beyond the Jones but in the temperate calmnesse of the air coming far
behind them. The The loss of Smyrna.
occasion and means whereby they lost Smyrna was this. Having entertained the
Colophonians driven from their country by civil tumult and sedition: the
people of Ionia bearyng grudge and malice toward them, lay in diligente
wayght to surpryse and take their city. Which thing they did at such time as
the Smyrneans were busied in the solemnising of Bacchus festival, which they
usually kept without the city. The Jones therefore when every one went out stale
privily into the city, and shuttinge the gates held possession by vyolence.
Which thing being known and spedy help yielded from al parts of Aeolia, they
fell to condition y^ restoring to the Smyrneans all their necessaryes and
mouable goods, yt should be lawful for them to hold the city in peace:
whereunto the contrary part having given their consent it was agreed by the
eleven cities of Aeolia to deuyde the rest between the^, eueryone making choice
of their own citizens. Such therefore and so many in number are y^ cities of
the maine, excepting those that inhabit Ida, which are not referred to the
former account.

This also: Lesbos is impeopled with five sea Cities planted in ylandes: having
once also possessed the sixte called Arisba, with the Methymneans, seduced and
withdrew from the rest, as alied to themselves in kyndred and lyneage.

There was also a city founded in Tenedos, and an other in the place called
the hundred Isles. Now the people of Lesbos and Tenedos with the rest of the
Graecians inuyroned by the sea, had no cause to be dismayed or troubled. But
the other cities of the land determined to take such part as the Jones did and
to follow them. Wherefore the ambassadors of both nations in short space
landing at Sparta: they chose one Pythermus a Phocaean to be the mouth of yt
rest, and to reveal their suite to the Lacedaemonians, who at yt fame of the
ambassadors arryuall flockinge together in great heaps, Pythermus stood
forth and in many words moved the Lacaedemonians to employ their aid and
assistance to succor the rest: but they giving little ear to his talk with out
purpose to move one foot in the behalf of Ionia sent them away, Pythermus
and his company in this wise repulsed, made speedy return to Ionia. Howbeit
the Lacedaemonians desirous to understand the success of Cyrus, and the
Graecians sent forth a bragandyne or ship of espyall to prye and listen how
all things went.

Who being sodaynlye driven to shore at Phocae a spyed one Lacrines the
stoutest champyon in the rout of Sardis, where king Cyrus made his abode to give
him to wit from the Lacaedemonians that he should not endamage or abuse the
Grecians any way under pain of their, heavy wrath and displeasure.

Cyrus hearing the bold message of Lacrines, demanded of certain Grecians
that stood about him, what manner of fellows the Spartans were, and how many
in number, which after he understood he made him this answer.

Verily (my friend said he) I never stood in awe or fear of those which in
the midst their city have avoyde place whereby mutual oaths, feigned vows,
and protestations, they defraude and cosine each other: whom if the Gods spare
me life I will one day cause to leave of the regard of other men's miseryes and
bewail their own. Which words were uttered by Cyrus in mockage and derision
to all the Grecians, for having such wide and wast marketplaces, for open sale
and marchaundise. For the Persians neither have any such place for exchau^ge
and chapmandry, neither are troubled at any time with buyinge or selling.

After this leaving the rule and government of Sardis to one Tabalus a Persian:
and having in like manner given one Pactyas a man of the country of Lydia in
charge with the goods of Craesus, and the rest of the Lydians accompanied with
Craesus, he took his voyage toward Ecbatana, the chief city of the Medes and
having no great regard of Ionia, albeit they were first to be dealt withal
(as scanning more sedious in his head touching the Babilonians, Bactrians,
Sacans, Aegiptians, all which he determined to assail by war) he sent
against the Jones some other of of his capteynes. Being newly departed from
Sardis Pactias caused the Lydians to rebel from Tabalus, and the Persians, and
having in his custodye all the wealth and tresure of Sardis he took sea and
leauied a power of hired soldiers, procuring the help and supply of all the
cities lying on the shore. Who being moved by his earnest entreaty joined with
him: and removing his tents to Sardis, forced Tabalus to take the tower for
his defense and sauegarde, where he planted his army in a siege against him.
Tidings hereof being brought unto Cyrus, who was yet in his journey, he turned
himself unto Craesus, and spoke on this manner. When will it be O Craesus (quoth
he) that I shall be quiet and have nothing to do? will the Lydiaus never leave
of to trouble me and themselves in such wise? were I not best to make slaves of
them and keep them under by miserable thralldome and bondage? For in this that
I have already done I am not unlike to him that having slain the father,
takes pity on the children. Forasmuch as I have led thee away captyue being
more then a father to the Lydians: and restored to themselves their city
again. So that I cannot but greatly maruayle what cause might move them so
suddenly to cast of obedience and become disloyal. Craesus fearyng least in
his fury he would have beaten down and defaced the city: began thus (and said)
most worthy Cyrus thou have spoken very well and wisely: yet never thelesse it
behooves thee to moderate thine anger, and not to suffer a city of so great
fame and antiquity to be wholly overthrown: which (the Gods do know) is all
together innocent both of the former offenses that were done against thee and
of the present treason which is now in hand, the first trespass (o king) I
did my self, and I smart for it: the second has Pactyas done, and let him
feel the price of it. But to the Lydians (noble pr^^ce) show mercy and
compassyon, and find some means by infeebling their strength to prevent their
courage, and to take from them all occasion of treason heareafter.

Command therefore that no man among them be found to keep any war like
weapons in his house: ordayninge besides that auorde their coats they wear
cloakes, drawing on their feet pumpes and buskins, inioyne them to bring up
their children in playing on the cithren, in singing, in keeping of tauernes and
vintninge houses: and undoubtedly thou shall see that of valiant men and
warlike people they will shortly become effeminate and like unto women: yt
there shall be no cause to fear least ever hereafter they rise against thee.
These things Craesus put into his head, thirking it better for the Lydians to
live in this sort then to be commonly sold for salues and vassals, knowing
that if in case he had not framed a very reasonable deuyse, he could never have
removed Cyrus from his purpose. It is also to be thought that he feared least
the whole nation of the Lydians should be clean rooted out and destroyed by
the Persia^s if escaping this at any time hereafter they sought to rebel. Cyrus
right glad at the counsel and deuyse of Craesus, gave him promise to do
thereafter, wherefore calling unto him Mazares a captain of the Medes, he
warned him to charge the Lydians with the accomplishme^t and perfourmance of
all those things that Craesus had told him: with a straight commandment to
let none of those escape unsold for bondmen which had accompanied the Lydians
in the assault of Sardis. As for Pactyas the principal, he commanded himto be
taken and brought alive. Which things after he had left to the discretion of
Mazares, he proceeded immediately toward Persia his native country. Now
Pacyas having knowledge that the army drew nere, raised the syege and fled to
Cumae, whom Mazares spedily arrived at Sardis, and hearing him with the rest of
his company to be vanished away. First of al bound the Lydians diligently to
perform all those things that Cyrus had commanded. In the next place sending
messengers to Cumae to will them to render and yield up Pactyas. The Cumaeans
took counsel together and decreed to send Branchyde to ye God inguiring of
him what was best to be done. For as much as in ye place rested an oracle very
ancient and of long continuance, which se^blably ye people also of sonia and
Aeolia did use and frequent. This prophecy was situate in a certain field of
the Milesi^ns about the haven Panormus whether ye Cumaeans at this time sent
for advise in their affairs, demau^ding what they might do in this case yt
might seem most acceptable and approved to the gods. Answer was made ye
Pactyas should be restored to ye Persians: which the people hearing and
thinking it wisdom to obey the oracle, were fully minded so to do. Howbeit,
the more part of the^ bendyng and inclyning hereto one Aristodi^us borne of
Heraclides, a man of no small account amongs the^, either for yt he believed
not ye oracle or mistrusted ye messengers yt were sent unto it, earnestly with
stood it tooth and nail, in no wise suffering ye Cumaeans to obey the voice and
suggestion of ye God, whereupon it came to pass ye other messengers were sent
the second time, to wit ye priests and religious me^ of the city,
Aristodicus himself making one of the company, who being come to the place
where the god held his seat, humbly besought him in these words. There came
unto us (O king) a certain Lydian named Pyctyas prostrate in all humility,
pitifully craving and beseeching us to save and assist him from the vyolent and
cruel hands of his spyteful and enraged enemies we (albeit dreading the might
and power of ye Persians:) yet have not delivered him, until we understood of
thy divine wisdom what pertained to us to do in so doubtful a case. Having
ended his speech, he received ye like answer as before, ye Pactyas was to be
yielded into ye hands of the Persia^s: where with all Aristodicus being angry of
set purpose wrought this fact. As he walked about ye temple certain young
sparrowes and other birds yt built there he took out of their nests and
suddenly a voice was hard out of the inner part of ye temple saying: thou
wicked and malicious wretch what makes thee in this sort, to spoil ye nests of
my innocent suppliantes, whereunto Aristodicus answeryng: (o king quoth he)
do thou so greatly favor and regard those that fly unto thee for succor,
and yet biddest the Cumaeans to deliver Pacty*as into the hands of his
enemies? To which the God replying. Truly, said he, I bid you all go to the
devil, and never hereafter to solicit this oracle about the restoring of your
suppliantes. The Cumaeans certifyed of this last answer determined nether to
give up Pactyas to be slain of the Persians: nor yet by keeping him still to
bring Cyrus to the subersion and ruin of their city. Wherefore they sent him
secretly away to Mytelaeane. But Mazares in like sort making challenge of him
from thence, the Mitylinaeans couenaunted upon a certain price to surrender
him. Which notwithstanding I dare not avouch and verify for that the matter
came not to full issue and perfection. The people of Cumae understanding in
what distress Pacctyas was at Mytilaene, sent a bark to Lesbos, where he
went a board and was spedely landed at Chyus, where having taken sanctuary in
the guardian temple of Minerua, he was nevertheless haled out violently by the
Chians, and given to his enemies. The Peraeans gave in reward to the city
Chius a certain field of Mysia named Aetarnaeus right over against Lesbos.

By this means was Pactyas in war with the Persians, when opportunity served
to be given into the hands of Cyrus. Nevertheless of the fruits and increase
of Atarnaeus, for a long time after the people of Chius, neither made any
barley cakes to offer to the gods, nor wrought any paast of ye meal thereof for
iunkets and banqueting dishes. And in brief what soever the ground yielded
they flatly abolished from the service and worship of the gods. Pactyas being
betrayed by the Chians, Mazares without further delay lead his army against
those that had ministered aid to him in gettyng the city, and conqueringe the
Pryenses, he began to wast and depopulate the fields of Maeander, giving the
whole pray and booty to his soldiers.

Which done, in semblable manner he gave the onset to Magnesia, and lastly
attached with extremity of sickness, finished his life. In whose steed
Harpagus, who was also Mazares dyi^g; Harpagusvvas made general in his steed
a Mede, guyded the army. This was he whom king Astiages intertayned with a
banquet of his sons flesh: and by whose means Cyrus before time aspyred to
the estate royal. To him the chief government of the army was nextly
committed: who coming into Ionia, entrenched many cities and took them. For
having first of all compelled the^ to use the refuge and defense of their
walls, he raised bulwarks against their towns, and with small force caused
them to yield. In which manner he wanne Phocaea, the chief city of the Jones,
the people whereof first of all the Grecia^s wan^ered on ye sea in long and
ample voyages, fynding out and discrying both the countries themselves, Adria,
Tyrrhenia, Iberia, Tartessus, and the nerest cu^^ also and rediest way of
navigations to the same. At which time they had in use no beaked or snow^ed
ships armed with a pyke or stem of iron, but smaller and lighter vessels
driven with es oeres ap^ece. These at their first arryual to Tartessus, were
very welcome to ye king whose name was Arganthonius and by whom the kingdom
had been governed 80 years, living by the space of 120.

Who made so passing much of the Phocaeans; and showed them so courteous
intertaynment, that he left it in their power to chose any part of his kingdom
to inhabit, whereunto not able to allure them by any perswations, and hearing
by them how the power of Harpagus daily increased, he gave them an infinite
sum of money to inuyron and compass about their city with a wall. The
circuit of their wall being no small number of furlongs in scope and compass,
framed and compacted of great and huge stones laid together with singular
cunning: by this means was ye wall of the Phocaeans builded. Against who^
Harpagus inca^ping his power gave fierce and mighty assault to the city,
giving them understanding withal that it should suffyce and content him if
they would throw down but one fortres or gardure of their wall for himself to
build an house on. But the Phocaeans abhorryng nothing more then servitude and
loss of liberty, required of him one days deliberation in the cause, and for
that while to reclayme his army from the walls Harpagus (albeit as he said)
he very well knew what they meant to do nevertheless, granted them space
to breath and bethink themselves. The army going from the city, forth with the
people of Phocaea with their wives and children and all their substance took
sea, in shippinge besides all the images of their temples and gifts offered to
the gods, saving those that were of iron or stone or only painted and wrought
in colors. Which done with all their caryage they sailed into Chius* Phocaea
left desolate without any liuig creature in it was ye next day taken by the
Persians. The people where of having cheapened of ye Chyans ye Isles Oenusiae
(who refused to sell them fearing least ye mart and custom of merchandise
should be translated from their own I Will, thither) departed thence into
Cyrnus.

Where twenty years before lead by a certain prophecye they had founded a
city named Aetalia. While these things were doing Argathonius the Tarcesian
king dyed. But ye Phocaeans holdyng their course toward Cyrnus turned out of
the way and came to their old city where they s^ue the garrison and power of
the Persians planted there by Harpagus for the possession and custody of the
City. Cursinge and banning those with most blasphemous and execrable speeches
which should seek to leave their company and turn behynd.

Wherewithal taking a fiery wedge of hot iron, they cast it into the sea,
deeply vowing never to return to their city Phocaea, before the iron rysinge
from the bottom of the water should ^^ote aloft and swim one the top.
Howbeit launchinge toward Corsica: the half part of the rowt were moved with
a great longing and desire of their country, and the manners and customs
thereof, insomuch that many of them without regard of their oath, returned back
to Phocaea. Others lead with a greater care of their late ^ow, leaving the Isles
Onusae, went straight to Cyrnus.

Where being come on shore, for term of 5 years they joined fellowship with
other their countrymen which before time were shed from the city to inhabit
that place, making ordinance and appointment of diume service and honor to
the Gods. Nevertheless being accustomed in manner of enimyes by open pillage
to spoil and destroy the fields of their neighbors round about: the
Tyrrhenia^s and Carthaginians determined by common consent to encounter them by
power of war having furnished to the same end a fleet or Nauye of threscore
ships. The like number on the other side being provided by the Phocaeans, well
stored and replenished with soldiers they set forth to meet the enemy in the
sea called Sardonium. Where ioyninge in battle the Phocaeans obtained a
victory much like unto that of Cadmus. For of threscore vessels forty being
sunk and overwhelmed in the sea, the other twenty were so mangled and torn,
and the noses and stemmes thereof blunted and beaten back, that they served
afterward to small use. Retiring therefore to Aetalia they took their wives and
children with the rest of their wealth as much as could well lie aborde and
removed from Cyrnus to Rhegium. The men wherewith the drowned ships were
filled, look how many escaped the water and came into the hands of their
enemies (which happened to many) at their coming to land were stoned to death.
Ensuing which murder they cattle and people of the Agilleans, as many came
into that place where the men of Phocaea were stonned were either scorched and
blased all with lightning or attached with extreme furye and madness. For which
cause the Agylleans willing to make satisfaction for the offense, sent to
Delphos, where Pythia commanded them to do all those things which they hold
and observe to this hour: annuallye perfourminge to the Phocaeans that were
stayne the solemn pomp of funeral exequies with a game of wrestling and
exercise of the body. Such was the event and success of those people after
they for sooke their country soil. Of which rout and company they which
escaped the dynt of battle and cut the Seas to Rhegium, planted a city in ye
Field of Oenotria, called Hyela: beyngtherto moved by the advise of one
Posidoniates, a man very well esteemed and thought of in all the land of
Phocaea. In this manner did Fortune deal with those that dwelt in Ionia.

The very like thing chanced to them that held the city Teios: whose town by
means of a vulwarke cast up against the walls veynge at a point welnye
vanquished and overcome by Harpagus, they passed the seas into Thracia,
fynishinge the city Abdera in the same place: the foundation and ground
whereof was first laid by Temesius Clazom enius. How be it, not inioyinge the
fruit and due guerdon of his labor, he was driven thence and expelled by the
Thracians. Albeit, the men of Teios in the self same city of Abdera have
him in honor and reputa^ion of half a God. These people only of the whole
nation of Ionia moved with hate and disdain of bondage, left the places, where
they all were naturallye resyaunte, and sought forrayne and strange
countries. The rest remayninge (except the Milesians) took heart at grass,
and fought both stoutlye and valtauntlye in the behalf of their lands and
liberty.

But the fortune of war proceedynge against them, they came into captiuitye.
And abydinge still in their own seats, did as they were commanded. Only
the Milesias (who were in league with Cyrus and the Persias) as we said
before, were quiet and void of trouble. By this means was Ionia the second
time bereaved and spoiled of their liberty. The people of the Isles
perceyuinge the main land to be all under the dominion and rule of the
Persians: fearyng the worst yielded themselves to Cyrus to be at his pleasure.
Now the Ionians albeit in very miserable estate and condition, yet osyng their
old haunte and accustomed meetinge at Panionium, the fame is that one Bias a
Prienian gave them such counsel, as had they pursued it with diligence, they
had lived in the most happy and blisseful estate of all the Grecia^s. His
advise was this, that the people of Ionia abandoninge their own howses and The
counsai of Byas to th people of Ionia.
places of habitation, should imbarke themselves to Sardinia, and there for
their whole multitude to build and erect a city to be held and inhabited by
them al in general which doing they might cast of the yoke of ye Persians, and
having in their dominion the griatest and most principal of all the Isles,
might also hold ye chief rule and dominion over all the rest. This was ye
cou^sayl of Byas, to ye pore afflicted Jones.

Not much inferyour to this was the grave advise and sentence of Thales whereby
he provoked and styrred up the people before their captivity to the institution
of one general parliament to be commonly held at Teios both for that ye city
was fixed in the middle part of the region, and that the other Cities round
about, might neurrthelesse be reckened as tribes appertine^t thereto. This
was ye holesom doctrine and wise cou^sayl given by these 2 learned sages to ye
people of Ionia. Harpagus after his triumph over Ionia, A discourse the Carians.
directed his power against the Caryans, Caunians, and Lysians, leading with
him the Jones and Aeoles. Of which number the Carians forsook the Isles to come
dwell in the main. For in ancient time they were under the authority and
government of Minos, bearyng the name of Lelages, at what time also they were
resident in the Islands without rent or pension of tribute, as far as I can
learn by ye diligent scrutiny (and hearsay) of times forepast and consumed.
only they wear leauied at a certain number of ships furnished and prepared
with men of arms as often as it seemed good to the Prince.

Moreover King Mynos inioying a very large and ample Oilion, very fortunate in
the event of war. The nation of Ca^ia was exceedingly aduau^ced above the
rest in royal fame and dignity: of whom the Gretians borrowed three principal
things, first found out and devised by them. It was their inuestion to wear a
Crest or Cope on their Helmets, to paynt and set forth their Targets in gallant
show and bravery of colors: last of all the steel or handle of the shield
came likewise from the^, whereas, before they used no steeles, but hanging them
about their necks and right shoulders, with lystes and thonges of leather they
moved and guyded them to and fro. Along time after the Caryans, the Doors also
and Jones changed the Isles with the main or continent, and rows^ed the^
there: all which things are affirmed of ye Carians by the people of Creta. From
whom the Caryans themselves do greatly dissent and swerve in opinion,
constantly auouching how from the beginning and beyond all memory, those
seats have been held by them without change or mutation either of name or
place. In testimony whereof they show the temple of Jupiter Carius, founded at
Mylassus whereunto the Lydians also and Mysians have common resort as allied
to the Carians in near kindred and affinity. For the Carian calls the Mysian
and Lydian brother, whereof it comes that they use all one place of prayer
and worship to the powers deuyne. All other nations beside though in tongue
they differ not from thy Carians, yet are they not joined with them in
fellowship of sacrifice and service to the Gods.

The people Caunij, though they fetch their Progeny, from Crete, yet (as me
seems) they rowst now in their natural Rest where in they have always been
resiaunt. Their speech or form of phrase they have drawn from the Caryans, or
the Caryans derived theirs from them: whereof I am not able to set down an
absolute and infallible sentence. The laws they use are very diverse and
strange, both from the manners of Carya, and other Nations. Forasmuch as with
them it is a very laudable custom and hyghly commended according to the
respect and degree of age, for men, women and children to flock together in
companyes to open feasts and bankettinges. The state of their religion and
manner of ceremonies accustomably used by them were first taken from forrayne
Nations: wherewith after being wearyed and discontented, they tied themselves
to ye Saynctes of their own Country. The self same taking Weapons in their
hands marched forward like mad men till they came to the Calyndian hills,
beatinge and swynging ye antes alleging that they banished out of their
coasts, strange and forreyne Gods. Such were the manners and customs also of
those people. But the Lycians most assuredly are an offpring and branch of the
Cretenses: for in the beginning Creta was inhabited by the Barbarians, but
afterward the sons of Europa, Sarpedon, and Minos, fallinge at variaunce
for the Empire, Minos gettinge the better of his brother, chased him and all
his co^sederates out of the land: who being dispossessed of their seats
seysed upon a Region in Asia called Mylias, which name at this day is sometime
attributed to that place where the Lycians dwell. Mylias so properly called,
having at that time to name Solinij. During the rule and governance of
Sarpedon they were called by ye name which they brought with them. Which is to
say, Termiliae, which as yet is held and retained of those that lie next unto
them. Howbeit Lycus the Son of Pandion being driven from Athens by the
rigor and violence of his Brother Aegeus, and coming to Sarpedon Prince of
the Termilians: in continuance of time it came to pass that they took the
name of Lycus, and were called Lycians. They accustomed them selves to the
laws of Creta, and Caria. Albeit they have one thing of their own proper and
peculiar, whereby as by Badge, or cognizaunce they are separated from other
nations, in that they call them selves by the names of their Mothers not of
their fathers: as if the question be demanded of any of them what he is, or
whose son, the manner and use is to blase his pedegre from his mother,
rehersynge besides his mothers mother and so upward.

Over and besides, if a Woman free borne couple hirselfe in matrimony with a
slave or bondma:: nevertheless their Children and seed generallye shall be
held and accounted free.

Contrariwyse if a man free by birth and natiuitye shall join in wedlock with
a forrayne woman, or one that is reputed for a scalant or common strumpit,
their descent and issue shall be always signed with the note of infamye, and never
be called to any degree of credit or estimation.

Furthermore the people which at those times held the dominion of Caria without
atchieuaunce of any famous or notable act were conquered and overcome by
Harpagus. Neither were the Carians only destitute of the glory and renoune
The people of G^ydus their original.
of noble deeds: but the rest also of the Gretians there about lurked in
silence and had their name darkened and overwhelmed with obscurity. There kept
resiau^tes in those places as well others, as also the Cnydians, which were a
remnaunt of the Lacedaemonians thither drawn and derived, whose region wyndeth
to the sea called Tryopium and is almost on every side hemmed in by the sea.
The North part being limited with the salt waves of Ceraunium: the southside
by the Rhodian and Simanian sea. The rest which is a very narrow straight, not
passinge five acres in breadth: the people of Cnydus (while Harpagus was busied
in ye affairs of Ionia) thought to have dug a way, and in so doing to have
brought there countreye into the form of (...) Island giving free course and
passage to the sea on every side. For their whole territory was within the
broken circle of the Sea: ioyninge to the main or firm land in that straight
where the waters almost met, which space they were in mind to have trenched
throughout, whereby the sea in manner of a circle might have his full scope and
issue a bout the I Will, whereto employing their whole force and endeavor it
chanced them in the midst of their toil to be taken in many parts of the
body, and chiefly with an extreme smarting and sorenes of the eyes. Whereupon
resoluinge to send to Delphos to Apollo, they inquired of him what it might be
that so greatly hyndred them to proceed in their enterprise.

To whom Pythia made answer in certain verses co^sistyng of six feet after
this manner.

Seek not to save your seat
by trenche or heaped pyle.
If mighty I oue had pleased
Your land had been an I Will.
This answer received, the Cnydians made holiday, and attempted no further to
delue the ground. Wherefore Harpagus inuading their country with his army they
submitted themselves without resistaunce. More then this, some what about
Halicarnassus in the region dwell the Pedaceans: with whom at the show or
appearance of any danger or misfortune either to themselves or their
neighbors, it falls out that Mineruas Priest has continuallye a long
bearde: which happened unto them three sundry times.

These alone of all the people in Carya kept Harpagus at lenghth of weapon, and
defended their city a long time, fencing the mountain Lyda with principal
guard and munition, howbeit in ye end they were driven to yield. From thence
Harpagus moving his tents into ye fields of Xanthus was encountered by the
Lysians. Who albeit they were fewer in number, nevertheless hardened themselves
to all extremity and with ma^ful courage sustained the might and puissaunce of
their enemies. Who preuayling against them at the last made the^ to recoyle
and take their City. Whereinto being entered, they took their wives Children,
and all their substance and shut them up into the Tower or castle of the
city, and setting fire to the same without pity or regard they burnt them all.
And immediately after binding themselves with a most horrible and dreadefull
oath, they closed the second time with their enemies: with who^ they persisted
in valiant fight: so long as one man of their number remained alive.

All the Lycians which are called by the name of Xanthians, and forreiners and
arrived from strange places, except 40 familyes, which by fortune at ye same
time being out of the city escaped death. By this means came Xanthus into the
hands of the Persians. In like manner also the city Caunium was taken by them
whose people for ye most part followed the example of the Lycians. Harpagus
therefore having added to the seat of Persia all the cities the lower: the
superior and higher parts thereof Cyrus by his own proper Mart and valiauncy
had overcome and vanquished leaving no part of the same free and unsubdued.
Wherefore in presence we will leave of to speak of the rest of their noble
acts and deeds, letting pass many things wittingly for desire to reveal and
displaye those things which to them selves were most labor some and
difficulte and deserve to be prynted in eternal memory.

Now when king Cyrus had brought into his power all the nations that lie in the
main, he levied his whole strength against the Assyrians. There be many and
great cities of Assyria, but above all one especial and pryncipall, both in
defense and dignity surmounting the rest, by name Babylon, where after the
occasion and ruin of Nynus was planted the seat and palace of the great
king. This city had the foundation and being in a wonderful huge plain: and
was builte and contrived into a four square form: every side thereof
containing in length an hundred and twenty acres. Whereby it is euidente that
the circuit and compass of the whole city amou^ted to the sum of 480 acres
of ground, so great and of so huge bygnes and amplitude was the mighty city
Babylon. Moreover within the walls fair and beautiful passing measure,
garnished and set forth with rych and sumptuous buildings, as no City whereof
we have notyce approaches any thing to the incomparable dignity of the same.

First of all it is cast about and encompassed with a wide and deep Ditch
filled and implet with water, in the next place is raised a wall 50 royal
cubits in thyckenesse and 200 in height: a cubute royal contayninge three
fyngers more then the vulgar and common cubyte, which we usually follow in
measuring. It shall not be impertinent to ye matter to show and declare to what
use and service the earth was employed, which was cast and voyded out of the
trench, as also in what manner and form the wall was builte.

Of the clay cast out, and cleansed from the ditche were drawed and framed
certain brickes, which arysynge at length to a great multitude they were dried
and burnte in a kill or furnace.

Afterward closing the same together with mortar betwixt every thirtith
course or row of brickes they laid ye ^oppes of canes or reeds dipped and
steeped in boylyng lyme, and first of in this manner they curbed and guarded
about the brinckes of the mote with a list or hemme of brickes observing also the
self same art in the frame and workmanship of the wall. On the top of the
wall along the edges and margentes thereof were built and cituated certain small
howses one story high facing and full opposite one to an other, between every
of the which was so much space and distance, as a carte might have gone
between them.

Through the walls there opened an 100 broad gates for passage and ingresse
into the city all of brass, with posts and hynges of the same. Eight days
journey from Babilo^ is placed a city called Is, fast by the which flows a
river of no great bygnes, named also Is, caryinge his streme into ye floude
Euphrates: This seely brook scowreth through his chanel great plenty of lyme
whereof they had principal use in the buildyng of the walls of Babylon. Of the
form and description whereof suffices it thus to have spoken. How be it, it
behooves us to understand that the city Babylon, is cut and sundered in
twain by the main stream of the rithe xiuer Euphrates: which is very great
deep and swift of course and taking his first issue from the mountains of
Armaenia, breaks at the length and emptyeth yt self into the red sea.

The partition of the walls made by the intercourse of ye river shootes bppon
the banks on either side, which are breasted out and fortifyed with a
countremure of brick to keep the waters from flowing into the city. The City
it self is replenished with houses four stories in heighte being also divided,
and as it were chekered into sundry streets and lanes some lea^dyng long ways,
other some cross and ouerthwort, at the end of one street opens a brazen
door through the wall and countergard of the river, whereby the people have
access to the water. And this wall is in defense of the city against the
vyolence of the flood. Moreover in either part and region of the city there is
another wall, not much inferyour in strenghe (albeit in thickness somewhat
less then the former. One of these in ye one part of the city incloseth
about the stately court and resyaunce of the Prince exceeding strong, and of a
mile compass. Likewise in the other part of the City is a wall, in the
circle and closure whereof is contained the Temple of Jupiter Belus, whereunto
entry is made through the wall by mighty brazen gates, standing yet in this our
age, to the open view and beholding of trauaylers. This wall is built in manner
of a quadrangle, foure-square, being on every side two acres long. In the
midst of the Temple stands a tower of sound work, very firm and solid,
without vaut or holownesse, a furlong thick, and as much high: on the top of
the which was planted another tower, which in like manner vphelde and
underpropped the third: whereupon likewise were five other turrets placed,
each taking his ground and foundation from the top of another. On the outside
of every tower do wind certain degrees of steps or stayres leading to the top
or highest part of the same. In the midway up the stayres are framed certain
seats or benches for those that go up to rest and breathe by the way. In the
top or supremity of the highest turret is another Chapel, within the which
is placed a bed decked with most costly and sumptuous furniture, besides the
which stands a beautiful table of fine gold. In this sacred house or vestry
no image is erected, neither does any creature lie in the same, save one woman
alone, being of the same country (as the Priests of Babylon affirm) and such
a one, as it pleases the god to choose for his own diet. Who do also
constantly report (albeit I am hardly brought to believe it) that the god
himself entering into the Temple, takes up his lodging in that chamber. Like
as also it falls out at Thebes in Egypt by the voice and record of the
Egyptians, where in the oratory or place of service dedicate to Jupiter
Thebanus, a woman uses to lie: who (as also the other of Babylon) is
constantly avouched at no time to have custom or fellowship with men. Such is
also the prioresse or woman priest at Paterae in Lycia when time or occasion
ferueth, for there the Oracle is not continually held, but at such time as it
approaches, the Abbess over night is fast lo^kt and included into the Church.
In the temple of Babylon besides there is another temple somewhat lower,
wherein is kept the famous monument of the god Jupiter wrought of gold, near
unto the which adioyneth a table, which together with the frame and settle
thereto belonging, is also of mere and solid gold, esteemed of the Chaldaean
priests at the sum and value of 800. talents. At the coming out of the
chapel, there is also to be seen an altar of clean gold: not far from
the which stands another of strange and wonderful bigness, whereon are
offered all such beasts as are of perfect age and ripe growth: contrariwise on
the altar of gold it is not lawful to sacrifice any but sucklings, and such
as are newly drawn and taken from the teate. On the greater of the two
aultars, the Chaldaean Chaplaynes burn incense to the god, with expense of a
C. M. talents of frankincense. In the same temple is also another image of. 12.
cubits in length of massy and beaten gold, which albeit I saw not with mine
own eyes, yet presuming upon the credit of the Chaldaeans, I have adventured
to set it down. This image Darius the son of Hystaspes, and King of Persia,
would feign have bin fingering, nevertheless, for fear of afterclaps, he was
content to cool his thirst, and forgo the spoil, howbeit, Xerxes his son
and heir in later days rifeling the temple, made a booty thereof, having done
to death a chaplain who stoutly forbad him to move the image out of his place.
With these and such like ornaments was yt temple of Babylon gorgeously adorned,
besides an infinite number of gifts and presents, franckly given and bestowed
to the polishing and setting forth of so rare and famous a monument.

Furthermore, the genealogy and succession of the Kings of Babylon is very
manyfold and diverse, of whom jointly with yt affairs and estate of Assyria
we mean to entreat: parse of these laid their wealth and treasure on the
trimming and beautifying of the city walls: other spared no coast to enrich
and adorn the temples and palaces of the gods. In the lineall descent of the
blood royal, mention is made of two women: the one of these reigned five ages
before the later, and was called Semiramis. This Queen caused to be cast up
and raised great mounts and mighty banckes, very wonderful to be seen, which
kept the river within the course of his natural channel, being wont before
time to ouerflow and cover the whole plame. The second Queen named Nitocris
was of wit more sharp and subtle, and of much more five invention then ye
former, by whom both other things were brought to pass right worthy memory,
which we purpose to recount: and chiefly this, that perceiving the power and
government of the Medes to grow and increase, and as well other towns, as
also the city Ninus to be vanquished by the^, she forethought all the means
that could be devised, to arm and defend hirselfe against the enemy. First of
all the river Euphrates that whilome by a straight and equal course stream
throughout the town, flowing in a right line toward the sea by means of
certain trenches cast up and dug for the stream, she drew into a confuse
and intricate race, folding and winding many ways, insomuch that in three
sundry places it has eftsoons recourse unto one little village in Assyria
called Arderica so that they which come from the sea to Babylon by yt river
Euphrates, are co^streined to ariue thrice at Arderica and that also in three
several days. This was also one work of hers which she did about yt river,
the borders whereof besides she has hemmed and guarded in with a bank so strong
and monstrous, and what for yt unmeasurable hignes and bigness of yt same, it
would greatly astonishe those that do view and behold it. Somewhat above the
city, a little off from the rivers side, she caused a place to be cast and
trenched for the receipt of a standing water or poble, which they dug so
deep, till they came to the water, extending every way in breadth the space
of. 320. furlongs. The earth that was voyded heerefro was referred and employed
to the bancking of the river. The edge and brinckes of the poole were laid
about and paued with stone. In both which things, as well in turning the
course of the water, as in deluing the trench or lake, she had this purpose,
that the violence of the flood being hindered by so many windings and turnings,
might flow in a more quiet and peaceable stream: then, that the passage from
the maine sea to Babylon might be made more troublesome to the sailors, by the
often creekes and circuites of the water: finally, that the next way and
readiest path from Media to Babylon being shut up, and intercepted by the
mutable course of the river, the Medes hindered from mutable trade of
Merchandise with the Assyrians, might be ignorant and unskillful of her
assayres and counsel. Thus did Queen Nitocris on the lower side of Babylon
provide for the safety and good estate of the Realm, having another meaning
in the fenne or marish which she caused the people to dig above the town,
for the City being separate and divided into two parts, by means of the river
which flows through the mids, under the reign and dominion of other
Princes, whosoever of the Citizens was desirous to go over on the other side,
he was feign to be feried over, and pass by a boat, which could not be
void of great toil and trouble, of which extremity by the good invention of
Queen Nitocris, the City obtained speedy release by one and the selfsame
means, leaving behind two famous momuments of perpetual memory. Wherefore
having turned the river into the maine gulf or lake that was cast up and
dug in the plain, she incontinently caused mighty stones to be hewed out,
squared for ye purpose. The flood having a breach and issue another way, within
the compass of his own channel became dry and void of water, Nitocris
therefore fenced the banks and shores of the river within the City, with a
skirt or edge of brick, to save the water from abating and wearing the earth.
In like manner the steps leading down from the brazen wickets to the water,
she framed of brick laid and mortered together in like sort as the walls.
About the midst of the City she made a bridge over the water, built of stone
cut and polished to the same end, which she caused to be knit and mortered
together with lead and iron. This bridge in the day time she covered with
planckes of fouresquare form, to give passage and recourse to her subjects:
which in the evening were continually drawn and removed from thence, to the
end all occasion of mutual theft and villainy in the night might be foreseen
and prevented. The work being ended, she wrought the means for the water to
return to his proper course, eftsoons boyding the lake again, which then by
continual feeding of the stream, drew to be full. Thus the end proved the
deluing of the fenne to be very profitable and commodious, by means whereof a
bridge was made for the use and benefit of the city. The same Nitocris also put
in practice this subtle and deceitful invention. Alost upon the most stately
and portlike gate of the City in open show and appearaunce to all me^, she
built her a Sepulcher, engraven with this title or superscripcion: If any of
the Kings of Babylon after me shall stand in need or pen^ry of money, let him
open the tomb and take as much as he will: but not unless he be driven by
extremity, for it shall not be good for him. This Sepulcher was so long
unmoved, till the kingdom fell into the hands of Darius, who very much
disdaining that he neither had use of these gates (because that over them was
placed a dead body, so that he counted it unwholesome to go through them) nor
any profit or commodity of the money, especially being allured and provoked
thereunto by the Epitaph and inscription, he brake open the monument and looked
in, not finding one cross nor ought else save the dead carkesse and certain
letters, saying thus: Unless thou had been an insatiable wretch, and greedy
of filthy gain, thou would never have discovered the graves of the dead.
These things are left to memory of the Queen Nitocris, against whose son
Labynitus having the name of his father, and the government and principality
of all Assyria; Cyrus prepared his whole army, at whose approach the great King
gathered a power of me^, having made abundant provision both of corn and
cattle. Moreover, great plenty of water was had in readiness, brought from
the flood Choaspis, running a little besides S^sa, of which river alone the
King is accustomably wont to drink. The water of Choa^pis being first sodden
and after reserved in vessels of silver, is continually borne after the King
whether soever he goes by Chariots driven on four wheels, which follow his
train in great number.

Cyrus therefore undertaking a journey to Babylon, after he came to the river
Gyndes (which proceeding from the Mantien mountains necre unto the people
Darnei, meets with the river Tigris, whose stream passing by the City Opis,
flows into the red sea) he attempted to pass the water, which by no means
can be gone over without shipping, where stepping forth a lusty gallant of the
army, and mounting on the back of a milkewhite steed, sacred and holy to the
gods, adventured in a bravery to take the water, and go over, whom the flood
winding and wreathing with in his stream, swallowed up so that he was never
after seen. But King Cyrus greatly agreeued at the unkind and injurious deed
of the river, threatened the water in furious manner, saying, that the time
should not be long err he brought it so low, and to so scant an ebb, that
the very women of the country should dare to go over it, not weeting
themselves to the knees, which thing for the vehemence of his rage he
immediately put in practice, intermitting and leaving off his voyage to
Babylon: wherefore dividing his camp into two parts, heleuelled out and drew
by a line. 180. trenches on either side of the river, whereinto he determined
to draine the water: which enterprise (as in so great a multitude) was at
length brought to pass, albeit he consumed the whole summer in performance
thereof. The mighty river Gyndes being in this sort shed and derived into. 360.
brooks at the approach of the next spring Cyrus renewed his purpose, and set
forth afresh toward Babylon, whom the great King with an host of men well
prepared, exspected and looked for in the fielt. When he drew near to the
city, sign of battle was given, and a fierce encountry made on both sides,
but the Persians prevailing, compelled the contrary part to fly into the city,
where the Babylonians (for that long before they perceived King Cyrus to be of
a busy and an unquiet nature, given to controversy and trouble, intermedling
and dealing with other nations) had made plentiful provision of vittailes, and
all kind of sustenance for many years, for which they lived in security,
nothing at all waying to be kept in and enclosed with a siege. Cyrus in like
case having a long time layne at the walls without any success or avail, was
altogether ignorant of what wood to frame his arrows, howbeit at last, either
of his own train, or by the counsel and advertisement of others, he cast
about another way, and wrought thus: placing his army on each side of the
city, some on that part where the river enters in, others on the backside
where it flows out, he gave commandment, that at such time as they saw the
water to fall and berome fleet and easy to be waded; they should invade the
city by the channel of the flood: leaving therefore his ariny in this order and
array, with the unfittest and weakest part of his power, he withdrewe himself
aside to the poole, made by the handyworke of Queen Nitocris, whether being
come, look what before time had been wrought by her while the bridge was
building, the selfsame also did Cyrus, piercing the bancke of the river; and
giving a vent to the water to pass into the fenne: whereby the streams
decreasing, became very shalow, and without danger to those that adventured to
pass through which thing being marked by those that stayed behind at the
walls, they took the river, and wading very little above the knees with
manfull and valiant courage, brake into the City: whom the men of Babylon (if
in case they had foreknowne the fact of Cyrus) had not only not permitted to
take the Town, but contrariwise had destroyed them all by a miserable death:
for having fast barred the little gates that open to the river, and placed
themselves p^rtly on the top of the wall, partly on the banks without the
City, they had pent and included them as it were in a ^aue or den from whence
they could never have escaped alive: whereas now the Persians stealing upon them
of a sudden, were at their elbowes before they were aware. In which their
distress (so huge was the City in ^ignesse) that (by report of those that
dwelt next them) they which inhabited the middle part of the City, were flatly
ignorant that the town was taken. Wherefore being a festival day, they egerly
persued their delight and pastime, disporting themselves with dancing, and all
kind of pleasant recreation, until the case was too plain that the enemies
were within the walls. Such therefore were the means whereby the City Babylon
was first of all taken and surprised by war. As touching the power and value
whereof, we will show many testimonies, this one especial and of manifest
euidency. The whole coast which is under the governance of the great King,
being levied at a certain rent to find the Prince and his army (I mean
besides those revenues and pensions which every month in the year are duly
paid and yielded to the Crown) at the fourth part of this rent or subsidy is
the region of Babylon rated alone, the other eight parts being gathered and
contributed out of the whole Country of Asia: so that the puissance and
hability of this region is equivalent and matchable to the third part of Asia.
The seigniorie also and principality of this part (which the Persians call a
Satrapy, that is, a Duchy or Countey) does in great measure exceed all other
provinces that are under the protection of the great King. For so much as
Tritechmas son of Artabazus whom the King made his Lieutenant, and
principal over this Country, had duly rendered unto him for tribute every
day in the week more then eight gallons of silver, according to the Persian
measure called Artaba, which exceeds by three quarts the measure that is used
in Attica, which they call by the name of Medimnus. Moreover he had a stable of
courageous and lusty coursers for the saddle, besides those which were
purposely kept and managed for the use of war: to these were added eight
hundred stalions or stone horses, with sixteen thousand maares which were
covered by those horses, one stalion being reserved and admitted to the
covering of twenty maares. Besides all this, so great a multitude of dogs or
mastifes coming of the kind and breed of India were belonging to him, that
four great towns standing in the plain of Babylon, stood at no other
revenue, then to find and maintain a company of curres. All which things were
peculiar and appertinent to him that was the viceroy or president of Babylon.
In the country of Assyria they have small store of rain: such grain as the
land yields being evermore watered by the flood, not after the manner of
Nilus in Egypt (which of his own accord rises over the banks, and gives
moisture to the fields round about) but partly by the labor and hands of men,
partly also by brooks and ditches deriuing the water throughout their ground.
For through all the region of all Babylon (even as in Egypt also) are drawn
many trenches and ditches, the greatest whereof is nauigable, and caryeth
ships, bearing to that coast where the sun is at a stand in winter, and
reaches from Euphra- reaches from Euphrates to the flood Tigris, near unto
the which was planted and situated the city Ninus. This soil for corn and all
kind of grain, is the most battle and plentiful of all others, being very
barren and naked of wood: wherein, especially the fig tree, vine, and olyue,
could never prosper or come to any proof, but for seed and tillage so
fruitful and abundant, that it never fails to yield increase two hundred
fold: and if the ground be very well taken, and the year favorable, it
multiplieth to three hundredth times as much as was cast into the earth. The
ears of their wheat and barley are more then a handful broad. Likewise ye
small seed of Millet or Hirse, together with the graiue of India called
Sesamum, to what exceeding growth and tallnes they arise in this country, that
almost they seem in manner of mighty trees, albeit I assuredly know and could
justly affirm, yet I will rather keep silence, knowing that those which has
been already spoken of the great increase of their grain are such, that they
far surmount above the common credit and usual course of nature. They use no
kind of oil but such as is made of the seed Sesamum. Palm trees are common
with the^ in every place of the country, many of the which bear fruit and
are very fertile. Part of this fruit they turn and employ to food and
sustenaunce, making wine and honny of the rest. The trees themselves they prune
and manure not unlike their fig trees. Some of these palms (as they use also
to do in other) the Graecians call male trees, the fruit whereof they eat not,
but only bind it to the fruit of the female trees, whereof breeds a small
woorme or fly, which with her sharp and forcked nebbe biteth through the
fruit of the female palm, whereby it comes to ripeness and maturity, being
otherwise wont to drop off and decay before it arrive to full growth and
perfection. For of the fruit of the male palm is bred and produced this
little worm, such as come also of a wild fig tree.

Let us now proceed unto that which next after the city it self, is (in my
fancy) the straungest mirror and wonder of the whole region. The vessels
wherein they are accustomed to pass down ye stream to Babylon, are made
circlewise, and of round compass, drawn over on the outside, and covered with
leather: for the people of Armenia, whose country lies above the Assyrians,
having hewed and smoothed out of willow certain round vessels very hollow and
deep, they cast over a paast or covering of leather, applying them both to the
use of household affairs to contemn licour in and such like, and also to row
in and pass the water. They have neither head nor tail that a man may point
at with his finger, there to be the nose and forepart of the ship, and here
the hinder part or stern, but are contrived into a circulare form like a
buckler or target. The bottom of these vessels they matte and fence with
straw or rushes, whereupon laying their chaffer and merchandise, they commit
themselves to the water. Their chiefest carriage is small roundlets or firkins
of wine, making the caske it self of the leaves of palm. The vessels are
governed by two several rothers, at the which, two men continually stand and
are attendaunt, the one whereof draws the ster^e toward him into the ship,
the other thrusts from him outward. These kind of ships are maruaylous
great, and very capable, albeit some of them be of smaler making then other.
The greater sort are of power to carry the weight of five thousand talentes. In
every of which there is one live Ass at the least, and in the bigger three or
four. Being landed at Babylon, and having made their mart of such things
as they brought, they sell also the woodde of their Ships, with the straw,
rushes, and such like, loadyng back their Asses with the skins, which they
drive home before them into Armenia: for so much as to sail upwards against the
course of the river, it is not possible for them, by reason of the swiftness
and violence of the strcame, which is the cause also that they make their
vessels not of wood, but of skins. After they are returned to Armenia they
make provision of other ships, all one in similitude and fashion with the
former: such are the vessels wherein the Assyrians ferry down the water to
Babylon.

Now for their habit and attire it is on this manner. Their usual custom is
to go clothed in two garments, one of linen down to the feet, another of
woollen drawn upon the same: about their shoulders they cast a cloak of
white color. In their shows following the custom of the whole country,
they use all one fashion, not much unlike the Thebane slippers. Their hair
very long, tied and bound up behind with a coyfe. In all parts of their body
embaulmed with sweet oils and precious oyntmentes. On their fingers they we
are a signet: bearing in their hands a slender rod in form of a scepter, very
skilfully and artificially wrought, on ye top whereof is carved either an
apple, a rose, a lilly, an eagle, or some such like thing, being accounted
wickedness with them, and against all law, to carry a rod or scepter without
such an ensign on the top. And thus much for their attire.

The laws which they use are these. One most commendable, and for the
singular wisdom and commodity thereof greatly to be regarded. Likewise
another, which (if I be not deceived) the people Eneti coming of the Hlyrians
do commonly practice throughout their whole land. Once in a year they
observed this custom. The virgins that were arrived to the due time and estate
of marriage, they assembled all into one place, fast behind these stood a
great multitude of young men and batchelers. When all were come and the company
was hush, there arose up a common crier, proclayming severally the sale of
every one to such as were minded to buy them, and in the first place she that
was the paragon and most beautiful damsel of all the route, was in like
manner first published and set forth to be sold, whom some one or other having
purchased with a great sum of money, she that was next in beauty to the
fairest, was next priced, with a condition annexed, that they which bought
should also marry them. Such therefore of Babylon that were of good wealth,
and wanted wines, bought up the brauest wenches, every one speeding best for
beauty that badde best for the beautiful. The basest sort of yonkers that
were not so deyntely toothed, contenting themselves with the homeliest lasses,
chose rather to take a good nutbrowne wench with a dowry, with whom to
practice the daliaunces of Venus. The market being made of the best and
fairest, incontinently the most vggly and foulest dross of the company was by
the voice of the crier cyted to appear, whom he set forth and propounded to
the liking of any, who with the least expense and sinalest charge that might,
would be content with a wife. In which sort she stands, til there step
forth a mate that will hold himself satisfied with a sluttishe wife and a
slender dowry, evermore making a gain of those upon whom nature and the
heavens had largely bestowed their graces and treasures, whereas with the rest,
that were either impotent, lame, or in part of the body disfigured, or
generally sluttish and ylfauoured, they endowed with a portion of goods the
sooner to procure and get them husbands. Neither was it free and indifferent
for any man to place and dispose his daughter to whom he would: nor for the
byer without sufficient warrant or surety of his good usage of her to take her
away: but having brought such as should plight their faith and honesty in his
behalf, that he should undoubtedly use her in place of his wife, he took her
with him, whereof if by fortune they could not agree, the law commanded that
the money which was given for price of the virgin should be eftsoons
restored to the buyer: wherein the custom was not so strict and severe, but
that a couple of contrary villages might match together, and enter the estate
of marriage one with another, the man always rendering a certain sum and
price for his wife if she were worth the buying. This law was very well and
wisely ordained by them, which within a while after lost his force, and was
utterly neglected: albeit in later days they coined a new devise that no man
should abuse or any way injury a woman, nor carry her away into a strange
city, for the city being taken, and themselves shamefully entreated by their
enemies, in so much that the most part of them had wasted their goods and
substance, the poor lay people that were in great extremity and want of
sustena^ce, caused their stock, ye care of their honesty and chaste living set
apart, to purchase lucre by the common use of their bodies. Another law and
statute they had of equal praise and commendation with the first, whereby it
was provided that all persons possessed with any grief or disease, should be
carried out and laid in the open market place, to the end that (using no
Physicions) every one might give their verdit of their sickness and malady.
As every one therefore approaches near unto the diseased, if at any time they
have had trial and experience of the like pain and distress either in
themselves or in other, they let not to minister connsaile to the sick, and
prescribe such order and diet, as has bin heretofore either profitable to
themselves, or wholesome to other: utterly abhorring from all law and
ciuility, to pass securely and carelessly by the feeble, and not to enquire the
state and manner of his grief. They esteem it no small bliss to them to be
buried in sepulchers, resembling very narrowly the custom of the Egyptians in
funeral sorrow and lamentation for the dead. As often as they have society and
fellowship with their wives, placing themselves in seats one over against
another, the men take sweet perfume, and burns it, the women likewise doing
the very same. At the drawing near of the evening they wash and wrinse
themselves very clean, not attempting to touch any thing with their hands,
before they have thoroughly cleansed and purged the filth from their bodies,
which thing is in use likewise with the Arabians.

The selfsame Babylonians acquaint themselves with an order full of all
abomination and wickedness. All the women of their nation once in their whole
lives, resort to the Temple of Venus, where abandoning their chastity, they
give up themselves to be defiled and corrupted by strangers: howbeit, such
women as are of great reputation, and have wealth at will, disdeining to sit
and accompany with the rest, are drawn to the temple in charlots or litters
cast over and covered with a vale of leather: whether being come, leaving the
train of their meyny and servants behind them, they place themselves in
seats before the gates of the palace, which is the common use of all such as
are of high degree. Within the Church they sit in great multitudes, bound
about the temples of the head with garlands of sweet and pleasant flowers,
some of them are coming, others going, for certain passages and ways
severally made by cords and lines, lead and direct the strangers to such as
they fancy best and have most mind to. Moreover, having once taken her seat
in the Temple, she never returns home until some one or other of foreigne
countries has given her money, and reapt her chastity, who approaching near
to his lady whom he likes, says thus: The goddess Militta be favorable
and gracious unto thee. By this name Militta is Venus called with Assyrians,
neither is it lawful to despise the money which is given, how much or how
little soever it be, being applied to a sacred and holy use. Neither may ye
woman be her own caruer to reject any yt comes to her, but whosoever is her
first chapman him she immediately follows without respect of persons: with
whom, after she has accompanied for a while, having made her offering to ye
goddess, she returns home, for the time to come not to be allured by
mountains of gold to acquaint themselves with any in the like sort. Of this
noble route such as are most prayseworthy for beauty and comely proportion of
the body, have soonest made their market and are gonne, the grosser and baser
sort being held by the law to remain there so long, till they have
accomplished the rites and customs of the Country, so that it chances the^
otherwhiles to abide in the Temple a year or two, yea sometimes three, before
the poor souls can be acquit of their servitude. The like ordinance is of
force and virtue in some part of Cyprus. These are the laws of the people of
Babylon, of whom there be three sorts, some which live only by fish, which
being purged and dried against the sun, they use in this manner, first they
powne and bray it in a mortar, which done, they preserve and keep it in linen
sheets, whereof they take at their pleasure, and putting thereto liquour, they
kneade and bake it in manner of bread.

The Persian prince Cyrus having obtained the victory over all the country of
Babylon, was pricked with desire to bring into his power the people of the
Massagetes; a nation very large, and in arms courageous and valiant, having
their habitation in the East toward the morning sun beyond the flood
Araxes, right over against the Issedonians, and being (as some men suppose) a
part of Scythia. The River Araxes is both greater and less then the mighty
stream called Ister, wherein also are many Isles not inferior in compass to
the Island Lesbus. The people of those Isles live in the summer time by all kind
of roots which themselves pluck up and gather, reserving the fruit of their
trees that is ripe and ready to be eaten for their winter food and sustenance.
By these people were found out and deseryed certain trees, whose fruit being
cast into the fire (which they use to kindle swarming together in great
flocks) does no less incharme and make drunken the senses of those that fit
by, with the savor and smell proceeding therefro, then their wine does
intoxicate the heads of the Grecians, being so much the more idle in their
brains by how much ye more they burn of the aforesaid fruit: even so far
at length, that they fall to singing, dancing and leaping past measure. Now
the floude Araxes (like as also ye river Gyndes which Cyrus broached and
divided into 360 trenches) begins at the Mantien hills parting it self
into sixty several streams, the rest (one only excepted) have their endinges
in fennes and marishe grounds: where certain people are said to make their
abode, which are nourished by raw fishes, being clothed and apparelled in
Seal skins. The other part of Araxes continues his course unto the sea
called Caspium, which is a sea of it self, not permixt and mingled with any
other, for as well the salt water through the which ye Grecians use to sail,
as also the other without ye pyllers called Atlanticum, finally, ye red sea and
it do meet each with other and are all one: but the Caspian waters are hemmed
in and enclosed with their own shores, being in length 15. days sail for a
light ship that goes with oars: in breadth such that the widest part (which
is toward the west) may be passed over in eight days. The west side of this
sea is edged in by the mountain Caucasus, being of incomparable height and
greatness: upon this hill one people of all sorts inhabyting: very many and
diverse sustained by wild food and fieldishe relief. The leaves which their
trees bear are much like unto ours in show, though different in nature: these
they beat to powlder, and rempering them with a quantity of water they make of
them a certain color of such force and virtue that paynting therewith upon
their garments the similitudes of sundry wild beasts, it never changes hue,
but even as if the pictures had been wouen and wrought in the cloth: so
together with ye woolle it self they wear out and decay. These men after the
manner of brute beasts meddle and accompany with their women in open sight. Now
the West part of the sea Caspian being inuyroned by the hill Caucasus, ye side
which exte^deth toward the East beats upon a large, spacious, and ample
plain. The most part of this plain is possessed by the Massagets, whom Cyrus
for diverse and weighty causes was styrred up and provoked to assail by war.
First by the remembrance of his birth and infancy, whereby he was moved to
think and imagyne him self to be more then half a god, far advanced
above the mortal estate of humane kind. Again not a little puffed up and
emboldned by ye luck and prosperous atchieuaunce of all his adventures wherein
fortune showed him so amiable a countenance, that against what nation soever
he set his force, the same he caused either to bend or break, always having
the better hand of his enemies.

The kingdom of the Massagets after the decease of the prince her husband was
held by the most noble and virtuous Queen Tomyris, unto whom Cyrus addressinge
certain messengers in fained gloss of deceiptfull words, demanded her
marriage: but the prudent and courageous lady perceiving his bent, how not for
the love of her self, but for desire of the kingdom he had colored a suit
of dissembled matrimony, flatly forbadde him to come within the lystes and
bounds of her country. Cyrus seeing his policy to be in vain, lead his
power to the river Araxes, in open and professed wise, threatening vengeance and
all kind of cruelty against the realm of the Massagets: wherefore having
covered the river with certain bridges, whereby to train and conu^y his army
over the water he fortified the same with defense and munition of towers
builte by ye help and aid of ships which he made for ye purpose: to whom being
diligently co^uersant and busied in these affairs, Tomyris dispatched an
Herald of peace with a message as follows. Thou king of the Medes, leave of to
trouble thy self in those matters which ye have taken in hand, uncertain what
gain yt shall reap by this thine enterprise: be quiet therefore and be king
of thine own, suffering us to enjoy these borders whereof we have the right and
chief dominion. But what? disdaynest y^ my counsel? preferrest thou al
things before peace and quietness? Be it then, if thy heart burn to be dealing
with ye Mas^agets, cease thy buyldings and either follow us 3. days journey
into our country, or depart our coasts and receive us into thine. Cyrus
having heard this greeting, assembled together the chief of ye Persians and
propounded ye matter to be scanned among them: who being all of one mind and
consenting in one opinion made it no controversy, but yt it behooved rather
Tomyris with her army to be received into Persia and them selves to retire into
their own land: against whom Craesus being of a contrary judgment began to
reason and argue in this manner. Truly (O king) as I said before, since it has
pleased the mighty Jupiter to deliver me into thy hands: whatsoever I shall
mark to be amiss in thy house the same to the most of my power I will study
to amend: for mine own fortune albeit an unthankful mistress, yet has she
been a lesson and schooling unto me: if thou think thy self a god, and thy
army immortal, my counsel is not for thee, my sentence cannot avail thee:
but if ye acknowledge thy self to be mortal, and to rule over those that be
subject to death, learn this first, that ye affairs of men are placed as it
were in a circle, which being rolled and turned about ne permits the same
man to be always fortunate: as touching therefore the question propounded I
vary in opyon from all thy counsel: for giving liberty to thy enemies to come
into thine own realm, it is to be feared least at the same time thou leese
both the victory and thy kingdom. think thou the Massagets if they get the
better, will straight ways depart without spoil of thy country?
contrariwise, if thou vanquishe them what can thou win? Certes (O King)
not comparably to that as if thou beat these Cocks one their own dunghilles,
so may thou follow them presently upon the spurs and set them besides
their own pearches. Consider this (noble prince) and if thou seem to like it,
seek to follow it, and fly not one foot before thou perform it: that having
done this fond girl to understand thy invincible force and prowess, thou
may follow thine enimyes at the hard heels even into ye gates and walls of
their city. For shame let it not be said at any time, that Cyrus the son of
Cambyses did abandone the field and give place to a woman. I think it good
therefore to go so far forward, until they provide themselves, and come
forth to meet us: wherein also we have fit occasion to use a policy. It is
not unknown to you that the Massegets are unacquainted with the stately diet
and magnificency of the Persians: for which cause having left behind us in our
tents all store of delightesome and pleasant meats, with great plenty and
abou^dance of sweet wines, let us leave the weakest part of our army there,
and withdraw our selves aside to ye river: our enemies glutted with riot, and
bereaved of their right senses by excess of wine; what may hinder us to take
them unawares, causing them to pay the price of their dinner with the loss of
their lives. These opinions were uttered as concerning the cause. But Cyrus
refusing to be ruled by the Persians, betoke him self wholly to follow the advice of Craesus. Wherefore he gave significations to Tomyris to retire back,
delaring him self to be ready to follow and give her battle at home in her own
country. The Queen according as she had determined withdrew her self back
into the mids of the region.

Now king Cyrus having committed to his son Cambyses the governance and
administration of the realm, he delivered into his hands Craesus king of ye
Lydians, earnestly charging him upon the duty and obedience of a son, yt if
his luck in battle were worse then he looked for, he should let pass no part
of courtesy, honor, and liberality toward him: which when he had said he
sent them away into Persia passing ye water him self with his whole power. The
same night after he had trained his host over the stream of Araxes there
befell unto him a strange vision, wherein being on sleep he seemed to behold
the eldest son of Hystaspes having on his shoulders two wings, with one of
the which he shadowed all Asia, with the other all Europa. Hystaspes (coming
of the princely house of ye Persian Achemenides and borne of Arsaces) had a
son named Darius, superior in years to the rest of his children, being at
that time welnigh twenty years old, whom his father for that he was too
young for the camp, left at home in his own conntrey. Cyrus awaked from his
dream, began to weigh and ponder with him self the drift and intent of his
vision, and supposinge it to be of no small moment called for Hystaspes with
whom in secret wise having removed all company he co^moned thus. Thy son
Hystaspes has wrought treason, against me and my kingdom, which his disloyal
and malicious treachery. I came to know by this means. The heavenly powers
whose providence is a buckler to me against all adversity having chief care
and regard of my health, have showed me all things that are to come. No longer
ago then this last night I beheld in my sleep the eldest of thy children,
bearing on each shoulder a mighty winge, and covering with the one all Asia,
with the other Europa, whereby I assuredly conjecture his treason which he
covertly tends against the crown: hence then, dispatch and speed thee into
Persia, reserve him safely to my next ret^urne, that calling him to his
trial. I may see by what means he can quit himself of treachery. These things
said Cyrus for that he assuredly thought that Darius had tended mischief to
his person and privily sought to undermine him in his kingdom. But he reckned
without his host, and was far deceived of his accounte: for the gods did
foreshew, and signify to him how in that place he should finishe his life, and
that his kingdom at the length should descend to Darius. Hystaspes shaping an
answer to ye kings words began and said. The gods forbid (O mighty prince)
that any one of the Persian blood should either malice thy person or impeach
thy Majesty: who if he were known a thousand M. deaths were to easy for him.
By whom, but only by thy aid (most gracious king) were we made of slaves
fremen, of subjects and vassals lords and rulers over other? If the gods have
accused my child of treason, take him, he is thine own, I yield him up to
be dealt withal as it seems thee best. His talk finished he immediately
took his passage over the river Araxes, into Persia, for farther assurance
and charge of his sons appearaunce at ye Kings pleasure.

Cyrus having gained the other side of Araxes, and marched forward one days
journey, forthwith he did as Craesus had counsayled him, leaving in his tents
the feeblest and most unapt soldiers of his whole number, and departed thence
with the rest to the shores and banckes of Araxes, being lightly harneysed and
addressed for the purpose. The seely remnaunte of the Persians appointed to
stay behind in defense and munition of the tents, were assailed by the third
part of the Massagets power: where using al means to save the tents and
succor them selves, they were miserably foiled and slain. The enemy entering
the camp and perceiving all places to be furnished with sumptuous provision of
dainty and delicious meats, took the benefit of so good and favorable
fortune, and fell freshly to the banquet, in so much that having there stomachs
forced with bittayls and their heads inchau^ted with wine, they were taken with
a profounde and heavy sleep: when of a sudden the Persians returning from
their ambush, came upon them unawares and putting the most part to the sword,
the rest they took and apprehended alive. Among these was the son of Queen
Tomyris named Spargapises, to whom was given and committed the guiding of the
army. Tomyris advertised of her sons misfortune together with the chance and
loss of her subjects, full of stomach and displeasure, sent her Legate ye
second time, and saluted Cyrus on this wise.

Thou insatiable and bloody boutcher boast not thy self of this thou have
done, for if by the fruit and sap of the Vine (wherewith thy self
otherwhyles being filled to the very eyes art free from no madness, vice, and
blasphemy) if herewith I say, thou have taken and inchaunted my son: it is
thy policy, not thy power: thy craft, not thy courage that has gotten thee
the victory. Well then: once again hear me, and be ruled by my counsel:
get thee hence yet, and be speedily packinge, release my son whom thou have
in hold: for if in case thou refuse and stay but one moment, I swear by the
Sun the god and king of the Massagets, I will glut that greedy pawnch of
thine with abou^daunce of blood, wherewith thou seem to be insaturable and
never to be satisfied. These words with Cyrus came in at one ear and went out
at the other, lighter in value then the wynd in weight.

Notwithstanding, seely Spargapises son to the stout and courageous Queen.
Tomyris, being thoroughly awaked and come to him self, perceiving the case he
was in, humbly besought Cyrus to loose him and take of his bonds: which done,
and having his hands at liberty, he pawnched him self into the belly with a
Iauelyne, and so dyed. Such was the end and heavy desteny of poor Spargapises
ye Queens son. Whom his mother greatly lamenting, and seeing her counsel
to take no place, gathered a mighty power and fought with king Cyrus in such
sort, that of all battayles and combatryes of the Barbarians there was never
any so bloody, fell, and cruel on both sides as this. The fight and battle
it self was in this manner. First of all being distant one from another a
certain space, they assaulted each other by shot of Arrows, which being
spente and consumed, so feirce a close was given on both parts with Swords,
Daggers, and Iauelynes, that the very fire sparkled out by the force and might
of their blows. Thus the battle remained equal a great space, neither
part yielding the breadth of a hair to his enemy, till at the length the
Massagets prevailing, made a great slaughter of the Persians: wherein Cyrus
himself having raygned thirty years save one, made a final end and
conclusion of his days: whom the wrathful Queen Tomyris seeking out among
the slain and mangled bodies of the Persians, took his head and throwing it
into a vessel filled with blood, in vaunting and glorious wife insulted over
it in these words. Thou Bout^herly tyrant, my son thou tokest by craft and
kylledst by cruelty, wherefore with thy self I have kept touch. Now therefore
take thy fill bloody caitife, suck there till thy belly crack. In this manner
dyed the noble King Cyrus: of whose death and end since many and sundry
things are bruted, it stein^d us good to follow that, which among the rest
founded nearest to truth.

The Massage^s are very like the Scythians both in living and attire. There
manner is to fight both on foot and horse back, in both kinds exceeding
valiant. There weapons which they use are Arrows, Spears, and short Daggers
after the manner, and custom of the country: all their Harness and furniture
is garnished and adorned both with Gold and Brass: vsinge to their Spears
Duyuers and Daggers, Spangs and bullions of brass: their Costlets, Belts, and
the rest of their armor being gallauntely set forth and beautified with
Gold. In like manner also the curets of their horse are laid and embossed with
curious work of Gold: wherewith also are done and beset their raynes,
brydles, and trappinges: being altogether unacquainted with the use of Silver,
or Iron. For the land yielding unto them inestimable plenty of Gold and Brass,
yet of Silver and Iron it is quite void and destitute.

Moreover their manners are these. Every one marieth a wife, which
notwithstanding is common and indifferente to all. For that which the Grecians
affirm to be done by the Scythians, the self same, not they, but the
Massagets do commonly use and practice: being of a very certainety, yt as often
as any of the Massagets is moved with desire of Women, he makes no more ado
but hanging his quyuer upon the pin of his wayne, goes openly to work
without any regard. They have no certain end or term of their lives: but as
every one is arrived to the pits brinke, and grown to extremity of age, him
his kinsfolks and acquaintance take with certain cattle and sacrifice him to
the gods, whose flesh being afterward boiled in a Chaldern, they make
thereof a solemn feast or banquet. Which kind and manner of death is esteemed
with them the most blessed and glorydus death that can possibly happen to man.
Such as dye through any disease or malady, they never eat, but ouerwhelm and
cover them with mouldes, holding him unhappy and accursed that lived not to the
divine dignity and honor of sacrifice. They sow not one foot of ground, but
mayntaine them selves and live by fish, great abundance whereof the river
Araxes does yield unto them. Their only drink is milk, besides the which
they use nothing. Among the gods they give honor to the Sun alone, unto
whom they consecrate and offer up horses: which manner of oblation they
ordained for this reason: that to the quickest, and swiftest of all the gods,
they might likewise offer the most flight and swifte creature that lives on
the earth.

K. v.

Herodotus his second Book entitled Euterpe.
AFter the death of the most noble and virtuous King Cyrus, there succeeded him
in ye empire a son of his, named Cambyses, born of Cassandana daughter to
Pharnasphus, who dying long time before ye king her spouse, was greatly
bewailed by him, and his whole empire. The young prince Cambyses making none
other accounte of ye Jones, then of his lawful seruau^ts left him by the due
right and title of inheritance, went in expedition against the Egyptians,
preparing an army as well out of other countries as also out of the regions and
borders of Greece, which were under his government. The Egyptians before such
time as Psamme^ichus held the supremicy, thought them selves to have been the
first and most ancient people of ye world. This king in time of his reign
and governance in Egypt, for the great desire he had to know by what people
the earth was first inhabited wrought An experience wrought for the trial of
antiquity.
an experience whereby the Egyptians were brought to think that the
Phrygians were the most old and ancient people of the earth, and them selves
to be next in antiquity to them. For Psammetichus by all means indeuouringe
to know who they were that first and before al others came into the world,
finding himself hardly satisfied with ought he could hear: practiced a devise
and feate of his own brain. Two young infants borne of base parents, he
gave to his Shepherd to bring up and nourish in this manner. He gave
commandment yt no man in their presence or hearing should speak one word:
but that being alone in a solitary and deserte cabyne far from all company,
they should have milk and other food brought and mynistred to them in due and
convenient time. Which things were done and commanded by him, to the intent
yt when they left of their childish cries and began to prattle and speak
plainly, he might know what speech and language they would first use: which in
process of time fell out and, happened accordingly. For being of ye age of two
years, it chanced that the shepherd (who was their Nourice and bringer up)
approaching near to the door of the Cottage and entering in, both the little
brats sprawling at his feet, and stretching forth It were a question if a man
should be taught no language, in what tongue he would speak
their hands, cried thus: Beccos, Beccos: which at the first hearing, the
Pastor noted only and made no words: but perceiving him self always saluted
after one sort: and yt evermore at his entrance the children spoke ye same
word, the matter was opened to ye king: at whose commandment he brought the
children and delivered them up into his hands: whom when Psammetichus also
himself had heard to chat in the same manner, he made curiouse search what
people used ye word Beccos in their language, and in what meaning they took it.
Whereby he came to know yt the word was accustomably used by ye people of
Phrygia to signify bread. For which cause the Egyptians came into opinion, yt
the Phrygians were of greater time and longer continuance then them selves. Of
all which matter, and the manner of doing thereof. I was credibly informed by
the priests of ye god Vulcane, abiding at Memphis. Howbeit many fond fables
are recited by the Grecian writers, that Psammetichus giving ye children to
certain women of the country to suck and bring up, caused their tongues to
be cut out yt they might not speak to them. Thus much was rehearsed by them
of ye trayning up and education of the infants. Many other things also were
told me by the holy and religious Chaplaynes of ye god Vulcane, with whom I had
often conference at Memphis.

Moreover, for ye same occasion I took a journey to Thebs and Heliopolis, which
is to wit, ye city of ye Sun, to ye end I might Heliopolis the city of the
Sun.
see whether they would iumpe all in one tale and agree together. For the
Heliopolitans are said to be the most prudent and witty people of all ye
Egyptians. Notwithstanding of divine and heavenly matters, as touching their
gods, look what they told me The vvisest people in Egypt.
I am purposed to conceal, save only their names, which are manifestly known
of all men: of other matters I mean to keep silence, unless by the course of
the Hystory I shall perforce be brought into a narration of the same. In all
their talk of mortal and humane altayres, they did rightly accord and consent
one with an other: saying this: that yt Egyptians first of all others found
out the circuit and compass of yt year, dividing The 12 months of the
year first found out by the Egyptians.
the same into 12 several months according to yt course and motion of the
stars: making (in my fancy) a better computation of the time then the
Grecians do, which are driven every third year to add certain days to
some one month, whereby the years may fall even and become of a just
compass. Contrariwise, the Egyptians to three hundred days which they part
and distribute into twelve months, making addition of five odd days, cause
the circle and course of their years to fall out equally and always a like.
In like manner the Egyptians The names of the 12 gods, Aulters, Images, and
Temples invented by the Egyptians.
first invented and used the surnames of the twelve gods: which yt Grecians
borrowed and drew from them. The self same were the first founders of Aulters,
Images, and Temples to the gods: by whom also chiefly were carved the pictures
of beasts and other creatures in stone, which thing for yt most part they
prove and confirm by lawful testimonies and good authority: to this they ad
besides yt the first king yt ever raygned was named Menes the first king that
ever raygned.
Menes, under whose governance all y^ land of Egypt except the province of
Thebes was wholly covered and overwhelmed with water, and yt no part of the
ground which lies above the poole called Myris was then to be seen: into which
poole from A Egypt for the most part covered with water.
the sea is 7. days sailing. And truly as concerning y^ country they seemed to
speak truth. For it is evident to all men (who having never heard thereof do
but only behold it) how that part of Egypt whereat the Grecians are wont to
arryue is gained ground, and as it were the gift of the river. Likewise all the
land above the poole for the space of thr^: days fayleing: whereof
notwithstanding they spoke nothing at all. Besides, there is another thing from
whence no small proof may be borrowed: to wit, the very nature and quality of
the Egyptian soil: which is such that being in voyage toward Egypt, after
you come within one days sailing of the land, at every sound with the
plummet, you shall bring up great store of mud and noisome filth, even in
such place as the water is eleven else in depth: whereby it is manifest that so
far y^ ground was cast up and left bare by the waters. The length of Egypt
by the sea coaste is 423. miles and a half: according to our lymitation which
is from the coaste of Plynthines, to the poole named Selbonis, whereunto
reaches an end of y^ great mountain Cassius: on this side therefore Aegypte
is sixety scheanes, which conteyne the number of miles before mentioned. For
with y^ Egyptians such as are slenderly landed, measure The manner of the
Egyptians measures.
their ground by paces, they which have more, by furlongs, unto whom very much
is allotted, by the Persian mile named Parasanga: lastly such as in large and
ample possessions exceed the rest, meet their torritory by Schoenes. The
measure Parasanga contains thirty furlongs, the Schoene three score, Egypt
next the sea coaste: 3600. furlonges.
whereby it comes to pass that the land of Egypt along the sea is 3600.
furlongs, from this part toward the city Heliopolis and the middle region:
Egypt is very wide and broad a plain and champion country, destitute of
waters, yet very slimie and full of mudde. The journey from the sea to
Heliopolis by the higher part of the region, is welnigh of the same length
with that way, which at Athens leads from the altar The description of the
country of Egypt.
of the twelve gods to Pisa, and y^ palace of Jupiter Olympius, between which
two ways by just co^putation can hardly be found more then fifteen
furlonges difference: for the distaunce between Athens and Pisa is supposed to
want of 1500 furlongs, fiftene, which number in the other of Egypt is full,
complet, and perfect: trauayling from Heliopolis by the hills you shall find
Egypt to be straight and narrow compassed, banked on the one side by a mighty
hill of Arabia, reachinge from the North toward the South which by degrees
waxes higher and higher, and bears upwards toward the redd sea. In this
mountain are sundry quaries out of the which yt people of Aegypte hewed their
stone to build the Pyramides at Memphis: one this side, the hill draws and
wyndeth it self toward those places whereof we spoke before. The self same
mountain has another course from the East to the Weste stretching so far
in length as a man may travail in two months: the East end hereof yeldeth
frankincense in great abundance: likewise one the other side of Egypt which
lies toward Africa, there runs another stony hill, wherein are builte
certain Pyramedes very full of gravel and gross A mountain.
Sand, like unto that part of the Arabian hill that bears toward the South:
so that from Helyopolis the ways are very narrow not passing four days
course by Sea.

The spate between the mountains is champion ground, being in the narrowest
place not above two hundred furlongs from the one hill to the other: having
passed this straight, Egypt opens into a large and ample wideness
extendinge it self in great breadth: such is the manner and situation of the
country.

Furthermore, from Heliopolis to Thebs is nine days journey by water, being
severed from each other in distance of place four thousand eight hundred and
sixty furlongs, which amounts to y^ number of four score and one schoenes:
of the furlongs aforesaid, three thousand and six hundred lie to the sea, as
we declared before: Now from the sea coaste to the city Thebs are 6120.
furlonges of plain ground, and from Thebs to the city Elephantina, 820. Of all
the region and country. Egypt whereof we have spoken the most part is
borow(...) ground, wherein the waters heretofore have had their cour(...) for
all the whole bottom which lies between the two mountains above the city
Memphis seems to have been a narrow sea, much like unto those places that lie
about Ilium, Teuthrania, Ephesus, and the plain of Meander: if it be not
amiss to bring small things in comparison with greater matters: forasmuch as
none of those ryuers which held their passage in the places forenamed, are
worthy to be mentioned where any one of the seven streams of Nylus are brought
into talk: there be also other floudes not comparable in bigness to Nylus,
which The strange effects of certain ryuers.
have wrought strange effects and wonderful things in the places where they
have run: amongst whom is the famous river Achelous, which flowing through
Acarnania into yt sea of the Isles Echinades, has joined the half part of the
Isles to the main and continent. In the country of Arabia, not far from Egypt
there is a certain arm or bosom of the sea, having a breach and issue out of
the red sea, the length whereof beginning at the end of yt angle or creek and
continuing to y^ wide main, is four days sail: the breadth easy to be cut
over in half a day: in this narrow sea the waters ebb and flow, raging and
roaring exceedingly against a forde or shalow place, whereat the stream beats
with great violence: such a like creek I suppose to have been in former ages
in the land of Aegypte, which brake out from the North sea, and continued his
course toward Aethyopia: like as also the Arabian sea (whereof we have spoken)
flows from the south waters, toward yt coasts of Syria, both which straights
welnigh in their furthest corners concur and meet together being separrted by
no great distaunce of ground: were it then that yt river Nilus should make a
vent, and shed it self into the narrow sea of Arabia, what might binder, but
yt in 200000 years, by yt continual and daily course of yt river, the creek
of the salt waters should be clean altered and become dry: for I think it
possible, if in 10000 years before me, sundry ryuers have changed their
courses and left the ground dry whereas first they ran: an arm of the sea also
much greater then yt may be driven besides his natural bosom, especially by
the force of so great a stream as the river Nilus, by whom diverse things of
greater admiration have been brought to pass. The report therefore which they
gave of the soil I was easily By what proofe^ the country of Egypt is
argued to have been covered by waters.
brought to believe, as well for that yt country it self brings credit to the
beholders, as also yt in the very hills and mountains of the region are found
a multitude of shel fishes, the earth likewise sweating out a certain salt and
brynishe humor, which does corrupt and eat the Pyramides. Again, it is in no
point like to any of the countries that lie next unto it, neither to Arabia,
Lybia, nor Syria, (for the Syrians inhabit the sea coaste of Arabia) being of
a black and brittle moulde, which comes to pass by the great store of
mudde and slimy matter which the river being a flote brings out of Aethyopia
into the land of the Egyptians. The earth of Lybia is much more read and
sandy underneath. The moulde of Arabia and Syria draw near to a fat and
batile claye, being under ground very rockye and full of stone.

Likewise, for proof that the Region in time past was watery ground the
priests alleged how in the time of king Myris his raygne the flood arysing
to the height of 8. cubits watered the whole country of Aegypte lying beneath
Memphis, scarce 900 years being past and expired since the death and decease
of Myris: whereas at these days unless it swell and increase 15. or 16.
cubits high, it comes not at all into yt coast, which aforesaid coast, if
accordingly to ye fall of ye river it grow still in loftynesse and become
higher, the earth receyuinge no In Egypt it never rayneth, but their land is
watered by the ouerflovve of Nilus.
moisture by the sloude, I fear ye Egyptians themselves that dwell beneath ye
lake Myris both other, and also the inhabitants of the land of Delta, will
evermore be annoyed with the same plague and inconvenience, which the Gretians
(by their accounte) are sometimes like to abide. For the people of Egypt
hearing that the whole country of Greece was moystned and watered by the
seasonable fall of rain and showers, and not by floudes and ryuers like unto
their own: they prophecy that ye day would come, when as the Greeks being
deceived of their hope would all pearishe through famine and hunger: meaning
that if ye gods did not vouchsafe to send the^ rain in due season, from whom
alone they have their moisture, the whole nation should go to wrack for want
of sustenaunce. Thus far is pleased them to descant of the fortune of Greece.
Let us now consider in what estate and condition they stand them selves if
then (as we said before) the low country of Memphis (for in these is the
gain and increase of ground seen) wax and augment accordingely as in former
times, our friends of Egypt shall show us the way, what it is to be famished
and dye by hunger: if neither their land be moystened by the sweet and timely
showers of rain, nor by the swelling and rising of the river. For as now, they
have an especial advantage as well of all The manner of husbandry amongst the
Egyptians.
men else, as of the rest of their countrymen yt dwell higher, in that they
receive the fruit and increase of the ground without either tilling or weeding
the earth, or doing ought else belonging to husbandry: wherefore immediately
after the ryseing of ye waters, ye earth being moist and supple, and the river
returned again to his old course, they sow and scatter their seed every one
upon his own ground and territory: wherinto having driven great herds of
Swine that root and tread the grain and moulds together, they stay till the
time of harvest, attending Hogs be the best husbands in Egypt, and the vvorst
in England.
the increase and gain of their seed. Being full grown and ripened, they
send in their hogs afresh to muzle and stamp the corn from out the ears,
which done, they sweep it together, and gather it. If we follow the opinion of
the people of Ionia, as touching the land of Egypt, who affirm, that the true
country of Egypt is in very deed nothing else save the A confutation of the
opinion of the Jones concerning Egypt.
province of Delta (which takes his name of the watchtowre or Castle of
espiall made by Perseus) testifying besides, that by the sea coast to the salt
waters of Pelusium, it stretches forty scheanes in length, and reaches from
the sea toward the heart of the region, to the city of the Cercasians (near
unto which ye river Nilus parts it self into two several mouths, the one
whereof is called Pelusium, the other Canobus) and that all the other parts of
Egypt are belonging to Arabia and Africa, we might very well infer and
prove hereof, that the country of Egypt in former times was none at all.
For the land of Delta (as they say, and we easily believe) was ground lif^
void and naked by the water, and that of late years also and not long ago:
wherefore if they had no country at all, what caused them so curiously to
labor in the searching out and blazing of their auncienty, supposing
themselves to be the chief of all people, the knowledge and intelligence
whereof, was not worth the two years trial and experiment which they wrought
in the children. I my self am fully persuaded, that the Egyptians took not
their beginning together with the place of Delta. but were always since the
first beginning and original of mankind, whose country gayning ground, and
increasing by the change and alteration of the river, many of them went down
from the high country, and inhabited the low places, for which cause, the City
Thebes, and the country belonging thereto, was heretofore called Egypt, the
circuit and compass whereof is 6120. furlongs. Be it so then that our opinion
accord and consent with truth, the Grecian writers are in a wrong box, but if
they speak truly, yet in other matters they reckon without their host,
making but three parts of the whole earth, Europa, Asia, and Africa: whereas
of necessity Delta in Egypt should be accounted for the fourth, since by
their own books it is neither joined with Asia, nor yet with Africa. For by
this account, it is not the river Nilus that diuides Asia from Africa, which at
the point and sharp angle of Delta, cutting it self into two sundry streams,
that which lies in ye mids should equally pertayne both to Asia and Africa.
But to leave the judgment and opinion of the Greeks, we say and affirm, that
all that country is rightly termed Egypt, which is held and possessed by
the Egyptians, even as also we make no doubt to call those places Cilicia and
Assyria where the Cilicians and Assyrians do dwell. In like manner, according
to truth, Asia and Africa are disseuered and parted between themselves by none
other borders, then by the limits and bounds of Egypt. Howbeit, if we follow
the Graecians, all Egypt (beginning at the places called Catadupae and the
city Elephantina) is to be divided into two parts, which draw their names of
the regions whereunto they are adjoined, the one belonging to Africa the other
to Asia. For the river Nilus taking his beginning from the Catadupae so called,
and flowing The course of the river Nilus.
through the mids of Egypt, breaks into the sea, running in one stream
til it come to the city of the Cercasians, and afterward leuering it self
into three sundry channels. The first of these channels turns to the East, and
is called Pelusium, The names of the channels of Nilus: Pelusium. Canobus.
the second Canobus, the third stream flowing directly in a straight line,
keeps this course, first of all scouring through the upper coasts of the
country, it beats full upon the point of Delta, through the midst whereof,
it has a straight and direct stream even unto the sea, being the fairest and
most famous of all the rest of the channels, and is called Sebennyticum. From
this stream are derived two other arms also, Sebennyticum
leading to the salt waters, the one being called Saiticum, the other
Mendesium. For as touching those branches and Saiticum. Menedesium.
Bolbitinum. Bu^olicum.
streams of Nilus, which they term Bolbitinum and Bucolicum, they are not
naturally made by course of the water, but drawn out and dug by the labor
of men. I follow not the fantasies of mine own brain, nor imagine any thing
of my self, for that the country of Egypt is so wide, and of such amplitude
as we have described it, I appeal to the oracle of the god Hammon which came
into my mind, being in study and meditation about these matters.

The people of the two cities Maerea and Apia that inhabit the borders of
Egypt next unto Africa, esteeming themselves A story touching the description
of Egypt.
to be of the lineage and nation of the Africans, not of the Egyptians, became
weary of their ceremonies and religion, and would no longer absteyne from the
flesh of kyne and feamale cattle, as the rest of the Egyptians did, they
sent therefore An oracle in Afrike.
to the prophecy of Hammon, denying themselves to be of Egypt, because they
dwelt not within the compass of Delta, neither agreed with them in any thing,
wherefore they desired ye god that it might be lawful for them without
restraint to taste of all meats indifferently: but the oracle forbade the^ so
to do, showing how all that region was justly accounted Egypt which the waters
of Nilus ouerranne and covered, adding heereto all those people that dwelling
beneath the city Elephantina, drank of the water of the same flood. This
answer How much of the land Nilus ouerflovveth.
was given them by the oracle. Now it is meet we know, that Nilus at what
time it rises above the banckes, ouerfloweth not Delta alone, but all the
country next unto Africa, and likewise the other side adjoining to Arabia,
covering the earth on both parts the space of two days journey or thereabout.

As touching the nature of the river Nilus, I could not be satisfied either by
the priests, or by any other, being always very willing and desirous to hear
something thereof, first, The cause and time of the rising of the river.
what the cause might be that growing to so great increase, it should drown
and ouergo the whole country, beginning to swell the eight day before the
kalends of July, and continuing aflote an hundred days, after which time, in
the like number of days it falls again, flowyng within the compass of his
own banckes till the next approach of July.

Of the causes of these things the people of Egypt were ignoraunte
themselves, not able to tell me any thing whether Nilus had any proper and
peculiar: virtue different from the nature of other floods. About which matters
being very inquisitiue, moved with desire of knowledge, I demanded Nilus
sends forth no miste.
inoreouer the reason and occasion why this stream of all others never sent
forth any miste or vapor; such as are commonly seen to ascend and rise from
the waters, but herein also I was faint to nestle in mine own ignorance,
desiring to be lead of those that were as blind as my self. Howbeit, certain
Grecian writers thinking to purchase the price and praise of wit, have gone
about to discourse of Nilus, and set A refutation of the Grecians as touching
the same things.
down their judgment of the nature thereof, who are found to varry and
dissent in three sundry opinions, two of the which I suppose not worthy the
naming, but only to give the reader intelligence how ridiculous they are. The
first is, that the over flow of Nilus comes of none other cause, then that
the winds Etesiae so named, blowing directly upon the stream thereof, hinder
and beat back the waters from flowing into the sea, which winds are commonly
wont to arise, and have their season a long time after the increase and rising
of Nilus: but imagine it were otherwise, yet this of necessity must follow,
that all rivers whatsoever having a full and direct course against the winds
Etesiae, shall in like manner swell and grow over their banks, and so much the
rather, by how much the less and weak the floods themselves are, whose
streams are opposed against the same. But there be many rivers as well in
Syria as in Africa, that suffer no such motion and change as has bin said of
the flood Nilus. There is another opinion of less credit and learning, albeit
of greater wonder and admiration then the first, alleging the cause of the
rising to be, for that the river (say they) proceeds from the Oeean sea,
which enuironeth the whole globe and circle of the earth. The third opinion
being more caulme and modest then the rest, is also more false and unlikely
then them both, affirming, that the increase and augmentation of Nilus commes
of the snow waters molten and thawed in those regions, carrying with it so much
the less credit and authority, by how much the more it is evident that the
river coming from Africa through the midst of Aethiopia, runs continually
from the hotter countries to the colder, being in no wise probable, or any
thing likely that the waxing of the waters should proceed of snow. Many sound
proofs may be brought to the weakening of this cause, whereby we may guess how
grossly they err which think so great a stream to be increased by snow.
What greater reason may be found to the contrary, then that the winds blowing
from those countries are very warm by nature. Moreover, the land it self is
continually void of rain and ye, being most necessary that within five days
after the fall of snow there should ^ome rain, where by it comes within
five days after snow, falls rain.
to pass that if it snow in Egypt, it must also of necessity rain. The same
is confirmed and established by the blackness and swartnesse of the people,
colored by the vehement heat and scorching of the sum: likewise by the
swalowes and kytes which continually keep in those coasts: lastly by the
flight of the cranes toward the coming of winter, which are always wont to
fly out of Scythia and the cold regions to these places, where all the winter
season they make their abode. Were it then that never so little snow could fall
in those countries by the which Nilus has his course, and from which he
stretches his head and beginning, it were not possible for any of these things
to happen which experience proves to be true. They which talk of Oceanus,
grounding their judgment upon a mere fable, want reason to prove it. For I
That there is no sea called Ocean.
think there is no such sea as the Ocean, but rather that Homer or some one of
the ancient Poets devised the name, and made use thereof afterward in their
tales and poetry. Now if it be expedient for me having refuted and disalowed
other men's judgments, to set down mine own. The reason why Nilus is so great
in summer I take to be this. In the wintertime The true opinion of these things.
the sun declining from his former race under the cold winter star,
keeps his course over the high countries of Africa, and in these few words
is contained the whole cause. For the sun the nearer he makes his approach to
any region, the more he drinks up the moisture thereof, and causes the
rivers and brooks of the same country to run very low. But to speak at
large, and lay open the cause in more ample wise, thus the case stands. The
bringer to pass and worker hereof is the sun, being carried over the high
countries of Africa: For the spring time with them being very fair and
clear, the land hot, and the wyndes cold, the sun passing over them works
the same effect as when it runs in the midst of heaven in summer,
for so much as by virtue of his beams gathering water unto him, he causes it to
ascend into the superior regions, where the winds receiving The cause why
the South and Southvveast vvind bring rain.
it, dispearse the vapors and resolve them again, which is chiefly done by
the South and Southwest wind that blow from these countries, being stormy
and full of rain. Now the water drawn out of Nilus by the sun, does not in
this sort fall down again in showers and drops of rain, but is quite spent
and consumed by the heat. Toward the end of winter, the sun drawing toward
the midst of the sky in like manner as before, sucketh the water out of
other rivers, which is the cause that being thus drawn until much rain and
showers increase them again, they become fleet and almost dry. Wherefore the
river Nilus, into whom alone no showers fall at any time, is for just cause
lowest in winter, and bighest in summer, forasmuch as in summer the sun
draws moisture equally out of all rivers, but in winter out of Nilus alone,
this I take to be the cause of the diverse and changeable course of the river.
Hereof also I suppose to proceed the dryness of the air in that region, at
such time as the sun deuideth his course equally, so that in the high
countries of Afric it is always summer: whereas if it were possible for the
placing and situation of the heavens to be altered, that where North is, there
were South, and where South is, North, the sun toward the coming and
approach of winter departing from the midst of heaven, would have his passage
in like sort over Europe, as now it has over Afric, and work the same
effects (as I judge) in the river Ister, as now it does in Nilus. In like
manner, the cause why Nilus has Ister a great river in Europe.
no mist or cloud arising from it according as we see in other floods, I deem
to be this, because the country is exceeding hot and parching, being
altogether unfit to send up any vapors, which usually breathe and arise out
of cold places. But let these things be as they are and have been always.

The head and fountain of Nilus where it is, or from whence it comes, none
of the Egyptians, Graecians, or Africans that The spring of the river Nilus
unsearchable.
ever I talked with, could tell me any thing, besides a certain scribe of
Mineruas treasury in the city Sais, who seemed to me to speak merrily, saying,
that undoubtedly he knew the place, describing the same in this manner. There
be two mountains (quoth he) arising into sharp and spindled tops, situate
between Syene a city of Thebais, and Elephantina, the one called Crophi, the
other Mophi. from the vale between the two hills does issue out the head of
the river Nilus, being of The two mountains Crophi and Mophi.
an unsearchable deapth, and without bottom, half of the water running
toward Egypt and the North, the other half toward Aethiopia and the
South. Of the immeasurable deapth of the fountain, the scribe affirmed, that
Psammetichus King of the Egyptians had taken trial, who sounding the waters
with a rope of many miles in length, was unable to feel any ground or bottom:
whose tale (if any such thing were done as he said) made me think, that in
those places whereof he spoke, were certain gulfes or whirlepooles very swift,
violente and raging, which by reason of the fall of the water from the hills,
would not suffer the line with the sounding lead to sink to the bottom, for
which cause, they were supposed to be bottomless. Besides this, I could
learn nothing of any man. Nevertheless, traveling to Elephantina to behold
the thing with mine own eyes, and making diligent inquiry to know the truth,
I understood this, that taking our journey from thence Southward to ye
countries above, at length we shall come to a steep and bending shelfe, where
ye river falls with great violence, so yt we must be forced to fasten two
gables to each side of ye ship, and in that sort to hale and draw her forward,
which if they chance either to slip or break, ye vessel is by and by driven
backwards by ye intolerable rage and violence of ye waters. To this place from
ye city Elephantina is four days sail, whereaboutes ye river is full of
windings and turnings, like the flood Meander, and in length so continuing
twelve scheanes, all which way the ship of necessity must be drawn. After
this, we shall arrive at a place very smooth and caulme, wherein is standing an
Island encompassed round by the river, by name Tachampso. The one half hereof
is inhabited by the Egyptians, the other half by the Aethiopians, whose
country is adjoining to the Southside of the I Will. Not far from the Island is
a poole of wonderful and incredible bigness, about the which the Shepherds
of Aethiopia have their dwelling: whereinto, after we are declined out of the
main stream, we shall come to a river directly running into the poole, where
going on shore, we must take our voyage on foot the space of forty days by
the waters side, the river Nilus it self being very full of sharp rocks and
craggy stones, by the which it is not possible for a vessel to pass. Having
finished forty days journey along the river, take shipping again, and pass
by water twelve days voyage, till such time as you arrive at a great city
called Meroe, which is reputed for the chief and The City Meroe.
Metropolitan city of the country, the people whereof, only of all the gods
worship Jupiter and Bacchus, whom they reverence with exceeding zeal and
devotion. Likewise to Jupiter they have planted an oracle, by whose counsel
and voice they rule their martial affairs, making war how often soever, or
against whomesoeuer they are moved by the same. From this city Meroe by as
many days travel as ye take from Elephantina to ye same, you shall come to a
kind of people named Automoly, which is to say, traitors or runnagates, the
same also in like manner being called Asmach, which emporteth in the greek
tongue such as stand and attend at the Kings left hand. These men being
whilome souldyers in Egypt to the number of eight thousand and two hundred,
they revolted from their own countrymen, and fled over to the Aethiopians for
this occasion. Being in ye time of King Psammetichus The soldiers of Egypt
forsook their own country.
dispersed and divided into sundry garrisons, some at the city of Elephantina,
and Daplinae Pelusiae, against the Aethiopians, other against the Arabians and
Syrians, and thirdly at Marea against the Africans (in which places agreeably
to the order and institution of Psammetichus, the Persian garrisons also did
lie in munition) having continued the space of three years in perpetual guard
and defense of the land, without shift or release, they fell to agreement
amongst themselves to leave their King and country, and fly into Aethiopia:
which their intent Psammetichus hearing, made after them incontinently, and
having overtaken the army, humbly besought them with many tears, not to
forsake by such unkind and unnatural wise their wives, children, and country
gods, unto whose plaint and entreaty, a rude roystrell in the company showing
his privy members, made this answer, wheresoever (quoth he) these be, there
will I find both wife The trick of a knave.
and children. After they were come into Aethiopia, and had offered themselves
unto the King of the soil, they were by him rewarded on this manner. Certain
of the Aethiopians that were scarsely sound hearted to the King, were deprived
by him of all their lands and possessions, which he franckly gave and bestowed
on the Egyptians. By means of these, the people of Aethiopia were brought
from a rude and barbarous kind of demeanor, to far more civil and manlike
behavior, being instructed and taught in the manners and customs of the
Egyptians. Thus the river Nilus is found still to continue the space of four
months journey by land and water (less then in which time it is not
possible for a man to come from Elephantina to the Automolians) taking his
course and stream from the West part of the world, and falling A slory
touching the spring of Nilus.
of the sun. Howbeit in this place I purpose to recite a story told me by
certain of the Cyraeneans, who fortuning to take a voyage to ye oracle of
Ammon, came in talk with Etearchus King of the Ammonians, where by course of
speech, they fell at length to discourse and common of Nilus, the head whereof
was unsearchable, and not to be known. In which place Etearchus made mention
of a certain people called Nama^ones of the country of Afrike, inhabiting the
quicksands, and all the coast that lies to the east. Certain of these men
coming to the court of Etearchus, and reporting diverse strange and wonderful
things of the deserts and wild chases of Africa, they chanced at length to
tell of certain young Gentlemen of their country, issued of the chief and
most noble families of all their nation, who being at a reasonable A voyage
undertaken by certain young gentlemen.
age very youthful and valtant, determined in a bravery to go seek strange
adventures, as well other, as also this. Five of them being assigned thereto by
lot, put themselves in voyage to go search and discry the wilderness, and
desert places of Africa, to the end they might see more, and make further
report thereof then ever any that had attempted the same. For the sea coast of
Africa poynting to the North pole, many nations do inhabit, beginning from
Egypt, and continuing to the promontory named Soloes, wherein Africa has his
end and bound. All the places above the sea are haunted with wild and savage
beasts, being altogether void and desolate, pestered with sand, and
exceeding dry. These gentlementrauellers having made sufficient provision of
water, and other vyands necessary for their journey, first of all passed the
countries that were inhabited: and next after that, came into the wild and
waste regions amongst the caves and dens of fierce and untamed beasts,
through which they held on their way to the west part of the earth. In which
manner, after they had continued many days journey, and traveled over a great
part of the sandy countries, they came at length to espy certain fair and
goodly trees, growing in a fresh and pleasant medowe, whereunto incontinently
making repair, and tasting the fruit that grew thereon, they were suddenly
surprised and taken short by a company of little dwarfes, far under the
common pitch and stature of men, whose tongue the gentlemen knew not, neither
was their speech understood of them. Being apprehended, they were lead away
over sundry pooles and meares into a city, where all the inhabitauntes were of
the same stature and degree with those that had taken them, and of color swart
and black. Fast by the side of this city ran a swift and violent river,
flowing from the Weast to the East, wherein were to be seen very hydeous and
terrible serpents called Crocodyles. To this end drew the talk of Etearchus
King of the Ammonians, save that he added besides how the Namasonian gentlemen
returned home to their own country (as the Cyraeneans made recount) and how
the people also of the city whether they were brought, were all coniurers, and
given to the study of the black art. The flood A City inhabited by
Necromancers.
that had his passage by the city, Etearchus supposed to be the river Nilus,
even as also reason it self gives it to be. For it flows from Africa, and
has a just and direct cut through the midst of the same, following (as it
should seem) a very like and semblable course unto the river ^ster.

Ister beginning at the people of the Celts, and the city Pyrene (the Celts
keep without the pillars of Hercules, being near neighbors to the Cynesians,
and the last and utmost The description of the river Ister.
nation of the western people of Europe) deuideth Europe in the midst, and
scouring through the coast, it is held by the Istryans (people so named and
coming of the Milesians) it lastly flows into the sea. Notwithstanding Ister
is well known of many, for that it has a perpetual course through countries
that are inhabited, but where or in what part of the earth Nilus has his
spring, no man can tell, for so much as Africa from whence it comes, is void,
desert, and unfurnished of people, the stream and course whereof, as far as
lies in the knowledge of men, we have set down and declared, yt end of the
river being in Egypt where it breaks into ye sea.

Egypt is welny opposite and directly set against ye mountains of Cilicia,
from whence to Synopis standing in ye Euxine sea, is five days journey for a
good footema^, by straight and even way.

The I Will Synopis lies just against the river Ister, where it bears into the
sea, so that Nilus running through all the coast of Africa, may in some manner
be compared to ye river Ister, howbeit, as touching ye flood Nilus be it hither
to spoken.

Let us yet proceed to speak further of Egypt, both for that the country it
self has more strange wonders then any nation Egypt the most vvonderfull
nation in the world.
in the world, and also because the people themselves have wrought sundry
things more worthy memory, then any other nation under the sun, for which
causes, we thought meet to discourse more at large of ye region and people.
The Egyptians therefore as in the temperature of the air, and nature of the
river, they dissent from all other: even so in their laws and customs they
are unlike and disagreeing from all men.

In this country the women follow the trade of merchandise in buying and
selling: also victualing and all kind of sale and chapmandry, whereas
contrarywyse the men remain at The laws and customs of the people of Egypt.
home, and play the good huswiues in spinning and weauing and such like duties.
In like manner, the men carry their burdens on their heads, the women on their
shoulders. Women make water standing, and men crouching down and cowring to
the ground. They discharge and unburden their bellies of that which nature
voydeth at home, and eat their meat openly in the streets and high ways,
yielding this reason why they do it, for that (say they) such things as be
unseemly and yet necessary ought to be done in counsel, but such as are
decent and lawful, in the eyes and view of all men. No woman is permitted to
do service or minister to the gods or goddesses, that duty being proper and
peculiar to men. The son refusing to nourish and sustain his parents, has
no law to force and constrayne him to it, but the daughter be she never so
unwilling, The daughter bound to nourish her parents in need.
is perforce drawn and compelled thereto. The priests and ministers of the
gods in other countries wear long hair, and in Egypt are all rased and
shaven. Likewise with other people it is an usual custom in sorrowing for the
dead to powle their locks, and especially such as are nearest touched with
grief, but contrarywyse the Egyptians at the deceasse of their friends suffer
their hair to grow, being at other times accustomed to powle and cut it to
ye stumps. Moreover, the people of all lands use to make difference between
their own diet and the food of beasts, saving in Egypt, where The good
fellowship in Egypt vvher the good man and his hogs dine together. The use of
grain is very ^lender in Egypt.
in barbarous and swinish manner men and beasts feed jointly together. Besides
this, ye people elsewhere have their greatest sustena^^e by wheat, rye, and
barley, which ye Egyptians may not taste of without great reproach and
contumely, using neuerthesse a kind of wheat whereof they make very white and
fine bread, which of some is thought to be darnell or bearebarly. This at the
first having mingled it with licour, they work and mould with their feet,
kneading the same afterward with their hands.

In this country also the manner is to circum^ise and cut round about the
skin from their privy parts, which none other use, except those that have
taken letter, and learned the custom from the Egyptians. The men go in two
garments, the women in one, stitching to the inside of the vesture a tape or
caddese to gird their appare. I close to them, which ye people of other regions
are wont to wear outwardly. The Graecians in writing and casting account,
frame their letters, and The manner of casting of account.
lay their counters from the left hand to the right, the Egyptians
contrariwise proceed from the right to the left, wherein also they frumpe and
gird at the Graecians, saying, that themselves do all things to the right hand,
which is well and honestly, but the Graekes to the left, which is peruersely
and untowardly. Furthermore, they use in writing two kind of charecters or
letters, some of the which they call holy and divine, Their letters or
charecters.
other common and profane. In the service and worship of the gods, they are
more religious and devout then any nation under heaven. They drink out of
brazen pots, which day by day they never fail to cleanse and wash very fair
and clean, which manner and custom is not in a few of them, but in all. They
delight principally to go in fresh and clean linen, consuming Cleanness in
auyre without pride.
no small part of the day in washing their garments. They circumcise their
secret parts for desire they have to be void of filth and corruption,
esteeming it much better to be accounted clean, then comely. The priests and
churchmen: The custom of the priests.
shave their bodies every third day, to the end that neither lyee nor any kind
of uncleanness may take hold of those which are daily conuersaunt in the
honor and service of the gods. The same are arrayed in one vesture of single
linen, and paper shoes, without sufferance to go otherwise attired at any
time. They purge and wash themselves every day twice in the day time, and as
often in the night, using other ceremonies and customs welny infinite that are
not to be rehearsed. The selfsame priests have no small advantage or
commodity in this, that they live not of their own, neither spend or consume
any thing of their private goods and substance, but have daily ministered and
supplied unto them food in great abundance, as well the flesh of oxen as of
geese. Their drink is wine made of grapes, which in like manner is brought them
in allowance. Their dyer.
To take any kind of fish, they hold it unlawful: and if by fortune they have
but seen or lightly beheld any beans, they deem themselves the worsse for
it a month after, for so much as that kind of pulse is accounted unclean. The
rest also of the Egyptians and common sort use very seldom or never to sow
beans: and to eat the same either raw or sodden, they hold it a grievous
sin. The priests take their orders in such wise, that every one by turns and
courses does service to all The orders of priesthood.
the gods indifferently, no man being clarked or chosen to be the several
minister of any one god alone. All these are governed by one general president
or Archbishop. If any man dye, his son takes the priesthood in his stead.
All neat and bullockes of the malekinde they hold sacred to Epaphus, whereof
if they be in mind to sacrifice any, they search and try him whether he be
clean or no after this manner. If in all his skin there appear any one
black hair, they by and by The manner of trying the bullocks that are
sacrificed whether they be clean or otherwise.
judge him impure and unfit for sacrifice, which trial is made by some of the
priests appointed for the same purpose, who takes diligent view of the ox
both standing and lying, and turned every way, that no part may be unseen.
After this, search is made also of his mouth and tongue, whether all the signs
and tokens appear in him that should be in a pure and unspotted beast, of
which signs we determine to speak in another book. To make short, he
curiously beholds the hayres of his tail whether they grow according to
nature, and be all white. If all these marks agree, they tie a ribaund to one
of his horns, and sear a mark on the other, and so let him run, and if any
man adventure to offer up an ox, whose horns are not marked with the public
seal or brandyron, he is by and by accused by the rest of his company, and
condemned to dye. These are the means which they use in searching and
surueying their cattle, such as are to be offered to the gods. Moreover, The
order of sacrificing.
in the time of sacrifice and oblation, this is their manner. The beast that is
sealed on the horn, being brought to the aultare and place of immolation,
incontment a fire is kindled, then some one of the Chaplaynes taking a boule of
wine in his hands, drinks over the oblation with his face toward the temple,
and calling with a loud voice upon the name of the god, gives the beast a
wound and kills him, the head and hyde whereof, they bear into the market
place, with many The head of the beast that is sacrificed is accursed.
detestable cursses, and devilish bannings, making sale thereof to the
Merchaunts of Greece. Such of the Egyptians as have no place of sale or use of
Merchaundise with the Graecians, cast both head and hyde into the river Nilus.
In curssing the head of the slain beast they use this manner of imprecation,
that if any evil or misfortune be to happen either to those which do the
sacrifice, or to the whole realm and dominion of Egypt, it would please the
gods to turn all upon that head. The like use and custom about the heads of
such cattle as are killed in sacrifice, and in time of offering for the priest
to drink wine, is in all places alike throughout all the churches of Egypt,
in so much, that it is grown into a fashion in all the whole land, that no
Egyptian will taste of the head of beasts sacrificed. Howbeit, there is
choice and diversity of sacrifice with the^, neither is the same manner and
form of oblation kept and observed in every place. Now we will show and
declare which of all the goddesses they chiefly honor, and in whose name they
solemnize and celebrate the greatest feast. Having therefore most deuoutely
spent the eve or day before the feast in solemn fasting and prayer, they
sacrifice an Ox, whose hyde incontinently they pull off and take out his
entrayles, suffering the leaf and fat to remain within him. After that, they
hew off the shanke bones, with the lower part of the loyne and shoulders,
likewise the head and the neck, which done, they farce and stuff the body
with hallowed bread, honey, raysons, figs, franckincense, myrrh, and other
precious odours. These things accomplished they offer him up in sacrifice,
pouring into him much wine and oil, and abiding still fasting, until such
time as the offering be finished. In the mean space while the sacrifice is
burning, they beat and torment themselves with many stripes, whereby to
satisfy and appease the wrath and displeasure of the gods. Having left off on
this manner to afflict and crucify their flesh, the residue of the sacrifice
is set before them, where with they feast and refreshe their hunger. It is a
custom receyuen throughout all the region, to offer bullocks and calves of the
malekinde, if in case they be found immaculate and pure, according to the form
of their law: howveit, from kine and heiffers, they absteyne A law greatly
honored in Egypt.
most religiously, accounting them as holy and consecrate to the goddess Isis,
whose image is carved and framed like a woman, with a pair of horns on her
head, like as the Graecians describe and set forth Io. Hereof it proceeds
that the people of Egypt do most of all other beasts worship and reverence a
cow, for which cause, none of that nation neither men nor women will either
kiss a Grecian, or so much as use his knife to cut any thing, his spit to
roast, his pot to voyle, or any other thing belonging to them, disdayning and
loathing the very meat that has bin cut with a Graecians knife, for so much as
in Greece they feed of all neat indifferently both male and feamale. If an
ox or cow chance to die, they bury them The manner of burying kyne when they
die.
on this wise, the kine and females they cast into the river, durying the oxen
in some of the suburbs with one of his horns sticking out of the ground for a
token; lying on this manner until they be rotten. At an ordinary and appointed
time, there ariueth a ship from y^ I Will Prosopitis situate in yt part of Egypt
which is named Delta, being in compass nine scheanes, which is 63. miles. In
this Island are planted many cities, one of the which continually furnishes and
sends forth the aforesaid ship, having to name Atarbeehis, wherein stands a
fair and goodly temple dedicated to Venus. From this city Atarbechis, many
people are wont to stray and wander into other towns of Egypt. The ship
coming to land at every city, takes up the bones of the dead oxen, and caries
them all to one place where they are buried together. The law also commands
the selfsame manner to be kept and observed in the sepulture and burying of
other cattle that dye in the land, from the slaughter of the which generally
the Egyptians absteyne. Nevertheless, such as abiding in the province of
Thebes in the temple of Jupiter Thebanus, are invested with the orders of
priesthood, use the same abstinence from sheep, and slain goats upon the
aultars of the gods, for in Egypt the same gods have not the same kind of
divine honor in every place and with every people, saving Isis and Osyris, the
one a goddess, the other a god, which are of all men worshipped alyke. This
Osyris is of the Egyptians thought to be Bacchus, albeit for some respect they
name him otherwise. Contrary to these, such as are belonging to the palace of
Mendes, and are contained within the precinct and limits of that sheere,
withholde themselves from goats, and make sacrifice of sheep. The cause why
some of the Agyptians will kill no sheep.
The Thebaries therefore, and such as following their example eschew and avoid
the slaughter and killing of sheep, testify themselves to be moved hereunto
by a law, because that Jupiter on a time refusing to be seen of Hercules who
greatly desired to behold him, at his instant prayers cut off the head of
aramme, and stripping off the fell, cast it over him, and in such manner showed
himself to his son, where of the Egyptians framing the image of Jupiter,
made him to have a rams head, of whom, the Ammonians took that custom,
which are an offpring and branch grown from two sundry nations the Egyptians
and Aethiopians, as well may be seen by their language which is a medley of
both tongues: who seem for this cause to have named themselves Ammonians, for
that they Whence the Ammonians drevv their name.
hold the oracle of Jupiter whom the Egyptians call by the name of Ammon. In
this respect the Thebanes absteyne from the blood of rams and sheep,
esteeming them as holy and divine creatures. Howbeit, one day in the year
which they keep festival to Jupiter they kill a ram, and taking off the
skin, they cover therewith the image, whereunto incontinent they bring the
picture of Hercules, after which, they beat the naked flesh of the ram for a
good season. The sacrifice being in this sort accomplished, they bury the body
in a religious and hallowed vessel. This Hercules they reckon in the number of
the twelve gods, as for the other Hercules of whom the Graecians make mention,
the Egyptians are altogether unacquainted with him, neither do they seem at
any time to have heard of him. This name I suppose to have come first from
Egypt into Graece, and to have been borrowed of them, howsoever the Graecians
dissemble the matter, to make The name of Hercules taken from the Egyptians.
the invention seem their own: whereupon I ground with greater confidence,
for that the yarents of Hercules, Amphytrio and Alomaeea are by country and
lynage Egyptians. Likewise in Egypt, the name of Neptune, and the gods called
Dioseuri, was very strange, and unheard of, neither would they be brought by
any means to repute them in the fellowship and company of the gods. And it in
case they had taken the name of any god from the Graecians, it is very credible
that as well as of the rest, nay above the rest, they would have made chose of
Neptune and the other, were it that at those days trade of merchandise, and
voyaging by sea were used either by them into Graece, or by the Graecians into
Egypt, which I suppose and think to have been. It is therefore most sounding
and agreeable to truth, that if any thing had been borrowed by them, the name
of Neptune rather then Hercules had crept into their manners and religion.
Besides this, the god head and name also of Hercules is of great coutinuance
and antiquity in Egypt, insomuch that (by their saying) 17000. The Kings of
Egypt could make at their pleasure gods.
years are passed, since the reign of King Amasis, in time of whose
governance, the number of the gods was increased from eight to twelve, whereof
Hercules was then one. Here in not contented with a slippery knowledge, but
moved with desire to learn the truth, I came in question with many about the
same cause, and took shipping also to Tyrus a city of Phoenicia, where I had
heard say that the temple of Hercules was founded. Being landed at Tyrus, I
beheld the palace beautified and adorned with gifts of inestimable price, and
amongst these, two crosses, one of tried and molten gold, another framed of the
precious gemme Smaragdus, which in the night season sent forth very bright
and shining beams, forthwith falling into parle with the chap^^ines and
priests of ye temple, I demanded them during what space the chapel had
stood, and how long since it was built; whose talk and discourse in nothing
agreed with the Graecians affirming, that the temple took his beginning with
the city, from the first foundation and groundley whereof, two thousand and
three hundred years are exspired. I saw also in Tyrus another temple vowed to
Hercules sumamed Thesius. In like sort; I made a journey to Thasus, where I
light upon a chapel erected by the Phaenicians, who enterprising a voyage by
sea to the knowledge and discovery of Europe, built and founded Thasus, five
men's ages before the name of Hercules was known in Greece. These testimonies
doplainely prove that Hercules is an ancient god and of long durance. For
which cause amongst all the people of Greece they seem to have taken the best
course, that honor Hercules by two sundry temples, to one they show reverence
as to an immortal The two temples of Hercules in Greece.
god, whom they call Hercules Olympius, to another, as to a chief peer, and
most excellent person amongst men. Many other things are noysed by the
Graecians, albeit very rashly and of slender ground: whose fond and indiscreet
tale it is, that Hercules coming into Egypt, was taken by the Egyptians, and
crowned with a garland, who were in full mind to have made him a sacrifice to
Jupiter. Unto whose aultare being lead with great pomp and celerity, he
remained very meek and tractable, until such time as the priest made an
offerto slay him, at what time recalling his spirits, and laying about him with
manfull courage, he made a great slaughter of all such as were present and
strove against him. By which their fabulous and incredible narration they
flatly argue, how ignorant and vnaquaynted they be with the manners of Egypt,
for unto whom it is not lawful to make oblation of any brute beast, but of
swine, oxen, calves and geese: couldethey so far stray from duty and fear of
the gods, (...) to stayne and blemish their aultars with the blood of men:
Again, Hercules being alone in the hands of so many Egyptians, can it stand
with any credence or lykelyhoode that of himself he should be able to slay so
great a multitude: But let us leave these fables, and proceed forward to the
truth, Such therefore of this The reason why in some parts of Egypt they
vvil kill no goats.
people as fly the bloudshead and slaughter of goats (namely the Mendesians)
lay for their ground, that Pan was in the number of the eight gods which were
of greater standing and antiguitie then the twelve.

The form and image of the god Pan, both the paynters and ca^uers in Egypt
franie to the same similitude and resemblance as the Graecians have expressed
and set him forth by, making him to have the head and shankes of a goat, not
that they think him to be so, but rather like the other gods. Notwithstanding
the cause whereby they are moved to portray and shadow him in such sort, is no
great and handsome tale to tell, and therefore we are willing to omit it by
silence, suffices it that we know how as well bucke as do goats are no
pety saints in this country, in so much that with the Mendesians goateheards
are exalted above the common sort, and much more set by then any other degree
of men, of which company, some one is always of chief estimation, at whose
death, all the quarter of Mendesia is in great sorrow and heaviness, whereof it
comes, that as well the god Pan himself, as every male-goate is called in ye
Egyptian speech Mendes. In these parts of Egypt it happened that a goat of the
malekinde in open sight closed with a woman, which became very famous and
memorable throughout all the country. An hog A Goat closing with a woman.
Hogs of all beasts vvurst accounted of. Hogheards of basest account.
is accounted with them an unclean and defiled beast, which if any passing by
fortune to touch, his next work is to go wash and dowse himself clothes and
all in ye river, for which cause, of all their proper and native countrymen,
only such as keep swine, are forbidden to do worship in the temples. No man
will vouchsafe to we^ his daughter to a swineheard, nor take in marriage any of
their descent and issue feamale, but they mutually take and yield their
daughters in marriage between themselves. Of the number of the gods only Liber
and the Moon are sacrificed unto with hogs, whereof making oblation at the
full of the moon, for that space also they feed of porke and hogsflesh. The
reason why the people of Egypt kill swyne at this time, and at all other times
boil in so great despite and hatred against them, because mine ears glowed
to hear it, I thought it manners to conceal it. Swyne are offered up to the
Moon in this manner: the hog standing Swine sacrificed to Liber and Luna.
before the aultare, is first slain, then taking the tip of his tail, the
milt, the call, and the sewet, they lay them all together, spreading over them
the leaf or fat that lies about the belly of the swine, which immediately
they cause to burn in a bright flame. The flesh remaining they eat at the
full of the moon, which is the same day whereon the sacrifice is made,
abhorring at all other times the flesh of swine as the body of a serpent. Such
as be of poor estate, and slender substance, make the picture and image of a
hog in paast or dowe, which being consequently boiled in a vessel, they
make dedication thereof to their gods. Another feast also they keep solemn to
Bacchus, in the which toward supper they stick a swyne before ye threshold or
entry of their dwelling places, after which, they make restitution thereof to
the swinehearde again of whom they bought it. In all other points pertaining
to this feast, so like the Graecians as may be, saving that they square
Superstition often times runs into most filthy devises.
a little, and vary herein. For the manner of Greece is in this banquet to
wear about their necks the similitude of a man's yard named Phallum, wrought
and carved of figtree, in stead whereof, the Egyptians have devised small
images of two cubits long, which by means of certain strings and coardes
they cause to move and stir as if they had sense and were living. The
carriage of these pictures is committed to certain women that bear them too
and fro through the streets, making the yard of the image (which is as big
as all the body besides) to dance and play in abominable wise. Fast before
these marches a piper, at whose heels the women follow incontinent with
sundry psalms and sonets to ye god Bacchus. For what cause that one member of
the picture is made too big for the proportion and frame of ye body, and also
why, that, only of all the body is made to move, as they refused to tell for
religion, Melampus the first founder of this ceremony in Greece. In the time
of Herodotus the name of Philosophers was strange.
so we desired not to hear for modesty. Howbeit, Melampus son of Amytheon
was falsely supposed to have bin ignorant in the ceremonies of Egypt, in the
which he was very skillful and cunning. By whom the Greeks were first
instructed in the due order and celebration of Bacchus feast (whom they
worshipped by the name of Dionysius) and in many other ceremonies and religious
observations pertaining to the same. Notwithstanding something wanted in this
description, which was after added, and in more perfect and absolute manner set
down by certain grave and wise men called* Philosophers, which lived in the
secondage after him. Most evident it is that the picture of Phalli(...) worn
of the Graecians in the feast of Bacc^^s; was found out and devised by him,
whose discipline in this point the Graecians observe at this day. This Melampus
was (...) of rare wisdom, well seen in the art of divination and
southsaying, the author and first founder to the Graecians as well of other
things which he had learned in Egypt, as also of such statutes and obseruances
as belong to the feast of D^onysius, only a few things altered which he thought
to amend. For why, to think that the Graecians and Egyptians fell into the
same form of divine worship by ha^ hazard or plain chance, it might seem a
very hard and unreasonable guess, si^^ence it is manifest that the Greeks both
use the selfe^ame custom, and more then that, they kept it of old. Much less
can I be brought to say, that either his fashion or any other has been
translated and derived from Greece into Egypt I rather judge that Melampus
coming from Phaenicia into Beo^ia, accompanied with Cadmus and some other of
the Tyrians, was by them made acquaynted with all such rites and ceremonies as
in the honor of Dionysius are used by the Greeks. True it is, that the names
by which the gods are usually called, are borrowed and drawn from the
Egyptians, for hearing them too be taken from the Barbarians as the chief
inuenters and deuisers of the same, I have found not only that to be true, but
also that for the most part they are brought out of Egypt. For setting aside
Neptune and the gods called (...) (as before is declared) lun^, Venus,
Th(...)is, the Graces, the Nymphs Nereides, all the names of the gods and
goddesses have been evermore known and usurped in Egypt. I speak no more
then the Egyptians testify, which a^ouch sincerely that neither Neptune nor
the gods Dioscuri were ever heard of in their land. These names I judge to have
been devised by the Pelasgians, except Neptune, whose name I suppose to be
taken from the people of Africa, for so much as from the beginning no nation on
the earth but only the Africanes used that name, amongst whom, Neptune has
always been reverenced with celestial and divine honors, whom the
Egyptians also deny not to be, albeit they show and exhibit no kind of
divine honor toward him. These and such like customs (which we purpose to
declare) have the Greeks borrowed of the Egyptians: nevertheless, the image
of Mercury, who is framed with the secret member porrect The beastly devises of
the paganes.
and apparent, I rather deem to have proceeded from the manners of the
Pelasgians, then from the usual and accustomed wont of Egypt, and principally
to have grown in use with the Athenians, whose fact consequently became a
pattern and example to the rest of the Graecians. For the self same soil was
jointly held and inhabited both of the Athenians (which were of the right
lignage of Hellen) and likewise of the Pelasgians, who for the same cause began
to be reckoned for Graecians. Which things are nothing maruaylous to those that
are Cabiri the three sons of Vulcane.
silfull and acquaynted with the worship and religion which the Graecians yield
to the three sons of Vulcane named Cabiri, which divine ceremonies are now
fresh in Samothracia, and were taken and received from the Pelasgians. The
cause is, that those Pelasgians whom we said before to have had all one
territory with the Athenians, dwelt sometime also in Samothracia, by whom the
people of that soil were taught and indoctrined in the ceremonies appertinent
to Bacchus. First therefore the people of Athens following the steps of the
Pelasgians, caused the picture of Mercury to be carved in such sort as we
have heard. For authority and proof why the image should be thus framed, the
men of Pelasgos recited a mystery out of holy books, which is yet kept and
conserved in the religious monuments of Samothracia. The selfe^ame in prayer
and invocation to the heavenly powers, made abla^ion of all creatures
indifferentlye, and without respect (which I came to know at Dodona) giving
no names at all to the gods, as being flatly ignoraunte how to call them.
Generally they named them (...) gods, in that (...) that is, they disposed and
placed in order all the countries and regions on earth. In tract of time, the
names and appellations of the powers divine used in Egypt, grew also in
knowledge with the Greeks: ^nsuing which, the name also of Dionysius,
otherwise called Bacchus, came to light, albeit, long after that time and in
later days. A small time exspired, the Greeks counsayled with the oracle in
Dodona to the same end and purpose. This ^hayre of prophecy Dodona sometime the
chief oracle in Greece.
was in those days the only and most ancient seat in the land of Greece,
whether the Pelasgians repayring, demanded the oracle if the surnames of the
gods received and taken from the Barbarians, might be lawfully frequented in
Greece: whereto answer was given, that they should be retained: for which
cause, yielding sacrifice to the gods, such names were held by the men of
Pelasgos, and lastly observed of ye Graecians. Howbeit, The beginning of the
pagans gods.
what original or beginning the gods had, or whether they were evermore time
out of mind: finally, what form, figure, or likeness they bare, it was never
fully and perfectly known till of late days. For Hesiodus and Homer (which
were not passing. 400. years before us) were the first that ever made the gods
to be borne and sproong of certain progenies like unto men, assigning to every
one a byname, proper and peculiar honors, sundry crafts and sciences wherein
they excelled, not leaving so much as the favor and portraytour of any of the
gods secret and vndeseried. As for such poets as are said to have gone
before these, they seem to me to have lived after them. The first of these
things (I mean the names of the natures celestial) to have been planted in
Greece in such sort as has been declared, the priests at Dodona do justly
witness.

Now for this of Hesiode and Homer to be no other wise then is said, I pawn
mine own credit. Furthermore, of ye oracles in Afric and Greece the
Egyptians bla^e this rumor, and principally such as are employed in the
service and ministry of Jupiter Thebanus: by whom it is said, that certain
men of the Phaenicians coming to Thebes; state privily from The beginning of
the oracles in Afric and Greece.
thente two women accustomed to minister in the temple of Jupiter, one of the
which they sold in Lybia, the other in Greece, by whose means and advise it
came to pass, that in each country the people created an oracle. Heereat
somewhat abashed, and requesting earnestly how and in what manner they came to
know this, they made we answer, that leaving no corner unsearched whereby to
come to knowledge of their women, and not able to find how they were bestowed,
news was brought at length of their plight and condition. Thus far was I
certified by the Thebane prelates, whereunto I deem it convenient to add such
things as were notified unto me at Dodona by the priests there, who
undoubtedly affirm how in A tale of two pigeons.
times forepast and long ago, two black pigeons took their flight from the
country of Thebes in Egypt, scouring with swift course through the sky, one
of the which fortuned to light in Africa, the other in that part of Greece
where Dodona is now situate, where pointing upon a mighty ^all beech, she was
heard to speak in a voice humane, like unto a man, warning the people to erect
an oracle or seat of divination in that place, being so thought good, and
provided by the destinies. Which admonition the people taking (as well they
might) to come by the instince and motion of the gods, did as they were
commanded by the done. In like manner it fell out that in Lybia the people
were stirred up and in^ensed by the other done to the planting and erection of
a seat prophetical, named the oracle of Ammon, being also co^fecrate to the
name of Jupiter. These things we received of the credit and authority of the
Dodoneans, confirmed: and established by the general consente^ of those that
had the ^ase and charge of the temple. Of these women priests resident in the
temple of Dodona, the eldest and most ancient had to name Promenca, the second
Timareta, the third and yougest Nicandra. Nevertheless of these matters such
is my judgment. If any such religions and holy women were by stealth of the
Phenicians transported and carried away into Lybia and Greece. I condecture that
the one of these was sold at Thesprotus, in that part of the region which
erst was in ye possession of the Pelasgians; and is at this present reputed
for a portion of Hettus: where, having served certain years, in process of
time she brought(...) divine ceremonies of Jupiter, under some beach tree
growing in shoa^e coa^stes. For what could be more likely con^emente, then for
her to establish some monument in the sacred honor of Jupiter, in whose
service and religion she had been long time conuersaunt at Thebes in Egypt
Which her ordinance at length grew into the custom of an oracle. The same
being perfect also in the Greek language, discovered unto them in what sort
the Pheni^ an^ had likewise made sale of her sister to the people of Africa.
The sacred and devout women of Dodona resyaunt in the palace of the great god
Jupiter, seem for none other cause to have called these Egyptian pufi^s two
doves, then for that they were come from harbarous countries, whose tongue and
manner of pronouncing seemed to the Graecians to sound like the voice of
bites. And whereas they show that in time the do^e began to utter plain
language, and speak like men, ^aught else is meant heareby then that she used
such speech as they knew and understood, being so long esteemed to emusate and
follow the noise of birds as she remained in her harbarous kind of speech and
pronunciation. For how is it credible that a pigeon in deed could have ^^urped
the voice and vtteraunce of a man^ and alleging yet further that it was a
blarke do^e, they argued her more plainly to have been a woman of Egypt, the
flower of whose beauty is a fair brown blew, ^anned and burnt by the fyery
beams of the sun. Again, the oracles themselves, that of Thebes, and this
of Dodona, are wel^ye in all points agreeable. Thspeake nothing of the manner
and order of southsaying in the comples of Greece, which any man with half an
eye may easily discern to have been taken from Egypt. Let it stand also for
an ^^^ent and undoubted verity, that assemblies at festiuals, pompes and
pageants in divine honor, talk and communication with the gods by Inventions
of the Egyptians.
a mediator or interpretour, were invented in Egypt, and consequently used in
Greece. Which I think the rather, for that the one is old and of long
continuance, the other fresh and lately put in practice. It is not once in a
year that the Egyptians use these solemn and religious meetings, but at
sundry The feasts of Diana, Isis, and Minerua.
times and in sundry places, howbeit, chiefly and with the greatest zeal and
devotion at the city Bubast, in ye honor of Diana. Next after that at Busiris,
in the celebration of (...) feast, where also stands the most excellent and
famous temple of Isis, who in the Greek tongue is called (...), which is to
wit, Ceres. Thirdly, an assembly is held in the city Sars in the praise and
reverence of Miner^^. Fourthly, at H^liopolis in honor The feast of the Sun.
of the sun. Fifthly at Batis in remembrance of Larona. In the sixth and last
place no^h^ city Paps^^is, to the dignity and renown of Mars. Moreover, suc^
of this people as with encyre. The celebration of Latonas feast and Mars.
and affectionate zeal most religiously observe these astat. B^bastis, behave
and bear themselves on this manner. Certain ships being addressed, wherein
infinite numbers of men and women fail toward the cat^, in the mean season
whiles (...)* be in voyage on ye water, certain of the women play upon drums
The manner of such as repair to the festival of Diana.
and taders, making a great found and noise, ye men on pipes. Such as want
these impleme^ts, clap their hands and strain their voice in singing to ye
highest degree. At what city soever they ariue, happily some of the women of
^^tinue their mirth and dispor^on ye timbrels, some other raise, reuise and
would at the da^^es of the city beyond measure: (...) trau(...) ^aunce motionly:
other cast up their clothes, and openly discover and being an^he in shame,
doing this in all those cities yt are near adjoining to the rivers ^i^i^.
Being assembled and gathered together at B^bastis, they honor the fe^^h day
with (...) all solemnity, making large ^ffring^ to Diana, wherein is greater or
(...) (...) of gr^p^ wi^e^ th^^ all the year besides. To this place by the
(...) of the country are want to repay ^^7000(...)en and woe(...), (...) fides
thildre^, and thus they pass the time at Bubastis. Now in what manner they
solemnize ye sacred day of Isis at ye city* Businis, we declared before, where
in the (...)age is after ye deeper furna^ce and accomplishment of ye sacrifice,
to whip and ^to (...)ge themselves (...) In mind table wise, and yt not one or
(...) many thousands of ^ache degree both men and women* ^nouor the less, by
what means, or where with all they beat and vex their bodies in this sort, I
may not disclose. Howbeit such of the people of Car^a as soiourne and make
their abode in Egypt. stricken with a deeper remorse of sin, in this point
of zeal and (...) go beyond ye Aegypti^^s, in that they hackle and slice their
forehead with knives and daggers: where(...) it is plainly (...) to
understand that they come of foreign nations, and not of the homeborne and
natural people of the land. Inlike manner meeting (as before) at the city
Sais, there to accomplish the rites and ceremonies due to the day, at the
approach and near point of the evening, they furnish and beset their houses
with torches and lamps, which being replenished with pure oil mingled with
salt, they give The feast of lamps.
fire to the weike, and suffer them to continue burning till the next morning,
naming the day by the feast of lamps. Such as resort not to this feast, do
nevertheless at their own homes give due honor to the night, placing in
every corner of their house an infinite number of tapers and candles, the
custom being not only kept at Sais, but spread and scattered throughout the
whole region. But for what end this night is held solemn by lighting of
lamps, a certain mystical and religious reason is yielded which we must
keep secret. At Heliopolis and Butis only, sacrifice, without execution of
any other ceremonies, is done to the gods Likewise at Papremis they remyne the
same custom of divine service and worshipping as in other places. At the sun
going down, certain chosen men of the priests, being few in number, and
seriously held and A combat of priests.
busied about the image, the most part standing before the door of the temple
armed with clubs as much as they can weilde: over against whom on the contrary
side, other, more then a thousand me^ (of the number of those that come to
worship) all strongly furnished and prepared with bats in their hands. The day
before the feast, the picture or image framed of wood, is by means of a few
(assigned to the ministry and cure of ye wooden god) conveyed out of a small
temple made of light timber gorgeously gilded: into another sacred and
religious house, being thither drawn by the minister and themselves upon a
wayne of four wheels, whereon the temple itself is placed, and the image also
contained therein. Drawing near to ye temple with their carriage, the clubbes
standing before the door with threats and cruel manaces forbid the^ to enter:
inco^tine^t ye band: of men oueragainst them to^ming with might and maine to
assist the image, and encoun^^ing with those that kept the temple, lay on
such escapes without his crown cracked in many places. Wherein also I
suppose that many men miscarry and came short home, albeit they flatly deny
that of a wound so taken any man ever perished. The homelings and peculiar
people of that country allege this reason of the battle. In this temple
(say The cause of this combat.
they) did sometimes inhabit the mother of the god Mars, who seeking at the
estate of ripe years against the law of nature to have society with his own
mother, took the repulse, and was rejected by her ministers that knew him not,
whereat the god storming in great rage, purchased aid out of the cities
adioynaunt, and made way perforce, to the great discomfiture and damage of
those as sought to resist him, for which cause, they yet solemnize to Mars a
feast of broken pates and The feast of broken pates.
bruised costards, enacting moreover by the virtue of their religion, that no
man should have carnal copulation with a woman in the temple, neither attempt
to set his foot within the doors of any such house of religion, unless after
the fleshly knowledge of women he first wash and cleanse his body with pure
water, which custom only takes place amongst the Graecians and Egyptians,
being the use in other nations to accompany with their women in the churches
and palaces of their gods, and also presently after such secret acts, without
any regard of purifying themselves, to rush into the houses of divine honor,
making no difference between men and other brutish and unreasonable creatures.
For it is seen (say they) how other things that have life and sense, meddle
themselves A reason drawn from the use of beasts to defend the manners of men.
each with other even in such places as the gods were worshipped, which if it
were a thing so odious and displeasaunt in the eyes of the higher powers, no
doubt the beasts themselves would eschew and avoid it, whose doings together
with their judgment I flatly disalow. Howbeit, understand we, that as well in
these things whereof we have entreated, as in all other the Egyptians are led
with a singular superstition. Egypt also itself albeit it abutte and point
upon the country of Lybia, yet is it not overmuch pestered with beasts. Such
as the land brings up and fostereth, are reputed holy, and by no means to
be violated or harmed by any, some of which have their nouriture and food
together with the people of ye soil: othersome are more wild, fierce, and
intractable, refusing so gently to come to haud. The cause of these things, why
creatures unreasonable are so highly honored of this people, I may not without
breach of piety reveal: which things of set purpose I have endeavored to
conceal and keep secret, unless by the necessary course of the history I
have been brought to the contrary.

Furthermore, about the beasts that breed and multiplye in the region, such
is their order. Generally they are The manner of the Egyptians touching the
beasts of the land.
held with a most tender and reverent care for the mayntenaunce and fostering
of them, in which kind of honor (for it is accounted a great honor with
them, to have regard of beasts) the son evermore succeeds the father. To
these brute creatures, all such as are resident in the cities of Egypt,
perform and pay certain vows, making humble supplication to some one of the
gods, in whose patronage and protection that beast is, which thing they
accomplish after this manner. Shauing the heads of their sons, either wholly,
in half, or for the most part, they weigh the hair in balaunce, setting
against it the just weight in silver, which done, they delivered it to him
that has the charge and oversight of any such cattle, by whom are bought
here with small pieces of fish which they give the beasts to eat, and such
is the means whereby they nourishe and bring them up. The s^aying of any of
these done of malice and set purpose, is present death to the killer, but
committed by chance a mule^ or pe^ne at the discretion and arbitriment of ye
priests. To kill an hawk The great regard of hawks
or the bird which is called Ibis, is loss of life, in what sort soever it be
done. Such beasts as are tame and come to hand, having their food together with
me^, albeit they be many in number, yet would they much more increase, were it
not for ye strange nature of cats in yt country. The feamale having once
kitled, always after eschueth the male, keeping her self secret and The
nature of catsin Egypt
covert from him, which the Egyptians seeing, kill ye kitlings, and use the^
for food. The feamale bereaved of her young ones, and finding her nest empty,
is by that means brought to submit her self to the bucke, being of all
creatures most desirous of increase. In time of fire, or such like misfortune,
the cats are moved with a certain divine kind of fury and inspiration. For
the Egyptians behauing themselves securely in the appeasing and extinguishing
the flame, the cats lie covertly in weight, and sodeinly coursing toward the
place, mount and skip quite over the heads of the people into the fire, at
which chance whenever it comes to pass, the Egyptians are extremely
sorrowful. In what house soever there dies a cat, all of the same Mourning for
the death of cats and dogs.
family shave their eyebrowes: but if a dog dye, their head and body. A cat
dying, is solemnly carried to the temple, where being well powdered with salt,
she is after buried in the city of Babastis. A bitch is evermore buried in the
same city where she dies, yet not without the honor of a sacred tomb,
burying Hounds greatly regarded.
their dogs after the same sort, and chiefly hounds of the malekinde, which
they most of all others esteem and set by. Likewise small serpents called in
their tongue Mygalae, and hawks of all kind, if they fortune to dye, they
take and bury them at the city Butis. Bears, such as be hallowed, and wolves
not much bigger then foxes, are covered in ye same place where they be found
dead. The nature also of the Crocodyle is this. The nature of the Crocodyle.
Four months in the year, and chiefly in the winter season it lives without
meat. And albeit it have feet like a land beast, yet has it a nature middle
and indifferent, living as well in the water as one dry land. Her eggs she
lays on the shore, where also she covers and hatcheth the same, biding the
most part of the day abroad on the dry land, but all the night time in the
water, being much more hoate then the cold deawe that falls in the night. Of
all creatures I judge none of so small and slender a beginning, to wax to such
huge and infinite greatness, the egg at the first not much bigger then a
goose egg, which measure the brood it self exceeds not when it first
commes out of the shell, howbeit, in durance of time, it grows to be
monstrous, surmounting the length of seauenteene cubits. The Crocodyle has
eyes like a swine, teeth of passing A cubite is a foot and an half.
bigness, according to the measure and proportion of her body, extendyng and
bearyng outward, being also very rough and grating like a saw: and of all
other creatures is only without a tongne: the selfsame, contrary to the nature
and property of all other beasts, has the nether most The Crocodyle has no
tongue.
chap steadfast and without moving, and champeth her food with the upper iawe.
Her claws are very strong and great, a scaly skin, and about the back
impenetrable, that no weapon be it never so sharp can pearce it. In the water
as blind as a moale, on land of an excellent sharp and quick sight. Living
in the water, it comes to pass that her mouth is evermore full of
horseleaches. No foul or beast can abide to see or come nigh a Crocodile, save
only the bird Trochilus, with whom she is at a continual truce for the
singular commodity she receives by him. For the Crocodile at what The bird
Trochilus.
time she forsakes the water, and comes out onlande, her quality is with
wide and opened mouth to lie gaping toward the West, whom the bird Trochilus
espying, flies into her mouth, and there deuoureth and eats up the
horseleaches, which brings such pleasure to the serpent, that without any
hurt in the world she suffers the bird to do what she will. To some of the
Egyptians Crocodiles are in place of holy creatures, to other profane and
noisome, which chase and pursue them as most odious and pestilent beastles.
Those that give honor to them, are such as inhabit about Thebes, and the
poole of Maeris, who are wont commonly to train up a Crocodyle to hand, and
make it tame, being in all points so gentle and tractable as a dog. At whose
ears they hang gemmes A ^ame Crocodyle.
of singular price, likewise golden eareings, hampering a chain to the
forefeete. This tame one they cherish and bring up with great care, setting
very much by it while it lives, and being dead, they powder the body with
sault, and lay it under the ground in a vessel accounted holy. Unlike to these
are the people dwelling at Elephantina, who be so far from thinking so
reverently of such venomous serpents, that for hate they stay, and in disdain
eat them. The Egyptians call the^ not Crocodyles, but Champsi, this name
being brought up Crocodyles in Egypt called Champsi.
by the people of Ionia, for that in shape they resemble those Crocodyles which
amongst them engender and breed in hedges. Diverse are the means whereby they
are taken, yet amongst other deuyses this one seems to me most worthy
rehersall. Such as lay for them and seek all ways to take them, bayte their
hooks with Swynes flesh and cast it into ye The manner of taking Crocodyles.
myddest of the river: immediately standing on the shore they beat a young
porkling and cause it to cry exceedingly: which the Crocodile hearing follows
the cry, and drawing near to the place, finds the bayte and swalloweth it up
at one morsel. Being fast entangled and drawn to land, they first blind and
stop up her eyes with clay and rubbishe, which causes her to lie still and
suffer all things quietly, which otherwise they could never obtain and come
by without much a do. Likewise, the Ryuerhorse (a beast so called) in all the
borders of A beast called the River horse.
Papremis is reputed holy: being of this shape and figure. He has four feet
cloven in sunder, and houed like and Ox: a flat nose: and tail and Mane like
an Horse: teeth apparaunt and standing out: in sound and cry neighing so like
a horse as may be: in highness resembling a mighty Bull, of so gross and
thick an hyde that being well dried, they make thereof Darts of exceeding
strength and stiffnesse. There be also found to breed in the river certain
beasts much like a Beuer and live like an Otter, which in Egypt are of great
accounte and thought holy. In the same degree of sacred honor are all kind of
scale fish and Eeles. Such is also their opinion and reverence toward birds
and fowls of the air, as wild Geese and such like. There is also an other
bird of whom above all other they think The bird Phoenix.
most divinely, called a Phoenix: which I never saw, but protrayed and shadowed
in colors. For the comes very seldom into that country (as far as I
could hear say by the Heliopolitans) to wit, once in 500. years, and that
also when her parent The shape of a Phoenix.
or breeder dies. If she be truly drawn by the Egyptians this is her form
and bigness: her feathers partly red and partly yealow, glittering like Gold:
in form and quantity of the body not much differing from an Eagle. Of this
Phoenix, Egyptians have bruted a strange tale, which I can hardly The nature
of the Phoenix.
credit: saying that the Phoenix flying from Arabia, to the temple of the Sun
in Egypt, carries in her tallaunts the corpse of her dead sire, embaulmed and
roled in Myrrh, which she accustometh to bury in that place. Adding also the
manner whereby she inureth her self to carry so great a burden. First she
gathers a great quantity of Myrrh and works it into a lump, as much as she
can well bear, whereby to make cryall of her own strength. After this
perceiving hirselfe able to weylde it. she makes an hole with her Beak in
the side of the balle, framing it very hollow and empty within, wherein she
incloseth the body of her breeder. This done, and the hole cunningly filled up
again, she poyseth the whole mass in her tallaunts: and finally, she
transporteth it to Heliopolis to the temple Palace of ye Sun: so skilfully
handling her carriage, that the Myrrh body and all waygheth no more then the
whole balle did before.

This they mention as concerning the Phoenix. Know we Serpents hau^ting in
Egypt.
besides, that in the region of Thebs in Egypt, there use to haunte a kind of
Serpents, had in dyuine worship: of body sinale, and nothing norsome or
hurtful to men. These have two horns growing out of their heads, and evermore
dying are laid in Jupiters temple, unto whom they are holy and consecrate.

In Arabia there lies a place of no great distaunce from the city Batis,
whether I went of purpose, having heard of certain wynged Serpents there to
be seen. And being come: I beheld the ribs and bones of Serpents in number
welnigh infinite and not to be reckoned whereofsome were greater, and some
less. The place where the bones are laid, is a sinale and narrow bottom
between two Mountains, opening into a wide and waste champion.

The speech goes, that out of Arabia at the point of the Spring, many
hydious and terrible Serpents take their The bird Ibis.
flght into Egypt: which ye fowls called Ibides meeting with, straight ways
kill and devour them: by which means ye soil is rid and delivered of a great
plague. For this cause ye bird Ibis (whereto the Arabians likewise accord) is
had in great price and estimation of the Egyptians. The fashion and
protrayture of this bird is such: her feathers as black as I eat: long shanks
The shape of Ibis.
like a Crane: an hooked beak: much about ye bigness of a Daker hen. And in
this sort is the foul bis rightly figured, that kills ye Serpents as they
come into ye land. There is also another of these which are brought up, and
live amongst men, having a sinale head, a slender neck, white plumed in all
parts of the body, saving in the head and neck, the hinder part of ye wyngs
and the tail, which are of a dark and black hue: the legs and ^yll in all
points like ye other. The Serpents themselves in form and making and much like
to ye pestilent and infectious beast Hydra, Hydra a water Serpent.
that lives in ye water. They have wyngs not of feathers, but of smothe and
naked skin like unto the wings of a Bat or Reremouse. But let it suffice us
hither to to have continued ye discourse and hystory of such beasts as with
this people are had in chief and principal honor, exhibiting toward them a
certain religious, holy, and divine worship.

Now it vehoueth us to know that such of the Egyptians as dwell in the corn
Country, and are most of all conversant in descrying to the posterity the acts
and affairs of ancient momory, The chief par^e ^f Egypt, nd their manners.
and of all the nation the most famous and principal. Whose kind of living is
after this manner. Thrice every month they cleanse and purify them selves,
both upwards by vomitting and downwards by purginge: having especial regard
of their health and welfare: evermore supposing all maladies and diseases to
grow and arise of the meat which they eat. For otherwise the Egyptians are
of all men living the most sound and healthful except ye Libians: the cause
whereof I judge to proceed of the immutable and constant course of ye year,
which with them never varieth but falls out always alike: the greatest
Sickness proceeds of the unseasonable times of the year.
cause of defect and sickness in men, arysing of the chaung and mutability of
ye same. Their bread is continually made of fine wheat: their wine for ye most
part co^pound of barley: the conntry bearing no vynes at all. They live by fish
partly raw and dried against the sun: sometimes powdered with salt. Likewise
by raw byrds well salted, as Duayles, Duckes, and other small foul. In like
manner, of other Creatures that have near affinity either with fish or foul
they make their provision and furniture, rosting some and boyleing other. The
rych and wealthy men of the land in great assemblies have an usual custom,
that by some in the company there should be carried about in a small coffine
the lively and express image of a dead man one or two cubits in length, which
having shown and revealed An excellent custom practysed by Nobles of Egypt.
to all that are present, he says thus: Behold here, and amiddest thy
pleasure and delighte remember this, for such a one after thy death shall thou
be thy self. Such is their order in feasts and banquets, contenting them
selves always with the customs of their own country and refusing to be
ruled by strange and foreign manners. Amongst whom are diverse fashions, very
convenient and well appointed: in New fashions abhorred.
the number of these an excellent Poem or Ditty, which the Greeks call Lynus.
And in truth meruayling at other things in Egypt, I am not a little amazed at
this, whence the name of Lynus should come. The Song they seem to have kept
and retained from all antiquity. Lynus in the Egyptian gibberishe is called
Maneros, who (as they say) being the only son of their first King, was
surprised and taken away by untimely death, whom the Egyptians bewail and
lament in this pitious and doleful verse. Herein they iumpe and agree with the
Lacedaemonians, in that the inferior meeting with his elder, Ciuility.
yields the way, and shows him a dutiful obeisaunce in riseing from his
seat, if happily he be sitting as he passes by: in which point they are
unlike all y^ rest of the Grecians besides. Meetinge in the way in place of
mutual salutation, they use humble and courteous reverence each toward other,
bendinge their hands to each others knees. Commonly they go clothed in linen
garments made fast with a lace about the thigh, which kind of attire they call
Calasyris: over this they cast also another besture of linen very clean and
white. Garments of woollen are never carried into the houses of religion,
neither will any man shroud him self in a woollen vesture, which is accounted
profane. This has some agreement with y^ ceremonies usually kept in y^ sacred
feasts of Bacchus and Orpheus, which partly Pythagoreans were such as
follovved the doctrine of Pythagoras the Philosopher.
were taken from y^ Egyptians, and partly devised by y^ Pythagoreans. For such
as have been partakers of those ryts, have evermore abhorred to be buried in
woollen garments. Whereof also an holy reason is given which we dare not
disclose. Many other things have been invented by y^ Egyptians, as what day
and month is proper and appertinent to every god. Likewise The Egyptians
first in^enred the art to read a man's destiny.
in Astrology what fortune is incident to him that is borne one such a day, how
he shall prove in life, by what means he shall miscary by death: which
things have been used, of many that have labored in the Art, and Science of
Poetry. Also, more wonders, and strange sightes and euentes have been discussed
and interpreted by them, then by any other. Nation living. For as any such
thing has happened at any time they commit it to memory, awaighting
dilligently what issue it has: and if the like fall out at any time after,
they conjecture of the end and effect thereof by the example of the first. The
knowledge of divination is so practiced by them, that they impute not the
invention thereof to the will of men, but to certain of the gods. In their
land there be these Oracles. The prophecy of Hercules, Apollo, Minerua,
Diana, Mars, and Jupiter, most of all retterencing the divine seat of Latona,
The seats of prophecy in Egypt.
held at the city Batis. These prophesies are not all instituted after the
same fashion, but have a difference and diversity between them. Phisieke is so
studied and practysed with them that every disease has his several physician,
who stryueth to excel in healing that one disease, and not to be expert in
curinge many: whereof it comes that every corner In Egypt every disease has
his physician.
is full of Physicians. Some for the eyes, other for the head, many for the
teeth, not a few for the stomach and belly. Finally, such as are of knowledge
to deal with secret and privy infirmities.

In like sort, the manner of mourninge, and funeral sorrow at the death of
friends: also the manner of sepulture and vuryall which they use, is most
worthy memory. When as any of Of mourning and burying the dead.
their familiars or domestical friends fortune to decease, (be he of
regard amongst them) all the women of that family besmere and gryme their
heads and faces with mire and dross: and leaving the forlorn and languished
corpse amongst their friends and acquaintance, they them selves being straight
gyrded, with their breasts all bare and naked, accompanied with all the women of
their kindred, wander about y^ sireets with most piteous lamentation and
howling: on the other side, y^ men fast gyrte about the loins, thump and beat
themselves, as the most miserable, unfortunate, and wretched persons in the
world. After this they carry out the body to embalme and preserve. Certain
there be definitly appointed for the same purpose, that make an occupation and
trade hereof. These when the corse is brought unto them, propounde and show to
the bringers, sundry forms and pictures of the dead, painted or carved in
wood, one of which The manner of embalming the dead.
is wrought with most curiouse art and workmanship (which we think impiety to
name): the second of less price: the third meanest of all: demaundinge of the
bringers, to which of these paterns and examples their friend shall be dressed.
Being agreed of the price they depart, leaving the body with y^ salyners: who
incontinent season and preserve the corpse with all industry, drawing the brains
out by the nosthrills with a crooked instrument of Iron, in place whereof they
fill the Brain pan with most sweet and pleasant ointments. This done and
finished, they cut and rip up the Bowels with a sharp stone of Aethyopia,
taking thereout the paunche and entrals, and cleansing the belly with wine of
Palm tree: secondly, with fresh water mingled with most fragrant and
delightful spyces: in place hereof they force and stuff the belly it self
with myrrh, of the finest force brayed and pounded in a mortar. Likewise, with
Cassia and all kind of pleasant odours, except frankincense. Having thus
done, they sow it up again, and embalming the body, preserve it for the term
of ^0. days: longer then which they may not keep it. The days exspired and
drawn to an end, they take the corse and wash it over a fresh, annoynting the
body with gum (which is to the Egyptians in steed of Glue) and attyring it in
a fine lynen drawn together with a lace, they send him back again to his
friends. His friends in y^ time, while the saliners have him in hand, procure
an Image to be made to the likeness and resemblaunce of him that is dead,
wherein being holow and vauted within, they cause him to be enclosed, layinge
both the Image and the body therein contained in a toumbe together. Howbeit
they which in meaner estate and fortune cannot reach so high, order the bodies
of their frindes in form as follows. First of all they fill a clyster with
the ointment of neder which without any manner cuttinge or opening the belly,
they strain it into the body by the inferior parts and Fundament,
preseruinge the corse: as before, 70. days. The last day of all they dreyne
out the oil from the bowels of the dead: which is of such virtue, that it
brings out with it all the inner parts of the belly corrupted and festered.
Herewith also they instill and power into the body Saltpeter, which is of force
to depratie, taynt, and consume the flesh, leaving nothing but skin and bones:
which done, they eftsoon deliver the body to y^ owners. There is also a third
kind of usage accustomably practiced about the bodies of the dead: that if any
one be deceased whose friends are very poor and of smalest substance, they
only purge the belly, and preserving the corpse with salt for term of like time
as before, in fine, redeliuer him to the bringers.

The wives of noble men, and such as are very fair and of Fair gentlevvome^
dying are kept three days before they be preserved.
great respect for their hearty, are not presently upon point of their death,
given to be embalmed, but three or four days after, fearing least they should
be abused by the inordinate lust of such as dress them: alleging moreover,
that a Saliner sometimes working such abuse upon y^ dead body of a woman, was
taken in the manner, and his villainy discryed by one of his own company. If it
fortune any one either of the Egyptians, or of foreign countries to be
drowned and cast on shore, the City in whose borders he is found must sustain
the charge of the funeralles, which in honorable manner must be executed, and
the body buried in the sacred and holy Monumentes. Being not lawful for his
friends and allies any whit to intermeddle or touch the dead, but the Priests
assigned to the worship of the river Nylus intoumbe and bury him so nicely and
solemnly as if it were the body of a god. The customs of Greece they will in
no wise follow: utterly estraunging themselves from all orders borrowed and
deryued from other Nations.

Albeit Chemmis a great City in the Province of Thebs not far from the City
Nea, wherein stands the Temple The City Chemmis.
of Perseus, senne of Danae, builte fouresquare and encompassed round about
with a Spring or Grove of Date trees: having also a large entry of stone, on
each side whereof are placed two Images of passing greatness: within the
palace is contained ye carved monument of Perseus, whom the Chemmyts avouch
often times to appear unto them out of the earth, and not seldom in the
church: at which time they stude his supper which he was wo^^s to wear, two
cubytes in length and affyrminge that at such times as that is seen, the year
proves very fertile and prosperous through out all Egypt. This town (I say)
has ordained certain games of exer^ise in the honor of Perseus, after the
manner of Greece. These being dmaunded of me why Perseus should appear to them
alone, and for what cause in the celebration of their games, they dissented
from the rest of ye Egyptians: they made answer, that Perseus was issued of
their city, adding moreover, that Danaeus and Lynaeus were also Che^mmyts and
sailed into Greece: in blasing whose Pedagree they came at length to Perseus,
who coming into Egypt for the self same cause as the Grecians testify,
namely, to fetch the head of Gorgon out of Africa, came also to them and
called to remembrance his kindred and lineage, of whom having taken
acquayntaunce, and hearing his mother to speak of the name of Chem, he
instituted a game of all exercises, which according to his appointment and
first ordinance they observe till this day. These are the manners of those that
lie above the Fennes, such as dwell in the Maryses differ not from the rest,
neither in other things, nor in estate of marriage, every one inioying the
private fellowship of his own wife, in semblable manner to the Grecians.
Notwithstanding for the easy provision of their food and sustenaunce other
things have been sought out and deinied by them. For in time of the floude
when the river ouergoeth the Their flood in Egypt.
country, there arise in the water great plenty of syllyes, which the people
of Egypt call Lotos. These they reap and dry them in the Sun. The seed
whereof (growing in the midst of the flower, somewhat like unto Popy seed)
they boil, after which they kneade it into cakes, and bake it for bread. The
root of this is very rothsome, pleasant and good to eat: being of form very
round, and in bigness like an aple. There is also another kind of lyllyes
much like to roses, which in like manner have their growth in the water, from
whose root springs a bud unlike to the former, bearing fruit in manner and
likeness of an honey Comb: herein are contained certain small kernells
resembling the stone of an Olyue, not unfit for sustenance, and commonly eaten
of the Egyptians, as well fresh as wythered. The self same people when the
season of the year serves, are busily conversant in gathering a kind of Rush
called Bybl^s, the top whereof they crop and turn it into use of food: the
residue being much about one cubyte in length, they partly eat and partly
sell. Such as be desirous to make fine and delicate meat of this Rush, use to
cast it into an Oven and broyle it: some there be that live only by fish, which
having taken, they incontinently draw them and parch them in the Sun like
stockfish, and being well dried they eat them. The common sort of fish used
among them, breed not in ye river, but in pooles, being of this nature. The
nature of their fish.
Toward the time of spawning they leave the fennes and make repair generally
to ye sea, the male fishes in manner of captains leading the rank. These male
fish as they pass still onwarde shed their seed by the way, which their
femals following after immediately devour, and thereof shortly after breed
their spawnes. Now at the point of breed, the femals forsaking ye salt
waters, stower back again to the maryses to their accustomed haunte, leadinge
the males that follow after them: and in swiming back again, they void
spawne, being very small corns, like the graynes of mustard seed which
lightinge upon the male fish in the tail of the rank, are swallowed up and
devoured by them. Not one of these little graynes but will grow to a fish, as
well may be seen by those that escape the males, and are vndeuoured: which
being nourished by the waters grow to small Frye. Such of these fishes as are
taken swimminge to the sea, are found to have the left side of their heads
very much worn and gauled: and in coming from the sea, the right side: the
cause being this, that both in going and coming they continually grate against
the shore and bancks of the river, as a direction to them in passinge to and
fro, least that ^loting in the midst of the stream, they chance to stray
and wander out of the right course. At such time as the river Nilus begins
to swell, all the low places in the country and Ponds near adjoining to the
river do likewise increase: being then to be seen great store of young Fry
in every little puddle: whereof these should breed, this seems to be a
probable cause. That the year before, at the fall and decrease of the water,
the fish which together with the river depart them selves, leave behind them
their spawne in the mudde, which at the rising of the next floude, being
eftsoon moystned, by the waters, recover virtue, and grow to be fish. As
touching which things let it seem sufficient thus much to have spoken.

The Egyptians that keep in the fenne country, use a certain The gatheri^g
of fruit for oils.
oil made of a tree, which the Apothecaryes call Palmachri. These trees (that
spring naturally in Greece) the Egyptians accustom to plant and set by the
banckes of Pooles and ryuers, which is the cause that they bear fruit, but
very strong and rank of sauoure. The fruit being gathered, some of them
bruise it against the fire, other some fry it in a pan, reserving that which
comes of it, which serves them partly for Oil, partly for the use of their
Lamps and candles, yielding (as they said before) a deyne very loathsome and
unsavory. Likewise, against gnats and flies, wherewith their land abounds
above measure, certain remedies are found out by them. Such as dwell above
the Fennes are helped herein by towers and high garrets, wherein they take
their sleep, forasmuch as the wind will not suffer the Gnats to fly high. The
people of the Fennes in steed of Turrets are feign to work this devise. Each
man has his Nets, wherewith in the day time they go on fishing, and in the
night pytche them about their chambers wherein they rest, by which means they
come to take a nappe of nine hours long: whereas otherwise (were they never
so well wrapped in clothes) the Gnats with their sharp nebbes would pier^ and
stinge quite through all, being not able in like manner to pass through The
manner of their Shyps.
the Nets. Their Ships used for burden or caryage are made of a kind of
Thorn, not far unlike the tree Lotos growing in Cyrene, from the which there
issues a certain kind of gum. Of the body of this thorn they saw and
square out certain boardes two cubits long, and fashioned like a tilesheard,
which they frame and compact together after this manner. First they unite and
join the plancks together with an infinite number of nails and pynnes, binding
the same to many transomes that go both cross and long ways for the
strength of the vessel. Their wood they frame not in compass, after the manner
of other Nations, but fasten and knit the joints together with Bullrushes and
such like. They have only one Helm or Stern, which is made to go through
the hinder part of the Ship. The Mast is likewise of thorn, the Sail of
the Rushe Byblus. These kind of vessels are not able to cut against the
stream, but are haled and drawn forward by land. Down the stream they pass
in this wise. They frame an hurdle of the bushe Tamarisk, fast bound and tied
together with the peelings of green Cane or Reeds: prouydinge moreover a
mighty stone with an hole through the midst, two talents in weight: which
done, they cast the hurdle into the stream being made fast with a Rope to the
nose of the Vessel: contrariwise, the stonne they tie behind with an other
Gable, geuinge it so much scope that it may sink to the bottom. By which
means it comes to pass that the stream caryinge on the hurdle, causes the
Ship to follow, with exceedinge swiftness: and the stone on the other side
drayling behind, directs the same in even and steadfast course. At such time
as the river ouerrunneth the soil, the Cities are only apparent and uncovered,
resembling in show the Isles of the sea Aegeum, all the land besides being in
manner of a sea. The Cities which in time of the flood are extante, be in place
of Ports for the ships to lie at rode in. During which time they sail not in
ye main river, but through ye The Pyramides were certain long rev^e^s of ^oe^
midst of the fields. They that take shipping from the City Naucrates to
Memphis, have their course by the Pyramides: albeit there be another way also
^^ndinge to the same place, strykinge over by the Neb of Delta, and the City of
the Cercasians. Likewise as we take our voyage from the Sea coaste, and the
city Canobus to Naucrates through the wide and open fields, we shall pass by
Anthylla a town so named: in like manner arryuinge, at the city Arcandry.
Anthylla a city of chief renown, is evermore given and allotted by the King
of Egypt to his Queen, that then is, to The revenues of a city assigned to
the Queen of Egypt to find her shoes.
find her shoes, which are purchased by the revenues of the same. Which
custom has remained since the time that the Persians gonerned in Egypt.
Archandry seenieth to have taken the name of Archander, son in law to
Danaeus, and the lawful ofspringe of Phthius Achaeus: not denying but that
there might be another besides him: but howsoever it is, the city Archandry
can in no wise be made an Egyptian name. Hitherto have I set dawne such
things as either by my self I have seen and known: or been constantly
aduertysed thereof by the people of the region, determining henceforth to
prosecute such matters, as I have only by heresay, interlaceing the same
otherwhiles, with such things as of mine own knowledge I am able to justify.

Menes the first King of Egypt (as the pryests make Menes the king of Egypt.
report) by altering the course of the river, gained all that ground whereon
the City Memphis is situated: the flood being wont before time to have his
course fast by the sandy mountain which lies toward Lybia.

This Menes therefore damminge up the bosom of the river toward the south
Region having cast up a The acts of Menes.
pyle, or bulwark of Earth much after an hundred Furlonges above the City, by
that means dried the old Channel, causinge the river to forsake and abandone
his natural course and run at randame amiddest the hills. To which damme
also the Persians that rule in Aegypte even at this day have a dilligent eye:
yearly fortifyinge and repayringe the same with new and fresh Earth. Through
the which if by fortune the river stryuinge to recover his old course, should
happily make a breach, the city Memphis were in danger to be overwhelmed with
water. By the self same Menes first bearinge rule and authority in Egypt
(after y^ by turning y^ stream of Nilus he had made dry ground of that where
erst the river had his passage) in the same plot of land was the city it self
founded and erected, which (as well may be seen) stands in the straight and
narrow places of the country. More then this, to the North and West (for
Eastward Memphis is bounded by the course of the river) he caused to be drawn
out of the river a large and wide poole: being also the founder of Vulcans
temple in Memphis, one of the fairest buildinges and of chiefest fame in all
the country of Aegypte. Three hundred and thirty Princes that by mutual
succession followed Three hundred and 30 princes after Menes.
Menes, the priests also readily mentioned out of y^ books of their Monuments:
of which number 18 were by Country Aethyopians, and one a foreign and
outlandish women, whose nation they knew not, all the rest being sprung of their
own land. This woman y^ aspired to y^ crown, bare the name of y^ famous
Nitocris a Queen of Egypt.
Queen of Babylon, and was called Nitocris: whose brother in y^ time of his
empire being slain by y^ Egyptians, Nitocris wearing y^ crown after him
sought means secretly how to revenge his death, whith she brought to pass by
a strange device and policy. Having therefore builte for her own use a fair
and gorgeous court, she caused an hollow Vaut or cave to be cast under the
earth, pretending for the time a reason of her device, albeit far different
from her secret mind and purpose. The work ended, she invited thither the most
part of her nobles to a banquet, such as she knew to have been y^ authors and
workers of her brothers death, who being all assembled and set together in an
inner Parlour, expectinge their cheer, the water was let in at a privy grate
and overwhelmed them all.

These things they spoke of Nitocris, adding besides, that having wrought this
feate, she cast her self into an house full of Ashes to escape unpunished.

By the rest of the kings of Egypt the priests could recyte Moeris the last
of the 330 princes.
no glorious act that should be accomplished, saving by the noble king
Moeris the last and latest of all this crewe. To whom they attribute y^
building of y^ great porches belonging to Vulcans temple, standing on the North
part of y^ Palace. By the same also was a certain fenne delued and cast up,
wherein were builded certain mighty Towers called Pyramides, of whose
bygnesse, as also of y^ large compass and amplitude of the Poole, we will
ioyntely entreat in another place.

These things were done by Moeris the last king. The rest consuminge the time
of their raygne in silence and obscurity, whom for the same cause I will pass
over, and address my speech to him who came after them in time and went
before them in Dignity: namely, the worthy Prince Sesostris. Him the Pryestes
recounte first of all the kings Sesostris king in Egypt, and his exployts.
of Egypt to have passed the narrow Seas of Arabia in long Ships or Gallyes,
and brought in subjection to the Crown all those People that march a long
the red Sea. From whence retyringe back again the same way, he came and
gathered a great power of men, and took his passage otter the waters into the
main land, conquering and subduing all Countries whether so ever he went.
Such as he found valiaunte and hardye not refusinge to icoparde their safety
in the defense and maynetenaun^e of their liberty, after the victory obtained,
he fired in their country certain small pyllers or Crosses of stone, wherein
were engraven the names of the king and the country, and how by his own
proper force and puissaunce he had made them yield. Contrarywyse, such as
without controversy gave themselves into his hands, or with little strife and
less bloodshed were A monument an the reproach of Covvardise.
brought to relent: with them also, and in their region he planted Pillars and
builte up little crosses, as before, wherein were carved and importrayed the
secret parts of women, to signify to the posterity the base and effeminate
courage of the people there abiding. In this sort he trauayled with his at my
up and down the main, passing out of Asia into Europe, where he made conquest
of the Scythians and Thracians: which seems to have been the farthest point
of his voyage: for so much as in their land also his titles and marks are
apparently seen, and not beyond. Herefro he began to measure his steps back
again incamping his power at the river Phasis: where, I am not able to
discuss, whether king Sesostris him self planted any part of his army in
that place ever after to possess y^ country: or whether some of his soldiers
wearyed with continual perigrination and travail, took up their ma^sion place
and rested there. For the people named Colchi, seem to be Egyptians: The
people Colchi spro^g of the Egyptians.
which I speak rather of mine own gathering, then of any other man's
information. Howveit, for trial sake co^moninge with the inhabitants of either
nation, the Colchans seemed rather to acknowledge and remember y^ Egyptians,
then y^ Egyptians the^: affyrming, that the Colchans were a remnante of
Sesostris army. My self have drawn a conjecture hereof: y^ both people are in
countenance a like black, in hair a like fryzled, albeit it may seem a very
feeble guess, the same being also in other nations. A better surmise may be
gathered of this, that y^ people of Aethyopia, Egypt, and Colchis only of all
men, circumcyse and cut of the foreskin from their hidden parts; reteyning the
custom time out of mind. For the Phoenicians and Syrians y^ dwell in
Palaestina, confess themselves to have borrowed the manner of circumsicion from
the Egypt(...). And as for those Syrians y^ dwell near unto the ryuers
Thermodon and Parthemus, and the people called Macrones their next neighbors;
they took the self same use and custom of y^ Colchans. Howbeit, the
Egyptians and Aethyopians, which of them learned it of others, it is hard to
discern, forasmuch as the custom in both Countries is of great antiquity.
Nevertheless, very good occasion of conjecture is offered unto us, that it came
first from y^ Egyptians, at such time as the Aethyopians had exchange of
marchaundise with them. For the Phoenicians, that in like manner have mutual
trafique which the Grecians, leave of to circumcysse them selves, and refuse in
that point to be conformable to the laws and statutes of their country. One
thing more may be alleged wherein the people of Colchis do very narrowly
resemble y^ customs of Egypt, in so much as, these two nations alone, work
their lynnen and dress their flax after ye same sort, in all points
respecting each other both in order of life and manner of language. The flax
which is brought from Colchis ye Grecians call Sardonick: the other coming out
of Egypt they term after the name of the country, Egyptian flax. But to
return to the tytles and emblems that king Sesostris left behind him in all
regions through yt which he passed, many thereof are fallen to decay.
Notwithstanding, certain of them in Syria and Paloestina I beheld with mine
own eyes, intayled with such posyes as we spoke of before, and the pictures of
women's secrets engraven in them. Likewise in Ionia are to be seen two sundry
Images of Sesostris himself carved in pillars: one as we pass from Ephesus to
Phocoea: another in the way from Sardis to Smyrna. Either of these have the
form and figure of a man, five hands breadth in bigness, bearing in his
right hand a Darte, in his left a vow, his harness and furniture after the
manner of the Egyptians and Aethyopians. Cross his back from the one
shoulder to the other went a sentence engraven in the holy letter of Egypt:
having this meaning. By my own force did I vanquishe this region.
Notwithstanding it is not there specified what he should be, albeit else where
it is to be seen. Some have deemed this monument to have been Memnon the son
of Aurora slayne^ in the war at Troy.
the image of Memnon, not a little deceived in opinion. This noble and
victorious prince Sesostris making his return to Egypt, came (by report of ye
priests) to a place named Daphnoe pelusiae, with an infinite train of foreign
people out of al Nations by him subdued: where being very courteously met and
welcomed by his brother, whom in his absence he had left for Viceroy and
protector of the country, he was also by ye same invited to a princely
banquet, him self, his wife, and his children. The death of Sesostris intended
by his own brother.
The house where into they were entered, being compassed about with dry matter,
was suddaynely by the treachery of his brother set on fire, which he perceiving
took counsel with his wife then present, how to escape and avoid the
danger. The woman either of a readier wit or riper cruelty, advised him to
cast two of his six children into the fire, to make way for him self and the
rest to pass: time not suffering him to make any long stay, he put his wives
counsel in speedy practice, and made a bridge through the fire of two of his
children, to preserve the rest alive. Sesostris in this sort delivered from
the cruel treason and malicious devise of his brother, first of all took
revenge of his treacherous villainy and devilish intent: in the next place
bethinking himself in what affairs to bestow the multitude which he had
brought with him, whom afterward he diversely employed: for by these captives
were certain huge and monstrous stones rolled and drawn to the temple of
Vulcane. Likewise, many trenches cut out and derived from the river into most
places of the country, whereby The country of Egypt cut out into trenches
for the better conueyance of water.
the land being aforetime passable by cart and horse, was thencefoorth bereaved
of that commodity: for in all the time ensuing, the country of Egypt being
for the most part plain and equal, is through the creekes and windings of
the ditches brought to that pass, that neither horse nor wayne can have any
course or passage from one place to another. Howbeit, Sesostris invented this
for the greater benefit and commodity of the land, to the end that such
towns and cities as were far removed from the river, might not at the fall
of the flood be pinched with the penury and want of water, which at all times
they have derived and brought to them in trenches. The same King made an equal
distribution of the whole country to all his subjects, allotting to every man
the like A division of land.
portion and quantity of ground, drawn out and limited by a fouresquare
form. Hereof the King himself held yearly revenues, every one being
rated at a certain rent and pension, which annually he paid to the crown, and
if at the rising of the flood it fortuned any man's portion to be ouergone by
the waters, the King was thereof advertised, who forthwyth sent certain to
survey ye ground, and to measure the harms which the flood had done him, and
to leauy out the crown rent according to the residue of the land that
remained. Hereof sprang the noble science of Geometry, and from thence was
translated into Greece. For as touching the Pole and Gnomon The beginning of
Geometry.
(which is to say) the rule, and the twelve parts of the day, the Graecians
took them of the Babylonians.

This King Sesostris held the Empire alone, leaving in Aethiopia before the
temple of Vulcane certain monuments to the posterity, to wit, certain images
of stone, one for himself, another for his wife, being each of them thirty
cubits: The images of King Sesostris.
the four images also of his four sons, being each of them twenty cubits
apeece. In process of time when the image of King Darius that governed Persia
should have been placed before the picture of Sesostris, the priest of Vulcane
which served in the temple would in no wise permit it to be done, denying
that Darius had ever achieved the like exploites that Sesostris had done. Who,
besides the conquering of sundry other nations (not inferior in number to
those which had been overcome by Darius) had also brought in subjection the
most courageous and valiant people of Scythia: for which cause, it were
against reason to prefer himself in place before him unto whom he was
inferior in chiualry, which bold answer of the priest, King Darius took
in good part and brooked welynough.

Sesostris dying, the seat imperial came to his son Pheco, who being
bereaved of his sight, undertook no voyage The death of Sesostris, whom
Pheco succeeded.
of war, but remained quiet in his kingdom. The cause he was stricken
blind, is said to be this. At what time the waters of the flood increasing,
by reason of a mighty raging wind, had drowned the low countries eyghteene
cubits deep. The King enraged at the unaccustomed swelling of the river,
took his darte and discharged it into the midst of the waters, for which
his, vnrcuerent fact, the fame is, that his sight incontinente was taken from
him, and he became blind the space of ten years. In the eleventh year,
there arose a prophecy in the city Butis, that the time of his misery was
now exspyred, and that his sight should eftsoons be restored again, if in
case he washed his eyes in the water of a woman, which never knew man but her
own husband. For further proof of this phetis medicine, An exquisite
medicine for the eyes.
the King began first with his own wife, which working not the effect he
looked for, he tried many others, but all in vain, lastly, lighting upon a
poor seely woman that had never woorshipped more Saints then one, he
speedely recovered his sight again, and causing all those whom erst he had
proved to be gathered into one city (the name whereof was called Reddclodd)
he set fire to the town, and An army of honest vvome^ burnt at a clap.
consumed them all.

The King thus healed, and freely acquitted of his former misery, began to be
devout, increasing the temples of the gods with gifts of exceeding value. All
which deserve for their excellency to be had in memory, and chiefly those
that he offered in the temple of the Sun, which were these, two mighty great
stones which the Egyptians in their tongue called Obeli, in fashion like a
spit or breach. 100. cubits long, and in breadth. 80.

Next after him the kingdom descended to a certain man of the city Memphis,
whose name in the greek language Protheus King of Egypt.
was Protheus, to whom the Egyptians erected a temple, which is yet to be
seeue in Memphis, very fair and beautiful, garnished with rich and singular
gifts. On every side whereof dwell the Phenices, a people descended of the
Tyrians; whereof the place takes the name, and is termed the tents of the
Tyrians. Within the temple there is standing the house of Proteus, called the
court of strange Venus, under which name is meant (as I deem) Helena, the
daughter of Tyndarus, who as a guest against her will, kept resyaunce for a
time in the court of Protheus, and was termed the strange Venus, in as much
as the other Venus (who Helena.
has many temples in Egypt) is never called by the name of strange. Hereof
entering talk with the sacred order of the priests, they discoursed unto me,
that Alexander having stolen Helena from the Spartanes, and speedyng himself
Of the ariuall of Paris in Egypt.
homewarde by the sea called Aegeum, by constraynte of weather was driven into
the Egyptian seas, and perforce against his will, was cast ashore in Egypt.
His ariual was at ye mouth of the flood Nilus called Canobicum, at ye port
which the inhabitants term by ye name of Trachex. In this place is situated
a temple to Hercules, where unto if any man's servant or A Sanctuary for
servants.
vassal fly, and get upon him the holy marks (as they call them) in token
that he yields his whole alleageaunce to the god of that place, it is not
lawful for any man to touch him, which order was kept inuiolate unto our agea
The servants of Alexander hearing of the laws of this temple, forsook their
Lord, and fled unto it, and in humble manner submitting themselves before the
god, they accused their master (whose death they all desired) showing in what
manner he came by Helena and the great injury he had wrought to her husband
Menelaus. The same playnt also they framed before the priests of Hercules, and
the chief governor of the port named Thonis. Thonis having hard the
accusation of these poor suppliants, sent in all haste to the King in these
words: Know you (noble Prince) that a few days since, a certain stranger
of the Troiane lignage (having committed a most villainous act in Greece, by
entising away the wife of him that had given him entertaynement) is by force of
tempest driven upon our coasts, we desire therefore to know your highness
pleasure, whether we shall give him free passage into his country, or bereave
him of that he has, and send him away. To which news the King returned an
answer saying. The person you speak of, of what nation soever he be which
has wrought this despitefull treachery to his host, see you apprehend and
bring to my court, to the end I may hear what he can say for himself.
Whereat Thonis without any farther deliberation, took this young gallaunt of
Troy, strayned his ships, and brought him with the Lady Helena and the rest of
his retinue to the city Memphis, where the King at that time made his place of
abiding. Being arrived at the Court, the King asked Alexander in these words:
Young gentleman, what are you, and from what country are you landed here in
Egypt? Alexander, who was not to seek of an answer, with a comely grace
made answer to the King, descrying both his country and lynage, the place
also from whence he was arrived, and to what coasts he directed his course.
And where then (quoth the King) had you this goodly geutlewoman, for she
seems to be a woman of no common blood: whereat my youth somewhat mammering
before he could cast the plot of his excuse, was betrayed by his servant,
who in humble inanner on their knees, disciphered to the King the whole
discourse of his treason. The vassals having ended their speech, Protheus
turned himself to Alexander, and tucked him up with this round tale: my
friend (said he) were it not for the reverence I owe to strangers, with
whom my custom is not to deal by rigor, I would surely pipe ye such a
dance for the wicked villainy wherewith thou have abused thine host in
Greece, that all unthankful wretches should take example by thee how to use
those that show them courtesy in a foreign land. Ah unkind wretch as
thou art, is this the best requital thou make the Grecian for his noble
usage toward thee? to bereave him of his mate, the most comfortable companyon
of all his days, and not content therewyth, like an arraunt thief thou have
despoyled his goods, the best and principal treasures of his house. Thou
may bless the time ten thousand times, that the Egyptians yield such
honor to strangers: and pack thee hence from my presence with the rest of
thy mates, swearyng by my crown, that if henceforth thou be seen within the
borders of Egypt, I will account thee as mine enemy. As for thy minion and
the goods thou have brought, I shall reserve, till such time as the Grecian
shall come to reclayme them. By these means (said the priests) came Helena
into Egypt, whereof also Homer himself seemed not to be ignorant, but of
purpose rather (for that it fell not out so fittingly for his verse) he chose
the other, declaring notwythstandyng that some such fame as this was bruted
abroad, which appears manifestly in his Illiads, where making mention of
the voyage of Alexander, he affyrmeth, that by means of a contrary wind, he
was tossed by sea, and recovered the land at the city Sydon in Phaenicia:
read the verses that are framed by him in the praise of Diomedes, in which
place these lines are found.

There were the cloakes of gorgeous hue
so brave and princely dight,
Made by the dames of Sydony,
sold to the seemly wight
King Pryams son, that stale himself
a wife of royal race,
Queen Helene hyghte, retyryng home,
unto his natyue place.
Touching the same in his Odyssea in these verses.
This poison quycke and valerous
which Polydamna gave
The wife of Thonis, Helen brought,
and carefully did save.
Great store whereof in droughty soil
of scorched Egypt groe
Some sovereign good, and othersome
the cause of present woe.
In like manner to Telemachus, Menelaus speaks in this wise.
And when I sought to leave the land
of Egypt, and retire,
God hyndred, whom I left unserved
by vows and sacred fire.
In these verses Homer confesses that he knew of the wandering of Alexander
into Egypt, for so much as the country of Syria is bounding upon Egypt, and
the people Phaenices unto whom the city Sydon is belonging are resyaunt in
Syria. As well these therefore as also the place it self, are no small proof,
nay rather a most valerous argument, that the verses wherein it is said, that
Alexander conueying Helen from Greece in three days space, with a prosperous
gale, and quiet sea, arrived at Troy, were rather intruded by some other poet
then invented by Homer, who contrarywyse in his Illiads makes mention of his
error by sea.

To leave Homer, and come to the affairs of the Troianes, being desirous to
understand of what truth these things were Of the Troiane war.
which are bruted to have been done by the Greeks at Troy, I solicited the
matter with the priests of Egypt, who told me in such manner as themselves
beforetime had been advertised by Menelaus. After the flight of the Lady
Helen, there assembled, in the cause of ye kings brother Menelaus, a puissant
army of the Graecians, who embarking themselves into Teucria, and incamping in
their coasts, sent in embassage to the city Troy certain of their chief
peers and nobles, amongst whom, was Menelaus brother to the King. Being
entered the city, they made claim of the Lady Helena, with the goods and
treasures she took with her, requyring also a sufficient satisfaction to be
made for the injury. Whereunto the Troianes answered, that they spente their
speech in vain, to rechallenge either women or goods of them which they never
saw, alleging, that the things they challenged were surprised by the
Egyptians: neither was it reason why they should bear the fault of others,
and make restitution of that which they never had. Howbeit, the Greeks
imagining they had spoken it in derision, to shift off the siege for the time,
bent their whole force against the town, continuing the siege and battery so
long, till they had brought it to utter ruin and subversion.

The city taken, when Helena could not be found, and the same answer was
rendered the Graecians as before, they gave credit at length to their words,
and sent Menelaus into Egypt to the court of Protheus, whether being come,
and declaryng the cause of his arrival to the King, he gave him great
entertaynemente, restoring unto him his Lady with all his treasure, without any
manner of loss or imbeselment. Nevertheless, Menelaus for all this courtesy
Courtesy revvarded with cruelty.
and royal usage which he had received at the hands of the King, gave him but
a poupe for his labor, dooyng to the country this injury for a farewell. For
indeuouring to depart thence, and waiting a favorable wind to fit his
purpose, by means whereof, he stayde a long time in Egypt: to know the state
of his voyage, what fortune should thereafter betide unto him, he took two
children of the Egyptians, slew them, and paunched out their bowels, whereby
to take view of his future success. Which being known, and perceiving
himself to be mortally hated and pursued of the inhabitauntes, he sped him
thence into the Isles of Africa lying over against them, from whence also
making as good haste as he could, the Egyptians heard no more tydyngs of him.
Of all these things they were partly informed by the knowledge of hystories,
being much more certain of such things as were done in their country. Thus
far the priests of Egypt proceeding in discoursing of Helena, whereto I
add this surmize of mine own, that if Helena had been in Troy, no doubt for
ought that Alexander could have said or done, That Queen Helena was never at
Troy.
she had been delivered to the Graecians. For who would think that King
Pryamus with the residue of that lignage were so mad, that to the end
Alexander might enjoy the delighte of his Lady, would imperill their own lives
and their childrens, with the flourishing estate of so famous a city. In which
fond opinion, if in case they had been at the beginning, yet undoubtedly they
would have recanted at length when as many valiant souldyers of the Troianes,
and two or three of the Kings own sons, (if any credit may be given to the
poets) were most lamentably slain by the Graecians in fight. By these things I
am driven to conjecture, that if Helena had been in their keeping, Pryamus to
raise the siege from the walls of his city, would willingly have wrought
means to restore her again. Neither was Alexander heir apparaunt to the
crown, so that his father being crooked with age, the administration of the
kingdom should rest in his gouernemente, one there was between him and home,
namely his brother Hector, as well in number of years his elder, as in
nobleness of mind his better, whom it behooved not to smooth up his brother
in his filthy leachery, seeing such imminent peril to threaten not only
himself, but also the whole kyndred and nation of the Troianes. But it was the
just plague of God inflicted upon them for their wickedness, that they
should neither deliver Helena whom they had not, nor be credyted of the
Graecians, to whom they feigned not, to the end all men might learn, that
they which stryke with the swoorde, shall be beaten with the scabberde, being
evermore seen, that upon grievous injuries the gods always power down
grievous reuengements. Thus much I thought convenient to speak of mine own
fancye.

After the deceasse of Protheus, Kampsinitus took upon him the rule of the
country, who in memory of himself, Kampsinitus.
left behind him certain porches of stone, planted westward against the
temple of Vulcane, right over against the which, stood two images of five and
twentye cubits in length. One of the which standing northerly, they call
summer, and the other lying to the west, they term winter, contrary to all
reason and order. This King in abundance of wealth, and plenty of coin, so
far excelled all those that came after him, that none could go beyond him,
no not approach near unto him in that kind: wherefore desirous to possess his
goods in safety, he builte him a treasury or iewellhouse of stone, one of
the walls whereof bounded upon the outsyde of his court. In framing whereof,
the workman A tale of a cunning thief.
had wrought this subtle conueyance, one stone in the wall he laid in that
sorce, that a man might easily at pleasure pluck it in or out, which
notwithstanding served so fittingly to the place, that nothing could be
discerned. When the building was finished, the King caused his treasure to be
brought into it, minding henceforth to be secure and to lay aside all fear of
misfortune. In process of time, this cunning artificer lying at the point to
dye, called unto him his two sons, and disclosed unto them in what manner he
had provided for their good estate, in leaving a secret and most privy passage
into the Kings treasury, whereby their whole life might be lead in most happy
and blessed condition. In brief, he showed them all that was done by him,
delyuering them the just measures of the stone, that they might not be
deceived in laying it again, which the two young youths well marking, thought
from that time forward to be of the Kings counsel, if not of his court, and
to become the privy surueyers of his iewellhouse.

Their father being dead, they made no long delay to put in execution their
determinate purpose, but repayring to the court by night, they found the stone,
which with small force remoouing it from the place, they sped themselves with
plenty of coin, and so departed. In short space after the King entering his
treasury, and fyndyng the vessels wherein his money lay to be somewhat
decreased, was exceedingly amazed, not knowing whom to accuse, seeing both his
seals, which he had set on the door, untouched, and the door fast locked at
his coming thither. Howbeit, repayring sundry times to behold his wealth,
and evermore perceiving that it grew less and less, devised with himself to
beset the place where his money lay with certain greens or snares to entrappe
the thief in. These subtle merchaunts according to their former wont
approaching the spring head where they had drunk so often before, one of them
went in, and groaping for the money, was so fast entangled in a snare, that
for his life he wist not how to shifte, but seeing himself in these braakes,
he called his brother, to whom he disclosed his evil hap, willing him in
any wise to cut off his head, least being known who he was, they both might
be served with the same sauce. His brother hearing his counsel to be good,
did as he bade him, and fitly placing the stone as he found it, departed
home, bearyng with him the head of his slain brother.

The next day the King opening his jewel house, and espying and headless
thief surprised in a ginne, was woonderfully astonished, seeing every place
safe, and no way in the world to come in or out at.

In this quandary, uncertain what to think of so strange an event, be
devised yet to go another way to the wood, causing the body of the thief to be
hanged out upon the walls in open view to all that passed by, appoynting
certain to attend in that place, with straight charge, that if they heard any
making moan or lamentation at the sight thereof, they should foorthwyth
attache them, and bring them to the King.

The Mother of these two Breethron not able with patiente eyes to behold the
wretched carcass of her pitiful son, called the other brother unto her,
aduising him The affection of a mother.
by some means or other, to take away his brothers body and bury it,
threatening moreover, that in case he neglected to accomplish it with speed,
she would open all his theft and treachery to the King. Whom her son
endeavoring with many words to persuade, and naught auayling (so tender was
her affection toward her child) he set his wits abroache to the framing
of some subtyle conceyte, to beguyle and inueigle the Kings watchemen.
Pannelling certain Asses which he loaded with bottels of sweet wine, he
proceeded forward with his carryage, till such time as he came against the
place where the watch lay, where privily vnstopping one or two of his
bottles, the wine flowed out in great abundance, whereat, fayning as though
he had been besides himself, he piteously cried out, tearing his hair add
stampyng as one utterly; ignoraunte which to reuiedye first. The keepers
seeing the wine gushe but so fast, ra^^e hastily with pottes and cannes to
receive to least all should be lost, but the dryuer (who had already cast his
plotte) seemed heereat much more enraged then before, tauntyng and raylyng at
them with most bitter and reuiling words. Contraryly, the watchmen giving him
very fair and gentle language, he seemed better contented, leadyng aside his
Asses out of the way to new girde them, and place his carriage in better
order. Many words grew between them whiles he was addressing his Asses to
proceed on their way, till that one of them bolting forth a merry jest,
caused him to laugh heartily, so that like a good fellow, he bestowed amongst
them a bottle of wine. Which courtesy they all took in very good part,
requesting him to sit with them for company, and drink part of his own
cost. Whereto he willingly consenting, they drank a carouse, every man his
cannikin, till the wine began to run of the lies, which this coapesmate
perceiving, set abroach another bottle, and began to quaffe afreshe, which set
my keepers on such a tantarra, that being well wetted, they set more by three
drammes of sleep, then six ounees of wit. When all was hushe, and the
watchmen fast asleep, he took the body of his brother, and in mockage,
shauing off the hair of their right cheeks, he returned home, being right
gladly enterteyned of his mother.

The King seeing his devises no better to proceed, but for ought he could
imagine the thief still beguyled him, waxed woonderous wrath: howbeit,
determining to leave nothing unattempted, rather then to let such a villayne
escape scotfree, he built yet another trappe to catch the fox in. He had at
that time abiding in his court a goodly gentlewoman his only daughter, whom
he tenderly loved from her childhood. This Lady he made of his counsel,
willing her by the duty of a child, to a bandon chastity for the time, making
hirselfe a common stalant for all that would come, on condition they should
swear to tell her the subtilest and the sinfullest prancke that ever they had
played in all their life time, and who so confessed the facts lately achieved
in imbesileing the Kings treasure, and stealing away the thief, him to lay
hold on, and not suffer to depart.

The gentlewoman obeying her fathers will, kept open house, having great
repair unto her out of all parts of the country. Now the thief which knew
full well to what intent the King had done this, desirous to be at oast with
his daughter for a night, and fearing the danger that might ensue, being of
a very pregnaunt and ready wit, devised yet another shifte wherewythall to
delude the King: he struck off the hand of his brother that was dead, and
closely carrying it under his cloak, he repaired to the place where the Kings
daughter lay, who demanding him the question as she had done the rest,
received of him this answer, that the sinfullest act that ever he committed,
was to cut off his brothers head, being inueigled in a snare in the Kings
treasury, but the subtilest in that he had deceived a sort of drouken asses,
whom the King had appointed to watch the body. The Lady that had listened to
his tale, hearing the news she longed for, stretched out her hand to lay hold
on him, who subtly presenting her with the hand of his brother, (which
being dark, she fast griped in stead of his own) he conveyed himself from
her and was no more seen. The King hereof advertised, was stricken with so
great admiration as well of his wit in devising, as his boldness in
aduenturing, that forthwith he caused notice to be given throughout all parts
of his government, that in case the party which had done these things. would
disclose himself, and stand to his mercy, he would not only yield him free
pardon, but also indue and honor him with so princely rewards as were fit for
a person of such excellent wisdom. My yonker yielding credit to the Kings
promise, came forth in presence, and descried himself, with whom Kampsinitus
joining his daughter in marriage, did him the greatest honor he could devise,
esteeming him for the wisest man that lived upon the earth, holding it for
certain, that the Egyptians excelled all others in wisdom, amongst whom he
judged none comparable to him. The same King (say they) whiles he was yet
living, traveled so far under the ground, till he came to the place which
the Kampsinitus journey to hell.
Graecians call the seats infernal, where he played at dyce with the goddess
Ceres, and sometimes winning sometimes losing, he returned again at length,
being rewarded by her with a mantle of gold. In the mean space while
Kampsinitus undertook this voyage to hell, the Egyptians kept holyday,
prolonging the celebration till such time as he retired back again, which
solemn observance, since our memory has been duly celebrated. But whether
this be the cause of that sacred festival, I dare not auowe, howbeit, the
priests showed me a certain cloak, wouen in the space of one day, wherewith
once ayeare they attire some one of their petie vicares, blinding moreover his
eyes with a myter. Being in this sort attyred, they conduct him to the high
way that leads to the temple of the goddess Ceres, where after they have
placed him, they leave him grabling in that place, and depart their way. To
whom incontinently resort two wolves, conducting the priest to the temple
aforesaid, which is distaunte from the city twenty furlongs, where having
accomplished certain rytes, the wolves lead him back again to the same
place. All these things they doubt not to report for certain true, which we
leave to every man's lyking to judge of them as they deserve. For mine own
part I have thought it meet to make relation of such things as I heard
amongst them, going no farther in many things then he aresay.

Amiddest the infernal powers, the Egyptians affirm that Ceres and Liber
have the chief authority.

The same people were they that first held opinion that the soul of man was
immortal, passing from one body into another The opinion of the Egyptians
touching the immortality of the soul.
by a continual course, as every one took his beginning and generation of
another, and when it had passed through all bodies that have their being
either in the land, sea, or air, then consequently to return into the body
of man again, which course it finished within the term of three thousand
years: which opinion had many patrones of the Graecians, some ancient and of
great authority, others of later days, usurping and chalenging it for their
own, of whose names I am not ignorant, albeit I mind not to recite them. The
Egyptians likewise mention that to the time of Kampsinitus, religion, justice,
and true order of government greatly flourished among them.

After whom, the royal dignity came into the hands of Cheops, a man fraught
with all kind of vicious demeanor, Cheops.
and wicked conversation. For causing the temples of the gods to be fast locked
up, he gave out through all quarters of his Empire, that it might not be
lawful for any Egyptian to offer sacrifice, to the end, that being seduced
front the service and reverence of the gods, he might securely employ them in
his own affairs. Some were appointed to dig stones in the mountain
Arabicus, and from thence, to convey them to the river Nilus, where they were
received of others which pheryed them over the river to the root of a great
hill named Africus. The whole number of those that were conuersaunt in the
Kings affairs, was ten thousand men, serving by turns, every three
months a thousand. In which manner, he held the people the space of ten
years, in all which time, they did nothing but hew and carry stones, a labor
of no less importance (in my judgment) then to have built the pyre it
self, or tower of stone, which is in length five furlongs, in breadth ten
paces, and in height where it is greatest, to the number of eight paces, being
framed of stone, euriously carved and engraven with the pictures of beasts.
Herein also were consumed other ten years, The building of the Egyptian
Pyramides.
causing certain chambers to be cut out under the ground, undermining the
stoneworke upon the which the towers were founded, which he provided for his
sepulcher. The situation here of was in a small Island, through the which by
a trench or small draught, he caused the river to have passage. The pyre was
made stearewise, ascending by steps or degrees orderly placed one above
another.

Having in such sort finished the lower work, they devised certain engines
or wrestes to heave up stones from the ground to the first stayre, and from
thence to the second, and so consequently till they came to the place where
the stone should lie, having upon each stayre a wreast: or (that which is
more likely) using one for all, being framed of light wood, to the intent it
might the more easily be removed.

The gross work finished, they began to polishe and beautify the tower from
the top downewardes, coming last of all to the neathermost stayre, wherein
they made a final end and conclusion of the beauty and grace of all their
woorkemanshippe. In this pyre, were intayled certain letters in the Egyptian
language, declaring the expense the King was at in the time of his building,
for ^ustardseed, oynyons, and garlike, which (as I remember) the interpreter
told me, did amount to the sum of a thousand six hundred talents. If this
were so, how much shall we deem to have been spent upon other things, as upon
tools, engines, victuals, laboring garments for the workmen, being ten
years busied in these affairs? I reckon not the time wherein they were held
in framing and hewing of stones to set them in a readiness for the main
work: neither all the space that passed over in the conueyance and carriage of
the stone to the place of building, which was no small numbers of days, as
also the time which was consumed in undermining the earth, and cutting out of
chambers under the ground, all which things drove the King to such a narrow
straight, that he was feign to cloute out his devises with a most wicked
invention, which was this: Perceiving his golden mine to draw low that the
devil might dance in the bottom of his bag and find never a cross, he
made sale of his daughters honesty, willing her to entertayne tagge and ragge
all that would come, in case they refused not to pay for their pleasure,
sithence Venus accepts not the devotion of such as pray with empty hands and
threadbare pursses. The Lady willing to obey the hestes of the King her father,
devised also the mean to prolong the memory of herself, and to advance her
fame to the notice of all ages that should ensue, wherefore she made request to
such as had access unto her, to give her a stone to the building and erection
of a work which she had determined, wherewith (as the brute goes) she gave so
many stones as served to the framing of a whole pyre, situate in the midst of
the three former, in full view and prospect to the greatest pyrame, which is
every way an acre and an half square.

Ensuing the reign of Cheops, whose kingdom continued the space of fifty
years, the chief government was committed Chephrenes King of Egypt.
to Chephrenes his brother, which followed the steps of his predecessor as
well in other things, as also in building of a pyre, howbeit, not so huge and
great as that which his brother had finished before him, for we took the
measure of them all. Moreover, such vnderworke wrought out in caves and
chambers under the ground as is to be seen in the pyre of Cheops, are wanting
in this, besides the laborious and toilesome work which they had to derive and
draw the river to that place, which has his course through the midst of the
former pyre, ^emming in the whole Island wherein it is situate: within the
compass whereof, they affirm that Cheops himself was buried. By whom in his
lifetime, an house was framed of one stone alone, diversely colored, which he
had out of the country of Aethiopia, forty foot lower then the pire it self,
yet planted and built upon the selfsame foundation. Chephrenes also (by the
computation of the Egyptians) ruled the country fifty years, by which
means they make account that their misery continued an hundred and six
years, al which time, the temples of their gods were unfrequented, abiding
still from time to time sealed up and vnopened, wherefore these princes the
Egyptians will not name for the hatred they bear them, calling their pyres
the towers of the shepeheard Philitio, who at that time kept sheep in those
places.

Chephrenes dying, yielded the Kingdom to Mycerinus, Mycerinus King of Egypt.
the son of his brother Cheops, who eschuing the wicked acts and detestable
practices of his father, caused the temples to be set open, giving liberty to
the people being so long distressed under the government of his father and
uncle, to follow their own affairs, and return to their ancient custom of
sacrifice, ministering justice above all the Kings that were before him, for
which cause, none of all the princes that have borne Mycerinus famous for his
just governing
rule in Egypt is so greatly praised and renowned, both for other causes which
were wisely taken up by him in judgment, and chiefly for this, that a certain
Egyptian much complaining that the King had wronged him in deciding his cause,
he commanded him to value the loss which he had suffered by him, which the
party doing, he gave him so much of his own goods to make him a recompense.
Mycerinus in this wise governing the common weal with great clemency, and
seeking by virtue to advance his fame; was sodeinely daunted by a great
misfortune, the death of his only daughter, having no more children but her,
which was the first and greatest hartbreake that befell him in his kingdom.
For which cause, being stricken with sorrow above measure, and desirous to
solemnize her funeralles by the most royal and princely kind of buryall that
could be devised: he caused an ox to be made of wood, inwardly vauted and
hollow within, which being laid over and garnished most curiously with gilt,
he enclosed therein the wanne and forlorn corpse of his best beloved daughter.
This royal tomb was not interred and buried in the ground, but remained unto
our age in the city Sais in open view, standing in a certain parlour of the
Kings palace, adorned and set forth for the same purpose, with most
beautiful and costly furniture. The custom is evermore in the day time to
cast into the belly of the ox sweet and precious odoures of all sorts that
may be gotten: and in the night to kindle a lamp, which burns by the tomb
till the next day. In a chamber next adjoining are certain pictures of women
that were the concubines of Mycerinus, if we may believe the talk of those
that in the same city of Sais are professors in religion, for so much as there
are seen standing in that place certain mighty images made of wood, twentye
or thereaboutes in number, the most part of them bare and naked, but what
women they resemble, or whose pictures they be, I am not able to allege more
then hearesay, notwithstanding, there were which as touching the gilded ox,
and the other images framed this tale, that Mycerinus being inamoured of his
own daughter, dealt unlawfully with her besides the course of nature, who for
intolerable grief hanging her self, was intombed in that ox by her father:
the Queen her mother causing the hands of all her gentlewomen to be cut off,
by whose means she had been betrayed to serve her fathers lust, for which
cause (say they) are these images portrayed, to declare the misfortune which
they abode in their lifetime. But this is as true as the man in the moon, for
that a man with half an eye may clearly perceive, that their hands fell offfor
very age, by reason that the wood through long continuance of time was spaked
and perished, which even to our memory were to be seen lying at the feet of
those which were portrayed. The ox wherein the young princess lay, was
sumptuously clad, and arrayed all the body with a gorgeous mantle of Phenicia,
his head and neck being spanged and laid over with braces and plates of
gold of a maruaylous thickenesse. Between his horns was set a globe or
circle of gold, glistering as the sun. Neither is the ox standing and borne
up upon his feet, but kneeleth as it were on his knees, equal in bigness to
a great heighfer. The manner is once a year to bring this image out of the
parlour wherein it is kept, having first of all well beaten and cudgelled a
certain image of one of It is as good to be a slave in England as a Saint in
Egypt.
their Saints, whom in this case we think it not lawful for us to name.
The talk goes, that the Lady besought the King her father that being dead,
she might once a year behold the sun, whereof sprang the custom and manner
aforesaid.

After this, there befell unto him another mischief that sat as near his
skirtes as the death of his dilling, insomuch that he was ready to run
beyond himself for sorrow. A prophecy arose in the city of Butis, that the
term of six years fully exspired, the King should end his life, leaving
his Kingdom to be ruled of another. Whereof the King being advertised, and
greatly greeuing at the rigorous and unjust dealing of the gods, sped a
messenger to the place where the seat of prophecy was held, to expostulate
with the god, for what cause (since his father and uncle who had been so
unmindful of the gods, shutting up their temples, and making havoc of the
people had lived so long) he himself that had dealte better with them, and
caused these things to be restored again, should so soon be deprived of
the benefit of life, to whom answer was made, that his days were therefore
shortened because he took a wrong course and did not as he should do, being
appointed by the celestial powers, that the country of Egypt should suffer
misery, and be afflicted by their princes ye space of an hundred and fifty
years, which the two former princes well understanding, was nevertheless by
him neglected and left unperformed. Mycerinus hearing this round reply, and
perceiving that his thread was almost spoon, set al at revel, making great
provision of lights and tapers, which at euentide he caused to be lighted,
passing the night in exceeding great mirth and princely banqueting, letting
slip no time wherein he either wandered not along the river, and through the
woods and groves of the country, or entertained the time in some pleasant
devises, following all things that might either breed delighte, or bring
pleasure, which things he did, to the end he might prove the prophecy false,
and convince the god of a lie, making twelve years of six, by spending the
nights also as he did the days. Mycerinus Mycerinus made twelve years of
six.
also built a pyre, not equal to that which his father had set up before him,
being in measure but twenty foot square, framed quadrangularly, and another
lower then that, of three acres in compass, being built to the midst of the
stone of Aethiopia. There be of the Grecian writers that suppose this tower to
have been erected by a woman of notable fame, called Rhodope, who miss of
their account, not seeming to know The story of Rhodope.
what that Rhodope was of whom they speak. Besides, it is very unlikely that
Rhodope would ever have enterprised a work of so great value, wherein
infinite thousands of talentes were spent before it came to perfection. Lastly,
it was not in the days of this prince that Rhodope flourished, but under the
government of Amasis, many years passing from the time of those princes that
planted the pyres, to the days and age of Rhodope. This gallaunt dame was by
country a Thracian borne, the bondmayd of one Iadmon, whose abiding was in the
land of Samos in the city of the god Vulcane, who in the time of her bondage,
was fellowseruant with Aesope the inuenter of fables, to whom this smooth
minion had a months mind and more, for which cause, being given out by ye
oracle at Delphos, that it might be free for any man to slay Aesope that
would, and take pennaunce for his soul for his fault committed, there was
none found that would put him to death, but the nephew of Iadmon that came by
his son, who was also named Iadmon: whereby we may gather that Aesope was a
slave and vassal to Iadmon. The death of Aesope wounded Rhodope with so great
fear, that she took her flight forthwith into Egypt, accompanied by one
Xanthus a Samian, where she set forth her self to the sale of such, as rather
then Venus should be shut out for a Saint, thought it no idolatry to worship
idols. Whiles she abode in Egypt, she was redeemed and acquit of her
servitude by one Charaxus, who purchased her liberty by a great sum of
money. This Charaxus was of the country of Mitilene, son of Scamandronymus,
and brother to Sappho the notable poetresse. By these means came Rhodope to be
free, and remained still in Egypt, where she wanne so great credit and liking
of all men, that in short space she grew to marvelous wealth, being such as
far in deed surmounted the degree of Rhodope, but yet amounted not to the
buylding of a pyre. By the tenth part of which her substance, it is easy for
any man to guess, that the mass and sum of money which she had gathered, was
no such miracle as it is made to be. For studying to be famous and remembered
in Greece, she devised a work which had never been imagined or given by any
other, which in remembrance of her self she offered in the temple of Delphos.
Wherefore of the tenth part of her riches which she sent to the temple, she
commanded so many iron spittes to be made (which were employed to the rosting
of oxen) as the quantity of the money would afoorde that was sent thither by
her. These spittes at this present stand behind the aultare, which the
people of Chios erected just oueragainst the temple. Howbeit, such arrant
honest women as are fish for every man, have in no place the like credit, as
in the city of Naucrates. For So Much as this stalant of whom we speak, had her
fame so bruted in all places, as almost there was none in Greece that had not
heard of the fame of Rhodope. After whom, there sprang up also another as
good as ever ambled, by name Archidice, whose virtues Archidice.
were blased very far, but not with like fame and renown as her
predecessor, with whom, Charaxus was so far gone, that retyring home to
Mytelene, he was almost besides himself, as Sappho makes mention, inueyghing
in verse against his folly. We have thus far digressed to speak of Rhodope, we
will now return to the text again.

Next after Mycerinus, ensued the reign and dominion of Asychis, by whom (as
the priests report) was consecrated to Asychis King of Egypt.
Vulcane a princely gallerie standing to the East, very fair and large,
wrought with most curious and exquisite workmanship. For besides that it had
on every side embossed the strange and lively pictures of wild beasts, it
had in a manner all the graces and sumptuous ornaments that could be imagined
to the beautifying of a work. Howbeit, amiddest other his famous deeds, this
purchased him the greatest dignity, that perceiving the land to be oppressed
with debt, and A statute against borovvers.
many creditours like to be indamaged by great loss, he inacted forthwith,
that who so borrowed aught upon credit, should lay to pledge the dead body
of his father, to be used at the discretion of the creditour, and to be buried
by him in what manner he would, for a pennaunce to all those that took any
thing of loan: providing moreover, that in case he refused to repay the debt,
he should neither be buried in the tomb of his fathers, nor in any other
sepulcher, neither himself, nor the issue that should descend and spring of
his body. This prince desiring to surpass all that had been before him, left
in memory of himself an excellent pyre built all of clay, wherein was a
stone set engraven in these words: Compare me not to the rest of the pyres,
which I surmount as far as Jupiter excels the meaner gods, for searching
the bottom of the river with a scoupe, look what clay they brought up, the
same they employed to the building of me in such form and bigness as you may
behold. And this did Asychis imagine to advance the fame of himself to the
time to come.

After whom, the scepter was held by one Anysis a blind man, inhabiting in a
city called after his own name Anysis. In time of whose reign, Sabbacus King
of Aethyopia invaded Anysis the next King. Sabbacus vanquished Egypt, ruling
fifty years.
Egypt with a mighty power. Where at the poor blind King greatly
affrighted, crope privily away, and gained a privy covert in the marrishe
places of the country, leauyng the government to Sabbacus his enemy, which
ruled the same 50. years, whose acts are mentioned to have been these. If
any of the Egyptians made a trespass, he never used to do any man to death
for his offense, but according to ye quantity of his fault, to enjoin him to
arrere and make higher by foreign supply of earth and stone, some part of the
city wherein he dwelt, for which cause, the cities became very high and
eminent, being much more loftely situated then before. For first of all in time
of Sesostris such earth as was cast out of the trenches (which were made to
give the water a course to the cities that were far off) was employed to the
elevation and advancing of the low towns, and now again under this
Aethyopian they had increase of fresh earth, and grew to be very high and
lofty. Amongst the rest, the noble city of Bubastis seems The description of
the temple of Diana.
to be very haughty and highly planted, in which city is a temple of excellent
memory dedicate to the goddess Bubastis, called in our speech Diana, then the
which, albeit there be other churches both bigger and more richly furnished,
yet for the sightly grace and seemelynesse of building, there is none
comparable unto it. Besides, the very entrance and way that leads into the
city, the rest is inform of an Island, enclosed round about with two sundry
streams of the river Nilus, which run to either side of the path way, and
leaving as it were a lane or causey between them, without meeting, take their
course another way. These arms of the flood are each of them an hundred foot
broad, beset on both sides the banckes with fair braunched trees,
ouershadowing ye waters with a cool and pleasant shade. The gate or entry of
the city is in height 10. paces, having in the front a beautiful image. 6.
cubits in measure. The temple it self situate in the midst of ye city, is
evermore in sight to those yt pass to and fro. For although ye city by
addition of earth was arrered and made higher, yet ye temple standing as it did
in ye beginning, and never moved, is in manner of a lofty and stately tower, in
open and clear view to every part of ye city. Round about the which goes a
wall engraven with figures and protraitures of sundry beasts. The inner temple
is environed with an high grove of trees, set and planted by the hand and
industry of men: in the which temple is standing an image. The length of the
temple is every way a furlong.

From the entrance of the temple Eastward, there is a fair large causey
leading to the house of Mercury, in length, three furlongs, and four acres
broad, all of fair stone, and hemmed in on each side with a course of goodly
call trees planted by the hands of men, and thus as touching the description of
y^ temple. Likewise they make mention in what manner they shifted their hands of
y^ Ethiopian prince, who admonished in his sleep by The departure of Sabbacus.
a vision, hastened his flight to depart y^ country. There seemed unto him one
standing by his bedside, willing him in any wise to assemble together y^
priests of Egypt, and to cut the^ all asunder by y^ waste: which the King
pondering in his mind, said thus, I well perceive that y^ gods would pick a
quarrel against me, that by the doing of some villainy or other, I might either
incur their hatred, or the displeasure of men, but since the time of my rule in
Egypt, which by y^ oracle was prefined, is now exspired, I will kindle no more
coals then I may well quench, wherewith departing y^ country, he left the
government to y^ seed of the Egyptians, and retired himself into his own
land. For abiding beforetime in Aethiopia the oracles which the Aethiopians
use, gave out to the King, that he should bear rule 50. years in Egypt,
which time being finished, Sabbacus sore troubled with y^ strange sight of his
dream, of his own proper will departed the listes of the country. Ensuing
whose flight, y^ blind King forsaking his nest in the fennes, came out, and
showed his head again, exercising government as he had done before, having
wonderfully enlarged the Island where he lay, with addition of ashes and fresh
earth. For whosoever of the Aegyptia^s came unto him either with grain or
other provision, his manner was to give him in charge, that unwitting to the
Ethiopian prince (who then withheld from him the right of his kingdom) he
should present him with a load or two of ashes. This I Will before y^ time of
Amyrtaeus was unknown to any man, named in y^ Aegyptia^ language Elbo, being
in bigness. 10. furlo^gs. Next after whom, the title to all was resigned over
to a certain priest called Sethon, serving in y^ temple of the god Vulcane
Sethon.
by whom, the souldyers of Egypt were abused and had in contempt as men unfit,
and not serving for his purpose. Wherefore beside other slanderous tauntes and
reuiling words, whereby he sought at all times to grieve the^, he bereaved the^
also of such lands and revenues as had been granted unto them by the former
Kings: for which cause, after that Senacherib King of the Arabians and
Assyrians had invaded Egypt with a mighty power, they refused to yield him aid
and assistance in his wars. The priest driven to this sudden blanke, not
knowing how to shift, withdrewe himself into a close parlour, where
complaining himself before his god, he showed what great and imminent perils
were like to befall him. As he was in this sort pouring out his tears and
pitiful complaints before his image, he fell asleep, where there seemed to
appear unto him the strange form of his god, willing him to be of good
comfort, and meet his enemies in the field, not fearing the event of battle,
for so much as he would send him sufficient aid to assist and succor him.
Master parson taking heart of grace by this blessed vision, took with him such
of the Egyptians as were willing to follow him, and encamped in Pelusia, on
which side only Egypt lies open, and may be invaded by foreign power, in
whose cause, not one of the soldiers would move a foot to follow him out of
doors, but pedlers, tinkers, and common gadders that strayed here and there
about the country. Being arrived at the place before named, in y^ night
season, there came into the tents of their adversaries an huge multitude of
field mice, which gnawed their quiuers, but in sunder their bowstrings, and the
braces off their shields, y^ in y^ morning being disfurnished of their armor,
they betook themselves to flight, not without the loss of many soldiers.
Herehence is it y^ the picture of y^ same prince graven of stone, is seen
standing in y^ temple of Vulcane with this title and inseription, Learn by me
to fear God. Thus far The revvard of godliness.
went the Egyptians and their priests in describing the continual succession
of their kings and governors, alleging that from the first King unto this
priest of Vulcane before mentioned, were 341. generations. Three hundred
generatio^s contain ten thousand years, for so much as to three progenies of
men are assigned an hundred years, so y^ the residue of the progenies which
were 41. are valued at 1340. years. Likewise they affirmed, y^ in the course
of ten thousand three hundred and forty years, there appeared no god in Egypt
under the proportion and shape of a man, neither could any such thing be
mentioned to have fallen out under the governance of any of their princes,
howbeit, within the term of years aforenamed, these strange alterations
Miracles chanced in the Sun.
were marked in y^ Sun at four sundry times. Two sundry times it was seen
to rise from that place where it is now wont to fall, and in like manner to set
in those regions from whence it now arises, which also came to pass two
several times. Iusuing which things, there was no change in y^ country, no
alteration in any point, neither as touching the effects and course of the
river, nor for any maladies, death, or inconveniences in the land. In like
sort, before Hecataeus the writer of monuments (by whom in the city of Thebes
a rehearsal was made of the whole descent of his stock and kindred, fetching
his progeny from the xvi. god) the priest of Jupiter did this, (as also to my
self that made no relation of mine alliance) leading us into a large chapel
or house of prayer, they showed us both the number of our auncetry according to
our own account. Wherein also stood the images of certain chief priests and
Bishops in such form and manner as every one had led his life, where, by
orderly descent and issue they showed us in what manner y^ son had evermore
succeeded his father in y^ office of priesthode, reciting every one of their
images until they came to the last. Herein also they disliked y^ speech of
Hecataeus y^ sought to fetch his progeny from y^ xvi. god, making him another
account of his kinsfolk and allies, showing him how absurd a thing it was, and
disagreeing from reason for a man to derive his issue from a god. For which
cause, in reciting the genealogies, they disprooued his account in this wise,
relating how each of these images were in their speech named Pyromis, which
name they took by descent, the son from the father by line all course to y^
number of 345. whose pictures were standing in y^ same oratory. These Pyromes
(as they termed the^) were such me^ as had no affinity with y^ gods, neither
could challenge their progeny of any one of the chief nobles and potentates,
being such as y^ Grecians call (...), that is, an honest, simple, and well
meaning man. Of which sort were al those whose momuments were extant in y^
place very far from being allied with any of the gods. Before these me^, y^ gods
themselves were rulers in Egypt, having their dwelling and abode together with
me^. Notwithstanding, being many in number, they governed not the country all
at once, but some one of the^ for a time, or each in course, til at length y^
scepter came to the hands of Orus son of Osiris whom the Graecians call
Apollo. The last and youngest of all the gods by the Grecians account, are
Hercules, Dionisius, and Pan. Albeit Pan with the Egyptians is a grandsire
god, one of the most auncientst among them, in the number of those eight y^ are
y^ chief and principal. Hercules is reckned in y^ number of y^ xii. meaner
saints. Dionisius among those y^ are called y^ iii. saints, issued of the xii.
former. From Dionisius (who is said to be the son of Cadmus by Semele) unto
this our age, are 6000. years. From Hercules sprung of Alcmena to this time
welny 9000. From Pan son of Mercury, begotten of the Lady Penelope, unto
these days wherein we live, the time is not so long as from the Troiane war, to
wit, 8000. years or there aboutes. In all these things we leave it free to
every ones fancy to follow what he will, our selves best liking of the common
opinion which is generally received of all men. For if these gods being
renowned with great fame in Graece, had The Greeks took their saints from the
Egyptians.
there also wasted the whole course of their age (as Hercules descended of
Amphytrio, Dionisius of Semele, Pan of Penelope) happily some man would have
said that the Egyptians had worshipped some other gods, which being of the
same name with these before mentioned, were notwithstanding in time long before
them. Now the Graecians themselves confess, that Dionisius being begotten by
Jupiter, was no sooner borne, but he cleaued fast to his fathers thigh, and was
carried away by him into Nyssa, which is a town in Aethyopia near unto Egypt.
Of Pan they make short work, as ignorant in what part of the world after
his birth he was brought up and nourished. Whereby it is easily coniectured,
that the names of these gods came of later days to the ears of y^ Graecians,
and that according to that notice, they began to frame for each of them a
cradle in Greece, as though they had been borne there, planting more upon
hearesay, then certain truth. Thus far we have followed the sayings of the
Egyptians, from henceforth minding to set down the consent of others,
wherein they accord with the people of Egypt as concerning such things as were
done in that country, adding thereto such matters as our selves have been
beholders of, and eyewitnesses.

The last King (being as before was mentioned the priest of Vulcane) leaving
the seat imperial void by his death, ye Egyptians The twelve Kings of
Egypt.
being now at liberty, and yet unable to live without the aid of government,
chose unto themselves 12. princes, dividing ye whole la^d into so many parts.
These 12. joining between themselves mutual kindred and affinity, exercised
the authority and office of Kings, establishing mutual league and couenaunts,
that none should incroch or gather upon another, but holding himself satisfied
with an equal portion, should live in friendship and amity with the rest,
which their league and agreement they sought by so much the more diligence and
warines to confirm and strengthen, for that in ye first entrance to their
kingdoms a prophecy was given out, that who so drank of a brazen mazer in
the temple of Vulcane, should be King alone over the whole la^d. When the
sacred rites and ceremonies observed in striking of league and making covenant
were duly accomplished, it liked the^ all to leave some common monument or
work behind the^ to the continuance of their memories, which they did, making
a labyrinth or maze somewhat above the poole called Maeris toward The Labyrinth.
the city, much more greater and famous tha^ ye brute goes. This I beheld with
mine eyes, being named The Maze of the Crocodyles: for if a man would frame his
conjecture according to the report which ye Graecians make thereof, measuring
the walls and beauty of ye work after their account, certes he shall give but a
beggarly judgment of so sumptuous and magnificent a building. For albeit ye
temple of Ephesus be an excellent and worthy monument, and the church or
religious house of Samos, yet are they nothing in respect of ye pires in
Egypt, one of yt which may well stand in comparison with all ye renowned works
of Greece, and yet eue^ these are far excelled and surmounted by ye labyrinth.
In this princely monument are 12. most fair and sumptuous haules, whose gates
open opposite each against other, 6. standing north near adioing together, ye
other 6. south, guarded about with ye same walls.

The rooms and lodgings therein contained, are of two sorts, some lower,
wrought cellar wise under the ground, other above these, being together in
number three thousand and six hundred. Of such rooms as were situate in the
second story, our selves had the full sight and view, speaking no more thereof
then we beheld with our eyes, following in the rest the report of others,
for so much as the under buildings were kept covert from the sight of all that
were travelers, because in them lay the tombs of those Kings that were the
founders of that place, with the bodies and dead carcasses of the sacred
Crocodyles. Thus of the neathermost house we speak by hearesay, of the
lodgings above viewing with our own eyes, more strange and wonderful
miracles then could be wrought by the help of men, for the sundry turnings and
windings leading from one chamber to another, did wonderfully amaze and
astonish my wits. Out of the great haules we go into certain The description
of the caves that are in the Laberinth.
parlours, wherehence the way leads in other bedchambers, next unto which are
situate diverse secret lodgings that open into the six great haules, standing
on the contrary part of the court, all which are coped over above with
wrought and carved stone, encompassed also with a wall of most fair and
beautiful stone, engraven with sundry sorts of pictures. Every one of the
haules are laid with smooth white stone, beautified on each side with a goodly
course of pillars. To one corner of the Laberinth is adjoining a pyre or tower
of stone, being forty paces, wherein are the pictures of many strange beasts
hewne out and carved of stone. To this tower is a way undermined in the ground.
Notwithstanding, for all the wonders that are to be seen and marked in the
Laberinth, the poole called Maeris, near bounding unto the same, has (in our
judgment) sundry things thereto belonging of far greater admiration. The
compass of this ponde is three thousand six hundred furlongs, and sixty
Schoenes as they term them, containing altogether as much space as the sea
coast of the country of Egypt. The length of the poole lies North and South,
being in deapth where it is highest fifty paees. Now that it has not sprung
naturally in that place, but rather has been wrought and dug by the travel
of men, this is an evident proof, for that welnye in the midst of the ponde
are planted two mighty towers of stone appearing fifty foot above the water,
and being as much under. On the top of each tower is a great image wrought of
stone, sitting in a chair of majesty, so that the towers conteyne in height
an hundredth paces. An hundredth full paces do make a furlong of six acres. A
pace conteyneth six feet, or four cubits. A foot is four times the
breadth of the hand. The water of Moeris is not naturally flowing from any
spring belonging thereto (the ground being exceedyngly patched and dry) but
is derived from the river, the water having recourse into the poole every six
months by ebbing and flowing. The six months wherein the water is retyring
out of the ponde, the multitude of fish which is there taken, increases the
Kings fiske every day by a talent of silver, and at such time as it refloweth
again, it brings advantage of twenty pound a day. This poole, the
inhabitants affirm, searches through the vames of the earth, and sheddeth his
waters into the Syr^s or quickesands of Africa, undermining a secret course
into the main land toward the countries of the West, fast by the side of an
huge mountain which appears over the city Memphis. Now for so much as I could
not discern how all the molde should be bestowed that was cast out of the
poole at the first making thereof, being desirous to know what was become of
it, I questioned with the inhabitaunts of those places as touching the same,
whose answer was, that it was employde to the rampeiring of the banks of
Nilus, and much of it thrown down the river, whose speech obtained the more
credit with me, for that I remembered the like thing to have been done at the
city Ninus, one of the chief cities of Assyria. In this city it fell out in
ancient time, that certain good fellows wanting silver, determined to visit
the Kings treasury, who at that time was Sardanapalus abounding with infinite
sums of treasure, which for that it lay safely guarded under the earth in
houses undermined for the purpose, these yonkers aforesaid beginning at their
own houses, made a way under ground, directly leading to the palace of the
King, voyding all the mold which they dug, into the river Tigris by night,
which flows fast by the city, until they had brought their enterprise to
pass. After the same manner it fell out in Egypt, in casting the lake of
Maeris, saving that the one was dug by night, the other by day, but in this
also, the greatest part of the boyde earth was cast into Nilus, and dispersed
by the stream. And in this manner say the Egyptians, was the poole of Maeris
first made. Now when as the 12. Kings of Egypt had practiced equity every one
within his own territory, they drew together at a certain time to do
sacrifice in Vulcans temple, where (as ye manner was) ye last day of ye
festival, the priest ministered wine unto the^ in certain chalices of gold
reserved for the same use, where happily missing of his number, having but xi.
cups for xii. princes, Psammitichus standing last, took from his head a brazen
costlet, and for want of a cup, drank therein. In like manner fell it out with
the rest of the princes, that every one was there present in his headpeece of
brass. In thus doing, it was deemed that Psammitichus meante no craft or
legerde^ayne, but had a plain and simple meaning. Howbeit, it could not sink
with the rest but that he did it of purpose, and coming in mind of the oracle
that was given them, that whosoever drank of a brazen chalice, should usurp
the whole empire alone: weying his fact, and finding that it was committed by
error, they thought it not meet to put him to death, but depriving him of the
greatest part of his dominion, banished him into the marrish country, with
especial threats, that he should not meddle with any part of the country
besides. Notwithstanding, Psammitichus having put to flight Sabbacus the King
of the Aethyopians, and chased him into Syria, after this conquest was acquit
of his exile, and restored again by those Egyptians which are of the tribe of
Sais, wherefore, once again using government with the rest of his
confederates, for the old grudge of the brazen helmet, they forced him to take
the fennes again. Recounting therefore with himself Psammitichus became
prince alone.
ye great despite they had wrought him, determined eftsoons to revenge his
cause upon those yt had pursued him, and speeding a messenger to the oracle of
Latona in the city of Butis, which of all the seats of southsaying is of
greatest truth, answer was given him to be of good courage, he should have
help enough by brazen men that should arise from the sea. Which prophecy for
the strangeness thereof could hardly sincke into his brains, to make him hope
for the help of brazen souldyders. Not long after, certain pirates of Ionia
and Caria proling along the seacoastes for their pray, were by constraynte of
weather driven upon the shores of Egypt, where going on land all in armor of
brass, a certain Egyptian ran to Psammitichus in the fennes, and for that
he had never before seen any in the like array, he told him that certain
brazen men were sproong out of the sea to waste and despoyle the country.
Psammitichus reknowledging the truth of the prophecy, forthwith joined
himself in amity with the rouers, inducing them by great and large promises
to abide with him, which being by him in like sort obtained, with this fresh
supply of forreyne aid, and the help of such Egyptians as favored his
cause, he provided against the rest of the princes. Having the whole
gouernemente alone, he made in the city of Memphis certain porches sacred to
the god Vulcane, lying upon the South wind, and oueragainst the porches a
fair large haule dedicated to Apis, wherein the god Apis at such time as he
appeared, was relieved and nourished. This place was beset round with stately
pillars, and engraven with sundry similitudes and imbossements of beasts,
fowls, and fishes. Wherein also in place of some pillars are planted diverse
fair images of no less then twelve cubits in bigness. To these forreiners
of Caria and Ionia, by whom he was helped in his wars, Psammetichus gave
certain manner places to dwell in, lying on each side of the river Nilus
called the Tents, whereof being possessed, he performed all such promises
besides that were couenaunted between them. Moreover, he put unto them
certain young impes of the Egyptians to be instructed in the Greek language,
from whom, by descent of issue came those which are now interpreters in
Egypt, and use the Greek tongue. A long time did the people of Ionia and
Caria inhabit those places lying against the sea, somewhat above the city of
Bubastis, situate at the mouth of Nilus, which is called Pelusiacum, from
whence, they were afterward translated by King Amasis into the city Memphis
to guard him against the Egyptians. After the Greeks were thus settled in
Egypt, the people of Greece had traffic thither, by which means, such
affairs as were achieved in that country from Psammitichus following, are
certaynely known of us without any error. These were the first that inhabited
Egypt, being of a diverse language from the homelings. In like manner, from
whence they fleeted thither, the relics of their ships wherein they came, the
old posts and groundreels of their houses were showed me. And these were the
means whereby Psammitichus obtained the dominiou of Egypt. As touching the
oracle or seat of prophecy, we have made many words, and will make more, as
of a thing most worthy to be mentioned. This oracle is planted in the temple of
the goddess Latona in a great city named Butis standing against the mouth of
Nilus which is called Sebenniticum, into the which they have entry that from
the upper part of the sea cut against the stream. In this city also are the
temples of Apollo and Diana, and the great palace of Latona, wherein is the
place of divination, having a gallery belonging to it ten paces high. Herein
such things as might lawfully be seen, and deserved greatest admiration, of
those I mean to make report. In this temple of Latona is a small chapel
framed of one stone, whose walls being of equal height, were in length forty
cubits: which semblably was coped over the top with another stone, being
four cubits in thickenesse. Wherefore of all those things that were
pertaining to the temple, there was nothing that deserved greater wonder then
this little chapel. Next to this is an Island called Echemmis standing in the
midst of a deep and wide lake a little besides the chief An Island that
svvimmeth.
temple, which the Egyptians suppose to swim and to be borne up of the
waters. Howbeit, I neither saw it swim nor move, maruayling very much (if
it were true) that an Island should be carried in the waters. In this I Will is
planted the temple of Apollo, a great and sumptuous building, likewise three
rewes of aultares, and many fair palme-trees, some very kind and bearing
fruit, other fruitelesse and barren.

The Egyptians also render a cause of the swimming of this Island, saying
thus: that at what time Latona (which is one of the eight saints that are of
greatest antiquity amongst them) dwelt in the city of Butis whereas now the
oracle is held: she took the sauegard of Apollo commended unto her Isis, the
mother of Apollo
by his mother Isis, and preserved his life in the same Island, being at that
time steadfast and immovable, when as Typhon made so diligente search in all
places to find out the son of Osyris. For here we must understand, that
this people imagine Apollo and Diana to be the children of Dionisius and Isis,
and that Latona was but their nourse and bringer up, that delivered them from
peril. Apollo in the Egyptian tongue is called Horus. Ceres has the name of
Isis: Diana, of Bubastis, from whence Aeschilus the son of Euphorion drew his
opinion, which alone of all the rest of the poets makes Diana daughter to
Ceres, after which event, the I Will (say they) became loose, and was marked to
floate and move in the water.

Psammitichus governed in Egypt 54. years, 29. of the Psammitichus reigned
54. years.
which he spent in the asseige of the great city of Syria, which at length he
subdued. This city is called Azotus, which of all the cities that ever we
heard of, sustained the longest assault.

Ensuing the reign of Psammitichus, the gouernemente of the country fell to
Necus his son: by whom, first of all Necus King of Egypt.
was the channel dug that leads to the red sea, which afterward was
cast afreshe, and made deeper by Darius the Persian.

The length of this course was four days sailing, the breadth such, as two
reasonable vessels of three oars apeece might well sail in it together.

The water which is derived from Nilus into this channel, flows into it
alittle above the city Bubastis, against a town of Arabia named Patumon, and
so continues his course unto the red Sea.

They began first to dig from the plain of Egypt toward Arabia, for all
the country above the plain is filled and occupied with a course of great
mountains near unto the city Memphis, wherein are many pittes and quarries
of stone, wherefore from the root of this mountain is the channel derived,
continuing a long course toward the East, until it come to the place where
the hill parts in twain, which distaunce and separation between the
mountains opens to the South regions, and leads to the narrow seas of
Arabia.

In the digging of this course there perished an hundred and twenty thousand
of the people of Egypt.

When this enterprise was half done, Necus brake off and left it unfinished,
being discouraged by a prophecy that told him that he toyled for the profit
and behoof of a Barbarian.

The Egyptians term them all Barbarians which are of a sundry language.
Necus therefore leaving his work unfinished, applied his study to the
provision of war, gathering souldyers, and preparing a fleet of warring
Ships, some of the which were builte at the North Seas, others in the
strayghtes of Arabia at the red Sea, some tokens whereof are yet to be seen in
the same places. This Fleet he employed in his affairs continually so long
as it fitted him to the use of war.

Forsaking afterward the Sea, and giving himself to The acts of King Necus.
battles by the land, where, in a conflict with the Syrians at a place named
Magdolos, he wanne the renown of the field, and after the battle was ended,
took the great city Caditis.

And being very neat and fine in his apparel, he sent a suit of his brauest
array to Apollo in Branchidae, a certain field of the Milesians. In the end,
after he had held the Kingdom seauenteene years, he then died, leaving the
title Necus reigned 17. years.
of his soueraignety to Psammis his son. During whose reign, a certain
people called Helus sent messengers abroad Psammis King of the Egyptians.
into all regions, to give them to understand how by them was devised a game in
Olympus of greater admiration and equity, then by any that ever had used that
place, supposing that the Egyptians (who had the praise of wisdom above all
nations) could not better or more justly dispose of these matters then
themselves. When they were come into Egypt, and had told the cause of their
arrival thither, the King assembled such of the Egyptians as were most
excellent for grave and sage advice above the rest. To whom, when the Helians
had made discourse of all those things which they had ordained in the setting
forth of this noble combat; and had asked the Egyptians if they could devise
anything better, after deliberation had of the matter, they asked the Helians
whether they had inacted that citizens should maintain the controversy
against strangers, or otherwise, who answered, that it was indifferently
lawful for all to strive of what country soever he were: whereto the
Egyptians replied, that it could no wise stand with justice, for so much as
one citizen would show favor to another, and by that means by partial dealing
do injury to those yt came from far, so that in case they would order ye
matter with more equity, and for that cause had arrived in Egypt, it were
better to make the game for strangers alone, not suffering any of the Helians
to strive. These things the Egyptians put into their heads and sent them
packing. Psammis having reigned full Psammis reigned six years.
out six years, and making a voyage of war into Aethyopla, incontinently
dyed.

After whom, succeeded his son Apryes the most fortunatest of all the
princes that had ruled before him, excepting Apryes King after the deceasse of
Psammis.
Psammiti(...) his great graundfire, governing the country 25. years. During
which time, he warred upon Sydon and fought with the people of Tyrus by Sea.
Howbeit, fortune owing him a despite, she paid him home at length, the cause
where of, we withriefely touch at this present, deferring a more ample
discourse of the same, till we come to speak of the affairs of the Punickes.
When as therefore undertaking a journey against the Cyrenians he had suffered
great loss of his men: the Egyptians continuing hatred against him, denied
their allegeaunce and rebelled, supposing yt he had betrayed their lives on
purpose, to the end that with more security he might govern those yt remained.
For which cause in great disdain, as well such as forsook him and returned
home, as also the friends of these yt had died in the battle, stood at
defiance with the king, renou^ceing all duties of subjection. Apryes witting
hereof, sent Amasis to treat peace with them: who, when he came and in many
words had rebuked their disloyalty, one of the Egyptians standing behind him
clapped a Costlet on his head, saying he had done it to Amasis rose against
Apryes.
make him King. Amasis nothing discontent herewith, was no sooner proclaimed
King by the rebels, but forthwith he put himself in a readiness to encounter
with Apryes. Apryes understanding this, sent one of the Egyptians named,
Patarbemes a man of approved virtue, with especial charge to bring to him
Amasis alive. Who arryuing speedely at the place where he was: told him the
Kings pleasure. Amasis sittinge on horse back and incouraginge those that
were about him, commanded Patarbemes to bring Apryes unto him: Patarbemes once
again willing him to make speed to the King, who had sent for him: he
answered that he would come with all speed possible, saying, that the King
should have no cause to complain of his slacknesse, for he purposed, god
willing, to be with him shortly, and bring him more company. Patarbemes
perceiuinge by his manner of speech and dealinges what he was minded to do,
thought with as much speed as he could to give notice to the King: and being
returned, Apryes in a great rage, for that he had left Amasis behind him,
without any words, by and by commanded his Nose and his Cares to be cut of.
The rest of the Egyptians that followed the Kings parts seeing this, that so
worthy and renowned a man should without cause suffer so great shame and
reproach amongst them, without any delay fled over to the rebels and came to
Amasis. Apryes increasing his fury, put in armoure all such as of forrayne
countries were hyrelinges in his host (which he had of Ionia and Caria,
about thirty thowsande men) and marched against the Egyptians. He had in the
City Sais a very great and gorgeous Palace. The armies therefore of both
parties, encamped against other at the City Memphis, there to abide the lot and
event of the battle.

Now the people of Egypt are diversely addicted, amongst whom are to be
marked seven sundry Trades and kinds of living: which are these: Priests,
Soldiers, Grasiers, Neateheardes, The trades of living in Egypt.
Salesmen, Interpreters, Maryners: so many kinds be there of this people,
taken of the Trade or craft which every one follows. Likewise, the soldiers
are called Calasiries and Hermotybies dwelling in certain regions. For the
whole countreye of Aegypte is distinguished into certain territories. The
coasts of the Hermotybies are these. Busiris, Sais, Chemmis, Papremis, and the
half part of the Island Prosopis, otherwise called Natho. In these quarters
are inhabyting of the soldiers Hermotybies 160. thowsande, none of the which
give themselves to manuary arts or any trade of gain, but wholly practice the
science of arms. Moreover, to ye Calasyrians are assigned these regions:
Thebana, Bubastiana, Aphthitana, Tanitana, Mendesia, Sebenitana, Athribitana,
Pharbaethitana, Thmuitana, Thnuphitana, Anysia, Myecphoritana, which tribe
possesses an Island lying against the City Bubastis. The tribes of the
Calasyrians, when they are mustered to the most, yield to the war two
hundred and fiftye thousand men, which are never trained up in any thing but in
feats of Chiualry, the Son learning of his father.

Which custom, whether the Greeks took from the Egyptians, or borrowed it
from else where, I can not certainly Craftsmen of all others least set by, and
soldiers most.
say, seeing that in Scythia, Persia, and Lydia, and welnigh all the countries
of the Barbarians, the basest sort of Cityzens are such as exercise
handicraftes, and their children of least accounte: and they best regarded
which are least conuersante in the same, especially such as are employed in
the field.

The same manner also do the Grecians observe, and chiefly the Lacedaemonyans,
and even among the Corinthyans, craftsmen and such others are debased to the
lowest degree.

To these gentlemen soldiers, this chief honor is assigned The honor of
soldiers in Egypt.
above all sorts of men, saving those only that are busied in the service of
the Saints, that to every one of them is allotted twelve portions of singular
good ground, exempt and free from all kind of Tribute and Pension, and
several to their own use and behoof. Each plot of ground containing every
way an hundred cubyts by the Egyptian measure. A cubyt amongst the Egyptians
is equal to that which they use in Samos.

A thousand of each company, as well of the Calysirians as Hermatybians, did
yearly give attendaunce, to guard and defend The Kings Guard.
the Kings body. To whom, besides the profit and reuennewes of their land,
were certain Farme-places given, to each man one. Moreover, for their lyuery
five pound of tosted bread, two pound of Beef, and a gallon of wine, which
were duly served to them every day. When as therefore Apryes on the one side
with his stipendaries, and on the other side Amasis with an huge army of the
Egyptians were come into the City Memphis, they closed bartaile: where the
hired soldiers of Apryes acquitted them selves very valiauntly, till at the
length (being fewer in number) they were put to flight. Apryes was persuaded
that neither god nor the devil could have ioynted his nose of the Empire, he
seemed so surely to have strengthened it to him self. Nevertheless, in this
fight he was foiled, taken a live, and carried to his own court in Sais:
where Amasis kept him more like a Prince then a prisoner, for the time that he
lived. At length the Egyptians murmuring against him, that he did not well
to reserve a live a mortal enemy both to himself and the whole country, he
delivered up Apryes into their hands. Whom they immediately took and strangled,
and buried The death of Apryes.
him in the sepulcher of his father in the temple of Minerua, near unto a
certain Oratory, at the left hand as you enter in. Being the use with the
people of Sais to bury all such, as out of their tribe have attained to the
kingdom, within the temple. For the toumbe of Amasis is placed upon the other
side of the Oratory, contrary to the Sepulcher of Apryes and his Progenitors.
Likewise, in one place of this Temple is a fair Chamber builte of stone,
beautyfied with sundry Pyllers engraven like unto Palme-trees, being otherwise
very sumptuously and royally garnished. In the midst of the Chamber are two
main Posts, between the which stands a Cophine. There is also a toumbe in
the same, the name whereof I may not descry without breach of Religion.

At Sais in the Temple of Minerua, beneath the Church and near unto the wall
of Minerua, in a base Chapel, are standinge certain great brooches of
stone, whereto is adioyninge a low place in manner of a Dungeon, covered over
with a stone curiously wroughte, the Vaute it self being on every side carved
with most exquisite art, in biggnesse matchinge with that in Delos, which is
called Trochoides. Herein every one counterfayteth the shadows of his own
affections and fantasies in the night season, which the Egyptians call
Mysteryes: touching which, god forbid, I should adventure to discover so much
as they vouchsafed to tell me. In like manner of the Decrees of Ceres, which
the Grecians term (...), that is to say, the publishinge of Laws and
Ordynances: of these matters I dare not be very francke in speakinge, no
further then religion will permit. This is certain, that the Daughters of
Danaeus were the first that brought this custom out of Aegypte, and made it
known to the women of Pelasgos.

But afterward mislyked of the Doors, it was utterly abolyshed and left off
in all the Country of Peloponnesus, sauinge of certain Arcadians, whom the
people of Peloponnesus lycensed to contynewe in the Country, by whom the same
order was retained.

Apryes being dead Amasis raygned in his steed being of ye Tribe of Sais, and
trained up in a City named Suph. In the Amisis King of the Egyptians.
first entrance of his raygne the Egyptians set light by him, and had him in
great contempt, being spronge of no Noble house, but arysinge of the common
troup of the popular sort. Whose goodwill Amasis sought to reconcile rather
by A devise wrought by Amasis to purchase the goodvvill of his subjects.
policy then severity. Being therefore infinitely rich, he had amongst other
his treasure, a Basen of clean Gold wherein both him self and his Guestes
were wont to wash their Feet. This Basin he caused to be beaten into the
form and Image of a god, and set it up in a fit place of the City. The
Egyptians repayringe to the place, bowed themselves in great reverence unto
the Image: which Amasis having learned by his friends, assemblinge the people,
told them that of the same Basen wherein him self, and many other of the
Egyptians had been wont to vomit, pysse, wash their feet, and all such
base exercises, was framed the god that they so greatly honored: saying, that
his own present estate was not much unlike unto that Basin: for albeit, before
time he had been one of the basest degree of the people, yet now being their
King he ought of right to be had in honor. Whereby the Egyptians wear so
allured that they thought it meet afterward to obey their Prince. Who
afterward His custom in administering the kingdom.
observed this Custom in dealinge with the affairs of the realm: from the
morninge, until the places of assembly and common meeting were filled, he sat
upon all matters, that were brought before him: spending the rest of the day
amongst his companyons in swilling, drinking, and such broad and unseemly
jesting, as if he had been some common rybauld or Vice of a play. Whereat his
friends aggrieuinge, rebuked him in these or such like terms. Most worthy
Prince, it is a great blemish to your name to live so wickedly, more meet it
were for you to sit in a Throne of majesty and decide the causes of your
subjects, whereby the Egyptians might know them selves to be governed by a
worthy Prince, and your fame be increased throughout all the land. To whom
he answered. They that owe the Bow know best when to bend it: which being
always bent becomes so weak, that it is altogether unfit for those that
should use it: even so it fares with those that ^yreing themselves with
continual pains, giving no intermission to their cares, they are suddenly
bereaved either of their right mind, or their perfect members.

This king, whiles he lived without honor, was given to His nature.
bibbing and scoffing without measure, never greatly minding his affairs: and
as often as he wanted to serve his turn, and to yield supply to his
pleasures, he sought mayntenance by filching and stealing, whereof if happily
he were at any time attached, his manner was to stand stoutly in denial of the
thing and defiance of ye person: for which cause, being many times brought to
the Oracles and places of southsaying: he was sometime convicted by them, and
at other times acquitted. Wherefore, having attained to the kingdom, which of
the gods soever had acquitted him of theft, he had no regard to their temples,
did no honor to them, gave no gifts, offered no sacrifice, esteeming them
unworthy of any reverence, having given out a false verdite. And such as had
pronounced him guilty, to these as to the most true gods, whose Oracles were
agreeable to justice, he performed the greatest honor he could devise.
Besides, in the City of Sais he made a porche to the temple of Minerua, a
work of great admiration, and far passing the rest, both in heights and
bigness, so great is the quantity of the stones that were employed in the
building. He erected besides in the same place, diverse Images of a wonderful
size, and the pictures of many noisome and pestilent Serpents. He laid there
also many huge stones, to the repayring of the temple, part of the which were
dug out of the stone quarryes by Memphis: other of great quantity brought
from the city of Elephantina, which is distant from Sais 20. days sailing.
Moreover, that which is not the least wonder, but in my mind to be reckoned
amongst the chiefest: he brought from Elephantina an house framed of one A
house of one stone.
stone: in the carriage whereof 2000. choice men of the Mariners of Egypt
consumed three years. The roufe hereof on the outside is 21. cubyts long, 14.
cubits broad, and eight cubits high: being on the inside 22. cubytes in
length, and in height 5. This house is set at the entering into the temple:
giving this reason why it was not brought into the church, for that the chief
Mariner, when he had gotten it to that place, as weary with his days work,
took respite and breached him self, whereat the King being very much moved,
bad him leave of work, not permitting him to labor any longer. Some say that
one of those, which were busied in heauing of the stone with leauers, to have
been bruised to death by it, and that this was the cause why it stood without
the Palace. By the same King were erected sundry temples, built by art very
exquisitely and cunningly, whereof one he made sacred to Vulcane: before which
lies a great Image with the face upward, in length seventy five feet, being
spread along upon a pauement of stone: in the self same place on each side
this Image, stand two carved monuments of stone, twenty foot in quantity. Like
unto this is another stone in Sais, lying in the self same manner. In like
sort the great temple in Memphis, so gorgeous and beautiful to the sight of
all that behold it, was the handiwork also of ye same King Amasis. In the time
of this Kings g^uernmente Egypt floryshed in all wealth, being greatly
increased, as well by the riches which the river yields, as in other revenues
which the people receive by the country, which at the same time was so
populous that there were then inhabited 20000 cities. Likewise, by this King
it was enacted, that every one should yearly render accounte to the chief
president of A statute for arr^rages.
the country, how, and by what manner of trade he gained his lyuinge: being
always prouyding that such as refused to do it at all, or beeinge called to a
reckoninge, could show no lawefull means, how they spent their times;
should for the the same cause be adjudged to dye.

Which law Solon borowing of the Egyptians, did publish it in Athens, and is
by them, for the profit thereof, most religiously observed. Amasis upon good
affection he bare to the Grecians, besides other benefittes franckly bestowed
on them, made it lawefull, for all such as trauayled into Aegypte, to inhabyte
the City Naucrates. And such as would not abide in that place, having more
mind to sea^aring for the use of Marchaundize, to those he gave lybertye to
Plant aulters and build churches. So that the greatest and most famous Temple
in all the land is called the Grecian temple. The Cities of the Greeks by
whose charge and expense this temple was builte in Aegypte, were these: of the
country of Ionia, Chius, Teus, Phocoea, Clazomene: amongst the Dorians four
Cities: Rhodus, Cnydus, Halicarnassus, Phaselus: one City of the people of
Aeolia, namely, Mitylene. To these Cities of Greece is the Temple belonginge,
by whom also are found and mayntayned certain Priests to serve in the same.
There are other towns besides in Greece that have some right to the Temple,
as having contributed some thing to the use of the same.

Howbeit the Temple of Jupiter, the people of Aegina built of their own proper
cost. No City took part with Samos in setting up the Palace of Juno: the
Milesians alone took upon them to erect the Temple of Apollo. Besides these
there are no other monuments built by the Grecians which remain extant in
Egypt. And if by fortune any of the Greeks pass into Nylus by any other way
then that which serves to land from Greece, he is feign to swear that he
was constrained against his will, byndinge him self by oath that in the same
Ship he will speed him self into Canobicus, another Channel of the River
so called: and if by contrary wyndes he be hindered from arryuinge there:
he must hyre caryage by water, and so ferry the next way to Naucrates. In
such sort were the Grecians tied to that City, being by reason of their
trafique thither, had in principal honor. Now whereas the Palace of
Amphiction which is now at Delphos, being straungely pearyshed by fire, was
gone in hand with a fresh, upon price of three hundred tallentes: the people
of Delphos which were leauyed at the fourth part of the charges, straying
about all countries, gathered very much, being chiefly assysted by the
Egyptians.

Amasis the King, bestowinge on them a thowsande tallents of Asume, and the
Grecians that were abiding in Egypt twenty pound. Moreover, with the
Cyrenaeans Prince Amasis entered friendship, and struck a league of fellowship
with the same, insomuch, that he thought meet to enter as^yaunce Ladyce, wife
to Amasis.
with them, taking a wife of that country, either for affection he bare to the
women of Greece, or in respect of his love to the Cyrenaeans. His wife, as
some say, was the daughter of Battus son of Arcesilaus, as others report, of
Critobulus a man of chief credit and regard amongst those with whom he
dwelt. His Ladies name was Ladyce, a woman of surpassing beauty, with whom,
the King being in bed, was so strangely benumbed, and daunted in courage, as
if he had been an Eunuch, not able to execute any duty of a man, whereat the
King himself being greatly aghast, feeling himself frollicke in the company
of other women, and so faint to his Lady Ladyce, on a time began to taunt her
in these terms. Can it be thou filthy and detestable hagge, that by any
means I should refrain from doing thee to the most miserable death that can
be devised, which have thus inchaunted and bewitched my body? In faith minion,
I will conjure this devil of yours, and assure thy self, if thy luck be not
the better, thou shall not live two days to an end. The poor Lady standing
stiffely in her own defense, and nothing preuayling to appease his fury, vowed
within her self to the goddess Venus, that in case it might please her to
enable Amasis to perform the duties of an husband, and accompany with her the
same night, she would dedicate an image unto her at Cyrenae. Her prayers being
heard, Amasis became so frollicke, that before the morning they arose the best
contented folks on the earth, ever after that finding himself so apt to enjoy
the delights of his Lady, that he took greatest pleasure in her company, and
loved her most entirely of all other. Ladyce remembering her vow she had made
to Venus, thought good to perform it, and framing a most beautiful and
curious image, she sent it to the city Cyrenae, which stood unperished unto
our days, being placed by the citizens without the town. The same Ladyce,
Cambyses King of Persia vanquishing Egypt understanding what she was, sent her
without any manner shame or violence into her own country. By this King
Amasis were many gifts distributed of singular price and value. To Cyrenae he
sent the image of Minerua, garnished all over with gilt, and his own personage
most curiously shadowed by a Paynter. Likewise to the city Lindus he gave two
images of the goddess Minerua wrought in stone, with a linen stomacher most
excellently imbrodered by art. Moreover, to the goddess Juno in Samus, two
pictures expressing her divine beauty, of most exquisite workmanship. Which
bounty he exercised toward the Samians for the great friendship he bare to
their King Polycrates the son of Aeaces. But to the city Lyndus, why he
should show himself so frank and liberal, no other reason served, saving
that the fame went that the great temple of Minerua in Lindus was builded by
ye daughters of Danaus after they were known, and had escaped the dangers
intended against them by the sons of Aegyptus. These and many other
excellent gifts were dispersed and given abroad by King Amasis. By whom
also the city Cyprus which was deemed of all men invincible, and had never
before been vanquished by any, was conquered, taken, and brought under tribute.

FINIS.

