Horae Succisivae, OR, SPARE-HOVRES of Meditations: Upon our DVTIE To GOD,
OTHERS, Our SELVES.

The Second Edition, corrected and much enlarged, By IOS. HENSHAVV.

LONDON, Printed by R. Badger, for Ralph Mabb. 1631.

TO The Right Honorable LADY, the LADY ANNE COTTINGTON.
Right Honorable,
I Have provided a PRESENT proportionable to my skill my time and your Honors
knowledge of me, short: Your desire many times to hear others writing out of
my mouth, made me to put this of my own into your hands; a rapsodie of
resolves and observations, some for contemplation, others for caution, the
first divine, the other moral, when you lose an hour from better and graver
matters, throw it away on these; wherein you have somewhat of God, of others, of
our selves, what God is to us, what we should be to him, to others: there
cannot be much said of it, because there is but little said in it; in all which
little I intend nothing to my self, but to others. The general end of reading
is to know, but the end of divine reading is to good our knowledge, and if it
do good, I have my end, and my reward, whose office is to live, not to my
self, but others, and am a servant to all by a common duty, but your Honors
by especial relation

to be commanded, I. H.

Horae Succisivae, OR SPARE-HOVRES of MEDITATIONS.
MAke God the first and last of all thy actions: so begin that thou may
have him in the end, otherwise I doubt whether it had been better thou had
not begun.

That we brought nothing into this world, is not more every where known, than
it is of every one believed; but that we shall carry nothing out of this
world, is a sentence better known than trusted, otherwise I think men would
take more care to live well, than to dye rich.

Wealth is not the way to heaven, but the contrary; all my care shall be how
to live well, and I am sure I shall never dye poor.

Sleep is but deaths elder brother, and death is but a sleep nicknam'd; why
should I more fear to go to my grave than to my bed, since both tend to my
rest: when I lie down to sleep, I will think it my last, and when I rise
again, account my life not continued but restored.

Too much labor toils the body, too much looking the mind: I will deal for
my study as for my stomach, ever rise with an appetite, lest if I once surfeit,
I ever loath it.

How hard it is for a man to forget his sin, or remember his God, not to do
that evil which he should not, and not to leave undone that good which he
should do, every man can tell by experience. I were no man, if I had no sin,
but if I am a Christian I must not delight in sin; if I cannot avoid some
sins, yet I will stand in none.

To do any thing to think to be talked of, is the vainest thing in the world;
to give alms and ask who sees, loses the praise and the reward: I may be
seen to give, I will not give to be seen, that others are witness to my piety
is not my fault, nor my praise; I will never be so ill a friend to my self to
sell heaven for vainglory.

The obedience of good children proceeds not from fear, but love; it is a very
bad nature will do nothing without blows; to turn to our vomit as soon as
God is turned from his rod, and ask who is the Lord till a new plague, is a
state I know not whether more to be feared or pitied: if I cannot avoid
correction, I will mend with it; not be beaten twice for the same fault.

I know not which is worse; the bearer of tales or the receiver, for the one
makes the other: I will no less hate to tell then to hear slanders: If I
cannot stop others mouths, I will stop my own ears. The receiver is as bad
as the thief.

With God a Publican goes beyond a Pharisie, a sigh or a groan, that cannot
be uttered, beyond a long prayer with ostentation: Care not how long, or how
loud thy prayer be, but how hearty.

Woman was first given to man for a help, since for a remedy, what shall we
think of those, that turn the remedy into a disease, and hold it in all cases
for some, and in some cases for all, not only dangerous but damnable to marry;
what is this but to teach God what He has to do? I have ever counted it safe
and wise to leave that indifferent which God has left so.

GOD cannot endure a Pharisee that says and does not: with His disciples,
saying and doing must not be two men's offices; if thou can do but little,
promise the less; so though thou may be thought niggardly, because thou
performest so little, yet thou shall be known just because thou promised'st no
more.

A good man would so be honorable, as he may still be honest, not broker for
preferment; if not worthy, let him want it, but if deserving, why should he buy
his due? I will neither grow great by buying honor, nor rich by selling it.

In injuries it is better to take many, than give one, in benefits the
contrary: I will requite the first with bearing them, the second with requiting
them.

Evil communication corrupts good manners. Peter denied his master among the
Jews, whom he confessed among the Apostles: I may have a bad man of my
family, I will never have a bad familiar; or if at any time of my court, never
of my counsel.

So live with men as considering always that God sees thee, so pray to God, as
if every man heard thee; do nothing which thou would not have God see done;
desire nothing which may either wrong thy profession to ask, or Gods honor to
grant.

Every night is an Emblem of death, in this, that in both we rest from our
labors: I will labor to long for my rest in heaven, and I shall never be loath
to go to bed to the earth, who would not desire to dye that he might be with
Christ?

It is good in prosperity, to make room for adversity, that however it come
unsent for, it may not come unlooked for; if it do not come, we are never the
worse, if it do come we are the better provided; expectation, if it do not
hinder crosses, yet it lessens them.

Earthly things are like dreams, awake to nothing; like shadows set with the
sun, wealth and honor will either leave us, or we them. I will labor only
for those pleasures which never shall have an end, and be more delighted that I
shall be happy, than that I am so.

It Is a good Sign, when GOD chides us, that He loves us, nothing more proves
us His than blows, nothing sooner makes us His: God can love His children
well, and not make wantons of them; if I suffer, it is that I may reign. How
profitable is that affliction, that carries me to heaven?

Suffering is the way to glory, sometime in this World: Joseph had never been
a Courtier, had he not first been a prisoner.

Gods children are ever the better for being miserable, and end in that; It is
good for me, that I have been afflicted; let God use me how He will on earth,
so I may have what He has promised to those that love Him in heaven; Who
would not be a Lazarus for a day, that he might sit in Abraham's bosom for
ever?

Gods Church must be a lilly among thorns, and while I am a member of the
Church, I must not look to fare better than the whole Body, if they have
called the master of the house Beelzebub, well may it be endured to those of
the household; my comfort is if I am reviled for His sake, I shall be blessed.

Prosperity is like Vinum merum, all wine; it makes drunk the soul, and
therefore God mingles it, that He may keep us sober; feeds His children with a
bit and a knock, ever dishes His sweet meat with sour sause: if we did
always abound we would grow proud, and forget our selves; and if not
sometimes, we would despair and forget our God: I will pray with Solomon,
give me neither wealth nor poverty, but a mean; or if wealth, grace to employ
it, if poverty, patience to endure it.

Afflictions are the medicines of the mind, if they are not toothsome, let it
suffice, they are wholesome; it is not required in Physic that it should
please, but heal, unless we esteem our pleasure above our health: let me
suffer, so I may reign, be beaten, so I may be a son. Nothing can be ever too
much to endure for those pleasures which endure for ever.

There was never good but was hard to get: the prison and the hatchet, sores
and crumbs lead to Abraham's bosom, and the way thither is by weeping-crosse:
if many tribulations will carry me to heaven, on Gods name let me have them;
welcome the poverty, which makes me heir to those riches that never shall have
an end.

I will deal for my soul, as for my body, never refuse health because the
Physic that should procure it, is bitter; let it distaste me, so it heal me.

There are in the world that think it too great sauciness to be our own
spokes-men to God and therefore go to St. Somebody to prefer their
petitions for them: I shall ever hold it good manners to go of my own errants
to God, He that bids me Come, will bid me welcome; God has said, Come unto me
etc. It is no unmannerlinesse to come when I am called.

All consciences like all stomachs are not alike how many do we see digest
those sins with ease, which others cannot get down with struggling, one
strains at a gnat, when another swallows a camel: he that will keep clear
of great sins, must make conscience of all. I will think no sin little,
because the least endangers my soul, and it is all one whether I sell my
SAVIOVR for thirty pence, with Judas, or for half I am worth, with Ananias;
whether I go to hell for one sin, or for many.

This life is but a journey unto death, and every day we are some spannes
nearer the grave; how is it that we which are so near our death, are so far
from thinking of it? Security is a great enemy to prevention, and a presumption
that we shall not dye yet, makes men that they do not prepare to dye at all:
it is good taking time while time is; if it come suddenly and find thee
unprepared, miserable man that thou art, who shall deliver thee from the body,
etc?

Therefore has Nature given us two ears and but one mouth, that we should
hear twice as much as we should speak: with all thy secrets trust neither
thy wife nor thy friend, he that is thriftie of his own tongue shall less
fear another.

There are that affect not so much to have true friends as to have many, and
whisper to that friend what they hear from this, and again, to this, what
from that: and glory to have it known, how much they are trusted, whereas they
were therefore trusted that it might not be known: I have ever thought it a
maxim in friendship, that he which will be intimate with many, is entirely
nones; let me love and be loved of all, I will be inward only with a few: I
had rather have one mean friend that I may call my own, than the most potent
where I must share with others.

He that provides not for his own is worse than an infidel; it is not the
blame of charity that it begins at home, it is that it ends not abroad: I am
not borne all to my self, somewhat to my friend, to my neighbor. I will so
care for my own, as I may relieve others, and so do for others, as I wrong
not my own.

Much knowledge not much speech, Emblem's a wise man. I shall ever hold it
neither safe nor wise, always to speak what I know of my own affairs, nor
what I think of others; a man may speak too much truth.

Pleasures like the Rose are sweet but prickly, the honey does not countervaile
the sting, all this worlds delights are vanity, and end in vexation; like Judas
while they kiss, they betray. I would neither be a Stoic nor an Epicure,
allow of no pleasure, nor give way to all: they are good sause, but naught to
make a meal of, and were given not to fill the belly, but to relish the meat:
I may use them sometimes for digestion, never for food.

In crosses these two things must be thought on; first whence they come, from
God, He strikes thee that made thee, next wherefore they come, for thy good
either to try thee or to mend thee, if they be harsh, yet they be gainful: I
shall ever count it a good change, to have the fire of persecution for the fire
of hell, who would not rather smart for a while then for ever: let me rather
have that fire which is rewarded with heaven, than these pleasures which shall
be rewarded with fire.

Salomon's, Rejoice oh young man in the days of thy youth, were the finest
thing in the world if it were not for that which follows, for all this thou
shall come to judgment; to go well, lie soft, sleep hard, if there were noe
after-reckoning; who would not say out of delight what the Apostles did out of
amazement, It is good for us to be here; but when I have a stewardship to
account for, and God knows how soon, my master returning and my talent to
seek; the Bridegroom entering and my oil to buy, I have more reason to care
how to redeem my time past, than to spend the present.

To grow heavy or lumpish with crosses, argues not so much want of courage, as
grace: nothing more soyles the reputation of a Christian, than to have his
mind droope with his Mammon; what if health, friends, means, have all
forsook thee, will thou lose thy wits together with thy goods? all the
afflictions in this world, cannot answer the joys of that other. I will never
care whose these pleasures I see be, while those I do not see are mine, and
the fountain of pleasures whom I shall one day see, as I am seen, shall be
mine.

Let another praise thee and not thine own mouth; either we are far from
neighbors or ill beloved among them, when we are feign to be our own
trumpet, and blaze our selves: the Jews, not the Centurion, say, He loved our
Nation and has, etc. It is both honorable and humble to hear of our praises,
and tell of our unworthiness.

Many a little make a mickle, every day a mite will increase our store; I will
be ever adding to my heap of knowledge, of faith, etc. That when the Master
returns I may be able to say, behold Lord, thy two Talents have gained other
two.

The building of the soul, like that of the world, is not done in a day; grace
like Ezekiel's waters, is first to the ancles, then to the knees, etc. In vain
does any think to be perfect at once, in an instant; well is it for us, if
after many Lessons learned, and heard in CHRIST'S School, we get past the
spoone, and with some years of tears and prayers come to a stature, a growth;
and with clambering and pains, like Zacheus, get to see Christ time was when
it was said to the Apostles, Oh ye of little faith; and he was once afraid to
confess CHRIST, that was not afterward afraid to die for him: like Bees, while
we are here, we are ever gathering, in His good time we shall be perfect, in
the mean time LORD suffer us not to be tempted above that we are able.

God is that to the soul which the Sun is to the world, light and heat, and
with them comforts and stores it: he that has God has every thing; God alone
is a world of friends against millions of enemies: then will I think my self
poor, miserable, distressed, left, when He leaves me.

Every thing almost we see, borrowes its nature from its soil; thus the body
and temper of men differ with the air; and the soul like the body, commonly
savours something of the company it keeps, and we grow familiar with their
sins, together with their persons; at first wink at them, then imitate them,
then defend them. I will not be more scrupulous in the choice of any thing
than of this: he can hardly have a good soul, that has a bad companion.

Sin at first is modest, and goes disguised with Saul to Endor, that after a
while grows impudent, and dares look barefaced on the world; first persuades
to civil recreations, thence bids to unlawful delights. He that will prevent
the growth of sin, must resist the beginning; the remedy is thought of too
late, where the disease is past cure; it is easier preventing a sickness, than
recovering it.

Custom as it lessens favors, so it lessens sins; else the same sin would
still be monstrous, which in time is not taken notice of.

Goodness is not the gift of all but some, but perseverance only of a few;
how many like Ezekiahs sun have gone backward, and forsaken their first love?
How many have we seen, that with Caiaphas, would have rent their clothes at
the name of blasphemy, have afterward sworn by the life of Pharaoh: what we
are, is no argument for what we will be; every man knows his beginning, not his
end; what he is, not what he shall be; let him that thinks he stands, take
heed lest he fall.

When I take a serious view of my self, and see (besides inward discontents)
so many outward enemies of quietness every where, every minute; want,
sickness, dangers, loss of friends, of health, of life, threatening if not
pursuing me: and to these my spiritual enemies so strong, my corruptions so
many, my infirmities so continual, and my self so overmatched with all these:
with Peter I begin to sink, and I could wish I had not been, since I must
be miserable, but when I look up to heaven, and those joys I am going to, I
would not be less miserable to be so happy. GOD is my Father, the Angels are
my fellows* Heaven is my Inheritance; now if my inheritance be in heaven, why
is not my desire there? Where our treasure is, there will our heart be also,
where our treasure and our heart is, there shall we be one day: who would
exchange his future happiness for a present?

Contentation is a blessing, not wealth; true riches consist not so in having
much, as in not desiring more: why* then do we so labor to abound, and not
rather to be content? If I have but a little, my account is the less; if I
have much, and do not more good, I shall add to my condemnation, together
with my store: I will ever study rather to use my little well, than to
increase it.

I will not care to be rich, but to be good; this only is that treasure, that
never shall have an end: let me be rich in goodness, and I cannot complain
of poverty: he only is poor whom GOD hates.

To speak little, is a note of a wise man, to speak well of a good man:
goodness is not seen in the length or brevity of our speech, but in the
matter, the streams of the tongue runs from the current of the heart, and are
like the fountain; it is a sign we have little goodness in us, when there
comes little out of us: if GOD were more in our hearts, He would be often in
our mouths, and with more reverence. Though I will never affect to speak of
my goodness, yet I will show it in my speech.

He that will be a Critic of others actions, had need look well to his own:
it is a foul shame to have that found in our selves, which we would take upon
us to mend in others: in this I will ever follow my Saviors rule, first get
out mine own beam, and I shall see better to help my brother out with his
more.

Injuries, if they dye not, they kill: Here only a CHRISTIAN must learn to
forget: for if we forgive not men their trespasses, neither will our Father,
etc. In this case my care shall be only how to put them up, and leave
vengeance to whom it belongs, God is ever his Judge, that is not his own.

The malicious man is so much no man's foe as his own; for while he is out of
charity with others, GOD is so with him; if he loved himself, he would not
hate his brother. I will love all men for His sake that made them: but the
Christian, because he is GODS son, I will love doubly, for his own sake, for
his Fathers sake.

GOD looks not at what we have been, but what we are: it is no commendation
to have been an Israelite. That we once did well, adds to our condemnation
together with our sin; and if the righteous man forsake his righteousness,
his reward is lost: our former goodness will not excuse our present evil, the
end crowns us: what ever my beginning has been, I shall ever pray and
endeavor that I may dye the death of the righteous; and my latter end may be
like unto his, for as the tree falls, so it lies.

Man till he sinned was naked and was not ashamed, clothes are not more our
covering than our shame, and we may justly blush every time we look on them,
not brag; the best ornament of the body, is the mind, and the best ornament
of the mind, is honesty: that best becomes, which best beseems, not that which
is most used, But most decent. I will neither look what others do, nor what I
may do, but what I ought to do, many things are lawful which are not
expedient.

To do well and say nothing is Christianly, to say well and do nothing is
Pharisaicall; if the hands be not Jacobs as well as the voice, we are but
impostors, cheats: If we are good trees, by our fruit they shall know us. I
will not less hate not to do good, than to tell of it: my faith is dead if it
bear not.

Eating was the first sin in the world, and it is now the sin almost of all
the world; and as before the building of Babel so still in this, all the Earth
is of one language, what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, and wherewith,
etc. Eating and Drinking have taken away our stomachs to spiritual things: I
will never be so greedy as to eat my self out of heaven: He loves his belly
well, that with Esau will sell his Birthright for pottage: of the two, I had
rather beg my bread with Lazarus, than my water with Dives.

Great men's Words are like dead men's shoos, he may go barefoot that waits
for them: I will ever be a Didymus in these, believe only what I see, so I
shall neither be deceived with others promises my self, nor deceive others
with them.

The good man's word is his Oath, his actions serve only to make good his words:
He that promises either what he cannot, or what he means not: is for the
first a Boaster, and for the last an Hypocrite; by such an one, I will be
deceived but once.

Dissimulation is state-policie, and wise men set out themselves as Aristotle
did his books, not to be understood at first sight. He that always speaks
what he knows, is not wise, but he that does not always speak what he
means, is not honest. As I will not have my heart at my tongues end, yet I
will have my tongue speak from my heart, it is not necessary I must be
dishonest, or a fool.

Commonly your open ears are open mouthed, and they that are craving to hear,
are apt to tell: I will neither desire to know much of another man's estate, nor
impart much of my own; never any man repented him of saying nothing.

A Parasite of all Trades is the basest, and in two things like an Echo;
first, that he speaks only what he hears others; and that he is nothing but
voice, words: next to an ungrateful man, I would not be a flatterer.

Sins grow like Grapes close, but in clusters: We usually say, He that will
swear, will lie; and he that will lie, will steal; and he that will do all
these, will do any thing. Satan is a Serpent, if the head be once in, his
whole body will not be long behind.

It is better to go into the House of mourning, than into the House of
laughter, etc. He is worse than mad, that with Herod will part with a
kingdom for a dance. He takes little thought for his sins, that thinks to
put them out of his head, as Cain and Saul did with Music: He that truly
considers those joys which never shall have an end, cannot but desire to have
an end of these: Where the treasure is, there will the heart be also.

Gods promises do not bind Him to keep us in our wickedness, our sins quit
Him of His promise, and us of His protection, when we leave to be of His
Family, we are none of His Charge, His Friendship keeps pace with ours. If
thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? (says He to Cain) do well, and
have well, such as we behave our selves toward God, such shall we find God
toward us; now if we do smart, thank our selves.

We have too many that have a double heart in one body, but very few that have
but one heart to two bodies, yet so is it with friends, the one cannot laugh
when the other weeps; one friend is the looking glass of the other, where
face answers face, when the one smiles the other smiles, when the one is sad
the other is trobled, there is no Amity where there is no Sympathy; If I do
not suffer in my SAVIOVR, I do not love Him. Can the Head be ficke and the
Body not feel it.

There is a time to laugh as well as a time to mourn, we are not denied the
use of mirth, but the excess, it is not forbidden Fruit. He who gave Oil to
cheer the Countenance, gave Wine also to glad the heart: And I will not say,
whether Salomons draught be not sometimes in season; Drink, that thou may
forget thy poverty; yet so as thou remember thy God. God never intended
religion should make men Stoics, as if to mew up our selves from the World,
were to single out our selves to God: And because He has forbid the abuse of
things, not to use them; thus we should abstain from drink, because some men
have been drunk: If that which is one man's meat prove another man's poison,
the fault is not in the meat, but in the stomach. If they be so easily abused,
the more our thanks, our praise, if we do not abuse them we shall be
commended for our temperance: we cannot for our want of them; GOD makes us but
to use them as we should, and we cannot have too much of them.

Where should Joy be but in the Fountain of Joy, or how do we partake of
that Fountain and rejoice not; that Joy must begin to fill here that will be
full hereafter. He shall never sing Halelujah's, that does not first sing
Hosanna's: He is no sound Christian that is not taken with the glory he shall
have, and rejoice in this, that his name is written in the Book of Life.

God ever helps at a pinch, when all helps fail then is He seen, when Jacob
wants at home then Joseph is heard of abroad, and when the prodigal wants
abroad then God makes him think of home. What if he will not deliver Jonah
from the Tempest, yet He will from the Whale: If the danger be great, His
Glory shall be the more; never despair then thou drooping soul, why art thou
cast down, why art thou so disquieted, etc? The goodness of thy God endures
yet daily.

The Contention of Christ's time is the contention of all the world, who shall
be the greatest, and most men envy to be out-gone in any thing, even by those
they love best: If Joseph be his Fathers darling, he is his Brethrens
eyesore: and I doubt me whether David's brothers were more glad that Goliath
was slain, or angry that by their brother: bad natures whom they cannot reach
by imitation, they will by detraction: He casts out Devils through
Beelzebub, was the Pharisees of Christ: it argues very little goodness in us
when we malice it in others, none but a Cain (that ever I read of) will envy,
because his works are evil, and his brothers good; they are desperately
wicked that love not the looks of godliness.

It is an hard matter for a man to know much or have much and know himself,
and whence he has it, if we would think worse of our selves, we should be
better thought of, but now our selfe-conceitednesse breaks our neck.

Most men are Pharisees in this, that they love the upermost seats, all would
be sons of Anak: if their bodies did but swell with their minds. The care of
the most is to live honorable not well, their reputation is more cared for than
their God: Occidat modo regnet: With that Mother of Nero, Let them be damned so
they may be dubbed: what is this but to exchange a heavenly kingdom for an
earthly: He that will be great upon any terms shall one day repent that He
has been happy too soon.

My Friends faults as my own, where I see I will remedy: I may (happily) hide
or excuse them to others, never to himself, this were to kill him with
kindness, and lest I should lose a friend, lose a soul: I am guilty of the
loss of that soul I might save and do not.

Some Friends there are, such as Ionadab to Ammon, Pandors to their
wickedness: Brethren they are but in iniquity; He shall be no friend to me
that is a friend to my faults: and I am no friend to my self, if I think him
my enemy that tells me of them, one day, if not now, I shall hear of them to
my cost: Men may, God will not wink at small ful^ts.

There is a friend to himself, as Nabal, and his charity begins at home,
and there it ends; near is his coat, but nearer is his skin; again, there
is a friend for gain, by Diana we live, he shall be their friend that they
can live by: So, some love CHRIST, because they fear Him, He can destroy both
soul and body in, etc. Others, because they need him, but if we be true
friends, though there were none of these we would love Him.

Friend of all compellations is the dearest, the sweetest; and as one of
ingratitude, si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris: So may I of friendship, call
him friend, and you have said all, another self, or rather the same self
multiplied; skin for skin and all that a man has will he give for his
life, and yet a man's life will he give for his friend; if our love will not
follow CHRIST through fire and water we are but counterfeits.

Therefore did not God at first make many women and but one man, or many men and
but one woman, that every man should not know there were more than one woman
in the World; nor any woman more than one man, they that know more shall not be
known; CHRIST shall say, Depart from me, etc. I know ye not.

I see many marriages in the World and never a good, one to his barnes with the
fool, another to his board with the glutton, one to his cups, another to his
coffers: only those marriages are blessed from heaven, that are made in
heaven, they are ill help up, that are married to one another, and not married
to CHRIST.

Beauty is as it hits, if the heart do not answer the face, it were better
missed, it will prove a snare which was an ornament: the more any have of
this, the more cause they have to pray, Lead us not into temptation.

Earth is a place of penance; and small drink and Camells hair does well; it is
a place of toil and labor, and men go not to work in their best clothes:
Men should do well then to pranke up their insides a little better, and let the
body shift: I never heard any man found fault with for his rags, I hear it
upbraided to one, that he went in purple.

It is not our means, but our sins that shuts us out from God; I will be
ashamed of nothing but my sins, and proud of nothing but that I am a
Christian.

I will never care what I am in men's eyes, but in Gods: Beauty, Wealth,
Honor, may make us accepted of men, but it is only a broken heart can do the
deed with God: never any man came to Heaven for his good looks.

He is not a Jew that is so outwardly, then had not Hlerusalem fallen: nor he
an Apostle, that does so profess it, then had not Judas been a castaway: The
washing of the outside clean will not quitt us of being Pharisees; The Kings
Daughter is all glorious within, if we be good Christians we are best at core.

The good man ever sets God between him and harms; and says, The Lord is on
my side, etc. He is no good Christian that thinks he can be safe without Him,
or not safe with Him.

Never any man was a loser by his God, or left in a danger, and stood to Him:
Lazarus may stink in his grave, but he shall not be seen rot there, neither
the dungeon nor the den can shut us from His providence, His care: Elias
Ravens shall serve him in his meat: and Daniels Lions, since they cannot feed
him, shall fast with him, and rather starve than eat a Saint: what cannot God
do where He will? what will He not do where He loves? Oh God, they do not
know thee that distrust thee.

To give with hope to receive, is to lend and not to give: or rather to put to
use and not to lend: I will give where I cannot be requited, so shall my reward
be in Heaven.

Charity is of that which a man has, and not of that a man has not: If the
purse will not reach to a Sepulcher with that Counselor of Arimathea, yet a
pound or two of spice would be seen: If Silver and Gold that have none, yet
such as thou have, a Mite would be spared: Something, has some savor.
Obedience is as well seen in a little as in much; and if he which gives a cup
of cold water shall not lose his reward: I can never be so poor to want this.
Where the cruse and meal is low, it is not looked that the Cake should be big.

As we must use this World, so we must love it, as if we loved it not: God
would have earthly things looked at and affected with all temperance; We may
not be peremptory in our desire of them. But as our SAVIOVR of His cup, Father
if it be thy will, and yet not my will but thy will. Beggars must not be
choosers: Religion will teach us in modesty to submit to Him, and think that
our best, which God thinks so.

Seneca an heathen but a Philosopher, could say, he was better borne, than to
be a slave to his body, and they are no better that are continual factors for
it: Every man lays up for a hard winter and a Rainie-day: I will lay up for
that day which I am sure will come, and am not suer how soon it will come.

The bare desiring of earthly things, is not unlawful; He who first taught us
to pray, allowed us this in; Give us this day our daily Bread; it is the
excess, either in using, or in caring for them makes them ill to us, that are
not so in them, selves: I will so desire these as I may be the better for
enjoying them and so employ them, as I may have little to account for them; Why
should I abound to my cost?

Tears are a second B^^^^sme of the soul; (...) it is rinced anew, as the
sins of the old world, so of this little world, need a deluge. There is but
one sorrow never to be repented of, the sorrow of repentance: only these tears
go into Gods bottle, and thus blessed are they that mourn.

Others eyes are Sermons unto mine, when I see a Peter weeping for his denial,
it puts me in mind of mine: why should I weep for the loss of my friends,
(...) my health, or of (...) state, and not of my soul.

There are two kinds of tears, of joy and of grief: and two causes of these
kinds: Heaven and our Sins; the one of affection, the other of remorse, the
one for what we have done, the other for what we would have, these two shall
vie tears in mine eyes, to be forgiven and to be dissolved.

This World is a stage, the play is a tragi-comedy of the life and death of
man; every man plays his part and exit: and it may be he that has lived a
beggar, would not exchange with the KING when he comes to dye; for then he is
rewarded, not according to what he has been, but what he has done. I will
not greatly care, what part I play, but to do it well.

Home is home, be it never so homely, says the Proverb: Men go forth to
labor, and come home to take their ease; this world is our workehouse, and
Heaven is our home, why am I loath to go to my rest?

This world is the valley of tears, and we may sooner want them, than cause to
shed them: I will be content to sow in tears, that I may reap in joy.

I read of Augustus, when ever he heard of any that dyed suddenly, he wished
him and his friends the like (...), similem.
happiness; he shall not choose for me: Let him and his brother-heathens, pray
for their fools paradise. Our Church has learned us a better Language, From
sudden Death good Lord deliver us. I ever thought it not a little blessing to
dye by degrees. In this case the farthest way about is the nearest way home.

Me thinks it is but the other day I came into the world, and anon I am
leaving it: How time runs away, and we meet with Death always, e're we have
time to think our selves alive: One does but breake-fast here, another dine,
he that lives longest does but suppe: We must all go to bed in another World.
I will so live every day, as if I should live no more: it is more than I know,
if I shall.

All go to the same home, but all go not the same way; one falls by the hand
of a brother, another by the fall of a house, etc. Again all go to the same
home, but all go not the same pace, one dies in his cradle another on his
crutches, to some their life is a prey, to others a burden: Job and Jonah are
weary of living, and Lot and Hezekiah would live longer: as for the way, I
shall ever pray God that I may take my last sleep in a whole skin; but for
the pace, Come LORD JESUS, come quickly.

Death was given for punishment of sin, but is the end of it; when we lost
Paradise, we met with this, and again when we part with this we meet our
Paradise: they that know whither they are going, cannot but wish themselves
gone, and say with our Savior, but in another sense, Arise, let us go hence.

Through how many dyings do we come to our Death? And how many deaths may we
come to? Infinite are our ways out of this life, that have but one way into
it: Our life is composed of nothing but deaths: for that we may live, other
creatures die; again, our childhood dies and is forgotten when we are grown
up: Our youth dies when we are men: Our manhood dies when we are aged; at
last Our age dies and all dies, and we dye with it: every day dies at night;
now if my life consist of days, what do I else but dye daily?

Favor is a thing to esteem, but not to build on; he that stands upon others
legs knows not how soon they may fail him: Greatness is not eternal. I
will never lean so hard upon any man, that if he break he shall give me a
fall.

The things of this world are in a manner but apparitions, not so indeed: all
our Pomp is but like the strowing of Boughs before our Savior, taken up
again strait, our provision here is like that of the Gibeonites, apt to
moulder, open to the thief, and the moath, to be corrupted, and stole, we
have waters, but like those of Marah, bitter; we have riches, but we have
crosses; sweet meat but sour sauce: they make a fair show but they last not;
I may say of them, what my Savior did of Israel, their goodness is but as a
cloud, etc. I will use this world, but I will be in love with that better
only; why should I delight to be miserable?

This world is a region of Ghosts, or of dying men, if not dead; our life is
but one continued sickness, and we are ever in a comsumption, wasting: we now
accompany those to the grave, whom shortly we must keep company with in the
Grave: Every man must have his turn, and GOD knows whose turn is next; it
may be thine, it may be mine, and mine before thine, GOD knows; thou have
more years, (it may be) and therefore as thou think, some strides before; I
am no less subject to diseases, and therefore no whit behind, these threaten
no less to me, than age does to others: Every ache, every stitch tolles the
bell in mine ears, for some have dyed of these; but every strong sickness
digs the grave, and says service over me, and cries, Dust to dust, etc. Since
there is a time to dye, and I know not the time, I will provide for it at all
times: Blessed is that servant whom when the Master comes he shall find
watching.

No man thinks he shall live ever, yet most men think they shall not dye
yet; otherwise, they would dye better, and more care for the heaven they shall
have, than the earth they must part with; this world will not last always.

Our life is but a day, it is now noone: who knows how soon it shall be night?
I have a great way to go, and but a little to spend (a little time I mean) my
care shall be to make it hold out.

As we do not gather, so we do not look for grapes on thorns, or figgs on
thistles: such as the seed is, such will the fruit be, and such as the fruit
is, so will the Harvest be, and one day (if not now) God will reward every man
according to his works, and ill shall be ill requited.

Sin and punishment are like the shadow and the body, never apart, like
Jacob and Esau, they follow one at the heels of another. Never sin went
unpunished; the end of all sin if it be not repentance, is hell: if I cannot
have the first, to be innocent, I will labor for the second, to repent; next to
the not committing of a fault, is the being sorry for it.

That which we usually say of men, is sometimes true of Christians, foul in
the cradle, and fair in the saddle; an unhappie boy may make a good man; he
that should have seen Saul killing, would little have thought ever to have
heard him preaching; we may not judge of the future by the present. He runs
far that never turns. It Is not with God, as with men, to say I will forgive
it, but I will never forget it; with Him sins repented of are as not done, as a
broken bone well set is the faster ever after. God looks not at what we have
been, but what we are. Repentance makes us friends with God, re-intailes us in
the inheritance, and by I know not what strange heavenly slight of hand, does
what you would have it. If we would but down on our knees and ask
forgiveness all should be forgotten.

Our life is but a walk, we come hither but to take a turn or two, and away;
and all our life we are going to our home, and we do not live but travail.
Some gallop it over, others go a foot pace: The poor man curses the hour
he was borne while he lives, because he goes no faster; the rich worldling
curses the hour he was borne, when he comes to dye, because he can live no
longer: it is a like ungodly to be loath to dye because we are happy, and to
desire to dye, because we are miserable; I have ill learned Christ, if I have
not learned to be content.

Humility is good to all, best to it self; I do not hear it said he that
boasts of his good works, but he that confesses his sins shall find
mercy: the Publican not the Pharisie goes away justified. God never thinks
well of him that thinks so of himself and what he does: they that scorn to
be humbled, cannot complain to be scorned.

All men would come to heaven, but they do not like the way; they like well of
Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, but not at Dives door, they love heaven well, but
they would not pinch for it: silly wretch, all the wealth in the world cannot
buy thee into heaven, or out of thy punishment, and this thy glory shall add
to thy torment, that thou are now so well, shall one day be the worse for thee.
I had rather wait for my happiness, than smart for it.

God preaches to us no less in His judgments than His word; when He strikes
offenders, He would warn the standers by, and beats some upon others backs;
when I see another shiprack'd before mine eyes, it bids me look well to my
tacklings. Every man sees himself fall in his neighbor: Others harms
threaten me and say with the Apostle, What makes thee to differ from another?
where the sins are the same, Oh God, it is thy mercy that thy judgments are
not.

It Is not an easy matter for men to believe that which they know; whatever
they do wherever they are, they are seen: but because GOD is invisible, they
think they are so too, and he sees not because he is not seen: GOD is
inclusively in no place, and yet he is in every place, and hears and sees
what is said and done; if we did but consider this, we would neither do nor
speak what we would not have seen and heard: Consideration would tie men's
hands, and if they did but deliberat, they would not sin.

It is no less sin to be over earnest in purveying for the Body, than over
prodigal in pampering it: as well Saint Lukes fool as his glutton; Nabal as
well as Balthazar is condemned of folly: and I hear Israel chid not for
eating, but for laying up their Manna. Make not have to be rich, and make not
waste of thy riches. I will neither fear poverty, nor seek it.

Our Eye extends but to the outside, the skin, the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees will quit any of the censure of men. He that fasts,
prays, gives, goes for current among us, I may not think him otherwise in his
heart, that is not so in his behavior, with us every man goes for what he
seems, we dare not pronounce any man a Leper till we see the scabbe. It was
the evidence our SAVIOVR left us, by their fruit you shall know them.
Hypocrites while they keep their own counsel, do not only grow among the
wheat, but go for wheat. None but God, or a Prophet, God in a Prophet, could
give Gehezi the lie, and see his sin through his demureness; only He who
knows all things, knows who are His, and shall one day gather the wheat into
His barn, but shall burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire.

To how many, under God, do we owe our selves for being: to the sheep, the
silke-worme, for food, raiment; when we are at our finest, we are but like
Aesop's Crow in stolen feathers, and if every creature should claim his own,
we must be glad of fig leaves again, or ashamed of our nakedness: Why are
we more proud of our embroyderies, than our Grandfires were of their Aprons?
Since both are but borrowed; and what have thou that thou have not received?
Now if thou had received it, Why do thou glory as if thou have not received?

GOD made all the World for man, man for himself, other creatures to serve
themselves and us; us to praise and give thanks to Him; and He who prepared a
dwelling for us on earth, is gone to prepare a place for us in Heaven: let us
take heed lest by our disobedience we loose our second PARADISE, as our
Fathers did their first.

The Covetous man has his eyes in his feet, ever poring on the earth, all his
care is, to lay up for many years: like spiders, men spend their bowels to
catch flies, trifles: toil and sweat, and all that they may leave a little
behind them when they dye: if they have but somewhat to leave behind them,
it is no matter whether they have any thing to carry with them. All are for the
present, is it not good, if there be peace in my days? He that truly
remembers what he has lost, cannot be so delighted with what he has, then
only may thou say to thy Soul, Take thy rest, when thou have wealth laid
up, not for many years, but for ever.

I usually see Parents most affect those Children, that most resemble them; I
am sure it is so with God, they are best liked that are most like him, nothing
shall ever be able to separate Christ from him, that will not be seprate from
Christ.

It is with the soul as with the grain: that which we sow pure wheat,
comes up with chafe and straw: there is no fruit but has it is core, its
kernel, its stone: in vain do we think while we live here to be at our
best. It is not looked we should be Angels upon earth: the best have their
faults: happy is he that has least and fewest: our prayer must be, Lord
keep us from presumptuous sins: for sins of infirmity, like ill weeds,
grow apace; Tares there will be, well is it with us if we be not overgrowne
with thorns and briars, surfeiting and drunkenness etc. and the Day of the
Lord come upon us unawares.

At usual things we less admire; While Moses does only what the Magicians
can, he is slighted; men are taken with something that is not ordinary. All
Samaria will run out to see a man can tell them all that ever they did; and I
doubt whether the Apostles drew not more after their miracles than their
doctrine, when they begin to heal and cast out Devils once, Simon Magus will
be one too; I will admire GOD for His power: but I will love Him only for
Himself.

Two things our SAVIOVR commends to us from His other creatures, Wisdom and
Innocence, from the Serpent and the Dove: The wisdom of the one may stand
with the innocence of the other, nay it cannot well stand without it: Innocence
without Discretion will make us too forward with Peter, and wrong our selves:
Again Wisdom without Innocence will make us unjust stewards, and wrong our
Master: both do well, and only both do well.

The poor man is Gods lottery: cast in earth, and ye shall draw heaven; cast
in a mite, and ye shall draw without measure; for God returns not ten in the
hundred, but a hundred for ten. I will be an Usurer only to GOD.

Give and it shall be given to you: He that commands the one, promises the
other. Alms never made their owner a bankerupt; Charity is not so ill a
servant, as to leave the master a beggar. That cruse and meal shall never
waste, that the Prophet has a Cake of.

It is an easy matter not to desire that which we have not; to complain when
we have no cause, scarce speaks us men, muchlesse Christians, but when all
fails to stand our ground, and look to heaven for a handful of supply,
speaks our faith: At a Lions den, or a fiery furnace, not to turn tail is a
commendation worthy a Prophet. It is no honor to overcome, when it is no
danger to fight. Adversity best speaks a Christian in prosperity, it is as
easy a matter to find friends, as not to need them; but when we have
nothing left, not to leave GOD, nor so much as whimper, but chide down our
distrust with a Deus providebit: My Son, God will provide, tryes our temper.
Then is our valor commendable, when we can endure to be Jobs.

When our Savior would put to silence the distrusters of his time, He points
them to the Lilies and the Crows: the Lilies of the field, not of the garden,
which are dug and dung'd; but of the field which have no gardener, but the
Sun, no watering pots but the clouds, and your heavenly Father (says He)
clothes these: Does my Father provide for others, and will he see me go naked?
What will He think too much for His sons, that is so bountiful to
strangers? How will He cloth them, that so clothes the grass? If Solomon in
all his royalty was not arrayed like one of these, the Sun in all his height,
shall not shine like one of us; when He shall have changed our vile bodies,
that they may be like unto His glorious body.

Distrust is a sin which custom has almost made commendable. Every man
lays up Manna for to morrow, forgetting that if that be not worms, they
themselves may be so. As if there were no heaven, but pleasure and abundance:
no other hell but affliction and want; if their purse grow light, their heart
grows heavy, their mirth ends with their store, and they think no man can say
to his soul, take thy ease, that has not wealth laid up for many years: but
we are not yet what we should be, if we cannot be content to be what we are,
what ever it be. Beggars must not be chusers; It Is not for us to teach God
which way He shall bring us unto heaven, let us thank Him that we come thither
any way, and if He will have us suffer before we shall reign, down on our
knees, kiss the rod, and not a word, not a sob.

Wherever God is, there are these two, increase and multiply; Abraham and Lot
cannot dwell together while they dwell with him, and I see Israel once to big
for Goshen, that is now too little for Bethlehem, give a man God and throw him
into the Sea, with Israel, Jonah, and he sinkes not; needs must he swim that is
held up by the chin.

In apparel we are not to respect merely necessity, but decency. God never
meant religion should make men slovens or Stoics, as if a man could not wear
good clothes and go to heaven, or a Christian were ever bound in conscience
to be out of fashion: We are not tied to wander, or to wear sheepskins and
goat-skinns, because the Apostle tells us some did, some of whom the world was
not worthy, God meant that those holy men should be patterns of piety, not of
fashions. I will never be niggardly of another man's purse, deny my self that
which God has not.

There may be pride in the meanest things in the world; no less the Cynick of
his tub, than Alexander of all the world besides: Sackcloth and Ashes in the
same bill with purple and fine linen, both condemned of pride; to fast and to
fare deliciously is strange but true; and so much worse is that pride than
this, by how much it has a better face; small drink and Camels hair goes
away Sainted, though but counterfeited when open pride is cried down of all
hands: and of the two the least suspected is the more intolerable, I am sure
the more incurable. A known disease is every man's cure, which when it lies hid
is never meddled with: There is less hope of an Hypocrite than an Atheist.

Afflictions are Gods mould in which He casts His Children, spare the rod, and
spill the child is as true in grace as nature. God receives no son whom He
chastises not, but it is with a gentle hand, He leaves no marks behind, and He
has soon thrown away His rod, if with unfeigned resolution you will do so no
more. God though He beat many of His Children till they cry, yet He never
beats any for crying.

There is a double life in man, and must be a double nourishment, men live as
if there were no more to be done, but feed and be warm, food and raiment are
the maine businesses of the World: It Is true, wealth and friends and health are
things to thank God for, but better desires better becomes Christians; the
Christian man lives not by bread only, etc. Meat for the belly and the belly
for meat, but God shall destroy both it and them, every good man's meat and
drink is to do the will of Him that sent him.

God has given us this air to breathe in, it does not give but continue life,
it is the means of living not the Author of life: God gives it us to use, not
to serve. How many make this world their God, and serve it: and God (as it
were) but their World to make use of? I will never be a servant to my slave.

God though He be ever the same in Himself, He is not always so in us, though
He love those whom He does love unto the end, yet not without Intermission.
Men commonly never know the benefit of a thing but by the absence of it; we
could not so well esteem of health, if it pleased not God we were sometime
sick: the long absence of a desired friend makes him more welcome at his
return; thus Christ is pleased sometime to withdraw His presence, that with
more earnestness we might be drawn to seek Him: Tell me Oh Thou whom my
soul loves where thou feedest, etc.

As when many eyes are fixed upon one pictture, every one thinks the eyes of
the picture to be fixed on him; so with our souls, all look together at God,
but every one must appropriate Him to himself. To know that God is the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, is but a weak assurance that
He will provide for me, unless also He be my God; our faith as our charity,
must begin at home, and say, My Lord and my God.

Our Savior does not say, do unto others as others do unto you, but, as you
would have others do unto you. If thou would have thy neighbor do thee
right, do so to him though he have done thee wrong. Lex talionis was never a
good Christian Law; If I forgive not, I shall not be forgiven.

As he cannot rise again the resurrection of the body that does not first dye
the death of the body: no more can he be borne the birth of the soul, that
does not first dye the death of sin. It is necessary that he which will be
borne twice, should dye once while he lives, and he that will once rise the
resurrection of life should dye twice. That I may live ever I will dye daily.

That two contraries cannot consist in the same subject, is as good Divinity,
as it is Philosophy; Good and evil are like Fire and Water, ever contending
till the one be conquered; either my sins and I must part, or God and I: I
cannot be at once Gods Church, and the Devils chapel.

It is the fault of a great many, if God bear with them in their sins, they
think he countenances them: if they be not presently stricken dead with Vzzah,
they go on; when they smart not, they believe not, and he is not feared till
felt. Sickness is not thought of till death, nor that till hell: forgetting
that the long sufferance of God should lead them to repentance, he forbeares us
that he might forgive us; shall I sin because grace abounds? God forbid.

God as He is infinite in mercy, so is He in justice; and as His mercy extends
to thousands in them that love him, so do His judgments to many generations of
them that hate Him. That He is long in coming is no argument that He will not
come, forbearance is no acquittance: the longer our time, the greater our
account, if we have lived long and lived not well, of young Saints prove old
Devils, we had been better have gone to heaven young, than to have lived to
these years to go to hell: miserable is that man's case whose latter end is
worse than his beginning.

The relation between sinning and falling is so near, that they are used
promiscuously the one for the other. Now it is a hard matter to fall without
hurt, and once down, it is not an easy matter to rise without help: Where it
is so dangerous to fall, and so hard to rise; if we love our selves we will
look to our footing.

Most men fear to hear ill, that fear not to do ill; the arrantest
hypocrite in the world would not be thought so, he would not be censured for
sin, that fears not to be damned for it, and is afraid of holding up his
hand to the bar, that is not afraid of standing at the Tribunal seat of God
All the care is how to sleep in a whole skin, not so much to live well, as
to die safe, keep without the compass of the Law, though they come within the
teach of hell. If this be not to fear men more than God, I know not what is.

I should wonder many times to see sin so smugge to here a Judas at his hail
Master and kisses; did I not remember of what Sire they come, the Devil: and
that he can still personate that goodness he once had. He would be more
shunned, if he could not be mistaken, that is not suspected in a disguise
where the adversary is so subtle, they had need be wise as Serpents, that
would be innocent as Doves.

Charity so forgives offenses, that it is ready not only to pardon the
offender, but to do for him, and thinks it self not innocent that it starves
not it is enemy, while it sees him starve. What little difference is there in
Religion between not saving and killing? we are not commended that we require
not evil with the like. We have not forgiven injuries if we do only not
revenge them, if wrongs tie our hands from doing good where we ought and may,
they prove sins to us, that were but crosses; and we wrong our selves more by
not doing than by suffering: and God shall so forgive us our trespasses: For
with what measure I mete unto others, it shall be measured unto me again.

God deals by us as He would have us deal by others, and we must do by
others, as we would have them do by us, and all of us deal one with another,
as we would have God deal with all of us. As I cannot love God and hate my
brother, so can I not be loved of God* How justly is the fire of Envy punished
with the fire of Hell?

It cost God more to redeem the world, than to make it: He that made me with
a word speaking, when he redeemed me, spoke, and wept, and bled, and dyed to
do it: what can I think too much to endure for his sake, that was made a
curse for mine.

It is with us here as with Gedeons fleece; one while the ground is wet, and
the fleece is dry, another while the fleece is wet, and the ground is dry.
Sometime we have Rain, and Fair Weather would do better; anon it is Fair,
and Rain would be welcommer: And it fares with our bodies, as with our
estates, now happily we have health, and want means, then again we have
other things, and want health; all our delight here is like our selves fading:
and many times with Balthazar, we are fetched off in the mids of our jollitie:
Nothing here but ebbing and flowing, tumult and alteration; in heaven only
shall we rest from our labors: now if we love our ease, why do we so love
our lives?

The good man takes his God as he does his wife, for richer, for poorer, in
sickness and in health: we may not always judge of Gods favor by His bounty.
I am but a novice in Religion, if I think I cannot be Gods son and miserable.

Commonly those men are hottest in the pursuit of honor that least deserve it;
While deservednesse sits still, and bides his leisure that gives and takes
where he list, and when, and how, and to whom; and at last is importuned to the
place, not for the good he shall receive, but for that he may do: he will not
be great upon all terms, but will rather endure poverty, tha^ part with his
honesty, and not sell his soul to buy a purchase What will it profit a man to
gain the world and lose his soul?

Christ is in us, as the soul is in the body, he gives life; we are in
Christ, as the branches in the Vine, whence we receive life. Let our care be to
offer up our selves living sacrifices to him, of whom we live and moove: It Is
all he requires, an egg of his own Bird, some minutes of that time which he
has given us. What can I do less? one good turn requires another, if I love
not those that love me, I come short of Infidells.

Selfe-conceitednesse is the sin in fashion, It Is a hard matter not to think
well of our selves; I am not behind the least of the Apostles (ye know the
Voice) and if he had not been buffeted, he had been exalted above measure,
and carried higher in conceit, than he was before in his ecstasy: he that well
remembers from what he once fell, cannot but be ashamed of what he is and fall
yet lower: Oh Lord, I am less than the least of thy mercies.

Malice never wants a mark. He who has nothing, has something to be envied
for, and if nothing else, he is envied for this, that he is content with his
nothing. It is hard to be prosperous, and be loved at once: Those that will
be great, shall be envied; it is hard but safe, to be contented with a little:
but if I cannot avoid ill tongues, my care shall be no to deserve them; and
then, let Shimei curse.

I seldom see sin but in a religious tire: Nay but I reserved them for
sacrifice, was Saul's to Samuel: for sacrifice not for prey. Goodness is the
best disguise of evil, either seem what thou art, or be what thou seem:
God is not mocked.

Their sin is more unpardonable that sin of purpose: malice leaves the
owner as without excuse so without hope: Sins of ignorance excuse a tanto,
save some blows. I may and do sin daily against my will, I will not against
my knowledge.

What more glorious Master than God? What better Mother than the Church? How
glorious is that calling that at once serves such a Master, and such a Mother?
As it is our glory to serve them, so it must be our glory to do them good
service. God in us sets the world copies of piety, and we must live to others
no less than preach: As we are more eye, so we are more looked at, motes in
others eyes are beams in ours: many things are lawful that are not expedient,
and some things are expedient in respect of the person, that are scandalous
merely for the chair; that which is reproveable in another, is in us a
reproach: seeing it is so, what manner of men ought we to be.

Promotions are neither from the East nor from the West, but from God: He that
has them and not of His gift, has them with a vengeance who would not rather
wish to want, than to be great so.

There was never any that was not ambitious: every man is borne a Corah, only
some more superlative than other. But of all men I most wonder at those that
are ambitious only to be talked of, and since they cannot be notable they
would be notorious, and with Cain be marked though for murderers. Whether I
know much, or am known of many, it matters not, only this I will care for,
that God may not say to me in the last day, I know thee not.

Pride is good to none, worst to it self: when Adam would better his
knowledge, he lost his dwelling in Paradise; and when those builders of Babel
would mend their dwelling, they lost their knowledge. The itch of being great,
potent, or pointed at, how many has it undone? I will never care to be or to
know, that which I know shall repent me: what commendations is it to have been
somebody?

The tongue is the only betrayer of the mind: The fool while he is silent is
not discovered. I will not be more thriftie of any thing, than of my speech; I
had rather be thought to know a little, than be known to know nothing.

There is but one thing a Christian need desire of God, that is a clean heart:
Create a new heart, etc. there is but this one thing that God desires of a
Christian, his heart: My son, give me thy heart; and this I will only desire
to have, that I may give. A broken and a contrite heart, Oh God, thou will not
despise.

The Kings daughter is all glorious within, but yet her raiment too is of
wrought gold; our outside, our life must tell the world what we are within. If
our lives do not answer our profession, we are Pharisees, we say and do not.

It is a common fault to forget what we have been, when we are changed for
the better: how many have been resolved for heaven in their sickness, that in
their whole skin have disclaimed it, and requited the recovery of the body
with a relapse of the soul To receive good at the hands of the Lord, and not
evil, is unreasonable to expect: but to receive good at the hands of the Lord,
and return evil, is wicked and not to be endured. I will never pray more
heartily to God for a blessing than for grace to manage it; Wherefore should I
be blessed to my cost?

With God all things are not only alike possible but easy, and he can as well
of stones make Abraham children as of Jews. I will never despair of him that
can do al things, I cannot be so infinitely sinful as God is merciful. Oh God,
if thou will, when thou will thou can make me whole; why should I give my
self over, where my Physician does not?

Works without faith are like a suite of clothes without a body, empty: Faith
without works is like a body without clothes, no warmth, want hear; Works
without faith are not good works, and faith without good works is as good as
no faith, but a dead Faith. Then only are they themselves, when they are
together, what God has joined let no man put asunder.

Our actions are never pleasing to God, when our light does not shine before
men; let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven; that your Father which is in heaven
may one day glorify you.

With men, confess and suffer is good justice, but with God, the contrary to
confess our sins is the next way to be forgiven them; that soul is past hope
that lies speechless. I will ever pray; Oh Lord, open thou my lips, and my
mouth shall show forth thy praise, and my own sins.

Pray for them that curse you, do good to them that, etc. Is durus sermo, a
hard saying, and against the hair; it is not so easy a matter to forget an ill
turn, as to do one, yet this must be if we will be Christians: he that will
not be in charity shall never be in heaven. Why should I do my self a shrewd
turn because another would?

It was the devil that first made us enemies to God, and it is still he that
makes us enemies to one another; it is not for nothing (I have thought) that he
is painted with a clove^ foot, he loves divisions so well, and there is no
greater argument of a devil incarnate than a malicious heart: say what thou will, but I will never believe thee against scripture, that thou love God
whom thou have not seen, that love not thy brother whom thou have seen; if
we love Him we will love one another.

If we will be Christ's Disciples we must leave all, but its not all, we must
take up our cross too; be ready to take it up, not of our selves, but if it
be laid upon us, we must suffer willingly for Christ's sake, we must not suffer
wilfully or throw our selves into the fire. He that bids us suffer, bids us
fly, If they persecute you in one City, fly, etc. It is our commendation to
endure to stroke or the Faggot, it is not to seek it when zeal runs without
discretion, warrant, it commonly makes more haste, than good speed; CHRIST
would have us innocent, but wise too, Serpents as well as Doves, lay down our
lives for His sake, but not fling them down; we must neither go like bears
to the stake, nor like madmen, neither run to our martyrdom or from it:
Pray with our SAVIOVR, if it be possible to miss the cup, or but to kiss it,
but still not my will but thy Will, we must submit all to God, and think that
fittest for us which He thinks so.

That which I hear from David, I would hear from every good man, Thy word is
a Lantern to my feet, etc. To his feet, not to his eyes alone; if we use the
Word of God only to gaze on, and see fine stories, to discourse by, not live
by it; wants his use, and we want our goodness, and shall want our glory:
knowledge without practice adds to our punishment together with our sin. How
many Pharisees have sat in Moses, that shall never sit in Abraham's bosom,
only for this, because they knew and did not.

Works of piety must never go without humility; he that prays and is not
humbled, like the Pharisie in the parable, goes away worse than he came. When
thou prayest, thou ask blessing, and do it on thy knees, if to your earthly
father, how much more to your heavenly: Men have inverted the course now, they
drink their health upon their knees, and pray for their health upon their
tails, God shall answer such men according to their manners, proudly. Why
should GOD stoop to their wants, that stoop not to their own? we cannot be
too humble when we are to speak to that Majesty, whom we cannot see and live,
and whom we shall one day see and live to our cost, if we be not humbled;
thank God thou have knees to how, how many would that have not; why should
thou bend and cringe and bow, to thy father or thy friend, or thy betters, and
not to thy God.

Prayer is the Jacobs ladder of the soul whereon it goes up and down to God,
and conferres with Him; in our prayers we bless Him, and by our prayers we
bless our selves: there is no part of Gods worship more acceptable or more
profitable than this of prayer, and none more slighted, men come to prayer as
to a thing indifferent; wilful negligence in leaving it undone, and coldness
in doing of it, are the sin almost of who not, only, Oh Lord, do thou be
merciful to the neglect of thy people.

There are many services and many Masters, and yet no man can serve two
masters, that is, two of a contrary disposition; for there is the world, the
flesh, and the devil, and ye may serve all these at once, nay ye cannot serve
one and not all, the glutton he serves his belly and with Esau sells his
birthright his blessing for pottage: the drunkard he serves I know not well
what, whether the drink, or the company, or his appetite, or all, but instead
of quenching his thirst, drownes his soul: the envious man, and the furious
man are alike in this, both serve the passion, only here they differ, the
envious man with Sampson, will brain himself so he may brain others; the
furious man brains others so long till at length he be brained himself: the
usurer he serves his gold; the adulterer he serves his lust, but all serve one
chief Lord, one Master, the Devil, and shall all receive the same Wages,
which is the wages of all sin, death; Why should God pay them for their
pains, that go not of His errands.

FINIS.
SPARE HOVRES of Meditations.
The Second Part.
BLessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: How are they poor
that have a Kingdom? or what Kingdom is wealthy, if not that of heaven? or why
complain'st thou of that poverty, that saints thee? that is a happy soul that
makes even with God every night; and every morn begins the World anew.

God is love, and he that loves is borne of God, and God loves him; so there
is no love lost; by this are we known to be Gods sons and Christ's disciples,
if we love one another: I may love others for other respects, my enemies that
they may be good to me, or my friends because they are so: but God I will
love, because I will love Him, and because He is to be beloved.

When I at first look out into the World, and see many men (and those none of
the best) in better case, I think my self forgotten, and wish for more: but
when I remember my account, I fear I have too much and forget those wishes; It
may be if I had more wealth, I should be more riotous: outward losses are
sometimes gainful, and it is good for us that we are afflicted; it would be
worse with us, if it were not sometimes thus bad; many if they were not kept
short of these would come short of Heaven. He knows us that keeps us, and if
He will have us Lazar's and not Dive's, bring us to Heaven that way rather than
another, His will be done; let Him give my goods to the poor, and my body to
be burned, and bring me to Heaven, though in a fiery Chariot; I cannot complain
of the foulenes of that way that carries me to God.

Things which we come easily by, we easily part with; lightly come, lightly
go; true friendship, as it is hard to find, so it is hardly lost, and
therefore hardly lost, because hard to find: I will put up many injuries before
I put off one friend; small faults I will swallow: others I will wink at; and
if he will not be my other self, I will be his, and change my nature before my
friend: friends like stones, get nothing by rolling.

We are content with a little, when we are by our selves; who puts on scarlet,
and resolves not to be seen? or is served in plate, when there is none to take
witness of it? Nature if it would but be private, it would not be so costly,
most men are therefore covetous, because they are ambitious, and love the
stage; and desire to have much, that they may have much to show, and set their
land upon their cupboards; I think they would show more of their wit, if they
showed less of their substance, they do not so much show that to their guests
as themselves, and are admired at, not for the abundance of these, but the want
of the other.

Pride and Uncharitableness are sins in fashion, and the one the cause of
the other, many think they should want for their pride, if they should but be
charitable; I have often wondered and grieved to see a rich porch, and a poor
Christians walls clothed, and men go naked. Say what thou will, but I am sure
with the Apostle, That he cannot love God whom he has not seen, that loves
not his brethren whom he has seen, and can endure to see miserable.

Many are therefore friends to others, that they may befriend themselves: and
like leaves in winter, fall from the trees when they begin to wither, and with
Saint Peter, know not the man. How many do we nickname friends at large, that
prove but strangers at a pinch; that will be your servants in a complement, and
not know you in a business? I will not desire of God not to have friends, but
not such friends, or not to need them.

We owe more to God for redeeming us, than for making us; His Word made us, but
when it came to redeem us, that Word must be made flesh, and that flesh must
suffer* in our creation He gave us our selves; but in our redemption He gave us
Himself; and by giving Himself for us, gave us our selves again that were
lost; so that we owe our selves, and all that we have twice told: and now what
shall we give unto thee, o Thou Preserver of men, for our selves thus given
and restored? If we could give our selves a thousand times over, yet what are
we to God? and yet if we do give our selves to Him and His service, such as
we are, and such as we can, He accepts it, and will reward it. I will never
grudge God His own. I have nothing that is not His; and if I give it to Him,
He will restore it again with interest, never any man was a loser by God.

The best ornament of the body is the mind, and the best ornament of the mind
is honesty; I will care rather how to live well, than how to go fine. I may
have an ill garment, and come to Heaven; I cannot, and have an ill soul. He
who first bid us cast our care upon Him, did not so mean, as if we should take
no care our selves; it will not come to our share, to sit still and cry, God
help us: Solomon has read his fortune, that will not work in summer;
therefore shall he starve in winter: It was the destiny sin brought upon
the world, in the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy meat, and thank God
we can have it so: He that made us without our selves, will not keep us
without our selves; it is mercy enough for us, that we eat with sweating. I
will never think much of my pains, where it is rewarded with a blessing.

If an Ass do but speak once in a world, as Balaam's did, a beast have any
part of a man in him, we wonder, and justly; but let a man have every part of a
beast, go upon all four, and wallow with the drunkard, or lose his speech
together with his legs, it is never talked of. It is the property of a man to
speak, as of a beast not to speak: why do we wonder to hear a beast speak,
and not wonder to hear a man not able to speak? or how justly does he want the
blessing, that cannot ask it?

It was our Saviors to His disciples, Behold, I send you as sheep in the
midst of Wolves; blessed Savior, did thou not care for thy Disciples? or
if thou did, why are they not rather sent, as Lions in the midst of sheep;
than as sheep in the midst of wolves? Even because He loved them, therefore He
so sent them, that out of the Lions mouth they might come forth more glorious;
as there shall be ever some poor to exercise our charity; so there shall be
some wicked to exercise our patience; some bulls of Basan to compass, etc.
Where the enemies are so strong and so many, they had need be wise as serpents,
that will be innocent as doves.

Desperately wicked is that of some, if I shall be saved, I shall be saved: as
if Heaven would come unlooked for, and they should be saved, whether they would
or no* God never did, nor will save any man in spite of his teeth, or against
his will; as we cannot keep body and soul together, without sweating; no more
can we bring our soul and God together with sitting still; never any got
wealth, by barely wishing for it: and as few come to Heaven, by merely
desiring it. There Is a race to be run, and a battle to be fought* and as
well in religion as in any thing, we must work for our living.

It is appointed to all men, once to dye: death is a punishment of sin, not
sin itself; yet sure it is the height of punishment when it is sudden; I
do not desire not to dye at all, but not all at once. I know I must dye, and I
think of my death, yet is it not always in my thoughts; the best of us all
may be taken napping. I will ever pray God when he does fell me, not to do it
at a blow, that I may see my self falling and bethink me in the fall; and
thus it is a comfortable thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

He that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes; and yet I cannot say whether shall be worse beaten, he that may know
it and will not, or he that does know it, and does it not; the one sins
against his knowledge, the other sins because he will not know, and shall
one day not be known.

God made this world not barely to look on, but to contemplate on, and of Him
in it: here the Christian and the Philosopher part, they are led by reason, we
by faith: they argue, we believe: they enquire the manner, how all were made,
the Christian, why: He is not curious in the manner, but looks at the end, for
the glory of God, and the way to our glory: and uses them not for
spectacles, but motives, to the glorifying of him of whom he has them; and if
we enjoy these as we should, we shall one day enjoy him from whom we enjoy
them.

This World is often compared unto a sea, our life is the Ship, we are the
passengers, the grave is the common haven, Heaven is the shore; and well is the
grave compared unto a haven, for there we unload; the things of this world are
neither borne with us, nor do dye with us; we go out of this world as we came
into it, naked: why are we so covetous of those things, which are so hard to
get, and so certain to be lost? If I enjoy them all, I shall not enjoy them
long: or if enjoy but some, I shall shortly have use of none. I will comfort my
self against the want of them, with the assurance that I shall one day not
have need of them.

Who can but once look back upon his creation, and dares distrust God for his
preservation? whether is it easier to give, or to continue life? to keep thee
or to make thee? If He have given thee the greater, why do thou distrust Him
for the less? Or if thou distrust Him for earth, how will you take His word for
Heaven? Oh God, they have forgot of who^ they live, that distrust thee for
their life.

This life is a race, and we do not live but travel; but we have another
race beside this, of our soul as well as of our body; since both must be
run, and the one will not tarry for the other: I will try who can run
fastest; if I have finished my life and not my course, I have made more haste
than good speed.

Every thing else has a beginning, it is only Gods title, Which was, and is,
and is to come: Eternity is only there; our glory must be, not that we have
lived ever, but shall do so.

If we look but out into the World, we shall see almost as many miracles as
things, that trees and plants should every year dye, and recover; that the
Sun should only lighten and warm the earth, and not burn it; that the
heavens should distill its rain in drops, and not in rivers full, and drown
us, where they do but wet us; God is not less miraculous in preserving the
World, than in making it; and as His mercy, so His glory is over all His
works.

Religion with some men is but a matter of fashion. Many are of Agrippa's
Religion, almost Christians; such men shall be saved, as they do believe;
almost: God will never own: such halfefac'd followers. The hypocrisy of a
Pharisee, would have shamed thee into an outside of Christianity, and unless
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you
cannot enter, etc. It is not only want of grace, but wit, to dissemble where
we may be discernd, if I will needs be a Christian, I will be one to some
purpose.

I hear men commended now adays as the Lord did the unjust steward, because
they deal wisely, not honestly; it is held no crime to deceive, but to be
seen, to be discovered, that is a foul fault, he is a novice that does that;
the care of many is, not to live innocent but close, and they cast, how to go
(as Saul to Endor) to the Devil in a disguise; but they cosen only men's eyes,
Gods they cannot; and since they will not be known for what they are now, they
shall not be known for what they would be one day. God shall say unto them,
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not.

To dissemble sin was never the way to be pardoned it, only he that
confesses his sin shall find mercy: never be ashamed to say, what thou
were not ashamed to do: blush to commit them, but not to tell of them; it is
better that the world note thee for a sinner, than God for an hypocrite.

Some there are that hear only to tell, and many times make differences,
where there were none meant, it is not good always to tell all we hear; many
a man speaks that in his anger, which in cool blood, he would not own; and we
do a double wrong by relating that which the one is sorry to hear, and the
other to have spoken, when he is himself. I will hear all, and report only
the best, he that makes debate between others lays a bait for himself, it
is safe and honest to compose discords, but sow none. I will labor what I
can, to set others together, but not by the ears.

When we behold (for who can choose?) such a world of sins in every corner
of the world; buyers and sellers in the temple, and not whipped out, selling
our souls for the provision of their bodies: others with Zimri and Cosbi
outfacing judgment; how, do we not wonder and bless our selves that we enjoy
so good, so much, some thing, any thing? that Pharaohs lean kine are not seen
amongst us, and the metamorphosis of famine, of the heavens to Brass, and the
earth to Iron? that either the clouds are not shut, to withold their rain,
or that the windows of heaven are not opened, to rain not water, but fire and
brimstone? It is admirable where the fact is so foul, that the reprive is so
long? Oh Lord we have nothing to say for our selves, but acknowledge, it is thy
mercy that we are not consumed.

Good natures are won rather with entreaty than curstness, if we do not
more love God, for His goodness that He does preserve us, then fear Him for
His power that He can destroy us, His mercies are ill bestowed and worse
employed, we have not received the spirit of bondage to fear. I will love
God, and honor Him, but I will be afraid only of offending Him.

God loves timely holiness, remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth.
Nature ever begins at the wrong end, lays in, and lays up indeed, but for the
thief and the moth. With Absalom the first care is taken to leave a monument
behind, and when they are settled upon earth, they will see if God have any
thing to say to them for Heaven: and the best part is the last provided; such
shall one day have their heaven to seek, because they will not have it to
seek now. He that will not when he may, etc. You know the Proverb: He that
does not seek the Lord, while He may be found, cannot complain, if he do
afterward seek, and not find.

All sins are forbidden trees to us; and we are so much ADAMS sons in
nothing as in our disobedience, ever reaching after that we should not; to do
good, there is a lion in the way, like Salomons sluggard; but to evil, how
swift are our feet? So then, it is not going fast that carries us to Heaven,
but going right: I will care rather to set my foot down sure, than to take it
up quick; What am I the nearer to go a great pace and the wrong way.

Every man is his own worst foe, and his greatest enemies are those of his own
house: we may thank our selves that we live at no more ease than we do; In
the sweat of thy brows, thou shall eat thy meat was of our own procuring. We
had never known so much evil, if we had not desired to know too much good, our
ambition hindered our preferment; we were at first made happy, and we made our
selves miserable, and now we are miserable. God has chalked out a way to our
happiness; now if we love misery rather than bliss, it is fit we should have
enough on it.

A good man, still the longer he lives, the better he dies; men should grow
better, as they grow older; not like a dead hedge, the longer it stands, the
rottener. To see a man white in his leprosy leaving the world, and not his
avarice; and with S. Lukes fool; dye thinking of his barnes, is horrible. I
had rather have no portion on earth, than buy it with that I shall have in
Heaven; I will not (with the Curre in the fable) part with my flesh, for its
shadow.

The way to sweeten death is to think of it, every day I live I will remember
I might dye; and I will not desire to live a day longer, than I grow some
drammes better: What will it benefit me that I have lived some hours which I
cannot answer for?

Worldly minds mind nothing but Worldly things. Laban and Nabal think of
nothing but their sheep-shearing, and making merry when they have done; their
business is thought on, not their salvation; for they make that no part of the
business, only matter of course; grudge God His service, and in His service
the length of it; and pay God His due, as Laban did Jacob his wages, with an
ill will; and would fetch it back again if they could tell how: and yet these
men that will steal time from God for their profit and their business, will
steal time from their business for their pleasure: He that will break the
Sabbath for an hours work, will break off his work for an hours drinking.
Thus they prefer the humoring of their souls, to the saving of them. I will
never sell Heaven for company, it is better being a good Christian, than a good
fellow.

Every man would be thought to be in love with heaven, and yet most men are
loath to shake hands with earth; here is the difference between the heavenly
Language and ours; they cry, how long Lord, how long? and we cry, how soon?
they think He stays too long, and we think He comes too fast. I will labor
to be a follower of those, with whom I would be partner; he has not yet
enough conn'd Heaven, that is does to go to it; that voice only is worthy an
Apostle; I desire to be dissolved, and to be with CHRIST.

The just man shall live by his faith, and others live by his charity: true
faith is seen in its works; he that says he believes, and does not show it,
believe him not. To make show of believing, and not in thy works, is to show
thy Hypocrisy, but not thy says.

Not every one that eats his meat in the sweat of his brows, shall eat bread in
the Kingdom of Heaven: and yet it is not eaten but with sweating neither: but
it is such a sweat, as will make thy heart ache, and not thy lims: prizes are not
had but with hazard, he that will drink of the water of the Well of Bethel,
with David's Worthies must through his enemies: the water of life is not had, but
with hazard of our lives. My comfort shall be, that though I lose my life for
CHRIST'S sake, I shall not lose my labor. Or, who would not lose this life,
which he is ever looking to leave, for that which he is sure ever to enjoy? Oh
Lord, we want lives to lose; I cannot endure enough, to come to Heaven.

This life, as if it would never be done, is ever providing for; Eternal life,
as if it would never begin, is never preparing for. I will care for this life,
but not dote on it; I will remember I shall live ever, but not here.

The love of the earth is the disease of the world, and that gulf between
Abraham's bosom and us, to forsake house and land etc* that they do not like
of; if Christ would but leave out, that same, leave all, men would do well
enough with Him: they would enjoy this world, but not with the loss of a
better. Again, they would enjoy that, but not with the loss of this; they
would have their Canaan, but they would have their fleshpots; they love the
blessing, but they would not lose their pottage: with Naaman, they will worship
no other god, but yet, the Lord be merciful, etc. when I enter into the house
of the god Rimmon. They would so please God, as they might neither displease
others, nor themselves, and would part stakes with God, let such juglers in
religion look upon Saul in the Old Testament, and Ananias in the New, and read
their judgment: what society has light with darkness? The Arc and Dagon
were never friendly householders: thou can not at once, have two such guests,
as GOD and the devil; If one heaven could not hold them both, how shall one
heart?

No man is so provident for his own good, as God is for every man's; every
sinner is an Absalom, to Him, and He does not only wish, Would God I had dyed
for thee, etc. But dyed indeed: we do not so desire our own salvation, as He
does all ours, promises, persuades begges our obedience, He leaves no way
untried, that He may leave us inexcusable, wash His hands of us, and say,
perditio tua ex te, etc. Our destruction if it do come, is from our selves; if
we could but wish well to our own souls, we could not but do well: and yet
it is not wishing, but doing well that does the deed. I will do what I can, and
I will desire to do what I should and cannot. God accepts a willing mind, and
if I am willing beyond my ability, He will either make me able, or accept my
will. O God, thou that workest in me both to will and to do, work my will to
thine, and my power to my will, that I may not only will or desire, but do thy
will.

God does not look for every thing from every one: for ten talents where He
left but two: only He there exacts much, where He has given much: if the
seed of thorny, or stony ground bring forth no fruit, or withered, it is no
marvel; but where He has dung'd and gooded, to expect a crop is but
reasonable. The more I have, the more I have to answer for; the greater my
trust, the greater my account: Let others care how to get more, my care shall
be how to pay for that I have already.

All lands do not yield the same things, and the same land does not yield all
things: thus God divides His blessings to us, as He does to these, to some
strength of body, to another strength of wit, to one health, to another
knowledge, etc. He has distributed to no man all things: yet, to every man
some thing; he is strangely miserable, that has nothing; but this does not
please, if every one have not all, they grow surly. What will thou give me,
since I go childlesse? could the best of the Patriarchs say: It is hard and
rare to see that in others, which we want our selves, and would have, and be
still. Whilst I am in this world, I shall ever behold this inequality, and if
I cannot make a covenant with mine eyes, I will with my heart: Since I cannot
but see it, I will learn not to repine at it: it is the Lord, let Him do
whatsoever He will.

God calls some men to martyrdom, when others would startle at a stake, and
yet good Christians too: all men, as all trees, are not fit for fuel, that
are fit for use; every one cannot hold out against the prison, and the hatchet:
It is an easy matter to dare affliction before it come, and when it does come,
run away from it. We know not of what spirit we are, what metal we are made
of, our prayer must be, first not to meet with persecutions, and next to endure
them (but not meet them.)

Earth is but our rode to Heaven, and the things of this world, like highway
fruit, are common to all: the sun shines, and rain falls alike upon the
just, and upon the unjust: lest they should be thought evils, they are given
unto the good, and least they should be too well thought of, they are afforded
to the evil. There is another good, which is wholly the Godly's, and wholly to
be sought for the kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness thereof: they,
whose kingdom is not of this world, can see the kingdoms of this world (with
their SAVIOVR from the pinnacle) and contemn them, or at least not fall down
and worship them. It shall not trouble me that I am outbid in these things by
others, I will be contented to excel them in better things, the comfort I
have, and the glory I shall have.

The covetous man never has enough: like Pharaohs lean kine, eats but is
never the fuller; toiles and sweats and wakes, and wants for all this; it is a
greater misery to desire much, than to have nothing; of no man can it be
better said, all is vanity and vexation of spirit: he is his own tormentor,
and does at once make himself a hell here, and provide himself one hereafter;
he is never at rest till he rest his last, which yet is the beginning of a
worse torment; so he robs himself, both of the pleasure of this life, and of a
better. It is good to be covetous of good things, and labor for the food
which perishes not: of this I will never have enough, but pray: Lord give me
ever more of this bread, ever and more.

All that God made at first was good; He made them so, He left them so: if they
be not still so, the dishonor may be His, the smart will be ours; their
goodness consists in their good usage, and our sin in the abuse of them. God
make us but to remember why they were made, and we cannot be to seek how they
should be used.

Our Saviors commendation of John Baptist was, that he was a burning and
shining lamp: the hypocrit, like a glowworme, shines but burns not; others,
like hell fire, burn but shine not: and must look to have their portion in
the fire, they resemble. We are not excusable, if we do only shine and not
burn, or burn and not shine; the one we see condemned in the Laodiceans,
because they wanted heat; the other in the foolish virgins, because they
wanted light. He must first shine one earth that will after shine in heaven,
and burn on earth that will burn in hell.

Rest is the whetstone of labor. And that which we usually say of hope, is
true of this, if it were not for rest, the heart would break: wherefore God
has given for every day a night to rest in, and for every seven, a day and a
night. We could not live if we had not this, yet this must not be our life, to
live at ease, he shall never enter into Gods rest, that so loves his own.

Every one almost, with the Jews, is weather wise, and prognosticates without
book, when you see a cloud arise out of the west, ye say there comes a shower,
etc. hypocrites that can discern the face of the weather, and not of the
times: how vainly are men inquisitive for the provision of their bodies, and
let their souls shift? you will not plant or graft without consulting with
your neighbors, and your almanac; but in the point of salvation huddle on,
and the Minister and Gods Word is not intended? How ill holp up art thou to
know the state of the heavens, and not of thy soul? If thou will needs
contemplate it, behold it as thy home, not as thy Calendar to better not thy
knowledge, but thy life, or thy knowledge of a better life, and thy desire of
that place where the Father of life is, and where thou desire to live.

God made not death, neither delights He in the destruction of the living: oh
God, suffer not that which thou did not make, to prevail over that which
thou have made and redeemed. Man is the glory of His maker, and thy glory thou will not give to another; and suffer not us to sell that glory thou have
allreadie given, that we lose not our share of that glory thou have yet to
give.

In some cases and some things, a man may know too much. It is not good to be
prying into the privy Counsels of God: I doubt whether some men's
overboldnesse with the hidden things of God, have not made them an accursed
thing to them; and pressing before their time or leave into the Holy of Holy's
have barred themselves from ever coming thither at all: why should we call for
light, where God will have none, and make windows into heaven? I will admire
God in Himself, and be content to know Him no farther than in His word where
this light leaves me, I will leave enquiring, and boast of my ignorance.

What I have already done, was done long before, and what I am yet to do, is
already done before God; this shall be my comfort, that I can neither do nor
suffer any thing, without His knowledge and leave.

God has given man charge of His other creatures, and His Angels charge over
Him, and they are now our keepers, that shall be one day our companions; great
is His love to us in their care, and great should our care be to continue this
love; and since we are always in His sight, and theirs, why do we at all
that which we would not have seen? My care shall be, not to shun His sight,
but not to provoke His anger: what I do, He sees: and I will do it as I would
answer it.

Those that honor me, will I honor: is a bargain of Gods own making: Gods
honor is the way to ours, we cannot but be blessed, if we will but be
observant. I will care only to serve Him, and I am sure I shall serve my
self. Never any man lost in Gods service.

He who dwells not in tabernacles made with hands, will dwell in tabernacles
which His own hands have made, even the hearts of men: and we enjoy Him though
we do not see Him, for no man has seen God at any time; He is invisible,
but not insensible. Our blessedness consists here in feeling of Him, in heaven
in seeing of Him, whom yet I do not see, and shall one day see as I am seen:
in the mean time I will do nothing which I would not have Him see, or may rob
me of His sight.

I have read of the Heart that he weeps every year for the shedding of his
head, though to make room for a better: thus I see the worldling go away
sorrowful at that saying; Go, sell all that thou have, though it be for
treasure in Heaven; men do not look at what they are to have, but what they are
to part with, and are for one bird in the hand, above five in the bush; but he
that consults with his body for the saving of his soul, will never bring it to
heaven. Let me sow in tears, so I may reap in joy, I will be contented with
the heaven I shall have.

Many a man is therefore sinful, because it is gainful. By Diana we live,
that shall be their god, that they can live by; but he trafficks ill for his
soul, that loses it, to fill his coffers. I had rather be poor than wicked;
it is not thy poverty but thy sins that shut thee out from God; it is better
going to heaven in rags, than to hell in purple.

It is with the growth of our soul, as with the creation of our body, we come
up by degrees: First, with Nicodemus, we must be borne again, and then we must
dwell a while at the sucking-bottle, from strength to strength: which the
Eunuch, from reading the Scriptures to understanding them; from understanding
to applying, from applying to practicing, of hearers we become knowers, of
knowers doers of the Word, from perfection to perfection, or rather from
imperfection to perfection, from persecuting the Church, with Paul to preaching
to it: till we come from Dives door to Abraham's bosom, from eating and
drinking, from marrying and giving in marriage, to be as the Angels in heaven.

Many live as if they came but into this world, to make merry and away, and
after some years of quaffing with Nabal, die of a drunken fit: it were well
for such men, as they have lived like beasts, if they could die like them too,
never to live again: but alas they cannot, here is their misery; that they only
leave their pleasures behind them and not their sins. I will labor to leave
my Sins behind me, and have my repentance go before me, and my good works
follow after me, and I shall meet with pleasures that never shall have an end.

The ears are the doors of the soul; without these we were but artificial
creatures, men only in show: hence we know, we discourse, we believe, we
learn to speak to God, and hear God speak to us; without these we could not
speak, not know, not understand; in a word, by these (under God) we are what
we are; but some there are that cannot hear, others that will not hear. It is
a less judgment to want the power of hearing than the will, to be borne
deaf, than to become so, they that cannot hear are the more excusable; but
they that will not hear, it were far better for such if they had no ears.

Every envious man is a madman, for he will starve himself, to see another
thrive, he needs no other lent, than his neighbors welfare, other men's
prosperity is his gallows, where he will hang himself a hundred times over,
and at last, with Achitophel, once for all: I will not so dedesire of God to
have much, as not to cover much: he that can but think his own enough, will
never think another too much. I will never grudge any man's going before me,
but to Heaven.

Most men look for the theefs Paradise, to meet with CHRIST upon His cross,
Heaven upon his deathbed, and reserves his repentance, as the best bit, for
the last: and mean to go out of the world, and out of their sins all
together. But how shall God then hear them, that before could not be heard of
them? In this case it is good being foremost, why should thou put off
repentance till to morrow, when for ought thou know thy soul is going to
hell this night without it?

God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, was
Isaaks blessing to mistaken Jacob. First of the dew of heaven, and then of the
fatness of the earth, (for alas what is earth without a blessing from heaven?)
but of Esau quite contrary, first of the fatness of the earth, and then of
the dew of heaven; your Esau's prefer earth before heaven, and therefore have
their heaven upon earth, God gives them as much as they care for: Ishmael shall
be made a great nation, and that is enough; but he goes a wrong course for his
soul, that thinks preferrement is the way to happiness. My endeavor shall
be not to leave a name behind me upon earth, but to find it written in
heaven.

The Sun is placed in the heaven, as the heart in this little world of ours,
keeping its seat in the middle, lends life to every part, whereas if it had
been seated above, it would have been missed below, and if below, it could
not so easily have communicated above; so that I know not whether we owe more
to God, for creating the Sun, or for placing it; not in the lowest sphere
then (like another Phaeton) instead of lighting the world, it had burnt it; or
did it change place with the higher planets, we should complain of cold, so
wisely has God provided for our welfare, with our being, and has set the
Sun not too near us, lest we should complain of it, nor too far, lest
we should want it, but in the middle, where it is neither an ill neighbor,
nor too great a stranger: when we do but look upon what we have, we cannot
distrust God for what we have not, and would have. Oh God, they deserve to
want, that can distrust thee in sight of these.

Whatsoever was necessary for our preservation was created; and whatsoever was
necessary for our salvation was written. I will neither desire to know more
than God has revealed, nor to have more than He has provided.

Great men's actions are authenticke: If Herod and Caiaphas but begin, Christ
shall have fists enough about His ears; if Abimelech lead the way, every man
cuts his bough, and asks no question: with inferiors, Example does more than
Precept, and like men in a stream, they do not swim, but are carried: Do
any of the Rulers believe in him? is thought argument enough why others should
not; these see but by their candle, and if the light be darkness, how great is
their darkness? I will do nothing which I would not have God see, and others
learn; else my light were better under a bushel, unseene, than followed where
it should not; thus I shall help, not to light others, but to burn them.

Of idleness comes no goodness, doing nothing will in time come to doing ill,
and from being idle to be ill occupied; the labor that is imposed upon the
soul is not to sit still, but to run. Good men must not be like David's
images that have feet, and walk not; then only have we hope to come to our
journies end, when we keep going.

Some men's devotion is like hangings, which they can take off, and tack on as
they please: outsides of Christians; their hands and their eyes like some tomb
which they have marked, are lifted up; and they talk as the devil to our
Savior, nothing but Scripture: and with the Pharisee give farthings in the
marketplace; and yet all is but alchymie, but counterfeit: these are ill men,
but well thought of. If I am not what I should be, yet I will not seem what I
am not, or be an ill man in good esteem; what am I the better, to be a
Castaway with credit?

What is GOD to me without CHRIST? and what is CHRIST to me without faith? and
what is my faith to me without charity? but a dead faith? and if my faith be
dead, what am I else but a dead man? As it is vainglory to boast of our
works, so it is in vain to boast of our faith without works.

God as He loves young holiness, so He loves it old; ye are those that have
continued with me, etc. was the praise of the Apostles; Perseverance is the
pillar of our salvation: if that fail al goes to the ground. What commendation
is it to have done well? If thou have forsaken thy first love, if thou have
lost thy first hopes. He must carry his goodness to his grave, that will have
it carry him to heaven.

If we look but on our bodies, we have matter enough of wonder, to see such a
Commonwealth of order; such a world of varieties in this little world of ours:
But when we cast our eye aside, on that part wherein we resemble God, the
soul; how do we blush, and are ashamed at our houses of clay? that so
glorious an Image should dwell so meanly, so pent up? that the Body should be
a companion for the Soul, which shall one day be a companion for Angels? but
thus was God pleased to allay our pride. We should have thought too well of
our selves, if we had not had some piece of us, like other creatures of the
earth, earthie. It shall not trouble me what metal my body be made of; if my
Soul be heavenly, my body shall one day be so too.

When God saw the thoughts of man's heart that they were evil, and only
evil, and continually: It is said, it repented Him that He had made man; and
that man whom He shall see so still, will have just cause to repent him, that
ever he was made, if he does not repent him of what he has done. God make me
but truly penitent for my sin, and I shall never repent me of my being.

It is a great way, and requires a long time to come to heaven; I admire their
strength, or rather weakness, that talk of getting it at the last gasp, as
if it could be had with a wet finger: I know those that have lived some years,
and taken some pains too, to set themselves forward, and if they come thither
at last, will think they have done well too; for my own part, I neither desire,
nor hope to enjoy it without a great deal of difficulty, anguish and agony:
and shall think it labor well bestowed, that I have it upon any terms.

Men usually measure others by their own bushels: they that are ill
themselves, are commonly apt to think ill of others; since no man is free from
slanders, I will not presently believe the worst of any man, but I will speak
only the best.

Our greatest enemies are within us: and therefore our greatest victory is to
subdue our selves: there is no such slavery as to be a slave to ones self; it
is a strange weakness, but ordinary, to be at every man's beck, but our
own.

Old men are twice children; and some, as if they were children for years
again, as well as for discretion, wax most worldly when they are leaving the
world; and as their bodies draw nearer the earth, so their minds grow more
earthie; as if they were to live anew again, or should set up again
underground: It is good and commendable to use these things while we have
them, yet still so, as remembering we must part with them. I will never be loath
to part with that which I cannot enjoy long; for to enjoy that which I shall
never part with.

Every man for himself, and God for us all, is a common position, but an
ungodly one; that God is all in us, and all in all, is true: but that we should
be all for our selves is wicked; every man for himself, and every man for
another. Thou it may be have enough, and to spare, another has not enough to
live; why has God given thee so much above others, but that thou should
spare somewhat of thine to releeve others? It may be thine own case; Every man
knows his beginning, not his ending; in the mean time thank God, that thou
art not so, and help those that are.

The barrenness of the body is sometime a curse, but the barrenness of the
soul is accursed; that is a punishment, this a sin, and punished with hell. We
came not into this world, merely to fill up room, but to bring forth fruit,
not for show, but for use: Our chief study must be not for ease, for riches,
or pleasure, but fruitfulness: If we are all for pleasure, our fruit is hell;
and if we are fruitful, our pleasures shall never end.

Blessed are they which dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors: in
this world, there is nothing but dangers and discontents, vanity and vexation:
then only shall we be at rest, when we cease to be: If we thought more of
this, we would not think much of our affliction. If I am never so beleaguered
with sickness, or want, or famine, or all at once, I will remember I came not
into this world to take my rest, but to prepare for it.

That ground is very hard, where the travelers foot leaves not impression:
and that heart's very stony, where Gods blessing not only takes no root, but
leaves no sign, as soon forgotten as received; it is all He asks for all He
does, a thankful heart: With what face can we expect God should give us our
asking, that deny Him His?

God made other creatures for man's service, man for His own: them for our use,
and us for His glory: How much, O Lord, do we owe to thee for our selves and
them, that have so abounded to us, above them, and have not made them but for
us? Teach us to give our selves to thee, for them, who have given them to us,
for our selves.

God is glorified in all His creatures, but not in all alike; some glorify Him
in their beauty, others in their deformity: His glory is not less seen in
our wants, than in our abundance: in striking with blindness, than in our
abundance: in striking with blindness, than in healing the blind; no less
in Ieroboams arm dried up, than restored: therefore do we see some want their
sight, others their feet; and yet it may be neither for the child's sin, nor
the Parents, as our Savior told the people, but that the glory of God might
be seen. Again, we see not only by nature, but by accident, one, with
Mephibosheth, by the negligence of a nurse, another with Abimelech by the fall
of a stone lose a limme, or their life: when we see this in others, and not in
our selves; how are we not thankful to God for our selves beyond others?
Lepers in Soul ( God knows) and it is His mercy we are not so in Body;
whereby we should at once need the help and want the company of friends,
and not only be miserable, but shunned. I will praise God not only for the
good which I have, but for the evil which I might have, and have not.

Our SAVIOVR knew what He did, when He taught us to pray: Our FATHER which art
in Heaven, etc. To give us, and to forgive us, for He only can do both; none
can forgive sins, or give grace, but God alone. Yet does He not always give
with His own hand, but reaches grace and salvation in His Word and
Sacraments, by the hands of His Ministers; and because no man can hear His
voice and live, He speaks in them; it is the wonder of His goodness, that He
respects not only our wants, but our infirmities, and would so appear to us,
as He might teach us, but not fright us: Thus we see Him speaking to Moses
himself, to Israel by Moses: He proportions the means answerable to our
strength; we are not like our Maker, if we think scorn to stoop to the
weakness of our brethren. I will be all things to all, that by any means I may
win some.

A good tree is known by its fruit; yet all trees do not bear the same
fruit; our fruit may be all good, though it be not all the same: all are not
workers of miracles; it is not looked we should remove Mountains, or walk upon
the Sea, command the winds, or appease the waters: there are other fruits of
the Spirit, that we must bear: Now the fruits of the Spirit are these, love,
peace, joy, long-suffering, etc. GOD make us fruitful in these, and we shall
have no need of those.

The end of all our SAVIOVRS miracles, for the most part was, see you tell no
man: It is one lesson in religion, not to be seen: and yet not precisely not to
be seen, but not therefore to do well, to be seen: our commendations must be
to do, and not say; or if we say any thing, say, we are unprofitable servants.

As the outward service of the body, without the inward sincerity of the heart
is unprofitable: so the contrary is uncivil; Gods service requires reverence,
as well as holiness. Many go to God as they do to their companions, not
kneeling, but sitting, or lolling along; as if they were the Judge, not the
petitioner, or were to grant suites, not to beg some; and that
unreverentnesse which they would not, nay, which they durst not use to this or
that Mr Gentleman, they use to God: this is neither becoming Christians, nor
reasonable, or at least civil men.

It is the fault of envy, that it sees nothing but injuries; but of charity
that it sees none, or takes no notice of them; but when one cheek is struck, it
turns the other: and when it can turn no way, lies down under the stroke: he
that will be righting himself of every wrong, does but pluck more fistes about
his ears, and set God against him too: who, if he would but be quiet, would
revenge it to his hands; unless we doubt of His power, we will trust God with
our wrongs; and stay His leisure, that is the fittest time for our deliverance,
which He thinks so; in this case we are like men in a pit, the more we
stir, the more we are mired.

I see MOSES in the Mount, and with the people with a different face; open to
GOD, veiled to them; GOD would not always have us show our brightness to the
world: in some cases He loves our talent in a napkin, lapt up and hid. Let it
suffice, He knows thee, that will reward thee: others, if they commend thee
not, it is because they know thee not; or if they do commend thee, there is
all, and it may be to thy cost. Why should thou lose Heaven for good words?
or what art thou the better, that others commend thee, if God do not? who
therefore does not, because they do, I will never care to have my praise ascend
up to Heaven, but to come down from Heaven.

Blessed are the merciful for they shall receive mercy: GOD's promises,
though they be gracious, yet they are confined: and he only shall receive mercy
that shows mercy; all the wrongs thou receiv'st, cannot equal one sin thou
committest, and art forgiven: now when God has forgiven thee thy hundred
Talents, which thou owedst, and could not pay: do not with the evil servant
take thy brother by the throat for two; be not so cruel to others, that have
God so merciful to thee: freely thou art forgiven, freely forgive; with what
measure ye mete unto others, with the same shall it be measured to you
again, and if you give, you shall receive good measure; not only shaken
together and pressed down, but running over.

God as He does not let goodness go unrequited, so does He not requite it with
a little, or inch out His blessings. He never has done enough for those that
love Him; one good turn draws on another, and He is ever thinking, What
could I do more for my Vineyard that I have not done? There is no pains of
ours which falls to the ground unaccepted, unrewarded, who would not serve that
master, whose service is perfect freedom, and the wages eternal life? I
cannot be more mine own friend, than by being GOD's servant, and the Worlds
enemy.

Our bodies wax weaker, as they wax older; our sins as they wax older,
they wax stronger; I will labor to be old in goodness, and I cannot
complain of weakness; let me but be too strong for my sins; and I have
strength enough.

Some men do not revenge injuries, because they cannot, they want power;
others because they want opportunity, and do but wait with Esau: the days
of the mourning for my father are at hand, and then I will slay my brother. It
is no god-a-mercie to pass over injuries when we can do no other, he is not
innocent that is so perforce: then is our goodness commendable, when we may
hurt, and will not.

It is the fault of the world, yet it is the fashion of it, to put off God to
the last; the fall of the leaf, will serve his turn: and think one sigh at
their death, enough for all their lives before; but true repentance as it is
not for a spurt, so it is not done in an instant. He that goes about thoroughly
to make riddance of his sins, shall find it a long business; sins are not
like servants, to be gone at a quarters warning.

In many things we offend all, is the voice of an Apostle; the best have their
faults, he is happy that has least and fewest. I can never be so holy as to
have no sins: my care shall be to repent me of those I have; if my
repentance be daily, my score shall never be long.

Youth, and holiness, do not meet often, to see a young man dead to sin and
ready for death, is admirable, but rare; it is a good thing to be good betimes,
sins as they grow old they grow lusty, and if they once get head, they know
no master, it is a harder matter to restore to godliness, than to make godly;
for there must be a dedocebo te, etc. an unteaching of that evil, which they
before learned, before there can be an insertion of that good which they must
after practice. Custom will alter nature, and an use of sinning make them in
love with sin; it is rarely seen that a young devil proves an old Saint. I
will so begin, as I would hold out, with GOD; otherwise, it is ill that I have
begun, but worse that I hold not out.

GOD desires not the death of a sinner, but that is not all, He does not only
not delight in our ruin, but He desires our recoverie. If we repent, He spares
us, if we return He receives us: for the first, mercy to forgive; for the
second, an Abraham's bosom to receive; if we wander, He recalls us, if we be
obstinate, he entreats us: if we come but slowly, He will stay for us: in all
His works He is wonderful; but in His works of mercy, He exceeds. I will
never despair of that goodness that has no bounds; my sins are infinite,
but not unpardonable. He was once a persecutor, who was after an Apostle: and
not behind the best of the Apostles, that was once before the worst of the
Jews for cruelty: God is able to make of a castaway, a convert; of a thief, a
disciple: of stones, children: of dead men, living Saints, if the disease be
desperate, the cure is the glory of the Physician; the recoverie is more
remarkable of a dead man to life, than of a sick man: if the danger were not
great, there were less praise of our redemption: but when our sins are gone
over our heads; when the beam of the timber, and the stone in the wall cry us
guilty; when thou art possessed, and not as Mary Magdalen with a few devils, but
with Legions: not one sin, or small sins, or a few sins, seven devils, as
it is said of her, but past number; like the stars or the sands; and of the
worst sort of devils too, that cannot easily be cast out, but with fasting and
prayer, and have not only committed them, but lived in them, and art now dead
in them: when we have thus lost our selves, and Him, to be found of Him and
brought to our selves, pusles us for thanks: His arms are ever open, only
our hearts are shut: we receive not, because we ask not, we are not
received, because we return not, or return to our vomit; It is but just,
when we turn to our sins, that GOD turn to His judgments: either we must
be cut off in our sins, or from them.

Salvation is the gift of God, it is given, and yet it is got with a great
deal of struggling; thou must fast, and watch, and fight (as Saint Paul says)
and as Saint Paul did too, not only with beasts, after the manner of men
(though wicked men are beasts in a manner) but with principalities, and powers,
not the Egyptians, but the Anakims, Giant sins, grown temptations. My glory
shall be not to have no sins, but to have the mastery; not that I am not set
upon, but not beaten.

That we shall all dye, we all know; when we shall dye, God knows; but how
any man should be dead while he is alive, is strange will some think, and would
be glad to know; yet so it is, sin is a death, and every obstinate sinner is
dead for the time. Some with Iairus daughter are not dead but sleep; others
with Lazarus, are not only dead, but stink; and it is with sin as with
sickness, it weakens by degrees; first it distempers the palate of the soul,
or spoils the stomach, so that either it refuses meat, or distastes it, or
puts it up again; and next it takes away the sense that they feel not their
sins, and then are remediless; and as our Savior told the Jews, they will
dye in their sins; and this is a death men care not to be acquainted with til
they be past cure: and then only think of Heaven, when they are going to
hell, and after forty or fifty years living, know not what belongs to dying,
more than, with Ezekiah, to turn their face to the wall, and weep when it
comes: The way to dye willingly is to conne death before hand; he that has
spent his life in providing for his death, is not troubled at his death how to
be provided of a better life. My care shall be not how I may not dye, but how I
may live ever.

Prosperity is a great enemy to goodness, how hardly do those which have
riches enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? I hear Israel praying in Egypt,
quarreling in the wilderness? When they were at their bricke-kills, they would
be at their devotion, and no sooner are they at ease, but they are wrangling
for their fleshpots; I think many a man had not been so bad, if he had but been
poor. It is the saying of a wise Father, that Salomons wealth did him more
hurt, than his wisdom did him good. Trouble, and want do that many times, which
fair means cannot; wealth, like knowledge puffes up, when poverty (as their
infirmities did many in the Gospel) make men flock to CHRIST. I will never
pray more heartily to God for His blessings, than for grace to use them, nor to
lessen my miseries, but to add to my strength. Though my afflictions be many or
often, so my strength be equal, I shall get by them; the stronger my trial,
the greater will be both my victory and my reward.

The way to live ever, is to live well, there is no way to everlasting life,
but a good life; it is not living at ease, or at random, or at rack and
manger, in pomp and plenty, mirth and jollity, and with Saul think to drive
away the devil with music. God cares not how rich, or how powerful thou art,
but how good. We should so live as we may have joy of our life, and be made
partaker of those joys, and that life which are for ever.

There are many dead men and many deaths; there is a death in sin, and a
death for sin, and a death to sin; the two first we may thank our selves
for, if we had not known sin, we had not known death, but the last we must
thank God for, it is from Him that we dye to sin, that have deserved to dye
for it, who Himself dyed for us, and has taken our sins upon Him, and at once
delivered us from the sting of death, and the strength of sin. And thanks be
to God who has given us this victory, through our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

We are in this world, as Israel in the wilderness: and Christ is to us as Moses
was to them; if He leave us, we know not which way to turn us; nature cannot
carry us to God. Here all our sufficiency is from Him, and we say well in our
prayer, for thine is the power and the glory; and it is by that power, that
we come to that glory, our strength is but borrowed; our standing but leaning
upon His arm; our going, but leading in His hand. It is with us as it was with
S. Paul upon the way, we must be led, we must be carried to God; we must pray,
turn us, O Lord, unto thee and we shall be turned. Of our selves we are
unable to go, yet draw us, and we shall run after thee; so shall we come
to thee, with thee, that are rather images, that have feet, and walk not,
without thee.

It is between some sinners and God, as between some men and their creditors;
all their care is how to be trusted, not how to pay. My first care shall be as
little as I can to come in Gods debt, and my next care how to come out of it.

Our goodness must be that part of the wallet that hangs behind us, seen of
others, not of our selves: our sins must be that part that hangs before us,
seen both of others, and our selves. To conceal sin, was never the way to
be forgiven it; or what art thou the safer, that thou can conceal it from
men, and not from God? I had rather be censured for my sin, than be damned for
it.

As in Morality so in Divinity, not to go forward is to go backwards; and
not to thrive in goodness, is not to be good. When I compare what I am, with
what I have been, I am not a little proud; but when I compare what I should
be, with what I am, with Peter I begin to sink; only here is my comfort, I
shall be received, not according to what I am; but what I am in Christ.

Every good heart is accuser, judge, and executioner of its ownfaults: Why
should I be afraid of standing at the tribunal of my own conscience, and not
of God? at one I must; and if I judge my self, I shall not be judged: I will
prevent Gods judgments with my own, and the fear of what I should suffer,
with the sorrow for what I have done; to him only is the last judgment
terrible, that shunnes the first.

Wicked men as they make most show of mirth, so they have least; their heart
and their face do not agree; they carry that in their own bosom, that
spoils their laughing: they are always pursued by themselves, and encountered
with their own thoughts. Their sleep is dreaming, and they dream of those
judgments in their sleep, which they have deserved waking: every noise is of
thunder, and every thunder of the last day; every shadow is a spirit, and
their sins are so many devils about them; they have a double hell, they die a
thousand deaths here, and hereafter dye eternally. There is no joy like the joy
in the Holy Ghost: Nay, there is no joy but that, and that is as far above
all earthly joy, as our heavenly joy shall be above this. Hallelujah above
Hosanna. Let me but have this within, and I care not how the square go
without?

Death to the wicked ever comes unwelcome, because they see it in its worst
shape, ghastly. Feign they would not go, and go they must, it is impossible
they should live still, but it is intolerable to be still dying, which is the
life they are to live, a living death. I will pray God to season this life to
me, as I may not be in love with it, and so to remember me of my death, as I
may not be afraid of it; and in my life so to prepare me for my death, that at
my death I may not only be prepared, but assured of a better life.

When I remember the sins I have already committed, and some it may be not
thoroughly repented of; and those which I do hourly commit, and some it may be
not taken notice of: so many of infirmity stealing upon me, and other stronger
sins breaking in upon me: I do not will that good which I should, or want
power to that will, or perseverance to that power: I am at a stand with the
Apostle, and think, miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death? Even He that delivered His body to death for me: Oh God, thou
that workest in me, both to will and to do, work my will to thine; da Domine
quod jubes, etc. Give but power to obey, and what thou will command.

Death is as hateful to man, as old age to beauty; and we are ever
complaining of the shortness of our time, unless calamity make it seem
long; which yet if they be never so little over, they are weary of that which
before they wished for, death: as I will not be in love with tribulations, so I
will not love my life the worse for them, nor the better for wanting them: if
prosperity make me fond of living, or afraid of dying, it had been better for
me, if it had not been so well; I shall pay dear for my ease.

It is better to go into the house of mourning, than into the house of
laughter; nay, the way to the house of laughter, is through the house of
mourning; so our Savior, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted: Mirth, like Salomons strumpets, leads to the chambers of death; and
the voluptuous man goes out of this World, as he came into it, crying; and
into another world, where there is nothing but weeping. It is a great weakness
to defer to do that, which must be done, if I must once weep, I will do it
now. It is better to cry for remorse, than for anguish.

There were no such tyrant upon earth, as the envious man, if he had but his
will, no man should live a quiet life, or dye a natural death, but himself;
he sees his neighbors house burning, and warmes him by the fire, and is
refreshed: there is no estate that he has not a quarrel to, no person; his
equals he hates, because they are his equals; his inferiors, because they are
not his equals; and his superiors, because he is not their equal: he is an
enemy to all men's peace, but most of all to his own, and I think if he were put
to it, himself knows not what he would be, or have others be. It is the
greatest vanity in the world, to run mad for others pleasures: what if I have
not the same thing, or in the same measure? I have enough to serve my turn, if
they have more, yet they must account for it, and I will never envy any man,
that he has more to answer for to God, than I have; I shall not account for
the talents which I never had.

Gods blessings, and our thanks must ever go hand in hand, one good turn
requires another. We must not think to serve our selves of God, and not serve
Him; His blessings are not only encouragements, or rewards, but bonds. Of
these, the more we have, the more we owe, and our care must be, not only to
receive, but to repaie. Why should we strive to come out of every man's debt,
but GODS.

The charity of forgiving, is more difficult than that of giving, and more
worth, by how much our selves are more dear to us than our goods, in the one
we are doers, but in the other sufferers, and many a man would do for
another, that would not suffer for him: I am but half a Christian if I have
only learned to pity, and not to forgive: we cannot at once, remember our
profession, and our wrongs, if they be small, the matter is the less; if they
be great, our glory is the more: nor only our glory, but our reward; it is
our own faults, if we be not gainers by our injuries.

Gluttony is not only a sin, but a disease: not only to be forbidden, but
to be afraid of; other sins hurt in future, this in present, and robbes not
only of eternal life, but of this, and destroies the body together with the
soul. Our bodies were not given for cellarage, to lay in bread and bear in. I
will remember, that I was not therefore borne, or do live, merely to eat and
drink; but therefore eat and drink, that I may continue life.

I have seldom known any wickedness so heinous, that had not clients as well
as patrons. Corah had companions with him in his sin, before in his
punishment. But innocence does not go by voices, I will never look at my
partners, but my cause. I desire no other Advocates, but GOD and the truth.

It was the accusation of the old world, that they were eating and drinking,
till they entered, etc. and is still of this, and will be so to the end, though
this were not the end of our being, but for the continuance of it: I will use
my meat, as others do their Physic, only for health, to satisfy not my
desire, but my stomach. I can a great deal cheaper, and safer, feed my belly
than my eye.

We see men set not their best wares upon the stalls, but within, lapp'd up; it
is neither commendable, nor wise to show our excellencies (as Musicians do) in
all companies; what are we the better, that we think well of our selves while
others think not so? Or what are we then worse, that others think meanly of
us, while we think so too? Since those art never the better for thy
selfe-conceitednes, nor the worse for thy humility, why should thou make thy
self envied for those graces which thou have, by showing them, and derided for
making show of those thou have not, and would seem to have? and art at once
noted of men for a boaster, and of God for a dissembler? I will be content to
be lowly in mine own esteem, and others, that I may be high in Gods.

A handsome garment is no argument of a strait body: those are not always the
best men that make the most show of holiness. Demureness may stand with
falsehood: Pretenses are evermore suspicious; they that are ever perfumed, it is
to be thought have naturally ill breaths, we must not ever believe our senses:
goodness is plain, and would be known by her works, but not tell of them,
whilst hypocrisy is painted to hide 'its wrinkles, and would be taken for
better than it is, and with the fig tree, it shall be cursed for flourishing;
if we are true Christians, we are both sides alike.

Goodness does not go by years; many times you shall have that from a Samuel
in his long coats, which you shall not have from a Saul, at forty years old;
and yet it is not forwardness commends us, but perseverance: Some men, like
some fruits promise fair in the blossom, but wither ere they be plucked;
others like some grain, lie long in the ground, but grow up the taller; it is
dangerous to defer long, but it is worse not to hold out. I will love and
endeavor early holiness; yet it is better to begin late, than to have done
betimes, there is a penny for him that comes at the eleventh hour: If thy
youth have been faulty, it is comfort that thy age is otherwise. It is no
disparagement to have been wicked, but to continue so; who has not bin
overseen sometime? He was once a Persecutor that was after an Apostle. I will
glory, not that I have never done amiss, but that I am now ashamed of it.

As promotion, so poverty, is neither from the East, nor from the West; but
from God. He has said to every man, rule thou here, or work thou there, be
this, or thus. Why do men grudge at their wants, when it is not chance but
providence? It is less praise to be honorable, than to be content not to be
so: our happiness is, not to want affliction, but to bear it. The less I
have, the more I have to come: no Lazarus would change states with that Dives,
who if he might but live again, would be Lazarus to choose.

Job in his description of man, says, His days are as the days of an
hireling, now we do not hire men to be idle, but to do our businesses, our
life is a long day, and this day has many hours, and these hours have all
work; every man is a day-labourer, and must do his task, to have his wages.
I do not see the penny given to those that stand in the market place, but that
labor in the vineyard: it is not for us to be lookers on, GOD and the holy
Angels are spectators; we must be actors, doers. I will be content to do
nothing but labor, while I am here, that hereafter I may do nothing but rest.

The food of the soul, as it is far more excellent than that of the body, so
it is far more dangerous; for, where it saves not, it kills: How many (with
Esau) have eaten themselves out of the blessing in this, and gone from Gods
table, as Baltazar did from his condemned men? Not the presence, but the
preparedness makes the acceptance: to come, and not worthily, is to be more
bold than welcome; it is all one to thee whether God have thy room, or thy
company; if thou have not thy garment, thou art condemned in both; let others
care only to come, my care shall be to be welcome.

GOD is a God of pure eyes, and cannot behold sin, and yet He continually
beholds us that are altogether sinful. Lord how are we bound to thy goodness,
that only thy eye is upon us, and not thy hand? That thou do but take
notice of our sins, and not take vengeance on them? If we had any good
nature in us, if for nothing else, yet we would be better, because thou art so
good; and dislike sin, not for our own sakes, but thine.

GOD, says the Heathen, has woollen feet, but iron hands; yet He has
sometimes iron feet, and woollen hands; where He would correct, and not in
wrath, He makes a great noise, but does little, only to fright, not hurt them:
Where He will judge, and not correct, He treads softly, but strikes home, and
is upon them ere they are awares; there is love in His corrections, but there
is wrath in His judgments. I will pray, Correct me, oh Lord, but not in thy
fury, lest I be consumed and brought to nothing.

There is no living without repenting; for all sins are against God, and all
forgiveness is from God, and there is no forgiveness without repentance; so
then without this thou can neither live comfortably, nor dye peaceably. I
will not presently give God and my self over, because I have sinned; but I
will therefore neither give God over till He have forgiven my sin; nor my
self till I have forgotten it, or remember it with detestation.

I have seldom seen a rich man want friends, or a poor man enemies; though
He have scarce to live, yet he is grudged his life, that he takes up room in
the earth: these men make much of this, for it is all they have to trust to. I
will grudge no man this world; it shall suffice me there is another to come,
and that mine shall begin, when this is ended. I will be content to want
this for a while, that I may enjoy the other for ever.

Holiness is not borne with us, nor does grow up with us: sometime, you shall
see the hoare-head, come short almost of the long coats. I will never regard
how long I live, but how well; and rejoice, not that I dye an old Christian,
but an old man in CHRIST.

Some men draw nigh unto God, but with their lips, as Judas did; others draw
nigh unto Him with their whole body, and will for outward complement come
short of none: into their sackcloath with Ahab, and down upon their knees with
face with Saul; they will dye the death of the Righteous as well as any, if
wishes will do it; but their heart is not sound. Not to draw nigh unto GOD at
all, is open rebellion; to draw nigh unto GOD, and not all, by halves is
secret dissembling; then only do we come as we should, when we come (like S.
Paul's Sacrifice,) our selves, our souls and our bodies: and thus if I draw
nigh unto God, He will draw nigh unto me.

If God only saw as we, there were no difference between holiness in jest, and
in good earnest. Ahab is in ashes as well as Ninivie; nay, what does Ninivie
more than Ahab, to the eye? What do the Apostles more than the Pharisees, or
John's disciples than theirs? they fast, pray, give: by the outside we cannot
tell who serves God with his body, or with his heart; we see they are
painted, God only sees they are sepulchers; we see their fairness, but not
their rottenness; only GOD which sees their heart, shall one day unmaske it,
and as they have before been applauded for what they seemed, so they shall then
be punished for what they are. If I have only the rin'd, the outside of
Christianity, and not the bulk, I am sure to be cast out: what I can, I will
so carry my self, as I may neither be condemned for being worse than I
should be, or seeming better than I am.

There is no music like that of the Word, yet it is not liked; we have piped
unto you, and you have not danced; was the complaint of Christ's time: men have
ears to hear, but not that; any music but that of the Cymbals; any Harp but
David's; any Bells but those of Aaron: they can hear others reviled, or God
profaned, or themselves soothed; they have ears to their commendations, but
not to their faults: the sluggard has his ears in his pocket; the drunkard
has his ears in his pot; the proud man has no ears, but to his
commendation; the covetous man has no ears but to his profit; the luxurious
man has no ears but to his pleasure; there is no music but in trumpets, nor
in them but at banquets. But he that will not hear now, shall one day cry and
not be heard, and be forced to hear that heavy doom, Depart from me, ye
workers of iniquity, into that lake, where there is nothing but crying.

It is strange, no men would be sick, and yet some men will not be well; for
they take courses to overthrow their health; as if God had nothing to do but
to wait on them: they are never well when they are well, but when they are
doing of ill; where the affliction is Gods, we may challenge Him of help;
where the disease is debauchnes, He may challenge us of sin: when our
sickness is His correction, it is comfortable, but when we need to be
corrected for our sickness it is fearful: what God lays upon us is to be
boarne; what men bring upon themselves, is not to be answered; and if in mercy
thou art delivered, Go and sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

Ill weeds grow apace; wicked men like Egyptian grasshoppers ly in heaps, when
the good, like Noah in his Arc, are two or three in a corner: our blessed
Savior (as He could never say otherwise) said true, The way had need be wide
that leads to destruction, for many there be that find it.

They must look to suffer, that look to reign; this world is Gods house of
correction for His Children: we must not think not to have crosses, we must
study to make the best of them. I will think of afflictions before they come,
that when they come, I may bid them welcome; while they tarry, I will make use
of them, and when they go, I will take leave of them, only as of an Ague, for
a well day or two, but to come again.

In Heaven all vessels shall be full, but none shall run over; here on earth
I see some run over, and yet complain of emptiness; they have not enough, if
they have not all: Thus I have seen some beasts, not knowing when they were
well, burst with feeding: they had more than enough, if they could be content
another should have more than they; if they could but be less envious, they
would be less covetous: all Vessels bear not the same sails, those do but
speed a tall Ship, wherewith a Bark is overborn: we know not our own
strength, submit ourselves to Him that does: He that gives us all we have,
knows we have all we should have, and that if we had more, we would sink:
that man that thinks he is never full, is never thankful. Whether I abound,
or am poor, I will endeavor but these two, to be thankful, and to be content.

Crosses are harsh, but they are the best Physike; I know not whether
prosperity have lost, or adversity recovered more; none prays so heartily for
His daily bread, as He that wants it: misery like Ionah's fish sends them to
their prayers that never thought of GOD under their goard; it is pity fair
weather should do any harm; yet it is often seen, we even adore those
Physicians in our sickness which being recovered, we only salute with a
complement; abundance makes many forget those friends, which want would make
crouch to; how welcome should that state be which makes us familiar with God? I
will not, I may not wish for afflictions, nor meet them. I am good Christian
enough, if I can be content to be poor, and not desirous. Our practice must be
not to make much of crosses, but to make use of them; yet I had rather endure a
world of crosses to come to God, than to be crossed in nothing in this world,
and once want him: let my sins rather be punished, then soothed: oh God, let
my hell be here.

CHRIST has many followers, but few disciples; GOD has many creatures, but
few sons. GODS flock is a little one, one of a family, two of a tribe, like
the Prophet Esaiahs tall Tree, here and there a berrie in the top of a
bough: there are many of Israel, but few Israelites, many that have Abraham to
their father, but a few his children. Many that came out of his loins, but few
that shall sit in his bosom. Goodness goes not by multitude: the many followers
may show thy greatness, not thy holiness; the most are commonly the worst.
How fondly then, how falsely do any boast of the truth of their religion by
their multitude?

Every thing, we say, is the worse for wearing; it is true of the world; the
older the more corrupt: we are forewarned of the last days, that they shall be
notoriously wicked; the world did almost begin with sin, but it shall end (in
a manner) with nothing but sin, and that in fire: Here Is our comfort, the
just are no part of the world.

If we had not known sin, we had not known sickness, and now we know not how
to be well of our sin, but by Him against whom we have sinned; our health is
from God, our sickness is from our selves: Heal thy self, is only for that
Physician to whom it was upbraided, it is not Saul and his witch, or Asa and
his Physicians can prevent death or a disease, without God; all is originally
from him, yet derivatively by means. I will use the one, but I will trust
only the other; if we are confident either without them, or in them, we
presume.

Whilst we are here, we are in continual want of somewhat, either our minds
are sick, or else our bodies, diseases or discontents. How should we long for
that place, where we shall enjoy nothing but rest, and want nothing but a
consummation of our rest?

This world is a liar, and he will find it so, that serves it: riches like
their master, are full of deceit, promise that they have not. How many have we
seen that have thought no joy but in abundance, have, after, ended their joy
where they begin to abound, and at last envied the quiet rest and merry meals
of their laborers? To impatient, inconstant minds, the present state is ever
cumbersome, and they would change though for a worse; If we can but make the
best of our own, and think our selves well, even when others think not so,
we are happy men. Why should I think that grievous which God thinks fit? If
there were no providence, I would struggle: but now it is hard to kick against
the pricks. Lord, be it unto thy servant according to thy will.

Pleasures are pleasing, but they are vanishing: the Pharisees were not so
truly painted sepulchers, as these, fair but rotten, fading nor only dying,
but killing. Like gilded pills (save that they are not Physic) but small,
and ill tasted; if they were either not short, or but sweet, there were some
color for loving them. But now they are not lasting, and yet unsavory: Why
are we not ambitious of those pleasures, which are beyond al time for length,
and all conceit for sweetness?

Some men are afraid to sin, because they are afraid to smart for their
sin, they would go on in their sins, if they could go away with them; it
does not so much trouble them to be wicked, as to be tormented, and their study
is not that they may not provoke God, but that they may run away from Him. Oh
God, if we could run out of the world, we should run farther into thy
judgments. Oh God, if we go down into hell, thou art there, there is no
running from the punishment, till from the sin.

All sickness is not of the body: every leprosy is not in the skin, it were
well for some men it were: every sin is a disease, our souls are no less
subject to infection, than our bodies; some are diseased and do not know it,
others are diseased and do not care for it: both cases are hard, but the last
is desperate. To make light of sin, and because thy soul is sick even unto
death, to say with the Atheist and Epicure, Let us eat and drink, for we must
dye, is to shake hands with vengeance: He that will not so much as ask to be
healed; how justly shall he dye in his leprosy.

It is strange, but it is ordinary to see every man greedy to continue this
life, and not to procure a better: If the head do but ache, strait to the
Prophet with the Shunamite, to the Physicians with Asa: If they be but talked
to of dying, with Ieroboam's wife they run and ride, and send; and as the
Cripple to our Savior, pull down the tiles to come at him; but in the matter
of their soul, they are deaf to the disease: why are we not as industrious
for Heaven, as for our health; and to live ever, as to live long? Alas! what is
age without goodness, but a fairer mark for vengeance? What is Dives the
better to outlive LAZARUS, and at last dye and be damned? Let others trouble
themselves and the world, how to maintain this body, my care shall be how to
subject it: whilst I employ my soul only for the setting out of my flesh,
what am I else but a glorious slave?

Diseases though they were the fruit of sin, and brought upon us by our
selves, yet they are not disposed of amongst us but by God, they head does not
ache but with his leave: nor leave aching but with His help; it is from above
both that we are sick, and that we are made whole; to whom should I not only
owe my life, but bestow it, but to him of whom I live and move?

As it is in extremities, for men to remember God, but with repining; so it is
hard in prosperity, to remember themselves, and what they have received of God;
we are apt to forget what we have bin, when we are changed for the better;
Pharaoh's butler has forgot he was a prisoner: it is too true, that too many
love God for their own sakes, either they are poor, and would be raised; or
they are sick and would be healed; and like beggars, no sooner are they
served but they are gone. I may both love my self, and God; I may not love God
for my self, I would not love my self but for that I am His, and I will love
Him but for Himself.

When I consider the years I have already lived, me thinks they are few, but
evil; evil not in respect of affliction alone, but of sin, and I am found
guilty: if I consider the present, (if there be any present, when it is ever
passing) I do but add to my score, and if I consider the time to come (if I
have any to come, God knows) I do but add to the measure of my own sins,
and Gods wrath together with my years; since I must live, and cannot but
sin, I will study how my sins may not hinder me of a better life; first, I
will abhor them, and then I will abhor my self for them; and if I could
not before break my heart of them, I will now break it for them: A broken and
a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.

To every one it shall one day be said; Give an account of thy stewardship,
etc. It is that which every man should tell himself and one tell another,
what the Apostle has long since told us all, that we must all stand before the
tribunal seat of Almighty GOD; the righteous thinks long of this day, and
longs for it; because he is long since provided for it; the wicked thinks it
coms too fast, and yet thinks not of it till it come; and when it is come, can
think of nothing but that, and is stown'd with the thought of it: his pleasures
which were never but shadows (yet accounted recall) then appear as they were,
and not as they were accounted; and those torments which were ever thought but
shadows, bug-beares, then appear as they are, and prove real: the comparing
of what he has enjoi'd, with what he has lost, and that little less than
nothing of time which he has lived, with the eternity of torment, he is to
dye in, makes him curse the time of his birth, since there is a time of death,
and another death beyond all time; so the godly and the wicked differ not more
in their lives, than in their deaths, but most of all after death. Oh my God!
as thou have made me of the best sort of creatures, a man, and of the best of
that sort, a christian; so let me be yet better, by being one of those whom
thou have sorted for thy self; what am I better, if I am only called and not
chosen.

All books are not alike easy; those that are, are not all alike profitable;
some would profit more, if they did but relish, others would relish better,
if they were more profitable; he does well that does both, utile dulci; I will
neither drown my meat in sauce, nor dish it dry.

They are not the only robbers that break houses, guile is worse theft than
outrage; it is alike wicked to make wine of other men's grapes (as Ahab did of
Naboth's) and to be drunk of our own; he that will have riches in spite of
heaven shall have hell to boot.

The malicious man is his own moth; that God is better to him than he can
expect, is nothing, whilst He is better to others than He is to him: like
Gideon's first miracle he would have all the ground dry but his fleece; if
Cain's sacrifice miscary, Abel must not be accepted and live; no man may be
either greater or better with safety. I will not look at what I have, but
what I deserve, and I shall never think my* own little, or another too much:
that is a wicked heart that would have all men worse than it self, and hates
all those whom others think better.

God is therefore bountiful to us, that we might be so to others; to feast
those, that cannot bid us again, and to build for those that cannot lodge us
again, is the way to that marriage feast, and those buildings, whose Builder
and Maker is God: he alone has the true use of wealth that receives it only
to disburse it; if of wealth that receives it only to disburse it; if men were
their own friends they would make others so with this Mammon; why should the
rust of that gold rise up in judgment against thee, the use of which will set
thee with those that shall sit in judgment?

Persecution is the door to happiness, Canaan has still the same way, a
wilderness; who can look for heaven cheap, that sees his SAVIOVR bleeding? I
may not afflict my self, yet I shall suspect my self without affliction;
calmes are no less dangerous than storms.

Some men do not climb, but vault into preferment at a leap; I know not
their slight, I mistrust their quickness; few men were ever great and good in
an instant. All the harm I wish these, is, that their early rising do them no
harm; they that are their own brokers in these, are likely their own thieves
in better; and steal themselves out of heaven.

Favors are more binding, but aflictions are more profitable; to have much is
more glory, but to be content with that we have is more victory; there is no
conquest like that of our selves, no conquest of our selves like that of want;
it is a hard matter not to find poverty a burden, or prosperity a snare; this
religion obtains us, that if we are not richer than others, yet we are content
to be poorer; he only has enough that would have no more.

Our endevors are in vain without God's blessing, yet in vain shall he
challenge a blessing that endevors not; sloth is no less guilty than
coveteousnesse. I can do nothing without God, yet I will not look God shall
do all.

The cause of all punishment is sin; and the end of all sin is punishment.
Either present or to come; how then do we love to be punished, and yet love to
sin? if we could but be innocent, we could not but be safe; while I am here I
cannot but sin, but I hope to avoid the punishment through Him who has borne
the punishment and the sin.

Our life is but a breath; at first God breathed upon man the breath of life,
etc. And it is gone with a breath, if He breath upon us in displeasure we die,
for at the breath of His nostrills we are all consumed: since we do not live
but by His leave, why do we not live to His glory? Oh God, I have not lived
long, yet so much of my life as I have not lived to thee, I have lived too
much; all I desire is, that as this life was thy gift to me, so it may be my
gift to thee; I I can afford God little, if not His own.

All punishments are from the same hand, Jobs boyles are no less Gods finger
than Pharaohs; but all are not with the same end; those are but chastnings upon
some, that are judgments upon others. God strikes His own because He loves
them, He strikes the wicked because they love not Him; those He corrects but
these He executes; it is a sign He loves us when He strikes us, and if his
strokes bring us to love him, we may brag with David, it is good for us that
we have been afflicted.

God is all ear and all eye, and all in all; grant Lord, that as I am always
seen of thee, so I may be always heard of thee: and may always hear thee in
thy Word, and contemplate thee in thy works; that I may one day see as I am
seen, and hear and be heard in that heavenly quire of Hallelujah's, Glory,
and power, and honor be unto the Lamb, and to Him that sits on the Throne,
for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

