A simple, and religious consultation of us Herman by the grace of God
Archbishop of Colone, and prince Electour. etc. by what means a Christian
reformation, and founded in Gods word, Of doctrine, administration of the
divine Sacraments, of Ceremonies, and the hole cure of souls, and other
ecclesiastical ministeries may be begone among men committed to our pastoral
charge, until the lord grant a better to be appointed either by a free, and
Christian counsel, general, or national, or else by the states of the Empire
of the nation of Germany, gathered together in the holy Ghost

Imprinted in the year of our Lord. 1547. The. xxx of October. I. D.

We Herman by Gods grace archbishop of Colone, Archchaunceler in Italye of the
holy Romayne Empire, And prince Electour, Duke of Westphalia and Angaria
administratour of Padebourne, wysheth to al them that shall read, hear, and
understand this our book, grace, peace, and blisfulnes from God our father
through our Lord, and only savior Jesus Christ.
IT is known to al men manifestly that our most redouted Emperor Charles, our
most gracious Lord has right diligently sought sundry ways in many counsels
with the princes Electours, and other princes and states of the holy Romayne
Empire in Germany, whereby these dangerous and pernicious disse^cion, and
altercatio^ in holy religion might be taken away, and a general and christian
consent, and reformation of congregations might be appointed and in troduced
through the whole nation of Germanye. But because the Emperors majesty could
not hitherto deuyse and constitute this general and godly concord, and
reformation of churches, he, for a godly cause, and very christian purpose,
enjoined, and commanded, in the counsel last assembled at Ratespone, with
the bishpop of Romes Legate, to al prelates, that among them selves and their
diocesanes, they should begyne a christian correction of ecclesiastical
matters which might help to a comely and holsom administration of the
congregations, and that they should propoune the same to the congregation to
be observed, and mayntain it with ernest diligence, and such faythfulnes as
becomes ecclesiastical persos in this matter, neither should have any regard
of them, which would hyndre or stay this godly purpose, because he trusted
that by this mean a more commodious way might be made to the ordring and
refurming of churches, and that men's minds might be prepared the sooner to
consent to a co^sultatio^ of religion. Besides this the states of our dominion
have earnestlye required of us in many conuocations that we would make a godly
and christian reformation. And moreover, in the last Convocation at Bone, the
Erls, Knights, Gentilmen, and cities of our dominion: committed unto us, that
after the said manner, we should procure a reformation of congregations to be
gathered to gether, and to be pubblished, and propouned to the congregations
committed unto o^^^ charge, which they should observe, (...) hereunto that we
our selves by most certain arguments of God, do perceive daily, how grate need
of ame^dement our co^gregacions have, because they be utterly destitute of
godly, and learned ministers, and therefore no sincere, and certain doctrine
is handled among our men, where as yet the same ought always to be preched,
and taught before old men, and young. For we perceive that of this neglectinge
of perfect, and pure doctrine, horrible ignorance of God, pernicious
supersticion, unbelief, most grievous fautes and confusion of all good things
follow necessarely.

Therefore when we perceived that the said things prevailed horribly it seemed
that we ought to make no longer delaie, but rather we thought upon the
emendation of these things, and consulted about the same ernestly, and
cheifely in this our extreme old age which surely warns us, that we must
shortly come before the judgment seat of Christ, where we know that we must
give an accompe of this office enjoined unto us. Wherefore that we might first
show our selves obedient to our saniour, and the Lord Christ the prince of
pastors, and to his flock, and secondly acknowledge our supreme officer the
emperor and finally seek the preseruacion, and correction of religion among
the people of Christ committed unto our charge, according to the office of a
bishop enjoined unto us, we have applied our hole diligence hereunto,
according to our simplicity, and the gift, which the almighty has granted
to us, that we might find out some mean to reform ecclesiastical doctrine
being so necessary in this great perturbacion of things, which afterward
we might propoune to our men wherein if we should not do our duty, surely we
should stir up greater anger of God to ward us, and all godly men perceive
that undoubted, and un couerable destruction of souls would follow thereof.
Wherefore we nether would nor could delaie our purpose of a reformacion.
Therefore we called to our co^sultation many men, and those exercised men, and
endued with the fear of God, and with spiritual wisdo^e, and lerninge, with
whom after that we had had long communication, we considered al things
faithfulli, and at the last we ordanied the form, and preparation folowinge of
restoringe ecclesiastical doctrine, and discipline among our men. And thought
I be their unworthy bishop, yet I was lawefully made both archbishop, and
curate of souls. And set not forth this same form, and manner of a
reformation as thought nothing could be amended, or changed in it, or as
though other ought in any wise to follow it. Thorough the grace of God we
acknowledge the weakness of our faith, and the slendernes of our judgment in
these matters of so great difficulty, concerning the heaven lie kingdom of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and our salvation. But because our dear Lord Jesus
Christ praised his father and gave him tha^ckes also for that, that he had
hidden the mysteries of the heavenly kingdom from the prudent and wise me^ of
this world, and had opened them to the simple, and despised and commanded his
wholesome gospel to be preached without difference to the learned and unlearned
that they might attain everlasting salvation, and moreover promised his
spirit, by whom we vndrestande, and receive those things, which he himself
gives us in the gospel for our everlasting salvation, asmanie as would seek
the same in the name of his dear son our Lord Jesus Christ, as Christ
himself witnesses, it should not have becomed us, which profess the name
of Christ, and execute the office of a bishop (though we grant we do not
satisfy in both I mean in Chriistan life, and in the office of a bishop) to
doubt of grace and gift of God and to distruste God our most merciful
heavenly father, as though he might not be moved with our prayers, and the
godly prayers of our men to gene us mercifulli his hollye spirit, whereby we
might learn of his gospel to adourne our office enjoined by him, and to
dispose, and ordain that the people committed to our charge be faithfully and
diligently taught by godly, and mete ministers how thorough true, and lively
faith they should acknowledge our Lord Jesus Christ, and confess him to be
the only savior and call for his help in all trobles with a very trust and
exercise them selves in such worckes as in deed be good and fruteful, in the
holy sacraments, and other ceremonies of the church according to Christ's
institution, that godliness may daily increase more and more, and that al
things which be contrary to Gods word, all sins, and offenses that be
crept in to the church of God may be abolisched wherefore attributinge
nothing either to our wisdom, or to the wisdom, and doctrine of other but
only encouraged and trusting in ye true grace, and sure promise of God the
father; and in the merit and strenghth of our Lord Jesus Christ the only head,
and vigilant pastor of his comgregation, we have determined to set forth
according to our simplicite, these things thus gathered after diligent
deliberacion, and correction, as much as could be done in short time, and
as much as God helped us with his grace, for some reformacion of Christian
discipline. For we grant that it is our office to feed christ's sheep, and
faithfully to look to the congregacions committed unto us. And we call God our
creator to witness, which is everlasting truth, and knows the hertes, and
sees al thoughts, that we in all this matter of reformation, seek nether our
own glory, nor our private commodite, but only have respect hereunto that
the glory of the almighty may be most largely set forth to the
everlasting salvation of our men.

Therefore we beseech al christen men of what condition soever they be, which
shall read o^ hear this our preparation of a reformation (by our Lord Jesus
Christ whose cause, matter, and business is handled in this book) if they shall
find any thing in it that shall not seem to be agreeable to gods word, and
make to the true edificacion of faith in Christ, which rests in the
augmentacion of gods increase, that they will certify us thereof and gently
teach us out of the holy scriptur We will take the same, by gods grace in
good part, and gladli embrace those things, that we shall perceive to help to
the reparation of the church, and we be ready to do them more diligently, than
it is set forth in this book, that nothing want to the nessarie reformacion
of the church. And contrary wise we require of them, that if they shall
perceive that the Lord has mercifully given us to attain his meaning, and
will, they will help us with their beniuolence, and diligence as much as they
may, that these things (as the wholesome commandments of our maker,
redemer, and iugde Jesus Christ) may be set forth, chiefly seeing that they
under stand, that it becomes us in nowyse in those things, which we surely
know to be enjoined and commanded unto us by our God, and savior out of his
word to differ any longer, either for the authorite and power of any men, or
for the expectacion of a council general, or national, the things which
perteine to the glory of God, and of his most dear son, and the salvation of
the people, but rather as commodiously as we may to propone the same to be
observed of our men, and other, as much as the almighty will help us with his
divine grace, which we wish to al them, that seek the same truly thorough our
Lord Jesus Christ. As we commend unto them this our obedience such as it is in
this our purpose, which we owe to the divine majesty, with all our subjects,
and our office, desiringe the same children of god which with a sincere heart
wish the amplification of Christ's kingdom, to whom undoubtedly our
necessary diligence though it be slender, shall be acceptable, that they with
their godly prayers will diligently aid in this our purpose, and ministry,
us and our subjects. Which thing how acceptable it was unto us we desire to
declare to every one, when we shall be able.

Given at. Buschonie.
A Table of the principal Articles in this book of a Reformacion.
OF Doctrine. That some Lesson must be resited out of the holy Scripture
before a Sermon, and declared unto the people That al Sermons must be made to
the magnifiyng of the Lord Christ Of the Trinity. Of the creacion, and
governance of all things. Of the cause of sin and death. Of original sin,
and man's wekenes before regeneration. Of the old Testament. Of the
difference of the old and new Testament. Of preaching peculiar to the new
Testament. Of the preaching of Repentance. Of the true, and proper use of
Gods law. A short exposition of the.x. commandments. Of remission of
sins, and justification. Of good works. Of the true, and natural
signification of this word faith. Of the cross and tribulations. Of the
church of God. Of the unity, or concord of the church. Of christian prayer. A
short exposition of the Lords prayer. Of the abuse in prayer. Of the true, and
false use of Images. Of Christian fast. Of holy offerynges. A premonicio^, and
commandment against the errors of the Anabaptists. Of the administration of
religion. Of Sacraments generally. Of Baptism. The form of a Catechism
before Baptism. The exorcisme. Of the administration of Baptism. How
Baptism must be administered at times not prescribed. Of Confirmation. Of the
Lords Supper. At what time the Lords Supper ought to be celebrated. Of the
communion of strangers, and sickfolke How sick persons must be visited, and
how we must celebrate the communion with the^ Of communion in private houses
for men in health. Of turning from sins, and true repentance Of
excommunication. Of the making of Pastors. Of the blessyng of Marriages. Of
Buriyng. Of holy and feastful days. Of fasting days and Lent. Of the
difference of meats. Of certain other ryghtes or ceremonies of the church. Of
ecclesiastical rites upon working days. Of peculiar days of procession. Of
Letany. Of commune alms. Of schools for children Of schools of Divinity. Of
disputation. By what means a christian reformation of holy ministry, and
cure of souls may be begun, and practiced in parishes. Of refourmyng of
canonical colleges Of the reformation of monasteries both of men and women. Of
free and not Monastical Colleges of virgins. Of the order of selbrethren, and
lay brethren The end of the table.
Of Doctrine.
OUR savior Gods son Jesus Christ, which came into this world to the intent
to open that wonder full, and hyd will of God concerning the salvation of
mankind, after this sort spoke to his disciples, and to all them that are
called to the ministry of his Gospel: As the father has sent me, so I send
John. x. Mark the last Chap.
you. And in another place: Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every creature, teaching them to keep all things that I have commanded you.
Further God eternal, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. iii. xvii.
spoke thus from heaven of his son: Him hear ye. Wherefore, let us
constitute him a Doctoure of authority, and judge of all writings. Peruse
Cypria^s book. ij. Epistle iij. And that Christ ought only to be heard, the
father witnesses also from heaven, saying: this is my son, in whom I am well
pleased, hear him. Wherefore, if Christ only ought to be heard, we must not
look, what any man before us has thought good to be done, but what Christ
first did, which is before all. All preachinges ought to be taken out of the
holy scriptures.


Forasmuch as tha^ this doctrine of God the father, and of our Lord Jesus
Christ is taught in no wrytinges, but in the wrytynges of the Propheies, and
the Apostles, and seeing that there is none other doctrine wherein the will of
God from the beginning concerning man's salvation, is set forth with more
certain and strong testimonies, Paul saying also that the church Ephe. ij
is builded thereupon, it is right necessary, that all the ministers of the
Gospel read often, and pondre the hole divine scripture, with the fear of God,
and exquisite diligence, both that they them selves may be better learned, and
also that they may enstruct other of the everlasting will of God, of the law of
sin, of the wrath of God, of grace and ryghteousnes promised for Christ the
mediator, of life everlasting, and pains everlasting, which the dispisers of
the word must needs suffer.

This wisdom, as Paul witnesses to the Corinth. does far excel al man's
wisdom For he says: we speak the wisdom of God in mystery, which is hid,
which God predestined before the worlds, unto our glory which none of the
princes of this world has known, but God has opened it unto us by his
spirit. i. Corin. xi. Wherefore forasmuch as God has propouned unto us this
his wholesome and heavenly doctrine only in the writings of the Prophets,
and of the holy Apostles, and because we cannot receive the same certain, and
undoubted else where, al shepherdes and preachers ought to exercise them selves
diligently day and night in these holy and deuyne books, that they may be
apter to teach other. As the holy S. Ciprian to Pompeius against Stephanes
Epistle. I^ behooves a bishop not only to teach but also to learn. For he
does better teach which daily increases, and profits in learning better
things. Se. s. Augu. also, book. v. of Baptism against the Donatistes, Cha.
xvi
Ghost requires it in them by name, that they declare and show them selves
approved to God, and such workmen of Christ, as need not to be ashamed of
their mynistery, and which also may rightly divide the word of truth, and teach
other with fruit. ij. Timoth. ij. Item that they hold fast that faithful
word, which is according to doctrine that they may be able to exhort thorough
wholesome doctrine, and to convince the agaynsayers thereof Titu. i.

In which divine precept propouned to al teachers and ministers of
congregations, the pastors, and preachers shall observe diligently. First,
that it is required of the^, that in teaching they hold fast the certain, and
faithful word, that is to say: to which certain, and undoubted faith ought to
be given. Whereof it follows, that they must take right diligent head, that
they myngle none opinions of men, with their doctrine, and preaching, but that
they teach religiously and deliver to the people the sincere word There be ma*
of God. For this saying is ever true, Every man is a liar. Psalm. Cxvi. And
Paul says. The natural man understands not those things that be of the
spirit of God for they be folyshnes unto him, and he cannot perceive them. i.
Cori. ij. After the same sort says Esaias. xl. Al flesh is grass, and all the
glory thereof is as the flour of the field, the grass wythereth, and the flower
fades. But the word of the lord abides for ever. Seeing then that men of
their own nature be deceived, and can not of them selves understand the
doctrine of grace, and saying that their glory or excellency (by which word
the prophet would chiefly signify man's wisdom) falls away like a
flower, how can man's reason, and wisdom, when it is not guyded and directed
by the spirit and word of God, perceive and teach any certentie, and truth,
chiefly concerning divine matters, and the restitution of man. And although al
christian men have the spirit of God, which as he leads each one into all
truth, as much as is sufficient for his own salvation, and for the profitte
of the congregation, so he has witnessed in man the gospel of Christ with
goodly books, and wrytynges, and does even unto this day witness, and
preach nevertheless flesh and blood abide in all, men, be they never so
holy, and spiritual, as Augustine. I can not deny nether ought to deny, that
as in our elders them selves, so there be many things in so many my works,
that may be blamed with right judgment, and no rashenes at all.
long as they live here, which flesh and blood perceive not the things
that pertayne unto God. The sense and understanding of the flesh remains,
which stryueth against God. Wherefore in this life there neither has been, nor
is any man endued with so great holiness, or doctrine, but that it has
chanced him often to fall, and to be deceived. Wherefore as Saint Augustine,
so likewise other fathers and old doctors allowed not all the writings and
sentences of them, which had taught either before them, or in their time for
this cause, that those things came from men so excellent in godliness, and
learning, but as far as every man confirmed his doctrine, The same antour
in the Epistle to saint Hierome.
and sentence with the word of God, and sure reasons. And they counted those
only reasons to be sure and certain, which they perceived to be derived out
of the word of God. Of which sort those be, with which S. Paul proves that a
woman must cover How we must judge of the wrytynges of the fathers.
her head in the congregation, and keep silence, and not teach men. i. the
Corhinth. xi. and. xiiii For the apostle confirms these things with this
reason namely because the word of God testifies that the woman is of the man,
that she was made after the man, and first admitted the gyle of Satan Item that
she ought to be subject to hy husband.

Wherefore al co^firmations of godly doctrine consiste in the only testimony
of the Upon what foundation al godly doctrine ought to stand.
scripture, upon wihche scripture all that we either believe or teach of God,
and our Christ ought to be grounded. For this scripture only sets before
us the word of God vnmixte, and certain (whereunto only we ought to give
credence in divine matters) for it was not taught of me^, but of the holy ghost
from heaven as. S. Petre witnesses, saying: know this first, that every
prophetical scripture is not of private interpretation. For prophecy was not
at any time brought by the will of man, but the holy me^ of God spoke, being
stirred of the holy ghost, ii. Petre. i.

Wherefore all doctrines of men in the congregation that are not grounded upon
the word of God, taught in the holy scriptures Math. xv. Esaias. xxix.
be unprofitable, and pernicious, as Christ witnesses and Esaias. But the holy
scripture is a certain, and a wholesome doctrine unto us as Paul teaches, where
as he says Every scripture enspired from God, is profitable for doctrine, for
reproving, for in struction which is in ryghteousnes, that the man of God may
be perfect, prepared unto every good work. ij. Timo. iij.

Forasmuch as than this scripture prophetical and inspired from God, is
profifable, and abundauntly sufficient for the perfect knoweledge of true and
wholesome doctrine, that the men of God may be instructed. and prepared to
every good work and further that all erroures, which be against religion and
godliness, may be disclosed, and confuted, all pastors, and preachers must
always needs take their sermons and doctrine out of the holy scripture. They
must also take diligent head, lest at any time they mingle herewyth man's
doctrines, and interpretations, that have not flowen out of this pure fou^tayne
of Gods word. Wherefore that feaders and preachers That preachers ought to
pray for e^crease of the holigost, and not to bewrapped in busynesses of this
life.
may ryghtly instruct the people of Christ, out of these books of the holy
ghost, in all things that be profitable, and necessary to know for salvation,
it is needful that they give the^ selves to the study of the holy
scriptures with most earnest, and continual care. And that they may do this
thing with more fruit and attain to the true understanding of the holy
scripture, let them pray continually with Godly petitions that the holy gooste
may be increased to them, which is the only interpreter of the holy
scripture. For the natural man understands it not, as he also understands
not other spiritual things, which thing the Apostles teach us
sufficientlye with their own example, which, as we read in the last of Luke
did not understand the scriptures, before that Christ opened their mind. The
spirit the^ before al things must be sought for, and obtained with faithful
prayer, the spirit I say of understanding the holy scripture a right both to
the health, and profit of our selves, and also of other. Wherefore, it is
nedeful that preachers wythdrawe them selves from carnal and worldly business,
as much as the necessity of this present life will suffer, and that they give
them selves thoroughly to all spiritual exercises, if they will both the^ selves
ryghtly understand godliness, and the holy scriptures, and also profitably
administre and faithfully dispense to the congregation of God, the doctrine of
salvation, that every one of them teach me^ committed unto their charge as well
the rude, as the quycke wytted, and learned the most holy Gospel, and doctrine
of godliness unto their salvation. Item that they bring to pass through that
their ministry that every man surely perceive the prophetical and eua^gelical
spech, and give head thereunto with all diligence, as to a ca^del shining in a
dark place, that they waver ii. of Petre. i.
not like children, and be carried about with every wind of doctrine, but that
following the truth in love they grow in him in all things, which is the head,
namely Christ. Ephe. iiij.


Further, it is the office of pastors, and ministers of the word, that they
exhort the^ How needeful exhortations be.
that be ryghtlye instructed in the doctrine of godliness, and that they call
upon them instantly, that they abide in that known doctrine, being prepared
and ready to suffer al things, rather than that they will depart from it, and
that they testify them selves to be the children of God with good works, and a
christian life. For our aduersarye the Devil never keeps holy day, but walks
i. of Petre. v. Chap.
about like a roaryng Lion, sekyng whom he may devour, as Peter witnesses.
And this he does not only within, with fiery darts of temptations, and fleshly
intisementes against the law of God, but also without with the persecutions,
and assaults of the myghtie, and further with hypocrisy, and a vain show of
false doctrine, as our daily experience testifies. Wherefore, Bishops and
preachers must procure with al study that they right diligently warn,
conforte, and exhort the weak in the faith of Christ, that they labor to
resyst manfully the old enemy ever endeuouryng himself to assault on every
side the flock of the Lord, and to continue in the faith, as s. Peter teaches
us. i. Peter. v. And also Paul to the Ephesians. vi. Chapter.

But at what time and in what place such consolations and exhortations ought to
be Exhortation to godliness, is ever nedeful.
used, it can not be certainly prescribed. For it is not only requisite openly
in pulpettes, but often at other times, and in other places, as occasion
suffers and necessity requires. As s. Paul with great gravity admonishes
Timothe. I beseech the (says he) before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, which
shall ij. Timot. iiij.
judge the quick, and the dead in his appearing and in his kingdom, preach the
word, call upon them in time, out of time, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
softnes, and doctrine The Apostle approves the same thing also with his own
exemple, in that last sermon, which he made at Miletes to the elders of the
congregations. You know (says he) from the first day that I entered in to
Asia, after what sort I was with you at al times, seruinge the Lord God with all humblenes of mind, with many tears, and temptations, which chanced unto
me throw the conspiracy of the Jews, how I with drew no part of those
things that might be for your profith, but I showed unto you, and taught you
openly, and in every house, testifiynge both to the Jews and to the Gretians
that repentance, that is toward God, and that faith, that is toward our lord
Jesus. Take heed therefore to your selves, and to the hole flock. Item, watch
ye, reme^bringe that by the space of.iii. years I ceased not night nor day
with tears to warn every man. And in the first epistle to the These. the.ii.
cha. You be witnesses and you know, how we were affectioned toward every one
of you, as a father is toward his Children, desiring you, confortinge and
beseching, that ye would walk worthily of God, which has called you in to
his kingdom and glory. And it is necessary that such exhortatio^s be done
gravely with a certain Godly vehemency of mind, and Let exhortation be
vehement and ernest.
feruentnes that they may move the people, and stere up good affecions in
men's minds, whereby they may labor to continue, and go forth in the way of
the Lord* which thing Paul signified by this sayynge that he may be able to
exhort etc. It shall much further this gravity and vehemency, if the
preachers with the commandementes of God shall diligently set forth and
declare the threats also, terrible exemples of Gods wrath, that the people
may be fraied from sinninge. Item if they shall set forth the mercy, and
promises of God with no^able exemples of Gods help and deliverance that in
like manner men may he allured to trust more constantly in God and to love him,
and so being inflamed with the zealle, and love of God they may go forth in all good worekes, and valiauntly suffer, and overcome afflictions for the glory
of the Lord. The feeders tha^ and preachers, that will faithfully serve their
vocation must necessarely not only be furnished to exhort the sorrowful, and to
comfort the weak, but also they must be ready, and have a burnning zeal
thereunto. For the obtaininge of both which things as they have need of
continual readinge, and studiyng of the scripture so they have need of
continual prayer, and all other spiritual exercises, and therefore also of
great werines, lest by any mean they be entangled in the How errors and
deprauations of Gods word must be refused.
busynesses of this life, and carnal cares. Thirdly it is required of feeders,
and curates of Christ's people that they be able also to confute the
agaynsayers, and adversaries with evident, and effectual testimonies of the
scripture. For Satan is busiest in this point that he may corrupt the
perfect and sincere doctrine, raysyng up sundry heresies, that the fayeth of
Christ being shaken, and at the last abolished, he may stablishe, and
maintain his own tirannie. Hereof it comes, that as we have read that in
the time of the Apostles, and Martyrs long since it happened, and a^ al
other times when the pure doctrine of God has been sincerely preached, so in
our time also new heretics spring daily, which labor, and establishe
their wicked doctrine with depraved testimonies of the scriptures as. S. Petre
writes, that such men even in i. of Petre the la^t Chap.
his tome began to wrest the writings of S. Paul that be heard to
understand, as the other scriptures unto their own destruction. Neither is it
marvel that Sa^a^ works this thing in his ministers, I mean that he
labors to corrupt, and overthrow the doctrine of godliness (which is taught
in the scripture only) by the testimonies of the scripture it self, but the
same being depraved and corrupted. For with this art he durst assail the
Lord Christ, when in the holy City Jerusalem, he set him upon the
pinnacle of the temple, and said unto him, if thou be the son of God cast thy
self down. For it is written, he has given commandment to his angels
concerning the, they shall bear the in their hands, lest perchance thou
should hurt thy foot at a stone. Psalm. xci. Math. iiii.


Wherefore let the faithful ministers of Christ know that the more sincerely
they preach the true word of God, with so much the greater diligence, and
labor shall Satan lay in awayte for them, and their flock and shall endeavor
him self by reason of the simplicity of the comen people, and weakness of
their judgment, to begyle the^ with depraved scriptures. For when he sees
that men will admit no authority, but the authority of the scripture, he
also lays nothing more to their charge then scripture, that he may more
co^modiously creep into them that be accustomed to hear the scripture only,
and thrust in his lies more easily, that the pastors, and ministers of the
congregation may disclose this gyle of Satan, and stop the mouths of
Sophisters his ministers, and either preserve or call again the flock
committed unto them from wicked errors, they must watch, and labor with
singular diligence, and care in this behalf. For as the Apostle says, there
be many untreatable, and vain ianglers, begylers of minds, which overthrow
whole houses teaching things that ought not to be taught for fylthy gain,
whose mouths must be stopped. Tite. i.

But that such may be more co^modiously Rules to reprove, and confute heretics
and groundly convinced, and confuted, these rules chiefly, are to be
observed. First that the articles of our faith be confirmed with sure, and
evident testimonies of the scripture. The second rule is, that the words in
sentences and testimonies, which are alleged in disputation, be compared
together, after the propre sense of the scripture without sophistry, and that
through such conferryng the true sentence of the holy ghost may be drawn
forth, concerning any question of religion.

The third rule is that dark sentences An example of the disputation against
Arrius
be declared with other places that are plain open, and pertaining to the
controversy. As when Arrius denied that the son of God sprange out of the
substance of the father, and that he was god by nature, he corrupted the true
sentence of this saying. And God was the word. For he said, that this vocable
God in this place did not signify god John. i.
which by nature, and almightines is God but some excellent creature passinge
all other in majesty, and dignitee. This false interpretation holy ghost by
the apostle Paul has laid upon all bishops, and ministers of
co^gregations, i. Petri. i. i. Petri. ij.
when he says thus: A bishop must hold fast the faithful word, that he
may be able to exhort, and confute the agaynsayers. Of which province, and
burden we will al pastors, and preachers to be admonished, that they may
busely exercise them selves, day and night in the study of the holy
scriptures, and so that they may use their ministry with ample fruit, and
therefore that they wythdrawe them selves not only from worldely intisementes,
and carnal concupiscences, but also from al occupations, and businesses of the
world, as much as the use of this present life will suffer, that they may
all together apply so hard, and divine a ministry, and execute their office
with al diligence. And yet this labor ought not to grieve them, which the
religion of their office requires, saying that otherwise it is the part of
every Christian man to consume the whole course of his life in the study of
Gods word. For we can not enter in to the kingdom of God, except we be
borne again. As for this regeneration it consists not of mortal seed, but
of immortal seed, and everlasting, that is to say of the word of God that
lives, and abides for ever, as Petre witnesses. Moreover when we are so
borne again, and re^nued we have need of spiritual meat also which like wise
is the word of God, where unto S. Petre allureth us, saiynge, Couette that
reasonable milk not of the body, but of the mind, which knows no gile newly
borne children, that ye may grow thorough it. Finally when we grow forth,
being fed up, and nouryshed by the word of God Satan seaseth not to assaut us,
and to resist, him we have need of spiritual weapons and armor out of the
word of God, as, Paul witnesses, saiynge: The sword of the spirit, is the
word of god. Ephe. vi.

Saying than the beginning, the middle and the end of our new life, that is
to say regeneration in to the said life, the increase of it. and victory
against Satan, consisseth of the word of God, the feeders of congregations
may easily see, in to what danger of Gods wrath they run if any be not
parttakers of this regeneration thorough their negligence, or if they that be
borne again of the spirit want the feedinge of gods word, and the
cherishinge of wholesome doctrine, of exhortation, or if they fall from the
life, and communion of Christ being sedused thoroughe false doctrines of men
wherefore they that have this office must ever with all diligence continue in
readinge, doctrine, prayer, and other exercises spiritual that they may say
with that faithful servant, Lord thou deliueredest to me ten tale^tes, and
lo I have gained other ten. And that they may hear again well done faithful
servant, thou wast faithful over few things, I will set the over many
Enter in to the joy of thy Lord. Wherefore that feeders, and al ministers of
congregations may the better understand and handle the holy scripture, we will
open unto the^ a certain way, and we will declare in order the more notable
places of the Chrystiane doctrine, not that we would have them to tarry in these
places, but because we desire to have them brought by these more easelie to the
holy scripture it self, out of which afterward they may be instructed more
fully, and perfectly.

That some leason out of the holy scripture must be set forth to the people
before the sermon, and that the same must be declared to them.
First we will that the pastors take all their sermons that they make to the
people out of some leason of the holy scripture, which at the beginning of
the sermon they shall recite with singular reverence, and gravity. As we know
that the old holy fathers used it even from the time of the Apostles. Which
thing also was observed in the synnagoges of the Jews, as it appears by
that, that we read of the Lord. Luke iiii. and of the synnagog Act. xiii. into
the which Paul, and Baruabas entered upon the Sabbath at Antioche of Pisidia.
Wherefore in old time every congregation had peculiar readers which red the
books of the holy scripture to the people out of the pulpette. But this
custom being abolished among other fautes of ecclesiastical administration,
and in this scarsnes of ministers of the word, by reason whereof Peculiar
readers cannot be appointed in every congregation, we will that the pastors,
and preachers execute their office, and religiously to read to the people
before hand those things, whereof they will speak, that so they may the more
accustom them selves to hear the word of God, and that they may be more
fullly enstructed of their salvation. It shall healpe also the pastors the^
selves to make, and finishe their sermons with better order, if they shall follow
the prescripte of the leason preposed, and keep the^ selves within the bands
thereof. And they shall measure these leasons after the measure of those lessons
that are accustomablye recited in Masses. So the people may more easily
remember the things that shall be read, and the preachers also may more
comodiouslie declare them. For they must diligently avoid this fault that some
have, that they tarry not upon one or two words of the premised leason,
lettyng the rest pass vntoutched, or fall quite to other matters, then were
read. Our faith must leave upon the pure, and only word of God, wherefore
that word must be heard and understood of every person. Wherefore it shall be
convenient to read out of the holy scripture, and declare so much as by
likelihode the people may perceive and retain to the edification of faith.

That al sermons must be made to set forth and magnify Christ the Lord.
FOrasmuch as Christ our Lord is the end of the law, and Moses, the psalms,
Romans x Luke the last, Acts. x.
and the prophets do testifi, and preach of him that he is the only savior
of the chosen people, in whom whosoever shall believe, shall receive forgyuenes of
sins through his name: all pastors must direct and order their sermons to
this marcke that they bear and declare witness of this Christ. For so he
himself commaundid the Al christian doctrine is a testimony of Christ the
savior. Acts, i. i. Cor. ij.
apostles, a little before his ascension into heaven, when he instituted the
holy ministerye of preaching, you shall be witnesses unto me at Jerusalem and
in all Jury, and Samary unto the uttermost ends of the earth. Here of it
comes that S. Paul writes of him self, I judged not myself to know any
thing among you sauinge Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And he had a good
cause to say so. For as he wrate to the Coloss. al things were created by him
that be in heaven and in earth, visible, and invisible, whether they be thrones,
dominations principates or powers. All things were made by him and in him, and
he is before al things* and al things consist thorough is him. He is the head
of the body of the church, which is the beginning the frist begotten of the
dead, that he may be the chief in all things, for it has pleased the father
that all fulness should dwell in him, and thorough him to reconcile al things
toward himself, the things that be either in heaven, or in earth being
pacified by the blood of his cross thorough the same person. Iohanne
witnesses the same things in the begininge of his gospel, and epistle. And
the Lord of him self Johan. v. iii. xii. xvii. and in many other places.

Therefore Christ him self comprehended the sum of the whole scripture in
this sentence, Luke the last.
repentance, and remission of sins must be preched in the name of Christ.
wherefore let the faithful ministers of congregations always magnify the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, testifiynge, that this only son of God, the true
God and man is he, by whom al things were made, be Ephe. i.
governed, repared and renewed, which also rules al things with the word of
his power, which gathers together the scattered children of God, and
straiyng sheep Hebru. i. John. x.
and gives repentance, and remission of sins. For there is none other name
under heaven given to men, wherein they shall be Act. v. Act. iiii. John. xvii.
John. x.
saved, the power of all flesh is given to him, that he may give everlasting
life to al the^ that the father has given him. He is that good shepeherde that
gives his life for his sheep, that he may give them eternal life, which so
defends, and keeps his sheep, that noman can take them out of his hand.
These and such like testimonies of Christ must be often, and diligintlye
beaten into the people in sermons.

The article of the trinity.
AL though man's reason understands not the nature of God, yet God has
opened him self in the word, and in his son, that we may know him as much
as he has reuelated him self, and call upon him. After which sort when we
call upon God the father, there is a great difference between our invocation,
and the invocation of all other people, and nations and this difference
consists cheifely in. ij. points. One is that, invocation thus ordered, is
derected to the true, and natural God. The Other is, that our invocation so used
must needs please God and not be void, and frustrate.

Wherefore the preachers must teach out of the holy scripture of the true, and
almighty Three persons but one substance.
God, the father, the only begotten son, and the holy ghost, that they be
one God of the same divine nature, and power, but yet three distincted
persons. And that this one God made, and maynteneth all things. Further that
the son of God by the unspeakable purpose and unmeasurable mercy of God,
did put on man's nature that he might be a sacrifice, and a ransom for us,
and that these two natures, that is to say, man's nature, and Gods is one,
and undivided person Jesus Christ. Two natures united in Christ.
How be it these two natures be so knytte in Christ, that they be not
confounded, or mixte, but each has by it self his own substance, and
propriety. As al these things are well known out of the word of God
administered by the Apostles, and Prophets, and be declared in sundry
confessions of the holy fathers against sundry heresies, in the creed made
in the counsel of Nice, and in the creed of Athanasius. Item in the agreeable
decrees and confestions of the old, and very holy counselles, as Nicene,
Co^sta^tinopolitane, Ephesine, Calchedone^se, and co^sta^tinopolitane again:
Further by the wrytinges of the fathers co^se^ting herunto, which faught
earnestly for the word of God, as by the books of Athanasius, Basilius,
Nazianzenus, and Augustine it appears.

Wherefore the sentence, and doctrine of this article must be diligently
propouned to the people, and commended, and defended, that the true knowledged
of God may be mayntayned, and that we may retain a difference between the
invocation of christian men, and other nations, which is very necessary,
namely that thou may call upon this true God the father of Jesus Christ,
together with his son Jesus Christ, and the holy gooste, which has
reueyled him self in the son, for whose sake he will be merciful, and will
give the holy gooste to them that thus call upon him in fayeth, which also
stireeth up in the hertes of men, the true knowledge of God, fear, fayeth, and
other motions The difference between the i^uocation of Christians and other
nations.
of new life. For though the excellent Philolophers among the heathen, the
Jews and the Mahometistes do glory that they worship not images and
Idolles, but the eternal God maker of heaven and earth, of me^ and of all other
things, nevertheless semge that they will not acknowledge this God which has
opened him self in his word by his son our Lord Jesus Christ, they do not
worship and call upon the true God, but they worship the vain imaginations
of their own hertes, and hands. Neither can they persuade them selves that
God is merciful unto them, and hears them, because they refuse the Gospel
and the only mediatoure. And therefore their invocation can in no wise be
directed to the true God the father of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, but
these men imagine to the^ selves. A peculiar God, which is not the father of
our mediator Jesus Christ, and therefore is not the true God, for which
cause they can not persuade them sellues, that their prayers be hard. Their
invocation then ha^geth and abides in the vain devices of their own reason,
in images and Idols standing before the^, and they remain very strangers,
and abominable to the true God, because they live without Christ and the word
of God, as Christ says, he that honors not the son, honors not the
father. And Paul to the Roma. v. through Christ we have entrance unto the
father. Thus God also reueiled him self to John How the holy Trinity was
reueiled to John Baptiste at the baptism of Christ.
the son of Zachary, that he afterward might instruct the church, of
true knowledge and right invocation, for in this sort God eternal the father
witnesses his son. This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, the
son him self stands at baptism, the holy ghost comes down openly upon
him, to testify that the holy gooste should be given both to Christ and to
his congregation. Wherefore three persons appeared in this place. This appering
the^ ought to be well considered of every christen man, which chanced not for
Ihon his sake only, but for the whole congregation his sake, that the same
might offer prayers to the only eternal and almighty God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which made al things with the eternal son and the holy
ghost. And which also will hear the church, govern and sanctify it with his
holy spirit for Christ the mediatoure his sake.

The words of Baptism signify the same thing, whereas it is said. I baptize
the A declaration of the words of baptism.
in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. For here
be three persons numbered, of one equal power, and diuitie, to who^ alone the
whole cause of our salvation is ascribed, for this is the meaning of the
words. I baptize the, that is to say, I testify by this token of dipping or
sprinklynge, that thy sins be forgeuen the, and that thou art received into
the grace of the eternal and the true God the father of Jesus Christ, and that
for this his sons sake. Item that the holy gooste shall work in the
effectuouslie. Surely this is an high doctrine, and above man's wisdom of
the nature, will, and efficacy of God toward us, which makes a difference
between us and al heythen, comprehending most ample promises as we will declare
herafter, of which promises it is very requisite that the people be admonished
as often as the text of the scripture requires it, that the congregation may
be well instructed of the one and singular divine substance and of the there
persons. For this article must be observed of al me^ and exercised in our
daily invocation. And our invocation must be discerned from the invocation of
the heathen, the Jews and the mahometistes, that we do believe that God
certainly hears us, if in our prayer we apprehende the mediator, whereof no
heathen, Jew, no mahometist can certify him self. For thus we must pray,
Almighty and eternal god the father of our Lord Jesus Christ which with thy
A form of christen prayer.
only begotten son and the holy ghost made al things, and preseruest the
same, have mercy on me for thy sons Jesus Christ, which for our sakes was
made a sacrifice. Kindle my mind with thy light, and govern me with thy holy
spirit, which thou haste promised us for thy sons sake. Thus in our prayer
we must ever co^prehe^d Christ the mediator, as the church has vsen in
collets A form of calling upon Christ.
from the beginning, adding these words in the end, through Christ our Lord.
Moreover this is a true invocation and acceptable to God. O Lord Jesus Christ
the son of God hear me, look upon me, and pity me, and give me thy holy
spirit, and eternal life. Thus we read that S. Stephan. Act. viij. called
upon Christ, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Such prayer attibuteth unto Christ
the glory of divinity, for that, that God has reueiled him self in him, and
works together with him, as we read Io. v. what so ever the father works,
the same does the son also. And in the xiiij. He that sees me sees the
father. I am in the father, and the father is in me. This is the sentence of
such an invocation, Lord Jesus Christ son of God healpe me, give me thy holy
spirit which together confesses the father, the son which is mediatoure
and the holy gooste. Wherefore this article of the divine substance and of the
three persons must be learned and exercised in daily prayers.

But forasmuch as this sincere doctrine of true and godly invocation, is
horribly darkened Against the invocation of dead saints and images.
through that abomimable wickedness, and madness upon Idols, which is committed
in calling upon dead men, and their images and bones, whereunto they have bound
not only divine power, but also a certain peculiar strength and efficacy of
saints, whereas yet it is evident that we must assign the power and working of
god, to nothing, in which god him self has not expressedly witnessed in his
word, that he will give the same, but it is plain that dead me^ help nobody.
Nor work in ydoles, for these causes I say the people must be called back
from such ydolotrye unto the true and religiouse invocation of God as to a
most godly work and principal worshypping of God wherein we chiefly learn
and feel which is the true faith, yea this is the only work whereby the true
people of God may be most discerned from the ungodly.

Of the creation and governance of al things.
OVre hole salvation and everlasting life consists herin, that we truly know
God in our Lord Jesus Christ that is to say, with a sure and lively faith.
In this knowledge the chiefest point is to know, that it is God which made all
things and preserves and governs the same alone, wherefore the preachers
shall study to declare to the people with singular dylygence, and to beat
into their heads those places of the scripture that teach and testify of the
eternal substance of God, of his power, knowledge, goodness, and severity,
for without this knowledge and faith we can never truly and effectuously, feel
our sins much less repent and amend our selves, neither shall the law alone
drive us thereunto, for what shall either his precepts or threats move or fear
us, of whose power bowntuousnes or severity as yet we know or feel nothing
substantially and effectuosely, wherefore he that will comme to God must
necessarily know before hand and believe that it is God which made, preserves
and judges all men, and largelye rewards them that love him. Very many boste
them selves to know God but in that, that they studi not to frame their life
according to the will of god dispising the word of God they bear sufficient
witness of the^ self to the contrary, namely that they say in their hertes,
there is no God though they confess the same before men.

It is therefore right necessary, that preachers often times and with great
diligence do propounde and beat in to their ears the common place of creation
preseruacion and governance of all things. And in the article of the creation
of things the pastors shall diligently teach that, that Lord which delivered
the ten commandments, the whole holy scripture and the gospel it self: is
the only true God and maker of things, which of no thing created heaven,
earth the sea, and whatsoever is contained in the^ and our selves also, and
alone preserves the same through his power, and has partly made the other
creatures subject unto us being created to his image appoyntynge them to a
profitable use, and partly ordained them to the ministerye of the health both
of the body and soul.

Wherefore the preachers shall often allege, faithfully declare and printe in the
minds of their herers those places of the scripture that teach that God made
us and al other things of no thing, and that we were fashoned after the image
of god, finally that inferior creatures be subject unto our rule by Gods
ordinance, and that the superior creatures be appointed to procure our
health, that the same herers may daily learn more and more, the almightines
and goodness of Gods majesty, and that in them selves and in all other
things that they handle in which they be occupied, which they behold, here,
or by any means do exercise, they know him, have him in reverence, praise him
and call upon him. And that thereby they may trust more fully in the almightines
and goodness of God, and more cherefully obey his commandments and also fear
his wrath the more, and that they may use all things which they do use in
this life as the most holy creatures and gistes of God and our savior, with
more holiness daily and thankfulness, and larger liberalytie toward their
neighbors*

For this cause, the prophets in the praises of God do so magnify and set
before our eyes with most elegant descripcions, the principal and notablest
works of God in the universal nature of things, as the heavens, the son, the
moon, the sterres, the Why the holy scripture often propou^neth unto us the
merueylous works of God.
clouds, the wyndes, mystes, rain, dew, snow, froste, thunder, lyghtnynge,
mountains, valleys, fildes, contreys, meadows, springes, rivers, standinge
waters, sundry trees and herbs, the pryncypall kinds of beasts both tame and
wild, men, and other innumerable works of God. For which many psalms do
greatly magnify the glory of God, as psalm. xix. xcv. Ciiii. Cxxxvi. Cxlv.
Cxlvii. Cxlviii. Job does the same thing from the xxxviii. Chapter to the end
of his book. And Esaias in the.xl. chapter unto the end of his book. Like places
ye shall find in other canonical books every where. This contemplacio^ of the
notable works of God and admiracion of the divine majesty was the cause why
Christ the Lord him self, and other saints lyfted up their eyes, and hands
to heaven when they pray. And in the form of prayinge the Lord taught us to
say. Our father which art in heaven, for when we behold with our eyes and
minds those most excellent and wonderful works of God, the heavens, the
son, the moon, the sterres, and other celestial works: a religiouse
consideration, admiration, and worshippyng of Gods majesty must needs be
stirred up in us, and grow meruaylouslye and be confirmed, except we be
Godles altogyther. And a religiouse, and attentyue contemplation of the rest of
Gods works in the minds of the Godly, works the self same thing.

Wherefore the preachers shall often recite, and declare in their sermons with
great diligencie such places of the scripture toutching the creation and
works of God, and therewith exhort men that they accustom them selves with
as much diligencie as they may, that, as often, as they behold them selves, or
other men, the heavens, the earth, the waters, and things contained therein,
as often as they use, and take fruition of the same, they call to remembrance,
and considre religiously with them selves, that those be the works, and gifts
of God our maker and father, and that they were made of him and set before us
for this purpose, that in them we should acknowledge God him self, and our
father, and his almightines, his everlasting wisdom, and goodness in Christ
the savior, that we should call upon him, and magnify him. And herein let
them labor to call to their minds, and consideration, that there is none other
God the maker and preserver of al things, then the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which gave this his son unto us, and with him all things perteynynge
to the use, and salvation both of body, and soul. Which has opened his
word, and doctrine of life in the holy writings, that so they may learn to
comprehend, and join together the word, and works of God, and to know, and
behold him, and his works in his word, and to reuolue the same in their
minds, when they se, and use the creatures of God, Lo this is thy God, and
maker, which gave the his son Christ our Lord that he might bring the from
eternal death to eternal life, and has reueiled his fatherly will toutchynge
thy salvation in his scriptures, which also caused his law and Gospel to be
preached to the, he of nothing made these heavens, this earth, these waters,
these beasts, these men, this meat, drink, garments, and what soever is
before our eyes, and hands, and he has laid them before the, and given the
them for this entente, that they might serve the, for thy use and health, that
in these his works and gifts thou may more fully know him, praise, and
magnify him, and serve him from thy whole heart, with the very same things to
set forth his glory, and further the health of men. Which thing if thou
labor to do, these creatures, and all the works of God shall serve to
procure thy health. And if thou do not so, they shall be against the with God
their maker, and shall serve to revenge thy ungodliness.

Such a faithful meditation, and contemplation of the creatures of God
brings to pass, that every work of god preaches God unto us, and
admonishes us of his divinity, power, and goodness. For which purpose they
were also set before us, that as the Apostle writes, we may understand by
his works, through the creation, his eternal power, and Godheade. For we
ought so to behold and considre every work of God, that sterynge up a
religiouse admiration of his divine power, wisdom, and goodness, we may cry
out with David. How great be thy works O Lord, thou haste made al things
wisely, the earth is full of thy goodness, Psalm. Ciiii. This wise all the
world is, and ought to he unto us the temple of God, that we may acknowledge,
call upon, magnify, and worship God not in certain places only, as
ungodliness naturally grafted in us allows, but every where, in every place of
his dominion, as God our creator and maynteyner.

Whereof this follows, that while in our business, and doings we follow the
commandments of God, and call for his healpe we fear nothing that any man
can do to us, we be nothing agaste, or tremble. For as soon as we behold, and
consider those men, with who^ we have to do, and which seame terrible unto us,
or the things them selves in which there appears some danger, or
disticultie, as the creatures of god, and with that contemplation call to our
remembrance and think religiously upon God the maker of those men, those
things, and of us, then our faith in Gods promise, and testimony namely
that all things were both made for our health, and felicity, and do also
necessarely work the same still, and that they can be none other things, then
the instruments of God to perform our health and felicity, our faith, I
say, is so stered up, and strengthened, to do al things, that we take in hand
to do by the commandment of God, that all fear of danger, and inability
must needs depart, with all doubt of well bryngyng to pass the thing that
we Godly take in hand to do, that is to say, by the commandment of God.

This consideration of things, which pondreth that all things be the
creatures of God, and that God as he made them, so he preserves them for our
profit, and daily brings them forth, and gives them us to use, brings
this thing to pass also, that we abuse nothing, but that we have, and esteame
al things, that come to our use, as the works of the father him self, as
they be in deed. And it causes us to use them with all moderation, and
holiness, with all thankesgeuyng, and reverent praising before other and
magnifiynge of Gooddes bountuousnes, finally with liberal dealyng, and
bestowyng upon them, that need.

It is right necessary that the people be taught most diligently these
things concerning the belief of the creation, and conservation of all
things, and the faithful contemplation, and use of the creatures of God. For
the comen people be much farther drawn then men believe from the true, and
lively knowledge, and consideration of God the creator and of his works,
through that monstrous magnifiyng of saints and of their power to healpe us,
which they have untruly attributed unto the^, and through those mad
processions, that settinge forth and worshippynge of images, and of Saints
bones. All men in deed behold the heavens, the earth, and other godly, and
wonderful creatures, and works of God, they toutch them, they have them in
their hands, and also enjoy the commodity of them, but they seldom, or
never remember God the maker, they thank not God for these his so great
gifts and benifittes, which made, preserves, and gives us al things for
our commodity, health, and felicity. And they defer al thynkyng on God, all
worshippynge of God, till they come to their temples, and chapelles, there they
will execute all their veneration, worshippyng, and Gods service, that with
more security, in all other places they may live after their own pleasure,
and nothing at all remember God, as they should, and that many ways they
may abuse the holy creatures, and gifts of God. Wherefore it is merueylous
necessary that the preachers do ever with singular reverence, propoune,
declare, and beat into the people this article of the creation, and
preservation of things, that is to wit, that God made all things of nothing,
and preserves the same through his own only power, brings forth, and
gives us al thing through his bountiousnes, to the intent that they may serve
to our use, health and felicite, and that he may require to be known and
worshypped in these his works, and creatures. For which cause those places of
scripture which testify, and set forth this article shall be often alleged in
their sermons, faithfully declared, and printed in the minds of the people.

Of the governance, and administration of all things.
IT is like necessary, diligently to teach, and admonish the people, of the
governance, and administration of things, that they may know that they must
ask and look for healpe from God, and learn therwyth that sin, and other
horrible mischeifes in the world, were not made by god but sprange from an
other beginning, as we will show herafter. Wherefore that, that the scripture
teaches of the creation of things, must be so taken, as that, that is taught
Genes. i. and. ii. Psalm. xxxij. Esai. xliij. and in many other places by the
prophets, and apostles, and as that church ever believed, that is to say,
that God has not left his work once made, as the carpenter leaves the
ship that he has made, and commits it unto the shyppeman, being little,
or nothing careful for it afterward. But we must think thus that he is
present with his work, and perpetually susteineth, and governs the same,
that he knows, and beholds the doings of all creatures, that he sees also
the thoughts of angels, men and diuelles, and that there is nothing done
without him, that it is he, which with perpetual moving governs the
heavenly bodies, makes the ground fruiteful, gives life both to man, and
beast, adding fode, and other necessary things, as we read acts, xvij. In
him we live, are moved, and have our being. Hebr. i. he susteyneth al things
with the word of his power. Coloss. i. All things consist through him. i.
Tiuint. iiii. We trust in the living god, which is the savior of al me^,
chiefly of the faithful. Here Paul testifies that God gives life not only to
the faithful, but also to the rest, how beit that is done in unlike manner,
not with standinge he teaches us that God susteineth, preserves and governs
the life of al. As he defended David against Goliath Saull, Absalo^, and other
his enemies, and gave him many other temporal gifts, and likewise increased
him with spiritual benifittes and other gifts, with grace, and the holy
ghost. But among the heaten he healpeth many with corporal gifts only, as
with victory peace, and riches, that politye may be maintained, and that
mankind may endure in earth so long, till he have gathered together his whole
congregation, as Paul witnesses. i. Tim. vi. God which quyckneth. Item, give
precepte unto the rich that they trust in God which gives us al things
abundantly to our commodity. Math. x. Two sparowes are sold for a farthinge,
and one of them falls not upon the ground, with out the will of your father.
And the hears of your heads be al nombred.

Psalm. Ciii. All things look upon the, that thou will give them their food
in due ceason, when thou gyueste them they shall gather. When thou openest thy
hand, all shall be filled with bountuousnes. But when thou turneste away thy
face they shall be trobled. Thoue shalt take away their breath, and they shall
fail, and return to their dust. Thou shall send forth thy spirit, and they
shall be created, and thou shall renew the face of the earth.

Psalm. xxxiii. God look from heaven, he sees all the children of men, he
frames their hertes every one, and vndrestandeth al their works.

Psalm. xxxvi. Men, and beasts shalt thou save Lord. Psalm. Cxlvii. Which
covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain to the earth, which
brings forth grass in the mountains which gives food to their catail,
and to the young crows that call upon him.

Psalm. Cxlv. The eyes of al look upon the Lord, and thou gyueste them food in
due ceason. Thou openest thy hand, and filleste every creature with thy
goodness. Io. v. my father unto this time works, and I work.

By these places of the scripture we are taught, that God is present every
where, knows althinges, conserueth, and susteineth all things, and gives
life and mouinge. Wherefore this article must be dyligently thaughte the
peoqle, and learned of the same. For though the heathen grant that the world
was made by god yet they doubt, whether therebe any providence, whether God
has any care of men's matters, and judges them, whether he hears men that
call upon him, whether he ministre fode. peace, health, and other benifittes to
men, but they think that these things begotten, and maintained by man's
industry. As ever such heatheuish persuasions hang in the minds of men,
which thing many words, and sentences of the ungodly do well prove, against
which Jeremy in his lame^tatio^s Cha. iii. cries myghtely. Who is this that
says, out of the mouth of the highest nether good things, nor badde come
forth, what murmureth man against God and thincketh not how grievously he
offends God.

That the minds of men than may be delivered from those heathnishe opinions,
the alleged testimonies of the scripture, and such like concerning the
preuidence of God and goueruance of things must be delige^tly considered, and
we must hold fast in memory, that God looks upon the hertes of men and will
judge the doings of every one, that he with out doubt hears them, that call
ryghtly upon him, as it shall be showed here after. Item that he gives
benifittes to men, and frutefulnes of the earth, defends them and their
ofspringe from enemies, preserves commonweals et cet.

As we are commanded to ask these things, and to look for them from God,
when we pray, give us this day our daily bread and psalm. iv. Cast thy care
upon the Lord, and he shall nonrishe the up. But how can a man desire help
from God, if he dream that God neglects creatures, that he works not in all, but that the creatures are carried at al auentures, and that men do al
things, as they list, and of their own strength. This darcknes of man's
mind must be ernestly reproved, and we must lay evident testimonies, of the
scripture against it. For man's mind is far gone from God, and is full of
doubtinge, and horrible darckenes concerning God, which that God might dreue
out of our minds, from the beginning he has opened him self with great
miracles. He sent also his son into the world openly, which rose from
death, and raised many other from the dead. Al which things ought to
strengthen our faith, that we may certify our self that God is not idle,
but worcketh ever, bestows benifittes, and does al things for the felicite
of men whereby we might justly acknowledge his exeding love toward us.
Moreover this article must be taught the people, and be commended to them
with singular diligence for this cause also, that the un Godly custom of
calling upon saints departed, and desiringe of them good health temperatines
of the air, peace, and such benifittes, may be taken away feinge that these
things be not the worckes of holy men, nor of any creature, but be the
works, and benifittes of God only.

Of the cause of sin and death.
When mention is made of the creation, the preachers must together Against
the ungodly doctrine concerning saints.
teach plainly and distinctly, that sin, that is to say, concupiscence,
corruption of judgment and will, and further more al noughtye motions, or il
doings, be not created of God, but spring from the liberty of the apostata
spirit, and of man, as it is written Johan. viii. wha^ the devil speaks a
lie he speaks of his own, for he is a liar, and the father of lies, that is
to say, the cause and the autour. Psalm. v. Thou art not the God that wills
iniquitye. Zacharye. viii. Let not every one of you devise evil against his
friend, and love not a falfe oath for all these be the things that I hate,
says the Lord. Roma. v. Through one man sin entered into the world, and
death through sin. i. John. ij. the lust of the flesh and the lust of the
eyes, and pride of life is not from the father, but from the world.

By these and many other testimonies it is evident that God will not sin,
neither Every sin that man commits, is committed through his own will.
created, nor works the same. But after that the devil, and man slydde from
God such slydynge, and turnynge away came from their own will. And though
after the fall of Adam all men conceived by man's seed, are borne in
original sin, nevertheless actual sin is the propre, and free work of
man's will, and not necessary, that is to say, al be it that the devil pricked
forth Cain to the slaughter of his brother, and though he were enflamed with
anger, nevertheless he might yet have holden his hands, and he committed that
mischief, not through a constrained will, but through a ready will, and
agreeable. He should have resisted his anger and lust, and have prayed God for
remission of the evil sprongen up in him and have asked the healpe of god to
resist that mischief. So undoubtedly he should have felt strength to resist
Satan, and the tentations of his proper flesh.

Now punishments justly accompanye sinful, Sin is the cause of death and all
miseries. Roma. v.
and wicked acts. Wherefore Paul says well, thorough sin death entered into
the world. And again we may plainly see that whole mankind is subject both
to perpetual sins, and also punyshme^tes, and oppressed with so many, and so
great calamities, that man's mind can not co^prehende them in thought but
he must needs be agaste, while he co^sidereth so great a sea of mischeiues
here we must diligently discern between the creature of God, and our sin.
God made man right and blessed him, but man gave him self amiserable wound.
This wound remains perpetually in the creatures thorough propagation
Original sin.
and generation, and other infinite sins, and punishme^tes follow this
wound. And this is our fault not Gods, as Oseas testifies cha. xiii. Thy
destruction comes from thy self Israel, but thy help is in me only. Item
Psalm. xxxix. For iniquity thou rebukest man, and al his beauty wastes away
like agarment gnawen of mothes. Every man is a certain vain thing.

Wherefore when we see those horrible punishme^tes, death, sickness, war, and
su^drie like miseries, let us know that they be the punishme^tes of sin,
and that they happen not to mankind by chance, but by the will and permission
of God by reason of God sends greuouser afliction to the saints that he may
make them understand the horriblenes of sin.
sin. And though the saints be acceptable to God, and please him for Christ's
sake, yet thorough the marvelous purpose of God in this life they be subject
unto the cross. For God will that the church do ernestly acknowledge his
wrath against sin, and therefore be exercised with sorer discipline. For this
is the end of tribulatio^s. Wherefore S. Petre says also, indgement begins
at the house of God. As for the comfort that the Godly ought to have in
afflictions, we will speak of it in the place of the cross. Here it is
sufficient to have admonisched that those afflictions chance not to the
congregation with out Gods providence, and that God will not for sake his
under the cross, but that he will help them calling upon him, yea and he
commands that we pray, and look for deliverance from him. As Esai. xlix.
says. Can the woman forgette her child, that she will not have pity on the
child of her womb. Though she forget it, yet I will not forgette the. Behold I
have written the in my hands etc. This shall suffice concerning the
conservation, and governance of things, Hereafter we will declare what we
ought to think of the cause of sin, and of the corruption of man's nature,
and again what consolation we have in so great miseries.

Of original sin, and man's weakness before regeration.
GOd the everlasting father gave in creation to our first parents Adam, and
Eve, not only a free, but also an vpryght will. Further he did put into their
minds an exceadynge great light, that before the fall they might truly know
God, worship, and love him. The other powers obeyed willynglye to this light.
As Paul says, that man was made after the image of God, that is to say in
the knowledge of God, and in right will, that he might perfectly obey, and
satisfy the law, and be as it were the temple of God, wherein God would have
dwelled presently, and would have exercised his power.

When man was now settled and constituted in so great blisfulnes, and glory,
Satan to deface the work of God, borded Eve with gyle, and at length drove her
so far that together with Adam she became vnobedient to the commandment of
God, as Moses deseribeth the fall of man. Gene. iii.

Through this inobedience our first parents lost those godly gifts of
innocence and original righteousness with all their posterity, which comes
from them, so that all men conceived, and borne through man's seed, be subject
to original sin, as David testifies Psalm. li. and Paul. Roma. v

Wherefore the preachers must teach of original sin after such sort, as the
word of God prescribes unto us, and which the sincerer, and right believing
fathers followed, chiefly Augustine, and Anselme, namely that it is the want of
original ryghtuousnes, What original sin is.
wherwyth we ought to excel, that is to say, that men before regeneration be
not in the favor of God, nor heirs of eternal life, but cast from God, and
that they have a will turned from God, horrible darkness concerning God,
corrupt, and vicious motions, and inclinations in all their strenghthes
against the commandments of God. A certain image, whereof is set for^h
in him, whom the Lord by a parable declared to be wounded of thieves in the
way toward Ierico, and left half dead. For this thief Satan has drowned
the miserable nature of man in so great nuseries, that it is not only
despoiled of spiritual, and most excellent gyfres, but also is miserably
wounded in all her powers.

Whereof it follows that man's nature without the healpe of the holy ghost
ca^ not turn her self unto God with true fear, Natural strength before
regeneration.
ture soue, and faith, and that this thing must needs be done through the
word of God, and the holy ghost, by whom the mind being allumined may
believe God in Christ the lord out of the gospel, and know him thorough
faith, and the will being stirred up with the reverence of God, and enflamed
with his love, may apply her self to the commandments of god, and turn
the whole man to the preaise, and worshippinge of God.

But man's will even before regeneration, by the common healpe of God, may Of
free will or outward discipline.
so perform and exercise outward discipline that is to say the outward
works of the law. Which discipline God requires seuerelye, and punishes
the contempt thereof both with corporal peines, in this life, and with
everlasting after this life. i. Timo. i. The law was made for the
vuryghteous. Ite^ to the Hebr. xiii. God shall judge fornicatours, and
auouterers. Ite^ honor thy father and mother, that thou maiste belong lived
upon the earth. Also Gene. ix. he that shall shed man's blond upon the
earth, his blood shall also be shed. For man is made after the image of God.

With these, and like sentences all men must be admonished and steared to
perform the outward works of the law.

Furthermore Paul says, that the law is a guide unto Christ, whereby we
understand that he that continues in sins against his conscience, and
comes not to a better mind, casts away the word of his own accord, and
despiceth the holy ghost, and hyndreth his own health, that he be not
brought to Christ.

In the mean while this thing also must be taught, that this outward
discipline deserves not remission of sins, is not that ryghtuousnes, for
which we be pronounced ryghtuouse or acceptable before God. For this honor is
due only to the son of God Christ the mediatoure, which alone has deserved
unto us remission of sins, and everlasting life, which we obtain with
fayeth alone, or trust in him, as we will declare more largely hereafter.

Of the old testament.
AFter, declaration of the benifittes of God, which he has performed, and
does perform toward al men and nations in the creation, co^seruation, and
governance of things, the preachers shall propoune to the people What things
so ever God commanded, promised, or threatened to the people of the old
Testament the same pertain unto us also.
also those unmeasurable benifits, which he bestowed upon the holy fathers,
and the whole people of Israel. Item they shall declare the judgments, which
he executed upon the same, when they believed him not nether obeyed his
commandments. For the things that the scripture reherseth of them, be
written for our doctrine, as Paul says, those things happened unto them,
that they might be figures, and exemples unto us, and they were written for our
enstructio^ upon who^ the ends of the world be come. Wherefore, as in the
articles before toutchinge the creation, conservation and goueruaunce of al
things the power, and glory of god is known, in all his creatures, and
works, and in all nations, so in this place, out of the benifittes, and
punishme^tes which he laid upon our fathers in the old testament, we shall
learn the power, mercy, and ryghteousnes of God, which he used toward his
peculyare people, whom he chose out of all other nations of the earth, and
bound unto him self with the liege of grace, that he might not only be unto
them a creatoure, and Lord, but also a God, that is to say, an everlasting
savior of body, and soul. Al which things pertayne unto us, which believe in
Christ. For we are now the peculiar people, and heritage of God, the true
children of Abraham, the true Israelites, as many of us as believe in Christ,
and put him on through Baptism, as Paul teaches plainly to the Roma. ix. to
the Gala. iii. Yea Christ him self says of them that truly believe among
the heathen: Many shall come from the Est, and the West, and shall sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, but the children of
the kingdom shall be cast into outward darkness.

Wherefore it perteyneth to the ministers of the word to teach the people
diligently that all the promises, and benifittes exibited to the fathers (yea
universally to Israel, Item the threats, punishments, and precepts, saueing
those that perteyne to the outward discipline, and civility of that people,
which ought to stand in effect only, till the time of Christ) belong unto us
also. The same things are commanded us, the same things are forbidden to us,
and therefore we also must look for the same benefittes from the godnes of God
through Christ, while we continue in the faith, and love of God, and we must
fear the same punishments, if we cast from us the faith, and love of God.
Wherefore the Apostle in the place alleged before, sets the old people
before us for an ensample, saiynge: Many of them God allowed not. For they were
thrown down in the wilderness. But these things happened for a figure, and
exemple unto us, that we lust not after evil things, as they lusted, neither
be made Idolaters, as some of them were. In the same place he adds exemples
of fornication, tentation, and murmuration against God, and the punishments
that God therefore took of them, and again he testifies that all these things
happened unto the^, that they might be exemplars, and figures unto us, wherein
we might know how God abhors these abominable mischeuous acts, and that we
also should learn to abhor, and fle the same.

But before al other things the preachers must set forth, and beat into the
people the promises, the liege and covenant of Gods beniuolence made with
Abraham and his sede, in which he promises him that he will be his God, that is
to say, an everlasting savior, and great reward. Item through his only
free beniuolence, he embraced him How the patriarchs were enstructed in the
says.
and brought him from the laud of his natiuite, further that he was justified
by faith only, and many nations, yea of al believing persons, a citizin of
the heavenly city having a sure fundation, whose artificer and maker God is.
Item though through the trust of Gods promises he obtained the covenant of
grace and of his salvation, and became dear to God, yet that he dyed a
stranger in the land promised to him, and to his posterity. Who^ nevertheless
though he were a stranger, and had no certain possession in the land, God
merueilously guyded with his posterity, and defended from all harm, and
increased him with as manner of blessings. Of who^ sings the Psalm. Ciij. When
they were very few in number, and went from nation to nation, and from
kingdom to kingdom, he suffered not any man to do them wrong, and he
pinished kings for their sakes, toutche not mine anointed, and hurt not my
prophets. Unbelief was the cause of miseries, and punishementes in the old
people.


Through the same faith of his grace he governed, and guided the other
patriarchs and the universal people of Israel, which were truly the people
of Israel, and the children of the promises. And what so ever calamity
happened unto them, it was a punishment of their unbelief, because they had
not obeyed to Gods voice.

Finally the congregation must be taught this thing also diligently that, that
couenaunte Through Christ all benifittes happened to the fathers.
of grace, and al other benifites were obtained, confirmed, and exhibited to
the fathers by the son of God Christ the Lord the everlasting word of the
father. Al they desired to see his day, and than they began to enjoy the
promised blessings, when they saw that day he speak with the fathers, he
guyded them, and fed the^ not only with corporal manna rayninge down from
heaven, and with water drawn out of the rock by the power of God, but also
with spiritual meat, and drink of blessede participation with him, and
heavenly life, which he gives to his, whereof Paul speaks, saying. Al eat
the same spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink. For they
drank of the spiritual stone following them, that is, of Christ.

Wherefore they received the same spiritual meat, and drink namely Christ
the Lord not only among them selves, but also together with us though that
meat, and drink horough unbelief profited not al.

Wherefore let the preachers with all diligence teach and confirm this thing
perpetually, that al benifittes of God that were exhibited to the fathers from
the beginning, and all that be bestowed upon us, have been given, and be given
by Christ only the blessed seed of Abraham, the head, and savior of the
universal church.

Of the difference of the old, and new Testament.
FOr as much as not only Saint Paul, but also the prophet Jeremy puts
a plain difference between the new and old Testamente, affirmynge that the
new Testamente pertayneth to the coming of Christ and the old to Moses,
and the old people, the preachers shall diligently observe this difference,
that the places of the scripture concerning the old testament, and the new,
and old people may be handsomely interpreted, that they wythdrawe nothing
from the grace, and benifittes of God promised, and exhibited either to the
fathers, or to us, as some are wounte to do not understanding sufficiently
the words of Paul. Of which men some affirm that those things that God did
with the fathers were al only corporal, and erathle, and so much as they can,
they over throw, or do not ryghtly regard many goodlye benifities of God
among us, and wholesome ordinances, as officers, judgments, restraining of
malefactors, which things, they say, pertayne not at all to the new
Testament.

Other through the same ignorance of the Gospel, and new Testament, give
more then is conueniente to judicial rytes, and ceremonies, and they set forth
the observation of them with the hurt of fayeth in Christ, eue^ in this time
of christian liberty.

Wherefore the preachers shall observe that A double understanding of the old
testamente, one as God instituted it, an other as men, abuse it.
the prophets, and the apostles speak much otherwise of the old Testament,
when they speak of it, as it was at the begyunyng confirmed to Abraham,
Moses, and all the old people, then when they have matter in hand conceruyng
the Jews, which brake this couenaunte in deed, and only bosted outward
ceremonies without fayeth in Christ, and true obedience toward God. For when
they speak of the old Testament after the first manner, that is to say, as it
was delivered from God to the fathers, they testify that it is the couenaunte
of the grace of God, and that it conteyneth in it the promises of Christ the
Mediatoure.

They call the people that keep it, the first begotten, and peculiar people of
God, the kingly priesthode, the holy people, to whom in this promise, I will
be your God etc.

God promised through his son his everlasting mercy, remission of sins,
adoption to be sons, and heirs, and therefore a new and blessed life. For
God bestows all these benifites upon them, to whom he shows him self God.
Which thing may appear hereby, that Christ proves to the Saddnceis the
blessed resurrection of saints, which is a passage into a new, and blessed
life, by this that God testified, that he was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, which then were dead in their bodies. For it was known even among the
Sadduceis that God is not the God of the dead, but of the quycke, that is to
say, of them that live well, and blisfully. This followed then evidently that
al they to who^ such promise was made, must necessarely be raised from death
to life, wherein they should be heirs, eue^ after the flesh, of salvation,
and everlasting life, which God promised them, when he testified that he was
their God.

Wherefore that old covenant, or Testament made with the fathes co^prehe^deth
also remission of sins grace, and adoption into the children of God, the
gyuinge of the holy ghost, by whom he circumcided and renewed their hertes,
and certified them of salvation, and perpetual governance, and protection. And
for the confirmation of this grace he delivered unto them the whole religion,
the law, and the possession of the land of Canaan, and all that did he
thorough Christ our only mediator, and savior. and for this cause god
sets forth so greatly this his liege, and he calls the law, and his
statutes the couenaunte of life, and wisdom, wherein the people of Israel
excelled a^ nations he wytnessed with this liege that he is present with his,
that he dwells among them, hears their prayers, and delivers them from
al dangers.

For which causes. Paul also wrote of the Jews Romano. iii. and ix cha. that
the oracles of God were delivered unto them and adoption, and the glory of the
children of God, and the worshippinge of God and that Christ the Lord was
given them with all the benifittes of God. For this cause also he declares,
and proves to the Gala. iii. that we which believe in Christ be the children
of Abraham, and of the new testament, after that we have put on Christ
thorough baptism Item to the To. xi. he says that we be brainches of the
wild olyue, and be grafted into the natural olyue, that is to say, into the
people of God, through Christ, and that the root bears us, and not we the
root. In an other place he says, that we have received the same spirit of
faith with the fathers. ij. Corhin. iiij. Item Petre in the acts. xv. We
trust that we shall be saved not by the law, but by Christ only, as our
fathers did also, which were under the law. For this cause not only the
Apostles, but also the prophets condemned al them as bastardes, and
strangers from the Testament, and breakers of Gods covenant, which without
faith, and the spirit of adoption, would be called Israelites, by reason of
the law that they had received, and for the only keepyng of the ceremonies
outwardly. For the law, and the couenaunte of God, requires chiefelye faith
toward God, and love from the whole heart, and whole soul, and al
stre^ghthes: and commands us so to love our neighbor, as we love our
self, where upon, In all ceremonies Christ was shadowed and fayeth in him was
required.
as Christ witnesses, the whole law, and the prophets depend. Thus also
Christ was shadowed, and after a certain wise exhibited in all ceremonies,
and fayeth in him was required. Finally all promises either of spiritual, or
corporal things were therefore made to the fathers, as Christ him self
promises unto us all good things, if we seek the kingdom of God, and the
ryghtuousnes thereof, that being delivered from all euyls, and dangers, and
enryched with all good gifts, we may love God more fervently, and study the
more to obey his commandments, and magnify his name.

Wherefore it perteyneth to preachers, to apply handsomely unto us the
promises, and threats propouned to the people of Israel sundry ways, as well
in open sermons of the law, as in exemples, and thereof they must ever
diligently warn the people, that God will bountuously exhibit his healpe, and
give them all good things, beleuyng in him, and obeyinge his commandments.
And contrary wise that he will undoubtedly render punishemenent as well
presently, as in the life to come, to the unfaithful and despicers of his
word. These things shall cause the people to be returned, and furthered in the
fear, and zeal of God.

As for the difference of the old Testament The difference of the old, and
new Testament.
made with the fathers, and the new instituted, by Christ, and the apostles:
it is three fold. First because the old Testament was made with Abraham only,
and his seed namely the people of Israel after the flesh, and with them,
which outwardelye also embraced the same religion. But the new Testamente was
made with all men, and nations through the whole world, as many as believe the
Golspell, and become his children through fayeth.

Secondly, because in the old Testament beside faith, and obedience of the
law, circumcision, and other outward rytes of ceremonies were required. But in
the new Testament nothing is required, but faith, and love with the fruits of
those virtues and a few ceremonies, which Christ him self did ordain.

Thyrdely, for that, that God had not yet opened so clearly to the old people
the grace of the Mediatoure Christ, and because he held them in great fear,
and bondage. But the whole mystery of Christ is more fully reueiled to the
new people, and a greater liberty of outward things is granted. For in the
new Testament there is no difference of persons, places, or civility
commanded, but Christ bad that his gospel, should be preached to every
creature, that al men of all nations should be called to his kingdom,
affirming that al should be saved, that should believe and be baptized.
Wherefore Paul also wrate that those heathen that were converted, were not now
strangers, but the citizens of the saints, and household of God. This in the
steed of circumcision, and other ceremonies, with which they were innumerably
laden in the old Testament, Christ has left sacraments with his church, as
S. Augustine says, very few in nombre, most certain in observation, and
most reverend in signification, that is to say, baptism, and the
celebration of his body, and blood Finally he has now opened the mysteries
of his grace much more clearly, than in times paste to the fathers and he has
powered upon us more abundantly the spirit of ad optio^, and has mad us fre
from Mosaical rites, and al rudime^tes of the world. And he so governs our
hertes with his spirit, that of our own accord we submit our self to
every ordinance of man for the profit of our neighbors, appliynge our self
to every man's health and edificacion toward salvation, and seruinge plainly
with a free, and wyllinge spirit, not constrained,

Furthermore they must observe that there is other manner of speaking of the
old testament, which Paul, and the prophets than use, when they reprove the
vain confidence of the Jews in the Testament, and law of God, which they
observed only outwardly, with out faith in Christ. For in this place they
show, what the old Testament After what sort sacrifices were commanded in
old time.
is, and what it aualeth with out grace, and faith in Christ. Of which
Jeremy speaks cha. vii. This says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,
put your brunt offeryngs to your sacrifices, and eat felsh. for I spoke not to
your fathers, and I gave them no commandment in the day when I brought them
out of the laud of Aegipte, co^cerninge brunte offringes, and sacrifices but I
commanded them this thing saiynge, hear my voice, and I will be your God, and
you shall be my people and walk in all the ways that I have commanded you,
that you may be in good case. Lo the Lord witnesses that he gave not the
law of brunte offringes, and sacrifices, that he commanded his people notinge
concerning this matter which thing the prophet spoke not absolutely of the
law, but as it was corruptly observed of the ungodly Jews, which though they
still apeace provoked God with all manner of wickid deeds, yet they labored in
vain to appease God with sacrifices done with out repentance and faith, That
the prophet than might more strougly throw down this false confidence in
them, vsinge an hyperbolical, or exedynge speech, he says that God
commanded nothing concerning sacrifices. For God ordained sacrifices for
this purpose, that in them faith toward God and Messiah might be exercised,
not that a liberty of sinning, and careless living should be established.

In like manner. S. Paul speaks of the old Testament to the Gala. iiij.
Where he maynteyneth the doctrine of the Gospel against false apostles,
which taught that fayeth in Christ sufficed not unto salvation, but that men
had need of circumcision, and other Mosaicall ceremonies, whereby it came to
pass, that while they despiced the grace of Christ, they retained nothing of
the law and the old Testamente, but the letter, and a certain outward
visour. For he that puts not all his hope, and salvation in Christ only,
has now cast away Christ altogyther. Wherefore that the Apostle might open
more evidently to the Galathians, that the law, and ceremonies, of Moses do
not profitte now, without Christ, yea that they hurt very much. He
compares the old Testamente to Hagar Abraham's handmayde, and the new
Testament of Christ to free Sara. And he makes the old Testament or law to
bring forth bondemen, and carnal children like Hagar, which will persecute
the spiritual children borne of the free woman, wherefore at the last they be
put from the enheritaunce of God, as Hagar was driven out How the old
Testament engend^eth bondmen and enemies of the very God^ie.
of Abraham's house with her son. And surely as many as seek not al health
from Christ alone, but ask part of the law, and outward ceremonies, they
are the bondme^ of the lettre, and rudimentes of the world, and not the
children of God, yea they hate, and persecute all manner of ways the children
of God, which study to worship God in spirit, and truth, and be borne again
of the spirit.

But God made not his covenant nether with Abraham, nor with Moses for this
end, that they should glory in the lettre, and prerogative of the flesh,
refusing Christ, but that they should put al their trust, and hope of salvation
in the promised Messiah, for whose sake god would be their savior and
protector, and they through the faith of the same messiah should be the people,
and worshyppers of God. Saying then that the Galathians being seduced through
fals^ Apostles did put some hope in the law, and in the Ceremonies that the
law appoynteth, the Apostle propouned unto them the old testament to consider
what it brought to pass after that sort, that they trusted in it. So in an
other place he co^pareth the ministry of Moses with the ministry of the
Gospel, and new Testamente, and he testifies that the first is the
ministry of the lettre, and of domnation, as it is in deed to al them, whose
hertes God has not purged with the faith of his son, and confirmed unto them
the new Testament of grace and adoption of the children of God through the
holy ghost, which gives witness unto our spirit, that we be the children of
God, and teaches us to call upon God with confidence, and affection of
children, and to cry Abba, O father. Hither the law, and ministry of Moses
ought to bring us, Christ says to the Jews. If ye believed Moses, ye would
believe me to, for he wit nesseth of me. Paul also, the law is a guide unto
Christ. But the false Apostles with whom Paul fights in no wise taught
this use of the old Testament, but they co^tended that Mosaical ceremonies
must be keepte of necessity, even in the new Testament, and that we should
not seek for salvation in Christ only. As they then abused the ministry of
Moises against Christ and to make the faith of Christ of none effect, so they
made the Testament of such sort unto them selves, as the Apostle calls the
ministry of the lettre, and of damnation. Wherefore the Apostle did ryghtly
set that ministry against the ministry of Christ, and of the new
Testament, to who^ it ought to serve, and to bring to Christ the only
Mediator, obteiner, and confirmer of the new Testament, yea of all
Testamentes, and leiges of Gods beniuolence. Out of this manner of speaking
of the old Testamente the law and Moses his ceremonies, comes it that S.
Paul after the preaching of the kingdom of Christ in the gospel called the
ceremonies of Moses beggarly and weak rudime^tes, because that after the
appearyng of Christ, and the comen publishing of the Gospel into all the
world, they led no more to Christ, but rather were an hyndraunce and let.

The epistle to the Hebr. speaks also of this abrogation of the old
Testament, saying. The old Testament is abrogated, and abolished. But the
covenant of the old testament, as it was made of God with the old saints,
is everlasting, and consists herein, that he shows and exhibiteth him
self unto them a God, a gyuer of eternal life, and that they be his people.
This covenant of God with the chosen is established through the preaching of
the Gospel, and the old Testamente is fulfilled with the new.

And though all the couenauntes of gods beniuolence, which from the beginning
of the world have been made with men, were obtained and confirmed, through
Jesus Christ, which renueth our hertes, and only writes the law in them,
nevertheless the knowledge of Christ, and a more plentiful dealing forth of
the holy ghost was given after the ascension of Christ, and preaching of the
Gospel published through the world. And as there was fear, and bondage in
the old people, so love, and liberty of the spirit is more given to the
new. But saying that fear, and love, bondage, and fredome be together, and at
one time, and have been in all Godly men, the one Testament is contained in
the other among all the children of God, as saint Austen says, there is one
grace, one Christ, one fayeth, one adoption, and therefore also one people of
God, and one couenaunte of salvation.

Only as I said the glory, and knowledge of Christ was further, and more
plentyfull reueyled after the ascension of Christ into heaven, and the grace of
the holy gooste was more aboundauntly shed forth, and therefore true and
everlasting ryghtuousnes was communicated to more people, and more
effectuouslie.

For which cause Saint Paul magnifieth so greatly the rytches of the new
Testamente, and calls it a mystery hydden from the beginning of the world,
saying that it was reueyled in the time of the Gospel by the Apostles through
the holy Ghost, namely that the heathen be coheriters, and of the same body
with the old people, and partetakers of the same promises in Christ Jesus.

Wherefore if after this sort the preachers shall discern, and declare the
things that as well in common, as appropriatly be attributed in the scriptures
to the old, and new Testamente, they shall teach the people the wrytynges of
the prophets, and Apostles more certaynlye, and more fruitefullye, and being
truly instructed unto the kingdom of God, as a rytche and liberal
householder, they shall bring out of the treasures of the scriptures all the
promises, threats, exemples, and commandments of God delivered unto both
the people.

And they shall declare that in all the promises even of bodily things the
promises How Christ is enclosed in all the promises of Moses.
of grace in Christ, and everlasting life, be enclosed. For this promise is
contained in all the promises of God made to the elect people of God, like as
upon the benifit of reconciliation, and adoption by Christ all other depend,
yea without this there be no true benifittes, and worthy of the children of God.

So they shall teach that the threats of All the threatenings of Moses
pertayne unto us.
Gods wrath and eternal damnation, where unto all men be subject, be
contained in all the threatenynges of Moses, if Jesus Christ deliver them
not, gyuynge them repentance, and remission of sins through faith in him
self.

Thus also in all the exemples of healpe, and salvation, which chanced to the
old How the exemples of the scripture must be handled.
people through princes, and kings, they shall declare that everlasting
healpe, and redemption in Christ was shadowed, and exhibited. Again in the
Satanicall fury and cruelty of tyrannes, and wicked men against the good,
they shall admonish that we must considre the power, woodnes, and tyranny of
the devil, and of antichrist. Out of the lives and deeds of common saints
they shall put the people in remembrance of the merueilous governance, and
preserving of the church, of fayeth, of repentance, and of the true fruits
of faith, and repentance, and finally of the true blisfulnes that ever
follows these things. In the exe^ples of them that have despiced God and his
law, they shall declare the wrath of God, the reprobate sense, the
ungodliness, obstinate mind, and damnation, which such pull upon them selves
wyllyngly, being them selves the cause of their own destruction.

Thus they shall teach that in all the commandments of God faith out of a
true How the commandments of Moses must be declared.
heart, and love is required. For the whole law, though it prescribe bodily
offices, is spiritual, and requires the true, and spiritual righteousness of
the heart, which Christ our Lord, who only satisfied the law, begins, and
works in us.

Wherefore the preachers in declarynge every one of the commandments, shall
pearce unto the heart it self, and shall require the obedience of the heart, and
shall so declare, and set before their eyes their natural stubburnes, and
rebellion against God, that they shall drive them to distruste them selves,
and to seek, and call for the healpe of Christ, of whom as of the only
savior and physician they may require a new heart, and the holy ghost.

This must be done in declarynge of every precepte of God, and thus all the
commandments of the whole law must From what laws of Moses christen men
be free.
be opened to the people of God, which nevertheless must not be laded with any
things, from which Christ has delivered them, as those be, that properly
pertayne to the policy and discipline of Moses, in which the people of the
law were kept enclosed, in the fear, and faith of God unto Christ, which
be not necessary unto salvation, I mean circumcision, and the other
ceremonies, and rytes of the tabernacle, and temple, the ministeries of
priests, sacrifices washynges, and other bodily purgynges. holy days,
difference of meats, politic observations of judgments, and other facions
of civil governance. But as God What precepts of religion pertayne unto us.
in every precepte of religion taught and required this thing chiefelye, that
the people should come together in his name to hear his word with a
fayethfull heart, to pray, to call for healpe, to sacrifice unto him, and in
sacrifices to enjoy the Sacraments of his grace, and redemption in Christ,
and required all these things for this purpose, that the people thereby should
exercise and stablishe fayeth in his mercy, and in the only Mediatoure
Christ, whose death, and our reconciliation, and wholesome communion obtained
by the same, those sacrifices did shadow, and exibite. So we Christen men also
must learn out of such precepts, with how great religion, with how true
sanctification, and faithful preparation of body, and soul, we must come
together into the common company before the Lord, to hear the word of God,
to pray, and to give thanks, to give oblations unto Christ the Lord
hongriynge, and thurstynge in his members, to receive the Sacraments, and in
them the communion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of all his merits, and
grace.

And so we must know also this thing out of the same kind of precepts, how
grievous a sin we commit, and how horrible pains we deserve, if at any
time we so little esteame the word of God, the use of the Sacraments, so
Godly gifts of God, and the common prayers of the congregation, that neither
we our self study to nourishe, and strengthen our fayeth through these
things, nor serve other in mayntaynynge, and commendinge these exercises, and
aids of religion cheifely on the sondayes, and holy days, wha^ the whole
cogregation is wont to come together Thus saying that it is known that God
thorogh those sondrye washinges, How the precepts of washynges and purginges
of the old Testament must be declared.
and bodilye purgynges, which he prescribed to the old people, would stir
up and move the same, that before all things they should remember that they
ought to seek the cleanes of heart, and that they should diligently beware,
and avoid in their whole life, and conversation al those things, that may be
abominable, loathsome or in any wise unacceptable, and unpleasant to God, and
their nighboure: we ought also in such precepts to stirrevp and exhort both
our selves, and also those that be committed to our charge to this point,
where unto S. Paul also exhorts ii. Co. vii. saiynge: For as much as than we
have these promises derely beloved, let us cleanse our self from al spots
of the flesche, and of the spirit, workinge holiness with the fear of God,

After the same sort the precepts delivered How the political precepts of
Israel must be declared.
to Israel concerning the form, and religion of judgments, and
administration of that whole polity, must be confidered, and handled. For in all these things obedience toward the officers is commanded, which must be
showed from the heart, and readely, and further there is required in them an
honest and civil conversation with all sorts of men, what so ever they be,
and finally a good, and godly administration of the commen weal, wherein
every man may have his right, and all the people may be instituted, and
governed to live godly, and honestly, and be kept pure from al mischeuous, and
abominable acts.

For though we have the Roman laws or other and verditis be given according
there unto, and though God bound us not to the laws of Moses his polity,
nevertheless we must know the will of God out of the self same laws, which
would have all grievous offenses, to be rigorously punisched, and that men be
enstructed, and put forth with good laws, and with the observation, and
punishmente of the same, to al godliness and honesty. Item that innocent, and
good men be constantly defended, and malefactors restrained and cast out of
the come^ weal, or utterly put to death that they hurt not the good.
Finally this thing must be taught also out of these precepts, that every
governance of a commen weal is Gods, and that the officers occupy the
room, and office of God, to judge the judgments of the Lord, as Iosaphat
said to his officers, and therefore that God will require a strait co^pte of
the gouerners of his people toucthing their administration.

If the preachers shall propoune and declare to the people after this sort,
what things God has commanded, and did to the old people, as well in heapinge
most ample benifites upon them as in chastisynge with horrible punishments,
and if they shall set forth all the exemples, that God has exhibited in the
scriptures to be considered, either of his bountiousnes, and severity, or of
his kindness, and unkindness of the people, they shall for their measure perform
that thing, that the Lord witnessed of him self, I come not to break the
law, but to fulfill it. And that, that the apostle says, we abolishe not the
law, but astablish it.

Of preachinge appropriated to the new Testament.
The preachinge of the new Testament is to preach repentance, and remission
of sins in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. For so the Lord him self
said, and prescribed, Luke xxiiii. Because it is so written, and so it be,
houed Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day and
that repentance, and forgyuenes of sins should be preached in his name
among al nations beginning at Jerusalem.

Out of this commandment of Christ S. Petre also testified before the
assemble of the Jews, and the priests, acts. v. in this sort. The God of
our fathers has raised up Jesus whom ye slew. and hanged upon the cross This
prince, and savior God has exalted with his right hand, to give repentance,
and remission of sins unto Israel. In like manner he preaches also before
Cornelius act. x. he commanded that we should preach to the people, and
testify, that it is he, that was appointed of God a judge of the dead and
quick, to him all the prophets bear witness, that whosoever believes in him
shall receive remission of sins thorowgh his name. Paul also in the synagoge
at antioche of pisidia acts. xiii. says thus. Be it known to every one of
you brethren, that thorowgh this man remission of sins is preached unto you,
and thorough this man every one that believes is instified from al things,
from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses. So he says also
to the elders, which he called from Ephesus to Milites cha. xx. ye know from
the first day that I entered in to Asia, how I was with yon at al times,
serving God with all humblenes of mind, and with many tears, and tentations,
which chanced unto me thorough the layinges awaite of the Jews, how I over
slipped nothing that might be profitable unto you, but preached unto you, and
taught you openly, and in every house, testifiyng both to the Jews, and also
to the greeks, that repentance, that is toward God, and that faith that is
toward our Lord Jesus.

By these testimonies it is evident, that A double preaching of the Gospel.
there be two parts of the preachinge of the gospel, or new testament, that
is to say, a preachinge of repentance, and of remission of sins. Wherefore
the preachinge of the new testament must be ginne at repentance as the
exemples of Johan baptiste, of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the apostles do
teach. For all these men began their preachinge with these words, repent your
former life, for the kingdom of God approaches, and believe the gospel, that is
to say, the preachinge of remission of sins. But in this place the preachers
must declare, what repentance we ought to understand. Which is true
repentance.
For this saiynge must not be taken of every repentance but of that, that is
toward God, which Christ the Lord him self raises up in our minds. And
that is true contritio^, and a just grief for our sins, which we have
committed in thought, words or deeds against the law of God. Which grief,
and anguish drives us to fle to Christ with faith, and trust, that for his
sake we shall be delivered from al our sins, and from the wrath of God, and
that for his sake we shall be nombred among the ryghteous before God, and shall be
compted heirs of everlasting life,

This is a very euangelical, and Christian repentance. For it is not inoughe
for wholesome repentance to be grieved, and vexed for our sins, and to fear
the judge, me^t of God, with which repentance Cain, and Judas perished, and
wherewith at length al ungodly men perish, after that they begin to feel
what anger of God, and what damnation they have purchased to them self
thorough their sinful acts. But as Paul says we must necessarely have
repentance toward God, that is to say, we must therefore be grieved for our
sins, and fear the judgment of God, because we have offended god our
creator, and redemer, and have forsaken him thorough sins, that besides
contrition for our sins there be in us also a burninge desire, and study of
reconciliatio^ with God, a trust to obtain the same, and a sure purpose to
amend our lives, and to yield our selves wholly in to the obedience of God. Al
which things a true repentance must have, desire, and perceive, and that
thorough our only bischoppe, and redemer Jesus Cehrist, which alone stirs
up and works true repentance in us, while he makes the preachinge of
repentance effectual in our hertes, gyuinge his increase.

Of the preachinge of repentance.
But to raise up this repentance in our hertes we must cheifely use the
preachinge of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, wherewith he
satisfied God the father for our sins. And we must also use a continual
declaration, and repetinge of the law of God, wherein God shows what things
he allows in us, and what he disaloweth, and how ge^tly and bountiously he
handles them that obey his commau^dimentes, and how rigorously That
repentance must be taught out of the ignominious death of Christ.
he punishes the^, that contemn the same Wherefore the preachers in their,
sermons and in the administration of the sacraments must preach the death of
the Lord with singular diligence, and set before the eyes of the people, and
warn them studiously that the son of God which never committed any sin
suffered that most bitter, and sha^ful death only for our sins. For they shall
teach that they be so abominable in the sight of the lord, that they could be
purged with none other sacrifice, with no merits or peynes either of men, or
angels, but only with the precious death of the son of God, For this cause
the preachers shall admonish me^ of the greatness of sin, and of the wrath of
God, and they shall stir them up to repent earnessly.

And because Christ our Lord is the only glass and exemplar of a godly
life, we may learn certainly, and substantially out of the life and obedience
of Christ, to what manner of life we be made, and called what stubburnes there
is in us against god and what corruption of nature whereby surely we have
deserved, that we should suffer eternally those punishments that the son of
God suffered for us, seeing that inobedience and stubburnnes against God do
ever remain in us.

Hereof it comes that the Apostles in their sermons as we may see in the
acts, were wont to join together the death, and resurrection of Christ, as
the principal points of Christian doctrine, which al me^ ought ever to have in
their sight. And undoubtedly they ever declared the same diligently and taught
thereby how Christ thorough the preordeined purpose, and providence of God,
was delivered and died for our sins, and rose for our ryghteousnes.

Wherefore thorough the preachinge of the passion, and death of Christ they
exhorted the people to acknowledge their sins and to repent truly, and by the
testimonies of the resurrection they stirred them up to faith and trust of
grace, and for gyuenes of sins. For they that can truly believe, and persuade
them selves that the son of God was smitten for their sins, and that the
horriblenes of our sins is so great, that it behooved the son of god to
suffer so shameful, and cruel a punishmente for the purgation of them, while he
would redeem us from eternal death, these men undoubtedly shall be ashamed, and
repentaunt of their sins, and such men shall abhor excedinglye and fear
sins. And so they shall conceive a lively, and substa^tial repentance.
Wherefore when Paul exhorts to profit, and go forward in repentance of
sins, and warns that we live not to satisfy sins, but to kille them in
us, and to dye concerning the same, he is wont to make mention of the
passion, and death of Christ. Roma. vi. Know ye brethern that as many of us,
as be baptized into Christ Jesus, we be baptized into his death. That he dyed,
he dyed for sin. Item, him which knew not sin he made sin for us, that
is to say a sacrifice for sin. The Apostle does the same thing in many
other places, where he allureth to a new life, and to amendment, that is to
say, to true repentance, Ephesi. iiij. Philip. ij. iij. and. Collo. ij. and
in other places. For which cause also in mentioning both the Sacraments,
Baptism, and the the supper of the Lord, he preaches of the death, and
passion of Christ. For as he said of baptism, that we are buried with Christ
so he adds in the description of the supper do this in my remembrance. For
as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall show
forth the death of the Lord till he come. So. S. Petre says also. Se that
having your conversation in fear, ye pass the time of your dwelling, knowing
that you were redeemed from your vain conversation, which ye received of the
fathers teaching, not with transitorye things, as with silver and gold, but
with the precious blood as of an unspotted and undefiled lamb Christ.

After the same sort it shall be the preachers part as well in sermons, as in
the administration of the Sacraments, to show forth diligently to the people
the death of the Lord, as the only satisfaction for our sins, and through
the same to raise them up, and to drive them unto repentance.

And they must witness to them that sin carelessly, and stubburnly, the
thing that is in the Epistle to the Hebru, that is to say, that such with
their wicked life do stamp the son of God with their fete, and defile the
blood of the Testament, and therefore shall be punished of God at length
horriblebly, and euerlastyngly.

Of the true, and propre use of Gods law.
Forasmuch as the true acknowledgynge of sins is necessary to repentance,
or contrition, the law of God must be continually declared, and beaten into
the people, and the horrible punishments which God in the law threatens to
them that sin, both with terrible words, and most dreadful exemples,
which he shows in punishing the ungodly, must be set before them. For
though Christ alone be the author of repentance toward God, that is to
say, of wholesome contrition, and grief for sin, whereby the heart of man is
perfectlye turned unto God, and brought again unto the obedience of him, yet
he will that the preaching of his law be applied to this purpose, and he will
not deny the increase of his spirit, when it is faithfully applied.

This thing then is chiefly to be warned, to the intent that men may be
ryghtly taught of the law, namely that all that, is called the law or
commandment of God, and is so in deed, that declares unto us what god
requires of us, what pleases him, and what displeases him. And this thing
must What is to be understood by the name of the law.
necessarely be taught, because of the^ which think that the law is not
contained in the books of the new Testament, and that there be no
commandments taught therein. And again that there is no Gospel in the old
Testament. Which error makes me^ unfit, and untoward to understand the
scripture a right. Wherefore where so ever commandments are taught, with
which god shows, what he allows ordisalloweth in us, whether they be in
the new Testament or in the old, they ought to be compted for the law of
God, and they must be none otherwise taught, and declared, then those that
Moses taught.

Secondly we must know this also, that there is a double understanding of the
law. A double understanding of the law.
The first is flesly, and gross, when men think that only outward acts
are prohibited in the law, which if a man auoyed metely well, he has
satisfied the law, though there remain still in the mind evil affections,
and concupiscence repugnant and contrary to the law, which is only
restrained for fear of punishments, that it break not forth into outward
mischeuous acts. As if a man should think, when the law says. Thou shalt
not steal, that he has obeyed this precept, when he has holden him self
from manifest robbery, and theft, though in the mean while his heart boil
with couetise, and carfulness of this life, and burn with the desire of an
others good.

Surely this understanding of the law, is a false and a very heathnishe
error, which makes nothing else then hipocrites, of which sort that
pharisee was standing in the temple, and praying, I thank the God that I am
not, as other men be raueners, un just, adulterers, as also this publicane is.

They then that think so carnally of the law, have much a do and great
difficulty to come to the knowedge of Christ. For they look only to outward
works, which they think they can perform with their own strength, and
therefore they trust that they may obtain forgyuenes of sins and salvation
with their own works.

And as for the preaching of free remission of sins through Christ, and the
ryghtuousnes of fayeth, they are either offended with it, or despice it, as
folishe. The veil in old time laid over the face of Moses when the children
of Israel could not direct their eyes unto his face, signified this ungodly
persuasion. For such men have their wits blinded, as the Apostle says. For
as then the Isralites only beheld the veil laid upon Moses his face, and
not the face it self. So these hypocrites se not the true meaning of Gods
law, but styckynge in the letter they follow a carnal understanding, which
they falsely lay upon the clearnes of the law as, a certain cover. This
veil remains unto this day in reading of the old Testament in all them,
from whom Christ takes it not away, which only with his spirit opens the
true understanding of the law. Wherefore the Apostle says, but when they
shall be turned to God, the veil shall be taken away.

The other understanding of the law is true, and spiritual, when we understand
that not only outward naughty works are prohibited, but also inward, that
is to say, evil co^c^pisce^ce, evil affections, al thoughts, words, deeds,
will, inclination, and what so ever things either in our body, or soul be
moved in any wise against the law of God. Then we acknowledge that not only
outward discipline is required of us, and virtues which without grace we may
perform of our own strength, but such works, as the holy gooste him self
works in us, as, a true and perfect trust of grace and Gods healpe through
Christ Jesus, true invocation in all perilles, fervent love of God, and our
neighbor, perfect obedience from the whole heart, and al our strengthes, to
be pure and fre from al naughty motions, and to be inclined and carried only
hereunto, that thou serve God only, that thou praise and magnify him only
with the true love of him, and of thy neighbor with all kinds of good works,
whereby thou may further the health of men, and therein set forth the
glory of God.

This true, and wholesome understanding of the law is necessary for all men,
wherewyth as all men be reproved of sin, so also they be called back unto
repentance, and a way unto their hertes is prepared for the Lord. Thus also
our Lord Jesus Christ interpreted certain commandments of the law.
Math. v. willing undoubtedly that the rest should be so understood, and
declared.

After the same sort Paul likewise declares the strength of the law. Roma.
viij. saying the law is spiritual, but I am fleshly sold under sin. Saying
then that the law is spiritual, it requires spiritual works. But man being
fleshly, does only the works of the flesh. For an evil tree brings not
forth good fruits. He then that will satisfy the law must be made a
pirituall man, and he must do spiritual works, as those be that the holy
spirit works in us, as, the true faith of Gods word, and burning love,
and fear of God, and the fruits of these virtues. We keep no precept of our
own strength
Whereof it appears that we can not do the least commandments of the law
through our own strengthes without the healpe of the holy ghost. The
brightness that shone in Moses his face, which the eyes of the Israelites
could not abide, signified the understanding of the law. For as the
Israelites could not suffer with there eyes this bryghtnesse but being afraid
fled away. So carnal reason can not attain this understanding of the law,
but rather abhors it, and judges it very mad For if it were so, thincketh
she, al men must needs be damned eneriechon, and she weneth that God does
unjustly with us, if he command those things that we can not perfurme of our
own strength. This reason casts away the true understanding of the law,
and casts a veil before her eyes and conforteth her self with this false
opinion, that we have free will and if we do as much as lies in us, that God can
not but take it in good worth, and that he requires no more of us at al. But we
that believe in Christ, and be taught of the holy ghost know that this is the
true sentence of the law, which we have proposed. For we see the face of
Moses uncovered, and have obtained that, that Paul spaketh of. ii. Cor. iii,
But when they shall be converted unto the Lord the veil shall be taken away, For
after that we have known, and do behold Christ thorough faith, a new glory
of god shyneth in us, and we are transformed to the same image of Christ,
going forth dailye from the clearnes of this new life be, gone in us, to the
clearnes of Christ's life, and that thorough the spirit of the Lord. Saying
that Christ tha^ thorough the know ledge of him self gives us this spiritual
light, and clearnes of new life, it is certain that it is required of us in
the law and that it is necessary for us unto salvation. For Christ came for
this purpose, rose again, and entered in to his heavenly kingdom, that he
might restore and finishe the same in us, where unto we were first made, and
are called again by the law of God. Wherefore the face of Moses is now
uncovered and the true understanding of the law is disclosed unto us, which
be converted to Christ the Lord, and be hold him thorough faith, and in him
partly know. enjoy, and live the life, that God allows

Thirdly when that it is declared, what must be understood by the name of
the law of God, and what is the true meaning, and interpretation of the law,
we must considre, and teach diligently, for what use and end the law was
given to us of God. For thought we have in few words some what toutched it,
that is to wit, that the law was given for this purpose, that thorough the
knowledge of sins, which it causes, it might work repentance, never
theles we must declare this thing some what more ple^tifully. And for as much
as, S. Paul taught the strenghth and nature of the law with singular
diligence, and plains, as a man that perceived, that the strength of the law
being not well declared, and known, men will be justified rather with the
keepinge of outward discipline, and cou^terfaite works of the law, than with
faith in Christ: we think good to consider three sentences of Paul, where
with he most clearly, and plainly expouned the strength, and nature, and use
of the law, that thus, as much as is possible, we may take away that festred
error of me^, whereby they go about to satisfy the law with their own
strength and being co^te^ted with anoutward, and vain show of righteousness,
they neglecte Christ, and have no care at al of the true ryghtuousnes of the
heart: these be the sayings of Paul. Through the law is the knowledge of syn.
To. iii. the law works wrath. To. iiii. The law is our scholemaister to
Christ: Ga. iii.

Out of the first saiynge, which is this thorough the law comes knowledge of
sin, we must learn, and, teach that thorough the fall of Adam there is so
great darkness brought in to man's reason, that of our self we can not
understand, what sin is, and therefore that God gave us the law that we
might know sin therebi For this cause we must be resolved hereupon, that,
that is sin in ded, that God Reason of her self understands not what is
sin
forbids, and contrary wise that, that is a good work, that God
commands. Wherefore when we turn our selves from the low of God, and look
upon it neglige^tly, as we have done a great while with the great hurt of the
church, the true knowledge also of sin is clearly lost, and likewise of
ryghteousnes, and than with cou^terfaite sins, and good works we vex both
our selves, and other in vain, which thing many have done, and do yet unto
this day. For if any thing be omytted against suprestious vows and against
other things What sins were falsely feigned.
which God requires not, if we have been slack in the afflictions of the
body taken upon us for no regard of Godlynes, and much less for the using
of the same, or if we have let pass any other invention of men, that
profits nothing to true ryghteousnes, for these things superstitions men
are meruailously grieved, and compte them for sins, they shryue them selves
of these things carefully, and think that they must wash the^ away with
singular repentance Contrarywyse if they have performed any thing herein,
they think that they have done a noble act, and have deserved much of God. In
the mean while they neglecte in them selves and wincke at those true, and most
grievous sins, from which (as from headspringes) al other evil thoughts,
words, and deeds flow out, as these be, the neglectinge of God, and his
word, unbelief, distruste of Godds promise, despiceing of his threats,
sondrye nawghtye lusts naturally engendered in us. But while these very sins
and vices be not yet known to us, and therefore grieve us not, how can we
ryghtly acknowledge the^, and ask forgiveness of them thorough Christ.
Wherefore that we may truly acknowledge our sins, and be delivered from
them thorough Christ, we must needs know them and considre them, not after
our reason nor man's Paul knew not sin without the law.
traditions, but after the law of God. Paul so great an apostle in, vii, to
the. To. writes thus of him felfe, I know not sin but thorough the law, yea
I had not known, that concupiscence is sin, except the law had said. Thou
shalt not lust. And though the same apostle say in the same Epistle cha. ii.
that the heathen which have no law do the things of the law by nature and
that they having no law, be a law to them selves, shewinge the works of the
law written in their hertes, yet it is known by the whole doctrine of this
apostle, and all the scripture, that men endued only with the judgment of
nature, and which have not the spirit that begets a new, determine
nothing effectuouslye, but of outward discipline, and of sins committed
against the same, to stir up true repentance thereof in the^ sleues. For
they which only have the light of reason, neglecte the things that they
commit against the faith in God and true worshippinge of God, because they
believe not, nor trust in God, nor call upon him with a true heart. They are
nothing payned for those things, nether have they any care at al to amend
the same, and to turn to God, and to approve them selves unto him with true
faith, and trust. This the apostle wrate of the wise among the heathen which
had gotten any knowledge of God. Where as they know God, says he, they
honored not him as God, neither were thankful, but were begiled thorough
their thoughts, and their ignoraunte heart was darckned. When they believed
them selves to be wise, they where made fools, and changed the glory of thim
mortal God thorough an image not only made after the lyknes of man, but also
of forefooted, and crepinge beasts.

But God which is ritche in mercy gave his spirit, the teacher of all truth
to many of them both before, and after the geuynge of the law, without the
ministry of this law, only through the common law of nature, and doctrine
received from the fathers And by this spirit they both knew, and did the
things that pertayne to the law, and were to them selves in steed of a law.
Of which things they could do none, through the only light of that nature,
wherwyth they were borne into this world. For saying that Paul could not
acknowledge sin without the law given, and reueiled from above, undoubtedly
the doctrine of the law of God is necessary to all men, that they may know
their sin thereby. Wherefore the law must be set forth, and repeted to the
people with all diligence, that they may learn to have it ever in their eyes,
and to considre it reverently, and to direct their minds, and all their
doings thereunto, that through true and substantial knowledgyng of sin, a
lively repentance of the same may be prycked up.

For that is a true, and wholesome knowledge of sin, when we do not only
acknowledge, what sin is, but also that we are guilty of sin. And the law
was given to steare up in us, such a knowledge of sin For it says not only
that murder, auoutrie, theft, and such like, be sins, but it says, kyl
not thou, yea be not angry with out a cause, commit not thou auoutrie, yea
desire not an other man's wife, steal not thou, yea defraude not thy
neighbor in any business. He that hears these things with a purged mind,
and lyghtened with the spirit of adoption, acknoledgeth that it is required in
the law, that we embrace and perform the thing that God commands with all
our heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength, and that we all
together abhor from that, that he forbyddeth, with al our understanding, all
our will, and all our nature. Therefore when a man perceyueth that he is yet
far from this true obedience, and study of Gods law, he acknowledges him
self, though he absteyne outwardly from murder, adultery, theft and fraud
of his neighbor, to be nevertheless before God a murtheer, an adulterer, and a
thief, and to be in danger for giltines of all these euyls. For all be it that
he has not conceived in his mind any reuengeaunce, lust, or wrong, nor has
consented to commit the same (whereof no man will lightly boste) neuerthels he
shall find in him self an inclination, and a readiness of mind to the same
mischiues. Thus when he labors to lift up his mind unto virtue, ge^tlenes,
liberality, and patience, he feels his mind repugnynge, and ever with
drawyng it self from those deeds, and if it be somewhat steared up thereunto,
yet he perceyueth it to faint therein, and not to be moved, and to burn with so
great desire, as it should.

But this lust to do evil, this repugnau^ce to good, this difficulty, slownes,
fayntnes, and slarkenes be very sins before God, because they be against
the law of God, which of right requires of us, that we do the things, that
he commands us to do most desirously, and abhor the things that he
forbids with all our heart, and all our strength, so that we abhor nothing
more in all our life.

Here of it appears plainly, that we are taught by the law of God, while we
behold it after the meaning of Christ, that we be not only sinners, but also
prisoners, and sold under sin. For we can not repress in any wise those
inward motions with our own strength, which thing when we learn, and
acknowledge out of the law, then we have a true, and an wholesome knowledge of
the law. Therefore as the Apostle teaches diligently, and beats in this
knowledge of the law, so al preachers must be most dilligent, to teach, and
print the same in the people, omitting the subtle disputations of the law,
that make nothing to the purpose. For while they continually beat in this
substantial obseruau^ce of the law, which Paul teaches, they shall steare up
in men a true knowledge of sins, and thereby a lively and effectuous
repentance, and a careful, and earnest conversation unto Christ. For they
that give them selves earnestly to this perfect obedience of the law, and
turn their life thereunto, shall much better perceive, then any man can
teach, how great corruption there is of nature, and how great tirannie of
sin in us.

An other saying of Paul, whereby we may know the true use of the law, is
this. The law works wrath, wherewith the Apostle signifies, that we do not
only not acknowledge sin of our selves, but also neglecte it when we have
acknowledged it, and dispice carelessly the judgment, and wrath of god against
sin, which the law threatens, as though God were not so much offended with
our sins, as the scripture witnesses, and as though he could wynke at them.
Where as yet David testifies, that God will not iniquity. For thus he says:
Thou art not the God, that wylleth iniquity. And thou hate all that work
iniquity, and shall destroy them that speak lies.

Wherefore God would fraye, steare, and move us again with his heavenly voice,
that we might feel his wrath in our consciences. And this he does with
threateninges of punishme^tes, and miseries, which he added to his
commandments in the law, both corporal, and everlasting many times, and
right horribly, and al sinners shall suffer them, if they repent not, and be
delivered through Christ. Therefore the preachers must diligently declare to
the people these punishme^tes and miseries, that at length they may
understand the wrath of God, and feel it in their consciences, that being
frayed with the intolerable judgment of God, they may be steared to seek
grace in Christ, and deliverance from this wrath of God.

Hereof it appears sufficiently that the law was not given to testify, and
to quick, but that through it we might understand that sin raygneth
myghtely in us, and that we should seek an other way, whereby we might come
into Gods favor, and obtain that life, that the Gospel shows, namely
fayeth in Christ. Whereof. S Paul wrate to the Galathians. iij. For if there
had been a law, that had been able to quycken, ryghtuousnes had been of the
law in deed. But the law justifies not, but condemns, while it
prescribes, and requires that, that God requires of man to be done, and
threateneth death, and hell to all them, that perform not the thing, that it
prescribes and requires, which thing no man can do. For we are so destitute
of the glory of God, and true ryghtuousnes, so sold to sin, and plainly so
dead, as Paul witnesses, that the law it self, which should be a remedy unto
us, and bring us again to life, is turned into our destruction, and casts
us further into hell, concupiscence being steared up through it, and sin
increased.

Wherefore this is the use of the whole law, that it show us this our
perdition through sin, and that it drive us (being stryken with true grief
for syne, and with the fear of Gods judgment, and being destistute of all
hope of salvation to begotten otherwise) to Christ the savior, which through
his passion, and death has removed the wrath of God from us, has obtained
favor, gives the spirit of regeneration, through which spirit being
sanctified, and strengthened, we are driven forth to work well, and we are
stayed with this consolation, that he is our only Meditoure, and Savior,
which may set his perfect obedience, and righteousness between the father,
and us, and at length in the resurrection will deliver us from all sins, and
give us perfect ryghtuousnes.

The third place of Paul is this. The The law is our guide or scholemaister
to Christ.
law was made unto us a scholemaister unto Christ. This end then of the law
must be diligently declared and repeted in sermons. For all we have yet need
of this scholemaistringe, according to the measure of faith, and the spirit
given to every one. For there remains a great weakness in us all, by
reason whereof we have need through the fear of the servile spirit, to be
ever driven to Christ, and to be kept in the obedience of God, unto a fulle
liberty of the spirit of children.

Further more no small part of christian people, in this last, and so
corrupt age of the world, after so notable a defection from the law of God,
follows their lusts without care, and lives in manifest vices. It is then as
necessary to preach the law to this kind of people, and to raise them up
from the sleep of their vices, through the fear of Gods judgments, and to
drive them to Christ, as it was to the old people. Therefore it shall
pertayne to the preachers, while they exhort to good works, to beat in
diligently the commandments of the law, the promises, and threats joined
to the commandments. How be it they must do it with such moderation, that
together with principal diligence, they teach that it is Christ only, that
works the true obedience of the law, and that he satisfied through his
obedience that, that wa^ted in ours, wherein there is no perfection. For as
long as we live here, our obedience is very sclender, and imperfect, nor
satissieth the law at any time, which law sets this mark of our
obedience, that we love God with our whole heart, our whole soul, and all our
strenghthes. Wherefore those places in the law, and in the prophets that
preach of Christ, Eue^ the law leads and remitteth to Christ.
whereof there be many in the scripture, shall be declared, and commended to
the people with great diligence.

For the law profits us not only in this point, that thorouge the
knowledge of sin, which it stirs up, and the fear of Gods wrath,
which it causes, it calls us again to Christ, and keeps us thorough
obedience toward god, in Christ and yet by none other strength, tha^ of
Christ but also it magnifieth, and shows Christ with pleasant preachinge,
and remitteth and leads sweetly unto him, because it preaches him be the
only obteiner of mercy, and our savior, which thing it does two manner of
ways, First with plain, and open testimonies, as this is, that we read in
Deutro. xxiii. The Lord shall raise up to the a prophet syke me. Secondly with
shadows, and pleasant allegories, as that is of the pascal lamb. So the
prophets also prophetied of Christ many ways, and more openly and ple^tifully
the^ Moses, til at the last John baptiste showed him with his singer being
present. Al which things must be preached, and expouned to the people with
great diligence out of the law, and the prophets.

These than be the causes, why the law was given, which God knew that we
would not keep, namely that being taught and admonisched thorough it, we
should acknowledge our weakness, and infirmity, and feel the excidinge wrath
of God, and through a certain Godly discipline be led unto Christ, and put al
our trust in him and appliynge good works, should grow in to him daily,
which is the head, being furnished with all Godlynes, and virtue. After that
the ministers shall be instructed of the law, and have taught the people
faithfully, than they shall both them selves use the law a right, and shall
bring the people in to the true knowledge of it, and shall move the^ to true
repentance, and grief for their sins, and so stir the^ up, and drive them
unto Christ the redemer, to serve him with all desire.

And because the commen people can not vndrestande and remember all the
precepts of the law, seeing that they be very many, and every one has a
large dominion, the preachers must after recite and printe in the minds of
the hearers: the brief sums, and chief articles of Gods law, as that is,
that we have in Math. xxii. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole
heart, and in thy whole soul, and in thy whole mind. This is the principal,
and great commandment. The second is like thereunto, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, as thy self. Upon these two commandments the whole law, and the
Prophets depend. Item, that the apostle wrate to Timothe. The end of the
commandment is love from a pure heart, and good conscience, and faith not
feigned. And in as much as it was most mercifully permitted in old time, that
Godly parents should teach their children with al diligence the ten
commandments, wherein the whole doctrine of godliness is plainly
comprehended, which thing brought such profitte, as no man can express, the
preachers shall diligently and often recite this sum of Gods law, and
shall declare in their sermons briefly, and plainly the true meaning of
every precepte.

A brief declaration of the ten commandments.
IN the first sentence then of the ten commandments, I am the Lord thy God,
A sum of the first commandment.
which brought the out of Egipte. etc. The preachers shall first teach, that
God witnesses with this his word, that he him self, which gives us this
commandment, is the only Lord, that is to say, the almighty maker, and
gouerner of all things, only good, and the cause of goodness, and the dryuer
away of all euyls,

Secondly that through the preaching of the Gospel, and baptism, he has
received us into his people, as in old time he received Israel, bryngyng him
out of Egipte, and the house of bondage, and giving him his Sacraments. And
that in Christ our Lord, he will be a God also to al us, to who^ he has
caused these things to be preached, that is to say, an author, and gyuer of
everlasting salvation, of restitution both of body, and soul.

And seeing that it is extreme ungodliness, not to hear God, when he speaks,
and not to believe him, when he promises, all good things, the preachers
concerning this word next before, shall teach, that God requires, that with all our heart we believe this his testimony, and promise, and that we rest
therein, namely that we acknowledge him to be our God, and Savior, that we
worship him, and always call for his mercy, succor, and aid through our
Lord Jesus Christ, and that we fear, love, and magnify him with all our
hertes above all things for his unmeasurable grace and great benifittes.

In the second commandment, thou shall have no strange Gods before me,
thou shall make to thy self n^ graue^ image to bow down to it, or to
worship it, the people must be admonished first, that through strange Gods,
and worshippyng Images al trust of Gods healpe is to be put in nothing besides
God in Christ, and that all worshyppynges of God, as all those be, that are in
hand without the word of God, as the worshippynges, of the Mahometistes,
Jews, and of them which go about to worship God and to obtain his help
with such ceremonies, as be not taken out of the word of God, nor serve
effectuously to the gospel of Christ or with ceremonies not instituted by the
Lord him self, but used with out repentance, and faith. The Lord also
forbids in this place all Witchcrafte, and all that abuse of creatures when
men either require that profit of things, for which they were not made of
God, which thing is committed in false dominations, and other witchcrafte, or
when they require profit of things, for which they were made in deed, but
they require it not as coming from God, and hanging upon his grace, praiynge
for it first of the Lord, thorough Christ, and to his glory.

Further they shall teach, that in this commandment there is reveled unto us
that corruption of our defiled nature, and that ungodliness that is naturally
grafted in us, by reason whereof we be ever ignoraunte, we fle, and neglecte
the true, and only God, and we seek no help of God trustinge in man's
strenght, and in our own, or we seek it not from him, the onley, and true God
in Christ, but from counterfaite, and false Gods, and that sometimes under
the name of the true God him self, when we call upon God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ thorough this only Mediator with out repentance, and faith,
and some times under other names, as wha^ me^ ask of saints deliverance from
sins and help of this present life, and of the life to come, or finally
when we use ceremonies strange from the word, with true conversion to God,
and worshippinge of the heart, to seek the help of God thereby, and to make
God bound to us. For all this ungodliness being naturally engendered in us is
disclosed in this second commandment, and set before our eyes to be
considered by the word of God.

Thirdly we have also in this word a How this commandment is fulfilled.
certain holy scholemastringe, where with God by this commandment showing,
us the corruption, and weakness of our nature, will bring us to Christ his
son, which may turn away, and pacify his wrath against this ungodliness,
and sin cleaninge in nature, which moreover may mortify the remnauntes of
this evil, through the holy ghost, and keep us in true faith, and calling
upon Gods grace, and give us, increase therein daily more, and more, that in
Christ by the healpe of the holy ghost we may attain so far at length that
we shall seek, and desire al good things, and deliuerau^ce from al euyls of
God only, and not of any creature, nor any other wise then he has appointed,
briefly that we shall behold, acknowledge, and glorify his goodness only
in all the creatures of God made for our use, and not the creatures them
selves, and this we shall do according to his word, and that way, that he
has ordained, either after the general workyng of nature, governance, and
administration of the world, or after some peculiar constitution of religion,
and governance of the chose^ unto the kingdom of his son.

As God made the sun, moon, and other sterres, the air, the clouds, and
other heavenly creatures, for this intent that they should shine, discern
the times, make the earth fruitful, and serve men for other commodities, and
also for such punishme^tes, as God will lay upon his despicers.

They now that require of the sterres, or look for other effects, as good
fortune, and success in things, an opportunity of taking matters in hand,
not simply hanging upon God, and his word, as in time paste the heathen,
Jews, and false christians did provoke God most grievously against them,
these men I say, give that to sterres, that pertains to God the maker of
sterres, and they abuse them to things, whereunto they were not ordained for us
of God.

They wrappe them selves in the same ungodliness that burn hallowed herbs
against tempests, and visions of the devil, which use herbs, or other
things to cause health of the body, or to procure success of their business,
to which God has given no virtue for that purpose, which madness raygneth
much now a days in the common people. For through the ungodliness that is
naturally engendered in every one of us, and through our turnynge from the true
God, and true worshipping of the same, it comes to pass, that al they that be
not borne again in Christ, never seek Gods healpe simply from God him
self, nor by those instruments, that he has set before us, nor after that
sort, that he has appointed. But they devise always new Gods, new
instruments, and new ways to obtain Gods healpe.

And me^ admit this ungodly frowardnes not only in natural things, but
also in civil. For the officer is ordained of God, The Idolatry that is
committed in ciulle power.
to maynteyne civil order, and to further his people to godliness, and to an
honest life through laws, judgments, and procuring of things, wherewyth
this present life is sustained, and through propulsation of those things, that
hurt this life. They the^ that require these benifittes of God, first of god
him self, and afterward of the gouerners, but as the ministers, and stewardes
of god, and require them by a lawful means, that is to say, by such as
agrees with the faith in God and love of our neighbor, and is received by
the common laws, and customs they do well and godly, and use the instruments
of Gods bountiousnes arighte.

But they that receive of them the laws of religion, and govern their whole
life after their will, not after the word of God, and think them selves
happy, if they be their friends and miserable, if the matter be otherwise,
though they run into the displeasure of God, these men preferrynge the power,
and empery of men, before the power and empire of the maker, do ungodly, and
peruersly, and pernitiously abuse these instruments of Gods providence,
offe^dyng in this commau^deme^t, which forbideth to have strau^g Gods. After
the same sort God has co^stituted religion in certain bonds and prescribed
The Idolatry that ryseth out of religion and ceremonies.
limits. For he has delivered us propre instruments, and a certain way,
whereby he will have us to ask of him, and to enjoy the benifittes of
regeneration, and heavenly life, that is to say, his word, his sacraments,
and ecclesiastical order. If then we use these things, as Christ him self
has propouned them unto us, conceyne, increase, and work fayeth in Christ,
we do Godly and religiously, a new and a blessed life is framed, increased, and
finished in us, and we present to God a true and acceptable service. But if we
use these ordinances, and ceremonies, which God gave us with the outward
work only, without true repentance of sins, and lively faith of the
redemption of Christ, or if we deuyse new ceremonies, and sacraments, which
were neither taught of God, nor lead to Christ wherewyth we purpose to purge
sins, to procure the benifittes of God, and to worship God, for which
intent the common people abuse images, and relikes of saints candelles, holy
water, salt, and other coniured and consecrated things, we do ungodly and
vnreligiously, and procure distructio^ to our selves in the stead of health,
and we worship not God acceptably, but we present unto him a thing that he
abhors, and counts abominable, and we do him great despite.

Wherefore the people must be diligently, True faith asks all good things
and help from God only.
and continually taught, that true religion, and right worshipping of God
consists herein, that we require, and look for all good things, and the
auoidaunce of al euyls from God alone, through the only Mediator Christ, and
by those instruments either of nature, policy, or religion, which God him
self has made, and commended with his word for every thing, and that we
use the same, after such sort, as Christ has appointed, that is to say,
that the same may serve effectuously to repentance of sins and faith in
Christ. Thus we cleave plainly to the one, and true God, and we exhibit
worship pleasant unto him, and wholesome for our selves, singing to him
with the Psalm writer, who is there in heaven beside the, or whom would I
have Psalm. lxxij.
in earth with the. My flesh and my heart is wasted, the strength of my heart,
and my portion God is for ever. etc

To al these things the law is our scholemaister through this commandment,
wherein God forbids us to worship strange Gods, and also forbids al
strange worshippyng of himself. But this commandment must be declared, and
set forth with all diligence in Christ the lord, that me^ may be alwais steared
up, and driven with this scholing to Christ, and to the true worshippynge of
God in him. After the same sort the third precept also shall be declared. Thou
shall not take the name of the lord thy god in vain. And first the people
must be taught that God forbideth with this commandment what so ever is so
spoken or kept in silence, that it diminishes the glory of god and the
magnifying of his name. For they that look for all good things from the fre
beniuole^ce of god in Christ, and put their hope of eternal life therein only,
say with David, I will praise the lord always, his praise shall be ever in my
mouth. etc. Secondly they must warn me^ that god throw this commandment
sets the wickedness of our heart and whole nature before our eyes to be
acknoledged, by reason whereof we neglect the due praising and magnifying of
god, whereunto we should have a burning desire. For by nature we are so
corrupted with ungodliness, that it is tedious to us to hear god praised, so
far of it is, that we study worthily to confess him, to call upon him, and to
magnify the glory of his majesty. Through which fault it comes to pass,
that with the lest incommodities, or commodities of the world, we suffer our
selves to be frayed, and to be turned away from the true confession of Gods
name, and from testifying of the Gospel. And if god did not sufteyne, us with
his power, we should al sone fall to this point, that we should abuse his
holy name to perjury, lies, superstition, and open blasphemy.

Thyrdly the instruction of this commandment How this commandment is
fulfilled.
must be taught, that me^ may learn that God through this commandment
shows us our natural disease of ungodliness, that thereby he may drive us to
Christ his son the true and only Mediatoure, which before him may entreat
for us, and obtain forgyuenes of this evil, and daily repress the same
through the holy ghost, and at length utterly abolishe it, which may move, and
kendle our hertes with his spirit, that we may begin the sanctification of
his name in confessing, testifyinge, and praising his name, and his word with
out fear, in all places, with all reverence, and chiefly keepynge our selves
from all abusyng of the name, and word of God.

Thus in the fourth commandment, remember that thou keep holy the Saboth
day, the preachers shall teach, first that it is commanded that in those
appointed times when the congregation is wont to come together to hear the
word of God, to pray and to receive the sacraments, all christian men
assemble thither setting aside al other business, chiefly on the sondayes, and
holy days, and that they hear the holy lessons devoutly, give somewhat to
the poor, use the sacraments. etc. For we must all seek an increase, and
confirmation of fayeth, and of al godliness for our selves, and for them that be
committed to their charge through these instruments of religion, which the
Lord him self gave and commended unto us for that purpose, and we must
through our exemples approve mayntaine, set forth and commend to other the
common ministry of the congregation, and the administration of the word, and
sacraments, and other ecclesiastical offices. And moreover, every Christian
man ought privately with him self, and with his family to exercise him self
often, and busely in readyng the holy scriptures, and in prayers. Therefore
preachers shall first teach that this is commended in the third commandment.

Secondly they shall teach that in this commandment our vice and ungodliness
is showed unto us, forasmuch as we neglecte holy companies, the ha^deling of
Gods word, the participation of the sacraments, and other exercises of
religion, and because it is paynefull to us to appear in the syghte of God our
father, and there to learn the holy knowledge of him, and his will toward us,
and to give him thanks with worthy magnifying of his name, and holy gifts.

Thirdly they shall teach that the Lord discloseth unto us the vice of our
nature to thentent to call us to the repentance thereof, and to drive us to
Christ, which turns away his wrath against the same sin, and represseth it
daily more and more with his holy spirit, and gives us strength to resist
that evil, and kendleth in us a love of Godly doctrine, prayer, sacraments, al
holy assembles, and exercises of religion, chiefly of them that be used upon
holy days. For such days we must with principal study, and religion
sanctify to the Lord, and cease from bodili works, and seculer business, and
give our selves wholly to the exercises of religion. How be it we must also
at other times come diligently together to pray, to hear, and to learn the
word of God, and privately every man ought to give attendaunce for his own
part, and with his household, to reading of the scripture, to exhortation and
prayer, as we have said. For all these things this piece of the law
concerning the Sabbath, shall be our scholemaister unto Christ, if it be applied
to our life. After the same manner concerning the first commandment, honor
thy father, and thy mother, the people must be taught that by the honor of
our parents, it is commanded that we honor al them, which exhibit unto us
fatherly and motherly kindness, either in teaching, and warnyng things that be
Godly, and wholesome, or in ministrynge necessary things for our life, or in
defendyng us from wrong, of which sort the ministers and pastors be
chiefly, and the civil officers, which we ought to acknowledge, to hear
and to worship, as our fathers with all humility, obedience, and tha^kfulnes.
And because there is no man but at some times he may do us some good turn,
the preachers ought to teach the people, that God requires in this
commandment all that, that. S. Paul commanded to the To. xiij. saying, go
one before an other in honor. Item to the Phil. ij. Let nothing be done by
contention, or vain glory, but through humility of mind let every man
think an other better then him self.

Secondly it must be taught out of this commandment that we have such
natural pride, that we will submit our selves to nobody, obey nobody, nor
requite the benifites that we have receuied, whereof spring many variaunces,
divisions of minds, and dissolution of al necessary frendshyp.

Thirdly, they must teach that God through the disclosyng of this evil, would
ster us up to true, and wholesome repentance, and drive us to Christ the
savior, which turns away the wrath of God, that we deserve with this
vice, and mortifieth the remnaunt thereof in the flesh through the holy ghost,
and brings us so ferfurth, that we study daily to repress that natural
arrogantie, and pride, and that we compte worthy honor and do worship our
parents, our ecclesiastical curates, and other civil governors, and al those
that do us good in doctrine, warnyng, counsel, correction, or with any other
benefitte, and further al me^ with whom we live, every one according to his
state, and dignity. Moreover that we take al me^nes admonitio^s, and rebukes
in good worth, submit our selves gladly unto the^ obey their pleasure, and
recompense their benifittes, that through out al our life, we may do good to
many unto the glory of God with our moderation, obedience, and thankfulness.
Whereunto this precepte conceruynge the honoring of our parents, ought to be
our scholemaister into Christ.

But in this commandment it is not to be omitted that. S. Paul monisheth us
of, that it is the first with promise. For it has a peculiar, and large
promise of long life, in the land which the Lord our God gives, namely in
which God is called upon and worshipped, whereupon his eyes look to show
bountiousnes on it. For it becomes them to have long life in the people of
God, which submit them selves, and show them selves obedient, and
thankful to their parents, to the powers, and to all men.

So in the sixte commandment the preachers shall teach, first that by
manslaughter all violence and wrong against the body of our neighbors, al
reuengeaunce, and unjust co^motion of the mind, anger, wrath hatred, envy,
and all signs, words, and deeds that come of anger be forbidden, as Christ
him self interpreted this saying Mathewe. v.

Secondly they shall teach that God warns us in this precepte of our natural
arroga^cie, iniquity, and impacience: Through which vices it comes to pass,
that we can suffer nothing that is unpleasant unto us but we will have all
other to follow our lusts, though they be naughti and infinite, where as we
in the mean ceasone will not only omit to do the things that be right and
good to our neighbors, but we will also commit many vnrightful and vnseamely
things.

God than will condemn with this commandment our natural ignorance,
vnpatientnes, lust, and those that spryng thereof, I mean anger hatred, envy,
brawling, fyghtyng. etc. And God will set before our eyes how evil these
things be, forbidding slaughter by name, but as well that, that is committed
with the mind, as with the hands. Whereby he requires that as we abhor all
slaughter, so we should abhor all causes, and affection of slaughter, and to
do our neighbor any wrong. Thirdly they shall admonish, that God will with
this precepte when our vice is known, provoke us to repent it, and drive us to
seek his grace, and mercy in Christ, which only appeaseth the wrath of God
deserved through these our euylles, and abolisheth, and mortifieth the
remnauntes thereof with the holy ghost, and works, and increases softnes in
us, that we may overcome the vice of impatientnes, and froward way wardnes in
other, with our patience, gentleness, and humanity, and recompense wrongs
done, with benifittes, and be gentle, and good toward all men, forgyuynge as
Christ has forgyuen us. Ephe. iiij. whereunto this commandment ministers
unto us an instruction in Christ.

In the seventh commandment, thou shall not commit auoutrie, the people
shall be taught, that God forbids, and damneth all copulations beside
matrimony, which he him self ordained, and moreuer al lust, and inordinate
motions, all intemperaunce, al delites and pleasures vnseamely for christian
men, al riote and vncomelines in meats, drynkes, garments, gesture, words,
and deeds, of which any cause of unchasteness may rise, or of any perturbation,
whereby the body shall be made vnpliable, rebellious and stubburne toward the
service of the spirit.

Secondly that God warns and accuses us in this commandment of our natural
lechery, fylthy, and immoderate conrupisce^ce in all things, which he him
self gave to sustain, and cherishe our bodies.

Thyrdly that through the knowledge of this disease we are driven to repentance
of the same, and to seek the grace, and mercy of Christ, which turns away
the fathers wrath deserved through this evil, and which quenches the
remnauntes of this disease remaining in the flesh, and works in us true
co^tinencie, chastity, and perfect holiness in all things, that being
healped with the assistence of the holy ghost we may resist evil
concupiscences, and al intemperaunce, cleansinge our selves from all fylth of
the flesh, and of the spirit, and workynge holiness with the fear of God. ij.
Cor. vij. To the perfourmaunce whereof this commandment warns and steareth
us, as a scholemaister.

Likewise out of the eight commandment, thou shall not steal, we must
learn that God here, by theft forbids al fraud and wrong in matters
perteyuynge to the use of this life. And furthermore all covetousness,
nigardnes, desire of more the^ other have, and slacknes of due liberality.

Secondly that in this commandment God warns and accuses us of this
covetousness, desire of more, carefulnes, and nigardnes in things pertaining to
this life.

Thyrdly that he dryueth us through the knowledge and condemnation of this evil
to repentance thereof, and faith in Christ, which remoueth the wrath of God
deserved through this erockednes, and damned desire, and represseth the same in
us, and contrary wise steareth up, and confirms such trust of his goodness
that we may surely certify our selves that God the heavenly father regards
us, and has care of us, and that he will ministre al things aboundauntly,
whereby we may sustain, cherishe and also delight this our life. Through which
trust being raised up, let us also learn to exercise true liberality
toward our neighbor leaving of all carefulnes for this life, and let us give
liberally to al men of that, that the almighty has given us, as much as we be
able, and as much as the necessity of our neighbor requires. Whereunto
this commandment exhorts us, as a scholemaister.

In the ninth precept we must teach that God by false witness forbids all
words, and sayings, yea silence, and disse^bling of witness, and privy
praise, whereby the fame and reputation of our neighbors is hurted, or not
defended, as we would have ours to be defended of other. Finally al false and
vain speech, that profits nothing neither them to whom it is spoken, nor
them of whom it is spoken. Secondly that God will bring us to acknowledge this
corruption of our nature, this ambition, maleuolence, envy. etc. wherewyth we
diminishe the estimation and excellency of other, and dissemble, neglect, yea
and often cover, and darken the things that pertayne to the praise, and
reputation of our neighbor.

Thirdly that God will through the knowledge of this our frowardnes provoke us
to repe^tau^ce thereof, and raise up in us a diligence and desire to call for the
grace of Christ, which came to pacify this wrath of God against these our
euylles, and to quench them in us with his holy spirit, and to begin such
humility of mind, such love of an others dignity, and excellency, that we
be delited with the good estimation, honest fame, and worthy praises of other,
and that we will labor to set forth those good things, with no less
diligence then our own fame, and dignity, and that we use in all our
communication truth, honest interpretation and gentleness, to the edification of
the hearers, speaking always those things to other, and of other, as we wish
other to speak to us, and of us, with a right judgment of the spirit.

In the tenth commandment, thou shall not couette etc. They must first
teach, that by the coveting of an others things, as his house, wife,
family. etc. all evil concupiscence is generally prohibited, and all
inclination, motions, and prones to evil, and al lothsomnes, and neglecting of
good works. Secondly me^ must be diligently warned of this, that they look
exactly upon this commandment, and to examine well them selves according
thereunto. For in it God pulls up by the roots, and sets before our eyes
the universal corruption of our nature, and the inward frowardnes, and
deprauation of the same, that in this commandment as in a glass we might
se, how wretchedly, and horribly we are depraved, and lost thorough the fall
of Adam in all our body, all our soul, and all our strength, that we may
instly cry with the Apostle, wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death? For though some man come so far by the grace and
healpe of God, that he acknowledge God with true faith, that he worship, and
call upon him, as the first commandment requires, neither regards straung
Gods nor admits false worshippynge of God, neither in purpose of mind, nor
in words and deeds, which thing the second commandment forbids,
neither thinks, speaks, or does any thing that is contrary to the
confession, and sanctification of Gods name, which thing the third
commandment requires, and that he be diligently occupied in all exercises of
religion, which thing the fourth commandment requires, that he submit
him self, and give due honor both to the officers, and to all men with who^
he lives, as the first commandment requires, that he contain him self
from anger, and all bitter thoughts, words, deeds against his neighbor, as
the sixth commandment requires, that he contain him self from all lecherous
lusts, and live temperatly, as the seventh commandment requires, that he
moderate his covetous desire, and be liberal to al men as the eight
commandment bids, that he repress the disease of backebitynge, and
enuiyng an others excellency, and favor the estimation, and just praises of
all men, whither the nynth commandment calls us, although I say, a man
through the benifit of Christ come to this victory against natural vices, and
to this great tower of virtues (which felicity yet none of the saints ever
knowledged to have chanced unto him) nevertheless the same man by this tenth
commandment shall be convicted, to be a wretch still, and a damned sinner, and
the enemy of God, and when he has well looked upon this commandment, he him
self shall bewail that he is such a one.

For as long as he shall find in him self, I say some motion of mind to
that, that God forbyddeth, and damneth, but any inclination, or prones at all,
and a faint and slack courage to do that, that God requires, not only a
lothsomnes, and resistance: he shall acknowledge him self to be reproned, and
condemned by this commandment, as a transgressour of Gods law. For where
as the law requires, that no forbidden thing please us, it requires the
same to be done of us with all our heart all our soul, and all our strength.
For the law requires, that God should so be loved and worshipped of us. But
no man can bring this to pass, that we be far from all those things that
God forbyddeth, except the love of God, and of those things that God
commands so have enflamed a man altogyther, that he abhor from all that,
that God forbids, with his whole heart, his whole soul, and al his
strengthes. But none of the saints atteined hereunto, while they lived here.
Wherefore it behooved to grant, that all men are convicted by this
commandment, and that no man lives in this world which in deed is of a
clean heart, and has no need to be delivered from the curse, and damnation
of the law through Christ.

Seeing then that the whole law depends hereupon, that we love God with all
our heart. etc. We are convicted transgressors of the whole law by this
tenth commandment, because it is proved that we have not satisfied that
point of the law where upon the whole law depends.

Therefore by this commandment our crokednesse, and all our misery
together is most largelye and fullye set before our eyes, and we are
most myghtely driven to seek repentance thereof, and the grace, and
satisfaction of our Lord Jesus Christ, which turns away the anger, and
the curse of God, deserved through this in obedience and stubburnesse of our
life, and offreth to the father for us his obedience, and perfect
ryghtuousnesse, and with his spirit mortifieth our flesh corrupted through
concupiscences, and renueth us all together, and rayseth up in us a fervent
zeal toward him self, and his commandments, that with the spirit we
may constantly, and manfullye fight against the flesh, and cut of the
law of our members, and kill the old Adam daily more, and more, putting on
the new man Jesus Christ, which only has satisfied the law, and is so
acceptable to the father, that he compteth us pleasant and acceptable in that
dear beloved, though we be ever yet as transgressors of the law so in danger
of his wrath.

This general sum, and interpretation of the commandments must be
most diligently repeted, and beaten into the peoples heads, in all sermons,
that they may both truly acknowledge their own sins, and learn to be
repentaunt of them effectuouslye, and that they may be myghtelye driven to
Christ the only leache, and Savior of our souls, and also that they may
be raised, and promoted in him to true virtues, to very good works, and to
worshyppynge acceptable unto God.

Furthermore the people must ever be taught this thing also that the
promises, and threats against the worshyppyng of false Gods, and Idolatry
pertayne to every commandment.

For the cause why they be joined to the commandment that toutcheth false
religion, is this, namely for that, that the keepyng, and transgression of the
whole law is contained herein, that we acknowledge, call upon and worship
with true faith, and fear the true God in Christ, the Lord, no depart from
him to false Gods, and to a worshyppyng strange from that, that he him self
taught.

For who so asks everlasting health, and all good things wholly from God
through Christ Jesus, and not from any creature, he shall also endeavor him
self diligently to keep al those things, that God has commanded. For he
can not once think what better thing he may do, as one that believes that a
blessed, and eternal life is prescribed unto him in these commandments. For
what thing can he gladder do then to gratify God, who^ he loves above all
things. Wherefore the Lord also said he that ha^h my commandments and
keeps them, he it is that loves me. Therefore who so studieth not to keep
the commandments of God, he loves not God neither, and therefore he believes
not that he is God, which commands these things. Wherefore he asks his
felicity and blisfulnes of some other, then of this true, and one God, and he
has straung Gods. Seeing then that the observation of all the commandments
of God depends upon the observation of this commandment concerning the
eschuinge of false Gods, and false worshyppyng of God, the promise of the
benifites of God, and the threatenynge of Gods reuengeaunce, were ordained
for this purpose. But as we transgress no commandment of God without the
transgression of this, so nevertheless both this promise and threatenyng
perteyne to every commandment.

Secondly the preachers shall also diligently warn this thing concerning this
place, (I will visit iniquities. etc.) that al manner of euyls, punishementes
corporal, and spiritual, temporal, and eternal be comprehended therein,
among which this is the sorest, when God forsakes men, when he takes his
holy spirit from them, and gives them to the desires of their hertes, into a
reprobate sense, into concupiscences, and lusts. etc. To. i. Whereof the Psalm.
lxxxi. speaks. But my people heard not my voice, Israel attended not unto
me, wherefore I let them go in the crokednes of their hertes.

Furthermore in this place the people must be right diligently taught, that
what so ever adversity chaunseth unto men either in soul, or in goods, it is
undoubtedly the punishment of God for our sins, whether it be blyndnes,
ignorance, darckenes of mind, perturbations, naughty desires, and affections
of the heart unto unlawful things, diseases, corporal pestilences either in
our own bodies, or in the bodies of our children, friend, cattayle, evil
weather for things of the earth, evil luck, damages in our business,
discord, sedition, war, and all troublynge of common peace. For all these
things are sent upon men from God for sins, and ungodliness.

In this place the preachers shall add, God exercises us with aflictions to
call us back to repentance
that God when he exercises the fayhthfull with sundry aflictions, corrects
them fatherly, and for their profitte, and draws them back to him self, and
to his son Christ, that they be not damned with the wicked world, and that
he loves them nothing the worse, whom he punishes with outward
punishments, and sore calamities. For he is wont to begin his judgment
from his own house, and to chasten them, whom he loves, and in them to show
to the world the vehemency of his wrath, that other men being frayed with
these judgments, and with this so great severity of God upon his own
children, should forthynke the sins, in which they stycke, and amend, and
take more diligent head afterward that they sin not.

Thyrdly the people must be taught concerning this promise and threatenynge of
God, I will visit the iniquities of the fathers upon the children to the
third, and fourth generation. etc. that God will exercise Other men's goodness
profits not the ungodly, nor others ungodliness hurts not the godly.
this reuengeaunce, which he threateneth here to his dispicers being ungodly
parents, and elders upon those children only, which through their own
wickedness have like wise well deserved the punishments that they suffer, so
that yet in this world they suffer much less, then is due to their sins,
and peruersitie. So in like manner that no Godliness of the parents, and
elders profits their children, which be ungodly them selves, and continue
in their ungodliness, but that it profits them only, which be inheriters
of their elders godliness. For this threate, and promise of God can not be
contrary to his Oracle set forth by Ezechiell, that is to say, that every
father, or child shall either perish through his own ungodliness, or live
through his own Godliness, and that the father shall not be well entreated for
the sons godliness, nor ill, for the sons wyckednes, but that every man
shall hear his own sins, if he live ungodly, and shall enjoy his
rewards, if he live Godly.

For by reason of original sin, all men are borne under the wrath of God,
and tyranny God punishes the wickedness of the parents in wicked children.
of the devil. Wherefore if God to show us his just judgment, leave the
children of the ungodly in the power of Satan and therefore through their own
mischeuous acts bring upon them selves so horrible punishme^tes that the
very world perceives the ungodliness of the parents to be punished in the
children also, nevertheless no wrong is done to those children, neither is God
to be accused of iniquity, saying that they be evil, and the children of
wrath by nature, to whom God can owe notyng but everlasting punishment. So if
God through his unspeakable mercy in Christ Jesus, deliver through his son,
the children of them that loved him, from all perdition, whereunto they were
borne, and adourne them with excellent godliness through the gift of his
spirit, and so heap so many benifittes upon them, that every godly man may
easily judge, that in the^ both their own, and their parents godliness is
recompensed, and that it is declared, how dear they were to God: the
unmeasurable goodness of God ought to be embraced, and magnified therein, and
therefore God is more to be loved, and his word to be received more
desirously, but the unsearchable judgments of his mercy ought not to be
sought out, the deape botome of his goodness must not be pored into, much
less ought we to blame this his so great bountiousnes, which does with his
own, as pleases him.

How the preachers must teach of remission of sins, and justification.
AFter that men being moved through the preaching of the law begin truly
to acknowledge their sin, and to repent, and now detestyng sin, sigh for
righteousness and carefully desire to come to Gods favor again, and to
worship him religiously, the preaching of the Gospel must also be added.
For to be sorry for sin, suffices not to righteousness before God, though the
sorrow be so vehement, that it may consume and kyl a man, as there was in
Judas. But satisfaction for sins is also required and a sure trust of Gods
mercy, with a purposed amendment of life, and a continual study of
ryghtuousnes afterward.

But man ca^ perform none of these things through his own strength, neither
satisfy for his sins committed and restore him self into the favor of God,
nor embrace a better life afterward. Our Lord Jesus Christ is alone, which
through his death has satisfied for our sins, as John says, he is a
propitiation or atonement for our sins, and not for our sins only, but
for the sins of the whole world. He through the preaching of the Gospel,
sets forth, and offreth the rytches of Gods grace, and goodness, and his
own satisfaction for our sins, and the gift of the spirit of adoption, and
justifies, delivers from the wrath of God, and makes part takers of
eternal life, all those, that with sure fayeth which he him self steareth up
and nourishes in us, acknowledge him, and the father in him, and this same,
his mercy, redemption, and satisfaction. This is the thing that Esaye
preaches, that my ryghtuous servant shall justify many through the knowledge
of him self, that is to say, through fayeth, whereby we acknowledge him, as a
savior. And Daniel in the fourth Chapter. Through Christ transgression shall
be finished, sin shall take an end, and everlasting ryghtuousnesse shall be
brought in.

As for the Gospel it is the joyful preaching, What the Gospel is.
and much wished for, of our Lord Jesus Christ, namely that he came for
this cause into the world being made man, to deliver all them that believe in
him from sin, death, and eternal damnation, and to give them a new, and
perpetual ryghtuousnes, and life. Which thing all the prophets spoke before
hand of him, as the lord him self expouned in the last of Luke. So, says
he, it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, and
that repentance, and remission of sins should be preached in his name among
all nations. The Apostles taught the same thing every where, as it appears
in their acts. For thus Petre preaches, repent your fautes, and let every
one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgyuenes of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost, acts. ij. Item, the
God of our fathers has raised Jesus, whom ye killed hangyng upon wodde, him
God has exalted with his right hand a prince and a savior, to give
repentance unto Israel and forgyuenes of sins. etc. And again, he
commanded us that we should preach to the people, and testify that it is he,
which was appointed of god a judge of the quick and the dead. To him all the
Prophets bear wytnes, that who so believes in him, he shall receive remission
of sins through his name. Saint Paul preaches the same thing acts. xiij.
Be it known to you then brethren that through this man remission of sins is
preached. etc.

Though this preaching of the Gospel be short, nevertheless it is the power of
God unto salvation to every one that believes, To. i. Wherefore Christ also
compares the Gospel to a mustarde corn, to a treasure hid in a field, to a
precious margarite, for the gettyng whereof we must sell, and leave all things.
Math. xiiij.

But that the strength, and efficacy of the Gospel may be more evident, the
preachers must ever studiously set forth Christ, and religiously preach how
great things he suffered for our salvation, how great things he did. Further
how he will have these things showed unto us, and what he will work in us
through this preaching.

It is evident through the preaching of the law, that all we be sinners of our
selves, and destitute of the glory of God. Romans iij. Item that we are dead
through misdedes, and sins, and be by nature the children of wrath, as other
be. Ephesi. ij. prisoners, and sold under sin, that we our selves can not
rise out of this perdition of our own strength. Roma. viij

Wherefore to obtain salvation there needed a mediator, and savior, which
might pacify God being angry, and reco^cile us to God, and deliver us from
sin, and death and make us heirs of everlasting life.

Such a savior and intercessour Christ is made unto us. i. Timo. ij. one
God, and one attonemaker of God and men, Christ Jesus a man, which gave him
self a price of redemption for all men. etc.

This Mediator first entreats with God the father through his life, death,
passion, and intercession, to turn his wrath from us, to receive us into
favor, and to give to us, as to his children the holy spirit, and everlasting
life.

Further he comes to us and handles his matter with us through the mystery
of the Gospel, his holy spirit, and the cross, that we may believe him, and
through faith obtain ryghtuousnes, and everlasting life.

And he handles his matter with God after this sort, first he ordered his
whole life according to the will of the father, being made obedient unto him
unto death, which things we should have done. But because he saw that they
were impossible unto us, he performed them him self he fulfilled the law, as
he says in Matthew. I came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it. And
Paul to the Gala. iiij. When the fulness of time came, God sent forth his son
made of a woman, made subject to the law, to redeame them that were subject
to the law. Therefore he wrate also to the Cor. Christ is made righteousness
unto us of God, that is to say, his righteousness was performed for our sakes,
and given unto us. Item Phil. iij. Yea and I think all things to be loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ my Lord, and I co^pt them for
refuse, that I may win Christ and be found in him, not having my
righteousness of the law, but that, that is through the faith of Christ. etc.
For whosoever believes in Christ, to him whole Christ, and his perfect
ryghtuousnesse is imputed at once, and together.

Secondly Christ translateth and remoueth all our sins upon him self, dies
for them, and suffers al those things that we should have suffered for our
sins. As John Baptiste testifies, Behold the lamb of God, which takes
away the sins of the world. Item Esaie, of a truth he bare our diseases,
and he sustained our sorrows, and we co^pted him stricken with a plage, and
depressed of God. But he was wounded for our iniquities, and beaten for our
sins, the chasteninge of peace was upon him, and we were healed with his
stripes. And we have strayed like sheep, every man into his own way, and God
has put upon him the iniquities of al us. Item Paul Romans viij. God spared
not his own son, but gave him for us all, and Chap. iiij. He was delivered
for our sins, and raised for our justification. So Gala. iij. Christ
redeamed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us, for it is
written, cursed is every one that hangs on tree.

Thirdly he is a mediator for us, that God will receive us into favor.
Esaie. liij. He bare the sins of many, and prayed for transgressors. The
prayer of Christ John. xvij. teaches the same thing, I pray for them, not
for the world, but for those whom thou have given me, keep them in thy name.
etc. And Paul To. viij. Christ is at the right hand of the father, and
makes intercession for us. Ite^ to the Hebr. v. which in the days of his
flesh, when he had offered up with strong criyng, and tears, prayers and
supplications before him, that was able to deliver him. etc. Yea the whole
epistle shows this thing most evidently, that Christ our high bishop
offered him self for our sins, and entered into the most holy place with his
own blood, an everlasting redemption being found out. So then Christ
handled, and does handle the matter for us through his death, and obedience
showed to the father, and through his intercession, that he reconcileth us to
God the father, and for this cause he is made Lord over all things, as the
Apostle witnesses Psalm. ij. which being in the form of God thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, but he emptied him self taking the form of a
servant, constituted in the lykenes of men, and in shape found as a man, he
humbled him self, made obedient unto the death, and that of the cross.
Wherefore God raised him up unto supreme highness, and gave him a name above al
names, that in the name of Jesus all knees should bow. etc.

After that Christ has thus handled our matter before the father, and pleased
his anger, afterward he executes the office of a faithful intercessour and
patron, he turns him self to us, he entreats us, that he may heal our
sins, and weakness. For this cause he said to his disciples. All power in
heaven, and in earth is given unto me, go therefore, and teach al nations, and
receive them into my discipline, preach the Gospel to every creature,
baptising the^ in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost, he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, and he that believes
not, shall be damned. And teach them to keep all those things that I have
commanded you. Thus through this short, and simple preachinge of the Gospel,
he executes the business of our justification after a merueylous sort.
Therefore as the strength, and use of the law must be declared to the people,
so the use, and virtue of the Gospel must be propouned, and beaten in with
singular diligence. For it is the power of God unto salvation to every one
that believes. To. i.

First then the preachers shall teach, that the Gospel brings to us
remission of sins, if we believe it truly, and unfeignedly, and determine
through this faith, that God for his sons sake will be merciful unto us, and
accept us, and count us for sons not for the dignity of our works, and
they shall teach that therefore it brings peace to our consciences, which by
reason of sin were fearful, and bruised, of which peace the angels sange
in the time of the nativity of Christ, Glory in the highest to God, and in
the earth peace to men. And Esaie, the discipline of peace is upon him, Ite^
Paul. Roma. v. Justified of faith, we have peace toward God through our
Lord Christ Jesus. Ephe. ij. he is our peace. etc. Esaie. lij. To. x. how
beautiful are the feet of them that preach peace. etc. For where the voice of
the Gospel sounds not, our consciences can have no peace, as David
witnesses Psalm. xxxvij. There is no whole part in my body by reason of thy
wrath, neither is there peace in my bones because of my sin. etc.

Secondly the Gospel brings to us the ryghtuousnes of Christ, in which we
may trust, as done for us, and given unto us, as well as, if we had performed
it our selves. For so Paul says. i. Cor. i. Christ Jesus is made unto us
of God, wisdom, ryghtuousnes, sanctification, and redemption, and Philip.
iij. That I may be found in him not having my ryghtuousnes of the law, but
that, that is through the faith of Jesus Christ, etc. For this is a perfect,
true, and everlasting righteousness. For our virtues be far from that
ryghtuousnes, and perfection of life, which the law of God requires. And
besides that, very many sins abide ever in us, and wonderful weakness, as
Esaie says. lxiij. all we are as one defiled, and all our ryghtuousnes as a
garment of beggarly patches. And the Psalm. O Lord enter not into judgment
with me. etc. which sentence, teaches merueilous playnelye, that we can not
set our worthiness against the judgment of God.

Wherefore if our salvation shall be certain unto us, it must leave upon some
other righteousness, and that a perfect righteousness, namely upon the
ryghtuousnes of Christ, as Paul witnesses To. viij. God has not spared his
own son. etc.

Therefore our Justification, and our righteousness before God, which. S.
Paul and all the other Apostles teach, consists in two things, in
forgiveness of sins, and gyuynge of the righteousness of Christ through fayeth.
And this only is a sure, certain, and perpetual ryghtuousnes, which Christ
has carried up into heaven with him self, to the right hand of God, where no
man can oppress it or overthrow it, as innumerable dangers fall upon our
ryghtuousnes daily. Therefore our life is said to be hidden with Christ in
God. Col. iij. And seeing that we glory of this our Lord and savior, and his
righteousness, our life is in the heavens. Philip. iij. For where our treasure
is, there is our heart.

Wherefore the ryghtuousnes of God given to us in Christ, must be diligently,
and continually beaten into the people by the preachers, and they must take
very good head that the knowledge, and trust thereof be not corrupted, and
that men slide not back again to the confidence of man's ryghtuousnes.

For though that true faith in Christ, be never without good works, and love,
yet works deserve not remission of sins, neither is a man acceptable to God
for works, but for Christ's sake, while he embraces, and holds by faith his
righteousness and redemption given unto him.

Thirdly when a mind affrayed with the feelyng of Gods wrath, susteyneth it
self with the voice of the Gospel, and through the knowledge of the savior
Christ, and promises of God, which Christ fulfilleth unto us, the holy
spirit is present and works in our hertes, a sure trust of Gods
beniuolence, and adoption of everlasting life. For in hearing of the Gospel
the holy spirit is given, as Paul witnesses, Gala. iij. This one thing I
desire to learn of you, received ye the spirit through the deeds of the law,
or through the preaching of faith. Item. iiij. Because ye be children, God has
sent forth the spirit of his son. etc. And John. vij. he that believes in
me, as the scripture says, fluddes of lively, water shall flow out of his
bealy, this thing (says John) he spoke of the spirit, whom they should
receive, that believed in him. And through this receyuynge of the holy gooste,
a new generation is caused, whereof John speaks. i. Chap. As many as
received him, he gave them power to be the sons of God, them I say that had
believed in his name, which were not borne of blood, nor of the will of man,
but of God, Item To. vij. who so ever be led with the spirit of God, they be
the children of God. And. ii. Cor. iii. we representing the glory of the Lord
in a glass with a right face, are transfigured to the same Image from glory to
glory, as of the spirit of the Lord, that is to say, when we receive through
fayeth the exedinge mercy of God promised, and exhibited in Christ, the holy
ghost works in us a new life, and a new knowledge of God unknown to man's
reason.

Moreover this faith, this knowledge of God in Christ, and assenting to his
promises, through the work of the same holy spirit, the spirit of adoption,
kendleth, susteyneth, co^serueth, and increases such love of God, such desire
to gratify, and to serve God, and to approve our selves to him in all things,
to glorify him, that with very great diligence, and carefulnes we keep our
selves from al sin, and most earnestly apply our selves to all good
works. The holy scriptures describe every where this nature, this strength of
a new creature in Christ, and of a man borne again, this order, and
consequentie, or rather lynckynge together of the works of the holy gooste in
the beleuynge. Which places the preachers must often with singular diligence
propoune, faithfully declare, and continually beat into the people.

Of which places these be some, To. viii. But ye be not in the flesh, but in
the spirit for the spirit of God dwells in you. And if any man have not
the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. Now if Christ be in you, the
body is dead concerning sin, but the spirit is life concerning
Justification. etc. Wherefore brethren we are detters not to the flesh, that
we should live after the flesh for if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye.
But if ye mortify the deeds of the flesh with the spirit, ye shall live. For
as many as shall be led with the spirit of God, be the children of God. etc.
ii. Cor. v. Iudgyng this that if one died for all, then all were dead, and he
dyed for all, that they, which live after this, might not live to them selves,
but to him, that died for them, and rose again. etc. Gala. v. walk in the
spirit, and ye shall not perform the concupiscence of the flesh. Item, but
the fruit of the spirit is charity, joy, peace. etc. Ephe. v. Ye were
sometime darkness, but now light in the Lord, walk as the children of
light. etc. Item, Se then that ye walk circumspectly, not as unwise, but as
wise, redeamyng occasion, because the days be evil. etc. Phil i. This I pray
that your love may abound more and more, in knowledge, and all understanding,
that ye may allow the things that be right good, that ye be sincere etc.
Collo. iii. put on then, as the chosen of God, holy, and beloved the bowels
of compassion, gentleness, sobrenes. etc. Tit. ii. Jesus Christ gave him self
for us for to redeame us from all iniquity, and to purify us to him self a
peculiar people, a follower of good works. i. John. i. And this is the tidings
that we heard of him, and show unto you, that God is light, and there is no
darkness in him. If we shall say, we have felowshyppe with him, and walk in
darkness, we lie. etc. Item. iii. Every one that has this hope in him,
purifieth him self, as he is pure, all that commit sin, the same commit
iniquity, and sin is iniquity. And ye know that he appeared to take away
sins. etc.

These places, and such other, in which the nature of regeneration, and of a
new creature, and the order, consequence, or rather the knittyng of the works
of the holy ghost, be declared, the preachers must often recite, faithfully
expoune, and printe into the people in their sermons, that they may learn
thoroughly, and ever diligently reuolue in their minds, that they which be
borne again in Christ, and grafted in him, and be made fruitful branches in
this life, and good trees, must also bring forth good fruits, and forasmuch
as they be a new, and divine creation, made unto good works, they must
travail also in new, and divine works, which God has prepared in them with
his commandment, calling and gift, and works continually with his spirit,
to his own glory, and to the edification, and repayryng of our neighbors.

But always, and before al things they must be taught most diligently, that
a conscience fearful by reason of her sins, and the wrath of God, must
comfort her self with the voice of the Gospel, and certify her self
thereby, that God will surely give his holy spirit, while we pray for it in
this distress, and that this petition is a true, and principal worshyppyng of
God, which god chiefly requires of us. And this high worshyppyng of God, must
be learned only with the exercise of true fayeth, whereof the blind men of
this world know nothing, putting their ryghtuousnes, and holiness, in outward
ceremonies, and trust of their own righteousness. But when the heart wrastleth
with the feelynge of the wrath of God, and lively knowledge of sins, and
comfort her self with faith in Christ the mediatoure, in this case, that
sweet word of Esaie is understood, which is the place of my rest, says
the Lord, I will look upon the humble, and broken in spirit, and trembling
at my word. For then the Lord dwells in us in deed, when we flee to Christ
the mediator, and determine with our selves, that for his sake we be accepted
and heard of the heavenly father, and made heirs of everlasting life.

Wherefore the true faith of the Gospel, whereof we speak in this place,
signifies not only the knowledge of the story, as in James, when he says,
the deuylles believe, but it signifies that knowledge of the Gospel, and
assentyng caused through the spirit of Christ, whereby there spryngeth in our
hertes a sure trust of Gods beniuolence, and adoption, through which we have
affiau^ce that God is merciful unto us, and has made us heirs of everlasting
life for his sons sake, which faith excludes all trust of our own
ryghtuousnes, and all error concerning God, and his will toward us. For this
faith comprehends a sincere and perfect understanding of all the articles
of our religion, and an assent thereunto. Therefore this pure doctrine of the
Gospel must be retained of fearful consciences, that they may know, that
they obtain remission of sins freely for Christ's sake by faith, and not by
the deseruyng of works. And let them beware that they remove not this glory
of the Mediator Christ unto men's works. For if the promise of salvation
did hang upon our worthiness, the conscience should remain uncertain,
stickyng in perpetual doubt, and should flee from God. For we can not
satisfy the law of God at all, and many sins cleave ever in us, and there
remains great weakness. Neither could the heart call certaynely upon God, if
our own deservings were to be brought forth, for it should be frayed away
perceiving him self to be destitute of those merits, that God requires.
Therefore we must come unto God with this fayeth, whereby we believe that we are
accepted and justified before God for Christ's sake, and not for our merits.
This fundation must be laid first of al, whereby we be planted in Christ, and
disseuered from all ungodly men, and aliauntes from Christ. Afterward it is
necessary to enstruct the people a right of good works, chiefly after this
sort.

Of good works.
That this place may be more easily understood, it shall be convenient to
divide it into these five questions.

The first.

What works are to be done.

The second.

How they may be done, seeing that there is so great weakness of man's nature,
and so great lettes of Satan.

The third.

How they may please God, being imperfect, and very sclender.

The fourth.

Why we must do good works, and auoyed evil.

The fyfth.

Of the difference of sins.

The first question.
What good works must be taught, and done?

The answer.

Those that God has commanded in the ten co^mau^dema^tes, and those that be
contained in the same after the interpretation of Christ, and his Apostles. For
we must take right good head, that we deuyse not worshyppinges of God, and good
works without the word. Therefore Christ also says. They worship me in
vain with the commandments of men. For God will that not only faith, but
also al our good works be limited with his word, as with a sure rule, lest
after the manner of the heathen we deuyse to our selves vain imaginations, and
works of our own, as it has chaunsed in calling upon saints, in voued
pilgrimages to the bones of saints, in forbiddynge of marriage and such like.

The second question.
How may good works be done?

Answer.

Man's diligence perfourmeth outward discipline metely so so. But the
commandments of God require also the inward works of the heart, as the
fear of God, faith, love toward the commandments of God, true invocation,
patience in troubles chastity. and cet. And it is well known that man's
weakness can in nowise perform such works without Godds healpe. There fore
God pours his spirit into the hertes of the Godly, which helps them,
which gives them new light, and strength, and this is a true exercise wherein
God will have us to call upon Christ, and to flee to him, that he may give us
the holy ghost, and guide us therwyth, that we fall not. For it was an hard
thing for David not to fall into desperation, when he was driven out of his
realm, and appeared to be cast away of God. Therefore he fled to prayer, as to
an only hold that was left, and he required to be stayed, and strengthened
with the holy ghost, that he might call upon God, and look for the end of the
matter in patience. Wherefore Christ says, I will not leave you fatherles.
Item the Lord says in Zachary Cha. xij. I will pour upon the house of David
the spirit of grace, and prayer, that is to say, he gives us the holy
ghost, that we may believe unfeignedly, that we are in the favor of God, by
which faith our mind is steared up to invocation. For when we knowledge that
the mercy of God is present with us, we look for healpe and comfort from him,
and we submit our selves to his will. etc. Therefore God did not only
command us, what we should do, but also he promises and offers us healp
to do the same. The cause why few men understand this thing, and considre it a
right is the dissolute, and vnreligious life, and great security that reigns
in the common people. For they fight not against sins, but utterly follow all
manner of lust, and fall into great blyndnes of mind, so that they know
neither God, nor his works in men. But they that live in the fear of God, and
call earnestly for this healpe, and aid of the holy ghost, have true
experience how present, and effectuous his healpe is in affictions. Wherefore
it is right expedient for fearful and weak minds, which have some
beginning and desire of godliness, to considre diligently the saying of. S.
Paul Philip. ij. It is God that works in you both to will, and to bring to
pass, according to the good purpose of his mind, that is to say, though
thou feel thy self to be weak, nevertheless when thou go about any good
thing in thy life, according unto thy vocation, unto the glory of God, be of
good comfort, and knowledge that God will healpe the in this endeavor and give
the his holy spirit, and good success to thy work.

The third question.
How do good works please God, saying that there remains ever in this
flesh so great weakness in this life. For we all have experience daily, that
there sticks in us as yet, much doubtyng co^ceruyng God and his word,
distrust of his presence, and healpe, inordinate motions, and carfulness of
this life. Which wounds of man's weakness the saints feel, to be so much
the greuouser, as they more study to remedy them. Which thing Paul
bewayleth of him self, Roma. vij.

It is profitable that the people be often, and plainly admonished of this
question. For a great part of men be encombred in two errors. Some be in
perpetual doubt, being uncertain whether their life, or works please God,
and living in an heathnishe ungodliness. For they can not call upon God, but
they flee his syghte. There is a very great multitude of this sort among
men. Wherefore this heathnishe blyndnesse of men must be diligently reproved.
An other arrogancy, and trust of our own righteousness, and works, as was the
error of that pharisie, which in the temple gloried of the keepyng of the
law, not perceyuyng his own uncleanness, and sins.

Therefore that this double error, and this blyndnes may be ouoyded, we must
know that three things are required hereunto, that good works please God.
First, that the man him self be acceptable to God, and be justified freely
for Christ's sake.

Secondly that it is requisite that a new life follow, and obedience toward
God, though it be imperfect, and though much weakness, and many vices
remain in us. Wherefore we must remember that it is ever needful to ask
forgyuenes of sins. As Christ taught us all to pray to the father. Forgive
us our dettes. For no man understands sufficiently, how great the anger of
God is against sin, our reconciler Christ did only fully perceive it, when
he said. If they do this in the grene wood what will they do in the dry? we
must not then extenuate, and diminishe sin.

Thirdly though this obedience be weak yet we must determine, that it pleases
God in the reconciled for his son sake, as saint Petre exhorts to offer
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ as if he would
say not for their own worthiness, but for the Mediators sake Christ our only
high bishop ever making intercession for us.

This is it that is wont to be said at other times, that good works ought
to be done out of faith, that is, that a man should not waver, doubting
whether his life or works please God, but certain determine that he is
acceptable to God for Christ's sake, as we have often said, and therefore that
his works, being commanded by the word of God, be acceptable unto God for
the same Christ's sake, though they be weak, and imperfect.

Therefore faith must be exercised in good works two ways. First that we
believe they please God. Secondly that we pray to God, that for Christ's sake,
he will healp us both to live godly, and also to do those works, that shall
profitte the common life of me^, and that he will give the^ good success.

Now let every man considre with him self, how great this mercy of God
is, and how sweet this doctrine is. It seems a small work when the mother
brings up her children, gives suck, washes them, and does other things
pertainyng to nuresing, and when she enstructeh them unto the invocation of
God, and religion. But the chiefest worshipping of God rests in these
points, if they be done in faith, that is, if the mother trust, that she is
acceptable to God for Christ's sake, and believe that her doings please God for
the same man's sake if she call for healpe of God to the perfourmaunce of those
things that he will prosper them, and make them wholesome, finally that he will
keep, and nourishe up her infant, and govern his life in all things.

After this sort our faith must be exercised in all other business, and offices
of this life. Magistrates, and wariars be exercised with sundry dangers,
troubles, and difficulties. Nevertheless if they execute their office after this
manner, and with such faith as we have spoken of, all such things be
worshippinges of God. This is no small consolation to a godly mind. And it is
the true, and propre doctrine of the Gospel, which Adam, Noe, Abraham, Jacob,
Joseph, Samuel, David, and Paul taught.

The fourth question.
Why are good works to be done?

Answer.

First because God has commanded them. Al creatures serve God, and be made
to the obedience of God. It is evident then, that saying that man ought to
show obedience unto God, Gods commandment is the first and chiefest cause,
why we should do good works. And in as much as God has commanded good
works, it follows of the same cause, that they that exercise not them selves
in well working, but continue in the contempt of Gods co^manndementes, deserve
everlasting pains. How be it God punishes sins in this life also with
infinite miseries. This the^ is an other cause which ought to steare up our
minds to work well, that we fall not into everlasting pains. For so Paul
says. i. Corhin. vi. Err not. Neither adulterers, nor worshippers of Images.
etc. shall possess the kingdom of God. And Gala. v. They which do such
things shall not possess the kingdom of God.

The third cause of doing good works is very necessary for that, that it is
not possible that a true faith, and a certain trust in Christ can stand
without perfect conversion unto God, or with sins, which are committed
against a man's conscience. These things appear plainly by the very nature
of faith. For faith is that assent to the Gospel, out of which there aryseth
a sure confidence of Gods mercy promised for Christ's sake. But such a
trust can not stand with a purpose of sinning, wherein there is a manifest
comtempte of God, and an undoubted provocation of Gods wrath.

By reason of this fighting between faith, and sin, Paul said, that what
so ever is not of fayeth, is sin, signifiynge that the nature of faith is
such, that it brings forth good fruits of it self. Wherefore when a man
sins, as that is done by wrong confidence, so the trust in Christ is
rejected, and grace, and eternal life is cast away and man's salvation is
paste remedy, except he recover a trust in Christ, and putting away all
wrong affiaunce, he wholly restore him self into the obedience of God.

The large promises of Gods reward ministre the forth cause of good works.
For it is the commandment of God, that his most ample promises should be
preached to all men. As Paul says, Godliness is profitable unto all things,
and has a promise of the present life, and of the life to come. And we showed
before that evil works be punished with everlasting pains, which yet often
times have their beginning in this life, as it apppeareth in Saul, Achab,
Judah. So contrary wise God requires their works, that repent with eternal
rewards. How be it this fundation of our salvation stands still, that is to
say, the trust of everlasting life in Christ the Lord, whereof we spoke
before, namely that we obtain remission of sins, and everlasting life through
faith for Christ's sake and not for the worthiness of our works. For this
sentence stands fast and sure, in which the Lord testifies of him self.
Iho^. vi. This is the will of the father, that every one, that believes in the
son, shall have eternal life.

For though God through a merueilous purpose suffer his church to be pressed
grievously with the cross, and exercises it with great miseries, as shall be
said hereafter, yet forasmuch as he will be known to men in this life, and
be magnified, he steareth up, preserves, and defends the preachers of his
name, the teachers of his Gospel, and also the hearers, as he promised that
his church should continue here unto the end of the world. Therefore for
this purpose, that his church may continue perpetually, he deals forth
sundry gifts of his spirit, and he gives to his saints that through good
works they deserve the increase of virtues, according to the word of Christ,
there shall be given to him that has. And saying that in this life we have need
of fode, peace, lawful governance of the common weal, health. etc. God
adds these things also, and recompenseth the good works of his therwyth,
and yet with this moderation, that nevertheless he holds still his church
under the cross. Of this reward of good works Christ speaks. Give, and
there it shall be given unto you. And Esaie. xxxiij. He that walks in
ryghtuousnes. etc. shall dwell in an high, and therefore a sure place. He shall
not want meat and drink, his eyes shall se the king in his glory. So
though Esaie, Hieremie, Daniel, and Paul were pressed with sundry, and most
grenous aflictions, yet God after a merueylous forte preserved them a great
while in life, and ministered unto them abundauntly things necessary for life.
And surely for this cause God promised us corporal goods, that being steared
up through such promises, we should exercise faith, and invocation, and
labor the more to be busy in good works. When thou hear then, that God
commands the to give alms, and adds his promises, that he will give the
again fode, and other good things. Give thine alms liberally, and exercise
thy faith therein, and confirm thy mind, that it is God, that gives the
corn, a living, and all good things, that maynteyneth the, and thine, and
that he will recompense thy liberality showed for his sake. And when thou
considerest these things with fayeth, and have afterward confirmed this
sentence of faith in thy mind, thou must exercise also the invocation of God,
and trusting in his promises, thou must pray him through Christ his son,
that as he has promised, he will give the things necessary for life, and
maynteyne the, and thine, and thou must also with a sure hope look for those
things, which thou haste so prayed for of him, nothing doubting but that he
will give them to the, as far as they may be good for the in deed.

For if the mind be so far from God, and so empty of the trust of his
goodness, that it can not so much as ask, hope and look for corporal goods
from him, neither exercise fayeth in asking, and lokynge for those things
from him, such a mind shall feel much less of desire, and hope of
spiritual, and everlasting goods.

Such causes then of good works must be driven into men diligently, that they
may be steared up to work well, and to auoyed evil works. Neither have we
need of a small fight in this case, that we beware of evil works, and
travail constantly in good works. For the weakness of nature does not only
provoke us to evil works but the devil lays in awayte for us, to drive us
thereunto with merueylous enginnes, as S. Petre says that the devil goes
about roarynge like a Lion, and seeking whom ue may devour. And though these
things seame folishe to the^ that lack the fear of God, which follow their
lusts without care, yet we have experience by daily exemples, that very many
men are miserably driven of the devil into horrible mischeuous acts, and so
into temporal, and everlasting punishments. For how many does he send
headlyng into Idolatry, and most pernicious errors concerning religion? How
many drives he to unjust murders? How many leads he to abominable, and
incestuous lechery? Which evil this thing also is wont to follow which is
most horrible of all, that sins are punished with sins, whereby greater
mischiues, and abominations spring forth. For how great, and how horrible
sins followed of the adultery of David. No sin is alone, there cleave
always to one very many other. Wherefore the healpe of God must be called
for continually, and with most fervent wishes, and we our selves must live in
fear, and continual care, which thing the Apostle cammaundeth, Philippi.
ij. work your own health with fear, and tremblyng.

The fyfte question. what difference is there of sins?
This question must be handled, because, as we have said, that sin remaymeth
ever in saints, while they live here. There is a question the^, what manner of
syn that should be, that is ever found in saints. For this thing must be
well declared, and we must make a difference between the sins, which the
saints avoid not in this life, and those that stand not with faith. Therefore
we must know that there is a sin against conscience, that is to say, which
a man commits wyllyngly and knowyngly. This in saints has no place. And if
they commit any such sin, they cast away the grace of God and faith,
and drive the holy ghost from them, and be no longer saints, and acceptable to
god. Those sayings of the holy ghost testify this thing clearly. i. Cor.
vi. and Gala. v. They that do such things shall not possess the kingdom of
God. And i. John. iij. My little children let no man deceive you, he that does
ryghtuousnes, is ryghtuous, but he that does sin is of the devil. Wherefore
Paul says also. i. Timo. i. The sum of the commandment is love out of a
pure heart, a good conscience, and faith not feigned. Ite^ afterward, keep
faith, and a good conscience. Wherefore he that synneth against his
conscience, he falls from grace, and ryghtuousnes. To this kind of sin
wylfull ignorance pertayneth also, as the ignorance of the heathen, and
pharisees was, which rejected the Gospel preached of Christ, and of the
Apostle, and would be ignorant. And in all times there be many such men,
which will neither hear of Christ the savior, nor know him, and do
plainly contemn the voice of God soundyng from heaven. This is my dear son
hear him. Such in our time are the Jews, and the Mahometistes, and many
other among the adversaries of the Gospel, which feign that they understand
not the Gospel, whereas notwithstanding they will neither hear it, nor admit
it into their hertes.

Hitherto we have spoken of their sins that continue not in the grace of God,
but in committing such sins make them selnes subject again to the wrath of
God. Nevertheless great corruption of nature, weakness, and evil
concupiscence, whereof many naughty affections spring continually, remain
in the^ that are in favor, and be reconciled. But while the saints resist
those corrupt motions, and beseech the heavenly father to forgive them the
same for Christ's sake, beleuyng that this weakness and naughty affections be
pardoned to the^ for the same Christ's sake, they keep still faith, grace, and
the holy ghost, they continue ryghtuous, acceptable to God, saints, and
heirs of everlasting life, as S. Paul teaches excellently. To. vij. viij.
Testifiyng that no damnation remains unto them that be in Christ Jesus,
which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. The godly must be
exercised with this fight, and so they shall well understand the grace and
victory of Christ against sin, and Satan, and they shall go forward in
godliness, and in the gifts of God. For the holy ghost is not given to the
reconciled, to maynteyne Idle slouthfulnes, but that they should fight with a
perpetual battle against sin and Satan, and that in such a confflicte they
might feel the healpe of the spirit. Wherefore Paul says. i. Cor. vi. We
exhort you that ye take not the grace of God in vain.

Of the true, and Germane significatiof this word, faith.
Because we have heretofore spoken much of faith in Christ, out of S. Paul,
whereby as the Lord him self, and the whole scripture witnesses, we obtain
remission of sins, enheritaunce among the saints, and everlasting life, the
ministers must remember, and teach the people diligently, that this iustifiynge
fayeth is the work of the holy ghost in the chosen of God, whereby their
minds are so illumined and taught, that they certainly assent to the Gospel
of Christ, and therefore to the whole scripture, and every word of God, that a
man out of the Gospel may know, and determine certainly that God gives him
remission of sins, and everlasting life for the only Mediators sake
Christ, that he is, and will be his God, and father, and account him for his
son, and that he shall be enheriter of eternal life. Out of this fayeth there
spryngeth necessarely a true confidence in Christ, a love of God, and a desire
to live after his commandments. All which things the holy ghost works
in them that believe, through who^ we are borne again, and be become a new
creature of God, made in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God prepared
that we should walk in them.

Therefore the ministers, as we have said must diligently teach the people,
when they entreat of iustifiynge and saving faith, that this lively, and
workyng faith is understood, which we defined a little before and not such a
faith, as may be without the love of God, and without good works. For such
one is not true faith, but as it were a dreamyng or rather a dead faith,
neither that we understand a maimed faith as is in Satan, as was in Judas, and
is in all them that despeyre of the mercy of God.

For this faith believes not the holy Gospel, but only part of the Gospel,
I mean that part wherein God pronou^ceth the everlasting punishment of the
evil, and not that part, wherein he offers his grace to them, that believe.
For they that have this faith, believe that there is a God, that made and rules
all things, that punishes the evil, but they believe not, that God will be
merciful unto them, and forgive them their sins freely for his sons sake.
Finally that we must not understand a temperarie fayeth, wherewyth men believe
the whole Gospel in deed, but it is but for a time. For they receive the word
of God with joy, but when afliction, and persecution chances for the
Gospel, they fall again, and their fayeth vanishinge out of their minds, the
sede of Gods word, though it be spronge up, is killed, and dries away with
the heat of persecution. Wherefore the preachers must teach men diligently,
that when they hear that we, which believe in Christ have everlasting life,
that we be borne again through faith, that the children of God be instified
and saved through faith, they must understand, and considre that these
things be spoken of true, and lively fayeth, which steareth up in them that
believe, a sure trust of Gods beniuolence, and of adoption unto everlasting
life. And hereby breadeth in them, and enflameth an earnest, and fervent love
of God, and works also a perpetual and effectuous study of all holiness, and
sincere, and serviceable love toward our neighbors. Finally brings to
pass, that they that believe, give them selves altogyther to the fulfilling of
the law.

Of the cross, and aflictions.
When this faith is sincerely taught and learned, and prevails in the life
of the saints, it can not be, God so orderinge, and finishinge the renuinge of
his, but the cross, and aflictih^ will follow sincere doctrine, and a godly
life. For God willing through his secret purpose to try the faith of his, and
to drive them to call for his healpe, permits Satan to exercise them with
sundry te^tations, which is an enemy of pure doctrine, and christian.
Wherefore while this is permitted unto him, he resists, and wrastleth against
good doctrine, and godly life with all the craft and might that he can, and
moves against the same what so ever he has in his power. And he has the
whole world in his power. Wherefore Christ calls him the prince of the
world. John. xij. If he be then the prince of the world, what other thing
shall we look for, then that he will be against us with all the world, and will
fight against pure doctrine, and pure life. Of doctrine Christ's word
testifies. John. xv. If they have hard me, they will hear you also. If they
have persecuted me, they will persecute you also. etc. And that they will
persecute a godly life. S. Paul teaches. ij. Tim. iij. As many as will live
godly in Christ shall suffer persecution.

It is then right necessary that the ministers of the word, teach,
comfort, and strengthen the people with all faythfulnes and diligence to bear
the cross, and to learn to overcome adversities with patience.

For we may hear every where the ungodly, and blasphemous words of men
that be in aflictions. For when they are warned to arm their mind with
patience, because that aflictio^s are sent of God, against that, they cry
straight way, that they are not sent of God, but of Satan, and if thou will
say still that God chastises them, whom he loves, they say, they wish that
he would not love them so much. When any incommoditie, or adversity
chances to them unlooked for, the cause whereof they can not attain with
their folishe reason, forthwyth they ascribe it to art magike. Which error,
and superstition is chiefly in vplandishe men, and other rude fellows. Through
which error it comes to pass that when they fall into any calamity, they
run straight ways to wisardes, and witches, they ask counsel of them, and
believe their lies, and for the most part burden them with unjust
suspicions, and falsely sclaunder them, that be innocent. Further also they
embrace their enchauntme^tes, and magike remedies, using the aid of deuyls,
which is an horrible defectio^ from the true God, and a deniyng of him, which
surely be great, and heinous sins, for reuengeaunce whereof the wrath of God,
and manifest punishments are wont to come upon the unfaithful, as the
Apostle witnesses. Therefore that we may resist so great wickedness, and
abomination, and that men may be brought to have true patience in the
cross, the preachers must teach some what after this sort of the cross.

First, though the devil with his guard burn with an incredible hatred
against the godly, and desires excedingly to hurt them by all means, and
in what thing so ever he can, in body, soul, goods, fame, as Petre
testifies, saying the devil walks about. etc. Nevertheless this is
certain, that he can not once move an hear of our head, except God suffer
him so to do, as Christ says. Math. x. Are not two sparowes sold for a
farthynge, and one of them falls not upon the earth without your father. And
the very hears of your head are al numbered. The story of Job witnesses the
same, who^ Satan could not hurt, but by the permission of God, neither in
goods, nor body. For we are enuironned with many thousands of Angels, which
have charge of us, as the prophet Eliseus says to his ladde, iiij. of
kings. vi. When the king of Siria commanded the prophet to be taken. David
in the Psalm. xxxiij. witnesses that the same is given not only to Eliseus,
but also to all the godly saying. They that fear the Lord, he compasses
them about, as it were with pauilions, and the watching Angel keeps them
safe But where tents be pitched, there the holiest must needs be present. So
Christ him self says also of the young children. Their angels se always
the face of my father, which is in heaven.

We may daily se and feel this defense, guard, and custody of the Angels, if
we wilturne our minds to the works of God, and considre them with the eyes
of faith. For how many new enginnes deuiseth Satan daily: What mischiues
inue^teth he through wicked men, wherewyth he yet profits nothing, so that we
must needs grant that God disapoynteth those devises of Satan, and not any
wisdom of man. Wherefore men must be taught diligently that what so ever
good or evil chance to them (sin only excepted) they believe it chances
to them from God, and his providence though it be done by the ministry of
Satan, and of the ungodly.

Secondly forasmuch as it is well known that adversity comes not by
chance, but by the permission, and determined purpose of God, we ought not to
doubt, but that it chances to us for good, and that such things be as
signs of Gods beniuolence, and not of his wrath, as the Epistle to the
Hebrews teaches. xij. My son neglecte not the correction of God, nor faint
thou when thou art rebuked of him, for who^ the Lord loves, him he
corrects. etc. S. Paul says the same thing. i. Cor. xi. When we are
chastised, we are corrected of the Lord, that we be not condemned with this
world. Item To. viij. We know that to them that love God, all things work
for good, to them I say, which be called according to his determined will.

Thirdly they must be taught that the cross, and aflictions be a schole,
wherein we are well nourtured, and enstructed of the will of God. For Christ
says, Luke. xiiij. He that bears not his cross, and follows me can not be
my disciple. For we ought not to acknowledge an other master upon earth. If
then we can not be his disciples, except we take our cross upon us, we can
not learn of him the things that pertayne to our salvation, without the
cross, and afliction. Wherefore S. Paul exhorts us also To. xij. to give
our bodies a lively sacrifice, to be killed with the cross, and that we should
try what the good will of God is. etc. For we learn many things under the
cross, and aflictions, which it skylleth us to know unto our salvation. Of al
which nevertheless the sum, and end is, to acknowledge the good and fatherly
will of God toward us. But we will rehearse some of these things. Some under
the cross acknowledge their weakness, and sins, which otherwise they would
not have found in them selves, as Job. For when he had a while keept and
showed patience unto God, at the last being broken, and overcome with the most
grievous calamities, wherewith the Lord exercised him, he curssed the day of
his nativity, and murmured against God, which fault he would never have
thought to have been in him, without the cross.

In the cross then, we feel, how much evil hangs yet in us, the secret
vices of our heart, and naughty concupiscence of our nature is brought forth,
and disclosed unto us. Wherefore they which are impatient in tribulations,
which be discouraged, or moved with some kind of reuengynge, or flee to evil
crafts, and remedies of deuyls, or about the confession of the name of Christ
should back, and abjure the Gospel, or do some thing ungodly, and unworthy
of christian profession, such men may learn through their fall, that they do
not yet truly believe God. For such falls are undoubted fruits of infidelity,
and they prove those men, which so fall to distruste God, and to despeyre of
his gooddes, and healpe, and that they trust in them selves, and in other
creatures, yea in witchcraftes, and moreover in the devil him self. They then
which being tried with the cross find that there hangs in them great
wickedness, which they knew not before, and that they were counterfaites, and
empty of true fayeth, ought to be aghast, and to quake at this their
^ngodlines, and to be moved with earneste repentance, and to flee with all
their heart unto Christ which may deliver them of this infidelity, and give
them strong faith, etc. For God sends such miseries, and tribulations for
this purpose, that in them me^ might behold, try, and acknowledge the^
selves in a glass. For while they be in prosperity, they live carelessly, they
run not to God, they neglecte to hear his word, they call not upon God,
they think that they know him, and have all things that they need.

Some under the cross call their sins passed, to remembrance, and weygh
them worthily at length, and lamente them, and truly repent of them. For while
they have all things at pleasure, for the most part, they neglecte their
sins, they despice the wrath of God, and think it not to be so much as,
they hear it to be preached. But when the cross, and afliction comes upon
the^, their mind is aflight, it co^sidereth not that the things, which it
suffers, be the scourges of Gods wrath, it fears lest God will show him
self hereafter a rigorous judge, and revenger of wicked acts, and not a
gentle father. The man considers in this chastising of God al his sins
whereby he desirued the punishments a great while before, which he now
suffers, he weighs them worthily at the last, and condemns him self, and
says with him self in this, and that sin, I well deserved this correction
of God.

If then true repentance come into his mind, and if he flee to the mercy of
God in Christ, he is healped also with grace. For God therefore sends us
aflictions that we should acknowledge our sins, that we should condemn
our selves, and turn to the Lord, as Paul monisheth. i. Cor. xi. saying, for
this cause, that is to say, because ye celebrate the supper of the Lord
unworthily, and not religiously, there be many weak and feeble among you, and
many sleep, and he adds, if we had judged our selves, that is to say, if we
had repented our sins and amended our life, we should not be judged, that is,
we should not be subjected to so many euyls. But when we judge not our
selves, God judges and chastises us, not with an enemous, but with a
beniuolent, and fatherly mind, that he may put us in remembrance of our
sins, and call us again to repentance, and this it is, that he says
afterward. But when we be judged of God, we be corrected, that we be not
condemned with the world. Such then learn in the cross the bou^tuous, and
fatherly will of God in that, that they know that God will not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he be converted, and live, as Ezechiell testifies.
xviij. Whereunto he drives even with his scourges.

Other in the cross acknowledge not their sins only, or not chiefly, as
men having obtained remission thereof, and which sins be covered by the mercy
of God, but they get much more knowledge, of the mercy and exceeding
goodness of God, as he that was borne blyude, John. ix. Of whom when the
disciples had moved a question, whether he or his Parents had sinned, that he
should be borne blind. Jesus answered, neither has this man sinned nor his
Parents, but that the works of God may be made manifest in him. etc. Of this
sort be the aflictions of them, which have somewhat profited in christian
religion. For God is much redier to give, and to healpe, then we be to ask
it, which thing appears evidently by this, that he steareth us up with so
many his precepts, and promises to pray to him self, promising also that he
will give us, what so ever we ask in the name of Christ his son. Therefore
that we may acknowledge this his so bountuous, and very fatherly love
toward us, he lays a cross upon us, wherein he constrayneth us to call
upon him, that hearing us, and delivering from euyls, and heaping benifittes
upon us, he may declare his good will toward us, and move us to love him
again, and to magnify him, according to the sentence of the Psalm. Call upon
me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver the, and thou shalt glorify me.
This way the cross is easily suffered, and becomes pleasant. For who would
not be blind for a while if he knew that his sight should be restored to him
sone after by the hands of Christ him self, and also inward sight with the
outward. Who would not wish exie, and persecution with David, if he knew
that he should be merueylously delivered of God, and that he should be
extolled to sanctify his name, and dilate his knyngdome. Who would not chose
to be troubled, and despiced with Job, if he knew that at length, he should
be pronounced ryghtuous by the judgment of the divine majesty it self, and
that he should recover his former dignity, yea and more to both in temporal,
and everlasting goods. But we must be as certain of the healpe of God, and
deliverance, as David, Job and other were, whose exemples the scripture
sets before us, so that we call upon God with true faith. Wherefore the
people must be often warned hereof by the ministers, that by this mean, faith
and the invocation of God, being now welnigh quenched, may be raised up
again and florishe.

There be some also which while they are aflicted, learn the peculiar love of
god toward them, and get glory even in the cross, as the Apostles. Act.
v. When they were beaten with rods for the name of Christ, and confession of
the Gospel, went from the council reioysinge that they were compted worthy to
be spitefully handled for his names sake. Therefore it must be ascribed to the
peculiar goodness of god, when he judges us worthy to be troubled for his names
sake, for if we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified with him, as Paul
witnesses. To. viij. Surely it was a great benifitte, and great glory to
the Apostles that they had so great faith, and love to promote the kingdom of
God, that they thought they ought to rejoice, and to glory in the trouble and
despite which they suffered for the name of Christ, whereof undoubtedly they
took great consolation. Therefore christian men must ever labor to get
such perfection, which read that many Martyrs showed, men, women,
children, young, and old, learned, and unlearned, so that we may once say
with Paul. Be it far from me that I glory, saving in the cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ. etc.

In this place it shall pertayne to the preachers to arm the people against
the errors of the Anabaptists, which contend that no cross avails to
health, saving that, that is laid upon us for faythes sake, and for the
confession of Christ, neither will they acknowledge any to be a christian man,
which has not this cross that he suffer persecution for the confession of
Christ. Whose error is like the error of the donatistes, which as S.
Augustine witnesses, drove men even against their wylles to kylle them selves.

Therefore the preachers must teach the people three kinds of aflictions, and
of the cross. First, when we suffer persecution for the confession of Christ,
and for righteousness, which afliction, and cross is most wholesome, and most
to be wished for according to the saying of Christ Math. v. Blessed be they
that suffer persecutions for ryghtuousnes sake. etc.

The second kind of tribulation is, whereby God corrects us for sin, and
calls us again unto repentance, as be diseases, poverty, hu^gre,
pestilence. etc. In these if we show patience to God, and obey his will, and
seek his grace in Christ, being so pricked with true repentance of sins,
and earnest faith, this shall be a pleasant sacrifice unto God, which thing is
toutched in the parable Luke. xiij. Of the great banekette, to which the
bidden gestes refused to come, and the pore, lame blind. etc. were brought,
and compelled to come.

The third kind of the cross is, when malefactors are punished for their
wicked acts, as he murderers, adulterers, thieves, robbers. This kind of
tribulation becomes not christian men. Wherefore we must take diligent head,
that we be not troubled this way, as wicked, and euylles doers. i. Petri.
iiij. Let none of you be aflicted as a murderer, as these. etc. But if any
man be troubled as a christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in
this behalf. But if any such thing chance, and if some heinous act be
committed, the person must not despeare therefore, but he must acknowledge that
he is punished for his deserving. Where fore he must have patience, and pray
for forgyuenes, and so this cross though it be brought upon us through our
wicked acts becomes holy, and acceptable to God, as we may se in the thief,
which on the cross acknowledged, and called upon Christ.

Here the preachers shall also warn diligently, that it is not in our choice
to lay the cross upon us, as we list, but that every man must bear that
cross, which God lays upon him, according to the saying of Christ, he
that will be my disciple let him take up his own cross, not Christ's cross,
or Petres, or Paul's, but his own. Therefore let every man be contented
with h^s own cross, only let him ^^w are that he pull not a cross upon
him self with his own wicked deeds. The only exemple of John the Euangeliste
proves sufficiently that it is not necessary that every man be exercised
with the cross, for the confession of faith. For this man hough he were right
dear unto Christ, yet he dyed a natural death and in extreme age, and was
not put to death for the confession of fayeth, as the most part of the other
Apostles were.

Furthermore this thing also must be taught about this place, that it is not
only profitable, but also necessary that we be troubled in this life, and
exercised with su^drie adversities, by reason of our naughty flesh, and old
Adam, to which it is needful, to be repressed, and tamed with the cross, as
meat and drink be needeful for the body. For our old man in prosperity
for the most part wareth riotous, and insolent, forgets God, and loses
the bridle to allustes, and mischiues, as Moses testifies, Deuteronomy. xxxij. The
beloved was batted, and kycked, he was batted, and made fat, and left God
his maker, and departed from God his health. Wherefore Solomon prays. Pro.
xxx. Neither poverty, nor rytches give me, lest I being filled deny the,
and say who is the Lord. etc. To auoyed these so great euyls, the cross is
surely necessary, so that if God lay upon us no peculiar cross we must
humble, and chastise our flesh our selves, as Paul wrate of him self. i.
Cor. ix. I chastise my body, and bring it into bondage. etc. For the old man
must needs be mortified and perish, if the new shall be renewed. And this the
holy ghost works in us, chiefly by the law and aflictio^s, wherewith we are
moved, and nurtured to understand the law. Wherefore in baptism we submit
our selves, to the cross, and to death, according to the saying of Paul,
To. vi. As many of us as be baptized into Christ, are baptized into his
death. etc. And a little after, we know that our old man is crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be abolished, that hereafter we serve not
sin, that is to say, that God has set us forth an exemple in Christ, in
whom we should learn that our old man must dye, and that therefore he is
ever subject to the cross. For he that is dead, says Paul, is justified
from sin. Therefore as necessary as it is that our old man dye, and cease
from sins, so necessary is the cross, without which the old man can
neither be tamed nor mortified.

Beside this profitte and necessity of the cross, the dignity also, and
glory of the same must be diligently commended to the people. For God would
have his own son, in whom he had delight, as he testified with a voice from
heaven, to be exalted by the cross, and death, and to be crouned with glory,
and honor. Hebr. ij. If then the son of God suffered, so horrible things,
and th^rowe the cross entered into glory, the disciple is not greater, nor
ought to be in better case, then the master. Wherefore though there were none
other profitte in the cross, yet for this cause only we ought to suffer it,
patiently and gladly, that we may be made like unto Christ. For saying that
Christ was right dear, and acceptable unto God through obedience of the
cross, the fathers will was, that al which should be glorified with him,
should suffer with him, as Paul fayeth, To. viij. Whom he knew aforehande,
the same he preordined like the Image of his son. etc. And a little after. And
if we be children, then be we heirs, heirs I say of God, and coheyres with
Christ, if we suffer with him, that we may be glorified with him. Our
afliction also is planted in the passion of Christ, for through baptism we are
grafted into his death To. vi. So that we may know certainly that our cross
and sufferinges please God, as the passion of his son pleased him. For he is
our head, and we are his members, wherefore aflictions are come to both. For
which cause it was said to Paul persecuting the christians, Saul, Saul why
persecutest thou me. Wherefore if the head if self were subject to the same,
as Paul witnesses Cor. i. I rejoice in my tribulations for you. etc.

The cross then is an entrance to glory, and life, as Paul saye^h. ij. Timo.
ii. This is a sure saying, if we be dead with him, we shall live with him, if
we suffer, we shall reygne with him. etc. Neither is our tribulation at any
time equal with the greatness of glory, according to the saying of Paul, To.
viii. I compte that the aflictions of this present world are not equal with
the glory, which shall be reueyled toward us.

Saying then that every cross is from God, and Satan with the whole world
can not hurt one hear of our head with out the will of our father, men
ought to be warned diligently, that in trouble they turn not their eyes so
much upon the malice of Satan, and wicked men, as to the good will and fatherly
affection of God, which aflicteth us for this purpose, that we may
acknowledge our sins, and weakness, that we may be moved to true, and
wholesome repentance of our sins, and driven to seek grace in Christ, and
that we may go forward in all godliness, faith, invocation, and magnifiyng of
Gods name, mortifiynge the flesh, and ever more fully facionynge our selves
to the Image of Christ, that being daily more and more werie and full of this
life, we may more gredely desire the life to come, and sone after enjoy it
plentuousely, and reygne with Christ in everlasting glory.

If these things shall be prynted in men diligently, and commended unto them,
they shall be easily retained, that they be not discouraged in adversities, that
some fall not into impatiencie, some slay to ungodly aides against affictions,
but having their minds stablished with the trust of Gods goodness, they shall
gladly submit them seues to the yoke of the Lord, and shall find rest to
their souls Mat. xi. Chiefly saying that we have this consolation that God is
faithful, which will not suffer us to be tempted, above that, that we be able
to bear, yea with tentation he shall make away out, that we may suffer.
Besides this we have an healpe, and most present counsel ordained of God, in all manner of persecutions, as against the Devil him self, we have the Lords
word, against violent and wicked men, we have officers ordained of God,
against diseases we have sundry remedies, and the art of physic. Finally
against al these togythrr, we have a mighty weapon, the prayer of faith.
Wherefore there is no cause why we should ask healpe of Satan in adversity,
or of magike, or of other which serve the devil, and not God, as all they be,
that labor to seduce us, or to drive us from the obedience of God. Wherefore
let us use the said remedies commended of God, against the euyls that vex us,
and let us use them according to the word of God with a good, and simple
conscience, and if God will not straight way take our aflictions from us, by
those remedies which he him self has ordained and appointed to put away
such euyls, let us suffer still the hand of the Lord with a contented mind
and nevertheless let us ask consolation, and healpe of him with continual,
and buruyng prayers through our Lord Jesus Christ, our only Savior.
Undoubtedly at length he shall turn all our adversities to our health, and
profitte both present, and to come.

Of the church of God.
THe visible church of God in this life, is a company of persons truly
beleuyng the word of God delivered unto us by Christ, and the Apostles, and
of persons borne again through the holy ghost. In which company many
abide in this life not borne again, having sins against their conscience,
and yet co^sentyng in doctrine, and true use of the sacraments. As in Paul's
time there were at Corinthe, and in other places among christians, both godly
men having the holy ghost, and also some that sinned against their
conscience, which nevertheless spoke not against the true doctrine, and right
use of the sacraments, but took them with other in the congregation. And it is
received by custom, that the godly be called the quick me^bres of the
church. These men while they be not excommunicated, may execute ecclesiastical
offices in teaching and ministringe the sacraments, neither shall their
ungodliness hurt the godliness of them which use their ministry without
allowyng of their ungodliness.

Al be it then that the congregations, and ministers of the same ought to take
diligent head, that unworthy men be not received to the holy ministry, and
if they be received that as soon as their ungodliness is spied, they be removed
from the same again, nevertheless of what mean sort so ever they be that
ministre in holy things, while the congregation suffers them, they to whom
they ministre the sacraments of Christ must never regard the person, or
worthiness of the ministers, but the commandment, and promise of Christ in
the holy ministry.

For the Lord makes those things which he him self has ordained in his
church, to be effectuous unto the health of his, though the ministers be never
so unworthy, and he requires that the fayeth of his people be grounded upon
his word, and not upon the worthiness of the ministers. Therefore Christ
says he that hears you, hears me, that is to say, it is my word, and it
works through me, the fayeth of mine must lean hereupon, and not upon the
virtue, and worthiness of the ministers. For this cause he compares the church
to a fishers net wherewith good, and evil fishes are taken. And math. xiij.
He testifies that the evil must not be severed from the good before the
later day. The church must be exercised here, and war under the cross,
not only against flesh, and blood, but also against the devil him self,
some of the members thereof as it were stonpynge and gyuynge place, some being
quite overthrown, and some recoueryng them selves again, and renuinge the
fight. And though many in the church shall give place to Satan, and to the
flesh, and shall be oppressed of these enemies, yet ever some members of the
congregation must stand, and overcome, some time more, and sometime fewer.

Wherefore there shall ever be some visible congregation on the earth, as Christ
him self promises Mathewe the last. Lo I am with you unto the end of the
world. And Esaie. xlix. The Lord says. And I have made this covenant with
them, says the Lord, my spirit which is upon the, and the works, which I
have put in thy mouth shall not depart from thy mouth, nor from the mouth of
thy sede, says the Lord, from this time unto everlasting.

This sentence teaches what the church is, and that it shall endure ever. And
it is a great consolation to hold both parts, that we may be sure, that God
has not cast away whole mankind, but that he will ever hear, and save us.
But where will he do this thing? Answer. Not among the heathen, or desperate
Jews, or Mahometistes, or obstinate adversaries of Christ, but among the^
only which hear, retain and believe the word, which the heavenly father
has put in the mouth of the Prophets, and of his son, and call upon him
according to his most ample promises.

This consolation taken out of the doctrine concerning the congregation is
diligently to be considered, and printed deeply into our minds, and therefore
the preachers must often rehearse these things to the people.

Furthermore that gross, and pernicious error of the Donatistes, and
Anabaptists must be reproved, which called the people from the word of God,
and the sacraments to the person of the ministers deniyng there ministry to
be effectuous, which had sins against conscience. How be it this is the
commandment of God, in the calling of bishops, and ministers, that such
ministers be chosen for the co^gregations, as be not reproueable. And if while
they be in their ministry they fall into wicked acts, that they be removed
from the same again, according to the order, which the Lord has appointed,
whereof we will speak hereafter. In the mean while, as I said, we must ever
have regard to the commandment of God in the word, and the sacraments, and
not to the person of the ministers. For we speak here of the visible church,
wherein good, and badde be mengled together in this life. And god made mankind
for this purpose, that there might be some among whom he might be known,
which should call upon him, and magnify him. And therefore also he sent his
son our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him he has opened the exceeding rytches
of his grace toward us, that they mygh^e be unfolded and distributed among
us, whereby many might be saved. And because that these works of Gods goodness
must be manifest in the world, there must needs be a visible church, that
is to say, such a company, in which this will of God toward me^ is
preached, and celebrated. Therefore the Psalm says of such a visible
church. Their sound went into all the world.

But that the church may be known, and discerned from other polities, and
people, it has certain propre signs, namely these that follow. The first
sign is true doctrine delivered to the church in the Gospel, by Christ, and
the Apostles after a true understanding. The second is the true and lawful
use of the sacraments, which Christ ordained. The third sign is confession
of godly doctrine, which is made both in calling upon God, and reteynynge the
communion, and discipline of Christ with the saints, and also in professynge
and maynteinyng the Gospel when need is among them, which be without the
church.

Of the unity or concord of the church.
AL be it that the church in many things be unlike the politic orders of
the world, (for it is subject unto the cross) yet it is like in that point,
that is principal, and best in all commonweals, that is to say, in great
unity, and conjunction of the members among them selves. And the conjunction,
and unity of the church consists in three points chiefly. The first is a
consent in the doctrine of the Gospel, and true understanding of the same,
which saying that the Jews, Mahometistes, heretics, and adversaries of the
Gospel have not, they be not the members of the church, though the Jews, and
Mahometistes glory much, that they worship the true God, and many of the^
live well, and honestly. For it is certain that they are not of the people of
God, and there fore that they be cast away from God, and damned for ever, as
many as blaspheme the son of God our savior, and profess openly that they
acknowledge him not, nor receive his doctrine delivered to the church by
Christ, and his Apostles. Therefore they be the enemies of god, and subjected to
eternal damnation.

In like manner though heretics, and persecutours of the Gospel, reteyne some
articles of the evangelical doctrine, and boste them selves to be christians,
and many of them live honestly, and excel in virtues of the outward life,
yet they be not members of the church. For the sentence Math. xij. is sure and
certain, he that blasphemeth the holy ghost, it shall not be forgyuen him in
this world, nor in the world to come. For to blaspheme the holy ghost, is to
speak evil of the allowed truth, which was reueyled by the holy ghost, and
the ministry of the Apostles. Item. ij. John. i. Every one that
transgresses, and tarieth not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God. So
Gala. i. If any man preach a Gospel to you beside that, that ye have
received, be he accursed. Hereof it may be known also, that they be none of
the church of Christ, which follow strange doctrine, because that such have
partly heathnishe opinions of the divine nature, as Manicheus, which feigned
that there were two Gods, one good, an other evil, both eternal, and partly
they have Iewishe errors of the son of God, and the holy Ghost, as
Samosatenus and such like. Neither is it obscure that they perteine not to the
church of Christ, which wythdrawe from Christ the Lord, the glory of a
Mediatoure, assignynge the remission of sins to the deservings of works,
and devising peculiar works or worshippinges of God. The same thing do they,
which deny original sin, and seek justice through their own worthiness,
which take away propriety of goods, which condemn officers, and
judgments ordained by the commandment of God, as the Anabaptists do, these
fellows pinche from Christ, and from the holiegoste, which holy ghost rebukes
original sin, and ordeyneth, and defe^deth politic ordres. Whereof it
appears that such be not the true members of the church, because that
either they refuse all together the doctrine of the Apostles, or mangle some
article of the the same interpretyng them against the universal consent of the
true church.

The second thing required to the vnnitie of the church, is concord
concerning the right use of those sacraments, which Christ instituted.

The third is obedience toward the ministry of the Gospel in all those
things for which we have the commandments of God, I mean that the people
hear the word of God of the ministers of the Gospel, which be lawfully
called, and teach sincerely. Item that they receive the Sacraments of them,
and obey them, if through the authority, and jurisdiction of the church
ordained of Christ, they be warned, rebuked, and punished for their sins, or
excommunicated. For the ministers must be necessarely obeyed in those things,
which are commanded in the Gospel Luke. x. He that hears you, hears me.
etc. Hebr. xiij. Obey the^ that be your gouerners, for they watch for your
souls, as men that shall give account of their office. etc. But the faithful
ministers suffer persecution of the open adversaries of the Gospel, and the
administration by it self, is full of great difficulties, cares, and miseries.
Wherefore it is a great cross, if there be added unto it arrogant behavior,
and contempt of their hearers. So contrary wise it is a great consolation, and
disburthenyng of their labors, and pains, when their hearers obey them in the
Lord, and declare a thankful mind for their labors, and cares. Which
thing makes also for this purpose, that the consent of the whole church be
maynteyned, that the doctrine of Christ be set forth more, and more. Finally
that the offices of love be busely excercised, and that the instauration of the
whole church go well forward. As contrary wise where there is contempt, and
stubburnes of the subjects, the holy concord of the people of God is drawn a
sundre, the doctrine of the Gospel is obscured, and corrupted, mutual offices
of edification are hindered, and many other offenses spring up, and the wild
behavior of many increases. Therefore that the church of the Lord may be
maynteyned, and grow forth he commanded him self, that necessary obedience
should be showed to the ministers of congregations, in those things which be
committed unto them in the Gospel. For they must exercise the authority of
Christ, and not of their own. Wherefore of them selves they have no right to
command any thing to the people of Christ, neither ought the people to obey
them, if they do so. For christian men can obey no man in those things, which
be against God, as all those things be, which are ordained, and enacted
concerning religion not of the commandment of Christ. But while the pastors
require, and enjoin those things, for which they have the commandment of
Christ, they that in this case refuse to obey, cast of the yoke of Christ.
Paul with a great spirit exhorts to this concord of the church and
agreinge together of the members of Christ among them selves, both in other
places, and also in the epistle to the Ephesians. iiij Therefore, I which am a
prisoner of the Lord, exhort you, that you so walk, as it becomes the
vocation, wherewith ye are called, with all submission, and meakenes, with
softnes of mind, sufferynge one an other through love, labourynge to keep the
unity of spirit by the bond of peace. One body, and spirit. etc.

But it is manifest that Paul calls that the unity of the spirit in this
place, that is in the true doctrine of Christ, and in the obedience of the
commandments of God. For the holy ghost works this unity in them which
believe, and this unity of spirit brings, and preserves the true peace, and
edification of the church.

And the manner and order of choosing or calling the ministers of the
congregation, which the holy ghost has appointed in the scriptures, makes
for the preservation of this unity. For as S. Paul says, Ephe. iiij.
Christ ascending up on high led captivity captyue, and gave gifts unto
men, prophets, apostles, feeders and teachers. And though Christ him self,
as the apostle witnesses, does chose and appoint ministers to his church, yet
he does the same for the most part by the work, and ministry of his
church. To which church he has commanded to bring up, and to teach
perpetuallye some unto this ministerye, which being furnished for the same
ministry, must be called, and appointed by lawful choosing, and trial.
Wherefore there has remained ever in the church a manner to bring up, and
frame some to the holy offices of the church, and also to receive them when
they be brought up, and furnished, and to ordeyne them, when they be fit for
that purpose. And this ordinance must be ever religiously kept that the
church may ever be edified by me^e teachers and curates, as the Apostle
teaches diligently, and comendeth to the Ephe. iiij. and. i. Timo. iij. Tit.
i. And this must be one of the principal charges of the bishops, that ever
some be brought up, and taught, and afterward also chosen and ordained being
tried, to execute the same religiously, as the apostle prescribed to his
Timothe, and Tite, and it was enacted, and renewed afterward by the decrees,
and canons of many counselles.

Of christian prayer.
TRue Christen prayer healpeth also very much to the conservation,
maynteynyng, and encreasyng of godliness as we warned before.

For through it we must ask, and receive what so ever we look for of God by
faith. But this exercise also of religion is waxen so cold, yea is so quenched
almost, that scarcely any know how to pray truly, and christianly. In the
beginning of the church the study of praying so flourished that not a few
miracles were done by prayer, whereof we have many exemples. Neither should the
strength of prayer be any thing less now, if we did apply it, studiously,
and with true faith. Therefore that the diligencie of prayer may be restored
again, it shall be the ministers duty, to exhort the people unto it
diligently, and to enstruct them of the same after this sort.

First forasmuch as it can not be, that any man shall pray truly, and
earnestly except some danger, or necessity of life drive him thereto, the
preacher shall labor diligently to set before the peoples eyes the necessity
of prayinge by reason of the euyls and dangers which hang over all men, and
ought to drive every man to pray earnestly.

Two kinds of euylles, and dangers move us to pray. The one kind is
manifest, the other is secret. To the first, as all men know, diseases
pertain, and poverty, persecution, infamy, hatred, war, pestilence, death,
heresies. etc. What so ever be openly hurtful, whether they be corporal, or
spiritual.

And though all men do feel, and take grievously these euylles, yet there be
few, which so take them, and be so grieved for them, as they should, and as
the religion of Christ requires, that is to say, as the scourges of God, and
punishments of their sins which they should labor to auoyed with true
repentance and faith. Therefore the preachers must teach and warn the
people diligently, that all these euylles happen through the wrath of God
against sins, that in the same, they may learn to considre not only their
danger, and grief, but much more the anger of God. And further what damages,
what destruction of body, and soul, and of al honesty ryseth upon the same,
that so the people may be steared up to religious, and fervent prayer.

The secret dangers to which we be subject, are the snares that Satan
lays for us by all occasions, seeking the destruction of body, soul,
goods, and name. Which snares we could never escape, except God of his
unmeasurable mercy, and love did defend us by his angels. Otherwise he
would easily take away our life with his venomous breath, in some places he
would steare up robberies, and murders in other tempests, in other wars:
he would take from some men their mind with horrible visions, he would lead
some out of their way into unknown places, he would throw some from their
horses, some from steares, some into waters. Some should be killed with the
fall of an house, some should be torn of wild beasts. Some should be
infected, or leese their life with venomous beasts. In some places he would
set houses on fire, in some he would droune all, he would cause some to
kill them selves, he would drive some out of their wits, he would furnishe
some with evil crafts to hurt other men's life, and goods, as we se done
with sundry enchauntmentes. In other places he would overthrow discipline,
and honesty with all kinds of mischeues. In some places he would fill married
folks, and householders with hatred, brawlynges, venimmes, and murders. In
some places he would trouble common weals with great co^motions, and
seditions. He would give some men wit and mind to deprave the scriptures,
and to corrupt civil laws. He would tangle some with pleasures, and destroy
the same in body, and soul. He would so opresse some with persecutions, that
he would draw them from godliness to a careless, impenitent, and Epicureous
life. He would drive some having committed grievous offenses unto desperation.
Some time he would trouble the church with sore sclaunders, and sometime
(counterfaiting an angel of light) he would bring in false doctrine and
noisome exemples of life. Some times he would steare up heresies, and
Idolatries. Briefly there should be nothing in all the world, safe from his
malice, and violence, which he would not deprave, corrupt, and destroy, he
would fill all the world with calamities, sins, death, and all mischief,
except that God did break, and let his tirannie. For he is the prince of
the world, merueylous myghtie, which bears rule in the air. Ephe. ij. And
he works in the unfaithful, so that it is not hard for him to sow such
errors and offenses, wherewyth even the chosen might be brought to
destruction if it were possible. As we may well se in Job, neither want we
like exe^ples in these days, wherwyth God admonishes us both of the danger,
which hangs over us through the malice of Satan, and also of his protection
whereby he disapoynteth Satan's purposes, that we should ever pray for this
his defense, and acknowledge it with thanks gyuyng. Wherefore the preachers
shall declare these dangers diligently, that they may learn how many, and
necessary causes there be, that ought ever to steare and drive us to prayer,
and to learn of that our carnal carelesnes.

Secondly the preachers shall note the promises of God, which are set forth
every where in the scripture, wherein God promises that he will turn away
such perils, and deliver us, when we be fallen in them. And they shall
commend the same to the people diligently, when occasion shall serve, that they
may learn to look upon them religiously in their prayers, and to raise up
their minds therewyth unto a sure trust to obtain Gods healpe. For that
prayer may be hard, it must needs be done in fayeth, and in the name of
Christ, as Christ himself warns, what so ever ye ask in my name
beleuynge, ye shall receive it. Math. xxi. Item, what so ever ye shall ask the
father in my name, he shall give it you. Io. xvi.

Therefore that we may believe that our prayer is hard, we must needs have
Gods word, and promise, which we may believe. For otherwise it should be a
false trust, and ungodliness, if we did learn only upon our own judgment,
and persuasion. A promise then out of the word of God, where upon our prayer
may lean, is necessary, without the which we can in no wise pray truly,
neither yet be hard. But this thing must also be added, that it be done in
the name of Christ. And that we do, not only when we pray with these words,
we beseech the father almyghtie God through Jesus Christ thy son our Lord,
but also when we pray only for those things, which Christ commanded us to
pray for, so that after this sort we may pray truly, O Lord God heavenly
father we come not to pray unto the through our own lust, or confidence, but
by the institution, and commandment of thy only begotten son, of who^ we
have this sentence, and promise, that thou will hear us for his sake. Neither
do we pray, trustyng in our worthiness, or in our merits, for we know that
we have deserved nothing sauinge wrath, and punishment, but in the name of thy
son, that is to say, that thou wylt hear us for his sake and merit. This
is to pray truly in the name of Christ neither can it be, but that we shall be
heard as often as we pray with such a mind, and such a sure confidence, as
John witnesses. i. Epist. v. This is the trust that we have toward God,
that it we shall ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. etc.
Therefore the preachers shall declare to the people diligently, what a great
sin doubtyng is in prayer. For saying that our prayer has the promise of God
laid before it, it follows, that he which doubts whether he be heard or
no, doubts also whether God be true, whether he perfourm the thing, that he
promises. And there can be no greater shame done to God, then if we doubt
whether he be true. And therefore the prayer of a man that doubts can obtain
nothing, as James teaches. i. Chap. He that doubts, is like the waves of
the sea, which is tossed with the wyndes. Let not a doubting man think, that
he shall receive any thing of the Lord. A man that wanereth in all his deeds
can do nothing with a quiet conscience.

In the mean while the preachers must look hereunto, that they gently handle
the weak consciences of the godly, which stagger in the promises of God, and
that they healpe their weakness with some good consolation, teaching that
Christ will mercifully bear their weakness for a ceason, as he bear the
weakness of his disciples, to who^ even after his resurrection he vnbrayded un
belief with much softnes. But they shall exhort them to pray thus
constantly with the disciples, Lord increase our faith.

Thirdly they shall teach the people, that God has commanded us, that what so
ever good things we lack, we should ask the^ of him, and also that he will
remove the euyls that oppress us. Ask, says Christ, Math. vij. And ye shall
receive. Item, John. xvi. Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.
Luke. xviij. He teaches us with an apt similitude, that we must pray ever
and without ceasyng. The Lord requires the same thing in the beginning of
the ten commandments, when he says, I am the Lord thy God, thou shalt
not have strange Gods before me, sanctify my name. For he that
acknowledges the Lord his God, that is to say, him which only gives all
good things, and alone puts away all evil, and he that sets his trust
in no creature besides the Lord, and therefore desires with all his heart,
all his soul and all his strength to sanctify, extol, and glorify the name
of the Lord, this man must needs ask al things of God, and require healpe
of him against al euyls, and praise and magnify him for the same, according
to the Psalm. l. Call upon me in the day of tribulation, and I will deliver
the, and thou shall glorify me. Wherefore as he sins against the law,
which honors not his parents, which commits theft, lies, and
offends against other commandments, so they sin right grievously, and
against the principal commandments of the law, which call not upon God
in their doings, neither ask of him, what thing so ever they need, whether
it be corporal, or spiritual.

And that this sin may be more easily avoided, it is a christian, and godly
ordinance, that children be diligently instructed, and accustomed to prayer,
and that a form, manner, and order of praying be appointed unto them, when,
where, how often and what they ought to pray. Not that this thing be made by
a law, whereby their consciences may be entangled in superstition, but only
that their minds may be induced, and accustomed to pray, whom also it is
convenient to allure to pray with chyldishe entisementes, and gifts. For what
so ever is brought into custom in youth, the same cleaves fast in all ages,
whether it be good, or bad. Again things not accustomed are learned with
great difficulty in old age, though they be right profitable, and good, and
though we greatly desire to have the use of the same. But to them that fear
God, and set much by his commandments, there is nothing hard. Let the
ministers then admonish the parents, that they also healpe them therein, that
children may be enstructed, and accustomed to prayer from their chyldhode,
chiefly when they go to bed, when they rise, when they come to the table,
and go from the same, in the temple, when the time requires not to harken to
the reading of the holy scripture, or sermons, or when they must sing with
the congregation. It shall be good also for the confirmation of godliness in
them, to accustom them to pray always, when they be alone, or to call to
their minds some part of the holy scripture, or some works of God. For it
is incredible how many and grievous euyls may be avoided, if idleness, and
those their wanton, and wandering thoughts, when they are alone, be
restrained with godly prayers, or holy meditations. And God commanded by
Moses also such an institution, and exercise of children, saying. Deuteronomy. vi.
These words, which I command the this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou
shall declare them, and print them in, and muse upon them sittynge in thine
house, and walking in thy journey, going to bed, and rysynge. And that we
might have no cause of excuse, either that we have no leisure, by reason of
our business, or that we can not learn, how we should pray, Christ him
self has not only warned us that we need not many words, but he also has
set before us a most apt, short, and easy form of praying, which we call
the Lords prayer, wherein he has briefly comprehended what so ever we may
pray for, so that we learn truly to understand, and weigh it. And how it
ought to be understood, and pondred the preachers may teach out of our
institution if they have not a more commodious way them selves.

A short exposition of the Lords prayer.
ANd this is a sum of those things, that ought to be considered in this
form of praying. First we must mark the fu^dation of godly prayer, which
is the trust of fatherly beniuolence, whereof the Lord warned us in this,
that he commanded to call God father, though we be miserable sinners. This
trust before al things must be confirmed through fayeth in our Lord Jesus
Christ, that we may determine, that God is a father to us also, and that he
will deny no fatherly thing to us being now his children, for Christ's
sake his only begotten son, among many brethern, in whom he has received
us into favor being disherited, and cast away for sin, and has begotten
us again, and adopted us into his sons, and made us partakers, and heirs of
eternal life. Wherefore according to his fatherly love toward us, he will
suffer him self to be entreated, if we shall pray in the name of his son, as
he himself has commanded us. He made mention of the heavens, that we should
remember, that for as much as we are now lifted up into heavenly things in
Christ, we ought to ask heavenly things, and to think upon the same.
Wherefore, in things that wepraye for, or would have taken away of God, he
has prescribed this order, that our wishes for spiritual things should go
before our wyshes for bodily things. For first, he teaches us to pray, that
the name of god be sanctified, that is to say: that the name of God the eternal
power of God, wisdom and goodness, divine majesty, God himself in Christ the
Lord may be preached, glorified, acknoledged, called upon, and magnified among
our selves, and in all the world through manifest, sincere, and constant
confession, and preaching of the Gospel openly, and privately, with all men's
words and deeds. The second wish is, that at this preaching of Gods name, his
kingdom come daily to us, and to al called to the same more mightily, and
aboundauntly, that is to say, that the heavenly father will pour upon us ever
more plentifully the spirit of his son, which may bring to pass, that a
just, and pure ministration of religion, and dispensation of the word,
sacraments, and holy lernyng may florysh and prevail among us, and every
where, all they which believe in his name being so joined together, and copled
as it were members into his body so that this self same body may be repared,
and augmented, both in number of the^ that pertayne to the church, and also in
increase of their godliness, which be already come to the church, by every manne
that lives in Christ specially by the holy ministre of the church.

But because sin dwelling in us, and offenses coming from without, hindre
this work of the holy Ghost, that though we be in the church, in the kingdom of
Christ, and therein be daily enstructed to godliness, yet we go slouly forward
in the same, he did well to add the third petition, wherewyth we pray that
Gods will be done in us, which yet live in the earth, and be depressed with
the gross lompe of the body, so as it is done in heaven by the holy
spirits, this burden of the flesh, and these lettes of the world being
removed, with like prompnes and study, whether we must do, or susfre any
thing for the name of Christ.

And because that as long as we live here we have need of meat, and drink,
and other necessaries of this life, as prosperous health, and good
administration of the common weal, in the fourth petition we desire that also,
under the name of daily bread that we may the better, and more co^modiouslie
sanctify the name of God, promute his kingdom, and go forward in the same
with all godliness. We are commanded to ask these necessaries of life daily,
that we may considre, that they be not laid up in our storehouses, but in
the providence of God, and that they be ever ministered unto us of the free
beniuolence of God, and not gotten by our industry, or strength, how be it
every man ought to apply his industry, and labor to this bountuousnes of
God, according to the word of God. He adds our, and daily bread, epiousion,
that is to say, that, which the instant, and present use of life requires,
that he may teach us, that in these bodily things we ought to ask nor
get no more, then the need of our life requires, to provide the kingdom of
Christ in our neighbors, and moreover that we should acknowledge that
measure of this our need, that the heavenly father has limited, and not
that our unmeasurable desire appoints, to whom it pertains alone to meat
out to us his children our measure, that we may think that to be our bread,
and not doubt but that it shall suffice us abundauntly to live well, and
godly, that the heavenly father shall give us, what so ever it be.

In these parts then of this form of prayinge, the Lord has taught us,
what good things we must pray for of the heavenly father both spiritual,
and corporal. Afterward he teaches to pray for the removing of euyls,
namely our misdedes and sins, which we ever commit, and the punishments
that we owe to Gods justice for the same. Wherefore he taught us to pray.
Forgive us our dettes. For we do never our duty so religiously in those
things which God has commanded, but that yet we owe a great deal more unto
the full obedience of Gods law. Now we do not only run into those dettes
of the law not fulfilled, and heap daily more and more, but also we commit
many things playnlie against the law, for which we are endetted to God of
grievous punishments. And we can pay neither of these two kinds of dettes.
For we do not only never satisfy the law, whereby we run in new dettes of
the law not fulfilled, but also oftentimes we commit many things against
the law of God, whereby we run into infinite dettes of punishments.
Wherefore the Lord taught us to fleee only to the mercy of the heavenly
father through him self (for we must pray for all these things in his name)
and to desire forgyuenes of our dettes, and he adds no condition of
satisfiyng. For the Lord alone has satisfied for our sins, and he gives us
that satisfaction, when we commit our selves unto him. But he would have us
to profess, that we will forgive all the dettes that our neighbors may owe
unto us, either because against humanity they have done us wrong or because
they have not done their duty toward us, and he will that this thing be
surely performed.

For saying that God in all his commandments, prescribes only those things
unto us, which perteine to our health, and felicity, he made this the sum
of our precepts, that we love, and healpe one an other with a sincere heart,
and perpetual beniuolence, and he requires very straightly that from the heart
we forgive one an other mutual offenses, which ever more happen through the
naughtines, and weakness of our nature, yea and that we study one to overcome
an others wrongs with benifites, and leave the reuengeaunce to him, and pray
that he will remitte the same to them that hurt us. He will have such a sure
and perpetual beniuolence to grow among us, and to be confirmed with all
kinds of gentleness. Moreover because no man can ask of the heavenly father
forgiveness of his dettes, except he humble him self al together under his
hand and utterly yield him self to his commandments, the Lord has well
prescribed in this form of praying, that we should profess before the
heavenly father, that we would forgive our brethren what so ever duties or
punishments, they might seem to be endetted for unto us, in that place of
prayer, where we pray unto him to forgive us our dettes, which we owe unto him
infinite, either for our obedience which we have not fully performed, or
for the punishments that we deserve both for neglectyng our duties, and also
for the despitefull wrongs that we do to his majesty co^mittynge so many
things against the duty that we owe him.

Which our dettes if we rightly acknowledge, as we must needs acknowledge
the^ if we ask forgiveness of them with all our heart, we shall not doubt, but
that the wrongs that our neighbors do us, be the fatherly chastisement of
God much gentler then we have deserved, and that they shall be also an wholesome
remedy for us against sins. For which causes it shall be easy for us
earnestly to forgive our neighbors al offenses. Therefore the preachers shall
admonish the people with singular diligence about this place (As we forgive)
also that it is not such a manner of forgyuynge, as though we did ask of God
that he would so forgive us our sins, as we forgive, but that it is a
profession of forgiveness, which we also make to our detters before the
heavenly father, as we require of him to forgive us our dettes, as if we
should say, O heavenly father forgive us our dettes, as for us we gladly
remitte, and forgive al them, that may seem to owe us any thing. For we
acknowledge that we suffer so grievous things of no body, but that we have
deserved much worse, and therefore we bear the^ gladly, and forgive them with
all our hertes that have done us any harm.

But because it is not enough that God forgive us our sins and the pains
that we have deserved for them, but also it is necessary that we be kept by
him, that Satan draw us not afterward to sins through sundry tentations,
the Lord has added an other petition for the remouinge of euylles, lead
ought not to pray for, which thing is done more ways then can be numbered. For
the correction of these abuses, those words of Paul, To. viij. ought to be
diligently commended, and weighed. For we know not the thing that we shall
pray, as it behooves, but the spirit it self prays for us with
unspeakable gronynges. For if we our selves know not what, or how we
should pray, and if prayer be the propre work of the holy ghost, it is
meet, that the people be called back to those prayers, that are propouned in
the holy scriptures, that they may learn to pray to God according to his
will, and be certain that their prayers be allowed.

The second abuse in prayinge is, when we ask any thing of them, of who^ it
ought not to be asked, as when men pray saints, which now live with the
Lord, that they will make intercession for them, that they will give the^ those
things that they need as when they pray S. Sebastian to defend them against
arowes, and venimmes. S. Antonie against the Aposteme called commonly S.
Antonies fire. S. Appollonie against the touthache. etc. Ite^ when they call
upon the Images, and stocks of saints, as the saints them selves, as they
do, which vow pilgrimages to certain stocks, which idolatry has welnigh
ouerflowe^ the whole world, and that it may be taken away the people must be
diligently called back from saints to God, chiefly with these arguments.
First that there is no commandment, that we should call upon saints
departed, wherefore we can be but doubtful whether that be well done, or no,
whether it be acceptable to god, or unacceptable. And that, that is done with
doubtyng, can not be done of faith, and therefore it is sin. For what so ever
is not of faith, is sin, as S. Paul witnesses To. viij.

Secondly it is evident that the prayers that be in the scriptures were made of
the spirit of God him self, and came from him, and therefore that they be
most perfect, and chiefly to be followed of us. But in all the scripture there
is no exemple of such invocation directed to saints, wherefore no man can use
such a form, for therein he shall set the authority of men before the
authority of god For he follows their authority, whose exemples he uses in
prayings, and therefore sets it before the authority of the holy ghost. And
that is a wondrous great dispite against the divine majesty. Further if we
shall use the form of prayinge, which the scripture propouneth, the same
shall show how much it is not convenient to call upon saints. For who would
not tremble to say to saint Petre, or to some other of the saints, our father
which art in heaven, which kind of prayinge Christ him self prescribed
unto us. For he is not God, he is not our father. Neither can it agree at all,
if we would call upon S. Petre, or some other with some Psalm. They then that
call upon saints, do it out of the Imaginations of men. Therefore saying that
no man can prefer the devises of men, before the doctrine, and exemples of
the holy ghost without a most heinous dispite of God, and saying that all the
exemples of prayers delivered by the holy ghost, teach to call upon God only,
neither is there any, wherein saints be spoken unto, every man easily
perceyueth how unworthy a thing it is for christen me^, which ought to seek
the healpe of God with true prayers, to use this new invention of calling
upon saints, which in no wise agrees with the doctrine, and exemples of the
holy ghost, wherein they refuse to follow the rule of the holy ghost,
whereunto they ought to stick with all reverence.

Thyrdly such an abuse is stroungly rejected by the word of God, which our
savior Christ laid against Satan, Mat. iiij. Thou shalt reverence the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou worship. And god will have none other
Mediatoure, but his son our Lord Jesus Christ. i. Timo. ij. For there is
one God, one Mediatoure of God, and men, a man Jesus Christ, which has given
him self a price of redemption for all. And god witnesses that he will hear
for his sake, and will so be worshypped. As we have a testimony of Christ,
thou art a priest for ever. Item Math. xi. Come unto me all ye that faint, and
be laden, and I will refreshe you. John. xv. What soever ye shall ask in my
name he shall give it you. And To. ij. Whom God has set forth a reconler.
For therefore our trust is fixed in Christ because that of him we have a
promise, and commandment of God, but of the saints we have no such word,
that God will be worshipped through the invocation of them or that he will
hear us for their sakes. Therefore it is an horrible wickedness to transfer
and remove the trust due to Christ unto saints without the word, and
commandment of God. Moreover that service is condemned for this cause, that
it was instituted only by man's opinion. But in condemny^^ this abuse let
the preachers use such moderation, that rude men begin not to think, or
speak irreverently of the saints. For it is one thing to call upon saints,
and an other, to have them in reverence, and honor. We must honor them, but
we must not call upon them, nor worship them, which thing yet the common
people do.

And this is a true honor, and godly veneration of saints, to praise God for
that, that he adourned them with so godly gifts I mean constant faith, true
fear, and sundry virtues. Al which things must be set before the people,
that they may diligently think upon them, and magnify them, and chiefly
praise God, and give him thanks which works such things in saints.
Furthermore they shall also praise the saints, which used those benifites so
godly. For this way the faith of Christ is confirmed in us, that God will also
be good unto us according to our portion, and there is a desire steared up in
us to follow their exemples. Thus the old church worshypped the saints, which
thing appears by certain soleme prayers called collectes. For thus the
church prays.

In the memory of the Apostles, Petre and Paul.
Gd which haste consecrated this day with the martyrdom of thine apostles
Petre, and Paul, grant to thy church to follow their precepte in all
things, by who^ it received the beginning of religion, through Christ our
Lord.

On the feast of S. John Baptist.

God which have given us this present day honorable in the nativity of
blessed John, grant thy people the grace of spiritual joys, and guide the
minds of all the faithful into the way of everlasting life through Christ
our Lord.

On the nativity of S. Stephane.

Grant us we beseech the Lord, to follow the thing that we have in
reverence, that we may learn to love even our enemies, for we celebrate his
nativity, which could pray even for his persecutours, through Christ our
Lord.

In the co^memoration of saint Laurence.

Grant we beseech the almighty God that we may quench the flames of our
vices, which gave the blessed Laurence thy martyr to overcome the fire of
his torments through our Lord Jesus Christ.

In the memory of S. Agatha.

God which among other miracles of thy power gaueste the victory of
martyrdom even in a frail kind, grant mercifully that we may walk unto
the, by her exemples, whose nativity we celebrate through Christ our Lord.

In the co^memoration of S. Cecilie.

God which make us merry with the yearly solemnity of thy martyr blessed
Cecilie, grant that we may follow her in exemple of godly conversation, whom
we reverence with humanity.

Of this sort be all such prayers, that be any thing old. In other made
long afterward, though there be somewhat mengled of the merits, and
intercessions of saints, yet they be not called upon, as Lords, they be not
spoken to, they be not desired, that they will offer their own merits for us
to the father, or that they will healpe us with their intercessions, but God
only the father of our Lord Jesus Christ is called upon, and desired, that
he will vouchsafe to recompense the good deeds eue^ of his saints in us, and
that he will both steare up, and make effectuous their intercession for us
through our Lord Jesus Christ, not by the virtue of the saints.

The third abuse is when the words of a prayer otherwise godly, and
christian are drawn to an ungodly and unlawful end, as when through the
Lords prayer we will staunche blood, or drive away wolves, that they devour
not our sheep. As some go about to wrest the Psalm. xxxv. To auoyed wounds.
Of which kind innumerable superstitions, and impieties are used of ungodly
enchaunters. Therefore the preachers shall warn the people diligently how
grievous a sin it is, how great wydkednes to abuse the word of god to such
witchcraftes, and enchauntmentes. Which abuse is pernicious, and abhommable, no
less the^ the abuse of other false, and idolatrious doctrine.

The fourth abuse is, when the end of prayer is perverted, when men rehearse
the words of the prayers with this opinion, that they think they do
acceptable service to God, and to the saints even with this work of
rehersyng, whereas we must pray to God, not to do him some service with that
work, but that we may call for the free healpe of God, being in danger of
perils, and euyls, which we have deserved, or that being unworthy we may
receive benifittes which we have not deserved. And that we may pray with a
fuller feelynge, both of our own misery, and of the divine goodness of
Christ, and with feruenter desire of Gods healpe, we must use holy words
in our prays. But the common people has been brought into this error long
since by unfaithful pastors, that they offer the words of the Lords
prayer, of the Angels salutation, of the Psalms, and other prayers to God, the
blessed virgin, and other saints, as some acceptable service, or gift, whereby
they think they deserve much of God, and saints, and that they purge their
sins and obtain the benifittes of God. Which abuse of praying does not only
fight with the word of God, but also is folishe, and mad even by the
judgment of reason, and it may easily be taken away, if the people be so
enstructed of prayer, as we have showed before.

The first abuse in prayinge, and no less to be reproved and corrected is
this, that men communely believe that their prayer is more commended to God, and
sooner heard by reason of places, of which they think some to be more holy,
then some, as if the prayers be made at certain graven stocks or relikes of
saints, or other places, whereunto men go on pilgrimage, which is a great
dispitefull wrong to the grace and merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
only our prayers be acceptable unto God, in what place so ever they be made,
as he him self promised. John. xv. What soever ye ask the father in my name,
he shall give it you. And moreover he said to the woman of Samarie. Woman
believe me the hour comes when ye shall worship the father neither in this
hille, nor at Jerusalem, God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must
worship him in spirit, and truth, John iiij. And Matthew. xviij. He says.
If two of you consent together upon the earth of any thing, what so ever
they ask, it shall be done unto them of my father, which is in heaven. For
where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them. Lo here the Lord promises that we shall be heard, if we consent in
prayer, and that he will be a mean between us and obtain al things for us of
the father, when so ever, and where so ever we shall come and agree in his
name. These promises al they diminishe, that think they shall be heard more
certainly, and sooner in any place for the respect of graven stocks, or
relikes of saints, or some other outward prerogative of the place. Howebeit it
becomes us to come to the temples, and common places, and it healpeth to pray
more devoutly for this cause, that the congregation comes together in those
places to prayer, and because we are there more steared up to prayer through
the ministry of the word, and other holy exercises, and through the very
company of men prayinge together with us. So private places have this
comoditie to prayer, that in them we may pray with a more attentive mind,
and more lifted up to God. For in these places there chance fewer things to
call our minds from the things that we go about in our prayers. For this
cause we read that the Lord Jesus prayed often in mountains, and gardines,
as he commanded us to pray to the father in secret shyttynge the chamber. For
that our prayer may be heard, no place by it self healpeth more then other,
but the efficacy of prayer leans altogyther upon the merit of Christ, and
his intercession for us, and upon a sure faith of the promises of God, in
which a believing mind receives the merit, and intercession of Christ. And
where as prayers were wont to be said among the forefathers and holy
assembles celebrated, at the sepulchers of holy martyrs, it was done for this
purpose, that through the remembrance of the fayeth, which shined forth so
goodly in the martyrs, the people should be more steared, and enflamed to
pray God to give them like godliness and faith and also should more encourage
them selves to the same. For both the place it self, and also the praises of
the martyrs, which were wont to be declared with the preaching of the
Gospel, and use of the Sacraments, did warn, and testify that the virtues
of the martyrs were the gifts of the free goodness of God, obtained unto them
by the merit of Christ, and wrought in the^ through the holy ghost, and
therefore set before us that we should ask the same things of the heavenly
father, and trust to have them through Christ, and the more steare up our
selves to the desire of them.

Of the true and false use of Images.
IT is plainly known that the common people be yet sore entangled in the
abuse and superstition of Images, and graven stocks. For most commonly they
think that then they pray with effect, when they say their prayers before
graue^ wodde, and Images, and therefore they are wont to deck the^ sundry
ways, and to honor, and worship them with burning of candles, with incense,
and other oblations, and furthermore with vowed pilgrimages from far places.
Yea and they attribute to some a certain strength to healpe with no less
furour of wyckednes and Idolatry, then we read that the heathen, and the
Jews did in times paste. Therefore the pastors shall labor diligently to
call the people from this Idolemadnes, and al abuse of Images, and graven
stocks. First then they shall teach that there ca^ be no use of Images unto
christen men, but when Images are set forth, which declare true things, and
such, and after that sort, that the remembrance of those things may healpe
to steare up faith and provoke men to the office of godliness. And though there
were none other fault, yet this thing is most unworthy of christian men in
the use of Images, that liynge Images are set forth, which offer to the
thoughts of men things either plainly or partly feigned, and also oftentimes
superstitious and ungodly. For as they paynt or grave Antonie with fire, and a
pigge, Rock with a sore, which the Angel cures Leonarde with a chain, they
are ungodly faynynges, wherewyth the miserable people are taught to ask
remedy of Antonie against the fiery boil with the gift of pigges, of Rock
remedy against the pestilence with gifts and service peculiar to him, of
Leonarde escapynge or loosynge of chains. The temples for the most yart are
full of such false Images, which cause and confirm manifest ungodliness, and
Idolatry. Which ungodly Images saying that they ought to be suffered of
christen men in no place, it is evident how unworthy a thing it is that they
be seen in temples, where God only in Christ should be preached, and worcester
shipped, and that in spirit, and truth. Books which co^teine false, and
ungodly doctrines be taken out of the hands of christen people and that
right well, for we must auoyed all occasions of offense. What shameful spite
is it then to the divine majesty to set forth in places dedicated to his
name, and service, a doctrine of so manifest ungodliness in pictures, and
Images, chiefly seeing that they will have Images to be the books of the lay
people.

There is an abuse also of Images, and graven wodde in this point, that the
resemblaunces of saints are graven, and made with the garments, and trimminge
of the world facioned after the wantonues, and pomp of the world, from
which vanity, and ryote the saints did greatly abhor. Therefore through
this liynge of Images and graven stocks, the exemples of moderation, and
humiltie, which were in the saints in all their life, and use of things of
this present world, be not only obscured, but also the contrary vices are
commended. For me^ gather that they also should desire those things, which
they se to be assigned to saints now living in heaven, as orname^tes. For even
the Poet Terence perceived how much pictures representing naughty acts with
some commendation do provoke men to follow naughtines. For the Poet brings
in a young man openly declaryng, that he was ^ncouraged to fornication by
beholding a table, wherein the fornication of Iuppiter was painted, and that he
gathered this thing thereof. Should not I seely man do the same.

Further the preachers with like diligence ought to teach the people to
forgette the worshyppnge of graven wodde, and Images, that they fall not down
before them, or how their knees. For that the scripture calls worshyppynge,
and forbids it most straightly, both in many other places, and also in the
ten commandments, adding a threatnynge of reuengiaunce unto the third, and
fourth generation. For thus he commands, Exo. xx. Make not to thy self a
graue^ Image, neither any likeness of heavenly things, nor earthly, nor of
them that be under the earth in the waters, thou shalt not worship, that is
to say, thou shalt not fall down to them, or bow thy knees, neither shall
thou do them service or reverence. For I am the Lord thy God, a ielous god,
which punish the iniquity of the fathers in the children unto the third and
forth generation. Therefore the preachers shall warn, and teach the people with
all diligence, first that all they which fall down before Images, and graven
wodde, bow their knees and incline their heads, or put of their cappes,
lift up their hands and eyes to them, after the manner of prayinge do openly
against this commandment of God.

Furthermore that they also do the same, which cloth, and deck them, which
sense them, set up candels, offer, and hang up gifts, sing Hymns, and do
them honors and worshippinges due to God alone, when I say they are exhibited
to seek the secret healpe of God. For peculiar honors, and worshippynges are
due to princes, and honorable personages. For so the interpreter of the
scripture does translate the word supplicare, which signifies to bow down
humbly. But we must show them these signs of beniuolence, and reverence,
our mind ever beholding, and worshippyng the majesty of God in the^, and
seeking the healpe of God, not their healpe, yea and not only of them, but by
them, and according to the word of God. But as for Idolles as they feel
nothing, nor be instruments of any work of God, whereunto they might
ministre with their will, and work, God would have no honor given to them.
From which Idolatry the Apostle also draws us writing to the Cor. Neither
be ye worshippers of Images, as some of them were. Item flee from the
worshippynge of Images. i. Cor. x. And. i. John. v. My little children beware
of Images. Further they which attribute some secret power of God to Images (as
men are wont to attribute unto those Images, to which they go on pilgrimage)
they make them selves Gods of Images, and commit that most gross
wyckednes, which God condemns every wherein the scriptures, and also in the
second sentence of the ten commandments, where he forbids us to have,
and to worship strange Gods, for which also in time paste, after the
most earnest threats of the prophets, he punished with extreme calamities
the Jews, and other nations, and drove them out of the land of his promise
and bountuousnes. In this ungodliness they stycke also which make their prayers
turnyng them selves, and bowing before Images, and graven stocks, for this
cause, that they trust, that they shall so be more effecttuouse.

Therefore the preachers shall with all possible study call back, dissuade,
and fraye away the people from this so detestable, and most noisome
superstitions, wicked worshppynges, and Idolatries, which have long time
horribly reigned through all people of christendom. And for this purpose they
shall often rehearse, and declare unto the^, what terrible punishments God in
the law, and the prophets has threatened, and thrown upon them, which had
wrapped them selves in this abominable act of Ilatrie.

They must also diligently admonish the people of the danger of ungodliness,
which is ever joined with the use of images, chiefly of those, by which
things, and men having some commendation of holiness are represe^ted. For
man's nature is merueilous prone to Idolatry. Wherefore we ought to suspecte
so great diligence of making Images and graven stocks, and setting them in
temples, which thing though it were only done for an ornament, and to provoke
the minds of the beholders to good thoughts yet the great cost which is
spent about such Images, and graven wodde that feel nothing, and be the
works of men, is drawn from the lively Images, the members of Christ, which
are Gods creatures. And moreover there wants not a sore occasion of the
abuse it self. Wherefore saint Epiphanius, whose epistle saint Herome added
to his wrytynges against John bishop of Jerusalem, testified thus: They
have judged that it is against our religion, and the authority of the
scriptures to have Images in temples. And this he wrote as the common sentence
of the church, whereof no man should doubt.

Therefore the preachers shall exhort the people, that they rather get them
the holy Bible, which thing they may do better cheap, then images, that
they diligently read the same, and that they learn to acknowledge, wondre at,
remember, and worship the divine majesty, out of the creation of all
things, and merueylous governance of God, and preservation, and protection of
the godly from the begynynge, and punishme^tes of the wicked, which the bible
sets before us, rather than to learn the same in carned stocks. Further
that they be present in the holy assembles, hear the treatyng of the word of
God religiously, receive the Sacraments godly, and pray faithfully. For God
him self has laid these things before us for this intent, that we should
get preserve and encrase in us thereby knowledge, love, and zeal of him.
Wherefore while we rightly use these instruments of religion, we are sure that
the encrase of the holy ghost is present, and all peril of superstition is
away, whereas in the use of Images danger wants not, as in an invention of
man, and the holy ghost can not be present with them. For how much so ever the
diligence of setting Images in temples, and the admonition of holy things,
which they assign to those Images, be decked with words, and painted forth,
yet it can not be denied, but that what so ever can be brought for setting
forth of Images and carned wodde in temples, is but the inue^tion of me^,
which so much is not grounded upon Gods word, that God forbadde the old
people such use of Images, and the holy fathers in the new people suffered it
not, which thing appears plainly out of the deed, and writing of saint
Epiphanius, whereof we made mention before.

Wherefore the preachers shall diligently teach and warn the people, that it
is time that we worship, and honor God in spirit, and truth, and that we
godly use those instruments, which he him self has given us to steare up
this worshypping, with religious reading, and hearing the holy scriptures,
and sermons, whereby the same scriptures are declared openly, or privately,
moreover with religious vsyng of the Sacraments, co^tinuaunce of holy prayers,
and also with a godly consideration, and co^templation of the works, and
judgments of God, which ever offer them selves to our eyes, to our hands,
to our minds, and which we ever enjoy and take fruit of them, of which
stearynge of our minds toward God, and kendlynge of study to all the
offices of godliness, we have spoken a little before in the exposition of the
second commandment.

The godly preachers shall also add this thing and printe it in the people
diligently about this place, that what outward goods so ever God has given
us, we must bestow the same upon the lively Images of Christ, our
neighbors, the members of Christ, that we may feed Christ in them, give him
drink, cloth him, harbor him, cure him and comfort him being sick, and
succor him being in bonds. And that we cast not away our goods in making
deckyng, clothyng, and honoring Images and carved stocks, which have no
life, no feelynge, namely wodde, stones, metalles, vain works of our own
hands. Finally upon things that be abominable to God, as he often witnesses
in his prophets. Which in the last judgment, when he shall testify that to
be done, or not done to him what so ever we did, or omitted to do to the least
brethren, that lived with us, undoubtedly he shall speak terribly unto the^,
which neglecting his members the lively Images in poverty, penury, and
miseries, have poured out not their own goods, but his upon carved stocks,
and Images, which have no feelyng of such benifittes. Therefore the preachers
shall diligently go about utterly to root out of the minds of christian
people this error also of praying before Images, and stocks, and the rest
which we have noted. For they fight against the chiefest pointis of the ten
commandments. And they shall teach and declare, and prynt in always those
things, out of which the people may learn al devotion to pray to God
religiously and effectuously, and that they accustom them selves, and stycke
fast to that wholesome exercise of godliness, so that what evil so ever chance
to them, or hang over them, or what so ever good thing they desire, they go
ever forthwyth, and the right way to the heavenly father, through our only
mediator Christ, and call upon him only in the name of his son, with a sure
trust of children toward his more then fatherly love, with earneste fear
also and reverence, and careful supplication, of mind toward his majesty.
And to steare up, kendle, and feed such invocation, and praiyng. Let them use
those instruments religiously, which God him self has appointed, and
co^me^ded for this purpose, I mean holy assembles, the divine scriptures, the
sacraments, and a godly contemplation of al his gifts, works, and
judgments.

Of christian fast.
THe holy scriptures set fasting Augustine to Consulaine Priest epist.
lxxxviij. Of the fastes of the old fathers I, says he, in the wrytynges of
the Apostles, and evangelists, and all the new testament, reuoluyng that
thing in my mind, I se that fasting is commanded. But upon what days we
should fast or not fast by the commau^demente of the Lord, or the Apostles I
find it not determined.
before us, as a certain peculiar preparation, and way to more earnest prayer
for the remission of sins, for the singular mercy, and grace of God and
other singular benifittes, and gifts. As the Ninevites humbly prayed to God
with most strait fasting, for remission of sins, and forgyuenes of the
punishment, which God had declared unto them. Jonas iij. Such a fast it was
also, which God commanded to the people of Israel the.x. day of the.viij.
month, which was the day of purgation, in which all the people humbly pray
God for the remission of sins. Leuiti. iij.

God also commanded such a fast Joel. ij. When the people was punished of
corn, and with grievous war for their sins. Turn unto me (says he) with
all your heart, with fasting, weepyng, and bewailing. Item in the same place.
Blow up a trompe in Sion, sanctify a fast. etc. Such a fast also is
described. i. Samuel. vij. and they came together in Masphath, and drue water
and shed it forth in the sight of the Lord and fasted on that day, and
said there, we have sinned unto the Lord. Item Dauides fast in the syckenes
of his son, whom he had first of Bathseba. God struck also the young
child, whom the wife of Vrias brought forth unto David, and he was despeyred
of, and David humbly prayed to the Lord for the young child, and David fasted
a fast, and went aside, and lay upon the ground. Item Achab, when Elias had
declared unto him the reuengeau^ce of god for the death of Naboth. i. Kings.
xx. Of this sort was that fast of Paul which continued three days, when the
Lord had converted him nigh Damasco, and had taken away his sight acts. ix.
The fast that Iosaphat ordained, when the Moabites, and Ammonites had brought
forth an huge army against him, was joined with prayer for the singular
benifitte, and healpe of god. The fast of Esdras was like, when he prepared to
return into Jury. And that which Hester enjoined to her people when she would
speak to the king for the health of the people. Of the same sort it was
also, which the congregation of the saints at Antioche, enjoined to them
selves, when laying on their hands they should send forth Paul, and
Barnabas to preach the Gospel to the heathen Acts. xiij. And it was also such
a fast which the same two Apostles kept, when they would appoynte elders in
the congregations of Asia, which they had won to Christ, Act. xiiij.

And that fasting ought always to be joined to every earnest and solemn
prayer, the thing that Paul writes of married folks teaches sufficiently.
Let the husband render due beniuolence to his wife, and likewise the wife to
her husband, defraude not one an other, except any thing be done of
agremente for a reason, that ye may give your selves to fasting, and prayer.

The preachers shall diligently observe these, and such other testimonies of
the holy scripture concerning fasting, and they shall faithfully teach the
people by the same. First that fasting is a certain propre manner, and a
certain part of careful, and earnest prayer unto God, as the places alleged,
and such other testify, and that it is not a work acceptable to God, by it
self, or wholesome unto us.

Secondly they shall diligently warn this also, that fasting, as prayer,
except it be observed out of true fayeth, and earnest repentance for our
sins, it is not only a thing unacceptable to God, but also abominable, as if
we fast by reason of the institution, and custom of men, or also to boste our
selves, which thing Christ the Lord noted, Math. vi. They darken their
faces, that it may appear unto men, that they fast. A true fast, and
acceptable to God must be taken in hand wyllyngly, of man's own accord, of
one which feels the burden of sins in his conscience, which fears the
anger and reue^geaunce of God for his sins, which therefore is driven
diligently to seek and pray for remission of sins, or which desires to
make ready him self, and after a certain wise to sanctify him self to pray
more religiously for the benifittes of God.

Wherefore this thing which is in Joel ij. Chap. must be ever diligently
beaten into the people, when we speak of fasting. Turn unto me, says the
Lord, with all your heart, with fasting. etc. that men may learn that no
fasting pleases God, but that, that springs out of true repentance, and
lively grief for sins, and true conversion to the mercy of God, of whom we
seek remission of sins with singular, and fervent desire.

Thyrdly the preachers shall teach out ^f the alleged places, and such like,
that fasting is not only abstinence from meat and drink, but that there is
required moreover (forasmuch as fasting ought to be a part of careful
prayer for remission of sins, and the grace of God) that on the fasting
days we wythdrawe our selves utterly from al pleasures, and busynes of this
life, and give our selves wholly to prayer, with great humility of all our life
coming from the heart, and chastisynge of the body. Hereof it came that the
Lord in Ioell commanded to sanctify a fast, to call an assemble, to gather
the elders together, the spouse, and the spousesse, all the inhabitauntes of the
land into the house of God, and cry unto the Lord. He commands also the
infantes, and the suckelynges to be brought, that by the sight and pity of
them they might be moved to greater repentance of their sins, and feruenter
prayer for forgiveness.

This is the cause why God so sore rebukes the Jews, Esaie. lviij. Because on
the fasting days they regarded their busynes, and required their dettes. And
he testifyeth, that he abhors their fastings, and that they be not those,
that he commanded. In which place this thing is diligently to be considered,
that therefore he heard not their prayers, nor accepted their fastes, because
they followed their own desires upon the fasting days. Lo, says he, in your
fastinges, your will is found. Wherefore it is convenient that upon those
days when fastings are prescribed, the people absteyne from all other works,
and busynes, and wholly give them selves to hear Gods word, and to pray. For
this common prayer of the church, has a very large promise propouned, Math.
xviij. If two of you consent together upon earth. etc. Therefore we must
assemble together unto prayer, and we must apply the same that we do none
other thing and that our heart, and mind be bent wholly bent thereunto. Howbeit
in private fastes in which the whole congregation is not called together to the
word of God, and prayer: honest, and moderate labors of the body nothing
hyndre fasting, as they hyndre not prayer. For the labor it self healpeth
to chastise the body, and to draw the mind from the vauinitie of the world,
and to move it to prayer, and also to succor the poor. And though at al times
we must use labor of the body for this purpose, that we may ease the need,
of our brethern, when we desirously call for the mercy, and bountuousnes of
God. Then let this saying of Paul have place: He that has stolen, let him
steal no more, but let him rather work with his hands, that he may succoure
the needy. But that fast that we take upon us of careful desire to appease,
and to pray God, whereof we recited some exemples out of the scripture, byndeth
a man wholly ^o prayers, and other exercises of religion, and draws him from
al other cares, and business. As we may se in the fast of David, which he
took upon him, his son borne of Bathseba being sick, he lay only in
duste, lamented, and knocked upon the mercy of God with prayers. Paul did the
same thing in that fast of three days, when the Lord had converted him.

Fourthly the preachers shall teach, that large alms must be added to a
godly fast, that al unjust burdens of our neighbors must be loosed, and
discharged, and that we must succor the needy liberally. For so the Lord
fayeth, Esaie. lviij. Should this be the fast that I have chosen, that a man
should daily vex his soul, and wryth his head like a circle, and cast on
sack cloth, and ashes? Wylt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to
the Lord? Is not this rather the fast, that the Lord has chosen? Loose
ungodly bonds, remitte vsuries unjustly oppressynge, make them free, that be
broken with poverty, and break all burdens of dettes, break thy bread to
the hu^grie, harbor the needy, and harbourles, when thou see the naked,
cloth him.

For this cause the holy fathers condemned all fastes, as not christian, nor
acceptable to God, though never so strait abstinence be kept in them and
sharp chastisyng of the body used, if they that fast convert not the^
selves from sins with all their hertes to the Lord, and setting aside all
cares, and business of this life, give them selves wholly to prayer, and other
exercises of religion, and use most liberality toward the pore. Wherefore
they taught that they which will fast godly should bestow all that upon the
pore that they had spared in fasting. which is a very rightful thing, and
taken out of the very nature of godliness. I say that the faithful while they
studiously call for the mercy of God, and desire his liberality, show the^
selves also at that time chiefly, merciful, and bountuous to their needy
neighbors. For we please God with such sacrifices. Hebr. xiij.

Out of this doctrine of christian fastes the council Cabilonense enacted that
there is required to true fasting, that the fasters The old fathers celebrated
the communion of the supper of the Lord on fasting days at euentyde as ye
may se in Athanasius de virginitate.
be present at the evening prayers, which done and the communion celebrated,
and alines distributed, they should receive meat. For the old fathers
celebrated the communion of the holy eucharistia, or thankesgyuynge on
fastinges days at eue^tyde. But this much of common fasting. For christian men
have a double fast, a private fast which every man joins to him self, or
to his family only. And a common fast, which the governors of the common
weal, or the prouostes of the church, inioyne to the whole congregation, for
some common, and great necessity that lies upon all men.

When David bewailed his sin, and prayed that health might be restored to his
sick son, he kept a private fast. The fast of Cornilius was private,
whereof Luke speaks, act. x. Item the fast of the Prophetisse. But the fast
of the Ninevites, Hester, Iosaphat, and of many other was a common fast, which
thing is required Ioell. ij. And an yearly fast in the day of purgation, is
enjoined. Leuiti. xxiij.

The holy bishops in old time, and the ancient church kept two manner of
these common fastes. Some were yearly at certain and appointed times. Some
were not certain, but were used according to the necessity that happened,
that they might be readier to prayer. Of the first sort lent is, and other
fastes returning every year at certain days, which daily have been heaped in
number with men's traditions, but very much has been wythdrawen from godly
abstinence, and religious study of prayinge to god. For the institution of the
old church is long since corrupted. For the old bishops diligently
exhorted the people to fast, but they left men's conscience free, neither
condemned them, which would not or could not fast. As Paul also only
exhorts to fast, and the Lord him self laid no commandment upon us
concerning this thing, but taught only how it should be kept to the
acceptance of the father, not of men. In this moderation of exhortation, and
christian liberty, many will fast godly, and truly. Now whereas fastes be
most straightly enjoined, no part of fasting or little is kept, yea the
greatest part of the people know not what a true fast is. And if any fast,
and chastise their bodies, they do it with manifest ungodliness, and despite of
Gods grace, for with that work they will satisfy for their sins, and
deserve somewhat. Forthermore the fathers condemned them openly, which were
more careful for choice of meats, then for true abstine^ce and chastisyng of
the body. And they reproved them also, which though they vexed the^ selves
with abstinence, yet in fasting they regarded nothing else but abstinence
nor did no more. For we must fast for this intent, that we may be more
ready, attentyue and fervent to prayer. Now a days fasting is thought
nothing else, then to absteyne from the flesh of four foted beasts, of
birds. etc. For they serve their gul more daintily, and exquisitely with
fishes, and other meats upon fasting days, then upon other and they take
as much at dynner, as might suffice for a good supper to. And further that they
may seem according to the old custom to take meat after the evening
prayers, they have those prayers before none, Euensonge.
which according to the name should be said in the euenyng. What other
thing is this, then a mock, and despite of the divine majesty. From which
the preachers must dissuade the people with great diligence, and call them
again to the true manner of fasting, which we have declared. But we will
determine at a convenient time of the manner of inioynynge, and keepyng common
fastes, and we will use such moderation as we trust shall profitte our
people unto the maynteynyng, and amplifyinge of the studies of godliness, even
as this must be the end, and mark of all ecclesiastical ordinances, that
they serve to the maynteynyng and setting forth of godliness.

Wherefore as often as there shall be occasion of treating of faystynge, either
out of the scriptures, that shall be expouned, or by reason of the time appointed
to fastes, or through some other chance, the preachers shall diligently warn
the people of the ungodliness and abuses of fastes, and shall labor to corret
the^. First, and before all things, set no man think that he ought to
fast for this purpose, that he may deserve somewhat of God with that work,
neither let him be persuaded that any fast, be it never so hard, is allowed of
God, except it be taken upon us out of true repentance of sins, and a sure
trust of Gods mercy to be obtained for our Lords sake Jesus Christ, that
is to say, with a conversion to God from the whole heart. Further that fasting
be so ordained, and kept, that it serve to true, and godly humblynge,
chastisynge. and sanctifyinge of the body, that the spirit may be readier to
prayer, and other exercises of religion. This is a godly and acceptable fast,
whereunto the preachers must busily exhort the people.

And cheiefly the preachers shall call the people from that ungodliness, through
which some fast unto saints, either of enjoined satisfaction, as they call
it, or of their own wylles, or that they may obtain with that work certain
benifittes of the saints the^ selves, or that they may have their intercession
before God for certain benifittes. For as we said before, christian tastyng
is a certain preparation of a true, and faithful prayer unto God, through
Christ our Lord and not a work wherewyth God is worshypped by it self, much
less wherewyth we might deserve any thing at the saints hands. For with
fasting we humble our selves, and pray for remission of sins, and Origene in
Leui. Ho. x. Chap. xvi. Fast from evil doings abstain fom evil
communication, conteyne from evil thoughts. Touch not the stolen bread of
peruers doctrine desire not the deceyuable meat of philosophy, which may
seduce the from the truth. Such a fast pleases god. Item Athasius de
virginitate.
for the holy ghost, whereby we may do those things that be acceptable unto
God, which nevertheless are only acceptable through Christ, not for our
merit, because that God only is to be called upon, and worshypped of us, and
not the saints.

And forasmuch as the true manner of fasting is so much corrupted, and excess
in meats, and drynkes so much increased, that some on the fasting days will
absteyne very straightly from meat, and some times from drink to, using only
water, which the next day, and on the very holy days of the saints,
whereunto they prepared the^ selves with fasting, are not ashamed to drink
till they be dronken, and to live shamfully, the preachers (which thing the
holy fathers did also) shall chiefly beat in abstinence from sins, and all
excess, and fleshly pleasures, and they shall exhort them to moderation, and
temperance of life, which thing we read that the Apostles did also, Thus the
people at length shall be brought to true and godly fasting.

Of holy oblations.
THE people must diligently be taught this thing that Christ is that only
acceptable, and propiciatorie Chrysostom in the epistle to the Hebr. Homeli.
xvii. chapi. ix. And Cirill. to the queen's of the right faith do testifye of
the one only offeringe.
sacrifice, through which we obtain of God, grace, salvation, and al
benifittes, as all the prophets, and the Apostles witness, and chiefly the
epistle to the Hebrews from the fourth Cha. unto the tenth. Now moreover
through Christ we offer to god the father both our bodies, and our souls, an
acceptable sacrifice through faith, unto the praise, and glory of his name.
Whereunto S. Paul exhorts us, To. xij. saying, I beseech you brethren by
the mercy of God, that ye give your bodies, that is to say, your selves, and
your whole life a lively sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, your reasonable
service, and frame not your selves after the figure of this world. etc. So
Chap. xv. He glories that he so administered the Gospoll of God, that the
offering of the heathen should be acceptable, sanctified through the holy
ghost. Such a sacrifice is that also, whereof the Psalm. li. syngeth A broken
spirit, and an humbled heart through the true knowledge of sin, and
repentance (for so he means) is a sacrifice unto God. For they which through
the gospel have truly known Christ and by Christ have wholly yielded them
selves unto God, when being circu^ue^ted of Satan and ouercommed of their own
lusts they fall into great sins, and therefore be punished of God, and
exercised with sundry afliction, they offer to god in their prayers for grace,
an heart strycken with the repentance of sins, and touched with the fear of
gods judgment, and an humbled, and broken spirit. When God conforteth these
men again, and lyfteth up their conscience, and delivers from all perils and
tribulations, they thank God, they glorify him, and offer unto him a
sacrifice of praise, the fruit of lyppes confessing unto his name, Hebr. xiij.
As the Psalm. Cvij. witnesses, rehearsyng up the chiefest dangers, and
calamities, wherewith God is wont to chastise, and exercise men. They cried to
the Lord, when they were aflicted, and he delivered them from their
necessities wherefore they give thanks unto the Lord for his mercy, and for
his wonderful acts toward the children of men.

To these sacrifices of prayinge, magnifiynge God, and gyuynge of thanks, the
sacrifice of liberality toward our neighbors, chiefly the needy, is
joined. For with such sacrifices we please God, Hebr. xiij. For when the godly
pray for so ample benifites of God, or give thanks for receyuyng the same,
the^ the very nature, and propriety of godliness requires, that for Gods
sake, and his praise, they be liberal, and bountuous toward the pore,
chiefly seeing that they know that God accepts these benifittes, as done
unto him self. For which cause God commanded the fathers also in the old
testament, that at those three yerelie feasts, in which all the males should
appear in his sight, they should not come empty before him, but that every
man should offer according to his ability of that blessing, that every one
had received of the Lord, Exodus xxij. and Deuteronomy. xv. Which oblations he would
have to be given forth to sustain the Levites, wydowes, orphans, strangers,
and other pore people. And there fore the old church retained that custom
that when they come together to hear the word, and to receive the
sacraments, the faithful should offer their oblations to the Lord, and
consecrate them to him for the use of the pore.

Out of these places of the scripture, and institution of the old church the
preachers shall teach the people, first that the sacrifice of Christ is that
only propitiatory sacrifice, of good savor, which by it self is accepted
to God the father, and deserves unto us forgyuenes of sins, grace, and other
benifittes of God, and that it is the sacrifice which was shadowed in all the
sacrifices of the law, and which made all the other acceptable unto God. As
also the sacrifice of our selves, and what so ever pleasant things we can do
to God, be allowed, and accepted of God for respect of this only
propitiatory sacrifice. Without Christ there is nothing acceptable. No man
can do any acceptable thing without Christ.

Wherefore the preachers must busely beat into the people that they think
not, that, acceptable service, or worship may be done unto God, with any
sacrifice or oblation be it never so precious, for the dignifie, and worthiness
either of the thing, or of the offerer, if the same sacrifice, or oblation be
not offered, and made acceptable in Christ the Lord through his merit.

Secondly that they go not about to give any other sacrifices to God, the^
those which we rehearsed before, that is to say, the sacrifice of them selves,
of a bruised spirit, and heart afflicted through sins. Item a sacrifice of
praise, and thankesgyuynge for the benifittes that they have received, with
liberality toward the pore, and other things, that make for the promotynge
of the kingdom of Christ. Wherefore to offer to God great gifts, to build,
adourne, and enriche temples, altares, monasteries farther then that it
provoke the religion of Christ with this false opinion, as though these
things were much moore acceptable to God then if such gifts were bestowed
upon the pore for Christ's sake, be in no wise those sacrifices, which God
requires, or allows, but wherewyth the wrath of God is more provoked. And
therefore the people must be warned, that corporal goods must be offered to
God for none other use, then that the religion of Christ may be furthered,
that the holy ministry may be ordained, and maynteyned, that the necessity
of the pore may be provided for. Finally that there may be ministered to
every body as much as is needful to live godly.

Therefore to build huge temples, and to deck them with more things, then be
requisite to this purpose, that the congregation may have a comely place,
whereunto they may come together to hear Gods word, to receive the
sacraments, and to do other things perteynyng to religion, is not allowed of
God. For these things make nothing for the edification of faith in Christ or
for the health of our neighbors, whereunto all christian me^nes benifites, and
good works should be referred, seeing that Christ Jesus is the sum of all the
commandments of God, and the end of the law, that we (I say) may truly
know him, and take hold upon him, so that we may live in him, and he in us.
And further saying that the end of the law is love out of a pure heart and good
conscience, and faith vnfayued. i. Timo. i. Therefore let the thing that S.
Hierome teaches have place, that is to wit, that the temples of christen men
must be so builded, and decked, that out of them it may appear, our riches,
and glory to be set in the cross of Christ, and that we serve such a
Lord, that gathered his congregation in the most poverty of the world
without gold. The matter stood otherwise with the people of the old
testament, which had their peculiar rites, their ceremonies, their policy,
their orname^tes in the tabernacle, and in the temple, all which things after
the coming of Christ, ceased. That people had only one temple, which they
decked with some outward gorgiousnes, and in the mean while nevertheless they
were commanded that they should have no beggar among them. Deuteronomy. xv.

In the day of judgment when Christ shall pronounce the last sentence of
al men, he shall say thus. I have hungered, thyrsted, I was naked, a stranger,
weak, in bonds and you ministered unto me. For what so ever ye did to one of
these litleones, I take it to be done unto my self, enter therefore into the
kyngedome of my father, which was prepared for you from the beginning. But to
those, which have not done these things to his litleones, he shall say. Go
into everlasting fire. etc. But we shall hear no mention made of buyldyng of
temples, and monasteries, and deckynge of the same. Let the pastors then teach
the people to exhibit true worshippynges unto God, to deck his true, and
lively temples, that is to succor the pore and afflicted, which be the true
members, and brethren of Christ.

This thing God him self did not only command us, but the holy fathers
also require the same of us. S. Ambrose writes thus in the.ij. book of
offices. Chap. xx. When the Lord shall compain, and require why the goods of
the church, gold, and costly vessels were not bestowed upon the use of the
pore, and redemyng of prisoners, if a man will lay the ornaments of temples,
for his excuse, and say, I was a feared lest the temple of God should want
ornaments, he shall hear of the Lord: Sacraments require not gold, neither
do those things please by reason of gold, which are not bought with gold.
The raunsomming of prisoners, is the very orname^t of sacraments, and they be
very precious vessels, which redeem souls from death. That is the true
treasure of the Lord, which works the same thing, that his blood wrought.
Then (says he) I acknowledge the vessel of the Lords blood, when the chalice
redemeth them from the enemy, whom the blood redeemed from sin. etc. But our
natural blyndnes, and rebellion against God, causes, that we never worship
him according to his prescription. And through our natural pride, and
ungentleness, and neglectyng of our brethren, it comes to pass, that we
think those things vaynly wasted, and lost, or not well bestowed, which are
spent upon the needy, and despised men before the world. Therefore men fall
so far, that they had lever offer their gifts to God for an ornament of
wodde, stones, and dead bones, and for the maynteinaunce of unprofitable
fellows, then for the use of the pore, where as yet he testifies that he will
compte those things done unto him self, what so ever we bestow upon the pore
for his sake, promisyng that he will recompense the same in this world, and in
the world to come.

Wherefore this false, and perverse opinion of the flesh must be earnestly
rebuked, and diligently corrected, that they may omit those sacrifices
unacceptable to god, and that they succor the needy, and afflicted persons
with true sacrifices, and acceptable to God. And the preachers must teach and
exhort the people diligently, that they bring all their gifts, and oblations
into a common treasury of the church, and that liberally. And they shall
declare moreover that this is the deutie not only of the rich, but also of
all men, after the measure of the goods, which the Lord has granted to
every one of them. For Christ offered him self for all men, no less for the
pore, then for the rich. It becomes then al me^ to be tha^kfull, and to
remember that pore wydowe which by the judgment of Christ in offering of a
farthynge gave more into the common hutche, then all the other. Mark. xij.

We also, God wyllyng, shall take such order for the making of a common
treasury of the church, wherwyth not only the pore and beggars shall be
succurred, but also stipendes shall be appointed for certain toward young
men, which shall be brought up, and instituted unto the ministeries of the
church.

Wherefore the preachers shall diligently exhort the people, that they offer
their oblations to the Lord liberally, as often as they come together to hear
the Lords word, to the holy baptism, to the receyuynge of the communion of
the supper of the Lord, to the common prayers, or on the su^dayes, and other
accustomed festes, when marriages are blessed, when thanks are given to the
Lord for them, which have recovered them selves from some syckenes, when women
lately delivered go to church, and when so ever god has given peculiar gifts
to men, which thing he does even daily. For we daily enjoy the most ample
benifites of God, wherefore we must daily declare our tha^kfulnes, with godly
oblations, that the ministry of the church may be ever repared and
sustained, and that all men's necessities may be bountuously succurred. For
it is a great, and an ungodly vntha^kefulnes, that whereas men bestowed so
many things most liberally upon stones, wodde, and dead men's bones, upon
stationaries, and such other unprofitable fellows, and were constrained to bye
sacraments and other ecclesiastical things with money, now in the light of
the Gospel they will not contribute a little to maynteyne the necessary, and
wholesome ministry of the church, to feed the pore, the members of Christ
our brethren, chiefly saying that they be delivered of many superfluous
charges, which we have rehearsed. Therefore the people must be called by the
preachers with great diligence from those superstitious oblations which they
were wont to offer unto dead saints, their stocks, and relikes, and they
must be enstructed, and exhorted to true, and acceptable sacrifices unto God,
whereof we have spoken.

A forefence, and commandment against the errors of the anabaptists.
We are many ways premonished both out of the word of God, and also out of
histories of ecclesiastical matters, that Satan labors by all means to
steare up and to bring into the church sundry sclaunders, and offenses as well
of doctrine, as of life. Wherefore the pastors shall watch diligently to turn
away and disapoynt these pernicious endeavors of Satan, and to keep and
deliver the people of God from all false doctrine. In which thing they must
watch chiefly at this time. For it is manifest that the anabaptists run up
and down in most places, and with merueylous crafts, and giles creep in,
among the simple, which also have driven not a few out of their wits, who^
they hold enta^gled, and caught in a snare.

Against this inconvenience it shall be right expedient, if the pastors often
enstructe the people of those articles of our religion, for which the
anabaptists chiefly move controversies, and confute their dotyng dreams
substa^tially out of the word of God. Hereby the people certainly knowing how
ungodly their opinions be, being so armed aforehande shall easily determine that
the authors of such doctrine must be necessarily eschued, and condemned. And
the more that they shall abhor from the ungodly faininges and blasphemies of
these men, the more easily they shall be retained in the study of sincere
doctrine, and ecclesiastical consent. And the diligent handlynge and large
exposition of such places causes al men in the co^gretion to be more
plentifully, and certeynely enstructed, and confirmed in the doctrine of
Christ. And that the people may be armed aforehande against the ungodly
imaginations of these men, the preachers must entreat plainly, and clearly
of all their articles and show how noisome, and pestilent they be, and full
of all pernicious perturbation of the common weal, sedition, and horrible
blasphemies against god, and his holy Gospel. For some make for the
ouerthrowyng of outward polity, some for the confirmation, and ignorance of
sins, to blow up a trust of our own ryghtuousnes, and establishe a
contempt, and violation of the sacraments, and holy ministry of the church.
The chiefest then of these must be declared to the people by name, and often
repeted.

As these be, where as they say, that to administre the common weal, to
exercise common judgments to punish ill doers, be offices and works
contrary to the precepts of Christ, which a christian man ought not to do.
Ite^ that to offer an oath, or to swear at the commandment of them that
administre the common power, or be lawful Judges is against the Gospel. Item
that it is sin for a man to have any thing propre, but that all christen
men ought to make their goods common. Item that a Catabaptiste may forsake
his wife, which allows not his errors, and contrary wise.

It is evident that these errors be seditious, and that they must be as well
restrained, as other seditious devises, and deeds are wont to be. Wherefore
the common officers must punish these fellows with convenient rigorousnes.
And the preachers must show the people by the scriptures that these
Imaginations be against the Gospel, and that they have their beginning from
the natural arrogantie of me^, rebellion, and confusion, which fight
against the kingdom of Christ. The Anabaptists which keep not the
difference of spiritual and politic life, understand not that the Gospel
teaches the knowledge of God, and the invocation of him, in Christ Jesus our
Lord, and eternal ryghtuousnes, and that nevertheless it improueth not these
outward things, to eat, and to drink with thankesgyuyng. Item these civil
things, to govern the common weal, exercise Judgments to make war, to go
a warfare, to obey the officers, to marie, to keep our own goods, to
get, and mainteyne riches with labor, and lawful bargaynes, to set forth
sciences profitable for our life, to teach well the youth, and such like,
which in godly men are the very worshippinges of God. These things further
godliness, and common tranquillity, and it is profitable to amplify this
dignity of polityke things, which when they begin to understand, then me^
shall apply them selves more gladly to this divine ordinance, and they shall
learn to exercise fayeth, and love in these actions of life. And they shall
obey the officers with all their hertes, and as much as in them lies they
shall study to maynteyne common peace, and honest manner of living.

But beside the forsayed seditious opinions, some have brought forth yet more
abominable, of which company they were that invaded the City Monster, which
taught that the officers dissentyng from them ought to be abrogate, and they
did set up a new tirannie under the name of the kingdom of Christ. Which
thing perteyneth not only to the ouerthrowynge, and reprouynge of the
ordinance of God, as every common power is, but it is a sin against the
commandment concerning the magnifiyng of Gods name, under a false pretense of
Gods name, to oppress the common officers, and to turn the Gospel into an
outward politic governance. And to make this leude doctrine more pleasant,
they feigned the holy ghost to be the author of their furour, falsely imaginyng
visions, and prophets, which they brought forth most unshamefastly against
the word of God written, which they taugh^ to be plainly despised. All which
things be the acts of extreme ungodliness, and barbarousnes, which God is
wont to punish with notable, and horrible exemples even in this life, as
appeared in the very same men of Monster, whom we named before. For the
things that chanced among them, were surely horrible, and to be compared
with the most notable things that ever happened in the world. The preachers
shall exhort men diligently to considre religiously these so sore, rigorous,
and terrible exemples and judgments of God, which being considered they will
more vehemently abhor both from Anabaptists, and all other heretics, and
they shall learn to judge, and determine more certainly of hearing the word of
God, which God him self has so bou^tuousnes set before us in the holy
scriptures and so merueilously preserves unto this day. And they shall begin
to order their life according to the prescription of Gods word, with all
fear, and godly carefulnes they shall also haunt ecclesiastical assembles
studiously, and they shall cast away the love of them selves, and the
despisynge of the congregation, and the holy ministry, and shall not invade
other men's offices.

Surely our adversary the devil cease not nor slu^breth, but watches, and
seeks to pull men from God with infinite crafts, gyles, deceits, and
sclau^ders. Wherefore the preachers shall exhort the people with great diligence
to the fear of the Lord, and they shall be retained in sincerity of faith,
and communion of the congregation, and led in the way of the Lord with
continual prayers, wholesome doctrine, and diligent exhortation.

An other kind of ungodly doctrine, wherewyth the Anabaptists fight against
the congregation of Christ, is concerning spiritual matters. For first they
deny original sin, and they will not acknowledge how great filthiness, how
great impiety and ever pestilent corruption was brought upon us all through
the fall of Adam. Further because they admit not original sin, they also
refuse the baptiisme of children, and in as much as in them lies, they draw
away the most part of men from God, and eternal salvation.

Thyrdly they boste them selves to be ryghtuous, and to please God, not purely
and absolutely for Christ's sake, but for their own mortification of them
selves, for their own good works, and persecution, if they suffer any.
Wherefore they devise many works to them selves, for which they have not the
commandment of God, and boste them selves with arrogant hypocrisy, they
refuse the dignity of civil matters, and they think that, that imagined
cross is a great passion, as much as they may they quench the doctrine of
faith, teaching men to trust in their own works.

Fourthly they despise the outward ministry and doctrine of the church,
they deny that God works by them. They teach that we must look for private
illuminations and vilions. Wherefore they auoyed the common sermons of the
church, and holy assembles of the people of Christ, they withdraw from the
sacraments, which they will to be nothing else, than outward signs of our
profession, and fellowship, as the badges of capitaines be in war, they deni
that they be works and ceremonies instituted of god for this purpose, that in
them we should acknowledge, embrace, and receive thorough faith the mercy of
God, and the merit and communion of Christ, and that God works by these
signs, and exhibiteth unto us the gytes in deed, which he offers with these
signs.

And though all the Anabaptists do not hold all these ungodly opinions, yet
there be very few, that have not the most part of these. And there be some,
which follow, and teach things yet more abmominable then these.

Against these common errors of Anabaptists, the preachers must teach the
people, at certain times, and declare the very same places of the scripture,
for which chiefly the Anabaptists make all this business. Wherein they shall not
only do the congregations good in this point, that they shall be ware lest
the leaven of the Anabaptists spread any farther, and corrupt more, but
they shall also bring to pass that the faithful of Christ shall be more
plentuously, and certaynely enstructed, and confirmed of all the doctrine of
Christ, and chiefly of the controversies, which these heretics move, that
is to say, of civil officers, of the dignity of the politic things, of
oaths, of common judgments, of punishme^tes, of the propriety of goods, of
lawful bargains. And it shall be very profitable often to repete these things
in teaching, that the minds of Christ's faithful may be armed against the
doings of the Anabaptists. They shall labor diligently to declare out of the
scriptures, and propre testimonies of the holy ghost, that this whole manner of
civil life, fellowship^ and governance was taught, and ordained undoubtedly
of God him self, that they be the very works, and benifittes of God, which
he will adurne with his benifittes, as Paul testifies, To. xiij. And all the
prophets, and Apostles preach with Moses, that it is the commandment of
God, that we should obey the officers lawefully ordained, that the subjects
be not rebellious to the officers, nor go about to pluck them from their
place. And this place of S. Paul concerning officers must be truly,
proprely, and diligently declared, by reason of the busy spirits, which
think that the kingdom of Christ is not well exalted, except all earthly
powers be abolished, and that they use not the liberty, which he gave except
they cast of all yokes of man's bondage. But the Gospel teaches, and
offers a spiritual kingdom, that is to say, that Christ sits on the
right hand of his father, and prays for us, and gives forgyuenes of sins,
and the holy ghost unto the church, that is to say, to the^ that believe in
him, and call upon him. The Gospel not only wythdraweth nothing from the
civil life, fellowshippe, or governance, nor troubles nothing in the same,
but also it encourages, and instructs, rightly to maynteyne this life,
fellowship, and governance of civil matters. For it brings to pass that all
they which believe the Gospel, submit them selves to all men with all their
hertes for the Lord Christ's sake, that they serve al manner of men, and do
them good in all things, that perteyne to the need of the body, or to civil
society. Therefore in this civil life and society they exercise their faith
and show exemples of love toward their neighbors, with whom they live, in
all their necessities all manner of ways. What soever gentle behavior there is
in the world what so ever perteyneth, or healpeth to faithful, and honest
civility, and participation of present things, and to the maynteinyng and
adurnyng of the common weal, that christian me^ only do rightly understand, and
labor to perform most pro^ptly. In like manner the pastors must often
substantially declare, and excusse those doctrines also, that perteyne to a
spiritual life, for which the Anabaptists make much business, as, of
original sin, of the baptism of infa^tes of the righteousness of faith, and
these things they shall teach out of the holy scriptures, as, of original
sin, what an horrible evil it is, because man's reason does no^ se those
things to be damned, which remain in the nature of man, I mean the
ignorance of God, want of the fear of God and distrusting of God. Item that
God allows the baptism of our infantes, receives our infantes into his
children through baptism, and makes them heirs of his grace, and everlasting
life. That remission of sins, the communion of Christ, the felowshoppe of a
new, and blessed life is only in the congregation of Christ, and not among
the Jews, or Turbes, or other men among whom the Gospel is not preached the
sacraments of Christ are not administered, but rather the name, and doctrine
of Christ is blasphemed. The matter standing thus, and saying that it is
evident that God will be the God of our seed also, that is to say, a savior,
and author of a new, and blessed life, to us, which through Christ be made
the sons of Abraham, and heirs of the promise, and couenaunte, which God
Gene. xvij. Gala, iii.
made with him the father of all them that believe, the matter being thus (I
say) surely we may conclude, and it is plain, that our infantes borne of us
sinners and lost through sins, must be offered to Christ, and be
incorporated to him through baptism, that by him they may be washed in the
church from sins, and have his ryghtuousenes given the^, and put upon them.
For seeing that the kingdom of Christ is reueiled amounge us, and the mystery
of redemption, and salvation wrought by Christ, is more clearly, and
abundau^tly exhibited and preached then before (for many Kings, and prophets
desired to hear, and see the things that we hear and se, and it was not
given to them) it must needs be that they playnlie know not the Gospel of
Christ and communion of saints among them selves, that were saints in deed,
and acceptable to God, or else that they invade Christ, and his church with a
wicked fury, whosoever they be that will not have our infantes to be purged
from sins with the Sacrament of regeneration, and to be planted in the
church of God, saying that it behooved infantes of the old people to be
sanctified, and planted into the body of Christ, which is the church, with
that Sacrament, that God then gave them for this purpose. For why should our
infantes perteyne less to the kingdom of God then theirs, saying that through
Christ we be grafted in the holy root of that people, and made partakers of
the blessed fatnes of this Olyue? To. x^ Furthermore we have given unto us a
mig^tier spirit, Romo. viij. But we be gotten i^ sins, as well as the Jews,
and have need to be delivered from sins through Christ and to be brought
unto the life of God, and that in Christ's church. For there is not salvation
without the church, where neither the word, nor Sacrament is. Infantes then
must be planted into the church, and we must give them the sign that
witnesses, that the promise perteyneth unto the^. And forasmuch as in this
time the Gospel, the grace of God, and redemption of Christ be more clearly,
and effectuously exhibited and preached in the church both with words, and
sacraments, then among the old people, every man surely being rightly
warned hereof, except he be a very ungodly person shall acknowledge that
our infantes also must be washed from sins by baptism, which is the
Sacrament of regeneration, and that they must be planted into Christ our
Lord, and his church, in which church Christ works through his word, and
sacraments, as Ephes^. v. Paul says that Christ loved the congregation, and
gave him self for it, to sanctify it, and cleanse it, with the lauer of
water. etc. He describes not the congregation without signs, and without the
word. Wherefore he says also in an other place, one body, one spirit, one
Lord, one faith, one baptism. Which things surely do testify that they
which perteyne to the congregation, be planted into the same with some
outward sign also. If me^ shall be warned hereof often, and substantially,
they shall reverently use holy baptism, they shall come to it, and stand by
it more religiously, and they shall more fervently pray for the grace of God to
them selves, and to the infa^tes, and with purer minds, and greater
sanctification of them selves they shall labor to offer to Christ the Lord
both their own children, and also the children of the whole church, according
to the Lords words, suffer the litelones to come unto me for the kingdom of
heaven perteyneth to such. Which most sweet saying of the Lord our
savior they shall also embrace with more certain faith, and with greater
devotion give God thanks for his so great benifitte. Men shall moreover be
moved, and enflamed to procure their children being grafted in Christ to be
brought up to him, and to his church with greater diligence, and they shall
cause them to be nosseled in the knowledge of him, that they may profit the
church, and when they be grown up, they shall dedicate them betymes, as the
members of Christ, unto his church, being the sons, and heirs of God, and
ioynte heirs with Christ.

In like manner the righteousness of faith must be declared, and set forth, by
comparyng of the Anabaptisticall imaginations. For that comparison shall bring
greater light to this ministry, I say when it shall be plainly showed how
great difference there is between the true ryghtuousnes of Christ, and the
hypocrisy of these heretics. For that righteousness, that the Gospel teaches,
is to take handfast of Christ the lord with sure faith, so that the mind
trust therein constantly, and call upon God the father through Christ with the
confidence of children, and study to glorify the same with good works,
wherewyth our neighbors may be helped by all possible means, according to all
the power of the holy ghost, that it has received. But the righteousness
which the Anabaptists teach, and wherein they boste themselves, is al spent
in works fained by the^ selves, and in suffrau^ce of euyls, which they lay,
or pulle upon them selves, because they abstain from the administration of the
common weal, whereby nevertheless singular benifittes are exhibited unto men,
because they contemn other civil society, reiecte judgments, refuse to go
a war fare, eschew bying and sellyng and other contractes necessary in this
life, with all which things christen men shall study to do good to their
brethren, and neighbors. Furthermore because also they wythdrawe them selves
from ecclesiastical communion, and mock holy assembles, common doctrine, and
the Sacraments of the church, and deny their healpe to their neghbours.
Finally because that with obstinate madness they suffer spoilynge of their
goods, exile, imprisonment, scourgynges, and maymyng of their lymmes, and
su^drie kinds of death, for these forsayed things, and other seditious
sayings, and doings. These be the good works of these fellows, this is their
righteousness, which when the preachers shall try in their sermons, and private
admonitio^s with the divine scriptures, and try the nature of christen
religion, and shall compare them with very good works, and with the
ryghtuousnes of faith, the knowledge, and desire of true ryghtuousnes shall be
merueylously confirmed, and kendled among the people of Christ, and they
shall eschew, and abhor hypocrisy, and this counterfaited ryghtuousnes of
frantike fellows.

Thus when the preachers shall with singular diligence declare and commend
often to the people, how the Lord instituted the ministry of the church,
and how reverently he would have it executed, and received, what great things
he vouchsafes to work through the same unto our health, exhibiting his grace,
and the redemption, and communion of his son through these things, me^ shall
more esteem the holy ministry, and use it more religiously, omitting those
vain illuminations, and visions, which frantike men look for, and exhort
other to seek, the common ministry of the church being despised.

We thought it good to put into this place, this general and short
instruction concerning the errors, wicked doctrines, and pernicious sisme of
the Catabaptistes that the preachers being warned may learn, how they may
call them back into the way of wholesome doctrine, and ecclesiastical
communion, whom they have found seduced of those mad spirits, and be not
yet obstinate with heretical fury. And that they may arm them, which
stand yet in the wholesome doctrine, and consent of the congregation, against
the gyles, and hypocrisy of them, whom Satan holds confirmed in this madness,
and keep them in the sincerity of faith, and communion of the congregation,
and draw them from al fellowship, and communion of those fellows. For their
talk, as a canker, eats up the hole flesh in the body of Christ. And
forasmuch as heretics be very subtle, and have a wonderful mad zeal to
defend their ungodly imaginatio^s, the feders of the Lords flock lest any
perish through their slouggishnes, or ignorantie, and be carried away by these
wolves, must furnishe them selves against their Sophistry, and diuelishe
subtilties with readyng of the holy scriptures, and those wrytynges, which in
our time have been set forth of godly, and learned men against these
things.

After this sort then let the pastors watch in their sermons against
deceites, and crafty awaytes, with the care of every man one by one, if need
be, of them which be committed to their charge. But who so ever perceives
that there is some one in the city, town or village, where he dwells,
which co^senteth to the errors of the Anabaptists, and allows them, we
command such a man by the authority of the electorall dignity, which we
execute, that he utter the same person to the constable, or gouernoure of the
place with all speed, which thing becomes a good and a christian citizin to
do, which ought to prefer the sincerity of religion, and health of the
church before all other commodities. And we command our officers that they
procure spedely the person that shall be accused, or suspected of anabaptisme
to be called before them, having with them the pastoure, and other meet
ministrrs of the church, and other good, and godly men. Then the pastor, or
some of the ministers, which shall be better furnished for that purpose, shall
propoune to him, that is accused of anabaptisticall errors, those things
whereof he is accused. Which man if he shall confess any error, he shall be
kept in some tolerable common prison, til at convenient leisure he may be more
fully examined, and taught. But if he acknowledge no error, neither can be
convicted thereof by true witnesses, they shall let him go free. But
concerning them, which shall confess them selves to be of the Anabaptists
opinion in one, or two doctrines, we will have this thing observed. The
officer of that place, where such one shall be, as soon as he may, shall call
the superintendent of that congregation, and other fit for that purpose, both
of the ministers, and also of other tried men of the congregation. Before these
men, and the officer, the superintendent, or bishop move interrogatories to
him, which is fallen into any anabaptisticall doctrine, not only of that,
that he him self acknowledges, but of the principal imaginations of these
men, whereof we spoke before, if he shall perchance be found, or if there be
fear that he is snared in some other mad doctrines, For there be
catabaptistes, which bear about in their breast that detestable, and damnable
indaical error, which feign that the church shall be before the last day, a
certain worldly kingdom, wherein the godly shall reygne and destroy with
weapons all the ungodly, and hold all the kingdoms in the world. Some
confound the natures in Christ, partly acknowledgynge in him the divine
nature only, and partly the manhood only. Therefore they must be dillige^tly
demanded of these, and such other errors, and they must be earnestly and
with all softnes of the spirit of Christ, warned of those errors, which
they acknowledge, and they must be brought again from al errors to the
sincerity of faith, and consent of the congregation. And this thing must be
often assayed. For we go about their salvation, for whom the son of God was
crucified, and suffered a most bitter and shameful death, that they might be
called back from errors. Wherefore we must shonne no labor, so that we may
bring again Christ's sheep begynnyg to straye to the sheepfolde of Christ.
We must assay then so long to deliver such from their errors as long as of
charity we shall perceive any hope to remain, that we may win our neighbor

If the Lord shall be present at this correction of men in errors, and shall
give his increase, that some may turn from their errors, we will that those
which have suffered them selves to be brought again into the way, shall
plainly, and particulerly renie and abjure that error, into which they are
fallen, and al other ungodly doctrines, which chiefly in this time vex the
church, before all them, that shall be present in their exammation and
conversion.

But if any refusyng godly admonition, and doctrine shall obstinately
continue in their impiety, the officer of that place, must bring their cause
before an higher magistrate. He shall punish such according to the state of
the person, and error, with banishmente, or other sore pains after the law
of the empire, and the temporal co^stitutio^ decreed, and set forth co^ceruyng
these matters.

For we will that this be known to all men, that none in our dominions, or
places subject to our rule shall be suffered, that dares allow one or more of
the Anabaptisticall errors.

We will have the same manner used, with all them, which steare up, spread
abroad, or allow any false doctrine that fights with the received articles
of our faith.

Of the administration of religion, that is to say, of the handlynge, and
dispensation of the doctrine, Sacraments, and discipline of Christ in the
church. And first of the manner, and order of holy sermons.
ON the sondaies and holy days the preachers shall rehearse, and declare to the
people the wonted lesson of the Gospel, between the administration of the
Sacrament, as the custom is, and out of that lesson they shall teach the
people, admonish, and argue those things which they shall perceive to be
most necessary, and profitable for christian life. And forasmuch as all the
lessons of the holy scripture preach unto us of God, to be acknowledged in
Christ, of his almightines, and mercy, of repentance, and forgyuenes of
sins in the name of Christ, a wise and faithful preacher shall easily chose
that thing chiefly out of every lesson, that shall make to the health, and
edification of the present congregation. Wherefore the pastors must have great
care of the people, and try at certain times, how much every one has
profited in religion, in what partenerie one staggereth, and is ready to fall,
whether it be in the doctrine of faith, or concerning the trust of Gods
mercy, or in the fear of the judgment of God, or in patience, love, or
ordering of manners, that timely, and wholesome remedies may ever be brought
out of the word of God, as out of a plentiful apothe caries shop, and laid
to the grievous diseases and vices of the people.

The lessons of the scripture being recited in the beginning of sermons,
must be diligently declared to the people, and that whole together. For the
word of God must be propouned to the people, that they may learn it, and be
enstructed to godliness thereby. Wherefore so much shall be declared, as was read
to the people, that they may receive some fruit of godliness thereby. But the
preachers and ministers of the co^gregations shall labor diligently herein,
that the doctrine, and exhortation, which they will use before the lessons,
ever be referred to those things, wherein the people is weakeste, and they
shall instantly beat in the things, which they shall perceive to further the
amendeme^t of the people, and wholesome institution, which thing we se that
the holy fathers did also, which first declared in order the lesson that was
recited, and afterward tarried in those places chiefly in teaching, exhortyng,
and reprouyng, that seemed most to further the institution, admonition, and
correction of the people.

But because all doctrine, and exhortation is then ryghtly perceived, and let
to sink deeper into the mind, if it be derived out of certain principles
known before, as fundacion, and concluded in the same, the preachers must
refer all doctrine, and exortation in their sermones, to some place of a
Catachisme or institution, as to the ten commandments, to the articles of
our faith, the Lords prayer, the Sacraments, and such like principal
points of our religion. And because that the whole christian doctrine, and
what so ever perteyneth to godliness, consists in these su^maries, and be
meetelie well known to the people, it brings great light to the doctrine and
it moves the people the more, if the sermons shall be referred to these points,
as to a certain mark, and they shall show the people, to what part of the
catechism that, that they teach, perteyneth. This thing shall healpe much
to this purpose, that the people may, daily grow more, and more in all
godliness, fayeth in Christ, and love toward their neighbor.

The pastoure must also teach the people, the common offices, and duties of
this life, according to every man's vocation, as the office of married folk
one toward an other, the office of the parents toward their children, and
contrary wise. What masters owe to their servants, and servants to their
masters. How the officers ought to be esteemed, and all other governors,
how great reverence we owe them, how we ought to live with our superiors,
equalles, and inferiors. These things must be often propouned, and repeted in
sermons, chiefly on the holy days, when a great company of people resorteth
together. And the praises of civil life must be diligently beaten into me^,
and chiefly the youth must be accustomed with great diligence, and art, to
learn to have a reverent opinion of the officers, of the laws, and of al
politic things. This reverence is profitable to the common weal, and is the
nurse of great virtues.

On the sundays, and holy days at the euenyng prayers some exhortation must
be made, which shall be chosen out of the epistle of the sundaye, or holy day,
which the preachers, when it is read to the people, shall interpret
diligently They may, if they will, declare to the people the acts of the
Apostles, or one of the evangelists, or some epistle of Paul, or the Psa^ter
in order. But let none of the preachers take in hand to declare the books of
Moses, the histories of the old Testamente, the prophets, but they to whom
the Deanes shall commit that matter. We will also that upon the sundays, and
holy days, as well in the mornings, as eueninges holy assembles be used,
holy lessons be propouned and prayers be made, if there be ministers inowe,
and if much people come thereunto. For so servants and other of the common
people shall be better provided for, which can not ever come to the principal
assembles of the church. In the morning let the catechism be declared, if it
may be, if not, let it be declared at euentide when the people resort
together. For a certain hour on the holy days must be appointed for the
ruder sort, and the youth to have the Catechism declared. And that hour for
the Catechism shall be appointed that is most convenient for the people. And A
Catechism is an introductio^ institution, and instruction of the unlearned.
in the wicke days, two days, or one at the least, must be appointed for the
Catechism, from March, to November. From that time unto the spryngtyde, the
Catechism may be omitted on the workynge days, by reason of youge children,
which can not be present for the great cold.

In every congregation such ministers must be chosen to the handling of the
Catechism as may be found most ready, and meet thereunto, though they be not
priests, or in other ordinary ministeries. But how, and after what form
the Catechism must be expouned, we will declare hereafter. In cities we will
that even upon the workynge days, there be two holy asse^bles every day in
the which, holy lessons shall be read, with prayers, and Psalms, if ministers
want not, and if the people will be entreated to come together diligently. Let
such hours be appointed for these assembles, as shall be most comodiouse to
the people.

In villages, if it may be for the people, let holy assembles be called
together thryse a wieke, in which morning prayers and exhortations shall be
used out the scriptures. If by reason of the negligence of the people it can
not be done so often, they shall procure that they come together once, or twyse.

Of the holy Sacraments generally.
Let the pastors, and teachers remember that it is there duty, to enstruct
the people diligently not only in the administration it self of the
Sacraments, but also often in their sermons when the place shall require it,
what is done, and exhibited in the handlynge, and dispensation of every
Sacrament. How me^ ought to prepare them selves to receive the Sacraments, and
with what trust we must take them, and wherein we must put confidence of
receiving the benifitte of God in the Sacraments, and how much diligence and
religion is required to the handlyng of sacraments, not only of them which
the^ selves use the sacraments, but also of the^ which be present at the
administration, and dispensation of the same, and chiefly of the ministers
which exhibit, and distribute the^ to other.

But chiefly they shall warn the people that they think not, that they may
obtain the grace of God, and communion with Christ, in the Sacraments
through the strength, and worthiness of outward work, either in him, that
ministers the sacraments or of him that receives the^, but only through the
strength of God, and merit of Christ, which will work in his word and
Sacraments, and perform al those things undoubtedly, which he offers in
the Sacraments, and testifies with his words, to all them, which receive
the Sacraments according to his word with true faith.

Of Baptism.
Baptism is a Sacrament of regeneration, whereby we be planted and
incorporated into Christ the Lord, and be buried into his death, and put on
the same, and be made through him the sons, and heryes of God. Wherefore we
must handle, and receive this Sacrament with great reverence, and religion.
And therefore we must use that manner of administrynge this Sacrament, and such
time must be appointed for the administration of the same, that all things
may serve to steare up, and increase reverence, and religion, that this holy
Sacramnent may be godly, and holesomly administered and received.

Among the ancient fathers Baptism was openly ministered only at two times
in the year, at Ester, and Witsontyde. Which constitution because it should be
hard perchance to renew, we will that Baptism be ministered only upon the
sundays, and holy days, when the whole congregation is wont to come
together, if the weakness of the infantes let not the same, so that it is to
be feared, that they will not live till the next holy day, for our mind is
that the handlyng of the Sacrament of Christ's body, and blood called
Eucharistia may be joined with Baptism, and that they which bring the
infantes to Baptism, may use the body, and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ
after the manner, and institution of the primitive church.

But that all things may be ministered, and received religiously, and
reverently, the par^^es of the infa^tes shall signify the matter betymes to
the pastors, and with the godfathers shall humbly require Baptism for their
infantes. That if the parents, or the godfathers, or both be subject to
manifest crimes, they may be corrected of the pastoure, if they will admit
correction, or if they be incorrigible, that they may be kept from the
communion of Baptism, lest they be present at so divine a ministration unto
damnation, and with danger of offending the church. For they as well make them
selves gyltie of the body, and death of Christ, which unworthily be present
at this Sacrament of Baptism, and require the same for their Infantes without
true fayeth in Christ, as they which take the body, and blood of the Lord
unworthily, that is to say, not after the institution of Christ, namely
without true repentance, and faith in Christ. Whrefore if such come unto the
pastors to ask holy Baptism, whether they be the parents of the children,
or their godfathers, as be defiled with manifest crimes, and abominatio^s, the
preachers shall exhort them unto repentance, and warn them, that they be not
present at the administration of the Sacrament for that time lest they pull
damnation upon them selves, and offend the church. For such by reason of
their wicked acts have no part in the kingdom of God, neither be they to be
admitted to the participation of the sacraments, except they repent openly.
But if the parents be found in such crimes, they shall desire their
kinsfolk, or other friends, which be as yet the true, and lively members of
the church, that in their steed they will ask Baptism for their infantes.
If the godfathers shall be judged unworthy of the church, other shall be desired,
which have good testimony. In the request of Baptism the pastors shall ask
them, whether the infantes have not received Baptism already, which thing is
wont to chance, when the child is in peril of death. For if they be
baptized, then the pastors shall do those things, that we will declare
hereafter concerning such infantes. But if they be not baptized, or not
certeynly baptized, or not as it behooved, and if the parents, and godfathers
be not subject to those crimes, for which they should be kept of from
Baptism, they must be diligently warned by the pastors of the exceadynge
benefitte of regeneration in Christ, which they desire to their children.
Item of the horrible fall, and gilte from which the infantes are delivered in
Baptism through Christ. Then he shall exhort them, that they be present
religiously at the exorcisme, and Catechism, and so afterward at the
ministration of baptism, last of all that they use together the Sacrament of
the body, and blood of the Lord. For it becomes this thing to be done, not
only for this cause, that they be the members of Christ, and it behooves not
to be present at the Lords board without part taking, but also because it is
an unworthy thing, to ask the communion of Christ for infantes, and to
receive it in baptism, and not to receive the same in the Sacrament for them
selves, wherein it is offered to the^ also. For if they ask, and receive the
communion of Christ in Baptism with true faith, they can not but ask the same
for them selves, and receive it desirously being offered in the Sacrament of
Christ's body, and blood.

The old fathers administered this Sacrament of the supper of the Lord even
to infantes with Baptism. But seeing that, that custom is worn away, not
without a cause, it is convenient, and it perteyneth to godliness, that the
pare^tes with the godfathers, and the kinsfolk, which obtain the most holy
Sacrament of regeneration for their infantes should use the supper of the
Lord, with singular desire of the spirit that they may receive the communion
of Christ to them selves, which they obtain in Baptism for their infa^tes.
Which thing healpeth to the edification of other also, yea of the whole
congregation, and it commends the holy communion of Christ to other.

Therefore that all things may be done more diligently, and with greater
religion in the administration of holy Baptism, we will that, when so ever it
may be conveniently done, the Catechism or instruction of the parents, and
godfathers, and the exorcisme of the infa^tes be exhibited the day before the
holy day, or sunday, that baptism shall be ministered. For saying that Baptism
must be ministered in an high administration, when all the church is gathered
together, it is convenient that in these holy actions, such moderation of
both the sacraments be used, that may healpe to steare up the devotion of the
people, and that through long taryinge it give not some occasion of
negligence, or of diminishynge the godly feruentnes of the mind. Wherefore,
when it may so be, it shall be profitable to separate in time the handlinge of
the Catechism and exorcisme from the ministration of baptism after the
custom of the old fathers. But when the people can not be commodiously
present, because that many of them dwell far from the temple, or for some
other just cause, then the exorcisme and Catechism may be handled with
Baptism.

How be it the pastors shall labor, as much as is possible, that this
most holy Sacrament of Baptism, which is the first adoption, receyuyng, and
entering into the kingdom of Christ, be not administered, and received, but
before the whole congregation, with great gravity and reverence.

When the Catechism then, and exorcisme shall be handled the day before
Baptime: let the infantes be brought forth at the evening assemble, at the
which people, because of the holy day following, or sundaye, is wont to be
present. The parents, and the kinsfolk after the exemple of the old saints
must also be present, and bring their Infantes to the temple. Which, and
other being come together, the pastors, and ministers must first plainly
declare the mystery of holy Baptism, and the exceadynge benifittes of God
exhibited therein, to them, which brought the children, and to the rest of
the people, with singular gravity, and religion. Secondly they shall exhort
the^ to a godly, and faithful receyuyng of so great a Sacrament, and so
inestimable benefittes of Christ. Then they shall require of the pare^tes, and
godfathers to renounce Satan, and the world, and to confess the principal
articles of our faith, and religion, which confession and renunciation they
must make plainly, and gravely before the whole congregation.

A form of Catechism, that is to say, of institution, exhortation, and
demaundes made to the godfathers, and all them that bring infantes to holy
Baptism.
First the pastoure, other ministers standing by him, shall thus exhort
them, which bring the infantes to Baptism.

Beloved in Christ Jesus, we hear daily out of the word of God, and learn by
our own experience that all we, from the fall of Adam, are conceived, and borne
in sins, that we are guilty of the wrath of God, and damned through the sin
of Adam, except we be delivered by the death, and merits of the son of God
Christ Jesus our only savior. Saying then that these present infantes be
borne in the same state and condition, that we were, it is plain, that they
also be spotted with original sin and disease, and that they be subject to
eternal death, and damnation. But God the father according to his
unspeakable gentleness, and mercy toward mankind, sent his son, to save
the world. Wherefore he will also that these infantes be saved. He bare the
sins of all the world, and delivered, and saved as well the infantes, as us,
which be of greater age, from sins, death, the devil, and everlasting
damnation, which would have the infantes to be offered unto him, that he might
give them his blessing.

Wherefore according to your christian godliness take this child, bring him unto
Christ and offer him with your godly prayers, that he may obtain of him
remission of his sins, and be removed into the kingdom of grace, being
delivered from the tirrannie of Satan, and that he may be made heir of
eternal salvation. And be ye most certain hereof, that our Lord Jesus
Christ will mercifully regard this work of your charity, toward this
infant, and that he will hear your prayers, for he him self thus commanded
with his word: Suffer the litleones to come unto me, for unto such perteyneth
the kingdom of God. Wherefore, beloved I exhort you, and beseech you as many
as be present, that you will religiously considre with your selves the greatness
of this ministration, and work, that we go about. For ye se how the church
humbly, but constantly brings hither these miserable weak infantes, and
destitute of al strength. With which deed they confess plainly, that they be
the children of the wrath of God of sin, and everlasting death. They pray for
them with godly, and fervent wishes, desiring to obtain for them the grace,
and healpe of God, that through baptism being borne again of God, they may
be the children of God. Think not then, that any trifling, or chyldishe
thing is handled in this holy administration, wherein war is taken in hand
against Satan, wherein he is not only driven out of the infant, but the
infant is bound with an oath, that he ever war agayng him, as the enemy of
his king Christ unto his last breath with all his power. Wherefore God must be
called upon with great confidence, and most fervent prayers, that he will not
only deliver this child from the power of Satan, but also stre^gthen, and
defend him that through out all his life, and chiefly in the point of death,
he may stand, and fight against Satan valiauntly.

Wherefore lift ye up your minds also, and think that you must in this
place hear the word of God with singular devotion, that you must call upon
God with lively faith, and that here you are provoked to prayer for a most
weighty cause.

Therefore behave your selves so, that God may se your religion, and allow
it, neither suffer ye that this most holy Sacrament of Baptism, be
unworthily handled through you, and be made a mock unto Satan, and so shame
be done to God, which here powers forth so great riches of his grace. For he
him self calls this Sacrament, the lauer of regeneration, whereby he makes
us his own sons, heirs of everlasting life, and part takers of all his
benifittes, because we be the coheyres of his Christ, being delivered from
the tirannie of the devil, sin, death, and hell. Wherefore I beseech you for
Gods sake, and your salvation, that ye will worthily esteem and thankefully
embrace so wonderful abundaunt grace of God, which is exhibited in this
Sacrament. For Baptism is a great comfort unto us in our dangers, and
afflictions, and it is the first entrance unto all the benifittes of God, and
to the blessed feloshyppe of all saints.

Therefore that we may considre this unspeakable benifitte of God with a
presenter mind, and greater religion, we must first remember, into how
great euyls the fall of Adam thrue us. And contrariewyse how unmeasurable
grace God exhibited to mankind through his son in that, that he has redeemed
us from the same euylles by baptism. Thirdly how this so great mercy of God
ought to be ever before our eyes in all perilles, and with how great praises
we should magnify the grace of god, which we have received through baptism.

First then we must considre with all diligence, that all we through the
sin of Adam, and envy of Satan, be subject to the wrath of God, and moreover
damned, and be holden prisonners under the power, and kingdom of the devil,
under death, sin, and hell, so that we being by nature the children of wrath,
could appease God by no strength of man, no virtues, or works. For all that
is in us, and all our works be cursed of God, and subject to the tirannie of
Satan, by reason of our corrupted nature.

For saying that through the inobedience of our first Adam (of who^ we are all
borne into this natural, and earthly life) we come al into the world guilty,
and cursed of God so that we must all dye in him, and bear his earthie Image
in this mortal body, it feloweth, that all our life, and all the deeds of our
nature so corrupted, be condemned of God, though they appear never so godly,
and holy before men. For what so ever is borne of flesh, is flesh, that is to
say, strange from God, repugning to the spirit, and adjudged to death, and
hell. Wherefore flesh and blood shall not atteine to the kingdom of God. For
whatsoever is flesh, it sauoureth fleshely things, and so lives, it is an
adversary to God, for it is not subject to the law of God. Wherefore they
that be fleshely can not please God, the wisdom of the flesh is death. And
therefore our Lord Christ disputyng with Nicodemus concludes thus. Verily,
verily I say unto the, except a man be borne again of water and of the
spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom of God.

Secondly we must considre, how plentiful the grace of God given to us in
baptism, is, wherein his bountuousnes, and love toward men, truly appears
in as much as he has saved us, not through the works of ryghtuousnes, which
we had done, but according to his mercy, by the lauer of regeneration, and
renouation of the holy ghost. For he, through the virtue of his word washes
away, and abolisheth whatsoever makes us guilty, and condemns us, as in
old time, he drouned in the red sea, the enemies of his people, and
destroyed al mankind with the floude, eyghte souls reserved, which were
saved in the arc. So this lauer of water saves us, through the word, not in
washyng away the fyl^h of the flesh as it chaunseth in all other washynges,
but through the certification of a good conscience toward God, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. For by the virtue of Gods covenant we are
cleansed in our consciences, and we are certified both through the word, and an
outward sign, that all the sins that defiled, and condemned us, be plainly
abolished, because they be forgyue^ and be dead. Therefore through baptism, we
determine certeynly, that we are acceptable unto God and joined unto him with
an everlasting covenant of grace, so that nothing can separate us from him,
or condemn us. Wherefore hensforth we must not only eschew sins, but also
fear them, and abhor from them, none otherwise then from hell, as men dead
unto sins. For all we, as S. Paul witnesses, which be baptized into
Christ Jesus, be baptized into his death, for we are buried with him into
death. Therefore we be dead to sin, and to the whole old man, and brought
forth in Christ so far, that nothing can condemn us, or separate us from
the grace of God. For he that is dead is justified from sin, he is no more
subject to the tirannie of sin, death, and hell, though he feel the
remnauntes of sin in the flesh, yet those be not imputed unto condemnation
by reason of the justification of the spirit in Christ.

Furthermore Baptism works a new life in us, and acceptable to God. For as
Christ was raised from the dead, by the glory of the father, so he works in
us with his spirit, that we also may walk in newnes of life. For if we be
grafted in him by the lykenes of his death, surely we shall also be part takers
of his resurrection unto everlasting life, knowinge this that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin should be abolished, that hereafter
we serve not unto sin.

Wherefore let us reco^pte that we be dead to sins in deed, and live to God in
Christ our Lord, in whom also we be circumcised with a circumcision made
without hands, while we put of the body of sins, through the circumcision of
Christ. We are buried with him through baptism, wherein we have also risen
again with him, by the faith of the workynge of God. For God which raised
Christ from the dead, has quickened us with him, even when we were dead
through sins, by the uncircumcision of the flesh, or fleshly life. For
though our life be hidden in God with Christ, yet when Christ our life shall
appear, then shall we also in him be manifested in glory, as men, whom God of
his exceadyng mercy, has begotten again into a lively hope, through the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, unto (I say) an incorriruptible
inheritance, undefiled, and that fades not away, not of corruptible seed,
but incorruptible, namely the lively word of God, by which word baptism
consists, and works all the forsayed things in us truly, and effectuously.

Thyrdly we shall comfort our selves with so great excellency of the grace of
God, and benifittes bestowed upon us through baptism, and we shall ever thank
God, and that so much the more studiously, as we shall be oppressed, with more
grievous calamities, confirmynge our faith hereby, that God works in us,
mortifieth the old man and repayreth the new, though not after a visible
sort, yet by the virtue of baptism through the word, and the spirit.
Wherefore let us confirm our consciences, and think that God cares for
us, and that for the merit of his son, we be acceptable, and dear to him,
and when we be exercised with adversity, and sundry miseries, we must
remember, that we are baptized, and that in baptism al our sins, and evils
be ouercomed, and dead, and that they be daily wasted, and obolished more and
more through the cross and sundry afflictions, which God sends unto us, and
that the new man is continually renewed and repared through the virtue of the
resurrection of Christ. Therefore of right we ought to thank God, for his so
unspeakable mercy, and we must also pray therwyth, that he will vouchsafe
ever to further, and at the last to finishe his work which he has begone in
us, and in all them, whom he has called to baptism. The preachers shall use
such exhortatio^s longer or shorter, according to the time, out of the forsaid
places of the scripture, and other like, and then they shall add the
interrogations following.

Interrogatio^s, or demau^des, which shall be propouned to the godfathers, and
to the parents of infantes.
Do ye believe that those things be true, which I showed you out of the word
of God, concerning the corruption of nature, through original synnne, and
concerning regeneration in Christ our Lord, and everlasting communion with
God, which is exhibited through holy baptism.

Answer. We believe.
Do you require then, with al your hertes, and with true faith, that this your
infant, whom ye have brought and offered to Christ, be delivered from this
corruption of nature, through the merit, and virtue of Christ in baptism,
and be reconciled to God, and borne again into a new and perpetual life.

Answer. We require it.
Do ye then renounce in your name, and in the name of the child, the devil
and all his works?

Answer. We renounce.
And the world also, and all his concupiscence.

Answer. We renounce.
Do ye believe in God the father almighty maker of heaven, and earth?

Answer. We believe.
And do ye believe that God will be a father to you, and to this Infant, when
it is baptized, and that he will keep you from all evil, through his
almighty power, wisdom, and mercy, and heap benifittes upon you, and that
therefore you ought to fear him, and love him above al things?

Answer. We believe.
Do ye believe in our Lord Jesus Christ his only son, which to redeem us
became man, suffered and died, and was raised from death, ascended into heaven,
and sits on the right hand of the father, and from thence governs his
church, through his almighty power, and shall come in the end of the world and
appear to al me^, a judge of the dead, and the quick.

Answer. We believe.
Do ye confess out of this faith, that our Lord Jesus Christ is also your
Savior, and Savior of this child, which by his death has purged your
sins also, and has reconciled you to God and instified you through his
resurrection, and will at length fully finishe up the Image, and life of God in
you, being cleansed from all sin?

Answer. We confess.
Do ye believe also in the holy ghost, the holy and universal church, the
communion of saints, the remission of sins, the resurrection of the flesh,
and life everlasting*

Answer. We believe.
Out of this confession do you believe, that the holy ghost will be your
teacher, and comforter, and the teacher and comforter of this child, and that
you be the true members of the body of Chris^e our Lord, and of his church,
and that this child by baptism shall be a membre of Christ, and his church,
wherein he shall have remission of sins, a sure hope of resurrection, and
life everlasting.

Answer. We believe.
Will ye then take the infant from baptism, and compte him for a very son
of God, a brother, and membre of Christ, and as soon as he comes to the use
of reason, if peradventure he shall leese his parents, or, if they shall be
negligente in this behalf, will ye take the charge of him, that he may learn
the ten commandments, the articles of our faith, the Lords prayer, the
sacraments both at home, and in the congregation, that from his chyldehode he
may begin to understand the mystery of baptism, and the benefittes of
Christ given to him therein, and afterward when he is well instructed in the
religion of Christ, that he confess his faith in the congregation with his
own mouth, and through the participation of Christ, that he give him self to
obedience toward God, and the congregation.

Answer. We will.
Here the past our shall exhort again the parents, and the multitude
standing by.
Remember then beloved, that ye must with all faythfulnes and diligence
perform the thing, that ye have promised here in the sight of god and Christ
our savior, which is among us, and before his holy congregation. And all you
parents, godfathers, and other that stand by, acknowledge this child after
that he has received baptism, as the son of God, and membre of Jesus Christ
to whom the Angels be present as ministers, and serve him, neither doubt ye
but that what so ever good, or evil ye do to this seely Infant, you do the
same to God, and to Christ the Lord. Let it not be any pain to you then,
that every one of you according to his state, kynred, and vncation, procure
this child to be godly, and religiously brought up, and instructed, that at
length he may keep all those things, that Christ our Savior commanded to
us. It perteyneth then unto you, which are given of God to this child, to be
parents, kynsfolke, or godfathers to procure, as soon as he is grown up, to
bring him to schools, to the congregation, that he may be instructed moore
fully in the mysteries of Christ, and in other things, that he may perceive
the grace, and exceadyng benifittes of God given in baptism, that he give
account of his faith before the congregation, that he renounce in deed the
diuyl, and the world with al concupiscences, that he wholly give him self to
Christ our Lord, and to his congregation to be obedient in all points,
according to his gospel, and so continue in Christ our Lord unto the end, and
ever go forward in newnes of life, as a lively membre of Christ, and that
being a fruiteful branch in this vinyarde he bring forth the plentiful
fruit of all good works, to the praise of God and edification of the church.

Here follows the Exorcisme, or adiuration.
HEre the past our shall command the child to be brought nere him and shall
demand his name, which known, he shall say: I command all evil spirits, in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to depart from this infant, and to do him
no hurt any manner of ways.

After this making the figure of the cross with his thombe upon his foreheade,
and upon his breast, let him say.

Take the figure of the holy cross, in thy foreheade, that thou never be
ashamed of God, and Christ thy savior, or of his Gospel, take it also on thy
breast, that the power of Christ crucified may be ever thy succor and sure
protection in all thing.

Then let him say to the people. The Lord be with you. Let the the people
answer. And with thy spirit. The pastor. Let us pray. Almighty, and
everlasting God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I call the upon this N.
thy servant, for whom the church requires the Sacrament of baptism, and
therein thy grace, and spiritual regeneration, and thou saydeste, ask and ye
shall receive. etc. so give thy grace, and mercy to this child, as thy church
prays the that he may obtain the redemption of thy son, and inheritance
of everlasting, and blessed life, which thy congregation seeks for him,
through baptism. Open to him the door of thy kingdom, at which thy church
knocks for him, through Christ our Lord. Amen.
Let us pray.

Further almighty God, which in old time dyddeste destroy the wicked world
with the floude, according to thy terrible judgment, and dyddeste preserve
only the family of godly Noe, eighte souls, of thy unspeakable mercy, and
which also dyddest droune in the red sea, obstinate Pharao the King of the
Egiptians with all his army, and warlike power, and causedist thy people of
Israel to pass over with dry feet and would shadow in them holy
baptistisme, the lauer of regeneration, furthermore which dyddeste consecrate
Iordane with the Baptism of thy son Christ Jesus, and other waters to holy
deepynge, and washing of sins, we pray the for thy exceadynge mercy look
favorably upon this Infant, give him true fayeth, and thy holy spirit, that
what so ever fylth he has taken of Adam, it may be drouned, and be put away
by this holy floude, that being separated from the number of the ungodly, he
may be kept safe in the holy arc of the church, and may confess and
sanctify thy name with a lusty, and fervent spirit, and serve thy kingdom
with constant trust and sure hope, that at length he may atteyne to the
promises of eternal life with all the godly. Amen.

The pastor. The Lord be with you. The people. And with thy spirit. Hear
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Mark. x.
In that time they brought children to Jesus, that he might toutch them. But
the disciples rebuked them, that brought them. When Jesus saw that, he took
indigna ion and said unto them, sulfure the litleoues to come unto me. etc.

Believe these words, and this deed of our Lord Jesus Christ upon them, and
doubt not but that he will so receive your children also, and embrace them with
the arms of his mercy, and give them the blessing of eternal life, and the
everlasting communion of the kingdom of God. The same Lord, and our Savior
Jesus Christ confirm and increase this your faith. Amen.

After this the pastoure shall lay his hands upon the chyldes head, and the
godfathers touching the child shall pray with him. Our father which art.
etc. Then they shall also rehearse the creed. I believe in God the father. etc.

Let us pray.

After this the church shall sing the Psalm. Cxiiij. Item. Cxv. and. Cxxxvi.
When Israel went forth. etc. Not to us Lord. etc. Item praise the name of the
Lord. etc. Ye servants praise the Lord.

The pastor. The Lord be with you. The people. And with thy spirit.
Let us pray.

Almighty, and everlasting God, heavenly father, we give the eternal
thanks, that thou haste vouchsafed to call us to this knowledge of thy grace,
and faith toward the. Increase, and confirm this faith in us evermore. Give
thy holy spirit to this infant, that he may be borne again, and be made
heir of everlasting salvation, which of thy groce, and mercy thou have
promised to thy holy church, to old men, and to children, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, which lives, and reigns with the now and for ever. Amen.

Thus gyuynge his blessing let him dimisse the congregation. Of administration
of Baptism.
The day folowinge let the infantes being exorcised the day before, be
brought again to the congregation, a little before the supper of the Lord,
who^ there the pastor, after that the Gospel is read, and declared and the
creed song, shall bid, to be brought to the fou^tstone, and shall exhort the
pare^tes the godfathers, and kinsfolk after the manner folowinge.

Beloved in Christ, yesterday by the grace of God we heard, how exceading, and
unspeakable mercy is exhibited in Baptism. Ye have renounced Satan, and the
world, ye have confessed the faith of Christ, and ye have promised obedience
to Christ, and the congregation, and ye have required of God the father, that
for his sons sake our Lord Jesus Christ, he will deliver these infa^tes from
the kingdom of darkness, and settle the^ in the kingdom of his beloved son.
You must remember these things, and doubt nothing, but that we shall receive
all these things, that we require, if we believe. Therefore liftynge up your
minds unto the Lord, appear ye here with all religion, as in the sight of
almighty God, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, and receive ye sure
faith, and thanksgiving the benifitte of regeneration, and adoption into
everlasting life, of the one god him self, the father, the son, and the
holy ghost. And because the Lord him self commanded us to baptize in the
name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost, undoubtedly god him self
baptiseth our infa^tes, cleanses the^ from sins, delivers the^ from
everlasting death, puts upon the^ his own righteousness, and gives them
life eternal. We must acknowledge with true faith, and ever magnify these
exceading benifittes of God. Wherefore that we may steare up our faith and
minds. Let us hear the words of S. Paul following, concerning this matter.

To Tite Chapter. iij.
But after that the goodness, and love of our savior God toward me^
appeared, not of the works of ryghtuousnes which we did, but after his mercy
he saved us, by the lauer of regeneration and renewing of the holy ghost. etc.

The pastor. The Lord be with you. The people. And with thy spirit.
Out of the Gospel of Mathewe the last Chapter.

The Lord Jesus said unto his disciples All power in heaven, and in earth, is
given unto me. Go ye therefore into all the world, and preach the Gospel to al
creatures, and teach all the heathen, baptising the^ in the name of the father,
and the son, and the holy ghost. etc

The pastor. The Lord be with you. The people. And with thy spiritie.
Let us pray.

Almighty, and merciful God, and father, thou did promise to Abraham our
father, and the father of all that believe, and in him thou dyddeste promise to
us also his children, that thou wouldeste be a God to us, and to our seed.
Wherefore, as thou did receive the infantes of the old people into grace,
and into thine own people by circumcision. And thy son Christ Jesus our
Lord, and savior, admitted children offered unto him right gently, and
blessed the^ testifiynge that the kingdom of God perteyneth to such. So let it
be thy pleasure, to begette our infantes again, and to adopte the^ into
sons, unto the fellowship of everlasting life, by the sacrament of baptism.
Grant then heavenly father, that we may earnestly requir so great riches of
grace setfurth in baptism, for these infa^tes, and that we may acknowledge,
and receive them with true faith being offered both in the word, and in the
sacrament, finally that we may ever thank the, and magnify the for them.
And impute not to these infantes the sin of Adam, issued into the^, and
engendered by their parents, and regard not the merits of their parents, and
of all this people, but let the death, and merit of thy son our Lord Jesus
Christ prevail in them, and impute unto them his righteousness, and obedience.
Plant them into his death, and resurrection, make them members of his body,
put him upon the^, that they may be thy sons, and heirs, and continue for
ever. Grant us also that after Baptism, we may acknowledge them for thy
children, and members of the body of thy son, that we may godly bring them
up in the fear of the, unto thy glory, that we may healpe them in all
corporal, and spiritual things, that also by them thy holy name may be
more magnified, the kingdom of thy son enlarged, thy will be done in this
earth, as in heaven. Furthermore keep them safe, give them bountuously the
necessaries of life, and preserve them from all evil. Amen.

This prayer ended, let the pastoure require the Infantes to be given him,
let him ask the names, that they shall have, and let him Baptize them,
saiynge.

I baptize the, N. in the name of the father the son, and the holy ghost.

Let the godfathers forthwith receive the Infant from Baptism, the priest
saying, as it follows.

The almyghtie everlasting God, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
has begotten the again with water, and the holy ghost, and has forgiven the
al thy sins, confirm the with his grace, unto everlasting life. Amen.

The Pastor. The peace of the Lord be with you. Answer. Amen.
Here let the whole congregation sing in Douche. Now all thanks. etc. or
the Psalm. God be merciful unto us. Then let the pastor go forth in the
ministratio^ of the Lords supper.

How baptism must be menistead at other times.
But if the infantes be weak so that it is to be feared that they will not
live to the next sondaie, or holy day, or if for weyghtie matters Baptism
cannot be ministered upon those days, the Pastoures shall warn the people,
that yet they bring their children to be Baptized at those hours when after
the custoume, the people resorteteth together to hear the lords wo^de.

But if that thing cannot be done neither, baptism in the mean while must
not be denied to the infantes offered thereunto, when so ever they be brought
for as much as lies in us, we must not suffer that any depart out of this
life, without the sacrament of baptism. For the Lord instituted baptism that
it may be to us a sacrament of regenecion and wasshinge of sins from which
in this life no man is free, no not an infant one day old for it is our
part, to do in all things after the Lords word, and to receive his gifts,
and benefits that way, that he him self has appointed unto us.

When baptism than shall be mynistred upon workynge days, let the pastors
join to gether in order the Catechism, exorcisme, and baptism, and they shall
moderate their exhortacions, and prayers according to the company, and
strength of the child. For if they se that the child is in danger of life,
and that the company is small, they shall be short in all things. And they
shall use only the first part of the admonicion, which we willed to be said
before the Catachisme unto these words, wherefore, we exhort, and pray you
beloved. etc. So they shall use the first part only of the demaundes of every
article and in the exorcisme they shall use only one prayer with the Lords
prayer, the Creed and the Gospel. Which things premised, let them Baptize
the infant furthwith, and let them exhort the parents, God fathers, and other
that stand by, that they determine certainly that the infant whether he live or
dye, is the son of God, and heir of everlasting life, and if he live that
they procure him to be brought up unto religion and gods glory, according
to the exhortacion set before, which begins. After that beloved, etc.

Of baptism ministered to children as soon as they be borne for danger of life.
The people shall be taught and warned in sermons that they presume, not lightly
to ministre priuatli, this most divine sacrament for it is worthy to be
ministered in the congregation and by peculiar ministers, with all gravity and
reverence and that makes much for this purpose that it may be holesomely
mynistred, and received. But if exterme necessity pres us, that they that be
present with the child being in danger, mayei join them selves together in
the Lord, and lyftinge up their minds religiously unto God, let them call
for his mercy promised, and exhibited in Christ Jesus our Lord upon the
infant, and when they have said the Lords prayer, let them baptis him in
the name of the father, the son, and the hollye ghost. Which done let them
not doubt, but that their infant is truly baptized, washed from sins borne
again in Christ, and made the son, and heir of god let the^ than give
thanks to god, for this his so great benifite, and let them not think that
baptism must be renewed in children so baptized for in all points, as much as
we may, we must so do althynges, as the Lord has appointed. If any godly
man be present, when the infant is in extremity, let his ministry be used
to baptysme.

Further if it chance that the infant so baptized at home, do live, it is
convenient, that he be brought afterward to the temple of his parents
kynsfolke, and godfathers, which must com with a good company, and religiously,
as men that ought to give thanks for this exceeding benifite of regeneracion
ministered to their infant, and to offer him to god, and his savior in the
congregation. The pastors than shall ask these men after what sort, and with
what words they baptized the infant, whether they did baptize him, as the
Lord commanded in water, and in the name of the father, the son, and the
holy ghost. Which if they shall answer that they called god upon the child,
and prayed for him, and baptized in the name of the father the son, and the
holy ghost, and that they believe that he is truly cleansed from sins, and
borne again to God, the pastors must confirm them in this belefe and in no
wise Baptize such an infant again. And that men may be more comforted, and
the celebration of so great a sacrament, more augmented, and the benifite of
Christ bestowed upon the child through Baptism more commended, the
preachers shall allow the same in the congregation, vsinge a lesson of the
holy Gospel and prayer after this sort*

The pastor wha^ they become which bring such an infant unto the Lord, shall
first demand of them.

Beloved in Christ, forasmuch, as we be al borne in sin, and the wrath of
God, guilty of eternal death, and damnacion, and can by none other means get
remissyon of sins, righteousness, and everlasting life, than through faith in
Christ, and forasmuch as also this infant is borne subject to these evils, I
mean of death, and the wrath of god I ask of you, whether he were offered to
Christ, and planted in him through baptism If they answer that they so
believe, he shall ask the^ further, by whom it was done, and who were present.
And wha^ they have named them, he shall ask him, which by there relacion,
Baptized the child if he be present, or other which then were present
whether the name of the Lord were called upon him and prayer made for him. If
they answer that they did so, he shall ask how the child was baptized. If
they than answer in water and with these words, I baptize the in the name of
the father the son, and the holy ghost, he shall ask them last of all,
whether they certainly know that they have rightly used the word of god, and
if they answer, that they know and remember that they did so, let the
pastoure say this moreover.

Forasmuch as beloved in Christ, I here that althynges concerning the
baptism of this infant, have been done in the name of God, and according to
his institution, I pronounce in the name of Christ, that ye have done well.
For infantes want the grace of God, which our savior Christ denies not unto
them, whenever it is asked for children, according to his word for he has
not bound the benifite of his redemption to any places, times, or perso^nes.
For in what place soever they that believe in him come to gether in his name, he
is present in the midst of them, and when he is caled upon thoroughe faith,
he works in his word, and sacraments, and he performs in ded whatsoever
he offreth in his sacraments, promises in his words. And to confirm this
fayeth, and that we may sterre up our selves, to thank the Lord for this his
so great benifyte ministered to this infant by baptism, let us hear out of
the gospel, how the Lord will have children brought unto him, and how he
will bountouslye bless them, which be offered unto him.

Marcke. x.

And they brought children unto him, that he might touch them. etc.
By these words of Christ we be certified that as many infantes, as be
offered unto Christ according to his word, pertayne to the kingdom of God, be
the children of God, the me^bres of Christ, that the Angels be present with
them as mynistres, and that all the creatures of god be subject unto the^, to
do them good. Wherefore we must ministre to such with singular diligence, that
they may be well brought up in Christ, and grow in him, and this charge
pertains to you pare^tes, kinsfolks, godfathers, and all other friends,
which be of the body of this our congregation. I commend than this infant,
the son, and heir of God, the brother, and coheire of christ, the member of
christ and your membre in Christ: to your faithfulness, and charge, that ye
procure him with al diligence to be noryshied, brought up and enstructed to the
Lord, to whom he is borne again, and to the kingdom of god, to which he is
borne again, eueri man according to his vocation, and power, that as soon as
he can for his age, he may learn to keep all those things, that Christ
commanded to be kept. Wherefore it pertayneth to you chiefly parents,
godfathers, and kinsfoke thought all other in this congregation, and all
chrystian men to whom soever he shall come, ought not to deny their labor
and healpe to procure, that this infant as soon as he may for his age, be
brought to the schole, and to the congregation, and be enstructed in the
mysteries with all faythfulnes, that he may learn to acknoledge, and magnify
the most ample benifites of God received in baptism, that afterward he may
profess his faith him self in the congregation, that with his own voice he
may renounce satan, and the world with all his entysementes, and works
before the holy congregation that he may bynd himself to Christ, and to his
congregation, unto all obedience, and continue in the same unto the end, as a
liuelye membre of Christ, and a branch continuyng in Christ, and brynging forth
plentiful fruit unto the praise and glory of god, and edificacion of his
church, After this let him say lainge his hand on the child, The lord be
with you. Answer. And with thy spirit. Let us pray. Lord God the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which haste be gotten again this infant of water,
and the holy ghost, and haste given him in holy Baptism, remission of all
sins, confirm the same with thy grace, and guide, and further this new life,
which thou haste given, and fynyshe it up where unto thou haste bound the
infant with this hollye Sacrament. Grant also to his parents, and to us
all that we may faithfully, and diligently serve the in taking charge of, him
that thoroughe him, and us all, they name daily be more, and more sanctified
and they kingdom promoted, unto the full fruision of blesfulnes, thorough
Christ our Lord. Ame^.

But if they, which offer the infant, can not answer sufficiently to the
said demandes, so that they grant that they do not well know what they
thought, or did in baptising, being, sore trobled with the present danger, as
it often chauceth than, omitting curious disputacions, let the pastoure
judge such an infant not to be yet baptized, and let him do all those things
that pertaninge to this ministracion, as we described before that is to say,
let him use an admonicion and catechism to them that bring the child, and
an exorsisme of the child, the commen confession of the faith, and al other
things, which done let him baptize the infant with out condition, in the
name of the father the soonne, and the hollye ghost.

Of the confirmacion of thildren baptized And so^lemne profession of their
faith in Christ, and of therir obedience to be showed to Christ, and to his
congregation.
This custom has been observed in the old, and new testament, of the
institution of God, that those, which in their first infancy were received
into the grace of the Lord, a mong the old people, by circumsicion, and in the
new people by baptism, as soon as they had understood this benifite of God,
which they had received, and as soon as they had a fore conceived faith in
God, they them selves should profess their faith in the congregation, and
they them selves should bind them selves to the obedience of God, and of the
congregation.

At which confession of faith, and profession of obedience in the congregation
they were wont to be solemly confirmed of the congregation in religion,
thoroughe prayer, and some token of Gods confirmacion, which under Moses
consisted in sacrifices, and oblations, and in the time of the Gospel, in
layinge on of hands and participation of the supper of the Lord. For this is
the nature of true, and liuelye faith, that eueri man desires to set forth,
and magnifye the benifites, that god has showed him, and for his part to
offer, and consecrate himself, to the glorifiynge of his name with all offices
of godliness. Wherefore the Psalm. xxii. sings of the is my praise, in the great
congregation. Psalm. xxxv, I will give thanks unto the in a great assemble. et.
ce.

Forthermore we are so grafted in Christ thorough Baptism, and so made the
members of his body, that is to say, of the congregation, and so joined in
Christ to other members of Christ, that we must serve al them, with whom we
have any aquaintaunce any perticipacion of kindness, cheifely for the
furtheraunce of godliness, and religion, and afterward also in things
necessary for this present life, I mean that one of us acknoledge another,
and embrace one another in Christ with sincere love. And first that we teach
one another, warn, correct, comfort and exhort in those things, that
pertain to a new life in Christ. Secondly that we also help one another in
things necessary for this present life, with counsel, work, and seruise.

Therefore the comunion of both lives in Christ the Lord, and the
recompensation of good turns one to another, requires that every man openly
offere and give himself to this felowshyppe of the outward, and inward man,
and to this change an recompensacion of benefits. Seeing than, that this
confession of faith, and geuyng of our selves to the obedience of Christ, and
commendacion of his church, which the very nature of faith, and necessite of
this co^municacion of Christ requires, can not be done in baptism, when
infantes be baptized, it must needs be done of them, that were baptized in
their infantie, when they be meetely well enstructed of relegion, and when they
some what understand those great benifites that we give in baptism.

But when they solemly profess their faith, and obedience before the
congregation the very nature of faith requires again, that the congregation
pray for them solemli, and desire for them the increase of the holy ghost,
that he will confirm, and preserve the^ in the faith of Christ, and obedience
of the congregation, and that he will ever lead him into all truethe. And for
as much as such prayer made in the name of Christ, and trust of his promises
can not be but effectuous, it pertanieth to the mynisterie of the
congregation, to strengthen them with the confirmacion of the hollye Ghost, for
whom the church has prayed. Therefore our elders folowinge the exemple of
Christ, and the Apostle did use laiyng on of hands, as a sign, at this
confirmacion.

This ceremony tha^ observed in the faith of Christ because it is undoubtedly
the office of faith, and christian love, agreeable all manner of ways to the
words, and institutions of the Lord, and edifiyng the religion of Christ we
will that it be restored in the congregation to a godly, and wholesome use, all
abuses removed, that have crepte into the place of this ceremony, which how
shameful, and noisome they were to our religion every Christian manne may
easelye judge.

Heretofore this ministry of confirmacion was a peculier work of a
suffragayne.

But forasmuch as al things in the church must be referred, ordained, and
done for the commune profit of Christen men, we will that hereafter this
ministerye of confirmacion, if it can not be done commodiously by a
suffragayne, or not as it ought to be done, shall be done by visitours, twyse a
year in principal solemnities. For where as at the beginning, the office of
confirmacion was only committed to bishops, bishoprikes were not so large as
they be now, nether were their dioces greater, than that the bishops might
visit once a year every parish and here him self, and confirm the children
being catechized, or instructed. But now the world is other wise, and
bishoprikes be after another fashion, so that it is impossible that one
bishop, or sustragaine may with convenient leisure administre this
confirmacio^ in his diocese. For every year there grow up some in every
church, whom it shall be come to profess their faith, and to be solemli
confirmed. Wherefore forasmuch as every congregation has neade of yearly
lookinge to, and visitation, and solemn profession of faith and confirmacion
of them, which in age, and knoledge of Christ be grown so fare: the necessary
procuracion of the Lords flock committed unto us constrayneth us, that we
provide that the congregation want not a mete minister for this purpose. For
the health of the sheep of christ must not serve the persons of the
mynisters, but the persons of the ministers must serve to their health, that
al things may be done according to this saying, al are yours whether it be
Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas. i. Cor. iij.

And as S. Hierome witnesses this confirmacion was not therefore the proper
office of bishops in old time, because it was not lawful for other to
administre the same seeing that eue^ commen ministers yea every Christen man,
if ordinare ministres wa^ted, might minister Baptism, a much more excellent
sacrament, but it was committed to bishops peculiarly for this cause, that the
bishops of every congregation, might attain more certain knoledge, and
might have more wholesome care, and charge while they them selves enquired
every year with what faith fulness, and diligence the pastors hade instructed
both the rest, and chiefly the young children of Christ.

It help also togreater consent of religion, and reverence and obedience
toward the holy ministry, when eureie one professed his faith, and
obedience of Christ to one bishop.

But forasmuch as to many congregacions be committed to the charge of one
bishop, that every one can not be visited by one bishop, or suffragane, we
must neades procure that this office of examinacion, and confirmacion, which
cannot be deferred more than a year without the great incommoditie of the
congregacions, and peril of religion, be executed by more persons, saying
that it cannot be done by one, howbeit the parish preistes in every
congregation with their companions, certain days before the coming of the
visiters, shall diligently prepare the children, whom they purpose to offer to
confirmacion to make their confession of faith, and profession of Christen
communion and obedience dece^tly and semely, which must be done of them after
this sort. The demand. Do thou profess thy self to be a christian*
Answer. I profess. Demand. What is it to be a Christian: Answer. To be
borne again in Christ, and to have remission of sins, and partipation of
everlasting life through him. Demand. Where by trusteste thou, that these
things be given the? Answer. Because I am Baptized in the name of the father,
the son, and the holy ghost. Demand. What beleuest thou of God the father,
the son, and the holy gooste: Answer. The same that the articles of our
creed do comprehend. Dema^. Rehearse them. Answer. I do believe in God the
father almighty. etc.

Let the child in this place recite all the articles of the creed plainly, and
distinctlie.
Demaun. What understand thou, wha^ thou say, I believe in God the father,
in the son, and in the holy ghost: Answer. That they be three persons of
one substance, and power, and yet but one God. Demaun. Why say thou God
almighti^ maker of heaven and earth? Answer. Because I believe that god, as he
made al other things, so he made me of nothing by hi^ only son, our Lord
Jesus Christ, and preserves, and governs through the same Jesus Christ
alone, and is present in every place, and works all good things in all men,
through his only ever wise purpose and ryghtuous will. Demand. How do thou
understand the second article of Christ our Lord? Answer. I knowledge thereby
that our nature through the fall of Adam is so corrupted, that no angel, nor
man could purge our sins, and satisfy for them, so that it was necessary
that the eternal word the son of God, should be made man, conceived of the
holy ghost, and borne of the substance of the virgin Marie, a very man
undoubtedly, but without sin, which through his death satisfied for our
sins, and through his resurrection, and ascension into heaven, he sat us with
him self in heavenly things, to whom the father has given alpower in heaven
and in earth, that he may govern us, and restore in us his own Image, and at
length, when he shall come to judge the quick, and the dead, that he may
^ayse us from the dead, and that he may give to us, which were perfectly
framed again to his own Image, the enheritaunce of eternal bliffulnes in
heaven, and deliver other to be punished in everlasting fire, which have
obstinately despised him. Demand. What is the meaning of the third article:
Answer. Thus, that Christ the Lord has given the holy ghost to us, which
through the ministry of the Gospel gathers together the faithful into his
congregation, wherein they must be ever steared up unto repentance, and unto
faith, and to receive remission of sins by the word of God, and sacraments
of the communion of Christ, and so in leadyng a life holy, godly, and
profitable to their neighbors, with a good conscience, that they look for
Christ the savior, which shall take the^ up to him self in heaven out of this
world, and shall also raise up again their bodies in the day of judgment
unto an heavenly life. Demaun. Do thou then surely believe al these
things? Answer. I believe them al, and I pray God, that he will vouchsafe to
increase this faith in me. Demand. What ought this faith to work in the.
Answ. That I doubt nothing, but that God, and the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which with this his son, sent us his word, and gave us all things,
is the only true God, that he made all things of nothing, that he only
works, and gives all good things, and that he will show him self a father
unto me also, for the same his sons sake our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
washed me from sins with holy Baptism, that he gave me his holy spirit,
that he incorporated me to his dear son, and so received me into his church
and adopted me, to be his son, and heir, that also he will keep me in his
congregation, give me in the same repentance, and remission of sins, and the
communion of his son, that through him I may ever call upon his name with
childrens trust, and that in the renewing of my self, I may profit daily unto
his Image, furthemore I believe that through his word and sacraments he will
confirm, and increase the same in me, so that I may study continually to
sanctify his name, and to serve his congregation with all manner of good
works, till he take me out of this world unto heavenly joys and the blessed
resurrection. Al which things I acknowledge that they be performed unto me,
and shall be through the only free mercy of the heavenly father, and through
the inestable merit of his son our Lord Jesus Christ. Demand. God and our
heavenly father increase and confirm this thy faith, through his son our
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Do thou think then, and do thou acknowledge
in this faith, that thou art verily the son of god, and his hey^e the
brother, and joint heir of our lord Jesus Christ, and therefore a member of his
body, which the congregation is? Ans. I think so, and acknowledge trustyng in
the most certain promise of Gods beniuole^ce and in the merit of our lord
Jesus Christ. Them. Does that please the the^, and do thou allow it, and
will thou continue in the same, that thy godfathers promised, and professed in
thy name at holy baptism, when in thy steed they renou^ced Satan, and the
world, and bound the to Christ and to his congregation that thou should be
thorowlie obedient to the Gospel: Ans. I allow these things, and by the
healpe of our Lord Jesus Christ, I will continue in the same unto the end. Them.
And do thou thy self renounce Satan, and all his works, with thy heart,
and mouth here in the sight of God, and before his holy congregation: Ans. I
renounce. Dema. And the world, and all his co^cupiscences: Ans. I renounce.
Dema. And do thou wholly give self unto al obedience of Christ and his
congregation? Ans. I wholly give over my self thereunto. Dema. How wast thou
first adopted, of God to be his son, and to be received into his
congregation: Ans. By holy baptism. Dema. What is baptism: The la^^e^ of
regeneration, whereby I am washed from sins, and grafted in Christ the Lord,
and have put him upon me. Them. Will thou continue in this communion of Christ
unto the end? Ans. I will by the healpe of our Lord Jesus Christ. Them. What
requires this communion of Christ: Ans. That I continue in this doctrine,
that I have confessed, and in all the articles of our fayeth, and that I believe
that I have remission of sins in Christ the Lord, and that I am justified,
acceptable to God, and heir of everlasting life, for this dear beloved
sons sake, and not through mine own merit of rigtuousnes, further that I
study to live according to all the commandments of God And that I may go
forward in this knowledge of God, and obedience, it requires that I
diligently hear the word of God by the ministers chiefly upon the su^daies,
and holy days, and if the Elders of the congregation, or other that will show
me such love, do reprove me of sin, that I take it in good part, and amend
my life, that I also through a sincere zeal of Christ, and their health, warn
my neighbors living il, and inordinately, and amend them if I can, but if I
ca^ not, that I take other with me, which I think may do more with them, and
if they will not hear them neither, that I bring the whole matter before the
elders of the co^gregatio^s, who^ if they despise to hear, and be therefore
excommunicated, that I take the^ for heathen, and publicanes, and avoid their
companies as much as my vocacion will suffer, and civil business with them, and
their necessity according to the word of God. Demand. What does the
communion of the congregation of Christ require beside? Answ. It requires
also, that I receive the supper of the Lord with other Christian men, to whom
I come, and with whom I dwell, as one, that is one bread, and one body with
them in Christ. Demand. What is this sacrament? Ans. It is the communion of
the body, and blood of Christ, which in the Lords supper, wha^ it is
celebrated according to the institution of the lord, be truly exhibited with
the bread and wine? De. To what use do thou receive the body, and blood of
the Lord. Answer. That mi faith in him, and trust of the new, and eternal
testament, of the grace of God, redemption of Christ, and communion with him,
may be confirmed in me more, and more, and that I may live less to my self,
and more in him, and that he may repair a new and holy life in me For as
concerning mine own flesh, and blood, I can do nothing but sin, and live
an ungodly life. Dema^.

What more does the communion of the congregation require? Ans. That I add my
prayers to the commen prayers of the church, that I come together with the^,
and give their oblations and alms lyberally to the use of the pore, and so
behave my self in all things as a member of Christ joined in Christ, and
cleauynge together with all godly men, and that I acknowledge, and reverently
use in all things, those, whom the Lord has made feeders of his
co^gregatio^s curates of souls, and elders, as it becomes an obedient son
of God, finally that I be thankeful for these exceadinge benifittes, the
Gospel, and communion of his son our Lord Jesus Christ. Dema. Will thou
faithfully perform, and observe, al these things, as thou haste now
professed. I will, by the healpe of our Lord Jesus Christ.

After that one of the children has rehearsed a full confession of his faith,
and has professed the obedience of Christ before the whole congregation, it
shall be sufficient to propoune questions to the other children after this
sort. Demand. Do thou also thy son believe, and confess, and wylt thou
wholly give over thy self unto the communion, and obedience of Christ, and his
congregation, as thou heardest even now this child to believe, and confess,
that he would bind him self to the obedience of Christ, and his
congregation.

Here it shall suffice, that every one answer thus for him self.
I believe, and confess the same, and yield up my self to Christ, and his
congregation, trusting in the grace and healpe of our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ. But where children be not so exercised in the knowledge of religion,
that they can answer by heart according to the prescribed form, the visiter,
which shall administer confirmation, must read all the answers to such
children, and it shall be sufficient, if they answer simply, that they believe
the things, that were read, how be it he shall labor so to declare all
things unto them, that they may understand what they go about, and what they
confess, and profess. Howbeit they must be diligently warned, that they
remember, that they stand in the sight of god, who^ they ca^ not deceive, which
beholds the heart. And that therefore they must procure with all reverence,
that they declare the same thing in their life, that they profess with their
mouth, and think in their heart.

But, as we warned before, all the children one by one must be exercised, and
prepared hereunto, and diligently examined the wieke before, by the ministers
and Elders of every congregation, and the pastors and Elders must bring no
children before the visiter to be confirmed, but such as they trust, know the
sum of religion, and believe truly in Christ. It is not to be required
precisely, that the children answer featly concerning the words, for it
chau^ceth often, that they which be well enstructed in the knowledge of faith
can not very handsomely utter the things that they mean, chiefly in an open
place, either for shame or some other weakness of mind. Wherefore we must
more regard, which children truly understand the things that perteine to
religion, then which ca^ featly declare them with words, wherein those excel
moore often, which have less godly minds. Now further, when the children,
which shall be confirmed, have confessed their faith, and professed the obedience
of the Gospel, the congregation must be warned, that they humbly pray for
these children. Whose prayer the pastoure shall offer to the Lord, with such
a collecte.

The Collecte.
Almighty, and merciful God, heavenly father, which only workest in us to
will and to perform the things that please the, and be good in deed, we beseech
the for these children, who^ thou have given to thy church, and have begotten
again to thy self by holy baptism, and in whom thou haste powered that light,
that they acknowledge and confess before the congregation thy grace, and
benifittes toward them selves, and their redemption in Christ Jesus, and will
wholly give over the^ selves to the, and thy congregation, to be obedient to thy
commandments, confirm this thy work, which thou have wrought in them,
increase in them the gift of thy spirit that ever going forward in the
knowledge and obedience of thy Gospel, in thy congregation, they may continue
to the end, and that they go no where aside from that faith, and obedience of
the Gospel, which they have now confessed and professed, being seduced
through some perverse doctrine, or driven forth by the lusts of the flesh.
Grant them that they luckely springinge up in thy son our Lord Jesus
Christ, the head of us all, may grow into him till they come to man's age
fully, and perfectly in all wisdom, holiness and righteousness, that they may
more fully know, and more fervently love the, the father, and thy son our
Lord Jesus Christ and that they may confess, exhalt, and magnify the same
more earnestly, and effectuously before their neighbors, both in words and
deeds. And as thou haste promised us, that thou will give us, what so ever we
shall ask of the in the name of thy dear son, and as thy son promised us,
that thou would give us requirynge the, a good spirit much more pro^ptly,
then any father gives his children good things, when they pray him: so give
these children the thing, that we pray the for, through thy son Christ, that
when we shall now say our hands upon them in thy name and shall certify them
by this sign, that thy fatherly hand shall be ever stretched forth upon the^,
and that they shall never want thy holy spirit to keep, lead, and govern
the^ in the way of health, and in a very christian life, grant thou, I say,
unto them, that they may acknowledge these things with true faith, and that
they may certeynly believe, that thou will defend the^ with thy almighty
right hand, and keep them from al evil, and deliver them, and lead them to
al good works. Finally that thou wylt never take thy holy spirit from them
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Here the pastor laying his hands upon them, shall say.
O Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, which saidest in the Gospel. If you then
being evil, ca^ give good gifts to your children, how much more shall my
father give the holy ghost to them, that ask him. Item, If two consent
together upon the earth. etc. Confirm this thy seruante with thy holy
spirit, that he may continue in the obedience of thy Gospel, and strongly
resist the devil and his own weakness, and not grieve the holy ghost, or
trouble or offend thy church with sclaunders, but that his whole life may
serve to the praise of thy glory, his own health and commune profitte of thy
congregation, as thou have prescribed to us, and as thou haste promised that
thou will give to them that ask the. Amen.

After this let the Hymn be song. Now al thanks. etc.
Now a good while since the sign of oil was wont to be used in
confirmation but because they abused this sign most superstitiously, and
forasmuch as also among christian men, signs and shadows of spiritual
things ought not to be so much regarded, as the thing, and truth it self,
the sign of layinge on of hands shall be sufficient in this ministration,
which the Apostles, and old fathers thought sufficient. And that this
Ceremony may be handled with greater granitie, and reverence and with more
fruit both of the children and of the whole congregation, the deanes with the
visiters, or parish priests, of every congregation, shall chose out such a
place in the temples from whence the confession, and profession of the
children, and other things that must be done there with all, may be clearly
heard, and perceived of the whole congregation.

Of the Lords supper.
MEn must be much, and often taught, and warned of this most holy Sacrament,
that it is, as Paul witnesses a communion of the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ wherein we must so celebrate the remembrance of him, with
great religion, and grave preaching of his death, and resurrection, and of al
things, which he was made for us, which he did and suffered for our
salvation, that our faith in him may be confirmed, that we may cleave faster
and line more fully in him, and he in us.

And forasmuch as the Lord, when he iustituted this holy supper, did say. Do
this in remembrance of me, the preachers shall diligently warn this also,
that the Lord commanded, that we should do those things in this Sacrament,
which he him self showed to be done by his exemple.

Therefore we must set the same act of the Lord before us, neither must we
in any wise decline from the same, or change any thing of it, though an Angel
from heaven, or an Apostle did counsel and bid us so to do. Which thing the
right holy bishop, and martyr Ciprian, gathers well and truly out of these,
and many other words of the Lord. For if Christ be our only Lord, and
master, we as the ministers, and disciples of him must needs follow and do,
not the word or deed of any man, or Angel, but we must follow, and do with
al reverence the things that he did, and laid before us to do, neither may
we regard, what other did before us, but what Christ our Lord first did,
which is before al things. And al they that do not this, but change somewhat
of the institution of the Lord in this most holy mystery, ought not to be
judged his vicares, or his priests, seeing that for the traditions of men, they
cast away the commandment of Christ. The holy martyr writes these, and
much moore severe and earneste things in the same Epistle, against them,
that in the administration of this most holy Sacrament chaung any point of that
the Lord him self did in his supper. For he commanded us to do that only.
Now if we consider how Christ instituted this holy supper, it appears
clearelie out of the declarations of the evangelists, and saint. Paull, that
first he made his holy supper with his disciples, and that he made the same,
one, and commune to all that were present and with such disciples, as had
wholye give them selves to his doctrine. For though Judas were a feigned
disciple, and as Christ calls him a diuyll, nevertheless, the other disciples
did not yet know that, for he did clean to the Lord in outward profession,
and life, as the rest did.

But the Lord, when he gave his disciples, an exemple in his supper, where as
he admitted Judas, he would not follow his own secret judgment, but that
open and manifest judgment, which his disciples might, and should follow
afterward. For this cause ^n the old church, which observed that thing that it
had received of the Aposteles, no man ^as admitted unto the holy communion,
which had not witnessed himself, to be he disciple of the Lord. Further
more such (...) any company, and congregation of the ^aythful, had one supper
only, and that com^une to al, so that they al received the lords ^ody in one
bread, and his blod, in one cup. Whereof Paul writes thus. The cup of
blessing, which we bless, that is to say, wherwyth we give thanks, is it
not the communion of the blood of Christ? And the bread, which we break,
is it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we being many are one
bread, and one body for we receive al of one bread, and of one cup, Loo,
the Apostle speaks of one cup, in who^ one man gives not thanks for him
self, and he speaks of one bread, which all we that come together break
being commune and he witnesses, that this is the communion of the body, and
blood of Christ, which communion all we receive together out o^ one
Sacrament, and we confirm the same, because we are the members, and body o^
Christ. Wherefore the Apostle willinge t^ strength the thing, that he had say,
I meame that the bread, which we break in the holy supper, is the communion
of the body o^ Christ, used these words, we, being many says he, are one
bread, and one body, as ^^ he would say, one bread is broken, an^ one
sacrament is distributed among us being many for this purpose, that we being
many, which receive this sacrament with tr^^ faith, should be more and more
united in ^ one body, even the body of Christ, and the we should altogether
abide, and live in hi^ and he in us, after that we hade gotten the true
communion of his body.

This is singulerly to be noted, that the Apostle willinge to prove that we,
which in the holy supper of the Lord, are partakers of the Lords body, and
blood, be one body, added furthwith. For all we be parttakers of one bread,
whereby he signified also the communion of one cup. Let us than consider
this reason of the Apostle diligentli. For if we testify, and declare therebi,
that we are one body, and one bread of Christ, and that we truly receive, and
obtain the communion of Christ's body and blood from the Lords table, wha^
al we that come together to the Lords table, be parttakers ^f one bread, and
one cup, two things suer ^^ follow hereof, one, that they, which in one
^ongregacion of the faithful, do minister ^ore than one supper of the Lord,
testify of ^^em selves thereby, that they be not one bo^ye, and one bread of
Christ, nether rightly ^^ceiue nor have the communion of the Lords ^odye, and
blood. The other is, that they, ^hiche be present at the Lords supper, and
^^eyue not the sacraments, testify by this ^^eir abstinences from the lords
table, that ^^ will not be a member with other Christi^^s, which receive the
sacraments, that they will not be one body with them, and one bread of
Christ, if they be sufficiently enstructed of this institution of the Lord,
and have not a lawful cause to abstain from the sacraments.

Therefore for this very cause, that the Lord conmanded us to do that, in his
holy supper, that he himself did, and he celebrated it with those his
disciples only, which had wholly given themselves to his doctrine, and ever
followed him, and celebrated one supper only, the prechers shall observe two
things. First they shall teach, and exhort the people with all diligence,
that in this most holy sacrament they show them selves the true disciples of
the Lord, that is to say, such as put al their trust in the Lord himself,
and have bound them selves wholly to his word, and follow the fame studiously
in all things. For thus the lord says John. iij. If ye abide in my word, ye
are my disciples in dead. But they that will declare themselves to be faithful
ministres of the Lord, in the administracion of these mysteries, shall not
admit any other to the lords supper, but such as be tried, and have
confessed before the congregation, that they have given the^ selves to the
Lord, and have proved the same with their life, as the Lord also celebrated
the supper with chosen disciples. Secondly that in one co^gregacio^ of the
faithful, one supper be ministered, and that the pastor himself celebrate it,
if he may by any means, at such time when the whole congregation is wont to
come together, as upon sondayes, and holy days, if so be there shall be
present, that will communicate, as men, that be one body, and one bread of
Christ, and are so outwardly also joined together of the Lord that they pertain
to one congregation, and pastoral cure, and receive the communion of the Lord
out of one bread, and one cup.

The second thing that the Lord did in his supper, is this, he gave thanges
to the father, and that in such language, as the disciples might understand al
things, and be sterred up with him to praise God. For which cause the
pastors shall warn the people, first, that in the administracion of this
sacrament, we must give thanks to God through our Lord Jesus Christ, for all the benifites that he has given, and gives to us daily, and cheifely for
that benifite, out of which al other come, and be made true benifites unto us,
I mean, that he so loved us, that he gave us his son a redemer, that, all
that believe in him should not perish, but have everlasting life John iij.
wherefore he has given us all things with him. To. viij. remyssion of sins,
the spirit of adoption, and al things that may do us good either in body or
soul, in this life or in the life to come.

Secondly that the priest, and ministre of this sacrament in gyuinge thanks
to God, gives thanks in his own name, and in the name of the whole
congregation wherefore the people must lift up their minds, and herke^ to the
things, that are spoken of the priest, that they may praise, and thank God
together with the priest. For in this giuinge of thanks, as Chrysostom well
warns, all things must be commune between the people, and the priest, where
unto all men that be present, are called, when the preiste says, lift up
your hertes. Item let us give thanks to our Lord God. And they promise the
same, when they Answer, we have unto the Lord. It is worthi and right. For in
old time as S. Cipriane testifies, when the priest, or ministre said, lift
up your hertes, the people answered, we have unto the Lord. But all these
things must be done before the Lord in spirit, and truth. Wherefore the
people must with all dyligence, join they^ minds with the words of the
priest, tha^ with one heart, and one mouth they may magnifi and thank God with
him. The. iii. and principal point in the Lords supper is this, that he
distributed the bread, and the cup to al, and bad al take both, that al
should eat the bread, and drink of the cup, and added. This is mi bodi, which
is given for you This is mi blood of the new Testame^te, which for you and for
many, is shed forth unto the remyssion of sins. Out of these words of the
Lord, the pastor shall teach the people with great reverence, and diligence
that this is the principal point and work in the supper of the Lord that
sacraments be distributed according to the insttitucio^ of our Lord Jesus
Christ and received with true faith in Christ, with this faith, I say, that we
certanly believe that our Lord Jesus Christ himself is here present in the
midest of us, and that he himself, though i^ be by the ministry of the
church, does truly give us his body, and blod and together althinges,
whatsoever he obtained, and deserved by the offryng of his body on the cross,
I mean remission of sins, the everlasting covenant of Gods grace, the blessed
adoption of God, that we be the sons, and heirs of God, and ^is coheires. Out
of these things, y^ pastors ^hal teach, and warn the people with all possible
^iligence. First that they come to these most deuyne mysteries, not as the
common sort were wont to do heretofore, with cold minds far from a faithful,
and religious consideration of the things, that be here executed, but that
they sterre up them selves, and come with a godly burning desire of Christ
flamynge furthe with true repentance, and grief of sins, and faith fixed
upon our Lord. Further that they hear and embrace the words here of the
lord, and al gifts, as the words and gifts of salvation and everlasting life
as they be in deed. For this actio^ is a proper, and principal work of our
salvation, wherein Christ himself offceth, and gives to us, all his things,
that he was made for us, that he suffered and deserved, and according to his
name Jesus, he shows himself a savior unto us in words and deeds. Neither
is there any word, or deed of his set before us to be followed or done, that
does not properly, and effectuously make to our everlasting health, so that we
take hold of it, and use it with true faith. As in this present action of the
holy supper, he has heaped together with singular, and most feruente desire
to do us good, and has comprehended in a sum, and set before us to be known,
embraced, and enjoyed al those things, that for our salvation, he spoke,
commanded, suffered, did, and willed us to do. Wherefore when we here those
wholesome words of Christ in the holy Supper, Take, eat, drink, Surely we must
receive the Sacraments with great religion and most bounden thankfulness of
mind. And it is a great abhominatio^, to despise the Lord calling us so
gently, and so lovingly bidding us to this feast of health, and meat of
everlasting life, and not to make have most gredely to this heavenly, and
blessed banquet

Thirdly, the pastors shall warn the people, that they dout nothing but the
Lord him self is present in the myddest of them, and gives them this very
body and blood, that they ever may more fully live in him, and he in the^, and
that they may daily grow more and more into him, which is the head, and be
moved of him, as his lively, and vncorrupt members, and require of him
confidently al good things, and al evils to be taken away, and finally that
they may receive the things most abundantly, which they ask For as we
receive him in this sacrament so we receive with him al things that pertain to
the children of God.

And forasmuch, as this exhibition, and receiuyng of the body and blood of
Christ, this thing, and action is so heavenly, and divine a matter of faith,
and of the new testament, the pastors shall warn this also, that men
excludyng the judgment of their own reason, give faith simply to the Lords
words, and that they study to receive this heavenly meat, and this blessed
communion of our only savior and Lord with singular desire, and
thankfulness of mind.

Fourthly, the preachers shall diligently warn the people, that they ernestly
considre those most blessed words of the Lord, which is given for you, which
is shed forth for you and for many unto the forgeuenes of sins Item this is
the new testament in my blood or this is the blood of the new testamente. For
by this only thing, that Christ on the cross offered his holy body and blood to
the father for our sins, we be reco^siled to God and delivered from the power
of satan, and hell, being made the sons and heirs of God and the new leyge
of grace, the testamente of eternal salvation, is ordained, and confirmed
between God and us, that God will be our father also, and acknowledge us to be
his people: yea, his sons and heirs, that he will drive al evils from us,
and heap al good things upon us, both present, and to come, finally that in
the last day he will raise us from the dead, and settle us in an heavenly and
full blessed life.

The fourth thing that the Lord delivered, and did in his holy supper is
this, that he said, Do this in the remembrance of me. And he gave many other
wholesome commandments to his disciples, and exhortacions. For he taught the^,
and warned them before hand with many words, of his passion, and the fruit
that we receive by the same, of his resurrection and heavenly kingdom, of the
office, and ministry of christen men, and chiefly of their apostolic office
to preach his kingdom in all the world, and together in to it the scatered
children of God, and to confirm and further them in the same. For this cause
than the preachers shall warn diligently, as often as this sacrament is
ministered, that they must studiously stir up, and celebrated the remembrance
of Christ by godly, and diligente handelynge, and preaching of the Gospel,
whereby they shall faithfully declare to the people, how necessary it was for
us that the son of God should take our flesh, and with his death deliver us
from eternal death, and the terannye of Satan, and how great benifites he
obtained, and gave us, and daily gives us thoought his death, and
resurrection, that is to wit remission of sins, the spirit of adoption, a
new, and blessed power of living, the felloshippe of resurrection unto a
very heavenly, divine, and everlasting life. All which things must be
must religiously preached, and considered in the holy supper.

Wherefore in this must hollie action the doctrine of the Gospel, and the law
must be diligently beaten in, that the Lords death and resurrection, and al
things, that he was made for us, that he did and suffered, that he obtained for
us, and performed and daily perfourmeth, be must studyously preached and that
the remembrance of him be fully, and perfectly celebrated, to this end that
our faith in him, and new and blessed life in the lame, may be ever confirmed,
and augmented. Therefore we use yet of the custom of the old church, that
open, and principal sermons be made a boute this ministracion of the holy
mass.

The pastors, and teachers of co^gregacions shall often and faithfully warn,
and enstructe the people of all these things. So the chosen of God shall easly
suffer them selves to be led away from al abuses of this most reverend and
holy sacrament and be brought again to the true, and wholesome use of the
same. For the sheep of Christ know the voice of their shepeherde, and follow
him hertely. This manner surly can not be obscure, or uncertain to they in
that savor any thing of Christ. All christian Doctrine consists herein,
and is grounded hervpon, that men be taught to keep all those things, that
our Lord Jesus Christ commanded, as the father him self witnessed of him
from heaven, saying, This is my well-beloved son, here him. And he says of
himself to the Apostles, al power in heaven, and earth is given to me, teach
and make all the heathen my disciples, baptize them in the name of the father,
and the son, and the holy ghost, and teach them to keep al these thsnges
that I have commanded you.

But it is evident that this our only master, and Lord, instituted the
sacrament of thanckes gyuinge with these words, and commended it unto us. Do
this in the remembrance of me, meaning that, that he himself did, and that,
that the Evangelists Matthew, Marcke, Luke, and Paul clearly describe unto
us, as we showed before.

Who is he than, which being well admonished hereof, will not conclude
furthwith that al they that will christianely, and holesomely handle this
sacrament, must consider and follow (as S. Ciprian very godly warns) not
that, that some other has done before us, no not what the hole world does, or
thyncketh to be done, but what Christ the Lord did, and commanded to be done,
which is before al things, which is the maker and redemer of the world, nether
only the highest among us, but also our only master, and teacher, and finaly
they must further consider that all they, which dare other wise administer
this sacrament, do administer it unworthily, that is to say: other wise than it
be comes and they do make them selves gyltie of the body, and blood of the
Lord. The fautes that we have committed heretofore in this most holy mystery,
using it otherwise, than the Lord commanded, the Lord has mercifully forgiven
unto his, which have put al their trust in him, and his merit, and not in the
work of the sacrament other mynistred, or received But we to whom the lord
has given sure knoledge of his institucio^, and commandment shall not be
pardonned, if we neglect the thing that Christ did in this sacrament, and
commanded us to do preferring that before the Lords institution, that has been
brought in by men swaruynge from his word, and co^mau^dme^t. Before al things
the pastors must labor to take out of men's minds that false, and wicked
opinion, whereby men think communly, that the priest in masses offreth up
Christ our Lord to God the father, after that (...) ^^at with his intention
and prayer he (...) Christ to become a new, and acceptable sacryfice to the
father for the salvation ^^ ^en, applies and communicates the (...) of the
passion of christ and of the saving ^^^rifice, whereby the lord him self
offered h^^^^lfe to the father a sacrifice the cross, to them, that receive not
the same with their own faith

For to make men partakers in the supper of the Lord, of the sacrifice, and
merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, the minister can help no more, than that
first he exsibite, and ministre the holy supper as the Lord instituted, and
than faithfully declare, and celebrate religiously the ministry of it, the
redemption, and communion of our Lord Jesus Christ and further more dispense
the sacraments, whereby he may stir up, and confirm in them, that be
present, true faith in Christ, by which faith every man may him self
apprehend, and receive the merit, and sacrifice of Christ as given unto him.
Fynaly that he pray for such faith to all men in the name of the hole
congregation, and of his own charity. For he, that without his own faith
either ministers this supper of the Lord, or is present at it, or receives
it, pulls damnacion upon him self, and is made gyltie of the Lor^s body, and
blond.

But it is plain, that (...) every where in this error, that they believe, if
they be present when the priest says mass, and take part of the mass only
with their presence, that this very work and sacrifice of the preiste
whereby he offer^^^ the son to the father for their sins, that (...)
sets him before the father with his (...) prayer, is of such efficacy,
that it turns al evil from them, and brings them al felicite of body and
soul, though they continue in all manner of sins, and mischeues against God,
and their conscience, and nether perceive or receive the sacraments out of
the mass but only behold the outward action, as a spectacle, and honor it
with bowynge of knes, and other gestures, and signs of veneracion.

But what more spightfull shame can be done to gods majesty, and to the
king of glory Jesus Christ, than that this most divine sacrament, which he
himself instituted, and commended unto us, that throught it we should be
confirmed in faith toward him, and should dye more, and more to sins, and
live more fully in him, is so perverted, that of gods institucio^, it is made
a plain invention of man, and such one, that men trust most in it, against
God and our Lord Christ. For through this work of the mass, they are made
more careless, and stronger in their sins, and contempt of Christ, thinking
that, by that ceremony the wrath of God is turned from them, and all other
euilles. That the grace of God is gotten to them, and all blisfulnes, though
through their whole life, they be against God, and abuse all things against
God and that without any earnest thought of repentance. Wherefore the
preachers shall enstruct the people with al diligence of this ungodly trust
of the work and sacrifice of a priest, and they shall call them from the same
by all manner of ways.

And where as the holy fathers call the ministration of this Sacrament a
sacrifice and oblation, and write sometime that the priest in administrynge the
supper, offers Christ, let the preachers know, and teach other when need
shall be, that the holy fathers by the name of a sacrifice, understood not
application, which was devised a great while after the fathers, and preuaised
with other abuses, but a solemn remembrance of the sacrifice of Christ, as
Augustine expouneth it.

For while the supper of the Lord is ministered, as the Lord instituted it,
the sacrifice of Christ is celebrated, and exhibited therein through the
preaching of his death and distribution of the sacraments, that al they,
which rightly use the holy supper, receive the fruit of this sacrifice. The
pastors shall warn moreover that it is no small abuse of this Sacrament, that
it is wont to be set forth, and carried about to be gased upon and to be
worshypped with gold, and silver, and other such carnal ornaments, and that
with this opinion, as though this cariynge about, and showing forth, and
outward worshppyng of the Sacrament were able to turn away all inco^modities,
though they do not once think of true repentance of sins, and faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore we will in any wise, that the pastors hereafter
set not forth, nor carry about the Sacrament with like diligence they shall
teach the people, that the Lord instituted, and commended to all that believe
in him both parts of the Sacrament, the cup no less then the bread, that in
them they might receive his body and blood. For thus it is in Paul, I
received of the Lord that, that I delivered also unto you. But the Apostle
delivered to the whole congregation of the Corhinthians the communion as well of
the cup, as of the bread. Wherefore some make a rash, and a light argument,
that the Lord in his supper gave the whole Sacrament to his Apostles, which
were all priests, and that we can not gather thereof, that the cup must be
also given to the lay me^. For in this Sacrament, says S. Chrysostom, and
that out of the testimonies of the holy scripture, the priests have nothing
more, then the lay men, but all things are commune to both, and one bread of
the Lord, and one cup, is set before al men together, and equally. Thus
the Lord instituted, thus the old church observed always. Therefore none
other thing could be instituted of me^, neither did the fathers ever
institute any other thing. But in these later times, when the governors of
congregations did utterly neglecte their office, this abuse crepte in
secretly, that in the holy supper the Lords bread only should be
distributed, whether priests or lay men did communicate.

But that all the abuses, that have crepte into this Sacrament may be utterly
taken away, and rooted up, by the true use of this Sacrament, which the Lord
him self commanded, the pastors and preachers shall diligently warn, and
exhort the people, that as often as they come together to the holy supper of
the Lord with the brethren, they give them selves wholly to the Lord, to be
his disciples, that they think that all his words be spoken unto them, and
that they believe them certeynely, that they fervently desire the communion of
the Lord to be increased in them, and that they receive the same offered in
the Sacrament with a faithful and thankeful mind, briefly that they ever go
forward in the faith of Christ, and in the whole new life with Christ,
neither stand there as dispisers of so great gifts, which in the holy
supper be offered to all that are present, nor make to them selves an hurtful
spectacle of a blessed teaste. Surely he that is not meet to receive the
Sacrament, is not meet neither to pray with the congregation, as S.
Chrysostom does rightly gather. This Sacrament is not only the meat of the
stronger, but also the medicine of the weak, only let no man receive it,
which sticks in sins against his conscience. For he that continues in
such sins, will not live in Christ the Lord, he refuses his communion in
deed, and utterly renounceth Christ and his kingdom. Wherefore he must absteyne
from those Sacraments in which the communion of Christ is exhibited. And
such stick also in the condemnation of hell, and have no part in the kingdom
of Christ. Wherefore they can neither be present, nor ought to be present at
the holy supper, nor pray with the congregation. For no man that determines
to continue in open sins, and in the despite of God, can call upon God his
father with true faith, and pray for the sanctification of his name, the
coming of his kingdom, and obedience of his will. But they that repent them
selves of their sins, that desire the grace of God, and reteyne the
communion, and life in Christ our Lord, and wish the same to be increased in
them, neither be commanded by the congregation to absteyne, these men I say,
may much lift up, and conforte them selves with faith, and kendle them
selves with the desire of a new life, through the participation of Sacraments
at every supper, whereat they be present.

Therefore they ought not in any wise to despice so great bountuousnes of
Christ the Lord, being freely offered to them, but (...) there receive it with
most fervent (...) and great thankefulnes, remembryng (...) blessed word of
the Lord alluryng^ (...) to him. Come unto me al ye that (...). Item, take,
eat, this is my body. (...) of this al, this is my blood. etc. (...) this
meat and drink, he truly refreshes and receives us unto everlasting life.

The fathers in the primitive church which observed the Apostles tradition,
esteemed so much these words of Christ, that they excommunicated them, that
were present at the Lords supper, and would not be part takers of the
sacraments with the rest.

For this cause was that ordained, that we read, distinct. ij. of the
co^stitutions, when the consecration is ended, let al communicate, they that
will not, let them not come into the temple. For so the Apostles ordained, and
the holy Roman church holds.

Lo this decree speaks of one consecration, and it requires that al, that be
present, do communicate, and that under the pain of excommunication. It
witnesses also that the Apostles so constituted, which had received it of the
Lord. Item that the Roman church does so hold, which thing also al other
co^gregations observed as many as had ^eteined thordinau^ce of the lord, and
of thapostles.

This is the cause why S. Chrysostom so sore rebuked the^ which in his
congregation tarried in the temple at the celebration of the Lords supper, and
yet did not communicate, and he said that they stood at the Lords supper
vnsha^fastly, and stubburnly, and not without the dispite of Christ, and
contempt of his so great bountuousnes, which he offers us in the holy supper.

For they that be not the me^bres of Christ neither of true repe^tau^ce, and
grief of their sins, seek renuinge of life in Christ, but will continue in
their sins willingly, or have offended the congregation of Christ with so
grievous sins, that except they first repent and approve them selves with a
better life they ca^ not come to the Lords board, al these whiles the Lords
most holy supper is ministered ought to be away, and not once to behold the
Sacrament of the Lord, as S. Chrysostom with great gravity warns and that
out of the deed, and words of the Lord, which as he him self did, so he
commanded that this supper should not be celebrated, but with his disciples,
with such I say, which have given them selves to his word, which desire
remission of sins and salvation out of true repentance, and grief of
sins, which be made part takers of the new Testament, and be the sons of
God. Al which things, as we showed before, are co^prehe^ded in the very words
of the Lord.

As the pastors then, must deligently teach and dissuade them, which with
the rest of the congregation, can not communicate, because they stick in open
sins, that they be not present at the holy supper, and testify unto them,
that if they stand at the supper with such a mind, they do spite unto
Christ, and that it shall be damnation unto them. So they must also
diligently warn, and exhort them, which with a good conscience may be present
at the supper, that is to say, which truly believe in Christ the Lord, that
they receive the Sacraments with other members of Christ.

But forasmuch as this institution of the Lord, that all they, which be
present at the same supper of the Lord, should communicate of one bread and
cup, his body and blood, is to much out of use, and covered a great while
since, through commune ignorance, it shall be needful to call men back
again treateably, and gently to the observation of this tradition of the
Lord, and they must beware, that the minds of the simple, which nevertheless
be the true disciples of the Lord, and are entangled in no mischiuous, and
wicked acts, for the which they should be restrained from the Lords bourde,
be stricken, and troubled with sore rebukes, or untimely thrustynge unto the
receyuynge of the Sacrament. For there be not a few, which though they can
not thorowlie understand this mystery, and the perfect use of Sacraments,
yet they have such faith in Christ, that they can pray with the
congregation, and be somewhat edified in faith, through holy doctrine and
exhortations, that be wont to be used, about the holy supper, and the
ministration thereof, yea and they may be taught, and moved by little and
little to a perfecter knowledge of this mystery, and an oftener use of the
Sacraments even by this, that they be present at the holy supper, which
absteyne not from the Lords supper of any contempt of the Sacraments, which
they acknowledge in them selves, but of a certain weakness of men, and
preposterous reverence of the Sacrament. These men the pastoures must
fatherly, and gently teach, and enstructe daily of these mysteries and bring
them fair and softly to a perfecter knowledge, and use of the same,
declarynge diligently, and printynge in them the things, that we have taught
in this place concerning the true, and perfect administration, and use of this
Sacrament, and they must not fray them away, and drive them from the hole
action of the supper, while they have any hope of them, that they will go
forward in the study and communion of Christ.

At what time the supper of the Lord must be celebrated.
Therefore that this most holy Sacrament may be better known among al godly
men, and that the true use of it may be more easily restored, and much
esteemed, we will that it be ministered, as soon as the people of every
congregation for the most part be well enstructe out of Gods word of the
true use of it, only upon the sundays and holy days, or upon such days
when great companies assemble together to commune prayer. This thing was
observed in the time of the fathers also in greater, and much more populous
co^gregations, then we have. For the Lord instituted not this Sacrament unto
us for a thing to be beholded, but he commanded it to be ministered, for the
commune and wholesome receyuyng of his body and blood, which things all the
members ought equally to receive in every great holy assemble from one table
and one altar. Hereof S. Ciprian among other alleges this cause why we
celebrate this holy supper in the morning, whereas Christ did it after supper,
because, says he, that when we suppe we can not call the commune people to our
feast, that we may celebrate the truth of the Sacrament, all the brotherhode
being present. These be the words of Ciprian, which he took out of the
doctrine of Paul. i. Cor. x. which we alleged before. For the truth of this
Sacrament is, as the Apostle teaches in the same place, that all we, which
are the members and body of Christ should receive the body and blood out of
the same Sacrament. Wherefore the fathers judged that this supper is not truly
and rightly celebrated, except the whole brotherhode be present, I mean this
commune supper. For the holy bishops did sometimes celebrate the holy
supper privately, that is to say, the whole congregation not being present,
sometimes with strangers, and sometimes with the better and feruenter sort of
brethren, and that in their peculiar prayinge places, and sometimes also in
private houses with sick folk, of whose communion we will speak hereafter.
And these the holy fathers called private masses, not because that in them the
Sacraments were distributed to no body, but because they were distributed to
few, and the whole congregation not being present, and that even as it were
in a private place. For the holy fathers celebrated no supper without
distribution of the Sacraments. For they doubted not but that, that did
utterly fight with the Lords Institution.

Of the preparation to the supper of the Lord.
Saying that the Lords supper, as we said before, ought not to be celebrated
but with his disciples, and for as much as the ministers must be faithful
disposers of the mysteries of God, and must take great head that they cast not
an holy thing before dogs, and pearls before swyne, we will that the
pastors admit no man to the Lords supper, which has not first offered him
self to the^, and after that he has first made a confession of his sins
being Catechized he receive absolution according to the Lords word. And that
there may be a certain and appointed time for the doing hereof, I mean that
they which shall communicate be prepared, and sanctified to the communion of
Christ with an holy instruction, and prayer, let the pastors procure that the
people be called together in the temple at euentyde the day before the
celebration of the Lords supper, and let them make a preparation, and
sanctification unto the Lords bourde, after this sort. Wheree clerks shall
be, or scholars, let them in the mean ceason, while the people come together
sing a Psalm, or two with a dominical antiphone or Hymn, which yet we will
have to be pure, that is to say, diffenting in no part from the holy
scripture. To these let them add the song of the Lords mother, Magnificat,
and some convenient Collecte.

Afterward when the people be come together, they shall sing a Psalm in the
Douche tongue. And then the pastor or ministre, to whom the office of this
preparation is committed, shall read some place of the Lords supper, out of
the Evangelists or out of Paul Chap. x. xi. Of the first to the Corhinthi.
or out of the Lords sermon John. vi. For though the Lord speak not in that
place of the Sacrament of the supper which he had not yet made, nevertheless he
preaches of the true eating of his body, and drynkyng of his blood, for the
exhibition whereof he afterward instituted the holy supper. Out of such
lessons the ministers shall diligently teach the people, to what use the Lord
ordained his supper, and how we may receive it holsomely, after this sort.

Ashorte institution or sermon of the Lords supper.
Forasmuch as we entende to keep tomorowe the most holy supper of our
savior Christ, by his healpe, for the celebration of a blessed remembrance
of him, and confirmation of our faith, first it is convenient to declare with
few words, and call to our minds the mystery of this right divine Sacrament.

Before al things then the Lord offers unto us his flesh, and his blood,
and bids us to take the same, and affirming that we shall not have life, but
shall remain in everlasting death, except we eat his flesh and drink his
blood. Let us remember and acknowledge that our flesh and blood, that is to
say, our whole nature is through wickedness so lost, and adjudged to eternal
death by the just wrath of God, that of our selves we can never obtain
everlasting life, and the inheritance of the heavenly kingdom.

This remembrance, and acknowledging of our destruction ought vnterly to
humble and cast us down before the Lord, and to cut our hertes with such
repentance of sins, that we should be pricked forth, and enflamed to seek,
and receive with sure faith and greatly desire the grace of God offered to us
in the word and sacraments, and the restitution, and renuinge of our selves,
through the communion of Christ, and wholesome participation of his flesh and
blood. Furthermore let us diligently considre, that the eternal word of God,
the son of God al. mighty to deliver us out of this meserie, was made flesh,
was made our brother, that there might be some holy flesh, and holy blood,
that is to say, a very heavenly, and divine man, by whom the flesh and
blood of all us might be restored, and sanctified, which thing is then
brought to pass, when we truly eat his flesh and drink his blood John. vi.
Here it is meet that we be moved the more to wondre at, and to embrace with
certeyner faith and gredier will in this only begotten son of God our
savior, the exceadynge, and unspeakable love of God toward us, which gave
his son unto us, that beleuyng in him, we should not perish, as we were
borne, and as we deserved but have everlasting life, which he deserved, and
gives unto us.

Thirdly let us acknowledge, and firmly believe that the Lord Jesus truly
offers unto us this his sanctifiyng flesh, and blood in his holy supper
with visible signs of bread, and wine by the ministry of the congregation,
and exibiteth the same unto the remission of sins, to be meat of everlasting
life, to confirm the covenant of Gods adoption, and of everlasting life, for
so be his words. Wherefore they ca^ not deceive, and they shall remain when
heaven and earth pass away, and they truly exhibit, and give unto us the
things that they preach, so that we apply true fayeth unto them. Take,
says he, eat, this is my body, that is given for you. Item, drink of this
all, this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed forth for you,
and for many unto the remission of sins, we must receive these words with
true faith, and doubt nothing, but that the Lord, when we celebrate the
holy supper after his institution is in the middeste of us, and offers him
self unto us, by the ministry of the congregation, which he instituted for
the same purpose, and delivers his body, and blood, and all his merits,
and satisfaction for our sins, which he performed, his body, and his
blood being offered on the cross, remission of sins, and the grace of the
father, and the right of the Testament of the everlasting couenaunte, of
adoption and communion unto the life of God, so that the bread that we break
in the holy supper is truly even to us the communion of his body, and the
cup at which we bless the communion of his blood. Therefore let us ever
religiously considre, why the Lord does often exhibit unto us, this holy,
and wholesome communion of himself in the sacrament, namely for this purpose
that he may bring us daily in to the knowledge of our sins, and more ernest
repentance, that we may desire more fervently remission of the same by him,
and receive it with perfecter faith, and gredier minds, and so be more
confirmed, and set for ward in a new life thorough the true communion of
him, that so we may daily more and more abide, and live in him, and he in us,
and be more fully his dodie and members and he our head, which thing we
profess when we all receive the communion of him, in his sacrament, so being
parttakers of his body, and blood, as we in common be parttakes of one brade,
and cup.

Finally we must pray, and labor also, to receive these heavenly gifts with
true faith, and great reverence, and that we celebrate the wholesome
remembrance of the Lord with godly joy, and pleasant thankfullnes, and that
we give up our selves, and all ours to him, and testify the same with
collacions, and alms for the use of the poor lyberally, and according to
every man's power, finally that we ever praise, and magnify Christ, in all
our words, and worckes for these so great benifites, for his incarnacion
whereby he was made our head, and brother, for his most bitter death, whereby
he satisfied for our sins, for his resurrection, and ascencio^ in to heaven
and heavenly kingdom, which he administreth at the right hand of the father,
and makes us perfect, and absolute in his life being quickened with his
spirit and set in heavenly things, which life he has given in the life
of God, and it is an everlasting life, for this wholesome communion of his
body and blood, whereby we are confirmed in this same life of God, and are
set forward, and ever finyshed up. For all which things we must chiefly
give thanckes in the communion of this supper. And forasmuch as our God is such
one, as allows not wickedness, nether can all they stand before him, which
work iniquity it is necessary that we know, that those men must not be
admitted to the supper of the Lord, that is to say, to his communion, which
live without true faith, and love, by whom the glory of God is manifestly
blemisched, and his congregation is offended, I mean all unbelievers, and
manifest Idolaters, which call upon, and worship saints departed, Angels
or other creatures, which honor painted, or graven stocks. Item all
enchaunters, and sothsaiers, which will preserve catel, and other things
against perils, with their consecrations, yea, and I mean those to, which
believe shuch enchaumentes, and the manifest despicers, and blasphemers of God,
the mockers of gods word, and sacraments. Item al those, which at appointed
times wildely continue in neglectinge sermons, and other open exercises of the
congregation, which obey not according to gods commandment their
parents, ordinarye officers, and masters, but speak evil of the^, and rail
upon the^, do the^ spite, and resist them seditiously, and stubburnly, which
bring not up their children, family. and shuch as they have charge of, nor
enstructe them to godlynes, honesty, and justice. Furthermore I mean
murderers, and all those, which willingely continue in hatred of their
brethren, in braulinges, and shedinge of their neygboures blood. Item al
whoremongers, aduo^^erers, and Dronkerdes, al thieves, vserers, raueners,
disers, unlawful gainers, exercisers of faulse marchandises, al those likewise
which live idely without a lawful excuse, and burden other, al ilspeakers,
liers, periuers, backbyters, and which confess not the truth, and
righteousness, and confirm not the same with their testimonies, where they are
bound to do it by reasone of their vocacion. All these fellows, as long as
they live, and continue in such sins, nether have a true purpose to amend
their lives, may in no wise be admitted to the holy supper of the Lord,
saying that they be restrained, and excluded from thens by God, by his own
word.

Another exhortacion.

Forasmuch as deareli beloved in the lord we will celebrate to morrow by gods
grace, the most holy supper of our Lord Jesus Christ, where in he has given
us his flesh for meat, and his blood for drink, to confirm our faith, and
very christane life: it is convenient, that every man try him self, with
great diligence as S. Paul exhorts us. For this sacrament was given of the
Lord for singular co^solacion, and comfort to wretched, and afflicted
consciences, which do ernestly feel, and confess their sins, which be
stricken with the fear of the wrath of god, and of death, and hongre, and
thirst the righteousness of God. But if every one of us will examen our
selves, as S. Paul teaches, we shall find none other thing, but all manner
of horrible sins, and everlasting death, which we have deserved thorought
our sins. For the reward of sin is death from which we can by no means
deliver our selves. Wherefore our Lord Jesus Christ taking pity upon us, was
made man for our sins, that he might fulfill the law, and the whole will of
God for us, and procure our salvation, and that he himself might suffer death,
and all that we had deserved thorough our sins, only for us and our
redemption. Which thing that we might firmly believe, and that thorough faith
we might joyfully live after his will, wha^ supper was ended, he took bread,
gave thanks, and brake it, saying, take, eat, this is my body, that is
given for you, that is to say, that I am made man, and further whatsoever I
do, and suffer, all that is yours and it is given to you, and is done for your
salvation. For the testificacion, and confirmacion whereof, and that you may
daily a hide and live more, and more in me, and I in you I give my body unto
you to be meat, and meat of everlasting life. After the same manner he took
the cup also, saying, Take, drink of this all, this is the cup of the new
testament in my blood, which is shed forth for you, and for many, unto
remission of sins. As often as ye shall do this, do it in the remembrance of
me, that is to say, saying that I have now taken the charge of you, and have
translated your sins upon me, I will deliver miselfe unto death for the^, I
will shed mi blood, I will deserve grace, and remission of sins for you, and
I will set up a new testament, wherein sins shall be perdoned, and all
remembrance of the^ shall be abolished. For a pledge, and witness of al these
things, and to confirm, and further my life in you, I give you my blood to
drink. He than that eats of this bread after this sort, and dryncketh of
the cup, and firmly believes these words, which he hears of the Lord,
and signs, which he receives, eats truly, and holesomely the flesh of
Christ, and drinks his blood, and more fully receives in to him self hole
God, and man, with all his merits and favor, where with the father embraces
him, with the right and participation of euerlainge life, he abides in Christ
the Lord, and the Lord in him, and he shall live for ever. Let us tha^ god li
recompe^se these things with our selves and let us confirm, and ster up our
faith in him let us celebrate the remembrance of him worthily, let us most
studoyusly in all our words, and deeds exalte his death, resurreccion,
heavenly glory, and kingdom, let us rejoice in our own behalf that this
son of God died for our sins, rosse again forour instificacion, ascended
into heaven, and reigns at the right hand of the father, furthermore let us
couragiousli every one of us take up our cross, and valiantly follow this our
captain, and love one another according to his commandment, as he loved us.
For all we are one bread, and one bodi, because we be parttakers of one bread
and one cup.

After this prayer, there shall a prayer be made for all the necessites of the
congregation and cheifely for those men, which shall communicate the next day.

And when the people have ended their secret prayer, the minister shall
conclude the preparacion with this collecte.

Almighty everlasting God, heauealye father, because we can please the only
in thy dear son, sanctify our bodies, and souls, and grant us, that to
morrow we may receive the wholesome communion of him, in his holy supper with
a godly, and faithful desire, and all thanckefulnes, that being confirmed
again conceruynge thy perpetual mercy, and love toward us, and ever goinge
forward in a new life, we may live unto the and serve the thorough our Lord
Jesus Christ with more fear, and study, to the praise of thy name, and
profit of thy people. A men.

How the Lords supper must be celebrated
When the people be come to gether unto this ministration, for as much as it is
agreeable to godliness, that as often as we appear before the lord, before
althinges we should acknowledge, and confess our sins, and pray for
remission of the same, the minister, which shall administer the Lords supper,
when he shall come to the altar shall make a confession in the name of the
whole congregation, and that in the douche tongue, which al may understand,
after this sort.

Almightye everlasting God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the maker
of all things, the judge of all men, we acknowledge, and we lament, that we
were conceived and borne in sins, and that therefore we be prone to al evils,
and abhor from all good things, that we have also transgressed thy holy
commaundmentes with out end, and measure in despisinge the, and thy word, in
distrustinge thy aid, in trusting our selves, and the world in wicked
studies, and works, where with we have most greuousli offended thy majesty,
and hurted our neighbors. Therefore we have more, and more buried our
selves in to eternal death. And we are sorry for it with all our hertes, and we
desire pardone of the for all the things that we have committed against the, we
call for thy help against sin dwellinge in us, and Satan the kendler
thereof keep us that we do nothing hereafter against the, and cover the
wickedness, that remaneth in us, with the righteousness of they son and
repress it in us with thy spirit, and at length purdge it clean out. Have
mercy upon us most gentle father, thorough thy son our Lord Jesus Christ.
Give, and increase thy holy spirit in us, which may teach us to acknowledge
our sins truly, and thoroughly, and to be pricked with a liuelye repentance
of the same, and with true faith to apprehend, and retain remission of them in
Christ our Lord, that dyinge to sins dailye more and more, we may serve, and
please the in anewe life to the glory of thy name, and edifiynge of thy
congregation. For we acknowledge that thou justly requirest these things of
us, wherefore we desire to perform the same. Vouchsafe thou o father of
heaven, which have given us a will, to grant us also that we may study to do
those things with all our hertes, which pertain to our health, thorough our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Hear ye the Gospel. John. iij.

God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, that al which
believe in him, should have life euerlainge. Or. i. Timo. i.

This is a sure sainge, and worthey of all embrachynge that Jesus Christ came
in to this world to save sinners. Or Johan. iij.

The father loves the son, and has given althinges in to his hands, he
that believes in the son, has life everlasting. Or Act. x.

All the prophets bear witness unto Christ, that all that believe in him,
receive remission of their sins thorought him. Or. i. Johan. ij.

My litel children if any have sinned, we have o just advocate with the
father, Jesus Christ and he is an attomement for our sins. When the pastor
has showed to The people one of the said Gospels He shall say further.

Because our blessed Lord has left this power to his congregation, that it
may absolve them from sins, and restore them in to the savor of the
heavenly father, which being repentance for their sins, do truly believe in
christ the lord, I the minister of christ and the congregation, declare and
pronounce remission of sins, the favor of God, and life everlasting,
thorought our Lord Jesus Christ, to all the^, which be sorry for their sins,
which have true faith in Christ the Lord and desire to opproue them selves unto
him

After this where clerckes or scholars shall be, they shall sing some what in
latin taken out of the holy scriptures, for an entrance or begininge.

After that they shall singe kyrie eleson, and gloria in excelses, but because
that kyrie eleson, is a common prayer of the congregation and gloria in
excelses is also a common thanks giving, let the people sing both in douch

After this song, he that shall execute the holy ministry, shall recite a
collect in douch but yet so that all the people may well understand it. For
therefore the ministre speaks this sentence to the people, The Lord be with
you, And, let us pray, and the people answers, And with thy spirit,
signifiinge thereby that they also pray together with the minister. For so
Chrysostom interprets this saiynge.

And because this must be a common prayer of the whole congregation, it is
called a collet, for that, that a prayer gathered of the wyshes of all that be
prese^te, is offered to god by the minister, or because it is a prayer of the
congregation gathered together, and prainge together unto the Lord, But the
purer collectes, and more co^sona^t to the holy scriptures must be chosen out,
of which sort, we will cause some to be set forth After the collectes there
shall follow, according to the custoume, a lesson of an epistle, which shall be
red in such a place (the reader turninge his face to the people) that it may
be heard, and understood of the whole co^gregacio^. Where fore it shall be also
red in douch, because that lesson pertayneth to the instruction, and admonition
of all the people.

After the epistle, where clerckes be let alleluia be song in latin, or a
graile, or sequence, if they have any pure, and some douch song. Than let the
Gospel be red in douche to the people, which reading, an interpretacion, and
ordinary sermon, shall follow forth with, and after the sermon, a prayer for all states of men and necessites of the congregation after this sort.

Almighty everlasting God, and merciful father, which by thy dear son our
Lord Jesus Christ, and his Apostles co^maundest, that we should come before
the in his name and did promise, that thou would mercifully give us,
whatsoever agreinge together we should ask in his name, we beseech the by thy
son, our only savior, first that thou will mercifully forgive us al our
sins, and iniquites, which we acknowledge and confess here in thy sight,
and that thou will fauourally turn away from us thorough the blood and
satisfaction of thy son our mediator, thy most just wrath, which we have
deserved thorough so manifold transgression of thy commandments. But
confirm thou in us thy holy spirit, that we may holy give over our selves
to the obedience of the now and ever, that calinge upon the always for our
selves, and for other we may obtain thy grace, and help.

We pray therefore cheifely for thy congregacions, deliver them from a^olues,
hired servants which either spoil, and devour thy sheep miserabli, or
tratrouously for sake them, and destroy them, and proudly reioise, and delight
themselves in their destruction. Give the^ good and faithful ministers, and
pastors, and preserve the same. Increase thy holy spirit in all persons,
which be at this holy ministry, that therein they may faithfully serve
the, and with the profit of thy flock, that thy scatered sheep, may
thorough thy gospel be gathered to thy deareso^ne, the high, and only true
shepeherde and bishop of our souls Jesus Christ, from all straynge either
of errors, or of sins, breifely that they may be brought again to the true
communion of him, that there may be one flock, and one shepeherde.

So we pray the also holy father for thy servants the ministers of civil
gouernau^ces, for our most gracious emperor, and king for all other kings
princes, and magistrates. And specially we pray the for our most reverend
archebisoppe, and right excellent prince, for his consel, and officers for the
consel, and magystrates of this city. Give all these thy holy spirit, that
they may truly know, and embrace Christ thy son, to whom thou have given
al power, and al judgment in heaven, and in earth, and that according to their
strength they may so serve his kingdom, that they may so govern us, which
are in deed subjects to them, but be the creatures of thy hand, and the sheep
of thy pastures, that in this place, and every where we may live a peacible,
and quiet life with all godliness, and honesti, and being delivered fro al fear
of our enemies, we may serve the in all righteousness, and holiness we pray also
heavenly father for all those, moreover, which yet pertayne not to thy
kyngedome, cause the light of thy gospel to shine unto them also, draw the^ to
they son our savior, that beleuinge in him they be saved with us. And as
touching them, whom thou haste some what drawn unto him, so that they grant
him to be their savior, and the savior of al men, but never theles they have
not yet bound them selves to al obedience of the gospel, increase in these the
faith, and knowledge of they son, which thou have given the^, that they may
thoroughlye give over their selves unto the obedience of him, and of his
congregation, and that they may magnify the in the same thorugh out al their
life with godly sayings, and doings.

Furthermore we pray the father, mercyful God, the great conforter of the
afflicted, for all those, whom thou chastisest with the cross, and some
affliction, and exercisest unto patience with poverty, exile, fetters, infamy
disceases, and other calamites, and mischaunces. Grant to them, that they may
acknowledge thy fatherly and medicinable hand, under which they may humble
the^ selves with all their hertes. Conforte their minnes with faith, and
confidence of thy mercy, which moderateth all things, yea even aduersites
for the health of thine, and deliver them from al evils. Grant to us also,
that thorough their correction, and punishment, we may acknow^ege that we have
deserved things much more grievous, that we may amend our lives in time,
before worse plages happen unto us. Last of al, we pray the eternal God,
heaue^lye father, for us, which here come together in thy sight, to thy word,
prayer and sacraments, lighten the eyes of our mind, grant us to considre
with perfect faith, that we have a nature corrupted from the beginning, that
our flesh and blood cannot enjoy thy kingdom, but only commit sin, and delerue
eternal death, and increase the same destruction with daily sins, and that
thou most merciful father of thy unmeasurable mercy did look upon us, and
sendest into this world thy eternal word, thy son our flesh and brother,
that he might deliver us by his death, from this our destruction, and restore
us to thy Image and praise of thy name, that thou deliuerest him to the cross
and death, and that he gladly offered himself unto the in the cross for our
sins, and satisfied for the same through love and pity of us, that he
reconsiled us unto the, and more over that he offered unto us his body and
blood to be meat and drink, that we may live in him, and he in us. Grant
heavenly father, that we may consider and apprehend al these things with true
and lively faith now, and throughout al our lives, that deniyng our selves, we
may utterly refuse the folysh and blind judgment of our reason, and repress
naughty and noisome lusts, and wholly give over our selves to him, thy dear
son our Lord, and only savior, and restorer that we seek, and receive
comfort in all things, al help, aid, and sauegarde in him only, in his
death, cross and resurrection. Now also let us receive his holy body and blood
with sincere faith, and al thank fulness, and let us ever magnify him, and the
in him, for all thy exceadyng benifites, which thou have given in making,
gouernyng, and restoryng us, for the incarnation passion and death of thy
son, whereby he purged our sins, and reconsiled us unto the, for his
resurrection, asce^sion into heaven, and heavenly governance, whereby he
restored us unto the, and moves, and renueth us unto al thy pleasure.

Finally for this most ample benifite that he here delivered him self unto us
to be meat and drink unto eternal life, that so thy divine name may be daily
more and more sanctified by us and in us, thy kingdom may be established and
spredde abroad by us unto other, that all things may be done among us in the
earth according to thy will with such ferue^tie, and cherefulnes, as they be
done in heaven. And that these things may be done in us, give us also our
daily bread, all necessary things for our bodies prosperous health, and
peace, that we may enjoy these things unto the glory of thy name. And
forgive us our dettes, and sins which we daily commit, and mercifully
pardone us of the punishments which we have deserved, as we also in the sight
of thy majesty, do gladly, and hertely forgive all them, which have offended
us. And suffer not our tentator, the old enemy, which studieth ever to lead
us from the, and thy word to overthrow us at any time with his te^tations.
But deliver us from him, and all evil, for thou only art our God and father
thine is the kingdom, the power, and glory for ever. Amen.

An other, and a short form of prayinge.
Merciful God, heavenly father, which commaundedest us to come together in
thy name, and in the name of thy son our Lord and savior Christ, and
through the same our only Mediator to pray the for all things, the which we
desire for our selves, and for other adding a most ample promise, that we
should obtain, what soever we would ask of them, trustyng in this thy
commandment and promise, we stand in the sight of thy divine majesty, we
pray and beseech the, in the name of thy dear son, our only savior, that
thou will forgive us all our iniquities and sins, that thou will renew our
hertes with thy holy spirit, and steare up, and kendle the same, to thy son
Christ, and that for all the necessities of thy congregation and of al me^ we
may call upon the, and obtain what so ever is good for us unto the glory of
thy name.

We pray the then chiefly for thy congregations, deliver and preserve them
from al those ministers, whom thou have not sent, send them such ministers,
which with all faythfulnes, and diligence will seek thy scatered sheep, and
bring them to Christ our Lord, which is only their good shepeherde and will
study to feed them faithfully under him, that all ungodliness, heresies,
sects all naughty doctrines, and perverse service of God may be taken away,
and that in the unity of true faith, and knowledge of thy son, we may grow
and go forward to al things that please the.

So we pray the also for the Emperor, for our king, for all kings, princes,
and comune powers, and officers, and specially for our most reverend
archbishop, for his counselors, and officers for the counsel and
communaltie of this City, grant that all these may execute their office
according to thy will, that they may turn away all noisome things from
their subjects, and procure and maynteyne all good things, that being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies we may serve the with a quiet mind
in all holiness, and ryghtuousnes.

We pray furthermore merciful father for all men, as thou will be the
savior of all men, draw them to thy son, which yet perteyne not to him, and
grant that they, whom thou haste drawn to him already, may grow and be
confirmed daily more, and more in the knowledge, and love of him.

We pray also for them, whom thou chastifest with sundry miseries and
afflictions for an exemple unto us, that thou wylt conforte them, and deliver
them from al euilles and grant us that we may diligently regard thy fatherly
nurture, which thou set before us in them, considering that we have
deserved greuouser things, that in time we may judge, and amend our selves,
that it be not needful, that we be corrected, and condemned of the.

Grant also to us all, which here in thy sight come together to thy word,
prayer, alms and divine sacraments, that we may truly come together only in
thy name, and in the name of thy dear son, that we may take hold of thy
divine law, and holy Gospel with true faith, that dying daily more and more to
our selves, we may wholly give over our selves to thy dear son, our only
savior, which only through his stripes and most bitter death, has redeemed
us from sins, and eternal damnation, has restored us into thy favor, through
his resurrection and heavenly kingdom, has called us unto him self into his
congregation, and has planted us into him self unto euerlystyng life, and
made us his own members, that we should live more and more in him, and he in
us, that thy holy name may be more largely sanctified by us in all our life,
and all our doings, that thy kingdom may be amplified, by us, and in other,
that at length all things may be done among us upon earth, with such
prompnes and cherefulnes, as they be done in heaven. And for this purpose, that
we may wholly live and serve unto the, give us also our daily bread. etc. as in
the prayer before. After this solemn prayer let the whole congregation sing
the Creed. For this confession of our faith when the Gospel is heard, and
declared ought to be done of right by all men communely, as al equally heard
the Gospel, and the declaration thereof.

And because no man can hear the Gospel with faith, and know, and consider
out of the same how great love and gentleness God has showed toward us in
that, that he gave us his son, and all things with him, which shall not out
of this faith wholly give over, and bind him self to our Lord Jesus Christ,
this thing follows also out of the nature of true faith, that the faithful
study to declare this byndyng of them selves to the obedience of Christ, and
thankefulnes of their minds for so great godnes of God toward the^ selves,
which at that time they more earnestly remember with holy oblations for
Christ being needy in his litleons. Therefore while the Creed is in singing,
let the faithful offer their free oblations, every man according to the
blessyng, which he has received of the liberal and bountuous hand of God.
To which office of faith and godliness, the pastors and teachers shall
diligently exhort the people, teaching them, that these oblations ought to
follow the confession of faith and prayer even by the very nature of true
religion, neither ca^ be absent from the same, when we want not wherewyth to
declare this liberality. And that this work of religion may be conveniently
done, and rightly commended to the faithful, we will that there be some notable
place appointed in every temple, not far from the altar, which every man
may comely go to, and where the faithful may offer their oblations openly
before the whole congregation. Which after that the sacrament is ended, the
officers of the holy treasure shall gather together, and shall lay the same up
in the treasury, the congregation lokyng upon them.

It was the manner of the old church, and that taken out of Gods word, that
after the preaching of the Gospel, before the ministration of the Sacrament
should begin, not only those should be commanded to go out of the temple,
which were not admitted into the congregation, nor perteined there unto, but
they also which were yet in repentance, and not reconciled to the
congregation with open absolution of sins. Therefore because this discipline
was taught of the Lord him self, and ought of right to be called again
into the congregation, the pastors shall diligently, and often exhort those,
which live in such sins, as be against their conscience, that they leave
them and turn them selves with all their hertes unto the Lord. And after that
they be restored into the favor of God, and begin again to be the true
disciples of the Lord, then let them be present at the Lords supper, and
communicate.

But if any will not suffer them selves to be brought thereunto, and will
continue in their sins with so great contempt of God and his Christ, let the
preachers declare to such, that they may not be present at the Lords holy
supper, and if they take upon them to be present, that they do despite unto
Christ, and provoke upon them selves the must grievous judgment of God. As
for other which live not with an evil conscience, and yet receive not the
sacramet with other, or seldom receive it: the pastor must often warn them,
that it perteyneth to the duty of a christen man, to be often partaker of the
Lords bourde, and so to feed, and stre^gthen his faith, and to witness the
same unto the congregation to the edification of many, saying that God has
instituted this most holy exercise of religion for his, that they might
thereby be established and enflamed in faith, and study of godliness. Wherefore we
see that they, which neglect so great a benifite of God, become daily colder
in all godliness, and religion. For they grievously offend God through contempt
of his bountuousnes, and they hurt the congregation very sore with that evil
exemple, and moreover they make the^ selves guilty of the Lords body and
blood, abhorryng this meat and drink of everlasting life, so irreligiously
and so unthankfully.

But forasmuch as both the knowledge of this mystery, and moreover all the
discipline of the congregation, is so much gone out of use, and thereof comes
so great weakness of the very faithful: the pastors must restore to the
people, the knowledge and existimation of so great mysteries, with convenient
and tymelie admonition, and not trouble any man with untimely rigorousnes, as
we admonished before. For first the sheep of Christ so miserably scatered,
and diseased, must be fully brought to Christ, and be healed, before that
any rigorous discipline be restored, and exercised among them. But how so
ever the rest be handled in the congregation at this time, they nevertheless
that shall be admitted to the communion, as soon as they have made their
oblation, must go together to that place, that shall be appointed unto them,
nigh to the altar. For in every temple, there must some place be appointed
nigh the altar for them, which shall communicate, according to the opportunity
and fitnes of every temple. They then which shall be admitted to the communion
of the Lords bourde, shall stand in that place, the men in their propre place,
and the women in their place, and there they shall give thanks, and pray
religiously with the pastor. The gyuynge of thanks shall be handled after the
accustomed manner, but in douche that the people universally may give thanks,
as both the exemple, and the commandment of the Lord requires, and also the
old church observed.

The priest. The Lord be with you. The people. And with thy spirit. The
priest. Lift up your hertes. The people. We have unto the Lord. The priest.
Let us give thanks unto the Lord our God. The people. It is meet, and
right.
The priest.

It is verily a thing worthy, right, meet and wholesome, that we give thanks
unto the always, and every where, that we praise and magnify the, Lord
holy father, almighty, everlasting God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, by
whom thou made us of nothing unto thy image, and haste appointed al other
creatures to our uses, and where as we through the sin of Adam slidynge from
the were made thine enemies, and therefore subject to death, and eternal
damnation, thou of thy infinite mercy, and unspeakable love, dyddest send the
same thy son, the eternal word, into this world, who through the cross,
and death delivered us from sins and the power of the Devil, and brought us
again into thy favor, by his holy spirit, whom he sent to us from the, and
gave his body, and blood to be the fode of a new, and eternal life, that
being more confirmed through the trust of thy mercy, and love, we should ever
go forward to all that, that is thy pleasure by renuinge, and sanctifiynge of
our selves, and that we should glorify, and exalte the here and evermore in
all our words, and deeds, and singe unto the without end, with all thy holy
Angels, and beloved children. After these things, Sanctus shall be song,
where clerks be, in latin, but of the people in douche, one side answering
the other, thryse of both parts. As for that, that is wont to be added The
Lord God of hosts, and Benedictus it shall be song co^munely of the whole
congregation, and therefore in douche.

Straight way after this, let the priest sing the words of the Lords supper
in douche. Our Lord the night, in which he was delivered. etc. But these
words must be song of the priest with great reverence, and plainly, that
they may be well understood of all men. And the people shall say to these
words. Amen. Which all the old church observed, and the Greeks do yet
observe the same. For the whole substance of this Sacrament, is contained in
these words. And it consists altogether in the true understanding, and faith
of these words, that the Sacrament be holesomely administered and received.

When the people then have answered. Amen. The priest shall add, let us
pray. Our father which art in heaven. etc.

To which prayer of the Lord, the people shall say again. Amen.

The priest. The Lords peace be ever with you. The people. And with thy
spirit.
After this, they which be admitted to the communion, and do look for the same
in their place, shall come to the Lords bourde religiously. First men, and
then women, and the whole Sacrament shall be given to them all that they may be
partakers of the body and blood of the Lord, receiving not only bread but also
the Cup, even as he instituted it.

At the exhibition of the bodi, let the the pastor say.

Take, and eat to thy health the body of the Lord, which was delivered for
thy sins.

At the exhibition of the cup.

Take, and drink to thy health the blood of the Lord, which was shed for
thy sins.

After the communion, let Agnus dei be song both in douche, and in latin,
one side answeryng the other, where clerks be. And then let this douch
song, be song. Got sey gelobette. Item Jesus Christus Vnser Heylant. If the
communion shall give so much time, and leisure.

When the communion is ended, let the priest sing turnyng to the people. The
Lord be with ynn.

The people. And with thy spirit. The priest. Let us pray.
Almighty, everlasting God, we give thanks to thy exceadynge godnes, because
thou haste fed us with the body of thy only begotten son, and given us his
blood to drink. We humbly beseech the, work in us with thy spirit, that as
we have received this divine Sacrament with our mouths, so we may also
receive and ever hold fast with true faith, thy grace, remission of sins,
and communion with Christ thy son. Al which things, thou haste exhibited
unto us in these sacraments, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy son, which
lives, and reygneth with the in unity of the holy ghost, very God and very
man, forever. Amen.

An other thankesgyuyng.

We give the thanks father, almighty God, which haste refreshed us with the
singular gift of thy body and blood, we beseech thy goodness, that the same
may healpe to confirm our faith in the, and to kendle mutual love among us,
by the same our Lord Jesus Christ. etc.

Last of all let the pastoure bless the people with these words.

The Lord bless the, and keep the, the Lord lighten his countenance upon
the, and have mercy on the. The Lord lift up his face upon the, and settle
the in peace.

Or thus.

God have mercy on us, and bless us, lyghten his countenance upon us, and
give us his peace. Amen.

Or thus.

God the father, the son, and the holy ghost bless and keep us. Amen.

Or thus.

The blessyng of god the father, the son and the holy gooste be with us, and
remain with us for ever. Amen.

But where clerks be not, as in villages, there let all be read, and song
in douche. But let the songs be so moderated, as in every congregation
shall make to the edification of godliness.

But forasmuch as our Lord instituted this his sacrament only for this
purpose that we should eat it, and drink it for the remembrance of him, and
not that we should set it forth, or carry it about to be looked upon forasmuch
as sundry abuses be brought in, the true use of this sacrament being over
passed and so this sacrament has been drawn to horrible superstition, and
ungodliness, for the taking away both of this superstition and ungodliness, and
also sundry scruples of the work, and irreligious questions about these
mysteries, the pastors, and they that administre the Sacrament, shall
endeavor them selves, that as often as the supper shall be ministered, whether it
be in the congregation, or in private houses for sick folk, they compte the
number of them certeynely which shall communicate, that according to the
same, they may receive pieces of bread and measure of wine. As for the
remnauntes, after that the communion is ended, let the pastors them selves
receive them forthwith, and let them not keep the same nor lay them up in
any place, nor eary them away, or set them forth to be beholded. For the word
of God, which saves us, if we believe, and obey it, and damneth perpetually,
if we do not believe, nor obey it, has thus prescribed concerning his
sacraments. Take, and eat, this is my body. Take, and drink this is my
blood. Therefore we must stand in this institution of Christ, and not
institute a new usage without Gods word about this most holy Sacrament.
And because also that here the Lords death must be preached, and the
communion of him confirmed in us, that through him we may be daily more
crucified to the world, al worldly pomp must likewise be taken from this
ministration, and all tynges must be so ordained and moderated, that they may
healpe forth, and adurne the preaching of the cross and of the death of
Christ.

Of the communion of wayfaring men and sick folk.
When it shall chance that wayefaryng men, or such as commit them selves to
dangerous iourneis, or be sick, shall require the Lords supper upon workynge
days, fearyng that they can not come to the communion the next holy day, the
pastors shall ministre the Lords supper unto them upon any day, after that
they have received of them a convenient confession of their sins and faith in
Christ. How be it, as much as may be, it shall be done in the morning, and at
such time as some assemble of the people is wont to be gathered, or at the least, they shall call some together to this ministration of the supper. When
then they have admonished, and exhorted in the assemble such as will take
iourneis in hand, or be sickely, of these mysteries, and the whole faith in
Christ: they shall administre the holy supper, and distribute the sacraments,
in that form, and facion, that we described before saueing that they may
omit singyng, and read all things, which nevertheless must be done
plainly, and clearly, and with great gravity. But if the sick folk be in
such case, that they can not come to the temple, the pastors must go to
them, and give them the holy supper at home, so that they do all things
according to the form prescribed, or this that follows, which is peculiarly
appointed for sick folk, as much as the state of them, to whom the sacrament
shall be ministered, will suffer, and as much as shall make for the edification of
says in them that be present.

The pastors must also exhort the people, that not only their householde,
but also the neighbors and kinsfolk of the sick, endeavor to come together
to the celebration of that holy supper, and to receive the sacraments
together.

How sick folk must be visited and how the communion must be celebrated
with them. An other exhortation to the sick person.
My brother in the Lord, forasmuch as the Lord visits the with sickness of
the body, that thou may rest the better in his will thou must faithfully
consider and recompt first, that diseases are sent to us from the Lord God for
none other cause, then for sins, and that original sin, which was derived
from Ada^ unto us, draws death with it self, and what so ever perteyneth to
the kingdom of death, that is to say, al manner of diseases, sicknesses,
miseries, and calamities. For if we had continued in original ryghtuousnes
without sin, death should not have had any right upon us, much less
diseases, and other calamities.

Further thou must remember that, lest we should despeare by reason of our
sins, diseases, and other te^tations and anguishes of death, the Gospel was
given us, that out of the same we should learn, and believe that Christ the
son of God delivers us from sins and saves us, if we believe in him, and
that two manner ways. First in purifiynge our hertes from the will, and gylt
of sins, here in earth by the Gospel, and sacraments. Act. xv. purifiynge
their hertes with faith. Secondly when that our consciences be thus cleansed
from sins, and reconciled to God the father by faith, in taking away and
purging sin by little and little out of our nature, that at length being made
pure and perfect from all vices, and holy in all points, we may live with
the holy God in heaven, in divine righteousness and innocence. Thyrdly that,
for the workyng and fulfyllynge hereof, God our father sends unto us su^drie
diseases and death it self, not because he is angry with us, or will destroy
us, but because through very fatherly beniuolence and care, he will steare us
up unto true repentance of sins and faith of his son, and so deliver us
both from sins, wherein we yet stick, and moreover from all euyls both
corporal, and spiritual, unto which we be subject by reason of sins,
which thing the holy scriptures testify abu^da^tly. For thus says S. Paul.
i. Cor. xi. When we are judged of the Lord, we are corrected, that we be not
damned with this world. Roma. viij. To them that love God, all things work
health, neither can any thing disseuer them from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus, not afflictition, nor anguyshe, nor persecution. etc.

Fourthly forasmuch as these things be even so as I have said, and because
thou art taught and certified out of the Gospel, which the son of God him
self preached and confirmed with his death and resurrection, that al thy
sins are cast upon Christ, yea utterly taken away and abolished for ever
of Christ him self, so that God has now no cause of wrath, and condemnation
against the beleuynge in Christ, but the grace of the father, mercy, life and
health be certeynely restored to the through Christ, considre all these so
exceading benifites of god toward the with sure and certain faith, and
confirm this trust in thy self, that God the father compteth the not now
for such one, as thou waste borne of Ada^ and made tho row thine own sins,
that is to say, hateful unto him and appointed unto destruction, but compteth
the for Christ's sake dear, and destined to eternal life, and be thou
persuaded that thou shall live for ever by the ryghtuousnes and life of Christ
in perfect blisfulnes as certeynly, as it is certain that he suffered the
wrath of God and death not for his own sins, but for thine. Saying then that
it is so, see that thou comfort thy self with so great benifites and
knowledge certeynely that sin, death, and hell has now no right upon the,
but that Christ the lamb of God has taken away al those. John. i. For he
has translated those things upon him self, he has ouercomed them by him
self, and blotted them out forever. Wherefore be of God comfort, thy sins
be forgiven the, and there is no cause (if from thy heart thou believe in
Christ the Lord) but thou may certeynely, and constantly through Christ
our Lord, look for all grace, consolation, tymely healpe, and salvation from
God. Therefore with such trust commit, and give up thy self wholly to his
merciful and fatherly will, saying with David, God is my light, of who^ shall
I be a frayed? Heavenly father thy will be done. Into thy hands I commend my
spirit. Amen.

After this exhortation, if the state of the sick person will suffer, the
pastoure shall read before him, and the present congregation, the Lords
words out of the.vi. of John From this place verily, verily I say unto you,
except ye eat the flesh of the son of man: unto the words of the
Eua^geliste. These words he spoke in the synagoge.

And he shall declare the same text for the comfort and edification, as well of
the sick, as of the congregation, that is present. But the exposition shall be
moderated according to the commodity of the sick person. When thexposition is
ended, let the pastor rehearse a commune confession of sins, whereunto he
shall add an absolution. Then he shall recite the Creed, and shall make such a
prayer.

The pastor. The Lord be with you. They which be present. And with thy
spirit.
Almighty, everlasting God, which of thy exceadyng mercy haste given us thy
son and all things with him, lighten our hertes and minds, that we may
certeynly believe and acknowledge thy son to be our only savior, and the in
him our God and father, and that we may so receive and enjoy the communion of
his body and blood from this his table ordained by his commandment, that his
new and divine life with al trust of his grace, and sure expectation, of
blessed resurrection may be confirmed and increased in this our sick brother,
or sick sister and in us all, that we also may be content to sustain thy
hand in this present visitation and look with affiaunce for thy calling out of
this wicked world, and that as long as it shall please the, we may live
here, and more sanctify thy name, and set forth thy kingdom, through the
same thy beloved son our Lord.

Here the pastoure shall say the Lords prayer. That done, he shall wish
peace to the sick person, and all that be present. The^ he shall rehearse the
words of the supper plainly and reverently. The Lord that night that he was
betrayed. etc.

When he has rehearsed those words, let him give the whole Sacrament to the
sick persons, and to those of the standers by, which shall offer them selves
gistes to the Lords bourde, as it behooves, with those words, that we
rehearsed before. After the co^mnunion, let him conclude the Lords supper with
tha^kesgiuyng and blessyng, as is described before. The sick folk also must
be ever exhorted to liberality toward the pore

Of communion in private houses for men in health.
Because some both of the order of knighthode and men of other degrees dwell
farther from temples, then that they can ever come together to the commune
assemble of their parish in the winter and other incommodious times of the
year, the pastors shall not be grieved to celebrate the holy supper in their
houses at convenient times, when they shall require it, and when there shall be
just causes so to do by the^ selves, or by other meet ministers, after the
manner, and facion that is described before. But they which dwell so nigh the
temples of their parishes that they may well come together to the common
communion of their parish, shall have no private communion in their houses
administered, which thing the old holy fathers forbadde to be done.

Of conversion from sins, or repentance and christian excommunication.
IT is greatly to be lamented that man's weakness and the diuyls power is so
great that so many of the^ which be received among the children of God, fall
so sone from the begone obedience of God, and cast away the grace, which
they had received, and the holy ghost, being unthankful toward God their
father, whom they offend so ungodly, and toward their savior Christ, who^
they madly put from them and against the holy ghost, whom they so traitorously
agrieue, and finally most noisome against the^ selves. For they provoke the
wrath of God against the^ selves, which shall punish the^ eue^ with temporal
pains and not only them, but also those that be joined unto them by any
means. Which thing the history of Saul, David, and other testifies.
Furthermore they take from them selves the most excellent consolation in this
life, I mean, the calling upon God. For they that continue in sin against
their conscience, can not call upon God. Finally they bind them selves to
eternal damnation, and that, that is most horrible, they which have fallen,
suffer not them selves to be moved for the most part, that they may return
unto God. Wherefore it shall perteyne to a good pastor to be ever more busy
about him self, and other in godly exhortatio^s, that they may work their
health with fear and tre^bling, as Paul says, and that they suffer not the
gift of God to be idle in them, and to vanishe away, but that they steare up,
and exercise the same, desiring that the same may be confirmed in them, fleinge
perverse entisementes, and resistynge naughty affections, as we said before,
in the place of good works.

But if any man has fallen, and has sinned even against his conscience,
secretly or openly, let him nevertheless hear the word of god, so fatherly
alluring us unto amendment, when he says, in Ezechiell, as truly as I live,
I will not the death of a sinner but that he be converted, and live.

Therefore God would also, and so greatly commanded that in the congregation
the doctrine of repentance should be beaten in, which he him self began in
Paradise, when he rebuked Adam, and Eve after the fall, and comforted them
again with a most ample promise of grace, by the seed that should come. All the sermons of the prophets teach the same thing, and therefore John Baptist,
and Christ him self, and the Apostles grounded the sum of their preaching
hereupon. Come again to your selves, repent. etc.

As for repentance, it is a grief and anguishe of mind, by reason of sin,
out of a faithful consideration of the filthiness, and abomination, which the
law shows to be in sin, and out of the fear of Gods judgment against
sin, which the law threateneth, driuynge us to seek forgyuenes of sins,
and the grace of God with all diligence. And therefore Ioell. ij. Cut, says
he your hertes, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God, for he
is gentle and merciful, patient, and of great compassion, reco^cileable
touching wickedness. etc.

Ite^ in Esai. Where shall the Lord dwell? in a broken, and humbled spirit. etc.

Psalm. xxxviij. My bones have no peace from the sight of my sins. Esaie. i.
Cease to do frowardly, learn to do well,

The preachers must be diligent to steare up this repentance with preaching
of Gods word, which is taught us in the law, and Gospel. For thereby
sin is uttered and reproved, as Paul says, through the law is the
knowledge of sin. It admonishes also that these miserable calamities of
mankind, so many wars, so dangerous commotions, and all destruction of
peace, and polity with other euyls, which daily spring up new, by the
punishme^tes of Gods anger kendled against us for sins. Finally it
rehearses unto us terrible exemples of gods chastisinge, the floude, the
dronynge of Pharao, the destruction of the kingdom of Israel, and Jerusalem.
etc

And where as the Lords word testifies that what so ever adversity chances
unto us, it is sent from God for our sins, the same word of the Lord by
these daily miseries and incommodities, admonesheth us of our sins, and
calls us unto repe^tau^ce Finally the Gospel most vehemently rebukes the
contempt of Christ, that men will not acknowledge him, and his exceadynge
benifites, that they refuse his grace offered to them, that they neglecte to
call upon God with true faith through him. For which contempt, it threateneth
present peynes and everlasting to come.

All these things must be often beaten in, that men may be steared up to
true contrition, whereunto they healpe very much, if they be set forth
gravely, and religiously.

But the Gospel does also by the trust of Gods graces raise up, and
comfort minds being discouraged through repentance. For it bids an heart
bruised and sorowinge for sins, to acknowledge, and embrace mercy promised in
Christ, and to determine, that it shall certeynely obteyue remission of
sins, if it believe that sins be forgyuen us freely, not for our merits,
but for Christ's sake, which offered him self a sacrifice for us unto the
father, as we have declared before, and as it is clearly set forth, To. iij.
Ephesi. ij. and in other places. But to obtain this consolation, we must
hold fast the word of the Gospel. Wherefore private absolution must be
retained, and used in congregations, that through it the voice of the Gospel
may be preached to every man by him self, and that the benifites of Christ
may be so exhibited, as Christ says. John. xx. Whose sins ye shall remitte,
they be remitted. etc. Item mat. xviij. Thou shalt not only forgive seven
times, but seventy times seven times. So Luke xvij. If he shall sin seven
times in a day against the, and being seven times converted, shall say, it
repents me, forgive him.

These sentences teach clearly, and prescribe that they which acknowledge
their sins, and be stricken with repentance of the same, must not be left
in doubt of forgyuenes, but that remission of sins must be preached unto
them in the name, and by the commandment of Christ, and that they must be
absolved from sins. Which absolution they must receive, and embrace as a
sure voice of the Gospel, and believe that they obtain remission of sins not
for the worthiness of this work, of which sort the heathen had an absolution,
but for Christ's sake. Therefore that this godly benifite of absolution may be
more commodiously retained in co^gregations, we have enjoined to all curates,
and other ministers of co^gregations, which administre the sacraments, that
they admit no body to the communion of the Lords supper, which has not
received before private absolution of the pastor, and other ministers of
sacraments. And for the reteynyng of this absolution in congregations, private
confession must also be kept, not that numbering of sins is necessary, but
because that private teachinge, and the consolation of private absolution,
which is wont to be used in confession, is very profitable, and necessary
for many. How be it every man must humbly confess, that he has sinned,
and must be sorry from the heart, that he has offended God, and must have a
certain, and sure purpose to amend his life, and to govern the same from
thence forth according to the word of God, in the fear of God, obedience,
invocation of Gods name, and thankesgyuyng, so that he be offensive to no
body, but edify many in godliness, and further them to al good things.
Further every man must open to the ministre of Christ, to whom he confesses
his sins, those fautes, and misdeedes chiefly, which most trouble, and
vex his conscience, and for which he has need of counsel, instruction, and
consolation out of the word of God, that he may afterward live with more
warines of synnynge, and certeyner trust of the mercy of God, and so serve
God the better. After these things, it is convenient to require absolution.

Such confession avayleth much to warn and enstructe the repentant, and that
the pastor may know them before absolution, that they may the better be
enstructed to the amendment of life, and that the pastor also may know
whether he, which confesses requires absolution unfeignedly. For pearls
must not be cast before swyne. And he that promise^h not amendmente of life,
must not be absolved. For the repentance of such a man must needs be
feigned.

In this confession the pastor must hear and examen every man of his faith,
and require of him the ten commandments in order, and warn that men learn
to know, that it is sin against God, when they transgress the said
commandments, that so they may perceive, what sin is, and this
examination, and enstruction must be used with singular diligence in young and
rude persons. After this, he that requires absolution must be demanded,
whether he will earnestly amend his life, and live from thence forth in the
fear of God, and obey God unfeignedly. If he promise that he will so do, he must
be demanded, whether he has borne an offense to any body, or has unjustly
hurted any body, that as much as may be, such sclaunderous offense be taken
away again and that he labor to be reconciled to him, whom he has offended.
If the crime, and offense be open, as if a man keep an other man's wife, or use
unlawful company with some other woman openly, or bear manifest hatred
against some body, or wythholdeth some man's goods, if there be any such
manifest sclaunder, the absolution must be deferred, till the offense be openly
removed. He that asks absolution must also be warned, that true repentance
is required, and that, that is no small mattter, but an earnest, and vehement
grief for sin, with a faithful desire of forgyuenes, and sure purpose of
amendeme^t of life, and that God is most grievously offended, if any man
require absolution not of true repentance, but rather for men's pleasure, or
for custom.

Finally, they which confess must be warned, that it pertains to true
repentance, to auoyed diligently all occasions of sins, al places, times,
companies of men, which may offer any occasion of sin, and to fight
strongly against evil lusts, and entysementes of sins, and ever to call
upon the healpe of God. For thus faith, and invocation must be exercised in
true repentance.

When he then which desires to be absolved, has promised that he will do all the things, that I have rehearsed, let him be absolved from sins in the
name of Christ, and after absolution, let him be admitted to the communion
of the Lords supper.

Of excommunication.
IF any man continue in manifest abominable crimes, or if he may by convenient
witnesses, be co^uinced of such a crime, as ought to be punished, and for
which according to Gods word he can have no part in the kingdom of God, and
nevertheless the man is not moved with the remembrance of the wrath of God, in
the danger whereof he lives, nor of the grievous punishment that he deserves,
nor of the common sclaunder, and stomblynge block, which he lays before
other, and will not convert unto the Lord, the pastoure with other godly men,
which shall be chosen and appointed out of tounes, and villages for this
purpose must warn such a person with gravity, that he come to him self,
repent his sins and turn to God his father and savior, that he remove the
stombling block, which he has laid before the congregation, and finally that
he seek reco^ciliation with God and the congregation by worthy repentance.
And the very obedience due unto Christ requires, that every man in his
parish obey such exhortation with all subjection, and humility. For it is a
part of the ministry, whereof Christ speaks, Luke. x. He that hears
you, hears me, he that despiceth you, despises me. etc. If he then which
has lived with an open scaunder, admits such an exhortation, and promises
amendment, first he must take away the offense, that he had caused, as if he
keep unlawful company with some woman, he must put her away from him, if he
has borne open hatred against any man, he must be reconciled unto him,
as much as perteyneth to himself. etc. This done, he must come to his pastor,
confess his sins, and promise a better life, and so require, and receive
absolution, and then be admitted to the Lords supper.

But if such a man, which continues in open sins, will not come to the
pastors, and other ministers of repentance being called, let him be called
thrice, or if he come and yet abide obstinately in his wicked acts after the
third admonition, let the whole matter be brought before the superinte^dant,
by the pastoure and one of them, which shall be joined with the pastor by the
appointment of the congregation to execute this business. The superintenda^t
must come to that congregation, where such an obstinate wicked person shall be,
and shall call him again before him self, with the pastor and other
appointed to that office. And if he have not yet left his naughty acts, nor
amended his life, neither yet earnestly promises amendment, all these
persons must pronounce a sentence together against such one, and judge him
worthy to be cast out of the congregation, and to be excommunicated, and with
that their commune sentence they shall exclude him from all communion of the
congregation. And he, whom they shall so excommunicate, must be compted of
all the congregation as one not perteynyng to the body of Christ, and he
must not be admitted to the holy supper, or to Baptism, or to the
institutynge of the ministers of the church, or to the blessing of marriage,
which is wont to be done in the congregation. How be it he shall not be
forbidden to come to sermons, yea he shall be exhorted the more to hear
sermons, that by the word of God he may be admonished of the wrath of God, of
everlasting, and present punishments, of his unthankfulness against the
mercy of God, and the bitter death of Christ. For the ministry of the
Gospel must ever judge of al me^ in the world good, and had, must rebuke
the sin of all men, according to this saying of Christ. The spirit shall
rebuke the world of sin. etc.

And that men may rightly understand the ministry, and strength of
excommunication, and that a true doctrine of this matter may be retained in
co^gregations, this thing is diligently to be marked, and taught. I mean,
what difference there is between ecclesiastical, and civil punishments. The
civil officer restrayneth, and punishes me^ by the commandment of God with
bodily punishme^tes, enprisonment, exile, loss of goods and death. And he
must execute this his office, not only for common peace, but also for the
glory of God, and to reteyne discipline among men. To. xiij. Of which thing
the ministers must often admonish the people. And if the civil officer grant
to a man being excommunicate the use of the politic state and company with
citizins, the excommunication of the congregation, must not hindre civil
communion, and the true, and obedient members of the congregation may use the
company of such a person in civil matters, and in the administration of the
common weal, in commune judgments, in byinge, and sellinge, and such other
business of civil fellowship and of the necessity of this life. But in other
matters not necessary, the me^bres of Christ must auoied the company of such,
lest they defile the^ selves with other me^nes sins. Yea they must so behave
them selves toward such men, that both the persons the^ selves and also
other may understand that they be sore agrieued with their wicked acts, and
sclaunders, wherewith they trouble the congregation of God.

If any die in excommunication, let not the other me^bres of the congregation
be present at his burial, but let them compte him as a cast away, saying that
he died without the invocation of the name of Christ, and acknowledgyng of his
sins.

Therefore the superentendant, the pastor and other deputed to this ministry,
must use excommunication only against open il livers, which will not amend,
and not in civil matters, as to require dettes, for of these things the
politic judgments of the officers must give sentence, and observe that
way, which is described in our reformation set forth heretofore, concerning
this matter and if need shall require, it shall be yet more largely described
by the advice of our counsel. The pastors then, and teachers of congregations
must diligently teach, and warn men, that they despice not excommunication,
nor doubt, but that he which is lawfully excommunicated, is verily rejected
of God, and that God to confirm the fear of excommunication, punishes them
often with bodily pains, which despice the excommunication of the
congregation. For neither the blessing nor cursing of the congregation, and of
godly men can be in vain, as it is written Gene. xiij. I will bless them, that
bless the, and curse them that curse the. And psalm. Cx. Let his days be few,
and let an other take his bishopriche. Item, let him put on a curse, as a
garment. The exe^ple also of the Cor. testifies the same. So when S. Ambrose
had excommunicated Stilico the scribe, the devil invaded him forthwyth.
Wherefore there is no doubt, but that he shall surely be punished of God,
which despises lawful excommunication.

But if the Lord will give grace, that he which is excommunicated, will come
to him self again and leave his wicked deeds, for which he was
excommunicated and will acknowledge, and confess his sins, and be reconciled
to him, whom he has offended, and asks humbly remission of his sins, and
disobedience against God, and the congregation, let the pastor absolve this
man before the altar and restore him to Christ, and to the congregation, if
he hertely confess that he will obey Christ, and the congregation in all these
points, as a true penitent. How be it the other also which be appointed to
this ministry must stand by the pastor, as witnesses of those things, that
the man, which shall be absolved, promises, and as witnesses of the right
handling of the absolution.

And that no man may have occasion to require judgments, by which he may
obtain his right in dettes without unlawful delays, and great charges, we by
the advice of our counsel will take such away in judgments, which are
executed in our name, and in the names of archdeacons, that they shall be
driven to do that, that is right, and the same without abuse of
excommunication, and wrong of the kayes of Christ.

Of the appoyntyng, and institution of pastors.
AL men endued with the true fear of God and religion, understand that
thoffice of priesthod, that is to say, the ministry of preaching the Gospel,
and disposyng the sacraments, and discipline of Christ, is, and was from the
beginning of the world, and shall be to the end of the same right necessary,
and wholesome among al other offices and ministeries, whereby the commodities of
man's life are procured. For God sent his son into this world which was
promised from the begynynge to mankind, to execute this office, he sent also
to men his most excellent prophets, and patriarchs, and he mainteineth the
same ministry through all ages by wonderful means, and restores it often
times gloriously.

Wherefore he has enjoined to al curates of congregations, that they labor
with all religion that this treasure of everlasting life, this ministry of
salvation and blessed communion with him and his Christ, be not committed but
to faithful, and meet me^, that it may be ever kept sincere, nor be quenched
at any time, as it has chanced among the heathen. Wherefore we ought most
diligently to consider, and to renew in the co^gregatio^s as much as is
possible, the things that the holy ghost has prescribed, concerning the
religion of this ministry both in other places and also to Timothe. Neither
is it to be doubted, but that bishops were made presidentes over all priests
chiefly for this cause, that they should take singular care and study, that
the purity of christian doctrine, and discipline might be maintained in
co^gregatio^s, and that meet me^ might be admitted to the administration
thereof. And it is manifest that the co^gregations from the beginning of the
world have been most grievously enda^maged through the negligence, sluggishnes
rashness and boldness of them which were made overseers of the doctrine and
discipline of Christ. As other commonweals also were then most afflicted,
and came to ruin when they began to be administered by naughty officers. For
ever there want rather meet governors in commune weaels to keep, maintain
and execute good laws, the^ there want good and commodious laws. Wherefore we
hertely wish that principal diligence be used hereof, that faithful and meet
curates be appointed to every congregation, as it is most necessary, and as
it touches our office chiefly. Let no man then take it in ill part, that we
devise a way and mean whereby they that shall be admitted to the procuration of
co^gregations may be examined and tried with more religion, the^ heretofore.

As for us, we will not take from any man his right of appoyntyng curates to
congregations. But we exhort al men, which take this authority upon them,
that through favor and carnal love, or for some other cause they thrust not
such into the congregations, which be scle^derly furnished, or little willing to
execute this most holy ministry, but that they seek out with all diligence
such as will and be able to execute this office, which thing the very faith
of Christ greatly requires of al christian men, but chiefly of them, to whom
congregations be singnlerly committed for the same purpose.

And that we also may execute our office in this behalf, we command that no
man be admitted to the cure of any congregation, which is not diligently tried
and allowed by those examiners, who^ we shall appoynte to this office, and
brings from thexaminers a testimony of his probatio^, to those to who^ it
shall perteine to inuest, and to our suffragane.

In the examination of these me^, three things must chiefly be required. First
that he, that shall be admitted to the holy ministry of the congregation,
bring to the examiners a convenient testimony sealed in letters worthy of
credit, concerning his vocation, and former life. For God forbids such to
be admitted to this right excellent office, which openly despice his laws, and
be subject to manifest wicked acts.

Secondly the person must be examined whether he sufficiently understand the
doctrine of Christ, a sum whereof we have comprehended in this book. And
whether he acknowledge that the same doctrine in a su^me is truly described in
this book, as surely it is the only, and undoubted doctrine of Christ, which
the true catholic church of Christ ever holds, and follows.

Thyrdly it must be required of him that shall be admitted to the governance
of the congregation of Christ, when it shall be perceived that he understands
sufficiently this doctrine and confesses it to be true, that he promise to
continue in the same doctrine, and to deliver the same faithfully to the^, of
whom he shall be made curate for that purpose, and to follow the prescripte of
this book in all things diligently, and to execute his office in all points
with all faythfulnes and diligence.

When he is thus examined and proved, the examiners must give him a testimony
of their co^probation unto the^, whose office is to inuest him, and to the
suffragane. Which suffragane shall use nothing in the ceremonies of
ordination, nor enjoin any thing in ordeynynge, that agrees not with this
same doctrine of Christ set forth in this book. For it is euidente that this
doctrine, which is comprehended in this book, is the very christian doctrine,
and the certain sentence, and faith of the catholic church.

Now it pertains to us by reason of our byshoplye office, that we maynteyne
not those obseruaunces, which have crepte in beside the commandment of God,
and unto the destruction of many priests, but rather that we seek out, and
devise that way and mean, whereby we may find meet ministers unto our
congregations, and that they may execute their ministry with good conscience
not encombred with unjust traditions of men or vows, and call upon God with
sure trust, and be occupied in their ministry godly and luckely.

We trust also that they which now administre our co^gregations, will gladly
apply them selves to this manner of teaching and using of holy ceremonies,
when they shall have thoroughly perceived it, and not lead a life disagreinge to
the same. If it chance otherwise in any place, the visiters shall have
commandments so to provide the congregations of necessary and meet
ministers, that no man shall have cause to complain of any unjust burden.

Of blessing of marriages.
THey which have mutually promised matrimony between them selves, shall go
both the spouse and the spousesse, with their parents of both sides, or other
kynsfolke, or two, or three friends, to the Pastoure, or to some other
ministre appointed thereunto, and shall signify unto them their hand fasting,
and require the blessing of the congregation which shall diligently demand
of them whether their handfastynge were made after the will of the parents of
both parties, or of the^ under whose governance and power they be, whether
they have done all other things lawfully, and after a christian facion,
whether their be any lawefull impediment of their copulation. For if there be
any impediment that they can not lawefully and without sclaunder be joined
together in matrimony, let not the pastoure allow their marriage in any wise,
or bless it in the congregation, till that let be remoned, and their
copulation be allowed by the^, which shall be appointed to such matters and
causes by our commandment. Further the ministre shall exhort them that they
solemnise such a marriage as becomes christians, and that they follow not the
pomp, and excess of the heathen. Then let him write both their names, and
ask the banes upon three holy days, or sundays after this sort.

John N. and Anne N. have made promise each to other of holy matrimony, and
they desire that the same be allowed and blessed of the congregation. Therefore
they require that the congregation will pray for them, that they may begin
this kind of life in the Lords name, and that they may live in the same unto
the praise and glory of God. If any man know any lawful impediment of their
copulation, let him show the same in time to the glory of Christ, and for the
remouinge of an offense to the congregation.

Such a publication, as I said, must be made upon three holy days next
ensuinge one an other, except some special, and weighty cause require an other
thing, and suffer not so long delayinge. But no man must have any thing
dispensed of this thryse asking, except they permit it, to whom we shall
commit the office of causes of matrimony, and when it is manifest, that
there is no lawful let of their matrimony. Howbeit the banes of such
persons also must be asked in the congregation at the lest upon one holy
day.

Furthermore we will have this thing observed, that the weddyng of al
persons whether the brides be virgins or widows be confirmed and sanctified
in the congregation by the word of God, and prayer, and that they come to the
congregation with al sobriety, and honesty, as it becomes the^ which come
together in the Lord, and truly desire the blessyng of the Lord unto their
marriage. Wherefore they shall endeavor them selves to bring very many with
the^ unto the holy assemble, though christian moderation requires not so
many to be bidden to the marriage feast. For the prayers of many are godly
desired. But because they come together to pray for the grace, and good
spirit of God to be given to the despoused persons through our Lord Jesus
Christ, and him crucified: they must so appear in his syghte, that the
glory of the cross of Christ be not blemished by worldly pomp and excess.

Finally they must come into the temple at that hour, when Christ's
congregation comes together at other times, and they must be at the beginning
of the holy assemble that with the rest of the people of Christ they may
hear the lords word, and make their prayers to God.

When they then be present in the temple with the congregation, in a place
appointed thereunto, which shall be open to al men the pastor shall say to the
brydgrome and the bryde.

Be ye then present here in the syghte of God our father, and of our Lord
Jesus Christ, before his congregation, to profess your marriage, which ye have
promised each to other in the Lord, and that ye may receive blessing and
sanctification of the same from the Lord, by the ministre of the congregation?

The answer of the brydgrome and the bryde. We are present for that purpose.
Then the Pastoure shall say further.
Saying then that after the open asking of banes, no body has come forth,
which would gaynesaye the conjunction of these persons, or could declare
any lawful impedement by reason of kindred, or of affinity or for some other
cause, the heavenly father vouchsafe to confirm that, that he has wrought in
you.

And that ye may the better understand, and acknowledge how great a grace, and
benifite the heavenly father has given you herin, which has joined you
together with holy matrimony, and that ye may learn to give him condign
thanckes for this his beniuolence, and bountiousnes toward you and embrace
one a another with more firm faith, as joined to gether by the hand of God,
and call for his help with more co^fide^ce, and ever serve him in this state
finally that ye may more fully know the promise and office of matrimony,
and perfurme the same more promptly, ye shall hear with reuerente minds some
testimonies, of the scripture, and a religious exhortacion out of the same. And
first ye shall here out of the second. Cha of Genes. the first institution of
holy matrimony. God said, it is not good that man be a love, let us make
him an help, to be with him, and God sent a sleep upon Ada^ etc.

Now hear ye the voice of Christ. out of the gospel Math. xix.

The phariseis came unto Jesus te^ptinge him, and saying to him, may a man
make a divorce with his wife for every cause? etc.

Thirdly hear ye also the commandment of the holy Ghost concerning the
office of marriage. For thus he prescribed to married folk Ephe. v.

Men love your wives, as Christ loved the congregation etc. read forth to the
end of the Chapter.

Out of these places the despoused persons, and rest of the congregation must
be warned, that they learn, and considre first, how holy a kind of life,
and how acceptable to God matrimony is. For by these places we know, that
God him self instituted holy wedlock, and that in paradise man being yet
perfect, and holy, and that he has greatly blessed this copulasion, and
joins himself all those together, which contracte matrimony in his name,
and gives the husband to be an head, and savior to the wife, as Christ is
the head, and the savior of the congregation and further more gives the
wife a body, and a help to the husband, that here in this world they may
lead a godly, honest, and joyous life together.

Hereof a godly mind shall certainly conclude, that this copulacion of man,
and woman is without doubt acceptable to God, and therefore holy, and luckie
which thing appears by this, that God planteth in the^, which be joined in
matrimonye, so great and so marvelous faythfulnes, love, and most serniceable
minds, both toward the^ selves mutually, and also toward their children,
kinsfoke, and allied by any mean to either part. For God is love, and he that
abides in love, abides in god, and the whole law is fulfiled with the love
of our neighbor. Where fore in what soever state of life more faithfulness,
and love, and a redier mind to procure the commodites of our neighbors
according to the Lords word is wounte to spring forth, the same vndoub tedli
is more acceptable to God, more holy, and blessed. But there is no surer
faythfulnes, no feruenter love, no nerer frendshippe no prompter will to warn
on another than that is, which is among such married folk, as be joined
together in the lord, and sofurth among their children, and all those, whom
marriage has allied together on both parttes. Wherefore al they, who^ god has
brought to this kind of life, ought to give great thanks unto God for this
so great a benifite, that he has called the^, to so holy a kind of life, and
so acceptable to him self. Nether must the husbaunde other wyle receive his
spouse, nor the spouse her husband, than delivered and joined together with
the Lords hand, and whatsoever aduersite shall chance in matrimony (as this
copulacion is as you would say a singler shop of godly, and faithful
invocation) they must fle to God with sure confidence, and require help, and
consolation of him. For the most beninge father can not for sake his children
in that kind of life, to which he himself appointed them, he cannot but
aswage the difficulties, and exercises of obedience, which he him self will
have to be in this state, to try, and to stirreup the faith of his, and not to
afflycte them.

The pastoures tha^ shall diligently warn and exhort that men conclude these
things out of the forsayde places of the scripture concerning the hollines of
matrimony and the help of God prepared for this state, and that they learn
thereby to give God thanked for this so great a benifite, and call for his
help with confidence in all distresses that shall happen in this state.

Further more they shall teach and warn this also out of the same places with all possible diligence, with how great beniuolence and love they that be
coupled in matrimony ought to embrace one another, by what means, and with
what redines of mind the one ought to do the other good, with what diligence
the man must show himself an head, and savior to his wife, and the woman a
body, and faithful help in all things to her husband, breifely with what care
they must maintain between themselves agreement of minds, and avoid all
disseuering of the same, saying that they must needs be one flesh, one man,
and live together with one mind and one heart, and have al thiges commune both
those that pertayne to God and those that partaine to men. Great is the
conjunction and nere is the frendshyppe of allies, and kinsfolk, and other
friends among them selves, and the same be greater between parents, and
children, but the greatest of al must be between married persons.

For they must be so glued one to another with the affection of love, that they
make one man, al other being left, and set apart, Imean not as touchig charity,
and other duties, but as touching the use, and company of the hole life

Such an exhortation must be made with more, or fewer words, as it shall appear
convenient, or necessary for the present congregation, and the despoused
persons which done, the pastor shall exhort the newly married folk, and the
whole congregation that they make their prayers religiosly to God yt will
grant to the persons entering in to holy wedlock, so to begin it, and
keep it thorough all their life, as they be taught out of the word of God.
When the congregation has ended her prayers in silence, let the minister
bid the bridegroom, and the bride to come nere, and first let him demand
the bridegroom after this sort.

Johan N. haste thou than determined before the Lord to take Anne N. to thy
wife in the Lord, and so to live with her all thy life, as thou heardest even
now, that it is required of a Christian husband.

Answer. I have so determined by the Lords help. Have thou also determined
Anne N. before the Lord to take Johan N. to thy husband in the Lord and so to
live with him thorough out al thy life, as thou wast taught even now, that it
is required of a Christian wife.

Answer. I have determined by the Lords help. Than if perchance they have
ringes let them put them one upon another finger, and so let the minister
join their right hands together, and say, that, that God has joined, let
no man disseuer. And let the pastoure say more over with a loud voice, that
may be heard of all men.

Forasmuch as than this Johan N. desires this Anne to be his wife in the
Lord, and this Anne desires this Johan to be her husband in the Lord, and
one has made the other a promise of holy, and Christian matrimony, and have
now both professed the same openly, and have confirmed it with giuinge of
ringes each to other, and ioininge of hands, I the minister of Christ, and the
congregation, pronounce that they be joined together with lawful, and
christian matrimony, and I confirm this their marriage in the name of the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost. Amen. After this let the psalm. Cxxvij.
be read, or sounge, except the Lord build the house etc. And the Psalm.
Cxxviij. Blessed are all they, which fear the Lord etc.

Than let the minister conclude the whole matter with this prayer.
Almyghtie God, and heavenly father, which with thyn own word have
witnessed, that it is not good for man to be alone, and therefore at the
beginning made a wife to man of himself, and did join her to him for
an help, that they might pass their whole life luckely in all holiness, and
righteousness, and did ordain the man to be the head, and the savior of
the woman, which also should govern, and aid the wife his body to al
godliness, and honesty, and have adourned, and blessed this copulation, as
holy, and acceptable to the, in it self a syngular exercise, and aid of
faith thorought thy goodness, we beseech the for thy sons sake our Lord, who^
thou would have to be borne of a virgin despoused, and joined to Joseph in
holy matrimony, which also honored matrimony with his presence, and with
the begininge of his miracles, and would have it to be a token and mystery of
his exceadinge love to wards the congregation, we beseech the I say, that
thou will mercifully perdonne these thy children, if any thing has crepte
in, and mingled it self in their copulation at the beginning, or at this
present, beside thy constitution thorough man's weakness, and the craftye
snares of Satan, and that thou will keep them in the fear, and obedience of
the, and increase these thy gifts in the daily. Strenthen thou, and increase
their faith, that they doubt not, but that they are joined together with thy
hand, though it be by our ministry, that they may be one man in the
son our Lord Jesus Christ, and so live, and serve the with one heart, and
one mind, that no creature may ever disseuer them, or any thing dimynishe
this great love and consent between them, but that the husband may be an
head to the wife and the wife an help to the husband in all things, which
thou alowest in them. Give them also plentiful fruit of their bodies, holy
seed, and children of thy kingdom. grant that they may bring them up to
thy glory, that thy holy name may be ever more sanctified, and glorified by
them, and by their children, and by us with them, in all our words and deeds,
and that so thy kingdom may be ever pro^moted, and amplified, and that al
our conversation upon earth, may be so framed to thy pleasure, with like
readynes of mind and zeal, as they which be in heaven obeie they will. And
that these things may prevail in us, and be daily increased, give us also
our daily bread, necessary things for the body, prosperous health, peace,
and tranquillite, that we may get, and enjoy those things, that be nedeful
for our life, to thy glory. Forgive us also our dettes, which we daily run
in to, thoroughe neglectinge our duties, forgive us our sins, wherewith we
offe^de the perpetually, and remove mercyfully they scourges, which we well
deserve through our misdedes, and sins, as we also before thine eyes do
gladli forgive al them, which may seem to owe us any thing, either in
omitting their duty, or in dowinge wrong, nether lead us in to any
tentation, whom thou instly examinest, and tryest with sonder tentations, on
the right hand, and the list, with prosperity, and aduersite. But deliver us
from the devil the old crafty enenie. Satan, and from al his subtillities,
and violente invasions, wherewith he tempts us sondrie ways, and ever
laboreth to pulle us from the, and thy commandments, deliver us I say that
we may never decline from the, and thy word, nor suffer our selves at any
time to be drawn away, therwyth entisementes, or terrible threats, but that
we may continue to the end in the faith of thy word, and in the obedience of
thy commandments, as they true, and germain children, for thou art our only
God, and father, thine is the kingdom and the power, and the glory with our
lord Jesus Christ, thy son, and the holy ghost, now, and everlastingly.

Or more breifely.

Lord God, which would ioyn man, and woman in matrimony, and have blessed
them with the fruit of the womb, and would that in their copulacion, a
sacrament of thy love toward the congregation should be set forth, we
beseech thy mercifulnes, that thou will not suffer this thy institucion, and
holy work to be in any wife violated in thy servants, or thy blessinge to
be turned from the^, but preserve the^ thorough thy bountuousnes, and increase
in them the thing, that thou have begone to the wealth of them, and of thy
congregation, and give them the ample blessinge of thy mercy, thorough our
Lord Jesus Christ.

The pastoures shall cause also, the names of them, whom he has married, or
baptized to be written in a book with a note of the day and the year.

And forasmuch as the ingnorauncie of degres, of consanguinite, and affinite,
causes often times much business, and many errous, we will procure that they
shall be clearly, and distinctly set forth, which the pastoures shall often
declare to the people. Furthermore grievous offenses, and many periuries grow
of this, that young persons promise matrimony one to a another rashly, and
privily, with out witnesses. For it sone chau^ceth that they forswear their
promises we will therefore that no promise of matrimoni be ratified, that is
made the parents not knowinge of it, or not consenting there unto or against
the minds of their kynsfoke, or tutors, if their parents be abse^t or not
able to rule themselves. But if the parents kinsfolk, or tutors, will have
young men, or maidens being of ripe age, to differ marriage, or drive them
to unpleasant marriages (which thing as it fights with humanite, and with
the word of God, so it is also forbiden by the laws) than they that be so
burdened, shall bring the matter before the pastors, and officers, which
shall labor to aswage the rigorousnes of the parents, kinsfolk, or tutors
with a friendly exhortacion and if they can prevail nothing with that
exhortacion, they shall refer the matter to an ordinary officer, which by
judicial authority shall resist the unjust rigorousnes of the parents,
kinsfolk, or tutors, and he shall chose, and appoynte some honest and wise men,
by whose advise, some thing shall be determined to the glory of God, wealth of
the young persons and edificacion of the church concerning the marriage of
them, to who^ their parents, kynsfolke, or tutors be some what ungentle in
this behalf. And if any have nether pare^tes, nor tutors, nevertheless the
despousation, and promise of marriage, which they make, is not to be compted of
effect, if both the parties acknowledge it not, or if there were not at the
lest three or four witnesses, at the handfastinge, which must be honest men,
and worthey to be believed. For marriage is an holy thing, and therefore we must
go about the same with good aduisement, and with the fear of God, not
thorough any passion, or desire of the flesh, raschnes, gylte, deceyte, and
nawghtie crafts.

Whereof the pastors must often warn the people, and declare how unseemly a
thing it is for Christian men, to contracte matrimony, the right holy
copulacion of men, secretly, and raschly, that hereby young men, and maidens
may be ware that they knytte not themselves together folishlye, and craftily,
whereof periuries, debates, divorces, and miseries, and that, that is most
grievous of all, the wrath of God is wont to follow.

But that those controversies, which (...) often about matrimony, may be more
commodiouslye declared, and decided, and that ignorante persons may be the
better provided for, we will appoynte judgments in certain places of our
dominion, to which such matrimonial causes shall be referred.

It shall also pertayne to the pastoures, to enstruct to the people certaye
times in the year of Matrimonye, with what religion, and reverence it ought to
be taken in hand, and to be kept. And they must teach with singular
diligence, what an holy copulacion of men marige is, and what an excellent
benifite it is of gods providence, to obtyne a good, and tractable husband,
or wife, that they may learn to pray God humbly, and relygiously that he
will provide them, and their children of convenient marriages. Let the pastoures
also warn how grate a sin it is, and how it is forbidden of God with a
peculier curse, not to regard religion above al things in contractynge of
marriage that every body seek principally a companion of faith, which does
knowledge, call upon, and worship Christ the Lord, which may be with him one
man in the Lord, and an help to goforwarde in the faith, and service of
Christ. Item after a consideracion of a consent in religion, that they must
also se, that there be a singular co^sente of minds and a likeness of manners,
and honest desiers, which are wounte to be signs of gods copulation fruther
more that they must prefere the affinite of godly, and honest men, by whom a
man may be increased in godliness, and honesty, before the affinite of rich
men, from whom only outward riches come unto us.

The pastors than shall endeavor them selves to enstructe the people
diligently of the holiness, nature, and hole strength of this most holy
copulacion, as we have here described it, that the youth knowinge the
institution of God and the dignity of this conjunction, may learn to a void
al those thin ges which in co^tracting and keeping of wedlock, are contrary to
the ordinance of God, and to the holiness of that kind of life, finally that
they may enter into, and mayntayn this holy purpose of living, as God has
commanded, and as it may be to their wealth

Of Buriynge.
AS touching dead persons, we will have this difference observed that if any
depart in the manifest contempt of Christ, their corpses shall not be buried
among the bodies of the faithful, nor any of the ministers of the
congregation shall follow them to their graves.

But if they depart in the communion of Christ and of his congregation,
cheyfely if in the extreme danger of life they have professed the same, and
have received the holy sacrament of the Lords body, and blood, and
absolucion, such I say shall be carried forth honorably, and be buried in
places appointed there unto. Neither shall any thing either be required of
any man, or received for such buriynge, which thing cannot be done without
the manifest wickedness of Simonie.

While the corpse is carried forth, it shall be lawefull to sing in the mydde
way, the Psalm. From the deep, or such other like songs.

And that the people may be more diligently admonished of those things, which
are to be considered about burials, it shall not be unprofitable, if a
certain time of burial shall be appointed, at which time some apt place of
scripture may be read, with a short exposition of the place, and admonition,
and exhortation derived out of the same, wherein things of this sort shall be
set forth. Chiefly the exceading greatness of sin, and of the wrath of God,
whereupon death ensued.

Secondly the singular, and inestimable benifite of the redemption of Christ,
which translated sin upon him self, and in diyng overcame death, briefly
purchased, and prepared to all the faithful a new and heavenly life, through
his most holy resurrection and ascension. And hereof a consolation shall be
taken, and applied to the departed person who being translated from death to
life, through faith in Christ, lives with the Lord, and resting in eternal
peace, looks for us. Hereunto let an exhortation be added for the^ that
stand by, namely that they should daily dye more and more to sin, and
prepare them selves to the heavenly life that is to come, and so pray God
continually, that he will grant them a luckie, and good end of this life. And
if there be any notable proves of gods goodness declared toward the dead
person in his life, or death, the ministre shall declare and praise the same,
with a good and godly commemoration to the glory of God and edification of the
church, wherein nevertheless he must beware that he seem not to have gone about
to please men's ears, but to have regarded with a pure heart the institution
of the congregation and commendations of gods gifts.

And as co^cernig buriyng, there is a most apt place in the first epistle of
Paul, Thessalo. Chap. iiij. We will not that ye be ignorant, concerning them
that sleep. etc. Out of which place there may be a sermon made after this
sort.

For as much as we are come togethee by the calling of God to bury our
brother, a membre of the same body of Christ, and saying also that in the
company of Christian men all things must be done to commune edification, we
have thought good to declare some thing unto you more exactly out of the
sermon, that S. Paul made of them that sleep, that by the healpe of the holy
ghost, we may receive some godly and christian consolation thereof, in the
sundry tentatio^s of our faith, and in the straites of death.

S. Paul then writes after this sort, iiij. These. I will not that ye be
ignoraunte brethren, concerning them that are fallen a sleep, that ye sorrow
not, as other me^ do.

This is that notable place of S. Paul concerning them that sleep, that is to
say, concerning christian men departed, which we ought to take, not as a
devise of man, but as the true, and sincere oracle of god, whereof we may not
only get consolation in this mornefull sorrow, which we be in, by reason of
the death of our brother, but also healpe and conforte against the terrors of
death.

The philosophers have disputed of the despisyng of death with many, and sundry
arguments, as when they say, that death is a commune debt of mankind, and an
end of all the miseries, that chance to the life. Which sayings among men
in prosperous health, and such as are careless, as touching Gods judgment,
seem godly, and have a color of wisdom. But in the true terrors of death,
they are vain, and can bring no substantial consolation. For if (...) man
look more narrowly upon the causes of death, he shall find, that death is in
deed as Paul says, the reward of sin. And as Moses speaks also, we are
wasted through thy wrath and by reason of thy hot indignation we are thrown
done. Thou have set our iniquities before thy sight. etc. Now it is well
known that God so hates sin, that he will punish the same, not only for a
time, but for ever. Death the^ is such a punishment of the most ryghtful wrath
of God, that man shall not only be deprived of this life, but also of
everlasting salvation, and shall be adjudged to everlasting damnation. So
far of it is then, that the end of evil is in death, as the philosophers
falsely persuaded them selves, that rather, if ye have a respect to sin, it
is a door, and entry unto everlasting misery.

These things than must be known, considered, and set before our eyes
continually, not that we should take thereof an accasion to despeyre, or to
doubt of our salvation, as the heathen and ungodly do, but rather that being
moved with this condesideration, we may be steared up and driven to Christ,
to seek our only salvation in his Gospel through faith, and to require of him
only deliverance from death.

And though death bring certain destruction and condemnation with it, if you
put Christ a part, and have a respect to sin yet saying that Christ never
committed any sin, and very giltles, if ye regard his own person, suffered
death, surely she had no right at all against him. Whereof it came to pass that
she could not hold him, nor destroy him, but was compelled to restore him.
For where as he was dead in the flesh, and afterward buried, forthwyth upon
the third day he rose again with great glory, and so openly and evidently
declared the same, his resurrection, not only by the testimony of Angels and
sundry appearynges to his disciples, but also by his ascension into heaven, and
wonderful sendynge of the holy ghost, and many other miracles, and signs
that nothing more certain ever chanced under the sun.

Neither did he rise from the dead for his own cause only, but for as much as
he abolished our debt and sin through his death the mercy and bountuousnes
of God is so great toward us, which believe in Christ that he will not only
forgive our sins for Christ's sake, but will also give us the fruit of his
resurrection, and in very death preserve us unto everlasting life. He the^^
that trusts in Christ, is planted into Christ through faith, so far that he
is made a member of him. Your bodies, says Paul, be the members of Christ.
And in an other place. God has put all things under his feet, and has
made him an head above al things unto the congregation it self, which is
his body, the fulfyllynge of him, which fulfylleth al things in all. Seeing
then that Christ the head of the congregation atteyned to everlasting life,
and glory through his resurrection from death, it is not possible that one of
his members planted in him through faith should not atteyne to the same. For
though it be dead, buried, rotten, wasted corrupted, yet it must needs come
to pass that it shall be raised up again in due time unto light, and life, and
so enjoin eternal blisfulnes with Christ. For this cause christian men
departed are not called dead, but are said to be a sleep, every where in
the scriptures.

S. Paul confirms this our faith, when he says, that as Jesus died, and
rose again: so God shall bring them again with him which are fallen a sleep
through Jesus.

He says thus also, Philip. iij. Our conversation is in heaven from whence we
look for a savior Jesus the Lord, which shall transfigure our base body that
he may make it like unto his glorious body. etc. Which thing that it may be
more evident, the Apostle teaches us, not only that the deliverance of the
faithful from death, and raysyng up again unto everlasting rest, shall be most
certain but also he adds with express words. i. Thessa. iiij. with how
great glory, and majesty these things shall be done. For thus he speaks.
This we say to you in the word of the Lord, that no man should think that
these be dreams, or imaginations of me^nes brains, but that it is the Lords
word, and therefore heaven and earth must needs pass away rather then one
jot thereof should fail, and this is that true and everlasting and
unchangeable word of the Lord, that we, which shall live and remain unto
the Lords coming, shall not prevent the^, which sleep. For the Lord him
self shall descend from heaven with a shoute and voice of the Archangell, and
trompe of God, that is to say, with so great glory and majesty, as was never
seen in the earth before, and the dead shall first rise again with Christ,
and then we, which shall be alive, which shall remain, shall be caught up with
them in the clouds, into the air to mete the Lord, and so we shall be ever
with the Lord.

Saying then that this our brother, who^ we have now brought to his grave, was
baptized in the name of Christ, and embraced his gospel, and confirmed, and
declared the same his faith with communicatinge at the Lords supper, and
finally departed in the confession of Christ, we have good hope that God has
forgiven him his sins for Christ sake, has received him in to the favor,
and so joined him to the death, and resurrection of his beloved son, that at
the sound of the trompe of the archaungel, in a moment, in the twinkling of
an eye, he shall come out of his grave to meet Christ, and shall obtain with all the saints the inheritance of the heavenly kingdom, and enjoy
everlasting blisfulnes.

Wherefore let us also give thanks to our Lord God for him, and let us
beseech him ernestly that he will bring us to the true knowledge of Christ
thorough the holy ghost, whereby we may over come death, and be kept in death
it self unto everlasting life, thorough Christ our Lord pray ye, our
father which art etc.

Another burial sermon.

Forasmuch as it has pleased almyghtye God, that according to his mercy, he
would take this our brother out of this world unto him self, to whose
burial we are come together of brotherly love in the name of Christ, it
shall not be unprofitable to set before you the Evangelical lesson, of Lazarus
raised up by Christ, which is in John, Chap. xi. in this sort.

Martha said unto Jesus, Lord if thou had been here, my brother had not
been dead. etc. In this Gospel Christ promises to Martha that her brother
shall rise again and streighte way he called him again to life, being four
days dead.

Howbeit we must not think, that Christ with this notable miracle would
signify, that every man after four days shall be raised up to this temporal
and mome^taine life as Lazarus was, but with this act he would confirm and
establishe the truth of his Gospel, which he comprehended in this place with
few words, and as it were in a su^me saying, I am the resurrection and life,
he that believes in me though he be dead, he shall live, and every one that
lives, and believes in me, shall not dye for ever.

And though the face of death by reason of sin be very terrible, and
horrible, as one that of her own nature draws with her everlasting
damnation, yet seeing that Christ has abolished sin, and escaped the
dominion of death through his resurrection, he has taken also from death, all
her power, and strength, so that who so believes in him, and is planted into
his body through faith, as a lively member, he shall be preserved in death it
self, and shall be translated from death to life. As Paul testifies, Christ is
rissen from the dead, he was the first fruit of the^, that had fallen a
sleep. For seeing that death came by man, the resurrection of the dead, comes
also by man. For as by Adam all men dye, so by Christ al men be quickened. etc.

Wherefore the death of the^, which clean to the body of Christ through
faith, ought not to be compted such, as should have strength to destroy and
condemn, but such as before God is compted precious, and is, as it were
entronised, and consecrated of Christ to be the door, and entry into
everlasting life Though the body then being buried in the earth, vanishe
away, and be confounded from the eyes of me^, yet God, which is almighty
preserves the life of it. As a grain of corn cast upon the earth, first
dies, and afterward brings forth fruit: so god has also ordained, that
man's body being now rotten, and consumed, should yet be restored again unto
life.

This is a divinity, and an unchangeable truth, that this self same body shall
rise again through the power of God, but nevertheless it shall not be subject
to any inco^moditie, or miseries, wherewith it is now afflicted, yea rather it
shall be clarified with so great, and so excellent glory, as man's mind ca^
atteine with no thought. Paul then speaks after this sort. It is sown in
corruption, and rises again in incorruptibilitie, it is sown in dishonor,
and rises in glory, it is sown in weakness, and ryseth in power, it is sown
a natural body, and rises again a spiritual body. etc. John also writes
thus. Now we are the children of god, and it has not yet appeared what we
shall be. But we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like unto him. etc.

Seeing then that so singular and excellent glory is laid up for us through
Christ Jesus, and nothing ought to be more certain unto us, the^ this
redemption from death, and resurrection unto eternal salvation, not surely for
any of our merits toward god, but for Christ's sake in who^ we believe.
Undoubtedly we ought to endeavor our selves by all means, that some fruits
of this glorious resurreccion may appear in us through the holy ghost even in
this temporal life, that is to say, that we rise again from sins and live a
blameles life, that we doubt not and despeyre with the unfaithful, but look
for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with a sure trust.

This our brother also, who^ we brought forth even now to be buried, saying
that being baptized, he acknowledged, and professed the same Jesus Christ, to
be the true, and only author of his salvation, we ought not to doubt, but
that he is coupled to the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, that now
through Christ he has obtained remission of his sins, and has received
with Christ and all the saints the enheritaunce of everlasting life and peace.
Wherefore let us all give God thanks together, and let us pray him, to
mainteyne true, and certain knowledge of Christ in us, and to make the same
effectuous in us through his resurrection.

Pray ye, and say the Lords prayer.

An other sermon at a burial of a young man, or young woman.

Christian love, and compassion has brought us to this place to the buryall of
a young man in Gods name. Saying then that we can do nothing, that may be
either more fruitful or more comfortable to us, then if we exercise our
selves in Gods word, and considre the doctrine, and acts of our Lord Jesus
Christ diligently, let us set before us that lesson of the Gospel, which
is written in Luke, Chap. vij.

And it came to pass afterward, that Jesus went into a City called Naim, and
many of his disciples went with him, and a great multitude. And as he
approached to the gate of the City, behold a corpse was in cariynge forth. etc.

If it be a young maiden let the Gospel of Matthew be read Chapter. ix.

A certain Prince came to Jesus, and worshypped him, saying: my daughter dyed
even now, but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live. etc.

This present history of the Gospel sets before us a notable miracle of a
maiden raised up again by Christ. Which deed we must not so take, as though
Christ did signify, that all dead men before they be buried must be called
again into this life, which is temporal, wretched, and subject to death,
but his purpose was to stablishe the truth of his Gospel, and by the way to
declare also this thing, that the fruit of his Gospel, and heavenly riches,
perteyneth not only to aged me^, but also to young persons. And where as we
see both old men, and young to dye, thereof we may gather that the same comes
not to pass at all auentures, and by chance, but by a certain wonderful
wisdom, and purpose of God.

God also will set before our eyes through such exemples how uncertain the
lotte of this life is, and admonish us therwyth, that we pass not over this
life with negligence, and sluggishnes, but seeing without Christ there is no
salvation, nor blisfulnes, that we prepare our selves to the true knowledge of
Christ, and to christian obedience. Furthermore he would declare the greatness
of original sin, by the death of this young person. For though after man's
judgment there be greater hope of salvation in the death of a young man, in
whom so great outward sins be not found, as in men of more age, yet in
their causes we must use Gods judgment, and not man's. Neither ought we
in any wise to think, that any man shall obtain salvation through his own
innocence. But saying that death, which is the reward of sin, inuadeth
both young and old, it is a plain testimony, that they be not free from
sin, but are comprehended in that general sentence of Paul to the Romans,
where he says, by one man sin entered into the world, and death through
sin, and so death went over all men, forasmuch as we have sinned.

Furthermore the nature of sin utters it self even in children, as they
grow in age by sundry fruits of vices.

Wherefore God forfende, that we should think that young men obtain salvation
through the merit of their own innocence. Yea they ought as well as old
men to acknowledge, that they receive their whole salvation through the
innocence of Christ. Wherefore that young men may be saved, they must needs
enjoy the innocence of Christ. For as Peter says, there is none other name
given to men, wherein they must be saved, but in the name of Jesus Christ.
Now young folk, are so planted in Christ through Baptism, that they are
made his lively me^bres, and by that means have right to all his goods. For
Paul says, al you that be baptized have put on Christ. For as before God
there is neither bondma^ nor free, neither male, nor female, so there is
neither child nor old man, but all we be one in Christ Jesus. Undoubtedly
Christ has deserved through his death forgyuenes of sin, and is rissen
again from death.

Wherefore it is a thing right certain, that young folk also being
Baptized in Christ, have already obtained remission of sins, and that it is
not possible, that they should utterly perish in death, but contrary wise
they must needs be raised up again from death to life through Christ. For so
Paul says, we are buried with him through Baptism unto death. If we be
grafted in him, by the lykenes of his death, we shall also be partakers of his
resurrection.

Saying then this young person, whose corpse we brought forth even now, was
baptized in the name of Christ, and brought up in Christian doctrine, and
moreover acknowledged Christ to be his only salvation and openly declared this
his faith, by communicatynge at the Lords Supper, surely we have a good hope,
that this death, is not death in deed, but rather is a sleep unto him, out of
which sleep he shall be raised inconvenient time, unto the possession of the
inheritance of the heavenly kingdom.

Wherefore remembrynge so great bountuousnes, let us only give thanks to
the Lord God, and pray, that he will teach us earnestly, to considre the
things that be in the Psalm writer, namely that our days be short, that we
slide away violently like a shoure of rain, that we are as it were a dream,
that we may be changed incontiuently like an herb, which florisheth and is
fresh in the morninge, and in the evening wythereth, and is cut up. And
these things we must do for this entente, that we may come to our selves in
time, and be converted to a better life, that we may lead an honest life, and
acceptable to God in the fear of the Lord, and finally that in death it self
we may be preserved unto everlasting life through Christ our Lord.

Pray ye to God. Our father. etc. When the prayer is done, let the mininister
say.

The Lord be with you. Let us pray.
Almighty God, and most loving father, increase in us the belefe of the
resurrection, where unto thou haste called us through our Lord Jesus Christ,
that being grounded upon this belief, we may comfort our selves in the
death of this our brother (or sister) whose body we have now committed to the
earth, according to thy ordinance, and that we may also comfort our selves
in other calamities, which in this valleye of tears, we worthyly suffer for
our sins. Further that we may lift up our minds, and thoughts unto the
heavenly life to come, and seek the things that are above, where Christ thy
son is, sittinge at they right hand, finally that diinge to sin daily, we
may serve the all the days of our life in all sanctification, and
ryghtuousnes, through the same Christ our Lord.

Another collecte.

We give thanckes unto the almyghtye God, hauenlie father for that, that thou
have vouchsafed to call this our brother (or sister) to the knowledge of thy
dear son, and his communion, and to preserve him in the same and now to
send for him, and remove him to thy kingdom Grant us we beseech the thorough
the same thy son, that in this place, and in all other we may truly
acknowledge our sins, earnestly lament them, and know, and praise the daily
more and more in the newnes of life, and that so being strenghthned with good
hope, we may look for that blessed hope and appearinge of the glory of the
great God and our savior Jesus Christ, which lives God and reigns with
the, in the unite of the holy ghost, thorough out al generations. Amen.

And for the consolacion of the faithful in the Lord, and mouinge the zeal of
godlynes, it shallbe convenient, when the corpse is brought to the burynge
place, to propoune, and declare before the people gathered there together, the
lesson folowinge out of the.xv. Chap. of the first to the Corinth, But now
Christ is risen from the dead etc unto this place what do we etc.

Or From this place.

This I say brethern that flesh, and blood, unto the end of the Chap.

Or To the Philip. iij.

For our conversation is in heaven unto the end of the Chap.

Or To the Romans vi.

And if we be dead with Christ, we believe, that we shall live with him etc.
unto this place, let not sin than reign. etc.

Of holy and festiual days.
FIrst we will that our men upon sondaies apply them selves wholly to the Lord,
and cease from all corporal worckes, and business, and also from all iorneyes
not necessary, and practicing of merchaundises. As God comau^ded in his law.
In six days let them finish, and make an end of all their work, and let
them sanctify the sunday altogether unto the Lord, that upon that day they
may be enstructed and renewed in faith, and religion, out of gods word. And
seuerli it is a great proof that, that man cares little for God, and his own
salvation, which of the whole weke, will not bestow so much as one day upon
heavenly matters, to make him self ready upon that day, and to come
together with a godly zeal, to hear gods word, and to receive the divine
sacraments, and to pray together with the saints. For the spirit of the
new testament ought to kendle in us a much more fervent study of these
things, than was stirred up in the old people thorough the law.

Wherefore the preachers shall often warn the people how great a sin it is,
to spend those days in idleness, surfettinge, dronckennes riotte, in nawghtye
and filthye lusts, as we se done communely, which be appointed to God, and to
relygious, and spiritual exercises. For thorough this ungodliness the calamites
that we suffer, and that hang yet sorer over our heads, are specially
provoked. The pastors than must pulle the people from this ungodliness with all
possible diligence by gods word.

Beside sondaies we will have holy days to be kept, and celebrated.

Christmas. The day of Stephane and Johan. Of Circumcision.
Of the Epiphanie.
Of the conversion of Paul. Of the purificacion of Marie. Of the Annunciation.
The thursdaie and fridaie before Easter, for this entente, that upon those
days the history of the passion of Christ may be propouned, and declared to
the people. Easter day with the two days folowinge. Ascension day.
Whittesondaye with the mondaie folowinge. The day of the natiuite of John
Baptist Of Peter, and Paul. The day of the visitacion of Marie. Of Michael,
upon which day a sermon shall be made of the Angels, out of this place, Math.
xviij. Their Angels ever se the face etc. Item hebru. i. Angels be ministringe
spirits etc. Out of these places the pastors shall warn the people of this
singular benifite of God to wards us, in that, that he has given his Angels
to be the ministers of our wealth, and they shall exhort them, to give God
thanks continually for this benifite and to take heed, that they grieve not
the Angels with their sins, but rather study to make them glad with all
holiness, and godlynes.
Upon the festeas of the Apostles we will that the people cease from labor, til
the end of the holy sermon, and than it shall be lawful for every man to
returue to his work. For it is evident that to cease from labor after
dinner, is hurteful to agreat part of the people. For in that time commenly
they offend God with carnal wanto^nes, more grievously than upon other days.
Therefore they that will keep these h^lye days holy, must se hereunto, that
they also sanctify the^ wholly to God, and pass them over with godly
exercises of religion, and not bestow them upon those things, whereby the
wrath of God, is cheifely provoked. Upon those holy days, on which we
celebrate, and extol such benifites of God, as be peculierly mentioned in the
histories of the holy scripture, the same histories shall be propouned, and
declared to the people.

And wereas we have no certain knowledge of the Apostles doings, beside those
things that we read in the Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, and in their
Epistles upon the holy days of those Apostles, of whom the holy scripture
makes no peculiar mention, the pastoures must warn the people, and enstructe
the^ of the office of the Apostles, and of the ministry of the gospel
generally, out of these lessons of the Gospel. Jesus sent his twelve disciples
etc. Mathe. x. Item Ioha^. xv. I am a true vyue, and you be branches etc. Or
out of some other like lesson. For hidden writings called Apocripha or such
histories, as men doubt of the certainty thereof ought not to be red in
churches, which thing was also decreed in the holy counsels.

Forther upon those days, on which the memories of the more notable saints
have been customeably celebrated heretofore, whether men cease from bodylye
labor upon those days, or not, let the pastors make holy sermons, and
their in, if there be any history of those saints worthey belefe let them
bring forth out of the same pure examples of faith and true fruits of faith,
and let the^ preach and exalte the same that they may be followed.

So yet that some lesson of the holy scripture be red aforehande at the
beginning, that the sermon may be derived out of that lesson cheifely, as we
read that the holy fathers did also. And if any supersticious tales,
monstrous, and false miracles of saynetes have been accustommed to be set
forth heretofore upon those days, the postours shall study to bring forth,
and confute those lies, as in like manner al false worshippinge of saints. And
let them always declare in these sermons with al faythfulnes, and diligence,
how sondrie, and horrible impieties and abommacions, have flowe^ over the
people thoroughe such monstrous praises, and false worshippinges of saints,
where with as the glory of God, so the honor of saints also has been horibly
defaced, and obscured

Wherefore as often as any holy day, or memory of Saints shall happen, the
ministers of the congregacions shall warn the people, how the memories of
saints may be godly celebrated, namely thus, first that we know their faith,
and the fruits of the same, that we have in reverence the gifts, and
meruaylous worckes of God, that we praise, and magnify God for them, further
that thereby we confirm in our selves faith and hope toward God, and pray
God with more confidence, to give us like faith, and to confirm the same, for
as much as he has promised that he wylbe our God no-lesse, than he is the God
of the Saints departed. Thirdly that we be enflamed by the examples of the
Saints to follow them godly, that we also may raise up the giste of God that
is given us, and religiuossi follow the steps of the Saints every man
according to his vocacion. Finally forasmuch as almost in all the other holy
days, yea even in those which were appointed for the remembrance of Christ
the savior, manifold superstition is crepte in, and many ungodly fables, and
very heathnish obseruacio^s have borne aswinge let the pastors enquire
diligently what part of these toys, and superstitions remains yet in any
people, and let them confute the same ernestly by the scriptures, and call
men back again from those erroures to worship God in spirit, and truth,
and that purely, and simply according to his word. For he has redeined us
with the precious blood of his son Christ the unspotted lamb, from these
vain rites delivered from the fathers. i. Peter. i.

Of fasting days, and of lent.
TThe pastors, and teachers of congregacyons shall dilygently teach the people
what true fasting is out of those things, that we have touched before
concerning Christian fast. For thereby any man may easily se, that a true
fast, and such as we begin out of true faith, must be taken upon us
willingly with true repentance, and with a godly geale to make our
supplicacious to God, not by any necessite of a law, not for the custom of
men, other wise they shall teach that it is not only of none effect before
God, but is also abominacion unto him. For it is evident, that, that will to
fast, that repentance, and desire to pray humbly to God, can be stiered up
by no commandment outwardly used. For we have not received the spirit of
Christ by the law, but thorough the hearing of the Gospel. Gala. iij.
Wherefore nether the Lord himself Christ, nor the Apostles or the saints
either after them, prescribed any certain day for fasting by a law, but
only exhorted the congregation, and every Christian man to fast godli, their
consciences in the mean while being bound with no law. So in the old
testament fasting was commanded by the law only upon one day in the year.
Wherefore it can not become us the ministers of the new testament, not of the
letter, but of the spirit, to make laws of fasting, and there with to snare
the consciences of Christian people.

Therefore we think it shall be sufficient, that the pastors exhort the
people dilige^tely to godly fastes, and upon the fasting days to allure them
with those exercises of religion, which the fathers also used. Whereof we have
entreated before in their place.

Wherefore we will have lent to be kept after this sort, First, that the
preachers admonisch the congregation dyligently as at al other ceasons, so at
this time also, of their weakness, and of their sins, and exhort them to
true, and lively repentance, Secondly that they declare that the more
religious sort of Christen men, and the feruenter in the zeal of Christ have
ever observed to give them selves somewhat more at certain times to the
worckes of repentance, as fasting, ernest supplications, and liberal alms, by
that means renuinge in them selves the study of godliness, and stirring up
themselves from their natural faintnes, and sluggishnes in goinge forward in
the way of the Lord. For our nature is so defiled with ungodliness, and
perverse lusts of things partaining to this life, that all care of god,
wareth feeble, and cold in us, if we do not often raise it up, and kendle it
with singular meditacion of gods word, and fervent preayers to God.

Further more let them declare that the obseruacion of lent was instituted
of the old fathers for this purpose, that if any in the rest of the year had
fallen in to some grievous sins, or lived carelessly, being touched with no
just repentance of their sins or other wise had behaved them selves
neglyge^tli in religion both which evils are wou^te to invade very many, such
persons should be stirred up, and kendled at this time to ernest repentance
of their sins, and liuelye exercises of godliness, by sondrie, and grave
sermons, by religious supplicatio^s of the whole congregacions, and also by the
examples of them that were more fervent in the zeal of godliness, that they
also might apply them selves to relygious fastes, and prayers,

Therefore that our men may be so delivered from that supersticion, and
hypocrisy, where with they provoked the wrath of God more grievously upon the^,
that nevertheless they may want nothing, whereby they may be allured, and
set forward both to liuelye, and effections repentance of sins, and to a
co^stante carefulnes, to go fore ward in the Lords way, by which things the
wrath of God is pacified, and his benifites be more plentuously obtained, we
will, that every day in the lent (if it may be obtained that the people will
come together) holy assembles be made, and that lessons be reliouslired, and
declared out of the scriptures, which do more vehementli provoke to repentance
of sins, and to a dilige^te study to go forewarde in the way of Christ.
Whereout the pastoures shall make ernest, and fervent exhortations, and add
therevn to somewhat long prayers, and they shall keep this asse^bles somewhat
later and farther forth in the day chiefly three days in the week, namely
upon the second the fourth, and the sixte day, that they, in whom a will to
fast godly is stirred up, may have more occasion, and oportunite thereunto.

For we can not well hope that the old manner of fasting may be called again
chiefly among us Germans which was to differ meat unto the evening, and to
bestow the whole day in holy doctrine, and prayers. Wherefore we shall be
content, if we may obtain, that after lesso^s, sermons, and prayers, which
shall be ended at noone time, than, as the custom now is, every man take meat
according to the necessite of nature, and as every man is stirred up to fast,
so that we call it not ennynge when it is not yet none, as we do now a days
to folishly I had almost said peruersly

But whereas we chiefly require lenten exercises three days only in the
week, noman shall think that we do remissi, and neglygently herein, which
will godly consider to how few the true religion of fasting is known now a
days, where as in Christian congregacions all things must be instituted, and
done in spirit, and truth, and by all means we must fle al hypocrisy, which
is abominable to God. Thus we read that in the time of the holy fathers.

Ambrose, and Augustine, even at Rome, and in mani other places, upon the
fifte, and seventh day of the weke fasting was remitted in the lent. Upon the
days of the four times communli called quatuor temporum embring days, let
holy lesso^s, sermones, and prayers, ernest and somewhat long, be used, and
later in the day, as in lent, and let the people be stirred up diligently
to true repentance, and the worckes of the same, fasting prayer, and alms.

Of difference of meats.
NO true Christian doubts hereof, all the fathers have witnessed, and taught
it with many words, that the only difference of meats, with out the
abstinence of things dilitinge this flesh, which may more prepare, and
sancsifie our bodies to the spirit of Christ in us for the performance of
alworkes of godlynes, is a very vain thing, and unpleasant to God, as he
himself has wytnessed Esaye, lviii. yea that it is an abomynable thing, if
any trust of merit be put in it before him, which thing he him self has
also witnessed. Esaie. i. cha. howbeit, among Christen men there have been now
a great while not a few, which have thought that it is a true fast, if upon
certain days they abstain only from the flesh of foul, and four footed
beasts, though in the mean ceason they dilitiously feed them selves with the
flesh of fisthes, and other meats much costlier, and delicater, than the
commune use of flesh is. The old fathers in many cogregations, were wounte
to fast upon the fourth, and syxte day of the weke, to which days some after
ward added the saturdaie also, hereof came the custom to abstain from flesh,
and eggs upon those days. For the old fathers upon fasting days abstayned
from those meats, howbeit they abstained not only from those, but also from
fishes, and all delycate meats, and from wine to.

But for as much as it has been begone a good wyle since, that grauntes be
made to all sorts of men, and not to princes only to eat al manner of meats
both in lent, and upon other fasting days, and our bischoplye office
requires that we ordain all things among our men acordinge to the word of
God, and to the edification of faith, consideringe these things, we see not
what we may enjoin to our men concerning the only differrence of meats, we
command our pastors and preachers this one thing, that they teach the people
what is the true and Christian abstinence, and moderation of meat and drink,
and other things, which God has given for the need of the body, and that they
exhort them to the same most diligently, I say to that obstimence, whereby the
flesh is more subdued, and made more obedient to the spirit, and that the
pore may feale some comfort, while we give the^ that, that we withdraw from
our selves. They shall also warn this diligently, that all abstinence of
things, which the Lord has created, and given to us for our use, if we take
it not upon us for this intent, that thorough the same religion toward God,
and liberality toward our neighbor may be encreced, is very heathinish and
Monkishe superstition, which God abhors though it be rigorous, and cause a
sharp chastiseme^t of the body. How will God take such an unshamefast
faininge of abstinence, yea rather not a fayning but a very wicked mocking of
the diuie majesty while upon those days, in which abstimence of flesh is
bosted men feed to the full, and delight them selu^^ with such, and other
meats much more costlye, and delicate than the common meats of flesh be. But
for our part we ernestly desire, and exhort al our men, and every one of the
pastors, that they labor to warn and exhort them of whom they have charge
to turn them selves from the excess, in tem perante and wastfulnes, which
they now use, to true sparing and moderacion of meats, and drinks, and other
things, which this body needs, remembringe this saying of the Lord, Take heed to your selves lest at any time your hertes be laden with surfettinge,
and dronckennes, and cares of this world Item Petr. i. v. Be sobre, and watch,
for your adversary the devil, walks about like a roringe lion, seekinge whom
he made devour.

Of certain other rites and ceremonies of the church.
THat holy days may be consecrated, and sanctified truli, and wholly to God,
we will that nothing be omitted, that pertains to the stirring up, and
prickinge forth of the people to this santificacion of Christ.

Wherefore in tou^nes, and great villages, where schloles, or more ministers of
the ^ongregacion shall be we will that an assemble of the people be appointed
there in the morning early as it shall be most commodious for the people, for
the behofe of servants, and workmen, which can not always be present at
the appointed time of Gods service, and between this assemble, and the
oppoynted time of commune service, there shall be at the least the space of an
hour, that they which will be present at the commune service, may have
leisure to prepare them selves thereunto. Let this assemble be begone with a
douch Psalm, and let it also depart with a douch Psalm. Finally let there be
made such a sermon as shall declare the Catechism, with a short exposition
of the Gospel.

And if there be in any congregation such a number of clerks, as both will,
and can sing the morning prayers, let them endenoure them selves to sing
songs out of the scripture only, and that with true faith, and pure minds,
that they may steare up, and confirm their faith in Christ. And if it
chance that some of the people come thither, let some lesson be read unto
them, and let them also be diligently moved to common prayer. Where scholars
be, let them come in to the church a little before the commune service, and
sing in latin these three Psalms, Tedeum laudamus, Benedictus dominus deus.
etc. with some pure antiphonie agreinge with the scriptures, and a Responsorie
and thus they may be exercised in the scriptures, for the knowledge whereof
they go to schole cheifely.

At the evening prayers, before the coming together of the people the same
usage shall be observed, and in the steed of Tedeum Laudamus, and Benedictus,
they may sing some pure Hymn, and Magnificat. When the people be come
together, let them sing a Psalm or two in douch, and then Magnificat, and
afterward let the Catechism be handled, and let some lesson be taken out of
the scriptures, and read to the people, whereunto there shall be added a common
prayer, or collecte. And so let the people depart with thankesgyuynge, and
blessing.

If there be a custom received in any place to sing praises a little before
night, the same may be observed, so yet that in the steed of Salve regina,
and such like, some Hymn in douch with a commune prayer be song to Christ
the Lord.

Of ecclesiastical rites upon workyng days.
IN cities and other places, where a meetely great multitude of people, and
ministers be, let there be appointed at the lest two assembles every day,
in the morning, and in the evening, and that at hours most commodious for
the people. In every assemble let a lesson be read, and brief exposition
of the same with Douche Psalms at the beginning, and the ending and last of
al with commune prayer. In very populus cities, if the people, and ministers
will permit it, there shall be two assembles before none, one very early in
the morning for workmen, and hired servants the other after the rysynge of
the sun for strangers, and citizins also, of who^ there is a great multitude
every where, which shall heave leisure enough to appear before God every
day, that they may hear his word and make their prayers.

To which thing the preachers shall earnestly and diligently move the people,
for we have very great need of continual doctrine, exhortation, and prayers
unto god. It is convenient for them then, to who^ God has given a sufficient
living, so that they may omit their handie work so long, to occupy the^
selves the more in spiritual works, to praise God, and to make supplications
unto him for their neighbors, chiefly seeing that if any time be bestowed
upon such spiritual and godly exercises, they do not only leese nothing of
these temporal things, but they rather gain, much temporal, and spiritual
riches.

And that the people may come with greater company to such assembles, upon
the working days, the whole service, which consists in syngyng, readyng,
preaching and prayers, shall endure but an hour. And the morning assemble of
workmen shall be dimissed somewhat sooner.

But as for the holy supper of the Lord, which the Lord instituted not to be
set forth for a vain fight but to be received for a common remembrance of
his death, and resurrection, and a true communion of his body, and blood
through the Sacrament, we see no cause why it should be observed upon the
working days, when there is not a full, and just assemble of the people. For to
handle this right holy ceremony, or to allure men to handle it otherwise,
then it was instituted, and commanded of God, makes us guilty of the Lords
body and blood, the continual, and daily abuses of which Sacrament, how
great calamities they have brought in to the world, we feel (alas) daily to
much. And if a lively and effectuous remembrance of Christ, and gods
benefits ca^ not be obtained and kept with holy lessons, Psalms and prayers,
what other thing shall we bring to pass with the often celebration of the
Lords supper, then to heap up offenses and gilt against the Lords body and
blood For how ca^ they rightly use the sacraments which can not increase, and
confirm their faith, out of the pure doctrine of Christ, and continual prayer.
The old and fervent fathers in the true zeal of godliness, thought that the
matter was in right good case with the^ if with semely attention, and earnest
repentance of misdeedes, they might celebrate the Lords supper with their
people, in who^ the faith of Christ as yet was more lively at the lest, upon
the sundaies. The pastors that dwell in villages shall ordeyne two assembles of
the people every weke, and three in the winter, in which some lesson shall be
had with common prayer.

Of peculiar days of supplicatious communely called professions.
Days of such supplications shall be appointed at certain times, namely when
some notable necessity, or occasion shall chance, which may provoke us to
call for the healpe of the God more vehemently as when we be aflicted of God
with intemperatnes, or corruption of the air, with want of vitaile,
seditions, wars, or with some other visitation, or at the lest when we be
pressed by reason of the grievous wicked acts of the whole people, or of the
ministers which have rule of the^.

When these things happen, let us understand that we are chastised of God.
Wherefore let us turn to him with all our heart, and with most earnest
attention of mind, in fasting, in weeping and lame^tations, as he him self
warns us to do by his prophets. We read moreover that the prophet Samuel,
King Iosaphat, Esdras, Jeremy, and the Ninevites with other instituted, and
called together assembles for such supplications. We know also that such
prayers were made by the whole congregation of Jerusalem when Petre was taken,
whereby they obtained also deliverance of the same person.

There shall be then an ordinary day of supplication appointed, every
month, and that upon wenesdaye, or fridaye, as it shall be most commodious
for the people. And the whole people shall come together to this convocation,
none otherwise then they do upon holy days. Then some lesson convenient for
the place, and time shall be recited whereby the people, may be steared up to
acknowledgyng of sin, and amendment of the same, wherewyth we provoke the
anger of God against us, and deserve al manner of calamities. Furthermore they
shall also be moved to prayer for remission of sins, for Gods mercy and
healpe, and also they shall be steared to liberal alms.

Whereunto there shall succeed a litanie in douch, after the form, that
follows.

And when the people have also said their private prayers, at length the
pastoure shall end commune prayers with some one of those collectes, that
follow the litanie here.

Besides these common prayers, in Cities and where a great company of people
is, a litanie shall be song with them that come together in the spirit, and
commune prayers shall be made upon an appointed day every week.

But in those supplications, which are appointed for some notable necessity,
and affliction sent of God, an holy day, and fasting shall be proclaimed to
the whole people, at lest unto the end of common prayers.

And in such solemn days of supplication, some vehemente and earneste
lessons, shall be read out of the Prophets, concerning repentance and
renuinge, and correction of life, and out of the same, the intolerable wrath
of God shall be propouned to the people most diligently, and vehemently.

Litanie.
Lord have mercy, Christ have mercy, Lord have mercy, Christ hear us, O
God the heaue^li father have mercy on us O God the son redemer of the world
have mercy on us. O God the holy ghost, have mercy on us. Be favorable.
Spare us O Lord Be favorable. Deliver us O Lord From al sin. Deliver us O
Lord. From al error. Deliver us O Lord. From all evil. Deliver us O Lord.
From the awaytes of the diuyll. Deli. etc. From sodeyne, and evil death.
Deliver. etc. From pestilence and hungre. Deliver. etc. From war and
slaughter. Deliver us. From sedition, and privy hatred. Deliver. From
lightenyng and tempests. Deliver. From everlasting death. Deliver us etc. By
the mystery of thy holy incarnation, Deliver us O Lord. By thy holy
nativity. Deliver us. etc. By thy Baptism, fasting and tentations. Deliner
us O Lord. By thine agony and sweating of blood. Deliver us O Lord. By thy
cross and passion. Deliver us. etc. By thy death and buriynge. Deliver us. By
thy resurrection and ascension. Deliver. By the coming of the holy ghost the
comforter. Deliver us O Lord. In all times of our tribulation. Deliver. In all
times of our prosperity. Deliver us. In the hour of death. Deliver us O
Lord. In the day of Judgment. Deliver us. etc.
We sinners, beseech the to hear us.

That thou will vouchsafe to rule and govern thy holy and catholic church.
We.

That thou will vouchsafe to keep the bishops, pastors, and ministers of
the church in wholesome doctrine, and holy life. We be.

That thou will vouchsafe to take away sects, and al offenses. We beseech
the to. etc.

That thou wylt vouchsafe to bring them again into the way of truth, which
stray and be seduced. We beseech the to hear us.

That thou wylt vouchsafe to tread Satan under our feet. We beseech the to
hear us.

That thou wylt send forth faithful workmen into thy harvest. We be.

That thou wylt vouchsafe to give to all the hearers increase of thy word, and
the fruit of thy spirit. We beseech the to here us.

That thou wylt vouchsafe to lift them up that be fallen, and to strengthen
them that stand. We beseech the to hear us.

That thou will vouchsafe to conforte and healpe the weaklinges and such as
be tempted. We beseech the to hear us.

That thou will vouchsafe to give peace and concord to al kings and princes.
We.

That thou will vouchsafe to give our Emperor perpetual victory against
the enemies of God. We beseech.

That thou will vouchsafe to guide and defend our prince with his officers.
We be.

That thou will vouchsafe to bless, and preserve our officer and cominaltie.
We be.

That thou will vouchsafe to regard, and save the aflicted, and such as be
in danger.

We beseech the to hear us.

That thou will vouchsafe to give luckie deliverance, and increase to women
with child, and nurses. We beseech the.

That thou will vouchsafe to cherishe, and keep Infantes, and sick folk. We
beseech.

That thou wylt vouchsafe to deliver prisoners. We beseech the to hear us.

That thou will vouchsafe to defend Orphans and wydowes, and to provide for
them. We beseech the to hear us.

That thou will vouchsafe to have mercy on all men. We beseech the to hear
us.

That thou will vouchsafe to perdon, and convert our enemies, persecutours and
sclaunderers. We beseech the to hear us.

That thou wylt vouchsafe to give and preserve the fruits of the earth. We be.

That thou will vouchsafe to hear us. We.

The lamb of God which take away the sins of the world. Have mercy on us.

The lamb of God which take away the sins of the world. Have mercy on
us.

The lamb of God which take away the synnnes of the world. Give us peace.

Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy on us.

Christ have mercy on us.

Lord have mercy on us.

Amen.

A prayer or collecte after litanie.

The minister.

Lord deal not with us after our sins.

The Quier.

Neither render unto us according to our iniquities.

The minister.

O God the merciful father, which despifest not the groaning of the co^trite,
nor contempnest the affection of them that morn, be present at our prayers,
which we pour forth before the in the affictions, which continually lay upon
us, and hear the same mercifully that the thing, that the gyles of Satan, and
me^ entende, may be brought to naught, and dispersed by the devise of thy
goodness, that being hurt with no persecutions, we may ever give the thanks
in thy holy congregation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Ame^.

An other Collecte.

The minister.

Call upon me in the day of tribulation.

The Quier.

And I will deliver the, and thou shalt glorify me.

The ministre.

Spare Lord, spare our sins. And though continual pain be due unto us,
which sin without ceasyng, yet grant we beseech the, that the thing, that
we deserve unto perpetual destruction, may pass from us unto the furtheraunce
of virtue, through our Lord, etc.

An other Collecte.

The ministre.

Healpe us O God our health.

The Quier.

And for the glory of thy name deliver us and be merciful to our sins for
thy names sake.

The minister.

Almighty, everlasting God, by whose spirit the whole body of the
congregation is sanctified, and governed, hear us praying for all ordres, and
degres, that by the gift of thy grace all the same may serve the faithfully,
through our Lord, etc.

An other Collecte.

The minister.

Show us Lord thy mercy.

The Quier.

And give us thy salvation.

The minister.

God from whom all holy desires, good purposes, and ryghtuous works proceed,
give thy servants that peace, which the world can not give, that our hertes
being wholly consecrated, to thy commandments, and the fear of our enemies
being removed our time through thy protection may be without storms and
quiet, through our Lord, etc.

An other Collecte.

The minister.

Enter not Lord into judgment with thy servant.

The Quier.

For no living creature shall be justified in thy sight.

The minister.

Almighty God, which know that we being in the midst of so great perels,
can not stand, by reason of man's weakness grant us salvation of body, and
soul, that by thy healpe, we may overcome those things, which aflicte us for
our sins, through our Lord, etc.

Of common alms.
IT is the propre, and necessary office of every congregation rightly ordered,
and instituted, to provide that none among the^ want necessary things to
live well and godly, but that every man, whom God has brought, and enjoined
to each congregation, be ministered unto, as much as shall suffice him to live
godly, and moreover that they procure that no man live idly, and be burtheuous
to other, to which ministry the primitive church appointed Stephane with his
companions. Act. vi. Wherefore we will also procure that in every congregation
some me^ of notable godliness, wisdom and faythfulnes, being approved by the
testimonies of every congregation, shall be appointed by the visiters, as many
as shall seem to suffice, for that purpose in every place. These men shall note
the names of all needy folk, and shall diligently observe, in what need
every man is, and how he lives, and they shall also exhort every man to
work, according to his strength, and shall withdraw alms from them that ca^
work, and will not, according to the saiynge of Paul, he that works not,
let him not eat.

It shall perteyne to these prouostes of the holy alms, to lay up in the
ecclesiastical treasury all manner alms, and oblatio^s, that godly men shall
offer to the Lord in the congregation, or give privately, and therout they
shall distribute to pore folk according to every man's necessity, and shall
give an acco^pte of all that they receive, and lay forth to the^, whom we will
appoint thereunto.

And that me^ may offer their gifts to the Lord more liberally, we will that
there be a peculiar place, and chest ordained in every temple for this
purpose, not far from the alter that it may be in the sight of all the
people. And the preachers shall diligently exhort the people, that they
appear not empty before the Lord, chiefly upon su^daies, and as often, as a
great company is gathered together, when baptism is ministered, the Lords
supper, confirmation, the blessing of marriage, and when men resort together,
to a burial. Ite^ as often as me^ privately either desire the healpe of God in
some great necessity, or give thanks to God for singular benifitee, as when
the Lord has sent, or removed diseases, or other dangers, or has otherwise
dealte bountuously with us.

Furthermore we will that the four offering days in a year be kept, that they
which communicate at the Lords table, may offer some gift four times in the
year, which thing they ought to do no we the more gladly for that, that they
know, that they truly offer to Christ him self in his me^bres, according to
his word, wherefore they shall hear in time to come that blessed voice. Come
the blessed of my father, and possess a kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world, for I hungered, and you gave me to eat. etc. We will
also provide by the healpe of God, that in no part of these ablations of the
faithful, be given to any body, but such as need in deed, and chiefly to
Citizins, and Iudwellers of every place, and among those to them principally,
that be in greatest need, as to widows, Orphans sick folk, and such as be
otherwise oppressed with need and misery. Finalli as much as may be spared,
shall also be given to strangers.

And forasmuch as this manner of gatherynge and distributing the offerynges,
and alms of the faithful was taught of God him self both in the new
testament, and in the old, the faithful will gladly apply the^ selves
thereunto, and will much rather co^ferre these their alms into the common
treasury of the congregation, the^ distribute the same to pour folk after
their own minds. For when most approved me^ shall be made overseers of this
matter by the hole co^gregatio^s after the institution of the holy ghost, what
man is there that will stand so much in his own conceyte, that he will not
believe, that such men, shall both se better than he himself can, in whom
Christ the Lord is to be cherished, and with a more sincere judgment
distribute to the members of Christ. For God is not absente with his
blessings from his own institucions.

As for commen alms remayninge, and other revenues given to the Lord for the
use of the poor, Item the goods that fraternites have for the same
liberalite, we will procure that they shall be brought together by the visitours
into the commune treasury of every congregation, that al poor folk may be
more lyberally succored. It is a very hard thing, and full of business to
minister things necessary for life, to all persons that need, nevertheless by
the help of Christ the Lord, we will so order this promision for the pore,
and cause it so to be administered that we doubt not it shall shortly come to
pass, that al manner of necessary things shall be liberally ministered to all
such as need un fainedly, and that wilful beggerie shall be taken away, and
every man put to such labor as shall be profitable, and comodious for him, so
that he shall burden no man with out cause. If their remainie in any plase
hospitalles for poor people, for orphans, for old men and women, for sick,
and leprosse persons, we shall procure, that the same shall be diligently looked
upon, and reformed, that nedie, and miserable folk, for whom those provisions
were made, may have consolacion, and comfort from thens as largely, and
co^modiously as may be, And the chief deacons of congregacions, and wardens
of the holy treasure shall have charge of them, so that by them, which
heretofore have had the procuration of such hospitalles, all things shall be so
administered, as they were first instituted, that all the necessites of the
faithful may be most commodiously helped, and succourred, according to the
Lords commaundment, and that alfautes, and incommodites which are wounte to
crepe into these holy institutions shall be resisted in time and that effectuosly.

Of erectinge of Schools for Children.
GOd has comprehended in the writings of the prophets and the Apostles, his
doctrine of salvation, whereby he brings men to everlasting life, and
shows us away to call upon him, and to pray to him fore things, that be
very necessary to pass forth this present life handsomely, and honestly. He
has commanded that men be taught this doctrine most dilige^tli and, that it
be learned, and kept perpetualy. And this is a singular benifit of God, that he
preserves his word being set forth in certain books, from the beginning,
unto the end of the world, wherein we have a sure knowledge, and doctrine of
him, to live godly, and blisfully, and by the same we may learn the beginning
the growing forth, and the spreadinge abroad of this doctriue, in to the hole
world. This benifite I say of God is right excellent, and very inestimable
wherefore that study, and care, wherewith me^ labor, that this book of life,
and euerlaystinge salvation may be kept sincere, and faithfully taught and
declared to men, that they may learn thereby the true knowledge of God, is
undoubtedly an office of godliness, and a service of god most acceptable. For
which cause God instituted the kyngedome of Judah, and maintained it wonderfully
so many hundred years, name ly that there might be a people, a monge whom
this book should be rightly kept, and a monge whom there should remain
sure testimone is of God, and of his will toward us, unto the cominge of
Christ. So God preserved also after the coming of Christ, and shall ever
preserve some kingdoms, and common weals, where this book shall be kept to the
end of the world.

Saying than that God, and our father regards so much that this book be
religiousli kept, taught and learned, it is surely the office of all princes,
and of them that ministre the comme^ weal, to erecte Schools, and so to
provide mete teachers for the same, and such manner of teaching the youth of
Christ, that this heavenly doctrine comprehended in the holy Bible, may ever
be kept pure and faithfully taught in the congregation.

For this cause it is well known, that at the beginning the Apostles ever
instituted schools in the congregations.

There be moreover other liberal sciences, right goodly gifts of God, whereby
great commodites are procured to the comme^ life of men, and preserved, which
also be very necessary for the civil administracion of the worldly matters.
It is than expedient, that the youth be enstructed herein. Wherefore if we shall
suffer schools to fall down, and the study of lerninge to perish, in short
time the congregations shall want pastors and teachers, and professors of
other good sciences, and the commen weal shall lack gouerners, whereby both
the congregations, and the common weal must needs utterly perish, and be
overthrown.

Wherefore we will, that in every town as well small, as great, latin schools
be erected for the behofe of the youth, as the condion of every place will
suffer. And that the scholemasters, and such as shall work with them in
scholasticale labor, may have their reward and wages with less charge of the
people, we will by thaduise, and assente of our diosesanes after that we have
tried the co^modite thereof, depute certain vicarages, and other prebe^des to
this use. Nevertheless the children shall also pay part of the stipe^d to the
masters, namely such, as need not the alms of the congregation. Which reward
every scholmaster shall equally dyuide with his assistantes.

Further more what order shall be kept in every school, what fourmes there
shall be, what hours shall be appointed to teach the youth: the scholmaster shall
so order, as it shall seem most convenient for the teachinge of children, after
that he has consulted with the pastor, and such as we shall make visitours,
or overseers of this matter peculierly. For as in other things so in schools
also a convenient order is of great importance. The sholemasters, and their
fellows shall have their office enjoined unto them by the consul of every
place, the pastor being present. To these persons the scholemasters shall
promise, that they will apply their office faithfully and teach the youth
after this sort

First that they will teach the children of the lowest form to read, and
write, and for that purpos they shall use latyne books, wherein is the Lords
prayer, the creed, and the ten commandments, and such like things
pertainyng to the institution of children in religion, so that with the first
letters they may acquaynte them selves with the precepts of godliness.
Hereunto they shall add the reading of Donate. And the scholemasters shall
prescriebe to these children certain latin words or sentences daily in the
eueninge which they shall render the next day in the moringe. They which have
learned to read, and begin to assaye to write, shall be removed to another
form. And the book of Cato shall be red unto them, and they shall be set to
learn Donate without book whom when they have learned, some commen grammar
shall be set before the^, which they shall also learn without book in order
word by word. And the high procuratours of schools shall principaully have a
regard hereunto, that the children learn some certain and regular grammar.
For that is necessary for many causes. But because great labor and
continual repeticion is requisite to the printinge of grammatical rules in
children, and the children themselves abhor from this labor, the most part
of sholemasters neglect the rules of grammar, or teach the^ negligently and
make haste to the readinge of poets, and Tullie, and such like authors, which
is pleasaunter both to the teachers, and hears, than the perpetual repeticion
of the rules of grammare is. But by this preposterous manner of teachinge, the
youth is greatli hindered, for they never learn to speak certaineli, and
purely, when they be not accustomed to certain rules of speaking. Wherefore
the sholemasters must be enjoined with singular diligence, and bound by an
other to teach a certain accustoumed, and reguler grammar, and certain
precepts of speakinge, and to beat in the same with convenient
interrogaciones, and answers that they may be grammarians, and know
acertayne way to speak latin. In this company than of the second form,
the children shall be retained so long, til they have perfectly learned Donate,
and al grammar rules. And herwyth besides Cato, Aesopes fables, and some
dialoges of Mosellane, or Erasmus, shall be expouned, and such other good for
exercises, and preludies.

And the things that shall be interpreted upon one day about eueninge, they
the^ selves shall interpret the same the next day, with the declinacion, and
co^iugacion of some nownes, and verbes, where rules of the gendre, case,
preterperfectetens, and supine shall be demanded of the^, as al good
scholmasters know they must do, and will do also diligently. Further more this
form must be daily exercised in writing, and every one shall deliver to the
master some enjoined writing

After the children have learned the Etimologie or rules of grammare metely
well, a third form shall be appointed of such, as have profited so far in
learning. To these children the masters shall expoune Tirence, and the Aeneis
of Virgil, and they must procure, that they learn perfectly the rules of
construction which the masters shall declare with plain, and evident exemples.
Further in the repetion of a lesson, these two exercises must be diligently
retained, namely that the children do ever declare the constructio^ of the
text, and also add the rules so that they recite the coniugations, and
declinations and show the rules of the same. In this exercise of repetinge,
and examininge, a learned, and faithful master shall teach, how many ways the
same sentence may be spoken in latin, with such declaracions of the
propriete, and elegancie of the latin tongue, they shall cause more plentious
fruit than may be here fully expressed. But this matter consists altogether
in the faythfulnes, and dexterite of the master. Wherefore men thoroughly
learned faithful, and prompte in teachinge, must be sought forth, to have the
governance of schools, cheifely in great towns.

In this form there shall be a certain hour appointed every week, at which
hour the children shall rehearse without book the rules of grammar, that they
forget them not. The masters may also change their lectures, and in the hour
deputed to virgil, expoune Tullies epistles. In this furme also every child
shall write, and deliver every week a latin Epistle, that together they may
learn both to speak and to write latyne

The fourth form shall be of the^, which have learned their grammare rules, and
construction, and have attained a metly good latyne tongue. To the^ afterward
some logike shall be red, as the logik of Cesarius, Philip, or Sturmius, and some
easy accentinge, as of Murmelius, or some other like. In this form more over
some books of Ouides Metamorphosis, de Po^to, and Tullies offices shall be red,
The children of this form shall also be sterred up to write verses which they
shall deliver to the master every month. But forasmuch as many be of that
nature, that they lern to make verses with much difficulty, the shole master
shall use such moderacion in requiringe this study, that he may exercise
every one in that, that he shall perceive the nature of every one, to
prevail in. How be it he shall exhort the dulle also to this art, that they
do not utterly cast a way this art, for the great profit, which it has
undoubtedly. But they shall stir them to travail forth as much as they
can, and to write some verses though they be but few. For this exercise
makes perfect grammarians, and puts the youth in remembrance of many
necessary things of figures, of so^drie ways to speak latin, and fedeth
maruailously copy of latin speech.

Two hours a week shall suffice for the readinge of logike. But when it is
ended, it must be begone a gain. At other hours the master shall interpret
to them, to whom logike is red, the greek grammare, if they be fit for that
purpose, and when he has ended the grammare he shall expoune Hesiodus, or
Phocilides, or some like thing, as a wise master shall percieue to be
profitable for the children. But the exercises of grammar rules, and
construction shall not be omitted in this form, but shall be used in the
repeticion of Ouide.

These be the lectures, which may conuenently be read the second, third,
fifte, and sixte day of the weke. For saying that christian schools ought
chifely to serve for the mainteinaunce, and furtherau^ce of the knowledge of God
among men, and to retain, and promote the doctrine of Christ, and the hole
true Christian religion, we will, and command that upon the forth day of the
weke the schole cease from other lectures, and exercises, and that this day be
bestowed upon teaching the catechism, and demand, what the chilhren can
say therein, And we will do our endeavor that some comme^, and uniform
Catechism shall be used thorought the hole diocese. For we must not grant to
the scholemasters that every one shall make a new catechism, but we will
that they all use the received, which they shall so decylre, and beat in to
children, that the youth may be kept, and ever furthered in the sincere
knowledge of Christ, in faith, and communion of the congregation.

And the self same doctrine must be taught in the schools and in the
co^grgacio^s. Which things the overseers of the congregacions, shall chiefly
look to. Furthermore the scholemayster shall exhort his elder sholars to the
communion of the Lords supper, but let him first enstructe them diligently of
this sacrament, and examen them.

Finally in this fourth day of the weke, when the catechism shabe handled,
let eueri child of the lowest form be heard, whether he can faye in latin,
and in his mother tongue the parts of the catechism, that is to say, the
Lords prayer, the creed, the ten commaundmentes, the words of baptism, and
of the Lords supper, and of discipline, and christian correction, as they are
written, Math. xviij.

Upon the same day the schole master shall grammatically interpret to his elder
sholers, and to such as can attain to it, the Gospel of the sunday next
following, and shall declare the sum of that lesson to them, and show them what
things are touched therein concerning faith, and other virtues that, the
scholemaster, and the youth may accustom them selves to know more certainly,
and to search out more religiousli, the thiuges that be taught in the Gosples
let the Saturday be bestowed upon Music, that upon that day the rules of
Music may be taught and the young men enstructed, and exercised to singe,
cheifely those songs, which upon the next sunday shall be sounge in the
temple. For scholemaysters and scholars must not only be present at the songs
in the congregacions before other, but they must al so bear the cheifeste
stroke, not only upon holy days, but also upon other days, wha^ there shall be
holy assembles as it shall be appointed, after the condition, and commodites of
every place. In this matter such moderacion must be kept, that the childrens
heath be not hurted in the winter thorought cold, if they be detained to long
in the temple, and that they be not so occupied in singinge that their study of
lerninge be hindered. It pertains also to the maintenance and encrese of
grauite, and religion in temples, that to sondrie, and long songs be not
used. But these things, and such other that pertain to the dignity of holy
assembles and edificacio^ of the people of Christ, the visiters shall appoint
according to the opportunity of every place.

Of the schole of deuinitie,
But for maiteinaunce of Christean doctrine, and wholesome administration of
churches, those first beginninges are not only required, which be gotten in
the schools of children, but furthermore it is necessary that men given them
selves altogether, to learn perfetly the universal scripture of the prophets,
and the Apostles, and to excusse all the heard questions which have exercised
the church from the begninge, Item to know the way, and mean, whereby the
holy fathers in their time defended the Lords truth in the congregation, and
kepete the same pure unto us, and finallye how we may in our time defend,
and retaiue the same.

That there may be ever in the congregation meet men, and well furnished to
set furthe, and defend the doctrine of Christ, and that so the true doctrine
of Christ reveled unto us from God, and commended and beclared by the Appostles,
which the true catholic church of Christ has ever holden, may be kept, and
sprede forth unto our posterite by the grace, and goodness of christ this of
right ought to be chiefeste care of great princes, and al gouerners of
commenweales, as in deed, it is the principal service of God.

For these causes the Apostles, and their disciples instituted in their
congregacions such peculiar lectures and schools, as we read of Johan the
Eua^geliste, Pof olicarpus, of the schools erected Antioch, Alexandre and
constantinople. And such were schools at the beginning, which now be
ecclesiastical colleges.

And this manner of institutinge such schools was very profitable to the
co^gregacions for four causes. First that the writings of the Apostles, and
prophet in such colleges, and schools, might be preserved from perishinge.
Secondly that there might ever be witnesses of the Apostolic writings, which
should be true, and which counterfeit. For even straight way at the
beginning some wrytinges were carred about under the name of the Apostles
untruly, which were forth with rejected, and noted by these schools. As we
read that Ihon the Euangeliste reproved one, for addyng a false appendice, to
the Acts of the Apostles. Thirdlye, that such scoles might bear witness, what
doctrine and understanding of the scriptures was taught by the Apostles, least
strange doctrines, and enterpretations of the scriptures and such as fight
with the doctrine of the Apostles might crepe in, the authors where of should
be unknown, or else adversaries to this testimoni of the congregation.
Fourthly that out of such colleges, and schools meet teachers and gouerners
might be taken for other churches also. These, I thinck were the causes, whither
were always in the congregations such companies and colleges from the
beginning, which after that they were enriched by the liberality of princes,
and godly men, they were brought to such colleges of Cannons, as we se now
a days.

But forasmuch as the study of the holy scriptures is ever quenched a great
while since in these colleges, and many other slanders pernicious to the
co^gregations ar com in with a lamentable ignorance of holy matters, surely,
the great need, and necessity of the congregations requires, that schools be
restored, and preserved as much as the Lord will help thereunto.

Wherefore we also have purposed to erect, and co^stitute such a schole of
Divinity at Bonne, wherein after the custom, some mete readers shall teach the
holy scriptures and other good learning, in which we will also procure that
the students shall have a place, and a table as the manner is in other
universities. And moreover, we will depute somewhat for pore young men.

There shall then be appointed for a beginning seven professors in this our
schole. The first shall profess divinity, and shall teach openly two days
of the wieke in the old testament, and two other in the new, to whose
judgment we will permit, that he shall choose out of the holy books, those,
that he thinks will be most profitable for the hearers, as in the old
Testament, Genesis, Deutoronomie, the Psalms, Esaie. In the new, Paul, John,
Luke. And this professoure shall so moderate his doctrine, that it agree with
this su^me of holy doctrine, which we have described in this book, and which
is in deed the doctrine, and meaning of the true, and catholic church of
Christ. This principal reader of divinity shall also exercise the office of
the superintendant in the co^gregrations nigh about, and as the rector of this
schole, he shall have charge of the other reders and shall warn the^ of their
duti if need be, and if they do not their duties he shall bring the matter
before them, who^ we will appoint to be vphoders, and maynteyners of this our
ordinance. He shall labor also to maynteyne mutual co^corde between the
professors, that one hurt not an other with words, writings, or other
ways. And he shall decree, and put in execution, by the advice and assent of
the other readers, things perteynynge to the discipline, and correction of the
youth.

The second reader shall also examine the holy scripture, but there wythall he
shall teach the hebrew tongue. Two day in the wicke, he shall enterprite some
book, with a theological exposition. Four days he shall read hebrew in
order. First he shall teach the grammar, and then he shall expoune some book of
the Bible, and therein he shall declare the rules, and use of the grammar, that
this tongue may be more certeynely known of young men, and be made more
familiar unto them.

The third professor shall read logike, and the greek tongue, both twain
every day in the wieke, in the which he must teach, as upon the second, the
third, the fifte, the sixth day of the wieke. Which thing shall not be hard
unto him, which has atteyned but even a mean knowledge of both the arts.
For he that has once well perceived the ru^es of Logike, shall not have much a
do to teach them.

But he shall choose some common, and good Logike, as is the Logike of Cesarius,
philip. or Sturmius. And he shall not change that, that he has begone to
teach, and moreover as often as he has ended the same, he shall add some
book of Aritoteles his Logike, whom he shall interpret in greek. But he shall
chose the easiar books, as is the book of Porphyrius or of the Predicamentes,
or some part of the Analitikes, that the youth may be prepared to the readyng
of Aristotle. And he shall moderate all these things according to the
capacity of the hearers. When the book of Aristotle is finished, he shall
return to the accostomed Logike of Cesarie, Philippe or Sturmius.

In the other hour, when he must read greek, this reader shall first teach
the grammar, and afterward Hesiodus, or some part of Homere, or some Tragidies
of Euripides, or Sophocles, or some oration of Isocrates, or somewhat of
Luciane, or Herodotus. Those ended he shall return to the grammare.

The fourth reader shall profess Rhetorike, and shall read every day twyse,
one hour he shall bestow upon the precepts of Rhetorike, and he shall choose
some good Rhethorike co^munely used in the schools, which ended he shall
expoune Erasmus his book de copia rerum, and after that some books of
Quintilian, namely the second, the third the eight, and the tenth.

On the other hour he shall expoune some ^ration of Cicero, wherein as much as
he shall think needful, he shall declare how the oration agrees with the
rules, and precepts of Rhethorike. Howbeit some times in the steed of
oratio^s, he shall mengle some what out of the poets. This reader of
Rhethorike shall also profess moral philosophy. Therefore in the hour deputed
to this lecture, he shall expoune sometimes Tullies offices, and sometimes he
shall interpret Aristotle's his Ethikes in greek, and shall introduce the youth
to the reading of these books.

The fifte reader shall be a grammarian, for though this schole shall be
appointed and instituted for the^ that have learned gra^mare in the schools of
children, yet for as much as the wits of children, and young folk be
unlike, and some when they come to these common lectures, know not their
gra^mare fully, and some forget the same, it shall be necessary that among
other common lectures some chyldely exercise in grammare be also retained.

Let the professors then, when they have tried the learning of every one,
distribute the children into certain, fourmes, as every one has profited in
learning, and let them prick those forward, which have not been
sufficiently trained in grammare, to learn the same more perfectly. To this
reader there must be two hours assigned every day, in which he shall cause
the youth to rehearse without book the rules of grammare, every one in order.
And this custom must needs be ever retained in schools, and not changed. And
forasmuch as the youth unwillingly susteyneth this exercise, the professors
must all agree upon the maynteynaunce of this statute, and compel the youth
with punishments to this exercise, every one according to his age, and
according as he has profited in learning, that they may make their hearers
perfect grammarians, which thing healpeth exceeding much to true and
substantial learning. For common studies are greatly endamaged in this time,
by reason that a perfect institution of grammare is neglected, and many young
men go to other professions, and arts, before that they have perfectly learned
grammare. Of which hinderaunce though all faithful enstructours of youth
complain, and as much as in them lies, would gladly remove the same from
their scholars, and compel them to learn grammare perfectly, yet they want
the authority, and aid of them, which have superior power in scholars.
Wherefore we will that our ouerfears shall diligently resist this evil, and
procure with all diligence that this exercise of grammare be faithfully
maynteyned, and set forth. In the other hour this reader shall cause the
children to rehearse without book the accentynge of Mycillus, and shall require
of them, that they exercise them selves in writing of verses. And for this
purpose he shall expoune some Poet unto them.

We will that the sixte professoure shall read Mathematical sciences, and
natural Philosophy, and we think it sufficient that he read one hour in a
day. Therefore on the second, and third day of the wieke, he shall teach
Arithmetike, and that done he shall read the little book of the Sphere made by
John de Sacro busto, which must be diligently declared to the youth.
Afterward he shall return to Arithmetike, and shall continue therein. On the
other two days, namely upon the fifte, and the sixte, he shall profess
somewhat in natural Philosophy, and he shall choose some used, and approved
book in this art, as summula Alberti, or Philippes book De anima, or some such
that is not very long, nor obscure. Wha^ these be ended, he shall take in
hand to declare some short Cosmographie, as the Cosmographie of Appian,
wherein he shall teach the youth the manner of comptyng diligently.

The seventh reader shall be a lawyar, which shall expowne the Institutions
of Justinian one hour every day. For it shall be good to introduce
gentleme^nes children, and the children of other worshypfull Citizins, which
shall come to this schole, to the knowledge of the law, teaching the first
principles of this art. Which thing shall have this commodity, that while
they travail in the law, they shall perceive how great the use of other arts
is, chiefly of Rhethorike, and Logike.

But because many children, and young men shall come into this schole, a
physician, and an Apothecharies shop shall be needful. Where we will have an
eye to this commodity also.

Every wieke on the fourth day three professors shall come together, the
Rethoritian, the Logitian, and the Grammarian, that they may examen the young
men's wrytynges, as well prose as verses, and amend some of them, that the
youth may see what things be fautie, and learn to auoyed the same, and to
write better. The professors also shall procure as much as may be, that the
scholars do ever speak latin.

Of disputation.
It pleases us also that four times in a year, a disputation of divinity be
kept, upon a saturdaye, in which disputation the professors, of divinity
shall sit as Judges by course. But the professors of arts shall procure,
that some disputation, or declamation be used every month. In disputations
let the better learned among the stude^tes make arguments, and then the
professors the^ selves. At these disputatio^s we will have a Rector to be ever
present, that they may dispute comely, and with friendly minds, and that
the disputations give not occasion to pernicious brawlynges, and dissentions.
Further it shall perteyue to the Rector to see that profitable matters be set
forth to be disputed of, and such as be offensive to no man. The same man
shall diligently exhort the youth to the holy communion, and shall labor to
bring to pass, that they go to the Lords table often in the year. But they
that shall come to the communion, shall first ask absolution, and then they
shall be examined, what they have profited in the doctrine of Christ.

But how the hours shall be distributed, when every professoure shall read,
the professors them selves with the Rectour, shall appoynte, whom we will also
to make statutes by commune advise, concerning the manners of the students,
whereby they may be allured, and driven to those things, that perteyne to
godliness, and other virtues, and whereby also they may be an exemple to other
men, of godliness and honesty.

The Rectour then, and the professors shall make laws, that the Scholars at
convenient times go to the temple comely, and together, that they be present in
the holy assembles, hear sermons, pray with the congregation, use the
Sacraments, offer their gyfttes to Christ the Lord for the pore, that they
eschew ungodly oaths, evil speaking, eursynge, and all noisome, and unclean
speech, all gloutonie, dronkennes, and unchasteness, that they wear comely and
honest apparel, not iagged, or otherwise gaye, and proud, that their gounes
come down beneth their knees. These things and such like, perteynynge to
discipline semely for christian Scholars, and to honesty, shall be
comprehended in statutes, and ena^ted with punishments.

Such a Schole, out of which most ample commodities shall come to the
congregation, and that eueri order of me^ may be well instituted, and
maintained, so that not only the professors shall have just stipendes, but also
certain poor scholars shall be found, if the revenues of one abbaie be
appointed hereunto, which now be wretchedly wasted. For ye may find many
Monasteries every where, in which there scarcely remain five or six monks,
and such men, as neither be, nor ca^ be any ways profitable to the
congregation, and which most shamefully waste so great riches consecrated to
Christ the Lord, and to his congregation. Wherefore al princes, and such as
administre the supreme power ought to see that these things be corrected after
a christian sort, and that these consecrated gifts of godly me^ may be turned
to that use, for which they were dedicated to the Lord. Which thing we
trust by the healpe of God we will procure not unprofitably with the advice of
our men.

By what means a christian reformation of holy ministry, and cure of souls
may be begone, and practiced in parishes.
THat parishes, and the holy ministeries in the people of Christ, may be
ryghtly seen unto, it is chiefly necessary, that every parish have his
meet ministers, which will do their office in the congregations with al
faythfulnes, and diligence. Wherefore first we will procure that al parishes be
exactly visited by wise and grave men, which would gladly Christ's word to
be promoted. These men shall exame^, what manner of pastors, and ministers be in
every congregation. For if the people shall be ryghtly brought to Christ the
Lord and be instituted, and edified in faith toward him, they must needs
have such guydes, and pastors, as be learned unto the kingdom of God, as
saint Paul prescribes unto his disciples Timothe and Tite, and such as burn
with a zeal to bring many thereunto, finally such as be meet to teach other
to keep those things that Christ has commanded us all to keep, so that
the pastors and ministers be furnished to teach other, fast keepers of the
faithful word, that they may be able to exhort through wholesome doctrine,
and confute them, that gaynesaye the same. For if the salt be made unsavory,
no thing ca^ be salted therwyth, and if the light be darkened, darkness
obscureth all things. But it behooves pastors, and techers of co^gregatio^s to
be to other in the steed of salt, and a candle in the way of the Lord. You
be, says Christ to his disciples, the salt of the earth, and the light of
the world. Wherefore by the healpe of God we will procure with as great
diligence as we can, that in our dominion such be made pastors, and
ministers over congregations, as with unfeigned diligence labor to live
according to the Canon taught of the holy ghost by the ministry of saint
Paul, and most straitely required by all the Canons of the holy fathers,
though being let through man's weakness they can not perfectly atteyne to
the same, nevertheless at the least in the principal matters which perteyne to
the holy ministry, they shall order all their doings according to this
Canon. First then, which thing is also necessary to the reformation of the
church we have determined to admit none to the administration of
congregations, ^e to suffer any in the same, which is in a manifest crime of
intemperantie, or unchasteness, or covetousness, by unjust gain, by usury, or
any other fraud in bargaining, or in any wrong done to his neighbor, yea
which declares not a true zeal to live temperately, justly, gently,
friendly, and godly, and to enstructe their household in the same way. For
where this zeal wants, there lively faith can not be, nor the true knowledge
of Christ. How can such then teach fruitefully, and be meet witnesses of
the faith in Christ? For, as much as they buyld with doctrine, so much they
pull down again with their unclean life. For it can not be that such should
constantly teach true doctrine, saying they love not God truly. Wherefore it
is much more tolerable to have few, and the same very godly pastors, and
fervent in the zeal of Christ, till God him self vouch safe to thruste forth
more meet workmen in to his harnest, then to commit the congregations,
though they be never so small, to their faythfulnes, which them selves know
not Christ. For no man knows Christ, which studieth not to obey his
commandments and to keep him self clean from wicked, and mischeuous
acts. i. John. iij. Every one that sins, has not seen God, nor known him.

And that al unchasteness, and unclean life may bemore easily turned away from
the ministers of the congregations, we beseech, exhort and require of them al,
which be now set over the co^gregations, or shall be hereafter, that with all
diligence they order their life so godly, temperately, chastely, and holily,
that they may be guydes to the people of Christ, not only in doctrine, but
also in exemple of life, and that they may bring the same to Christ, castinge
before no man any block to stumble at, through dissolute and unchaste life.

But to who^ it is not given to live blameles, and holily without marriage, we
think it not our part to forbid them holy marriage. But this we beseech
them, and require of them, that if they will enter into holy marriage, they enter
into it holily, and in the Lord, that is to say, let them seek them selves
such wives, as they may well hope shall be an healpe to them, not only to
lead forth their private life godly, and without reprofe, but also to execute
the holy ministry of the congregation more readely, and religiously. Let
them then desire of the Lord, and with godly diligence let them seek women
excellinge in religion, and all honesty, godly, and holily brought up, having
good testimony among the congregation. For the holy ghost requires such
wives of the ministers of the congregation, and the very great necessity of
the congregations requires the same.

They that desire to marie them, whom they had for concubines before, shall not
be permitted so to do without the consent of the visitors, which shall
determine herein that, that shall seem to be profitable for the congregation,
and convenient for the holy ministry. For even the family of the pastors
must garnishe the Gospel of Christ, and their wives must be an exemple to
other wives in all godliness, and chastity. As the holy ghost commanded by S.
Paul.

Secondly we have determined to admit no man to this ministry, nor to suffer
any therein, which applies not the reading of the holy Bible, and has not
profited so far in christian doctrine, and life, and also in the knowledge of
administringe the congregation of God, that at the lest he be able to declare
the customable, and communely used lessons, which are wont to be propouned to
the whole congregation out of the scriptures, and conveniently handle by the
same the principal articles of our doctrine, and moreover enstructe tollerably
children, and more aged folk, yea the universal people of Christ, in the
religion of Christ.

Thirdly whereas that a man may rightly order the holy ministry, and
profitably serve the co^gregations therein, it is necessary, that he entangle
not him self in the business of this life, but give him self wholly with all
diligence to readyng, doctrine, and prayer, we exhort and require by the
commandment of Christ, and by the authority of our archebishoply office, of
al pastors, and curates of souls, that they utterly bid al worldly, and
fleshly cares, and business farewell, and cast the same from the^, as (beside
the law of god) the canons require with great severity. For concerning the
necessaries of life, we will faith fully procure, that every man shall be
liberally provided for, that being discharged of the care of this life, they
may wholly give the^ selves both to learn the holy scripture, and to study the
same day and night, which only enstructeth unto salvation through faith in
Christ, and also to prayers, with which only we may obtain the true
understanding of the scripture, and the gift and grace to de liver the same
wholsomely unto other, and luckely to serve Christ the Lord in this office
unto the edification of the congregation.

Fourthly we command that the pastors have often co^uocations, and godly
exercises in the same, which we will appoynte in certain, and convenient
places, and times, as the commodity of the co^gregatio^s, and ministers shall
suffer, and herein they shall use none excuse, except it be very necessary.

In these conuocations one shall faithfully, enstructe, warn, and exhort an
other of the sincere understanding of the scriptures, and of the wholesome
administracion of their office. For seeing that the knowledge, and use of a
pastoral office, is so miserably lost, we will appoynte by our visitors, as
much as we may, some pastors, and teachers in certain places, which be some
what more furnished in the knowledge, and religion of the holy ministry, to
who^e the other pastors and ministers dweling nigh about, shall resort every
weke, or as often as it shall be convenient, and shall hear of them the
exposition of the scriptures, and other things pertaning to pastoral cure, and
so better furnish the^ selves unto their office. And if cases, and difficultes
hape^ in their ministry, out of which they can not unfold the^ selves, let
the^ use the counsel of these men. And if they be warned that they have erred,
or don amiss in any thing let them take that warninge in good part, and regard
it well, and diligentli amend the^ selves in that, wherein they erred, and let
them, if they have not, fully execuited their office in any point, recompense
the same studiously.

Further more we will also institute greatter conuocations to be keep twice a
year, and beside those we will have two to be kept every year in our cite of
Colone, as the old custom is, whereunto the Deanes only shall resort, and they
which have some peculier business there, or be called thither.

To these conuocatio^s than, the pastors and Deanes every man according to his
order, shall come together studiouslye, neither shall they absent them selves
from thens, except it be for a necessary cause, we will provide also that every
congregation shall be visited every year by mete visiters, which if they have
perceived any fault to have crept into the parishes, which they them selves
cannot amend, they shall propoune the same in the greater conuocations, that
it may be amended by the authority of a synod. Where for we will choose men
excellyng in wysdom faythfulnes and authority, as much as the Lord shall give,
to rule this conuocatio^s, and to execute visitations, to whom we will give such
authority, that they may resist fautes, and inconveniences when they arise,
and use fit remedies.

Now all the acts of conuocations, and visitations must be referred hereunto,
that al parishes may have faithful, and mete ministers, which may execute their
ministerye faithfully according to Gods word, and want not just defense
against unjust violence and cauillations of wicked men. And that they, which
have not faithfully executed the holy ministry, or be found to have committed
any faut in their living, be corrected or if that cannot be brought to pass,
that they be removed from the holy ministry. Finally, forasmuch as sundry
chaunses, and diseases and other lets of the holy ministry happen daily unto
pastors, as unto me^, this thing shall also be decreed in co^uocations, and
visitations, wha^ it happens to some minister by reason of siknes, or some
other cause, that he cannot execute his ministry himself, that some of his
fellows, if there be sundry ministers in the same congregation, as it happens
in tounes or some of his neighbors, if any have no fellow, as it is wont to be
in vilages, shall supply the rome of the minister, so empesched, that the people
be not any where defrauded of the holy ministry of Christ.

Of the reformation of canonical colleges
CAnonical colleges ar now a days for the most part of two sorts Some there
be, into which the sons of Dukes, Earls, knights and noble men are only
received. There be other, in to which the children of other men ar admitted.
Now where as all these will be counted clearkes, and partly also priests,
deacons, and subdeacons, and some ca^nons, that is to say reguler clerks, if a
lawful and canonical reformation of these persons should be taken in hand, it
behooved surely, that al they should buckle the^ selfs to that manner of
ministering to the congregation and also of living, which the rules prescribe to
such persons, that is to sai, they should apply them selves to the cure of
souls, and to the edifiyng of the rest of the congregation in the doctrine of
Christ, I mean that the preistes should endeavor the^ selves to preach and
minister the sacraments, and govern ecclesiastical discipline, the deacons
and subdeacons should apply the ministry of the same doctrine and sacraments,
and the distributing of alms, wheru^to the other orders of the clerks should
set their hands also, eueri man according to his place and degree. For this is
the proper office of all the clergy, as the authorities of the ca^no^s and
old fathers testify, to feed the flock of Christ. Clerks feed the sheep, I
am fed says Jerome to He liodo, where he numbreth him self among Monckes,
and shows a difference betwne Monckes and clearkes.

And where as in a christian reformation of churches, we ought to have a regard
here unto and to seek this thing with all dilige^c na^ely that al things may be
restored in the co^gregations right co^modiously, and with as little offense of
me^ as may be, that the reformation consist not only in glorious writings, and
nothing in deed, for the christian me^ must do al things sincerly, therefore in
the reforma^io^ of ecclesiastical matters we must bring to pass, that the
holy ministry, and hole doctrine of Christ may be restored to a sure
instauratio^ of religion, and to the wealth of the universal congregation. This
end tha^ being set before us, and sincerely regarded, we think this way of
reformation should be taken in hand in canonical colleges.

First we will that our reverend chapter of the hiest, and principal college,
shall retain and keep still their free, and canonical election of al their
fellows, and prelates, al their dignity, old laws, libertes, and preuileges as
they hane had of old time, and use the same freely, and fra^kly without let or
perturbatio^ of any man, howbeit under this co^ditio^, that in doctrine,
celebratio^ of Masses, administration of the sacraments, and other
ecclesiastical ministeries, they so behave them selves, as it is described in
this our form of reforma^io^, and that they order their life, as it becomes
the^ that profes the discipline of clearks, and they must pass other in
religion, that not only nobody be offended with their conuersa^io^, but that
many by their exemple may be alured and stirred up unto al godliness, and
honesti Further that they so order and moderat their lesso^s and so^ges in the
temple, that they fech al things that they will read, or sing out of the divine
scriptures or at the lest that they disse^t not from the same. Which thing that
we may bring to pass more co^modiously, and certainli we offer our selves to
choose, and to join mete me^ for this purpose to the^, who^ it shall please our
supre^e ca^ons to depute to this matter which with their chose^ me^, shall
examen the books of holy lesso^s, and so^ges that are now used, and shall frame
al things that must be read, or song in the temples thorough the year,
according to the rules of the holy scriptures. So that not only our principal
Chap, and college, but also al other clerks thorough our city, and diocese
shall have a form, and manner, that they may follow to read, and singe in
temples. And that the use of the latin tongue may be keptein congregacions:
we will that it be fre, and lawful not only to our principal Cha. and college,
but also to al other colleges thorough our diocese, to use the latin tongue in
gods service, and yet so that where as parishes be incorporated to colleges,
those lesso^s, and so^ges, which are used for the people, be red and so^g in
douch, as it is co^stituted in this our form of reformacion that the common
people may understand the things, that shall be red or song out of the
scripture, and add their A men to the same.

Thirdly let the colleges of Canons through our whole dioses provide, that the
parishes which they have had long time in corporated, want not mete pastors,
teachers, and scholemasters. And that they be not defrauded of just wages,
lest these co^gregacions should want lawful ministry both of religion, and
also of common lerninge. And if the colleges shall thyncke that they are
burdened therewith, their may some vicarages, when they shall be vacant, be
turned to this use, which is right necessary for the co^gregacio^s. Fourthly
that there be appointed in our pre^cipal college tow men of excellent lerninge,
and religion to preach to the common people daily to whom let their be tow
prebe^des assigned and it shall be convenient that they be exe^pted from the
quiare for the purpose rehearsed. Fifthly that they order a schole of the college
with singular diligence, that the young princes, and Earls, which be
appo^inted to the high college, and also other may be so taught, and
enstructed therein, that they may be an ornament and aid boeth to themselves
and also to other, and to the hole congregation of God

Sixthly we require that eueri prelate, and ca^non of our principal colleges
execute the ministry, that is peculyarly enjoined to every man faithfully,
and diligently, that is to say, that the provost, and eueri Archdeaco^ provide
every man in his Archdenerie, first that the congregations and schools be
faith fulli looked upon and renewed in time. Secondly that the goods of the
church be faithfully kept and distributed, and nothing wasted thereof, or
alienated from the congregation. Furthermore, that every man exercise his
jurisdiction in his Archedenery after that sort and reformation, that
hertofore we have prescribed in our seculer, and ecclesiastical judgments,
and will prescribe hereafter by the advice and consent of our counsel.

Finallye, let this be the proper charge of the prouest, that as much as he may,
he mantain the goods of all the churches, and such as shall be given to schools,
and that he bring to pass that all the ministeries of the congregacio^s of his
Archedenery be restored, and preserved every where, and renewed wha^ the matter
shall so require according to Gods word, and this is our form of reformation.
So it shall pertain to the Deane of the principal college, first to labor
herein, that all ecclesiastical ministeries, administrations of sacraments and
their ceremones be ordered and executed chiefli in the principal college
afterward in other co^gregatio^s also according to the lords word and this
our reformation Secondly that all the Canons of the principal college, order
their life well and honestli, and live in Christian discipline, as their
profession requires. Further that he bestow faithful labor about the
colleges matters, that they may be rightly, and timeli handled and dispatched
as co^modiously as may be. Finalli that he have a peculiar charge of the
preachers of the high college, that there be ever mete me^ appointed, and that
they, which be appointed do their duty diligently.

For the perfurmaunce of al these things the Subdea^e or Vicedea^e must be an
helper to the Deane, and in the absense of the Dean he must exequute all the
forerehersed matters pertaning to the Deane.

The ouerfear of the Quiar shall procure, that al things be co^ely, and
religiously red, and soung in the Quiar, and in the assemble that is wounte to
come to gether to the principal temple, and that al troblesome, and uncomely
actions be eschwed. The office of the scholerulers of the principal college
shallbe, first, to provide diligently that the schole of the high colege have
faithful, and mete teachers, and that the same order, and exequite their
lecturs, and ecclesiastical exercises rightli, and co^ely. Seco^dli to procure
that the younger Canons be stirred up, warned, and pricked forth to godly, and
honest studies of lerninge, and also to a semelie institution, and framinge of
their life, and manners. Further to watch that they, which must be appointed to
the holy ministeries, be lawfully examined, and that no man be admitted or
ordained to any holy ministry, except he be approved according to this our
reformacion. Finally he shall faithfully exequite his wounted office in the
chapter houses, in demaundinge of sentences, and in speakinge, and aunswering
In the name of the chapter.

After the same sort other Canons also must faithfully apply their office,
and ministry as well noble me^ as priests in reading, and in ha^dlinge matters
of the college in the Chapter, and obeinge their prelates, as it is convenient.

And wha^ Canons, which be priests shall not be bound to somanie masses, as
they have been heretofore, it would please us, that this way be kept
co^cernig them hereafter, namely that tow of them be deputed, and bound upon
the so^daies, and holy days to celebrate the holy Eucharista, and to
dispense sacraments. Tow to preach, which therefore should be fre from the
Quiar, Tow to read divinity in the schools. Tow to study the law, that they
may answer, and give counsel to the college and the chapter in doubts that
shalarise, and that they may exequite foraine business. And we would this
distribucion of offices so to be ordered among preistes, that yet all should be
fellows of the Chap. and should have their place there, and say their minds.

In like manner let the diacons apply their office not only in reading the
Gospel at the holy Eucharistia, but also in taking charge of the poor, and
distributinge to the poor after the pleasure of the Chap. the things, that
they which communicate at the Lords table, shall offer unto the Lord.

Nether must the vicares be idle let them be present in the Quiar, when the
time shall require let the^ give ear to the holy lectures and sermons. and
endeavor that the same be done religiously, and co^ely, further let them serve
the people of Christ unto edificacion every man according to the gift that God
has given him in other ministeries of the clergy

As for those which heretofore were bound to say private masses, we will have
the^ to be present at common masses religiousli, and that they al be
parttakers of the sacrament together with the rest, and that they live godli,
and honestely beside forth as it becomes men dediacted to holy things.

And because there be many vicares, which after this reformacio^ shall have no
ministry in the congregation beside holy lectures, and sermons, it seems
not an evil advise unto us, if some prebendes of vicares after their dissease,
which now have them, be turned to other, and better uses by the counsel, and
consent of our diocesanes.

And forasmuch as we se not, as we said before, that it lies in our power,
to forbid holy marriage to be used of any man in the Lord, we will that the
congregations be provided for, therein, that the children or wives of the
ministers deteine not the ecclesiastical revenues after the death of the
ministers, but that al things return to the congregation forth with after the
death of any minister. And that every minister faithfulli maintain those
goods, which he has of the congregation, and diminish them in no part, either
in pelferinge, or in neglectinge, as the Canons, and every man's oath
requires.

After this sort we wish that our principal colege be renuid. Which way and
reformacio^ we desire that it may also prevail in S. Gereous college. Nether
do we go abonte to bring in any change in other colleges, tha^ that the
Canons, and vicares of all colleges first confirm the^ selves to the form
prescribed in this book in doctrine, celebration of masses, and other
ceremonies, and that there fore they moderate and use their holy lesso^s, and
sounges in temples after the manner declared before, and which we will declare
more largely, hereafter. Seco^dli that they provide the parisches, and schools,
which they have in corporated, of mete ministers, and give to the same
liberally the necessaries of life, that they may apply their ministeries to
the true profit of the congregation. Finally that in life, and manners they be
an exemple unto other of godlynes, and honesty, avoiding all spots, and
offenses in their conversation, as much as they may by the Lords help.

But because it is well known that the greatest part of possessions came to
colleges through the liberalite of princes, earls, and knig htes, concerning
secondarie colleges we will seek these ways by the advice, and assente of our
men, that partli they shall be adjudged to the nobilite, so that none shall be
received in to them but gentlemen, partly they shall be given to other honest
men, under this condition that they prove their nobilite from their
grandefathers, and great gra^dfathers, and they which be of the honest kindred
of citezins prove themselves to be borne of lawful parents, which were me^ of
honest condition, and life.

As touching presbiteral prebendes in other colleges, we will that they be
bestowed upon sectures of divinity, holy sermons, and ministracion of the
secramentes, and further more upon lawiers and such as give counsel to the
colleges in temporal matters. And as touching the procuration of holy sermons
and institucion, and maintenance of schools we will have al these things so
ordered, and kept, as we have prescrided to our principal college, as much as
the commodity and faculties of every college will sustain,

And it is convenient that to those principal ministeries, where presbiteral
prebe^des wa^te or suffice not, other prebendes be adjudged, and incorporated.

Thus we will also have the same way observed, in vicares, and diaco^s of other
colleges which we have set forth in our high college.

Vessels of silver, and gold, and other costly vessels and ornaments of
churches, and colleges thorough our diocese, we will have be put in an
innentorie, and to be kept diligently, and that none of the^ be alienated from
their congregations, and colleges, or changed to another use with out the
lawful consent of us, and our prouincials. We have observed also that the
time of vacance in many colleges is required longer, than it is convenient,
whereby the co^gregacions are long destitute of their ministeries, and the new
ministers are burdened to much. Therefore that we may moderate this thing
according to equity, we will that the time of wantinge new fellows be not
prolonged more tha^ one year. But as soon as every man has lawefully obtained
a prebende, let him enjoy it after the first year, without any diminucion
except therebe some lawful, and cananical impediment.

We have observed this thing also that residence of the first year in many
colleges is required to preciseli, and scrupulusly, with out any necessary,
or profitable cause. By which supersticion many fellows are drawn from those
ministeries of which agreat deal more profit might come both to the colleges,
and also to the congregacions, than if they should be present every hour.
Yea and other inco^modites, and heart burninges are wounte to arise we will
therefore that a remedy be laid to this incommodite, and that the laws of
residence be so tempred, as Christian charity, and true edificacion of the
congregacions shall require, and as the condition, and facultes of every
college shall permit

Finally we have marcked that those fellows, that study in universities, be
worse entreated, tha^ right would. It pleases us there fore that hereafter
hole prebendes be granted to the^, which by the permission of their Chap,
live in universities, and apyroued schools, how beit such moderacion shall be
used herein, as shall be agreeable to every man's age, wit, and study. For
saying that al ecclesiastical prebendes were appointed for this only purpose,
that they, which are sustained thereby should profitably serve the
congregacions, and set forth their commodites, surely it is much mor right,
and more worshipful, and profitable both for the colleges, and also for the
congregation to give hole prebe^des to these young fellows which abide in
schools, and furnysh them selves with godly, and honest arts, wherewith they
may afterward bring greater profit to the colleges and to the congregations,
than that they should spend in their colleges those good years idly in foul
ignorancie, and so rather burden the colleges, than do them any good.

Of the reformation of monastaries both of men and women.
WE can not hope that the old and true Mouckrie may be restored again in
this time, as we have no hope neither of restorynge of the old discipline of
Canons, of that sort as it was once, and as it is described of Sayncte
Augustine in the book of the manners of the congregation. Wherefore we will be
content with that reformacion of the monasteries which yet remain, that we
may hope shall be obtained, and kept.

First therefore we will, that all monasteries conform them selves to that
way which we have described in this book, and shall hereafter appointe more
largelye, in doctrine, in administracion of sacraments, and ceremonies, in
repurgacion and moderacion of holy lessons, and songs. Secondly that they se
the parishes which they have incorporated, the revenues, and tithes whereof they
enjoy, to be provided of ecclesiastical and scholasticall ministeries, and of
stipendes for them, which must exequite ministeries to the congregacions, in all points according to that form which we prescribed before to colleges.

Thirdlye we will that they which in monasteries shall be found meet to take
the charge of soul shall be appointed theru^to, as also among the old fathers
clerckes, and pastors be chosen from the company of monks. And now the
great necessite of the congregation requires the same. Fourthly concerning
those which be unfit to ministre, and have not the gift, nor yet the will to
live godly, and honestli in monasteries, we se not that it is lawful for us to
deteine the^ in monasteries, to be certainly offensive to them selves and to
other. Wherefore as much as pertains unto us, we will not grudge to grant
to such cloisterers, if they under whom they live, will permit the same,
that leauinge their monasteries, and monastical bondage, they shall conueye
them selves to the commune honest, and christian life, and to live in marriage,
or wiueles, so that their purpose be godly, and unfeigned. To which kind of
living, it shall not displease us, that they which have need be helped of the
monasteries, which they leave.

Fifthly we will that they, which will tarry in monasteries, shall live godly,
and without offense, and keep the commen discipline of christen men, and be
content to receive things necessary for the body by the administracion of
the monastery, and not to waste the goods of the monasteries in shameful
riot. For monastaries ought to serve to the cherishyng of honest and godly
studies, and to bring up young men, which afterward may bring certain
utility to the co^gregations. Further we will have the noumber of these me^ so
moderated, that every year some what may remain to the monasteries, where by
some children may be helped, which have not wherewith they may be honestly
brought up, and be taught some craft to maintain the^ selves thereby. And
moreover that young folcke of more age may be helped, which though they have
a craft, wherbi they be able to get their own living, yet they have not
wherwyth to set up their craft, or to find a commodious marriage.

So it seems good to us also that monasteries of beggynge friars be wholly
dedicated to godly learning. For it is evident that they were not made at the
beginnynge that men should beg, or only read and sing in temples, or sai
masses, but for this purpose chiefly, that in them, men should be brought up,
and framed unto the congregations, which might supply the negligence of
pastors, and sustain the holy ministerye of the cure of souls, which than
began to were out of use. Wherefore, we will provide, that they which in these
monasteries shall be found meet to ministre, shall be deputed to the same in
convenient places.

And where as it is against christian simplicite, and the very rules of the
old holy fathers prescribed unto monckes, that cloisterers should show forth
themselves to be gased upon, with such disgised, and so manifold variyng
garment, where as monckes apparel should be base, and of small price, not
differinge much in shape, and color of the gramentes of other mean and base
men it shall please us that, they, which will abide in monasteries shall use
comen garments not much varnyinge from other apparel of good men which yet
shall be homely, and honest, and so ordered as it shall be convenient for every
man's ministry and condition of life

And because it is right expedient for the co^gregacio^s that there be schools,
where in the youth may be godly, and commodiously taught, and framed, we will
do our diligence that where opportunity hereof shall be, certain monasteries
with the advice and assente of our pronincialles, shall be turned in to schools,
in which we will study to set learned and good scholemasters, as much as we
may and we will appointe some monasteries for the nobilite, and some for other
honest men, that in the^ their children may be godly, and honestly brought up,
and be furnished with good lerninge and honest manners.

And because that folowinge the Lords word, we make it free to them, to whom
it is not given to live well, holy, and godly in monsteries to return to the
common life of christen men, many men fear sondrie dangers that may come
hereof. For some of the order of gentlemen, and other worshipful men, because
they have many children and can not set forth al their daughters to mariag,
fear lest it may chance, thorough this liberty of forsakinge monasteries,
that their daughters shall return to them, and be burthenous unto them, or at
the lest shall be allured to vnauised, and unseemly marriages, or sedused, to
some other spotte of life. For our weakness is very much in continuyng in
good, and honest studies, and our old enemy Satan lays marvelous waits a
gainste al christian reformacion of things. Some fear also that great, and
pernicious contensions about inheritaunces will come hereof, and an intolerable
diminucion of patrimonies for they are aferde, lest the women which shall
forsake their nonries, will require their protion of inheritance, and not only
of that inheritance that shall be divided, but also of that, that is divided
already.

But as for us, seeing that in the whole reformation that we take in hand, we
have an hertie regard hereunto, and most studiously refer al things to the
same point, that we may augment al commodities unto our men to the glory of
God first spiritual, and secondly temporal, and not to intercepte, or diminishe
any commodity in any thing, we wysh as much as we may possibly, to turn a way,
and remove both these things and al other, which men fear will happen, or which
in deed will be paynful to some.

And therefore we exhort in the Lord most ernestlye all virgins, cloysterers and
other which are now in Abbaies, that they take good head that this so
necessary, and wholesome work of christian reformation be not made open in any
part to the il speaking of men nor hindered, nor defaced with any abuse, or
offense, seeing that very many stomblyng blocks, and lettes otherwise happen to
this work, before it come to any purpose and be established, through so great
wekenes of men, and so sharp and continual awaytes of Satan.

As for us we must needs follow the Lords word, and not to go before it,
which word not only enioyneth not to man wiueles life, nether by necessity of
commandment nor by commendation, or exaction of a vow or by the occasition of
any kind of life, or mynistery: but also it byndeth, and moderateth the
praise of wyueles life, and not of every wyueles life, but of that, which may
cause a man to cleave to God and godly actions more fastly, and with great
continuance. It moderateth the praise thereof I say so studiousli, and with so
singular a promise that as often as it brings forth any thing in the
commendation of this wyueles life, and of the manner of seruyng. God without
Marriage, it adds furthwyth somewhat, whereby it admonishes that it is not
given to every body to serve God out of wedlock and that eueri man ought to
consider, what gift he has received of the Lord, lest labourynge to higher
things, he be not able to stand in the lower, and lest while he follows the
higher virtue, he lose the lower, and lay a snare for himself. Thus the
Lords mouth, and the holy ghost has taught of wiueles life. Math. xix. i. Cor.
vij. i. Timo. v.

Seeing than that the Lord himself, and master of religion comme^deth wineles
life after this sort, and with this warines both by himself, and by his
Apostle, it cannot surely be lawful to us his disciples, to lay a snare to men
commeuded to our charge, that we should keep the^ in the grace of God either by
any renuyng of commandments, or exaction of vows, whereby they perish, and
to thrust the^ from that, that might be to them a better and a surer way (as it
is to be joined in Matrimony to them which burn, and to drive them to that,
that is not good to them, but daungerons. For as the Lord will have nothing
commanded to manne in his name, but that, that certainly pertayneth to his
wealth, so he will have no vow either to be commended or required, which
helps not to the same. For he came to save that, that of me^ had perished,
and not to bring them into any danger of salvation. He came not to press
down his, with the burden of unprofitable comaundementes, but to deliver
them. Wherefore we must stand herein, nether can it be lawful unto us to depart
from the religion of our office, either that we may turn away any temporal
displeasures, or get commodities. For we must not do evil, that good may
happen.

In the mean while, as all christen men so al cloisterers to, must no less
religiously consider the things, that the lord so ernestly commands, and
requires concerning the reverence and obedience of pare^tes, kinsfolk, and
such as in this lif ar made of the lord, our gonerners Item how we should not
enter into marriage but in him, that is to say according to his word and
pleasure. Furthermore concerning the eschuinge of offenses, and the lust that
we should have to approve oureselues to all men unto their wealth, and
edification, in all our life, and doings. Item to follow, and to study for all
those things that be acceptable, and of good report, and laudable, and win
greater worship to the Gospel.

Out of these commandments of the Lord we admonish and exhort in the Lord
and in his name, al virgins, cloisterers, and al other men, what so ever they
be, that they will godly considre, and lay up in their hertes al these
commandments of the Lord that they trouble not them at any time with
untimely marriages, to whom they owe all honor, reverence, and love, and so
disworshyppe the Gospel of Christ, and be offensive to the congregation of
God, and to other me^, which offense by the healpe of God they might auoied.
For if any ask of God with true faith, and call for his spirit in the name of
his son our Lord Jesus Christ, he will not deny his healpe to the
perfourmance of those things, which he so much commands, and requires.
Which thing we see daily in so many holy maidens, and wydowes, whom he
preserves in right purity of life, without all foul superstition, and
offense, while there chance to them no meet husbands, to whom they might be
married. And there is no gift surely perteynyng to the edifiyng, and adournynge
of his congregation, but God will bountuously give it us even in this time, so
that we do not dispice, nor cast away his liberality, but seek and pray for
the same godly. Wherefore God will give no less in this time, virgins, and
wydowes, and other holy men, which shall gelde them selves for the kingdom
of heaven, then he did in the time of the holy fathers, if we shall godly
require of him these ornaments of the congregation. And there be some surely
in this time, to whom the gift of godly wyueles life has chanced from God,
if only they will use the same in the true fear of God, and zeal of
promotynge the Gospel. Therefore let al cloisterers with al diligence, and
carefulnes beware, that they abuse not the liberty of Christ in any thing,
and make the good thing, which they have received of the Lord, and the
profession of the Gospel to be subject to the ill speaking of men. But that
they look about them religiously, try and discern, whither the Lord has
called them, and does call the^, and not whither carnal curiosity and desire
dryueth them, which yet the Lord will give them grace to overcome if only they
will diligently pray for it, and labor studiosly to this point, and facion
this whole life with godly care, that they may approve them selves to all men,
but chiefly to them among whom they live by Gods ordinance, that they may
please them I say unto their wealth, and edification, and seek their own in
nothing, but the things that profit other, as the Lord requires of all
christen men by Paul.

To al these things we warn, and exhort cloisterers after that sort, and
religion, that Paul did namely for the true profit of cloisterers, for that,
that is comely to them and healpeth them hereunto, that they may cleave the
better to the Lord, and more nighly, and with less danger of separation.

And not in any wise after that sort, and superstition, that we should lay a
snare to any man, that is to say, that we should give any occasion, to
enterprise more things, and higher, then every man has received power of the
Lord, as we protested before. Wherefore as at other times so we ever add also
to this our admonition, and exhortion the sentence of Paul, if they conteyne
not, let them be married. For it is better to be married, then to burn, what
so ever men against the same have willed, or commanded, or require through
their authority, or favor. For against that, that the Lord pronounces to be
better, no man may vow or command, or require, or perform by any means.

Wherefore we beseech, and exhort in the Lord the pare^tes, and kinsfolk of
these persons, that in them, whom God has committed to their charge, which
were borne of them, and be joined to the^ by blood, or some other divine
copulation, they will not prefer temporal co^modites, and ornaments before
everlasting, and that they will rather considre this thing well, and
religiously, that our whole wealth lies in the free, and bold invocation of
Gods mercy, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Which invocation can not stand
with an evil conscience. But they which burn because they have not the gift
of geldyng them selves for the kingdom of God, if they refuse the remedy of
burning, that is to wit, holy wedlock, they can very scantly maintain a
good conscience. For who so while he may, studieth not to embrace that, that
God has judged better, he vndoudtedly dispireth god, whose wholesome counsel he
regards not. The Lords word stands clear and evident. It is better to be
married, then to burn. And it ought to comfort godly parents, whom God has
honored, rather then burdened with a great meanie of children, that he has
promised, that all other things shall be added unto them, which seek the
kingdom of God, and the ryghtuousnes thereof, through his providence, which
surely can never leave his destitute of any manner of true commodities. Let
them comfort them selves with this, and such other like promises of God. They
which have more children, then that they ca^ think, that they may provide
meet marriages for them all, according to the dignity of their family, let
them not doubt, if principally they seek the kingdom of God, and the
ryghtuousues thereof, for their daughters, and sons permittynge unto them
holy marriage, where as they have not received the gift to serve God without
the same, let them not doubt I say, but that God will surely bless both
their chldren, and other so plentifully, that they shall have plain
experience, that there is nothing more profitable, that nothing obteineth
greater blessing of god for all necessities of life, the^ faithfully, and simply
to follow his word, and will. Furthermore how horrible a thing should it be to
be heard, that christian, and noble me^, or other wise exccelle^t through the
singular benifites of the Lord, should wyllyngly for temporal riches, and
worldfly glory put their children in danger oeternall damnation, and lay
before them a snare of sin, whom they had begotte to God, to enjoy eternal
life, and not to the diuyll to suffer everlasting damnation, and whom also they
had consecrated to Christ, to keep all the things that he commanded. Woe be
unto them, says the Lord, by who^ an occasion of stumblyng comes.

And if we hereafter by the council, and advise of our provincial states, can
healpe godly, and honest men as well noble, as other, which have more
children, then they can, well join in matrimony according to their estate,
that they may couple all their children whom the Lord has called to holy
wedlock, in marriages meet for them, we will omit no faythfulnes, and
diligence. In the mean while let the parents, and kinsfolk which have the
gouerna^ce of their yongers, labor to show such love, and faythfulnes to
their children, and kinsfolk in this behalf, whereby they may declare, that
they desire nothing more, then the glory of God to be set forth in the
wealth of they friends. So again let young prisoners behave them selves in
such sort toward their parents and Elders, as men which next after the
obedience of God, desire nothing more then to order al their life to the
acceptance, and worship of their parents, and kinsfolk, and to do and
suffer al things, that God will have them to do, and suffer, according to their
pleasure.

More then this, neither we, nor other ca^ bring any remedy, against the
former inconvenience, which men fear will ensue of the remission of
monastical bonds, I mean that virgins cloisterers return not out of their
abbayes to their friends and be burthenous unto them, and also a disworshippe
through unadvised marriages, or some worse change of life that is. But that we
may ease their carefulnes, which are troubled with the other incommoditie,
and fear lest their inheritaunces, and patrimonies shall be diminished, we
beseech the^, and exhort the^ in the Lord, that first they will well considre
that we christen men ought so to regard temporal goods, that we do not only
prefer them in no wise before eternal goods, but also that they be not an
hidrau^ce to the same in any point. Secondly let them remember that Gods
law, after which Abraham, and other holy fathees lived, grants unto
parents, that they may so distribute their temporal goods, among their
children, as they shall think most profitable, and worshypfull both for their
family, and also for the congregation of Christ. For Abraham made Isaac his
just heir and gave to his other children though they were lawfulli begotten,
only certain portio^s of his goods, ordered and distributed according to his
pleasure. So David made not his eld^^t son to be successor of his kingdom
but him whom he judged to be most meet to administre the same. For the same
reason Moses his law, which God him self gave, commands that two parts
of the inheritage be given to the eldest son.

This reason then being well considered, if the same thing shall seem good to
our diocesanes, we will thus determine, concerning the enheritaunces of them,
which shall forsake Monasteries, namely that none of them shall have title to
claim those enheritances, which were distributed among the other heirs,
before that they came out of their Abbayes. As for the enheritaunces, which
shall chance after that they have left their Abbaies, we will take this order
in the^.

If it be great hinderaunce to any man, to admit the^ to like portions,
which after cession of inheritance, left their abbaies, because that the
person trusting in that cession, and lokinge for agreater protion of
inheritance, enterprised to marie or began some other trade of life, so that
he should be greatli endammaged if such cession of inheritance should be
void, and if they should clame again their protion, which had given up the
same, at their entringe in to monasteries, in such a case we will procure, that
they which shall be put to such hinderaunce, shall be p^^uided for, and that
they also which have left their monasteries, shall be brought to christian
equite, so that no body shall have cause to complain of wrong. Further it is
convenient that they which shall be delivered out of cloister bondage, show
themselves so thanckeful to God for his inconparable benifite of the pure
doctrine of the gospel restored unto the^ and of christian liberty, that they
shall sone co^pte that sufficient, that shall be allotted unto them how litel
soever it be, only if they may therewith serve God with a free, and safe
conscience. But how soever these things shall happen, and how soever these
controversies may be provided for, yet Christian men must remember, that we
pray for daily bread after the sanctificacio^ of gods name and the
coming of his kingdom, wherefore al carefulnes for temporal things must
serve and give place to the sanctificacion of gods name, and to his kingdom.

Of fre, and not monastical Colleges of virgins.
FIrst we will that every college shall be left in that condition, concerning
dignite of birth, wherein it is now, I mean that such colleges as were
appointed to the daughters of Earls be left to them, and such as were
appointed to knights daughters, be distributed to the same.

Secondly that abbasses, and other virgins in colleges conform themselves to
this our reformacion in doctrine, administration of the sacraments, and other
ceremonies, item in the manner of readinge and singinge in the temples, so that
they read, and sing al things in a tongue which they understand.

It shall be the abbasses part to bring up and retain the other virgins in
the fear of the Lord, in holy moderacion of life and in all honest, and
therefore to stir the^ up with dilligent warning, and with the exe^ple of their
own life. Let the other virgins show the^ selves obedient to the abbasse,
and other rulers in all godliness, sobriety, and honest moderacio^ of meats,
drinckes, clothing, and other things, and doings.

Of the order of sell brethren And lay brethern.
SElle brethern in their profession are next to true monckrie, they live
together, they haunte schools, and labor with their hands. Wherefore we will
maintein, and aid them for these purposes, requiring of them only that they
purge, and moderate their ceremonies, lessons, and songs, according to this
our reformacion, and that they live a blameles life, in the communion of the
congregation where they dwell, and in the obedience of the common pastors.

So likewise lay brethren sustine them selves with their labors, minister to
the sick, and bury the dead. Wherefore we will also help them fatherly, and
aid them in this their holy kind of life, asmanie as will faith fulli
exequite these ministeries, and lead forth all their life godly in the
communion of the rest of the congregation, and in the obedience of the commune
pastors.

Al these persons must be diligently examined by the visiters of their
ministeries, and of their other conversation, and they must learn of the same
a certain form, and rule of their life, and tread of lyuinge, and they must
observe the same faithfully.

The conclusion of the work.
IT has seemed good unto us to publishe and set abroad among our men, all the
premises being thus devised, deliberated and gathered together, according to
our simplicite but yet faithfully, and with a true zeal of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as a plain introductio^ to a christian reformacio^ of ecclesiastical
matters and therwyth as much as the Lord shall permit, to satisfy the office,
and commandment, which we acknowledge to be enjoined unto us by God our
creator, and also by the decree of the co^uocacio^ of Ratespone, which thing
moreover our diocesanes have required of us and have committed the same unto us
to set an order therein. Which things nevertheless we set forth to be received,
and observed of men committed to our charge, none otherwise than as a
beginning of so holy, and necessary a thing until a general reformacion of
congregacions be made by the holy empire, by a fre, and christian counsel,
universal or nacionall, or by the most redoubted emperor our most gracious
Lord, with the princes electors, other princes, and common estates of the
holy empire gathered together in the holy Ghost. Which that the Lord will
grant to be appointed, and received with concord of minds for the settinge
forth of his glory, and the promotinge of our health, we ought continually to
desire, and pray of the same Lord, and our God. And where as in the mean
ceason we offer this our devise to our men we do it for none other cause than
we have declared. We labor to a void the fault of inobedience chefely
toward God, which has sondrie ways prescribed unto us in his law this
charge, and this work. Secondly also toward our superiors, who enjoined
the same thing unto us by the decre of the co^sel of Ratespo^e Furthermore we
study to eschew the crime of unfaithfulness toward our subjects, to whom
requiring now the second time, a godli reformacion of ecclesiastical
ministry and giueing us authorite to order the same, we promised this our
diligence, which we also owe unto the^, by reason of our office of an
Archbishop. Therefore that we may perform though not fully, yet somewhat the
thing, that was enioined to us by God, and our savior, and by our superiors,
and was required of our men, and by us promised unto them, we bring forth
these our devises, and deliberate sentences, and deliver them unto our men,
sekinge therewith to promote and maintain, as much as the Lord will vouchsafe
to grant, a godly concord, and wholesome edificacion of al men, in doctrine,
holy ceremonies, and discipline of Christ, and to preserve our men, chefely
in this so dangerous a time, in which so many heresies and wicked opinions
are daili more perniciousli stirred up about us, from al false doctrine, and
perdicion, which certainli follows, wicked doctrine. But if the Lord
hereafter shall reuele his will unto us more largely, and shall give us more of
his grace, and spirit, we now keep this liberte unto us, to enlarge, to
shorten, to change, to correct to declare farther these our devises, and
institutio^s howbeit none other wise tha^ after the word of God, and as the
Lord shall grant us to perceive, that the same is for his glory, and the
edifcacion of his people, whom he has committed unto us. We thought good to
declare, and testify these things to al christian men, which shall read this
book unto the glory of God, and profit of his congregation Whom almighty
God, and our heavenly father, vouchsafe to illumine daily more plentifully
with his spirit and to bring them farther in to the knowledge of his will to
give, and increase in them mighty strength to follow the same in all points,
and at length to make them thoroughly blessed, through our savior the Lord
Jesus Christ to who^ be praise, honor, glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Finis.
Imprinted at London by John Day dwelling in Sepulchers paryshe at the sign
of the Resurrection a little above Houlbourne Conduyt ()


