Ros Coeli. OR, A Miscellany of Ejaculations, Divine, Moral, etc.

Being an Extract out of diverse worthy Authors, Ancient and Modern.

Which may enrich the mean Capacity, and add somewhat to the most knowing
Judgment.

1 TIMOTHY 3.15. Meditate on these Things; give thy self wholly to them, that thy
profiting may appear to all.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Herne. 1648.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sr EDWARD POWEL, Knight and Baronet, one of the
Masters of his Mties Court of Requests.
Noble Sir,
THere is a double Tie upon my duty toward you, that binds me to the largest
acknowledgement that can be expressed by my best abilities: Your general
eminence both in Honor, and, the worthiest means to it, Desert (which duly
challenge the general observance of all men) and your particular noble favors
to me, that require from me a never sufficient gratitude. But as Presents
derive their value as well from the esteem of the Receiver, as from their own
inherent qualities; so will you make this rich by your acceptance, that is
without all worth as it is my poor Donative, though it contain in it self
many secret and mystical virtues, being an Enchiridion of many rare subjects,
both Moral and Divine, fit for the most serious observation and meditation:
The industry of many excellently-learned Authors, whose several Papers were
most accidentally committed to me, to be their fortunate, though unworthy,
preserver and Publisher. The only end for which I beg your Noble disposition to
entertain it, is that it may be understood a testimony of his due
thankfulness, whose only ambition is to be known and styled,

The humblest of your servants. R. H.

October. 18. 1639.

Imprimatur, THO: WYKES.

Ejaculations and Meditations, Divine, Moral, Political.
A Christian in his lowest ebb of sorrow is the Child of God, as well as when
he is in the greatest flow of comfort: only the Sun of Righteousness darts
not the Beams of his Love so plentifully; and he can show no more than God
gives him. When God hides his face, needs must Man languish: His withdrawings
are our miseries: His presence our assured joy. Sin may cast the Good man in a
trance, it cannot slay him: it may bury his heat for a time, it cannot
extinguish it: It may make him in the Waine, it cannot change his Being: it
may accuse, it shall not condemn him. Though God deprive him of his presence for
a time, he will one day re-inlighten him, polish him, and crown him for Ever.

He that when he should not, spends too much, shall, when he would not, have
too little to spend. Diogenes wittily asked a half penny of the Thrifty man, and
a pound of the Prodigal: because the first, he said, might give him often; but
the other, ere long would have none to give. As to be too near, having enough,
is sordid baseness; so to spend superfluously, though we have abundance, is
one of Follies deepest over-sights. There is better use to be made of our
Talents, than to cast them away in waste; God gives them not to spend vainly,
but to employ profitably.

A Full delight in earthly things, argues a neglect of heavenly. Though the
pleasures, profits, and honors of this life may sometimes shuffle a Christian
out of his usual course; yet like the Needle in a Dyall, remooved from his
point, he wavers up and down in trouble, runs to and fro like Quicksilver,
and is never quiet, till he returns to his wonted life and inward happiness:
there he sets down his rest, in a sweet unperceived inward content; which,
though unseene to others, he esteems more, than all that the world calls by
the name of felicity.

PRide and Avarice usually attend great Fortunes: it is justly matter of
amazement, for a man to grow rich, and retain a mind unaltered; yet are not
all men changed alike, though all in something admit variation. The same Spider
kills the man, that cures the Ape. High Fortunes are the way to high Minds:
Pride is usually the Child of Riches. Contempt too often sits in the Seat with
Honor, causing arrogant spirits to contemn and scorn those, which but of
late they thought as worthy as themselves, or better. And of all Vices, nothing
does so debase a man as Avarice; it makes a Master slave to his servant, drudge
to his slave; putting him under all, whom God placed over all. Miserable is the
man that so cares for Riches, as if they were his own, and yet so uses them as
if they were another: that when he may be happy in spending them, will be
miserable in keeping them; and had rather, dying, leave wealth to his enemies,
than living, relieve his friends. Doubtless, true Noblenes esteems nothing
more sordid, than for a man's mind to be his Monyes mercenarie.

WHile blood is in our veins, sin will be in our nature: Our corruptions are
diseases incurable; while we live, they will break out upon us; we may
correct them, we cannot destroy them. They are like the feathers in a Foul,
cut them, break them out, yet will they come again: only kill the Bird, and
they will grow no more. A weak Christians life is almost nothing but a
vicissitude of sin; he sins first, and after laments his folly: Like a
negligent Schoole-boy, he displeases his Master, and then beseeches his
remission with tears. Since we cannot avoid sin, we should learn to
lament it: true sorrow for sin, is the only dark Entry that leads the way
to the fair Court of Happiness.

THere are no familiars so infectious, as the angry Man and the Drunkard: Anger
is the fever of the Soul, which makes the tongue talk idle; it puts a man
into a tumult, that he cannot hear what counsel speaks: it is a raging Sea,
a troubled water, that cannot be wholesome for the use of any. Which he well
knew, that advised us, Not to make friendship with an angry man. The Drunkard
has no memory at all, Excess has utterly consumed it; so that friends and
foes, familiars and strangers, are for the present of equal esteem. He
forgetfully speaks that in his Cups, which if he were sober, should be buried
in silence: first he speaks he knows not what, and after remembers not what
he spoke; his mind and his stomach are alike, neither can retain what they
receive. Whatsoever friend we make choice of, should be sure to have these two
properties, Mildness and Temperance; otherwise, it is better to want
companions, than be annoyed with a mad man or a fool.

NOthing makes us more wretched, than our own uncontrouled Wills: A loose Will
fulfilled, is the way to work out a woe; for, besides the folly in beginning
wrong, the greatest danger is in continuance: like a Bowl running down, which
is ever most violent, when it grows near its Center and period of aim. Man's
Will, without discretion, is like a blind Horse without a Bridle, that should
guide him aright: he may go fast, but runs to his own overthrow; and while
he mends his pace, he hastens his own mischief: when the reins are given
too loosely, the affections run wildly on, without a guide, to ruin. It
should be our vigilance, to curb desires betimes, that so they may not wander
beyond moderation; our own Will being a blind Conductor: good Precepts to an
ingenious Nature, are Bitts that restrain, and hurt not.

AN Eternal Kingdom is often lost, for the gain of toys and vanities: Who
is there, that hazards not his soul for the pleasures or profits of sin;
which when they have, what have they got, but shadows and vexations? The
wealthy man is like a Pouder-Master, who has provision against an Enemy, but
is ever in danger to be blown up himself. And as for the best of Earthly
pleasures, they are far sweeter in the expectation, than in the enjoyment;
the most excellent, we shall find but lame, and halting. It is great vanity,
to cast away our Souls on such transitory Trifles, which when we have, we
are neither sure to enjoy, nor to find commodious.

HE that reaches promotion, without Gods calling him, may flourish a while,
but cannot thrive: He that is most fit for a place of note, seldom seeks it
so much, as he is sought to for it; whereas ever the Bramble, that is low and
worthless, cries out aloud, Make me a King. Many would be Magistrates, that
know not how to be men: but the understanding man knows, that it is better to
live in the Valley, where the times tempests blow over him, than to be seated
on a Mountain top, where every blast threatens both his ruin and fall.
Howsoever others measure him, he knows his own height, and will not exceed
it. It is better live honestly, though meanly, than by unlawful practices to
usurp a Crown.

GReat is the wisdom and goodness of God, in hiding from evil men and
spirits those means and seasons, which taken, might prove most prejudicial
to his Own: we had been oftener foiled, if Satan could have known our
hearts. Sometimes we lie open to evils; and it is our great happiness, that
H^^^^ely knows it, that in stead of tempting, pitties us: And how just is it
with God, that those that seek mischief to others, find it to themselves;
and even whilst they are spreading of Nets, are ensnared; their deliberate
plotting of evil, being surprised with a sudden judgment.

EVery gracious heart is in some measure scrupulous, and finds more safety in
fear than in presumption: For he whose strictness commands a restraint from
things unlawful, surely dares much less take free scope to evil; and by how
much that state is better, where nothing, than where all things are allowed, by
so much is the strict and timorous better than the lawless Consciences. There
is hopes of that man who is scrupulous of his ways, while he that makes no
bones of his actions, is apparently hopeless.

OF all moral virtues Humility is most beautiful, she both shunnes Honor, and
yet is the way to it: she rocks Debate asleep, and keeps Peace waking, yet
does foster and cherish her. It is a vain thing to continue in strife: he
that lives most quiet, lives most secure from death and danger. It Is better be
accounted too humble, than esteemed a little proud: The purest gold is most
ductible; it is commonly a good blade that bends well.

THe Winter is far harder to the Grasshopper than the Pismire, who before having
stored her Garner, is now able to withstand a famine. When a mishap comes
suddenly and unlooked for, it distracteth the mind, and scares both the
faculties and affections from their due consultation of remedy: whereas an
evil foreseen is half cured, because it gives warning to provide for danger.

IF there be any Nectar in this life, it is in the sorrows we endure for
goodness: for they are but for a time, transient, and momentany. The
Israelites shall not live always under the tyranny of Pharaoh, or the
travells of the Wilderness. That God we fight for is able enough to vindicate
all our wrongs; and the more abundant our sorrows are here, the more
plentiful shall our joys be hereafter; our tears shall return in smiles, our
weepings in a stream of pleasures. God does not recompense with a niggardly
hand, we shall find our joys as an overflowing sea, and our glory beyond
thought exuberant. Death shall be our happiest day, and as a Bridge from woe to
glory: though it be the wicked man's shipwreck, it is the good man's putting into
harbor, where striking sails and casting anchor, he returns his lading with
advantage to the Owner, namely his soul to God, leaving the Bulk still moored
in the haven, who is unrigged only to be new built again, and fitted for an
eternal voyage.

GOod parts ill employed are weapons, that being meant for our defense, we
madly turn their edges, and wound our selves: they may make us fair in show,
but in substance more polluted: they are but as a saddle of gold to the back of
a galld horse, adorn us they may, better us they cannot; Grace only can make a
man truly happy, what she affords can content sufficiently, and easily
furnish the vast rooms of the mind. Without her all are nothing; with her even
the smallest is true sufficiency. We should never think our selves the nearer
heaven, for possessing much on earth: a weak house with an heavy roof is in
most danger. He that gets heaven has plenty enough, though the earth scorn to
allow him any thing: he that fails of that, is truly miserable, though she
give him all she has; for it is a poor relief in misery, to be only
thought well of by those that cannot help us. Our outward gifts may win us
applause with men; but inward grace wanting, we shall never gain approbation
with God.

WE are not rich or poor by what we possess, but by what we desire: for he
is not rich that has much, but he that has enough; nor is he poor that has
little, but he that wants more. If God make us rich by store, we should not
impoverish our selves by covetousness: but if he make us poor by want, we
should enrich our selves by content.

HE never was so good as he should be, that does not strive to be better than
he is; neither will he ever be better than he is, that does not fear to be
worse than he was: For it is the greatest of all sins, always to continue in
sin; and where the Custom of sinning waxes greater, the Conscience for
sin grows the less. It is easier to quench a spark, than a fire; and safer
to break the Cockatrices egg, than to kill the Serpent.

IT is a competent estate only, that yields the quiet of content: Abundance,
is a trouble; want, a misery; baseness, a scorn; advancements, dangerous;
disgrace, odious. We should not climb, lest we fall; nor lie on the ground,
lest we are trod on; we are safest, while our legs bear us. It is
madness, to desire either to freeze, or burn; a competent heat is most
healthful for our bodies.

REsolution without Action, is a sloathfull folly; Action without Resolution,
is a foolish rashness: first, know what is good to be done; then do that good,
being known. If forecast be not better than labor, yet labor is not good
without forecast: our actions should not be done without, nor against
knowledge.

NAture has sent us abroad into the world, and we are every day traveling
homeward: if we meet with store of miseries in our way, discretion should
teach us a religious haste in our journey: and meeting with pleasures, they
should pleasure us only, by putting us in mind of our celestial pleasures at
home; which should teach us to scorn these, as worse than trifles. A pleasant
journey is dear bought, with the loss of home; and a troublesome life is
oftener a blessing than a Curse: we may as well die of surfeit, as of hunger.

EAch Night is but the past days Funeral, and the Morning his Resurrection;
Why then should our Funeral sleep be other than our sleep at night? Why
should we not as well wake to our Resurrection, as in the Morning? Death rather
borrowes our life of us, than robbes us of it; and the glory of the Sun
finds a Resurrection, why not the Sons of Glory? Since a dead man may live
again, we should not so much look for an end of our lives, as wait for the
coming of our change.

COntention is very dangerous, especially with great Ones; as we may be too
strong for the weaker, so we must be too weak for the stronger: we cannot so
easily vanquish our Inferiors, but our Superiors may as easily conquer us. We
should do much to be at peace with all men; but suffer much ere we contend with
a Mighty man.

THere is no heart of flesh that at some time or other relents not: neither
flint nor marble but in some weather will stand on drops. Good motions barely
better not the man; the praise and benefit of those gusts are not in the
receipt, but in the retention. A good heart is easily stayed from sinning, and
is glad when it finds occasion to be crossed in ill purposes: those secret
checkes that are raised within it self, do readily conspire with all outward
retentives; it never yielded to a wicked motion without much reluctation, and
when it is overcome it is but with a half consent. Whereas obdurate sinners,
by reason of their full delight in evil, and having already in conceit
swallowed the pleasures of sin, abide no resistance, but keep a headlong
course in spite of opposition, not weighing how near their jollitie is to
perdition. Doubtless it is but just with God, that they who live without
grace, should die without comfort.

IT is no measuring of men by the depth of purse, by outward prosperity; for
even the best deservings may want temporal rewards. Servants are oftentimes set
on horseback, while Princes go on foot. Shall we contemn his necessity, who
perhaps is so much more rich in grace, as he is poor in estate? Neither does
violence or casualtie more impoverish a man, than his poverty sometimes
enricheth him. He whose wilful folly has made him miserable, is justly
rewarded with neglect; but he that suffers for good, deserves so much the more
honor from others, as his distress is more.

MAny speak fair that mean ill: but when the mouth speaks foul, it argues a
corrupt heart. Though with Saint James his verbal Benefactors we say, Depart
in peace, fill your bellies; we shall answer for hypocritical
uncharitableness: but if we revile and curse those needy souls we ought to
relieve, we shall give a more fearful account of savage cruelty, in trampling
on those whom God has humbled. If not healing with good works be justly
punishable, what torment is there for those that wound with evil?

IT is ill hurting the children of God; for though he suffers them not to sin
in revenging, yet he suffers not their adversaries to sin unrevenged. He that
says, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, repayes oftentimes when we have
forgiven, when we have forgotten, and calls to reckoning after our discharges.
Wherefore it is dangerous offending the meanest servant of Him, whose
displeasure and revenge is everlasting.

THat God whose the earth is, makes room for His every where, and oftentimes
provides for them a foreign Home more kindly than the Native. It is no matter
for the change of our Soil, so we change not our God: if we can every where
acknowledge him, He will no where be wanting to us.

THose who cannot fear for love, may chance to tremble for fear. And how much
better is awe than terror? prevention than confusion? Destruction is never
nearer than when security has cast away fear. There is nothing more
lamentable than to see a man laugh when he should fear: God shall laugh when
such a ones fear comes: for as in mercy he forgets not to interchange our
sorrows with joy, so neither does he the joys of the wicked with sorrow. It Is
an unreasonable inequality to hope to find God at our command, when we refuse
to be at his; or to look that he should regard our voice in trouble, when we
would not regard his in peace.

Custom makes Sin so familiar, that the horror of it by some is turned into
pleasure: To make a right use of Gods judgments upon others, is to bear them
in our selves, and finding our sins at the least equal, to tremble at the
expectation of the same deserved punishments. God intends not only revenge,
but reformation, in his execution: as good Princes, who regard not so much the
smart of the evil past, as the prevention of the future; which is never
attained but when we make application of Gods hand, and draw common causes out
of his particular proceedings.

THe best intent cannot excuse, much less warrant us in unlawful actions:
What we do in faith it pleases our God to wink at, and pity our weaknesses:
but if we dare present him with the well-meant services of our own making, we
run to his indignation: for Gods business must be done after his own forms,
which if our best intentions alter, we presume. There is nothing more dangerous
than to be our own carvers in matters of Religion. It is better be too
fearful than too forward, in those things which do immediately concern God.
As it is not good to refrain from holy businesses, so it is worse to do them
ill: Awfulnesse is a safe interpreter of his secret actions, and a wise guide
of ours.

THe first piece of our amends to God for sinning, is the acknowledgement of
our sins: he can do little, that in a just offense cannot accuse himself.
If we cannot be so good as we would, it is reason we should do God so much
right, as to say how evil we are. It is strange to see, how easily sin gets
into the heart, and how hardly out of the mouth! Is it because Sin, like to
Satan, where it has got possession, is desirous to hold it, and knows it is
fully ejected by a free confession? or because through a guiltiness of
deformity, it hides it self in the breast where it is once entertained, and
hates the light? or because the tongue is so fee'd with self-love, that it is
loath to be drawn to any verdict against the heart or hands? Or is it out of an
idle misprision of shame, which whilst it should be placed in offending, is
mis-placed in disclosing our offense? How ever, sure it is that God has need
even of racks to draw out Confessions; for scarce in death it self are we
wrought to a discovery of our errors. O Lord, since we have sinned, why should
we be niggardly of that action, wherein we may at once give glory unto Thee,
and relief to our souls? Whatsoever the sore be, never any Soul truly
applied this remedy and died: never any Soul escaped death that applied it not.

TO know evil by others and not speak it, is sometimes discretion: to speak
evil of others and not know it, is always dishonesty: he may be evil
himself that speaks good of others upon knowledge: but he can never be good
himself, that speaks evil of others upon suspicion. To speak all we know
shows too much folly: to speak more than we know shows too little honesty.
He that spends all that is his own, is an unthriftie Prodigal: but he that
spends more than his own, is a dishonest Unthrift. We may sometimes know what
we will not utter, but should never utter what we do not know.

HEaven being our Home, and Christ our Way, we should learn to know our Way,
ere we haste to travel to our Home. He that runs hastily in a Way he knows
not, may come speedily to a Home he loves not. Seeing Christ is our Way, and
Heaven our Home, we should rather chearefully endure a painful Walk, than
sadly want a perfect Rest.

AS it is not against reason to be passionate, so we should not be passionate
against reason: as we should both grieve and joy, if we have reason for it, so
we should not joy nor grieve above reason; but so joy at our good, as not to
take evil by our joy; so grieve at any evil, as not increase the evil by our
grief.

THe Widows Mite was of more worth than the Riches of superfluity: He gives
not best, that gives most; but he gives most, that gives best. If we cannot
give bountifully, yet we should give freely; and what we want in our hand,
supply by our heart. He gives well, that gives willingly.

HE that contemnes a small fault, commits a great one. Many drops make a
shower; and what difference is it, to be wet either in the Rain, or in the
River, if both be to the skin? There is small benefit in the choice, whether
we go down to Hell by degrees, or at once.

THe Devil is not more black-mouthed than a slanderer, nor a slanderer less
malicious than the Devil: for to have themselves thought as good as any other,
they will not have any thought good that dwells near them. He is to be
suspected as scarce honest, that would with a slander make us to suspect
another as dishonest: the worst of tame beasts, is the flatterer; and the worst
of wild beasts, is the slanderer.

I Admire with reverence the justice and wisdom of the Laws, but deplore with
compassion the abused practice of them; and resolve rather to bear with
patience a haile-shower of injuries, than to seek shelter at such a thicket,
where the brambles shall pluck off my fleece, and do me more hurt by
scratching, than the storm would have done by hailing. That Physic is not to
be chosen, which makes the remedy worse than the disease.

TO be good, is now thought too near a way to contempt. He that lives
virtuously and piously, the world commonly hates, and his reputation shall be
traduced by the ignominious aspersion of malevolent tongues. None can escape the
Lash of Censure. He that is never so profuse and vicious, shall be loved of
some, though not of the best. A supposed honest man found lewd, is hated as a
grown Monster. Private sins are often punished with public shame: for sin
is a concealed fire, that even in darkness will so work, as to bewray it
self. It Is impossible to have every ones good word, because howsoever we
carry our selves, some Cynicks will bark at our courses. I had rather live
hated for goodness, than be loved for vice: he does better that pleases one
good man, than he that contents a thousand bad ones. I care not for his
friendship that affects not virtue, since it must needs be partly fained: for
diversities breed nothing but disunion, and sweet congruitie only is the
Mother of true Love.

VIce is an infallible forerunner of wretchedness. All our dishonest actions
are but Earnests laid down for grief, anguish, or confusion. Sin on the
best condition brings repentance; but for sin unrepented is provided Hell. He
is in the highest degree of madness, that desires to buy his vexation. We
should force our selves to want that willingly, which we cannot enjoy without
future distaste. The Be chooses rather to go to the flower of the field for
Honey, where she may lade her thighs securely, and with leisure, than to the
Apothecaries shop, where she gets more, but makes her life hazardable.

WOrks without faith, are like a fish without water; in which, though there may
seem to be some quick actions of life, and symptoms of agilitie, yet they are
indeed but the forerunners of their end, and the very presages of death. Faith
again without works, is like a Bird without wings; who, though she may hop
with her companions here on Earth, yet living till the worlds end, she will never
fly to Heaven: When both are joined together, then does the soul mount up to
the Hill of eternal Rest. Faith is the foundation, good works the structure:
the foundation without the walls, is of slender value; the building without a
Basis, cannot stand. We should first labor for a sure foundation, saving
faith; but equally seek for strong walls, good works: for as the house is
judged by the edifice, more than by the foundation; so not according to his
faith, but according to his works, shall God judge man.

HE lives truly after death, whose pious actions are his pillars of
remembrance; though his flesh moulders to dross in the grave, yet is his
happiness in a perpetual growth: no day but adds some grains to his heap
of glory. Good works are seeds, that after sowing return us a continual
harvest. A virtuous man shining in the purity of a righteous life, is as a
light house set by the Sea side, whereby the Mariners both sail aright, and
avoid danger: But he that lives in noted sins, is as a false Lantern,
which shipwrackes those that trust it; or like one dying of the Plague, who
leaves an infection to the whole City. Doubtless he runs a woeful course,
that lives lewdly, and dies without repentance.

Secrecy is a necessary part of policy; divulged intentions seldom proceed
well: Things untold, are yet undone; Than to say nothing, there is not a less
labor. The Fig Tree, whose fruit is most sweet, bloomes not at all, whereas
the Sallow, that has glorious Palms, is continually found barren. We should
first be so wise, as to be our own counselors; and next so secret, as to be
our own counsell-keepers.

IT falls out often in this world, that Gods people are like Israel at the Red
Sea, environed with dangers on all sides; and are then like poor Hagar, who
when the bottle of water was spent, fell a crying, when there was a Fountain
close by, but her tears hindered her from seeing it. When things go ill with
us in our Trades and Callings, and all is spent, then our spirits droope, and
we are at our wits end, as if God were not where he was. God will never
forsake them that are his; his eyes are open, to look upon their condition; his
ears are open to their prayers; a Book of Remembrance is written, of all
their good desires, speeches, and actions: he has Bottles for all their
tears, their very sighs are not hid from him, he has written them upon the
palms of his hand, and cannot but continually look upon them.

TRue Religion consists in the outward duty and the inward man joined
together: What the heart does not in Religion, is not done: an empty title
will bring an empty comfort at the last: it was cold comfort to the rich man
in flames, that Abraham called him Son; or to Judas, that Christ called him
Friend: God cares for no retainers, that will only wear his Liverie, but
serve themselves.

THe price of the Pearl is not known till all else be sold, and we see the
necessary use of it: and the worth of God in Christ is never discerned, till
we see our lost and undone condition without him; till Conscience flies in our
faces, and drags us to the brinke of Hell: then, if ever, we taste how good the
Lord is, and will say, Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord.

IF Christians regenerate truly knew the power they have in Heaven and Earth,
nothing would discourage them, neither were any thing able to stand against
them: It is no wonder that Faith should overcome the world, if it overcome Him
that made the world. God is content to be out-wrestled and overpowered by a
spirit of Faith, as in Jacob and the woman of Canaan. Where unbeleefe is, it
binds up Gods power; but where Faith is, there it is between the soul and
God (as betwixt Iron and the Loadstone) a present closing and drawing of one to
the other.

IF we be careful to preserve communion with God, we shall be sure to find
in him whatsoever we deny for him; Honor, Riches, Pleasures, Friends, all:
so much the sweeter, by how much we have them more immediately from the
Springhead. We shall never find God to be our God more, than when for making
of Him to be so, we suffer any thing for his sake.

IF God should bestow his mercies upon us unasked, we would forget them, and
his hand would not be acknowledged in them. What blessings we win by prayer,
we wear with thankfulness; and those we get without prayer, we commonly
spend and use, without any lifting up of the heart to God, in praising him for
the same: All Gods Treasures are locked up to such as do not call upon his
Name; Prayer opens the door to them all, and is effectual to furnish us with
those we have occasion to use.

I Have seen some as happy as the world could make them, but never any more
discontented: for at the best they were but as a good day between two Agues,
or a Sunneshine between two tempests: It is no great happiness, to have lost
mirth, and found wealth; in which case, all we can boast of is, at once to
have ceast to be merry and poor. When Satan tempts us to any evil, with All
these will I give thee; we should repulse him with Saint Peter's answer, Thy
Silver and thy Gold perish with thee.

MAny had been greater, had they cared to be better: It is just, to be crossed
in what we would, when we will not what we ought. Those that honor me, I will
honor: It is an high favor, to have grace to honor God: but because men
honor God as a duty, that therefore God should honor men, is to give,
because he has given. It is a favor of God, that Man is honored of Man like
himself; but that God allows of our endeavors as honor to himself, is a
greater favor than that wherewith he requites it.

Flattery and Treachery is but one Vice, though dressed in two sundry Suits of
Evil: Treachery aims at the blood, Flattery at the virtues of Princes: That
takes them from others, This bereaves them of themselves; That, in spite of
the actors, does but change a Crown, This steals it from them forever: So
that it had been better for some great ones not to have been, than to have
been in their own conceits more than men.

GOds charges are often times harsh in the beginnings and proceedings; but in the
conclusion, always comfortable. True spiritual comforts are commonly late,
and sudden: God deferres on purpose, that our trials may be perfect, our
deliverance welcome, our recompense glorious. Isaac had never been so precious
to his father, had he not been recovered from death: Abraham had never been
so blessed in his Seed, had he not neglected Isaac for God. The only way to
find comfort in earthly things, is to surrender them with a faithful
carfulness into the hands of God. I would not do that wilfully which Jacob
did weakly, on condition of a Blessing: He that pardoned his infirmity, would
curse my obstinatenesse; I love his Blessing, but I hate his Lie.

Bless me also (my Father) says Esau: Every miscreant can wish himself well;
no man would be miserable, if it were enough to desire happiness. He should
have wept rather to his Brother for the Pottage, than to Isaac for a Blessing:
if he had not sold, he had not needed now to buy. It is just with God, to
deny us those favors which we were careless in keeping, and which we
undervalued in enjoying.

Jacob wrestled, and wrencht his thigh. It is a favor to halt from God; yet
this favor is seconded with a greater: he is blessed, because he would
rather halt than leave ere he was blessed. That man may go away sound, but
miserable, that loves a Limb more than a Blessing. Surely, if Jacob had not
wrestled with God, he had been foiled with Evils.

A Christian is a Man of another World, and here from home; which he would
forget, if he were not exercised here, and would take his passage for his
Country. But though all Christians agree, and meet in this, That through many
afflictions we must enter into Heaven; yet according to the diversity of
place, parts, and grace, there is a different Cup measured to every one.

SAtan is all for casting down: he was not ashamed to set upon Christ himself
with this temptation, and thinks Christ's members never low enough, until he
can bring them as low as himself. But God is often nearest to his children,
when he seems farthest off: In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen. God
is with them, and in them, though the wicked be not aware of it; even as the
Moon, at what time it is least visible to us, is then nearest the Sun.

HE that shunneth labor, procures trouble. An unimployed life is a burden to
it self. God is a pure At, always working, always doing: and the nearer our
Soul comes to God, the more it is in action, and the freer from disquiet. Men
experimentally feel that comfort, in doing what belongs unto them, which
before they longed for, and went without.

WE ought not to be overhastie in censuring others, when we see their spirits
out of temper: Many things work strongly upon the weak nature of man; and we
may sin more by harsh censure, than they by overmuch distemper: as in Jobs
case, which was a matter rather of just grief and pity, than great wonder or
heavy censure.

IN all our troubles we should look first home to our own hearts, and stop
the storm there: for we may thank our own selves, not only for our
troubles, but likewise for overmuch troubling our selves in trouble: if we
will prevent casting down, let us prevent grief, the cause of it; and sin,
the cause of that.

A Dejected man is indisposed to good duties; it makes him like an Instrument
out of tune, like a Body out of joint, that mooveth both uncomely and
painefully: It unfits him to duties toward God, who loves both a cheerful
giver and receiver. Dejectedness makes a man forgetful of all former
blessings, and stoppes the influence of Gods grace for the time present, and
that to come: it makes us unfit to receive mercies. A quiet Soul is the seat
of wisdom: therefore meekness is required, in receiving of that ingrafted
Word which is able to save our souls. It is ill sowing in a storm: A stormy
spirit will not suffer the Word to take place. Men are deceived, that think a
dejected spirit to be an humbled spirit: yet it is so, when we are cast down
in the sense of our own unworthiness; and then as much raised, in the
confidence of Gods mercy.

SAtan has never more advantage than upon discontent, it disposes us for
entertaining any Temptation: It damps the spirits of those that walk the same
way with us; when as we should as good travelers cheer up one another both by
word and example. In such a case the wheels of the soul are taken off, or as
it were want oil, whereby it passes on very heavily, and no good action comes
off from it as it should, which breeds not only uncomfortablenesse, but
unsetlednesse in good courses: for a man will never go on comfortably and
constantly in that which he heavily undertakes. So much as we are quiet and
cheerful, so much we live, and are as it were in Heaven: so much as we yield
to discouragements, we lose so much of our life and happiness: Cheerfulness
being as it were the life of our lives, and the spirit of our spirits, by which
they are more enlarged to receive happiness, and to express it.

THere is an art or skill in bearing troubles, without overmuch troubling our
selves: As in bearing of a burden, there is away so to poise it, that it
weighs not overheavy: if it hang all on one side, it poiseth the body down:
The greater part of our troubles we pull upon our selves, by not parting our
care so, as to take upon us only the care of duty, and leave the rest to God:
and by mingling our passions with our crosses, and like a foolish Patient,
chewing the Pills which we should swallow down.

WHy should we dwell too much upon grief, when we ought to remove the soul
higher. We are nearest neighbors unto our selves: when we suffer grief like
a Canker to eat into the soul, and like a fire in the bones, to consume the
marrow, and drink up the spirits, we are accessarie to the wrong done both to
our bodies and souls; we waste our own Candle, and put out our own Light.

IN great fires men look first to their Jewels, and then to their Lumber: No
Jewel is so precious, no possession so rich as the Soul. The account for our
own souls, and the souls of others, is the greatest account; and therefore
the care of souls should be the greatest care.

A Godly man's comforts and grievances are hid from the world; natural men are
strangers to them. If we be troubled with the distempers of our hearts, it is a
ground of comfort unto us, that our spirits are ruled by a higher Spirit; and
that there is a principle of that life in us, which cannot brook the most
secret corruption, but rather casts it out by an holy complaint, as strength of
Nature does poison, which seeks its destruction. He wants spiritual life,
that is not at all disquieted: he abates the vigor and liveliness of his
life, that is overmuch disquieted.

A Burning Ague is more hopeful than a Lethargy; so is he that feels too
much, more happy than he that feels not at all: for he in all his jollitie,
is but as a Book fairly bound, beautiful to the eye while it is shut; but
being opened, is full of nothing but Tragedies: despair to such, is the
beginning of comfort; trouble, the beginning of peace. A storm is the way to a
calm, and Hell the way to Heaven: It Is fit that sin contracted by joy,
should be dissolved by grief. A Christian should neither be a dead Sea, nor a
raging Sea. Affections are never well ordered, but when they are fit to have
communion with God; to love, joy, trust, and delight in him above all things:
for they are the inward movings of the soul, which then move best, when they
move us to God, not from him.

A Carnal man is like a Spring corrupted, that cannot work it self clear,
because it is wholly tainted; his eye and light is darkness, and therefore no
wonder if he sees nothing. Sin lies upon his understanding, and hinders the
knowledge of it self; it lies close upon the will, and hinders the striving
against it self. That which a carnal man does for by-ends and reasons, the
godly man does from a new Nature; which if there were no Law to compel, yet it
would moove him to that which is pleasing to Christ.

WE cannot say, This or that trouble shall not befall; yet we may by help of
the Spirit say, Nothing that does befall, shall make me do that which is
unworthy of a Christian. If we expect the worst, when it comes, it is no more
than we thought of: if better befalls us, then it is the sweeter to us, the
less we expected it.

IN the uncertaintie of all events here, we should labor to frame that
contentment in and from our own selves, which the things themselves will not
yield: frame peace, by freeing our hearts from too much fear; and riches, by
freeing our hearts from covetous desires: frame a sufficiency out of
contentedness. If the soul it self be out of tune, outward things will do
no more good than a fair shoo to a goutie foot. A man shall never live
quietly, that has not learned to be set light by of others. He that is little
in his own eyes, will not be troubled to be little in the eyes of others. Men
that set too high a price upon themselves, when others will not come to their
price are discontent.

THe state of our souls ought carefully to be looked unto. What a shame is it,
that so swift and nimble a Spirit as the soul is, that can mount up to Heaven,
and from thence come down into the Earth in an instant, should, whilst it
looks over all other things, over-looke it self, and be ignorant of its own
estate? What we are afraid to do before men, we should be afraid to think
before God. If we cannot prevent wicked thoughts, yet we may deny them lodging
in our hearts: No sin but is easier kept out than driven out. Little risings
neglected, cover the soul before we are aware.

AS in prosperity God mingles some crosses, to diet us; so in all crosses,
there is something to comfort us. As there is a vanity lies hid in the best
worldly good, so there is a blessing lies hid in the worst worldly evil. God
usually makes up that with some advantage in another kind, wherein we are
inferior to others; and deserving nothing, we should be content with any thing.

IT is no self seeking, when we care for no more than that, without which we
cannot comfortably serve God. And because some enlargement of condition is that
estate wherein we are best able to do good in, we may in the use of means
lawfully desire it.

THe disorders of the soul were not natural, in regard of the first Creation;
but since the Fall, they are become natural. Adams person first corrupted our
Nature; and Nature being corrupted, corrupts our persons; and our persons being
corrupted, increase the corruption of Nature, by custom of sinning, which is
another Nature in us. As a stream, the farther it runs from the Spring head,
the more it enlarges its Channel, by the running of lesser Rivers into it,
until it empties it self into the Sea: so corruption, till it be overtopped
with grace, swells bigger and bigger.

Men's hearts tell them, they might rule their desires, if they would: Foretell
a man of any Dish which he likes, That there is poison in it, and he will not
meddle with it. So tell him, that death is in that sin which he is about to
commit, and he will abstain, if he believe it to be so: if he believe it
not, it is his voluntary unbeleefe and Atheism.

WEre it not that God, partly by his power suppresseth, and partly by his grace
subdueth the disorders of man's nature, for the good of Society, and the
gathering of a Church upon Earth, corruption would swell to that excess, that
it would over-turne and confound all things, together with it self. For
although there be a common corruption that cleaves to the nature of all men in
general, as men, (as distrust in God, self-love, a carnal and worldly
disposition, etc.) yet God so orders it, that in some there is an ebb and
decrease; in others (God justly leaving them to themselves) a flow and increase
of sinfulness, even beyond the bounds of ordinary corruption; whereby they
become worse than themselves, either like beasts in sensuality, or like Devils
in spiritual wickedness, Lord circumcise our hearts, and wash us with clean
water; write thy Law within us, and give us thy holy Spirit when we beg it,
that it may be a never-fading Spring of all holy thoughts, desires, and
endeavors in us, subduing the seed of the Serpent, and drying up the issue and
spring of our corrupt nature.

MAny, out of a misconceit, think that Corruption is greatest, when they feel
it most; whereas indeed, the less we see it, and lament it, the more it is.
Sighs and groans of the soul, are like the pores of the body, out of which,
in diseased persons, sick humors break forth, and so become less. Upon every
discovery and conflict, Corruption loses some ground, and Grace gains upon
it. The Doctrine of the Cross has the Cross always following it, which
corrupt imagination counts the most odious and bitter thing in the World;
whereas indeed it is the chief course which God takes, in bringing men to
Heaven.

IT is an evidence that a man lives more to Opinion than Conscience, when his
grief is more, for being disappointed of outward good things, than for his
mis-carriage toward God. It marres all in Religion, when we go about
heavenly things with earthly affections, and seek not Christ in Christ, but
the World. Imagination is apt to breed false fears, and false fear brings
true vexation.

WE should not bring God down to our imaginations, but raise our imaginations
up to God: for by forging matter out of it self without ground, the imaginary
grievances of our lives are more then the real. Many good men are in a long
dream of misery, and many bad men in as long a dream of happiness, till the
time of awaking come; and all because they are too much led by appearances.

A Natural man is ever weaving Spiders webbes, or hatching Cockatrices eggs;
that is, his heart is exercised either in vanity or mischief: for not only
the frame of the heart, but what the heart frames, is evil continually. Every
other creature is naturally carried to that which is helpefull unto it; only
Man is in love with his own bane, and fights for those lusts that fight
against his soul.

Idleness is the hour of temptation, wherein Satan joins with our
imagination, and sets it about his own work, to grind his Grief; for the
Soul, as a Mill, either grindes that which is put into it, or else works upon
it self.

THe ministering of some excellent thought, from what we hear or see, often
proves a great advantage of spiritual good to the Soul. Whilst S. Austin,
out of curiosity desired to hear the eloquence of S. Ambrose, he was taken
with the matter it self, sweetly slyding together with the words, into his
heart.

SOme conceit, they may embrace Christ, without his Cross; and lead a godly
life, without persecution: They would pull a Rose, without pricks: But though
it may stand with their own base ends for a time, yet will it not hold out in
times of change, when sickness of body, and trouble of mind shall come:
empty conceits are too weak to encounter with real griefs.

IT is a strong argument, that the Spirit has set up a Kingdom and order in
our hearts, when our spirits rise within us against any thing which lifts it
self up against goodness.

THere is nothing that more mooveth a godly man to renew his interest every day
in the perfect righteousness and obedience of his Savior than the sinful
stirrings of his soul, when he finds something in himself always enticing
and drawing away his heart from God, and intermingling it self with his best
performances.

WE may with better leave use all the comforts which God has given, to refresh
us in the way to Heaven, than refuse them. The care of the outward man binds
Conscience so far, as that we should neglect nothing which may help us, in
a cheerful serving of God, in our places, and tend to the due honor of our
bodies, which are the temples of the Holy Ghost, and companions of our souls
in all performances: but the intemperate use of the creatures, is the Nurse of
all passions; because our spirits, which are the Souls instruments, are hereby
inflamed and disturbed; and it is no wonder, to see an intemperate man
transported into any passion.

SAtan and his instruments, by bewitching the imagination with false
appearances, mis-leadeth not only the world, but troubles the peace of men
taken out of the world, whose estate is laid up safe in Christ: Who
notwithstanding pass their few days here, in an uncomfortable, wearisome, and
unnecessarie sadness of spirit; being kept in ignorance of their happy
condition, by Satan's juggling, and their own mistakes, and so come to Heaven
before they are aware. Some again pass their days in a golden dream, and
drop into Hell before they think of it.

AS the distemper of Fancy disturbing the act of Reason, oftentimes breeds
madness, in regard of civil conversation; so it breeds likewise spiritual
madness, carrying men to those things, which if they were in their right wits,
they would utterly abhor.

MEn whose Wills are stronger than their Wits, who are wedded to their own
ways, are more pleased to hear that which complyes with their inclinations,
than a harsh truth, which crosses them; this presageth ruin, because they are
not counsellable: Wherefore God suffers them to be led through a fools
Paradise, to a true Prison; as men that will neither hear themselves, nor
others, who would do them good against their wills.

WHat an unworthy thing is it, that we should pity a beast over-loaden, and
yet take no pity of a Brother? Whereas there is no living member of Christ,
but has spiritual love infused into him, and some ability to comfort others.
Dead stones in an Arch uphold one another, and shall not living? After Love
has once kindled love, then the heart being melted, is fit to receive any
impression. Unless both pieces of the Iron be red hot, they will not join
together: two spirits warmed with the same heat, will easily solder together.

AS God loves not empty hands, so he measures fullness, not by the hand, but
the heart: A Widows Mite is preferred before the Temples Treasure, by Him who
never asks how great, but how good our offerings are.

GOod fellowship does no way so well, as in our passage to Heaven: Many sticks
laid together, make a good fire; which being single, lose both their light and
heat.

REmove the beam from thine own, if thou will clearly see the mote in thy
brothers eye: first learn, then teach. He gathers, that hears; he spends,
that speaks: and if we spend before we gather, we may soon prove bankrout.

THe Devil alleged Scripture, to tempt our Savior; and therefore no marvel
though hypocrites make a fair show, to deceive with a glorious luster of
holiness, since we see from whence they have it. No Devil is so dangerous as
the Religious Devil, which turns the Tables of God into traps to catch Souls.

SAtan makes the ruggedest way seem smooth, while we tread in his paths: but
turn thy feet unto holiness, he blocks up the way with temptation. For never
man endeavored a common good, without opposition; and it is a sign the Work
is holy, and the Agent faithful, when he meets with strong affronts.

SOmetimes the world underrates him, that finds reason to set an high price
upon himself: Sometimes again it over-values a man, that knows just cause of
his own humiliation. If others mistake us, this can be no warrant for our
error. We cannot be wise, unless we receive the knowledge of our selves by
direct beams, not by reflection: unless we have learned to condemn unjust
applauses, and scorning the worlds flattery, frown on our own vileness,
with, Lord, I am not worthy.

GOd gives to his poor conscionable servants a kind of reverence and respect,
even from those men that malign them most, so as they cannot but venerate whom
they hate: contrariwise, no wit nor power can shield a lewd man from contempt;
for the wise providence of God commonly pays us with our own choice: So that
when we think we have brought about our own ends, to our best content, we
bring about his purposes, to our own confusion.

HErod had so much Religion, to make scruple of an Oath, though not of a
Murder. No man casts off all justice and piety at once; but whilst he gives
himself over to some sins, he stops at others. It was Lust that carried
Herod into Murder. The proceedings of sin are more hardly avoided than the
entrance: who so gives himself leave to be wicked, knows not where he shall
stay.

Our hood-winkt progenitors would have no eyes, but in the heads of their
ghostly Fathers; and we are so quicksighted in our own eyes, that we pity
the blindness of our able Teachers. It is the boldness of Nature, upon an
Inch given, to challenge an Ell: for finding our selves graced with some
ability, we strait flatter our selves with a faculty of more.

IT has ever bin Gods wont, by small Precepts to try man's obedience; which is
so much the more, as the thing required is less: he will try thee with a
trifle, before he trust thee with a talent; and obedience ever meets a
blessing.

IT is most seasonable in our worst, to think of our best estate: for both
that thought will be best digested, when we are well; and that change best
prepared for, when farthest from us.

HOw indulgent is the wicked rich man, in studying his own misery: Famine is
his food, and Toil his recreation; Cares are his cheeres, and Torment his
glory. He remembers not, that his wealth has wings, which plucked or cut, fly
away: or that his Soul has so: but, Thou fool, this night, and it flies from
thy Riches to Hell.

I Like silent speaking well, when our actions supply the office of our tongue.
Give me the Christian that is more seen than heard; for a loud tongue and a
silent hand never escapes the brand of an hypocrite.

SAtan has most advantage in solitariness, and therefore sets upon Christ in
the Wilderness, and upon Eve single; and it is added to the glory of Christ's
victory, that he overcame him in a single combat, and in a place of such
advantage. Wherefore, those that will be alone, (being cast down by any
spiritual temptation) do as much as in them lies, tempt the Tempter himself
to tempt them.

AS we ought not to reject the comfort of our friends in adversity, so should
we not build too much upon humane comforts: Men being at the best, but Conduits
of comfort, and such as God freely conveyeth comfort by; taking liberty often
to deny comfort by them, that so he may be acknowledged the God of all
comfort.

WE must not go to the Surgeon for every scratch: opening of our estates to
others is not good, but when it is necessary; and it is not necessary, when
we can fetch supply from our own store: For God would have us tender of our
reputations, except in some special cases, wherein we are to give him the
glory, by a free and full confession.

A Wicked man, beaten out of earthly comforts, is as a naked man in a storm,
and an unarmed man in the field; or as a Ship tossed in the Sea, without an
Anchor, which presently dasheth upon Rocks, or falls upon Quicksands. But a
Christian, when he is driven out of all comforts below, nay, when God seems
to be angry with him; he can appeal from God angry, to God appeased; he can
wrestle and strive with God, by Gods own strength; fight with him with his
own weapons, and plead with him by his own arguments, till he obtain the
comfort he desires.

IT is an infallible rule of discerning a man to be in the state of Grace, when
he finds every condition draw him nearer unto God: For thus it appears, that
such love God, and are called of him, unto whom all things work together for
the best. Grace dormant without exercise, does not secure us. The soul without
action, is like an instrument not played upon, or like a ship always in the
haven. Even life it self is made more lively by action: and by stirring up the
grace of God in us, sparkles come to be flames, and all graces are kept bright.

WHen the soul suffers it self by something here below to be drawn away from
God, it is his mercy tous, that we should find nothing but trouble and
unquietnes in any thing else, that so we might remember from whence we are
fallen, and return home again: and it is a good trouble that frees us from
the greatest trouble, and brings with it the most comfortable rest. The soul
naturally sinks downwards, and therefore had need to be often wound up: but
after that Gods spirit has touched the soul, it will rather be quiet till it
stands pointed Godward; in whom there is both worth to satisfy, and strength
to support it. If we resolve in Gods power, and not our own, and be strong in
the Lord, and not in our selves, then it matters not what our troubles or
temptations be, either from within or without: for Trust in God at length will
triumph.

GRace, like oil will ever be above: and though the soul be overborne with
passion for a time, yet if grace have once truly seasoned it, it will work it
self into freedom again. The eye, when any dust falls into it, is not more
tender and unquiet till it be wrought out again, than a gracious soul being
once troubled: The spirit, as a spring, will be cleansing it self more and
more; whereas the heart of a carnal man is like a standing poole, whatsoever
is cast into it, there it rests: trouble and disquietnesse in him are in their
proper place: It is proper for the sea to rage and cast up dirt: and God has
set it down for an eternal rule, That vexation and sin shall be inseparable.

IF Man withdraw himself from Gods gracious government of him to happiness,
he will soon fall under Gods just government of him to deserved misery: If he
shakes off Gods sweet yoke, he puts himself under Satan's heavy yoke, who as
Gods Executioner hardens him to destruction; and so while he rushes against
Gods will, he fulfils it, and whilst he will not willingly do Gods will, Gods
will is don upon him against his will.

FOr settling our Faith the more, God takes liberty in using weak means to
great purposes, and sets aside more likely and able means; yet sometimes he
altogether disableth the greatest means, and works often by no means at
all. Nay God often brings his will to pass by crossing the course and
stream of means, to show his own soveraigntie, and to exercise our
dependence.

THere is nothing so high, that is above Gods providence; nothing so low that
is beneath it. Nothing so large, but is bounded by it. Nothing so confused, but
God can order it. Nothing so bad, but he can draw good out of it. Nothing so
wisely plotted, but God can disappoint it; as Achitophels counsel: nothing so
weakly carried, but he can give a prevailing issue unto it. Nothing so natural,
but he can suspend its operation, as heavy burdens from sinking, fire from
burning, etc.

WHere a fearful spirit, and a melancholy temper, a weak judgment and a
scrupulous conscience meet in one, there Satan and his, together with men's own
hearts, (which like Sophisters are continually cavilling amongst themselves,)
work much disquiet, and makes the life uncomfortable. But in this case, we
should wholly resign our selves up unto God, with David's words: Here I am, let
the Lord deal with me as seems good unto him. For God often wraps himself in
a cloud, and will not be seen till afterward. Where we cannot trace him, we
ought with Saint Paul to admire and adore him; for all Gods dealings will
appear beautiful in their due season, though we for the present see not the
contiguitie and linking together of one thing with another.

NOthing should displease us that pleases God, neither should any thing be
pleasing to us that displeases him. A godly man in all estates and conditions,
says Amen, to Gods Amen, and puts his fiat and placet to Gods. As the sea
turns all rivers into his own relish, so he turns all to his own spirit,
and makes whatsoever befalls him, an exercise of some virtue. Thus he inioyes
heaven, in the world under heaven: and Gods kingdom comes, where his will is
thus done and suffered.

AS beasts that cannot endure the yoke at the first, after they are inured a
while unto it, bear it willingly, and carry their work more easily by it: So
the yoke of obedience makes the life regular and quiet. The meeting of
authority and obedience together, main- the order and peace of the world.

SAlvation comes to be sure unto us, whilst by Faith looking to Gods promises,
(and to God himself freely offering grace therein) the soul resignes up it
self to God, making no further question from any unworthiness of its own:
for doubtless he will make good whatever he has promised for the comfort of
his children. And what greater assurance can there be, than for Being it self
to lay its being to pawn? and for Life it self to lay life to pawn? and all
to comfort a poor soul. By the bare word of God it is alone, that the
Covenant of day and night, and the preservation of the world from any further
ouerflowings of waters, continues: which if it should fail, yet his Covenant
with his people should abide firm for ever, though the whole frame of nature
were dissolved.

GOd (simply considered) is not all our happiness, but God as trusted in; and
Christ as we are made one with him. The soul cannot so much as touch the hem
of Christ's garment, but it shall find virtue coming from him to sanctify and
settle it: God in Christ is full of all that is good: when the soul is
emptied, enlarged and opened by Faith, to receive goodness offered, there must
needs follow sweet satisfaction.

NOne can know the truth of God, so as to build upon it, but by the Truth it
self, and the spirit revealing it by its own light to the soul. And that soul
which has felt the power of truth, in casting it down and raising it up
again, will easily be brought to rest upon it. We must apprehend the love of
God and the fruits of it, as better than life it self, and then choosing and
cleaving to the same will soon follow. Perfect faith dares put the hardest
cases to its soul, and then set God against all that may befall it. There is no
readier way to fall, than to trust equally to two stays, whereof one is
rotten, and the other sound: God will be trusted alone, or not at all: those
that trust to other things with God, trust not him, but upon pretense to carry
their double minds with less check.

WHen the darkness of the night is thickest, then the morning begins to
dawne: deep extremities are to the wicked a ground of utter despair; but to
him that is acquainted with the ways of God they are a rise of exceeding
comfort: for infinite power and goodness can never be at a loss; neither can
Faith, which looks to that, ever be at a stand: in a hopeless estate a
Christian will see some door of hope opened, because God is ever nearest to us,
when we stand most in need of him. Gods truth and goodness is unchangable, he
never leaves those that trust in him.

AS God commands us to trust him in doing good, so should we commit our souls
to him in well-doing, and trust him when we are about his own works, and not
in the works of darkness: we may safely expect God in his ways of mercy,
when we are in his ways of obedience.

THe heart is never drawn to any sinful vanity, or frighted with any terror
of trouble: til faith first loses the sight and estimation of divine things,
and forgets the necessity and excellency of them: when the great things of
God are brought into the heart by faith, what is there in the whole world that
can out-bid them. Faith preserves the chastity of the soul, and cleaving to
God is a spiritual debt which it owes him: whereas cleaving to the Creature,
is spiritual adultery.

WE cast away flowers after once we have had the sweetness of them, because
there is not still a fresh supply of sweetness in them: whatever comfort is in
the creature, the soul will spend quickly, and look still for more, whereas
the comfort we have in God is undefiled, and fades not away. Outward things
are only so far forth good, as we do not trust in them. Thorns may be
touched, but not rested on, for then they will pierce: we must not set our
hearts upon those things, which are never evil to us but when we set our
hearts upon them.

WHere affections to any thing below get much strength in the soul, it will by
little and little be so over-growne, that there will be no place left in it
either for Object or Art, God, or Trust in him, which is (as it were) the
mother root and great vein, whence the exercise of all graces have their
beginning and strength. An Heir doubts not but his father will provide him
food and nourishment, and give him breeding suitable to his future condition. It
is a vain pretense to believe that God will give us Heaven, and yet leave us
to shift for our selves in the way.

PLants move not from place to place, because they find nourishment where they
stand: but living creatures seek abroad for their food, and to that end have a
power of moving from place to place; and this is the reason why trust is
expressed by going to God with an humble boldness, which carries the soul out
of in self, to rely wholly upon his all sufficiency.

THose that take liberty in things they either know or doubt will displease
God, show they want the fear of God, and the want of fear shows their want of
dependancie, and therefore want of trust. Dependancie is always very
respective, it studieth contentment, and care to comply: and therefore he that
commits his soul to God to save, will commit his soul to God to sanctify and
guide in a way of well pleasing. Not only the tame, but the most savage
creatures will be at the beck of those that feed them, though they are ready
to fall violently upon others: Disobedience therefore is against the Principles
of Nature.

GOd can convey himself more comfortably to us when he pleases, without
means, than by means: and true Trust, as it sets God highest in the soul, so
in dangers and wants it has present recourse to him (as the Conies to the
rocks) patiently waiting his leisure: for God seldom makes any promise to his
children, but he exercises their trust in waiting long before, as Abraham for
a son, David for a kingdom, the whole world for Christ's coming, etc.

A Ship that lies at anchor may be something tossed, but yet it still remains
so fastened, that it cannot be carried away by wind or weather: the soul
after it has cast anchor upon God, may be disquieted a while, but this
unsetling tends to a deeper settling: the more we believe, the more we are
established: Faith is an establishing grace, by faith we stand, and stand
fast, and are able to withstand whatsoever opposes us: for what can stand
against God, upon whose truth and power faith relyes.

IT requires a great deal of self-denial, to bring a soul either swelling
with carnal confidence, or sinking by fear and distrust, to lie level upon
God, and cleave fast to him: Square will lie fast upon square, but our hearts
are so full of unevenness, that God has much ado to square our hearts sit
for him; notwithstanding the soul has no true rest without this.

A spirit set in tune, and assisted by a higher spirit, will stand out against
ordinary assaults, but when God (who is God of the spirits of all flesh) shall
seem contrary to our spirits, we shall then find small relief elsewhere. Needs
must the soul be in a woeful plight, when God seems not only to be absent
from it, but an enemy to it.

SIn is nothing so sweet in the committing, as it is heavy and bitter in the
reckoning. There is not the stoutest man breathing, but if God set his
conscience against him, it will pull him down and lay him flat, and fill him
with such inward terrors, that he shall be more afraid of himself than of
all the world beside.

THere is something in the very greatness of sin, that may encourage us to go
to God: for the greater our sins are, the greater the glory of his powerful
mercy in pardoning will appear. The great God delights to show his greatness
in the greatest things, he delights in mercy, it pleases him, nothing so
well, as being his chief Name. His mercy is not only above his own works, but
above ours also: if we could sin more then he could pardon, then we might have
some reason to despair. Despair is a high point of Atheism, it takes away God
and Christ both at once. Judas in betraying our Savior was occasion of his
death as man: but in despairing he did what lay in him to take away his life as
God. Wherefore we should never think the door of hope to be shut against us,
if we have a purpose to turn unto God. Invincible mercy will never be
conquered; and endless goodness never admits of bounds or ends. If Christ be
the Physician, it is no matter of how long continuance the disease be: he is
good at all diseases, and will not endure the reproach of disability to cure
any.

AS in the sin against the holy Ghost, fear shows that we have not
committed it: so a tender heart fearing lest the time of true repentance is
past, shows plainly that it is not past. God is more willing to entertain us,
than we are to cast our selves upon him. As there is a fountain opened for sin
and for uncleanness; as it is a living fountain of living water, that runs for
ever, and can never be drawn dry.

ALl men are not affected with a like sorrow for sin: God gives some larger
spirits, and so their sorrows become larger. Some upon quickness of
apprehension, and the ready passages betwixt the brain and the heart, are
quickly moved: where the apprehension is deeper, and the passages flower, there
sorrow is long in working, and long in removing: the deepest waters have the
stillest motion. Iron takes fire more slowly than stubble, but then it holds
longer. It is fitter to leave it to Gods wisdom to mingle the portion of
sorrow, than to be our own chusers.

IF we grieve that we cannot grieve, and so far as it is sin, make it our
grief, it should not hinder us from going to Christ, but rather drive us to
him: God delights not in our sorrow; if we could trust in him without much
sorrow, then it would not be required: and though want of feeling be quite
opposite to the life of grace: yet senciblenesse of the want of feeling, shows
some degree of the life of grace. When that which is wanting in grief for sin,
is made up in fear of sinning, there is no great cause of complain of the
want of grief: for this holy affection is the awe-band of the soul, whereby
it is kept from starting from God and his ways. That measure of grief and
sorrow is sufficient, which brings us and holds us to Christ.

WE should grieve for our sins, and rejoice for our grief: and though we can
neither love nor grieve, nor joy of our selves as we should, yet are we often
guilty in giving a check to the spirit, stirring these affections in us: which
is the maine cause of the many sharp afflictions we endure in this life,
though Gods Love in the maine matter of salvation be most firm unto us.

Grief is no farther good, than it makes way for joy: which caused our Savior
to join them together: Blessed are the mourners, for they shall be comforted:
it is one maine end of Gods leaving us in a sorrowful condition, that we may
live and die by faith in the perfect righteousness of Christ, whereby we
glorify God more, than if we had perfect righteousness of our own.

Our corruptions are Gods enemies, as well as ours: therefore in trusting to
him, and fighting against them, we may be sure he will take our part in
vanquishing them. The looking too much to the Anakims and Giants, and too
little to Gods omnipotency, shut the Israelites out of Canaan, and put God to
his Oath, that they should never enter into his rest: And it will exclude our
souls from happiness at length, if looking too much on these Anakims or great
corruptions within and without us, we basely despair, and give over the Field:
what coward will nor fight, when he is sure of help and victory?

THough God be of pure eyes, yet he looks upon us his poor Creatures, in him
who is blameless, and without spot, who by virtue of his sweet smelling
sacrifice appears for us in heaven, and mingles his odors with our services;
and in him will God be known to us by the name of a kind Father, not only in
pardoning our deserts, but accepting our endeavors.

WHatsoever comfort we have in goods, friends, health, or other Blessings, it
is all conveied by God, who still remains, though these be taken from us: And
we have him bound in many promises for all that is needful for us: we may sue
him upon his own bond. Can we think that he who will give us a Kingdom,
will fail us in necessary provision to bring us thither, who himself is our
portion.

DEparture of friends should not be grievous unto us: A true Believer is unto
Christ as his Mother, Brother and Sister, because he carries that affection to
them, as if they were so indeed to him. As Christ makes us all to him, so
should we make him all in all to our selves. If all comforts in the world were
dead, we may enjoy them still in the living Lord.

HEalth is at Gods command, and sickness stays at his rebuke. The time of
sickness is a time of purging from that defilement we gathered in out health,
till we come purer out: which should move us the rather willingly to abide
Gods time. Blessed is that sickness that proves the health of the soul: we
are best for most part when we are weakest. Then only it truly appears what
good proficients we have been in the time of health.

IN all kind of troubles, it is not the Ingredients that God puts into the
cup, so much afflicts us, as the Ingredients of our distempered passions
mingled with them. The sting and coare of them all is sin: when that is not
only pardoned, but in some measure healed, and the proud flesh eaten out, then
a healthy soul will bear any thing: when the conscience is once set at liberty,
we cheerfully undergo any burden. But it is a heavy condition to be under the
burden of trouble, and under the burden of a guilty conscience both at once.
When men will walk in the light of their own fire, and the sparks which they
have kindled themselves, it is just with God that they should lie down in
sorrow.

IN all sorts of injuries which we suffer, we should commit our cause to the
God of vengeance, and not meddle with his prerogative: he will revenge better
than we can, and more perhaps than we desire. The wronged side is the safer
side. If in stead of meditating revenge, we can so overcome our selves as to
pray for our enemies, and deserve well of them, we shall both sweeten our own
spirits, and prevent a sharp temptation which we are prone unto, and have an
undoubted argument, that we are sons of that Father that does good to his
enemies, and Members of that Savior that prayed for his persecutors: and
withal, by heaping coals upon our Enemies heads, we shall melt them either to
conversion or confusion.

We are not disquieted when we put off our clothes and go to bed, because we
trust Gods ordinary Providence to raise us up again: And why should we be
disquieted when we put off our bodies, and sleep our last sleep: considering we
are more sure to rise out of our graves, than out of our beds. Nay we are
raised up already in Christ our Head, who is the Resurrection and the life; in
whom we may triumph over death, that triumphs over the greatest Monarchs, as
a disarmed and conquered Enemy.

THat which belongs to us in our calling, is care of discarging our duty: that
which God takes upon him is assistance and good success in it. Let us do our
work, and leave God to do his own. Diligence and trust in him is only ours,
the rest of the burden is his. He stands upon his credit so much, that it
shall appear we have not trusted him in vain, even when we see no appearance
of doing any good. Peter fished all night and caught nothing: yet upon Christ's
word casting in his net again, he caught so many Fish as brake it.

Covetousness (when men will be richer than God will have them) troubles all, it
troubles the house, the whole family, and the house within us, our precious
soul, which should be a quiet house for Gods Spirit to dwell in, whose Seat is
a quiet Spirit. If men would follow Christ's method, and seek first the
Kingdom of Heaven, doubtless all other things should be cast upon them.

GOd is nearest to us in troubles: when our enemies on earth conclude our utter
overthrow, God is in Heaven concluding our glorious deliverance, Usually after
the lowest Ebb, follows the highest Springtide. Christ stands upon Mount
Sion, and will work our raising by that very means by which our enemies seek
to ruin us. There is no condition so ill, but there is Balm in Gilead,
Comfort in the God of Israel. The depths of misery are never beyond the depths
of mercy. Natural men from the common light of Nature discovering there is a
God, will in extremities run unto him: and God as the Author of Nature will
sometimes hear them; as he does the young Ravens that cry unto him. But
comfortably and with assurance those only have a familiar recourse unto him,
that have a sanctified suitable disposition unto God, as being well acquainted
with Him. It is an excellent ground of sincerity, to desire the favor of God,
not so much out of self-aimes, as that God may have the more free and full
praise from us: considering the soul is never more fit for that blessed duty,
than when it is in a cheerful plight.

IF we seriously think of what is our Duty, God will surely think of what
shall be for our Comfort: we shall feel God answering what we look for from
Him, in doing what he expects from us. Can we have so mean thoughts of Him,
that we should intend his glory, and he not much more intend our good. Yet
many do grossly mistake, in taking Gods curse for a blessing: To thrive in an
ill way is a spiritual judgment, extremely hardening the heart. There can
neither be grace nor wisdom in settling upon a course, wherein we can neither
pray to God for success in, nor bless God when he gives it.

WHen we are at the lowest, yet it is a mercy that we are not consumed: we are
never so ill, but it might be worse with us: whatsoever is less than Hell is
undeserved: and it is a matter praise worthy to God, that we yet have time and
opportunity to get into a blessed Condition.

THe Apostle thought it the first duty in affliction, to pray. Is any
afflicted, let him pray: Is any joyful, let him sing Psalms. Praising of God
is then most comely, (though never out of season) when God seems to call for it
by renewing the sense of his mercies in some fresh favors toward us. If a Bird
will sing in Winter, much more in the Spring. If the heart be prepared in the
winter time of Adversity to praise God, how ready will it be when it is warmed
with the glorious sunshine of his Favor.

Our life is nothing but as it were a Web woven with interminglings of wants
and favors, crosses and blessings, standings and failings, combat and victory:
therefore there should be a perpetual intercourse course of praying and
praising in our hearts. We should often apply these generals of Holy-writ to
our selves, to stir up our hearts to praise God: He will never leave nor
forsake us: he will be with us in fire and water: the issue of all things shall
be for our good: we shall reap the quiet fruit of righteousness, and no good
thing will he withhold from them that live a godly life. If we had a spirit of
Faith, to apply such like general promises, we should see much of Gods
goodness in particular toward us. God promises the forgiveness of sin, and
yet thou find the burden thereof daily upon thee; Nevertheless cheer up
thy self, when the Morning is darkest, then comes day; after a weary week
comes a Sabbath, and after a fight, victory will appear: we must endure the
working of Gods Physic: when the sick humor is carried away and purged, then
we shall enjoy desired health.

PRaising of God may well be called, Incense: because as it is sweet in it
self, and sweet to God, so it sweetens all that comes from us: We cannot love
and joy in God, but he will delight in us; when we neglect the praising of God,
we lose both the comforts of his Love and our own too. Our praising God
should not be as sparks out of a flint, but as water out of a Spring,
natural, ready, free, as Gods Love to us: as Mercy pleases him, so should
praises please us; For unthankfulness is a sin detestable both to God and man:
and the less punishment it receives from humane laws, the more it is punished
inwardly by secret shame, and outwardly by public hatred, if once it prove
notorious.

THe living God is a living Fountain, never drawn dry: he has never don so
much for us, but he can and will do more: If there be no end of our praises,
there shall be no end of his goodness: by this means we are sure never to be
very miserable: how can he be dejected, that by a sweet communion with God,
sets himself in heaven? nay makes his heart a kind of heaven, a Temple, a
Holy of Holies, wherein Incense is offered unto God? A thankful heart to God
for his Blessings is the greatest Blessing of all: But were it not for a few
gracious Souls, what Honor should God have of the rest of the unthankful
world? which should stir us up the more to be Trumpets of Gods Praises in the
midst of his Enemies; because this (in some sort) has a Prerogative above our
praising him in Heaven: for there God has no Enemies to dishonor him.

GOd is Salvation it self, and nothing but Salvation: and though our sins for a
time may stop the current of His Mercy, yet it being above all our sins, will
soon scatter that cloud, remove that stop, and then we shall see and feel
nothing but salvation from the Lord, all his ways are Mercy and Peace, to a
repentant Soul that casts it self upon him. We should not therefore so much
look what destruction the Devil and his threaten, as what salvation God
promises. Cannot he that has vouchsafed an issue in Christ from eternal
death, vouchsafe an issue from all temporal evils? He that brought us into
trouble can easily make a way out of it when he pleases: this should be a
ground of resolute and absolute obedience even in our greatest extremities;
considering God will either deliver us from death, or by death, and at length
out of death.

CAinish hypocrites hang down their heads when God lifts up the countenance of
their brethren: when the countenance of Gods children cleers up, then their
enemies hearts and looks are cloudy; Ierusalems joy is Babylons sorrow: It is
with the Church and Her enemies as it is with a balance, the scales whereof
when one is up, the other is down: The reason why wicked men gnash their teeth
at the sight of Gods gracious dealing, is, that they take the rise of Gods
children to be a presage of their ruin. Which lesson Hamans wife had learned.

SAlvation is Gods own work, humbling and casting down is his strange Work,
whereby he comes to his own work. For when he intends to save, he will seem to
destroy first: whom he will revive, he will kill first. Grace and Goodness
countenanced by God, have a native inbred majesty in them, which makes the
face to shine, and borrows not his luster from without; which God at length
will have to appear in its own likeness, howsoever malice may cast a veil
thereon, and disguise it for a time.

WHat comfort was it for Adam when he was shut out of Paradise, to look upon
it after he had lost it: the more excellencies are in God, the more our grief
if we have not our part in them: the very life-bloud of the Gospel lies in a
special application of particular mercy to our selves, without which we can
neither entertain the Love of God, nor return Love again; whereby we lose all
the comfort God intends us in his Word, which of purpose was written for our
solace and refreshment.

PRetend not thy unworthiness and unabilitie to keep thee off from God; for
this is the way to keep thee so still. God bids us draw near to Him, and He
will draw near to us. Whilst we in Gods own ways draw near to Him, and
labor to entertain good thoughts of Him, He will delight to show himself
favorable unto us: whilst we are striving against an unbeleeving heart, He
will come in and help us, and so fresh light will come in. God alone must help
us, and if ever He help us, it must be by casting our selves upon him: for
then he will reach out himself unto us, in the promise of mercy to pardon our
sin, and in the promise of Grace, to sanctify our Natures.

Spiritual Comforts in distress, such as the world can neither give nor take
away, show that God looks upon the souls of his, with another eye than he
beholds others: He sends a secret Messenger, that reports his peculiar Love
to their hearts. He knows their souls, and feeds them with his hidden Manna:
the inward peace they feel is not in freedom from trouble, but in freeness
with God in the midst of trouble.

SEchem had not sinned, if Dinah had not tempted him. Immodestie of behavior
makes way to Lust, and gives life unto wicked hopes. Lust commonly ends in
loathing. But Sechem would salve up his sin with an honest satisfaction: but
actions ill begun, are hardly salved up with late satisfaction; whereas good
entrances give strength to the proceedings, and success to the end. Dinahs
brethren pretend Religion, (we cannot give our sister in marriage to an
uncircumcised man:) here God is in the mouth, and Satan in the heart. A smiling
malice is most deadly, and hatred does most ranckle the heart, when it is kept
in and dissembled. Jacobs sons think of nothing but revenge, and which is
worst, begin their cruelty with craft, and end their craft with Religion.
Bloudiest projects have ever wont to be thus colored; for the worse any thing
is, the better show it desires to make; and contrarily, the better color is
set upon vice, the more odious it makes it: for as every simulation adds to an
evil, so the best adds most evil: Indeed filthiness should not have bin
wrought in Israel, nor should murder have been wrought by Israel: Cursed be
their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was cruel. To punish
above the offense, is no less injustice than to offend: and to execute rigor
upon a submisse offender, is more merciless than just. The idle curiosity of
Dinah bred all this mischief: what great evils arise from small beginnings?
Ravishment follows her wandering; upon her ravishment, murder; and upon the
murtner, spoil. It is holy and safe, to be jealous of the first occasions of
evil, either done or suffered.

IF Thamar had not put off her widows apparel, Judah had not taken her for a
whore: Immodestie of outward fashion or gesture, bewraies evil desires: the
heart that means well, will never wish to seem ill, for commonly we affect to
show better than we are, and it is no trusting of those which wish not to
appear good. Thamars belly swells, and Iudahs heart swells with rage, Let her
be burnt. How easy is it to detest those sins in others, which we flatter
in our selves? Even in the best men nature is partial in it self: it is good
to sentence others frailties with the remembrance of our own: Judah no sooner
sees the signals, but confesses his shame; She is more righteous than I. God
will find a time to bring his children upon their knees, and to wring from them
penitent Confessions; and rather than he will not make them soundly ashamed, he
will make them Trumpets of their own reproach. There is nothing more
thankelesse or dangerous, than to stand in the way of a resolute sinner: that
which does correct and oblige the Penitent, makes the wilful mind furious and
revengefull.

Me thinks it is torment enough for the poor man to want, and yet I see every
man ready to add to his affliction by neglect. Proud Haman was hanged, and
poor Mordecai raised to his honor. There is no man so fixed in greatness, but
may fall: nor any so low in misery, but may rise: why then should we slight
any man's means, since we know not his destiny. Nothing does so powerfully
call home the conscience as affliction: neither need we any other act of
memory for sin, than misery.

Actions salved up with a free forgiveness, are as not done: and as a bone
once broke is stronger after well setting; so is Love after reconcilement. Yet
as wounds though healed leave a scar behind them; so injuries (though remitted)
leave a guilty remembrance in the actors, and it must be a great favor that
can appease the Conscience of a great injury: for a guilty conscience seldom
thinks it self safe.

COrruption when it is checked, grows mad with rage, as the vapor in a cloud,
which would not make that fearful report, if it met not with opposition. A
good heart yields at the stillest voice of God; but his most gracious motions
harden the wicked. Many would not have been so desperately settled in their
sins, had not the Word controlled them. Any thing seems due work to a carnal
mind, save Gods service; nothing superfluous, but religious duties. Christ
tells us there is but one thing necessary; Nature says, there is nothing but
that needless.

REligion does not call to a weak simplicity, but allows as much of the
Serpent as the Dove. Lawful Policies have from God both liberty in the use,
and blessing in the success. A wicked heart never looks inward to it self, but
outward to the Reproover: if that afford exception, it is enough: as Dogs run
first to revenge on the stone. What matter is it to me, who he be that
admonishes me? Let me look home unto my self, and also to his advice; if
that be good, my shame's the more to be reproved by an evil man. As a good
man's allowance cannot warrant evil, so an evil man's reproof may remedy evil.

NOthing but innocence and knowledge can give sound confidence to the heart.
Ignorance as it makes bold, intruding men into unknown dangers, so it makes
men often causelessly fearful. Herod feared Christ's coming, because he
mistook it; had the tyrant known the manner of his spiritual regiment, he
had spared both his own fright, and the blood of others. And hence it is that
we fear death, because we are not acquainted with the virtue of it.

WOrdly Cares are fitly compared to Thorns; for as they choke the Word, so
they prick our Souls: Neither can the word grow up amongst them, nor the heart
rest upon them: Spiritual Cares are as sharp, but more profitable. They pain
us, but leave the soul better: they break our soul, but for a sweeter rest:
we are not well, but either while we have them, or after we have had them. It
is impossible to have spiritual health without these, as to have bodily
strength with the other. He lives most contentedly, that is most secure for
this World, most resolute for the other.

SAtan never fears us, but when we are well employed: and the more likelihood
he sees of our profit, the more is his envy and labor to distract us: he is
ever busiest in our best actions, and most in the best part of the best, as in
the end of prayer, when the heart should close up it self with most comfort. We
should therefore strive so much the more toward our own good, as his malice
strives to interrupt it. We do nothing if we contend not when we are resisted.
The Devil steals upon us suddenly by temptations, because he would foil us:
and if we be not armed ere we be assaulted, we shall be foiled ere we can be
armed.

HE that intermits good Duties, incurreth a double loss: of the blessing that
follows good, and of the faculty in doing it. Want of use causes
disabilitie, as Custom, perfection: He that omits prayer in his closet, can
hardly pray in public, but with a cold formalitie. He that discontinues
meditation, shall be long in recovering; whereas the man inured to this
exercise, performs both well and with ease.

CHristianity is both an easy yoke, and a hard: hard to take up, easy to
bear when once taken. The heart requires much labor ere it can be induced to
stoop under it, and finds as much content when it has stooped. The worldling
thinks Religion great servitude: but the Christian knows whose slave he was,
till he entered into this service, and that no bondage can be so ill, as
freedom from these bands. Every good action has his let, and he can never be
good as he ought, that is not resolute. The regenerate Christian both is, and
knows himself truly great, and thereupon minds and speaks of spiritual,
immortal, glorious, Heavenly things: but every Worldling is base minded, and
therefore his thoughts creep still low upon the earth. The more the soul
stoopeth to earthly matters, the more unregenerate it is.

ALl our future good we hold only in hope: and the present favor of God, we
have many times when we feel it not. The stomach finds the digestion, even in
sleep, though we perceive it not: We are most happy when we know our selves
so: But miserable were many Christians if they could not be happy, and know it
not. It is not a man's natural parts, but his graces that crown him: honest
sottishness, is better than profane eminence: None ever did so much mischief
to the Church, as those that have been excellent in wit and learning: others
have been spiteful enough, but were not able to accomplish their malice. That
Enemy is most to be feared, that has both strength and craft to hurt us.

THe Conscience can have no perfect peace, while sin is within to vex it, no
more than an angry swelling can cease throbbing and aching, while the Thorn or
corrupted Matter lies rotting underneath. Time, that remedies all other evils
of the mind, increases this: which like to bodily diseases, proves worse with
continuance, and grows upon us with our age. Sin is a perpetual Make-bait
betwixt God and man, betwixt a man and himself, ever working secret
unquietness to the heart. The guilty man may have a seeming Truce, a true
peace he cannot have: which makes the galled soul seek refreshing in variety
of pleasures, places, and companies; yet after many such vain wearyings, finds
no rest, but complains of remediless and unabated torment: for alas what
availes it to seek outward reliefes, when our executioner is within us. Nero
after so much innocent blood shed, may change his Bedchamber, but his Friends
being as parts of himself, will ever attend him. The soul may flee from the
body, but the Conscience will not flee from the Soul, nor sin from the
Conscience. It is a divine Power only, that can uphold the mind against the
rage of inward troubles. When therefore thy Conscience like a stern Sergeant
shall catch thee by the throat, and arrest thee upon Gods debt, let thy only
plea be, that thou have already paid it: Bring forth that bloody acquittance
sealed unto thee from Heaven by Faith in Christ, and straight way thou shall
see the fierce and terrible look of thy Conscience changed into friendly
smiles; and that rough and violent hand that was ready to drag thee to prison,
shall now lovingly embrace thee, and fight for thee against all the wrongful
attempts of any Spiritual Adversary. But the time will come when the careless
sinner shall be plunged in woes, and shall therefore desperately sorrow,
because he sorrowed not sooner for sin: He may feast away his Cares for a
while, and bury them with himself, in wine and sleep; but after all these
frivolous evasions, they will return again, nor will they be repelled, but
increased hereby. Sin owes him a spite, and perhaps will pay him when he is
in worse case to sustain it; Namely, up- his Deathbed, which shall prove very
grievous unto him, for his many wilful adjournings of Repentance.

HE said well, who when some skillful Astrologer upon calculation of his
Nativitie, had foretold him some specialties concerning his future estate;
answered, Such perhaps I was borne, but since that time I have been born again,
and my second Nativitie has crossed my first. The Power of Narure, is a good
Plea for those that acknowledge nothing above Nature: but for a Christian to
excuse his intemperatenesse by his natural inclination, and to say, I am borne
choleric, sullen, Amorous, etc. is an Apology worse than the fault: For
wherefore serves Religion, but to subdue or govern Nature? We are so much
Christians as we can rule our selves, the rest is but form and speculation.

THere is no difference but continuance, betwixt Anger and Madness: for raging
Anger is a short Madness, else what argues the shaking of the hands and lips;
the palenesse, redness, or swelling of the face, glaring of the eyes,
stammering of the Tongue, stamping with the Feet, unsteadie motions of the
whole Body, wild distracted Speeches, and rash Actions, which we remember not
to have done. Doubtless a mild Madness is more tolerable, than frequent and
furious Anger.

Our Cowardlinesse and unpreparednesse, is Deaths chiefest advantage: whereas
true boldness in confronting him, dismayes and weakens his forces: Happy is
the Soul that can send out the Scouts of his thoughts beforehand, to discover
the power of Death, a far off, and then can resolutely encounter him at
unawares upon advantage: such a one lives securely, and dies with Comfort:
Death argues not Gods displeasure: Abel whom God loved best, dies first, when
the Murderer Cain is punished with living.

COntentation is a rare Blessing, because it either arises from a fruition of
all comforts, or a not desiring of some we have not. We are never so bare, as
not to have some benefits: never so full, as not to want something, yea, as not
to be full of wants. God has much ado with us, either we lack health, or
quietness, or Children, or wealth, or company, or our selves in all these.
Nature is moderate in her desires, but Conceit is insatiable. Who cannot pray
for his daily bread, when he has it in his Cup-bourd? but when our own
provision fails, then not to distrust God is a noble trial of Faith. All
grudging is odious, but most when our hands are full. To whine in the midst of
abundance, is a shameful unthankfulness: it is a base cowardice, so soon as
ever we are called from the garrison to the field, to think of running away:
then is Fortune worthy of Praise, when we can endure to be miserable. O God, I
have made an ill use of thy mercies, if I have not learned to be content with
thy corrections.

NO benefit can stop the mouth of impatience, if our turn be not served for
the present, former favors are either forgotten, or contemned. No marvel we
deal so with men, when God receives this measure from us. One Moon of ill
weather makes us overlooke all the blessings of God, and more to mutine at our
sense of evil, than to praise him for our variety of good. It is an unfound
praise that is given a man for one good action. Many distrust God in their
necessity, that are ready to follow his guidance in their welfare: if we
follow God and murmr, it is all one as if we staid behind. We can think him
absent in our wants, yet cannot see him absent in our sins: It is
wickedness, not affliction that argues him gone: for he is most present, when
he most chastises. And the sorrow of repentance comes never out of season, all
times are alike unto that Eternity where to we make our spiritual moanes: that
which is past, and that which is future are both present with him. It is
neither weak nor uncomely for an old man to weep for the sins of his youth.
Such tears can never be shed either too soon or too late.

THere is scarce a vicious man, who name is not rotten before his Carcass:
Contrarily, a good man's name is often heir to his life, either borne after the
death of the Parent (Envy not suffering it to come forth before) or perhaps so
well grown up in his life time, that the hope thereof is the staff of his
age, and the joy of his death. The name of the wicked may be feared a while,
but is soon forgotten, or cursed: The good man's either sleeps with his body
in peace, or wakes (as his soul) in glory. Virtue is not propagated: Children
naturally possess only, as bodily diseases, so the vices of their Parents. The
grain is sown pure, yet comes up with chafe and husk: Have thou a good son?
he is Gods, not thine: Is he evil? nothing but his sin is thine: Help by thy
prayers and endeavors to take away that which thou have given him, and to
obtain of God that which perhaps thou have, and can not give; else may
thou name him a possession, but find him a loss.

Spiritual gifts are so chained together, that who excels in one, has always
some eminency in more: Faith is attended with a Bevy of Graces: he that
believes cannot but have hope: if hope, patience: he that believes and hopes,
must needs have joy in God: if joy, love of God: he that loves God, cannot but
love his brother: his love to God breeds piety and care to please, sorrow for
offending, fear to offend. Virtues go ever in troops, and that so thick,
that sometimes some are hid in the crowd, which yet are, but appear not.

IT is a rare evil that has not something to sweeten it, either in sense or
in hope: otherwise men would grow desperate, mutinous, envious of others, weary
of themselves. The better the thing is wherein we place our comfort, the
happier we live: and the more we love good things, the better they are to us:
The worldling laughs more, but the Christian is more delighted: Thou laughest
not at the sight of an heap of thy gold; yet thy delight is more than in a jest
that shakes thy spleen. As grief, so joy is not less, when it is least
expressed. It must needs be a strong and nimble soul that can mount to heaven,
possessing abundance of earthly things. If thou find wealth too pressing,
abate of thy load, either by having less, or loving less: or add to the
strength of thy activity, that thou may yet ascend. It is more commendable,
by how much more hard, to climb up to heaven with a burden.

THe meaner sort of men would be too much discontented, if they saw how far
more pleasant the life of others is: and if those of higher rank could look
down to the infinite miseries of their inferiors, it would make them either
miserable in compassion, or proud in conceit. It is good sometimes for the
delicate rich man to look into the poor man's Cup-board; and seeing God in
mercy lets him not know their sorrows by experience, yet to know it in
speculation. Which will teach him more thanks to God, more mercy to men, and
more contentment in himself. I never saw Christian less honored for a wise
neglect of himself: If our dejection proceed from the conscience of our want,
it is possible we should be as little esteemed of others, as of our selves:
but if we have true Graces, and prize them not at the highest, others shall
value both them in us, and us for them, and with usury give us that honor we
withheld modestly from our selves. I never read of Christian that repented him
of too little worldly delight: he that takes his full liberty in what he may,
shall repent him: how much more in what he should not. The surest course in
all earthly pleasures, is to rise with an appetite, and to be satisfied with a
little. That man's end is easy and happy, whom death finds with a weak body,
and a strong soul.

HErein as much as in any thing the perverseness of our nature appears, that
we wish death, or love life upon wrong causes: we would live for pleasure, and
die for pain. Job for his sores, Elias for his persecution, Jonas for his
Gourd would presently die, and outface God that it was better for him to die
than to live. Wherein we are like to garrison soldiers, that while they live
within safe walls, and show themselves once a day, rather for ceremony and
pomp, than need and danger, like warfare well enough: but being once called
forth to the field, they hang the head, and wish themselves at home.

THe shipwreck of a good Conscience, is the casting away of all other
excellencies: It is no rare thing to note the soul of a wilful sinner
stripped of all her Graces, and by degrees exposed to open shame: for since he
has cast away the best, it is just with God to take away the worst; and to
cast off them in lesser regards, which have rejected him in greater.

THe tongue will hardly leave that to which the heart is inured: if we would
have good motions to visit us in sickness, we must send for them familiarly in
health: for such as a man's delights and cares are in health, such are both his
thoughts and speeches commonly on his deathbed. And no marvel though the
worldling often escapes earthly punishments: God corrects him not because he
loves him not; he will not do him the favor to whip him. The world afflicts
him not because it loves him: for each one is indulgent to his own. God uses
not the rod, where he means to use the sword: the Pillory or scourge is for
those Malefactors which shall escape execution.

LAughing is proper to Man alone. amongst all living creatures: though indeed
he ought ever to be weeping, because he ever sins; and the beasts might rather
laugh to see man so much abuse his most excellent part, his reason. Doubtless
if man knew before he came into the world, what should be his portion in the
world, he would fear his first day more than his last: wherefore we ought to
moderate our affections, and in imitation of our great Lord and Savior (who
was a man of sorrows) we should not be altogether composed of mirth.

Seldom has any man got either wealth or learning with ease: and the greatest
good is most difficult in obtaining: he must not think to get Christ, that
takes no pains for him: If men can endure such cutting, such lancing, and
searing of their bodies, only to protract a miserable life for a short time;
how much should we care, what we do, or what we suffer, so we may win Christ:
No pain should be refused for the gaining of Eternity.

MVch ostentation, and much learning, seldom meet together: The Sun rising and
declining makes long shadows, but being at the highest makes none at all. Skill
when it is too much shown loses the grace; as fresh colored wares that are
often opened, lose their brightness, and are soiled with much handling. It is
better to applaud our selves for having much of that we show not, than that
others should applaud us for showing more than we have The conscience of our
own worth should cheer us more in their contempt, than their approbation
comfort us, against the secret check of our known unworthiness. Every man
has an heaven and a hell; Earth is the wicked man's heaven, his hell is to
come: contrarily, the godly have their hell upon earth, where usually they are
vexed with many afflictions and temptations by Satan and his accomplices; their
heaven is above in endless happiness: Though they sow in tears, they shall
reap in joy, though their seed time be commonly waterish and lowering, and
their spring wet, they shall be sure of a clear and joyful harvest. It is no
marvel if the wicked have peace in themselves, being as sure as temptation can
make them. Princes wage not war with their own subjects. The The godly are
still enemies, and must therefore look to be assaulted both by stratagems and
violence. Wherefore nothing should more joy us than our inward unquietness. A
just war is far more happy than an ill conditioned peace.

EVery good prayer knocks at heaven for a blessing, but an importunate prayer
pierces it, though as hard as brass, and makes way for it self into the
ears of the Almighty. And as it ascends lightly up, carried with the wings of
faith, so it ever comes laden down again upon our heads. In prayer our
thoughts should not be guided by our words, but our words by our thoughts. Good
prayers never came weeping home; and by fervent prayer we are sure to receive
either what we ask, or what we should ask.

Virtuous actions are a man's best monument. Foolish is the hope of Immortality
and future praise, by the cost of senseless stone, when the Passenger shall
only say, here lies a fair stone, and a filthy Carcass. That only can report
us rich, but for other praises our selves must build our own Monuments alive,
and write our own Epitaphs in honest and honorable actions: Which are so much
more noble than other, as living men are better than dead stones. We should
either procure such a Monument to be remembered by, or else wish to be buried
in oblivion: for it is better be inglorious than infamous.

NO man is so happy as the regenerate Christian; when he looks up into heaven
he thinks, That is my home, The God that made it and owes it, my Father: the
Angels, more glorious in nature than my self, are my attendants. Yea, those
things that are most terrible to the wicked, are most pleasant to him. When he
hears God thunder above his head, he thinks, This is the voice of my Father.
When he remembers the Tribunal of the last judgment, he thinks, It is my
Savior that sits in it. When death, he esteems it but as the Angel set before
Paradise, which with one blow admits him to eternal joy. And (which is his
greatest comfort) nothing in earth or hell can make him miserable.

AN evil man is Clay to God, Wax to the devil, God may stamp him into
powder, or temper him anew, but none of his means will melt him. Contrariwise,
a good man is Gods Wax, and Satan's Clay; he relents at every look of God,
but is not stirred by any temptation, knowing, that earth affoords no sound
contentment. For what is there under heaven not troublesome, besides that which
is called pleasure? And that in the end we find most irksome of all other.

THe spirits of Christians are like the English Iett, whereof we read, that it
is fired with water, quenched with oil. And these two, prosperity and
adversity are like heat and cold, the one gathers the powers of the soul
together, and makes them abler to resist, by uniting them: The other diffuses
them, and by such separation makes them easier to conquer. The Sun more usually
causes the Traveller to cast off his cloak than the Wind. I hold it
therefore as praiseworthy with God, for a man sometimes to contemn a
proffered honor or pleasure for conscience sake, as on the Rack not to deny
his profession.

THere is no vice does so cover a man with shame, as to be found false and
perfidious: clear and round dealing is the honor of man's nature. Certainly
it is heaven upon earth, to have a man's mind move in charity, rest in
providence, and turn upon the poles of truth.

THat man which studies revenge, keeps his own wounds green, which otherwise
would heal and do well. Revenge is a kind of wild justice, which the more
man's nature runs to, the more ought Law to root it out. In taking revenge a
man is but eaven with his enemy, but in passing over an injury he is superior.

CHildren sweeten labors, but they make misfortunes more bitter: they increase
the cares of life, but they mitigate the remembrance of death. Parents joys
are secret, and so are their fears and griefs: they cannot utter the one, nor
will they utter the other. The perpetuity by generation is common to beasts:
but memory, merit, and noble works are proper to men.

HE that has wife and children, has given hostages to fortune, for they are
impediments to great enterprises either of virtue or mischiefs. Unmarried men
are best friends, best Masters, best servants, but not always best subjects,
for they are light to run away, and almost all fugitives are of that condition.
A single life does well with Churchmen: for charity will hardly water the
ground, where it must first fill a poole. Grave natures led by custom, and
therefore constant, are commonly loving husbanda. Wives are young men's
mistresses, companions for middle age, and old men's Nurses.

CErtainly great persons had need to borrow other men's opinions to think
themselves happy; for if they judge by their own feeling, they cannot find it
so. Men in great place are thrice servants, to the Sovereign or State, to
fame, and to business: so as they have no freedom, either in their persons,
actions, or time. It is a strange desire, to seek power with loss of liberty;
or to seek power over others, and to lose power over a man's self. The rising
unto pains is laborious, and by pains men come to great pains. Great persons
are the first that find their own griefs, but the last that find their own
faults. The vices of authority are chiefly four, delays, corruption,
roughness, and facility. And it is an assured sign of a generous spirit, whom
honor amends: for honor is or should be the place of Virtue.

Goodness of nature is a character of the Deity, and without it a man is a
busy, mischievous, and wretched thing, no better than a Vermin. Goodness
answers to the Theological Virtue, Charity, and admits no excess but error.
Seek the good of other men, but be not in bondage to their faces, for that is
facility or softness, which soon takes an honest mind prisoner.

HE that denies a God, destroys Man's nobility: for certainly man is of kin to
the beasts by his body: and if he be not of kin to God by his spirit, he is a
base and ignoble creature. And doubtless hypocrites are the greatest Atheists,
who are ever handling holy things, but without feeling.

HE that travelleth into a Country before he has ^^^e entrance into the
language, goes to school, and not to travel. Things to be seen and
observed in travel, are, the Courts of Princes, specially when they give
audience unto Ambassadors: The Courts of justice while they sit and hear
causes: And so of Consistories Ecclesiastic, the Churches and Monasteries,
with the Monuments that are therein extant: the Walls and Fortifications of
Cities and Towns, with their havens and harbors, antiquities and ruins:
Libraries, Colleges, Disputations and Lectures, where any are: Shipping and
Navies, houses and gardens of estate and pleasure near great Cities, Armories,
Arsenalls, Magazins, Exchanges, Burses, Warehouses, exercises of horsmanship,
Fencing, training of Soldiers, and the like: Comedies, such as whereunto the
better sort of persons do resort. Treasuries of Jewels and Robes, Cabinets and
rarities, and to conclude, whatsoever is memorable in the places where they go.

THe mind of man is more cheared and refreshed by profiting in small things,
than by standing at a stay in great. It is a miserable state of mind to have
few things to desire, and many to fear. And yet that commonly is the case of
Kings: who are like to heavenly bodies, which cause good or evil times: having
much veneration, but little or no rest.

THere is no greater wisdom, than well to tune the beginnings and onsets of
things, that so neither have may harm thee, nor delay deceive thee of what
thou desire. As in races it is not the large stride or high lift that makes
the speed; so in business, the keeping close to the matter, and not taking of
it too much at once, procures dispatch. True dispatch is a rich thing: for
time is the measure of business, as money is of wares; and business is bought
at a dear hand, where there is not dispatch.

SEeing God has given us an uncertain life, and a certain death, we ought to
preserve the one, and shun the other, seeing the one fails us so soon, and
the other infallibly will come.

I Had rather with charity help him that is miserable, as I may be, than
despise him that is poor, as I would not be: They have filthy and steely
hearts, that can add calamities to him that is already but one entire Mass
thereof. Our estates are then best, when they are neither distended with too
much, nor narrowly pent up with too little. We may be at ease in a room
larger than our selves; in a room that is less we cannot.

HE that can be a worthy enemy, will, reconciled be a worthier friend: he that
in a just cause can valiantly fight against thee, can in a like cause fight as
valiantly for thee. And he that wilfully continues an enemy, teaches a man to
do him a mischief if be can.

SOme people cozen the world, are bad, and are not thought so: In some the
world is cozened, believing them ill when they are not. No man can either like
all, or be liked goodness lies not hid in himself alone, he is still
strengthening his weaker brother. Good works, and good instructions are the
generative acts of the soul, and he ungratefully slinkes away, that dies, and
does nothing to reflect a glory to heaven. Though all cannot leave alike, yet
all may leave something answering their proportion and kinds. They be dead and
withered grains of corn, out of which there will not one ear spring.

SVrely the world would be much happier if there were no such thing in it as
gold: but since it is now the fountain whence all things flow, I will care for
it as I would for a Pass, to travel the world by without begging: If I have
none, I shall have so much the more misery, because custom has played the
fool in making it material when it needed not. For the greatest worth
without wealth, is like an able servant out of employment: he is fit for all
businesses, but wants wherewith to put himself into any: he has good
materials for a foundation, but misseth wherewith to rear the walls of his fame.

CErtainly he that thinks seriously of life's casualties can neither be
careless nor covetous: like leaves on trees, we are the sport of every puff
that blows, and with the least gust may be shaken from our life and nutriment:
we should never care too much for that we are not sure to keep.

THere is no greater vexation to some, than to be advised by an inferior.
Strange pride, that we should be ashamed of any honest means that may benefit
us: He is sick to the ruin of himself, that refuses a Cordial because
presented in a spoone of Wood. That wisdom is not lastingly good, that will
command and speak all, without hearing the voice of another. Even the slave
may sometimes light on a way to enlarge his Master, when his own invention
fails. We think not Gold the worse because it is brought us in a bag of
leather: no more ought we to contemn good counsel, because it is presented us
by a bad man, or an underling.

A Discontented man is a Watch over-wound, wrested out of tune, and goes false.
Grief is like Ink poured into water, that fills the whole fountain full of
blackness and disuse: like mist, it spoils the burnish of the silver mind.
It casts the soul into the shade, and fills it more with consideration of the
unhappiness, than thought of the remedy. Nay it is so busied in the mischief,
as there is neither room nor time for the ways that should give us release:
Nor is the mind alone thus mudded, but even the body is disfaired, it thickens
the complexion, and dies it into an unpleasing swarthinesse: the eye is dim in
the discolored face, and the whole man becomes as if stated in stone and
earth: but above all, those discontents sting deepest, that are such as may not
with safety be communicated: for then the soul pines away and starves for want
of counsel that should feed and cherish it. Concealed sorrows are like
vapors, which being shut up occasion earthquakes, as if the world were
plagued with a fit of the cholick. That man is truly miserable that cannot but
keep his miseries, and yet must not unfold them. Vexations when they daily
billow upon the mind, froward even the sweetest soul, and from a dainty
affability turn it into spleen and testiness.

TArt jests are never good: Bitterness is for serious potions, not for health
and merriment, and the jollities of a pleasant feast. An offensive man is the
devils bellows, wherewith he blows up contentions and jarres. The soldier is
not noble that makes himself sport with the wounds of his own companion. Flouts
proceed from a kind of inward contempt; and nothing cuts deeper into a
generous mind than scorn. A man may spit out his friend from his tongue, or
laugh him into an enemy.

WHosoever is delighted in solitude is either a wild beast or a god. Speech is
like cloth of Arras opened and put abroad, whereby the Imagery does appear in
figure: whereas in thoughts they lie but as in packs. Better were it for a man
to relate himself to a statue or picture, than to suffer his thoughts to pass
in smother.

Suspicions among thoughts, are like Batts among Birds, ever fly by twilight.
And certainly they are to be expressed, or at the least well guarded, for they
cloud the mind, lose friends, and check with business, whereby it cannot go
on currantly and constantly. These dispose Kings to tyranny, husbands to
jealousy, wise men to irresolution and melancholy. They are defects not in the
heart, but in the brain, taking place in the stoutest Natures. The best means
to clear the way in this wood of suspicions, is frankly to communicate them
with the party we suspect, for thereby we shall be sure to know more of the
truth of them than we did before, and withal shall make the party more
circumspect, not to give farther cause of suspicion.

Certain things are to be privileged from jesting, namely, Religion, matters
of State, great persons, any man's present business of importance, and any case
that deserves pity. Certainly he that has a Satyricall vain, as he makes
others afraid of his riot, so he had need be afraid of their memory. Speech of
touch toward others should be sparingly used: for discourse ought to be as a
field, without coming home to any man. Discretion of speech is more than
eloquence, and to speak agreeably to him with whom we have to deal, is more
than to speak in good words, or good order. He that questioneth much, shall
learn much; but especially if he apply his questions to the skill of them whom
he asks, for he shall thereby give them occasion to please themselves in
speaking, and himself shall continually gather knowledge.

TO forsake or destitute a Plantation once in forwardness is a great sin, for
besides the dishonor, it betraies many commiserable persons to utter ruin.
The Planters chiefly ought to be Gardeners, Plowmen, Laborers, Smiths,
Carpenters, Ioiners, Fishermen, Foulers, with some few Apothecaries, Surgeons,
Cooks, and Bakers. When the Plantation grows to strength, then (and not
before) it is time to plant with women as well as men, that so the plantation
may spread into generations, and not be ever pieces from without.

AS the baggage to an Army, so is riches to Virtue, it cannot be spared, nor
left behind, but it hinders the march; yea, and the care of it sometimes
loses or disturbeth the Victory. Believe them not that seem to despise
riches; for they despise, that despair of them, and none worse when they enjoy
them. Seek no proud riches, but such as thou may get justly, use soberly,
distribute chearefully, and leave contentedly. A great State left to an heir
is as a lure to all the Birds of prey, round about to seize on him, if he be
not the better established in years and judgment.

AMbition is like choler, as that is an humor which makes men active, earnest,
full of alacrity, and stirring, while it has vent; being stopped becomes
adust, and thereby malign and venomous. So ambitious men, if they find the
way open for their rising, and still get forward, they are rather busy than
dangerous: but if they be checked in their desires, they become secretly
discontent, and look upon men and matters with an evil eye, being best
pleased when things go backward. He that seeks eminence among able men has a
great task; but that is ever good for the public. But he that plots to be
the only figure among Ciphers, is the decay of a whole age.

Man's nature runs either to herbs or weeds, therefore the one should be
seasonably watered, and the other destroyed. In Custom, whatsoever a man
commands upon himself, let him set hours for it: But what is agreeable to
nature, let him take no care for any set times, for his thoughts will fly to it
of themselves. A man's nature is best perceived in privacy, for there is no
affectation in passion, for that puts a man out of his precepts: and in a new
case or experiment, for there Custom leaves him.

A Man should not force a habit upon himself with perpetual continuance, but
with some intermission, for both the pause re-enforceth the new onset; and if a
man that is not perfect be ever in practice, he shall as well practice his
errors, as his abilities, and induce one habit of both. He that seeks victory
over his nature, should not set himself too great nor too small taskes: for
the first will deject him by often failings; and the second will make him a
small proceeder, though by often prevailings: at the first he should use helps,
as young swimmers do bladders and rushes: but after a time let him practice
with disadvantages, as dancers do with thick shoes: for it breeds great
perfection if the practice be harder than the use. Nature is often hidden,
sometimes overcome, but seldom extinguished. Force makes nature more violent
in the return, doctrine and discourse makes it less importunate: only Custom
does alter and subdue it.

Men's thoughts are much according to their inclinations; their discourse and
speech according to their learning and infused opinions; but their deeds are
ever as they have been accustomed. Wherefore we should by all means endeavor
to obtain good customs in our younger years, for those customs are most
perfect, and this we call education, which in effect is but an early custom.

FOrtune is to be honored and respected, and it be but for her two daughters
Confidence and Reputation: for those two felicity breeds: the first within a
man's self, the later in others toward him. Certainly there are not two more
fortunate properties, than to have a little of the fool, and not too much of
the honest.

Virtue is like a rich stone, best plain set, and suits best in a comely body,
though not of delicate feature, but has rather dignity of presence than beauty
of aspect. Neither is it almost seen, that very beautiful persons are
otherwise of great virtue: As if nature were rather busy not to err, than in
labor to produce excellency: And therefore they prove accomplished, though not
of great spirit, and study rather behavior than Virtue. But this is not
always though for the most part. Beauty like summer fruits, is easily
corrupted, and cannot last, and commonly it makes a dissolute youth, and an age
a little out of countenance: but again, doubtless if it light well, it makes
virtues shine, and vices blush. Deformed persons are commonly eaven with
nature; for as nature has done ill by them, so do they by nature, being for
the most part (as says the Scripture) void of natural affection, and so they
have their revenge of nature. Whosoever has any thing fixed in his person
inducing contempt, has also a perpetual spur in himself to rescue and
deliver his person from scorn: wherefore almost all deformed persons are
extreme bold; first as in defense of themselves, exposed to scorn, but in
process of time by a general habit. It stirs up also industry, especially of
this kind, to watch and observe the weakness of others, that they may have
something to repay.

IN civil government it is good to use men of one rank equally: for to
countenance some extraordinarily makes them impudent, and the rest
discontented, because they may claim a like due. To be governed by one is not
safe, for it shows softness, and gives a freedom to scandal and
disreputation: for he that would not censure or speak ill of a man immediately,
will talk more boldly being so great with him, and perhaps wound his honor.
Yet to be distracted with many is worse: for it makes men to be of the last
impression, full of Change. To take advice of some few friends is very
honorable: for lookers on many times see more than gamesters, and the Vale
best discovers the hill.

STudies perfect Nature, and are perfected by experience: for natural
abilities are like natural plants, that need proyning by study. And studies
themselves do give forth directions too much at large, except they be bounded
in by experience. To spend too much time in studies, is sloth: to use them too
much for ornament is affectation: to make judgment wholly by their rules is
the honor of a Scholar. Crafty men contemn studies, simple men admire them,
only wise men use them. Studies serve for delight, ornament, and ability: their
chief use for delight is in privatenesse; for ornament, in discourse: and for
ability, in judgment and disposition of business: for expert men can execute
and perhaps judge of particulars one by one: but the general Counsels, and
the plots and marshalling of affairs, come best from those that are learned.
Read not to contradict and confute, nor to believe and take for granted; not
to find talk and discourse, but to weigh and consider. Some books are to be
tasted only, others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed and digested:
That is, some are to be read only in parts, others cursorily, and few wholly
and with diligent attention. Reading makes a full man, Conference a ready man,
and Writing an exact man. Wherefore he that writes little had need have a great
memory: he that confers little had need have a present wit: and he that reads
little had need have much cunning, to seem to know that he does not. History
makes men wise, Poetry witty, natural Philosophy deep, Moral, grave: Logic
and Rhetoric able to contend. There is no stone or impediment in the wit, but
may be wrought out by fit studies: like as diseases of the body may have
appropriate exercises; bowling is good for the stone and reins: shooting for
the lungs and breast: gentle walking for the stomach; riding for the head, etc.
So, wandering wits should study the Mathematics; for in demonstrations, if
fancy be drawn away never so little, they must begin again. Let a wit not
apt to distinguish or find differences, study the School men. And he that is
apt to beat over matters, and to call up one thing to prove and illustrate
another, should study Law Cases: so every defect of the mind may have a
special Receipt.

Our behavior should be like our apparel, not too strait or point device,
but free for exercise or motion. Men had need beware how they be too perfect
in complements; for be they never so sufficient otherwise, their enviers will
be sure to give them that attribute, to the disadvantage of their greater
virtues.

Opinion many times perverteth verity: Praise from the vulgar sort is commonly
false: because they understand not many excellent virtues: the lowest virtues
draw praise from them: Middle virtues astonish them: but of the highest virtues
they have no sense or perceiving at all. Certainly fame is like a River, that
bears up things light and swollen, and drownes things weighty and solid. Vain
glorious men are the scorn of wise men, the admiration of fools, the Idols of
Parasites, and the slaves of their own vaunts. Vain glory suits best with
Commanders, and soldiers: for as iron sharpens iron, so by glory, one courage
sharpeneth another.

IVdges ought to be more learned than witty, more reverend than plausible,
more advised than confident: and ought also to remember, that their office is
Ius dicere, and not Ius dare; to interpret Law, and not to make or give Law.
Else will it be like the authority of the Church of Rome, which under pretext
of exposition of Scripture, does not stick to add and alter, pronouncing what
they do not find, and by show of antiquity do produce novelty. The
principal duty of a Judge is to suppress force and fraud: Force being most
pernicious, when open; and fraud when it is close and disguised. One foul
sentence does more hurt than many foul examples: for these do but corrupt the
stream, the other corrupts the fountain. In cases of life and death Judges
ought (as far as the Law permits) in justice to remember mercy; and to cast
a severe eye upon the example, but a merciful eye upon the person. Patience
and gravity of hearing is an essential part of Justice: and an over speaking
Judge is no well-tuned Symbal. It is strange to see that boldness of Advocates
should prevail with Judges: whereas they should imitate God, who represseth
the presumptuous, and gives grace to the modest. The place of Justice is an
hallowed place, and therefore not only the Bench, but the footpace and
precincts thereof ought to be preserved without scandal or corruption. For
certainly (as the Scripture says) Grapes will not be gathered of thorns, nor
Figs of thistles: Neither can Justice yield her fruit with sweetness, among
the Briars and Brambles of catching and polling Clerks and Ministers. An
ancient Clerk, skillful in Presidents, wary in proceeding, and understanding
in the business of the Court, is an excellent finger of a Court, and does many
times point the way to the Judge himself.

ANger is certainly a kind of baseness, as it appears well in the weakness of
those subjects in which it reigns. Children, women, old folks, sick folks:
Only men must beware that they carry their anger rather with scorn than fear,
so that they may seem rather above the injury than below it; which may easily
be done, if we can master our Passion by Reason. The prime motive of anger is
to be sencible of hurt: and therefore tender and delicate bodies must needs be
often angry, having so many things to trouble them, which robust natures have
little sense of.

PVblique reproof is like striking a Dear in the Heard; it not only wounds
him to the loss of inabling blood, but betrays him to the Hound his enemy,
and makes him be pushed out of company by his fellows. To be plain in reproof
argues honesty, but to be pleasing argues discretion: Sores are not to be
anguisht with a rustic pressure, but gently stroaked with a Ladied hand.

CHristian society is like a bundle of sticks laid together, whereof one
kindles another: as solitary men have few provocations to evil, so again have
they fewest incitations to good. So much as doing good is better than not doing
evil; will I account Christian good fellowship better than an Hermitish and
Melancholy solitariness.

AMbitious men are like poisoned Rats, who having tasted of their baine cannot
rest till they drink, and then rest much less till their death; for ambition
affoords as much coffeehouse in enjoying as in want. It is better to live in
the wise man's stocks in a contented want, than in a fools Paradise, to be
vexed with wilful unquietness.

SVrely we deceive our selves, to think that on earth continued joys would
please: It is a way that crosses that which Nature goes: nothing would be more
tedious than to be glutted with perpetual jollities. Were the body tied to
one (though most delicate) dish always, after a small time it would complain
of loathing, and saciety; and so would the soul if it did ever Epicure it
self in joy. I know not well which is the more useful: Joy is to be chosen
for pleasure; but adversities are the best for profit: and sometimes these do
so far help us, that we should without them want much of the joy we have.

Valor is then best tempered, when it can turn out of a stern fortitude,
into the mild strains of pity. For though pity be a downy virtue, yet she
never shines more brightly than when she is clad in steel. A Marshall man
compassionate, shall conquer both in peace and war, and by a twofold way get
victory with honor.

WIth a general swallow death still gapes upon the general world: It is a
sleep eternal; the bodies dissolution, the rich man's fear, the poor man's
wish, an event inevitable, an uncertain journey, a thief that steals away
Man: Sleeps father, Life's flight, the departure of the living, and the
resolution of all.

THe idle man is like a dumb Jack in a Virginal; while all the other dance
out a winning music, this like a member out of joint, sullens the whole body
with an ill disturbing laziness. It is action only that keeps the soul both
sweet and sound, whilst lying still does rot it to an ordured noysomnesse.
There is no creature but is busied in some action for the benefit of the
restless world: Nor is the teeming earth it self weary, after so many
thousand years productions. Men learn to do ill, by doing what is next it
nothing: for while we want business, we are ready to drown in the mud of
vice, and sloathfulnesse. The soul grows bright with use and negotiation: and
believe it industry is never wholly unfruitful, if it bring not joy with the
in-comming profit, it will banish mischief from thy busied gates: There is a
kind of good Angel waiting upon diligence, that ever carries a Laurel in his
hand to crown her: but the bosomed fist beckens the approach of poverty, and
leaves besides the noble head ungarded: while the lifted arm does frighten
want, and is ever a shield to the noble director.

CErtainly they work by a wrong engine, that seek to gain their ends by
constraint: You may stroke the Lion into bondage, but you may sooner hew him in
pieces than beat him into a chain. Easy nature and free liberty will steal a
man into a winy excess, when urged healths do but show him the way to refuse.
The noblest weapon wherewith man can conquer, is love and gentlest courtesy.
Nature is more apt to be led by the soft motions of the musical tongue, than
the rusticke threshings of a striking arm. How many have lost their hopes,
while they have sought to ravish with too rude a hand. Little fishes are
twitched up with the violence of a sudden pull; when the like action cracks the
line whereon a great one hangs. I have known denials that had never been given
but for the earnestness of the requester: Urge a grant to some men, and they
are inexorable: seem careless and they will force the thing upon you.

THe best object of bounty is either necessity, or desert: the best motive, thy
own goodness: and the limit is, the safety of thy state. It is for none but
him that is all, to give to all abundantly. To live well of a little, is a
great deal more honor, than to spend a great deal vainly. It is not good to
make our kindness to others, to be cruelty to our selves and ours.

CErtainly if there be any Dalilah under heaven, it is in bad society: it
binds us, betrays us, blindes us, undoes us. Many a man had been good that is
not, if he had but kept good company. Ill company is an engine wherewith the
devil is ever practicing to lift man out of Virtues seat: It is the spiritual
Whore, which toys the good man to his souls undoing. Good company should be
cherished as the choice of men; or as Angels that are sent for Guardians: but
we should study to lose the society of the bad, lest by keeping them, we lose
our selves in the end.

THe jollities of the villainous man stagger the religious mind: They live as
if they were passing through the world in state, and the stream of prosperity
turning it self to roll with their applauded ways: when how miserable is
despised virtue, and how stormy is her sea? Certainly for the present the good
man seems to be in the disgrace of heaven: he smarts and pines, and saddens
his incombered soul, living as it were in the frown and nod of the traducing
world: so that to view the virtuous but with natures eye, a man would think
they were things that Nature envyed; or that the whole world were deluded with
a poisonous lie, in making only the virtuous happy. Innocence is become a
staire, to let others rise to our abuse, and not to raise our selves to
greatness. How rare is it to find one raised for his sober worth and virtue.
Joseph's goodness alone brought him to the stocks and irons: whereas if he had
coaped with his enticer it is like he might have swom in Gold, and lived a
lapling to the silks and dainties. Doubtless we may find a soul within our
souls which tells we do unnobly, while we love sin more for the pleasure of
it, than we do virtue for the animal sweetness she yields in her self.

SVrely cowards have souls of a courser mixture than the common spirits of
men. The coward really meets with far more dangers than the valiant man: Every
base nature will be ready to offer injuries where they think they will not be
repaid: he will many times beat a coward, that would not dare to strike him if
he thought him valiant. An unappalled look does daunt a base attempter, and
oftentimes if a man has nothing but a courageous eye, it protects him: the
brave soul knows no trembling: and indeed valor casts a kind of honor upon
God, in that we show we believe his goodness, when we trust our selves in
danger upon his care only. Whereas the coward eclipses his sufficiency, by
unworthy doubting that God will not bring him off, so unjustly accusing either
his power or his will, while he would make himself his own Savior, he
becomes his own confounder: For, it is just with God to leave Man when he
distrusts him. No armor can defend a fearful heart; when he would run
away, fear arrests him with a senseless amasement, which betraies him to the
pursuit of his foes. I had rather have a mind confident and undaunted, with
some troubles, than a pulse still beating fear in the flush of prosperity.

IT is comparison more than reality, that makes men both happy and miserable.
Were all the world ugly, Deformity would be no Monster. In those Countries
where all go naked, they neither shame at their being uncovered, nor complain
that they are exposed to the violence of the Sun and Winds. Many never find
themselves in want, till they have discovered the abundance of some others: and
many again do bear their want with ease, when they find others below
themselves in happiness: Our adversity is lessened by seeing our enemies in
worse estate than onr selves. We pick our own sorrows out of the joys of
other men; and out of their sorrows likewise we assume our joys. When we see
the poor toiling Labourer, we look upon our selves with gladness: but when
we eye the distributers of the earth in their royalty, then what poor Atoms
do we count our selves, compared with those huge piles of State.

THe proud man and the choleric, seldom arrive at any height of virtue. They
are sometimes borne to good parts of nature, but they rarely, are known to
add by industry. It is the mild and suffering disposition that oftnest does
attain to eminence. Temper and humility are advantageous virtues for
business, and to rise by. Pride and Choler make such a noise that they awake
dangers, which the other with a soft tread steals by undiscovered. Temper and
humility are like the Fox when he went into the Garner: he could creep in a
little hole, and arrive at plenty: Pride and Choler are like the Fox offering
to go out when his belly was full, which enlarging him bigger than the
passage, made him stay and be taken with shame. They that would come to
preferment by pride, are like them that ascend a pair of stairs on horseback,
it is ten to one but the beast will cast them before they come to tread their
chamber. Pride is an enemy to it self, the proud man cannot endure to see
pride in another. Pride and Choler are both base vices, as being both awed by
the most abject passion of the mind, fear: we dare neither be proud to one
that can punish us; nor choleric to one much above us. Why should we live like
beasts, pusht at by all the world for loftiness? or like Waspes, stinging upon
every touch?

BEnefits are so long grateful, as we think we can repay them, but when they
challenge more, our thanks convert to hate: it is not good to make men owe us
more than they are able to pay, except it be for virtuous deserts, which may in
some sort challenge it. The Malefactor which thou savest, will if he can
condemn thee. Some say that Cicero was slain by one, whom his Oratory had
defended when he was accused of his Fathers murder. Whatsoever favors thou
impartest, let them be to those of desert: It will be much for thy honor, when
by thy kindness men shall see thou affectest virtue. It is only in rank
grounds that much rain makes weeds spring: where the soil is clean, and well
planted, there is the more fruit returned for the showers that did fall upon it.

Virtue gives us a safe conduct through all the various casualties of
Mortality; and therefore when fortune means to ruin us, she flatters us first
from this Altar; she cannot hurt us till we be stripped of this habiliment; then
she does both wound and laugh. It is for the most part true, Fortune first
fools the man she means to foil. The virtuous man is the only cunning
Fencer, no man can either give a blow so soon, or ward himself so safely.

FOolish bashfulnesse betraies us to all inconveniences: it brings a fool in
bond to his utter undoing: how many maids are undone by it, even blushing
oftentimes brings them to their devirgination; making their faces lures to
enkindle lewd men's loves, which being expressed by large gifts, do so work
upon their Natures, as they know not how to deny, so rather then be
ungrateful, they often become unchaste. In friendship it is an odious vice, and
lets a man run on in absurdities, for fear of displeasing by telling the
fault: Yet surely the Graces sojourne with the blushing man. Modesty is an
excellent virtue to curb and keep us from the stray and offense. I am
persuaded many had been bad that are not, if they had not been bridled by a
bashful nature; diverse have hearts for vice, which have not face accordingly.
Bashfulnesse, with a silent kind of Majesty (like a Watch at the door of a
Thieves Den) makes vice not dare peep out of the heart, wherein it is lodged.
Modesty in women should be like the Angels flaming sword, to keep vile men out
of the Paradise of their chastity.

SVspitious thoughts, like new Wine, boil in our breasts, to the hazard of
the hogshead, for want of venting. The wise and honest are never fooled with
this quality; he that knows he deserves not ill, (...) tentment royal, that
we know we are always in the hands of a noble Protector, who never gives ill
but to him that has deserved it.

VAinglory at best is but like a Window Cushion, specious without, and
garnished with the tasseled pendant, but within nothing but hay or some such
trash, not worth the looking on. Where the heart is full the tongue is seldom
liberal: the tongue is the hollow instrument that sounds lowdest. Whatsoever
good work the hand builds, is again pulled down by the folly of a boasting
tongue. To do well is as much as a good man labors for: The honest man takes
more pleasure in knowing himself so, than in knowing that all the world
approves him so. He that remembers too much his own virtues, teaches others
to object his vices. We disgrace the work of virtue, when we go about any way
to seduce Voices for her approbation.

HOpe is both a flatterer and a true friend; it is the miserable man's god,
which in the hardest gripe of calamity never fails to yield him beams of
comfort: It is the presumptuous man's devil, which leads him a while in a
smooth way, and then makes him break his neck on the sudden, Hope is to Man,
as a bladder to a learning swimmer, it keeps him from sinking in the bosom of
the Waves, and by that help he may attain the exercise. But when it makes him
venture beyond his height, and breaks, or a storm arises, he drownes without
recovery. How many would die did not hope sustain them? How many have dyed by
hoping too much? She dandles us into killing flames, sings us into Lethargies,
and like an overhasty Surgeon, skinneth dangers that are full and foul
within. Again, he that hopes for nothing, will never attain to any thing.
This good comes of over hoping, that it sweetens our passage through the world,
and sometimes so sets us to work, as it produces great actions, though not
always pat to our ends.

THe end of Policy is to make a man's self great: the end of Love is to advance
another. Therefore a Politician is one of the worst sorts of men to make a
friend on: give me one that is virtuously wise, not cunningly hid and twined to
himself. Policy in friendship, is like Logic in truth, something too subtle
for the plainness of disclosing hearts. For a friend to converse withal, let
me rather meet with a sound affection, than a crafty brain: one may fail me
by accident, but the other will do it out of fore intent. The soundest
affection is like to be where there cannot be expectation of sinister ends: and
doubtless love increases by adversity.

THe Cup is the betrayer of the mind, and leaves the soul naked: Reason only
distinguishes Beast from Man, and that it robs him of: He that would anatomize
the soul, may do it best when Wine has nummed the senses: Certainly, for
confession there is no such rack as Wine; nor could the devil ever find a
cunninger bait to angle both for acts and meaning. Indeed drunkenness besots a
Nation, and beastiates even the bravest spirits: I like a cup ad hilaritatem,
but continuance dulls them: It is less labor to plough than to pot it. I had
rather be disliked for not being a beast, than be good fellowed with a hug for
being one. Let the drunkards pleasure crown him, and his mirth abound, the
next day he will stick in mud.

HE that is perfect and marries not, may in some sort be said to be guilty of
a contempt against Nature: when the husband and wife are together, the world is
contracted in a bed; and without this, like the head and the body parted,
either would consume without a possibility of reviving. A wise wife comprehends
both Sexes, she is woman for her body, and she is man within, for her soul is
like her husbands. Questionless a woman with a wise soul is the fittest
companion for man, otherwise God would have given him a friend rather than a
wife. It is the crown of blessings, when in one woman a man finds both a
wife and a friend. Poverty in Wedlock is a great decayer of love and
contentation: Above all, therefore the generous mind should beware of marrying
poor; for though he cares least for wealth, yet will he be most galled with
the want of it. Single life is to be liked in those who can suffer Continency,
but should all live thus, an hundred years would make the world a Desert.

NOthing makes a man more like to God than Charity. As all things are filled
with his goodness, so the Universal is partaker of the good man's spreading
love. Wealth in a Misers hand is useless, as a locked up treasure: It is
charity only that makes Riches worth the owning. To every thing that has sense
there is a kind of pity owing: Solomon's good man is merciful to his beast.
Surely he that is right, must not think his Charity to one in need, a courtesy,
but a debt, which nature at his first being bound him to pay; yet should we not
water a strange ground to leave our own in drought.

Music is good or bad, as the end to which it tends: they that wholly
despise ^t may well be suspected to be something of a savage Nature: Light
Notes are sometimes useful, as in times of general joy, and when the mind is
pressed with sadness: whose dull blood will not caper in his veins, when the
very air he breathes in frisketh in a tickled motion? We find Halelujahs are
sung in heaven: and doubtless Music is a helper both to good and ill: it is
therefore to be honored when it moves to virtue; as to be shunned when it
would flatter into vice.

REpentance is so powerful, that it cannot be but a gift of the Deity: he is
not to be pitied in his sufferings, that may escape a torment by the
compunction of a heart and tears. Sometimes a return after failing is a
prompter to a surer hold. S. Ambrose doubts not to say, that Peter by his fall
found more grace than he lost, his faith being thereby much stronger. The
devil sometimes cosens himself by plunging man into a deep offense. A sudden
ill act grows often abhorred in the mind that did it: yet a man should beware
the steps he once has stumbled at. Doubtless that is the best life that is a
little sprinkled with the salt of crosses; the other would quickly be rank and
tainted. There are whose paths are washed with butter, and the Rose bud crowns
them: but surely it is a misery to live in oily vice, when her ways are made
slippery with her own slime. Heaven is not had without repentance, and
repentance seldom meets a man in jollity, in the careere of lust, and the
bloods lose riot.

COmmanders in war should be wise, valiant, and experienced: Experience puts a
credit on their actions, making them far more prompt in undertakings. And
indeed there is a great deal of reason why we should respect him, that with an
untainted valor has grown old in arms, and hearing the drum beat. When
every minute death seems to pass by and shun him, he is as one that the
supreme God has cared for, and by a particular guard defended in the hail of
death. It is true, it is a life tempting to exorbitancy; yet this is more in
the common sort, that are pressed, as the refuse and burden of the land, than
in those that by a nobler breeding are abler to command. Want, idleness, and
the desperate face of blood has hardened them to outrages. Nor may we wonder
hereat, since even their life is but an ordered quarrel, raised to the feud of
killing. Wars have the same nature with offenses, they must be, yet are they
mightily in fault that cause them. When a just cause and a just deputation meet
for war, I shall ever think this one of the noblest and most manly ways of
dying.

BLots appear fouler in a strict life, than a loose one: no man wonders at the
Swines wallowing: but to see an Ermin mired is a prodegy: Where do vices show
so foul as in a Minister? When he shall be heavenly in the pulpit only?
Certainly they wound the Gospel, that preach it to the world, and live as if
they thought to go to heaven some other way than that they teach the people.
How unseemly is it when a grave Cassock shall be lined with a wanton Reveller?
and with crimes that make a loose one odious? We should not profess that we
will not strive to practice. Surely God will be severest against those that
will wear his badge, and seem his servants, yet inwardly side with the devil
and lusts: They spot his honor, and cause profane ones to jest at his
holiness. Other offenses God may punish, this he must, left the enemies of his
truth triumph against him. If thou be unsound within, soil not the glorious
robe of truth by putting it upon thy beastliness. This is to be religiously
rude: and even all the Church of sincerest good men suffer in a seeming good
man's fall. Let not thy actions sight against thy tongue or pen: one ill life
will pull down more than many good tongues can build.

THe best way of speech is to be short, plain, material. Tedious admonitions
dull the advised, and make the giver contemptible. It is a short reproof that
stays like a stab in the memory: and many times three words do more good than
an idle discourse of three hours. A limitlesse tongue is a strange unbitted
beast to worry one with: A talkative fellow is the unbraced drum, which beats a
wise man out of his wits. Surely Nature did not guard the tongue with the
double fence of teeth and lips, but that she meant it should not move too
nimbly.

GOod men have most right to the best of Gods creatures: and seeing Wine was
given to cheer the heart, why should I not use it to that end: for surely the
merry soul is freer from intended mischief, than the thoughtfull man: and a
bounded mirth is a Patent adding time and happiness to the crazed life of man;
without which he is but a mere lump of quickened care: For as there are many
that in their life assume too great a liberty: so doubtless there are some
that abridge themselves of what they might lawfully use: forgetting what
Solomon says, That the only profit to a man, is to eat, and drink, and
delight his soul in his labor; for this is the hand of God.

I Never yet found Pride in a noble Nature; nor humility in an unworthy mind.
Arrogance is a Weed that ever grows in a dunghill; it is from the rankness of
that soil she has her height and spreadings. To be humble to our Superiors
is duty; to our equals courtesy; to our Inferiors nobleness. If ever Pride be
lawful, it is when it meets with audacious Pride and conquers: for then many
times the affronting man by his own folly may learn the way to his duty, and
wit.

Vlee is a myery deepnesse: If thou strivest to help one out and do not,
thy stirring him sinkes him in the farther. Fury is the madder for his Chain.
When thou chidest thy wandering friend, do it secretly, in season, in love.
Certainly he is drunk himself, that prophanes reason so as to urge it to a
drunken man. To admonish a man in the height of his passion, is to call a
Soldier to council in the heat of a Battle: Let the Combat slack, and then
thou may expect a hearing. Who blows out Candles with too strong a breath,
does (...) a stink, and blow them (...) again. And many times the tartness
of speech makes a reprehension worse than the fault.

TO find friends when we have no need of them, and to want them when we
have, are both alike easy and common. And certainly it is not the least part
of man's misery, that he can neither be truly happy without a friend, nor yet
know him to be a true friend without his being unhappy. Our fortunes and our
selves are so closely linked that we know not to which of them our friends love
al^es, till one of these two shall part, I confess he is happy that finds a
true friend in extremity; but he is happier that finds not extremity wherein
to try his friend.

INfidelity is the cause of all our woes, the ground of all our sins: not
trusting God, we discontent our selves with fears and solicitations; and to
cure these, we run into prohibited paths: Unworthy earthen Worm, to think
that he that grasps the unemptied provisions of the world in his hand, can be a
niggard to his Sons, unless he sees it be for their good and benefit. O my
God, let me find my heart dutiful, and my faith upon trial steadfast, that I
may but serve thee, and depend upon thee, and then I need beg no farther
supply; for these will be ground enough for sufficient happiness while I live
here.

NEither example nor precept (unless in matters wholly religious) can be the
absolute guides of a discreet man; It is only a knowing and a practical
judgment of his own that can direct him in the Maze of this life, in the
bustle of the world, in the twitches and twirles of Fate: for man's life is like
a State, still casual in the future: and he that lives always by book Rules,
shall show himself affected, and a fool. I will do that which I see is
comely, (so it be not dishonest) rather than take grave advice to the contrary.

VIce rules as a god in this present evil world, and it is impossible to live
and not encounter her: Wherefore it is good to be acquainted with Virtue also;
that the true beauty of the one may draw our affections from the ugly deformity
of the other: And happy is he that makes other men's vices, steps for him to
climb to heaven by.

THe good man is he to whom life and death is indifferent: for he knows, while
he is here God will protect him; and that when he goes hence God will receive
him. Certainly we are never quiet in any thing long, till we have conquered the
fear of death; every spectacle of mortality terrifies, and every casual
danger affrights us. Fear of death kills us often, when death it self can do
it but once. But he that would not die when he must, and he that would die when
he must not, are Cowards alike: And why should we fear to do that at any
time, which we know we must do once. But what we cannot do till our time
comes, let us not seek to do before. He that has lived well, will seldom be
unwilling to die: for death has nothing in it terrible, but what our life has
made so. Good men never die, but as the Phoenix, from whose preserved ashes one
or other still does spring up like them: for surely nothing awakes our sleeping
virtues like the noble acts of our predecessors.

COntemplation seconded by action, makes men happy; without the first the later
is defective: without the last the first is but abortive. Contemplation like
Rachel, is fairest; but Action like Leah, is most fruitful. I will neither
always be busy and doing; nor ever will I be shut up in nothing but
thoughts: yet that which some would call idleness, I will count the sweetest
part of my life, and that is my thinking.

Virtue were but a kind of misery, if fame only were all the Garland that did
crown her: but in heaven is laid up a more glorious and essential recompense.
For a mean man to thirst for a mighty fame is a kind of fond ambition. Great
fames are for Princes and such as are the Glories of humanity; good ones may
crown the private: the same fire may be in the waxen Taper, which is in the
staved Torch, but it is not equal either in quantity or advancement.

A Prince that leaves law, and rules himself and others by his own appetite
and affections, is of all creatures the worst, and of all beasts the most
furious and dangerous: for that nothing is so outrageous as injustice armed,
and no armor is so strong as Wit and Authority: whereof the first he has as
he is a Man; and the other as he is a Prince.

LEt this be my advice, and thy instruction: Shun verbosity, speak seldom,
and then to the purpose: have a pure conscience, and pray often: study much,
and be familiar with few: shun superfluous discourse: follow the steps of godly
and devout men: regard not from whom thou hear what is good, and having
heard it, forget it not: what thou read or hear, cease not till thou do
understand: be resolved of doubts, and search not too far into things which are
not lawful to know.

THose sins are greater which are committed through lust, than those which are
committed through anger: for he that is angry seems with a kind of grief and
close contraction of himself to turn away from reason: but he that sins
through lust, being overcome by pleasure, does in his very sin bewray a more
impotent and unmanlike disposition. For the angry man sins by another
injury that provokes him: whereas the other does of himself merely resolve
upon any evil action.

IT should be every man's duty to confine all his thoughts and cares to the
attendance of that spirit which is within himself, namely to keep himself
pure from all violent passion and evil affection, from all rashness and
vanity, and from all manner of discontent: knowing that all things happen from
Him from whom himself came: And with all meekness and cheerfulness to
expect death, as being a thing not to be feared, because common to Nature, and
nothing that is according to Nature can be evil.

AN absolute Puritan may justly be called a Church rebel, or one that would
exclude Order, that his brain might rule. But methinkes the reading of
Ecclesiastes should make him undresse his brain, and lay off all those
phanatique toys that gingle about his understanding, causing him through a
needlessenicity to be a Thief to himself, of those benefits which God has
allowed him. Man's wisdom connsists not in the not using, but in the well using
of what God and the world affords him.

Extreme poverty is worse than abundance: the best estate is that which
partakes of both, and consists of neither: he that has too little, wants
feathers to fly withal: and he that has too much is but combred with too
large a tail.

IMprisonment is nothing such a mischief as most do think it: the greatest
is, in that the eye is debarred the delight of the worlds vanity. And I see not
but a local restraint, without want or enforced employment, may very easily be
converted to a happiness, unless men will let their minds run against the
tides of Reason. It is no other but a place of retyring, or sequestration from
the world, which many of the wisest have voluntarily put upon themselves; and
surely while a man is tossed among men and business, he cannot so freely enjoy
himself as when he is secluded from them both: and it is a misery, when a man
must so apply himself to others, as he cannot have leisure to account with
himself. Besides, be he never so at large, he does but run over the same
things, he sees but the like world in another place. If he has but light and
any prospect, he may see by that what the rest is, and enjoy it by his
boundless mind. Indeed the most burdensome imprisonment is to be prisoner to
diseases; because for the most part these hold us, not without pain and the
great trouble of our friends about us.

A Perfect soul in an imperfect body, is like a bright Tapour in a dark
Lantern: the fault is not in the light, but in the Case, which curtains it
with so dull an outside, as will not let the shine be transparent. And we may
see this even in those that have been both able and ingenious, who after a hurt
received in some vital part, have grown mopish and almost insencible, that
defect keeping the intellectual so under, that it appears not to the outward
apprehension. Inward defects also, either in Nature or Generation, do often
eclipse the luster of noble spirits: yea, even from the womb some malignant
humor may interpose the true operation of the spirits internal.

CErtainly God has made man to dwell in doubt, that he might be awed to good
by fear and expectation. We are led along by hope, to the ends that are
appointed us, and by an uncertain way we come at last to a certain end, which
yet we could neither know nor avoid. The great Creator wisely put things to
come, in the mist and twilight, that we might neither be overjoyed with the
certainty of good, nor overmuch terrified with the assurance of an unavoidable
ill. If Fate be certain, it can be no good to know it, because we cannot
prevent it: If it be uncertain, we search in vain to find out that which but
may be. He that lives virtuously needs not doubt of finding a happy Fate: If
our lives please God, the success shall surely please us. Virtue and Vice are
both Prophets, the one of certain good, the other either of Pain or Penitence.

WIthout charity a man cannot be sociable: and take away that, and there is
little else that a man has to do in the world: Certainly if there be any
thing sweet in mere humanity, it is in the intercourses of beloved society: a
reverend humility toward God, and Christian charity toward our Neighbors,
will give us a peace that shall fit us for whatsoever befalls. He that has
these graces shall not fear himself, for he knows his course is Order: he
shall not fear the world, for he knows he has done nothing that has angerd
it: he shall not be afraid of heaven, for he knows he shall there find the
favor of a Servant of a Son, and be protected against the malice and spleen
of hell.

AS no Physician can be so abstemious, as to follow strictly all his own
prescriptions, so I think there is no Christian so much his minds Master, as
to keep precisely all his resolutions: they may better show what he would be,
than what he is. Nature has too slow a foot to follow Religion close at the
heel: Who can expect our dull flesh should wing it with the flights of the
soul? He is not a good man that lives perfect, but he that lives as well as
he can, and as humane frailties will let him: he that thus strives not, never
began to be virtuous, nor knows he those transcending joys that continually
feast in the noble minded Man. All the external pleasures that Mortality is
capable of, can never inkindle a flame, that shall so bravely warm the soul
as the love of virtue, and the certain knowledge of the rule we have over our
own wild passions.

I Never yet could meet the man that complained not of something. Every one
has his turn of sorrow, some more, some less, all men are in their times
miserable. Wherefore it is wisdom before sorrow comes to prepare for it, when
it comes to welcome it, and when it goes, to take but half a farewell of it,
as still expecting its return.

THe ill wishes of our impatience are oft-times heard: as those good things are
not granted us which we pray for without care, so those evils that we pray for
and would not have, are often granted: the ears of God are not only open to
the prayers of faith, but to the imprecations of infidelity. It is dangerous
wishing evil to our selves or ours. It is just with God to take us at our
word, and to effect that with his will, which our lips speak against our heart.

Sweetness of Contemplation is a great help toward the good entertainment of
an admonition. Roughness and rigor many times harden those hearts, which
meekness would have melted to repentance. Whether we sue, or convince, or
reprove, little good is gotten by bitterness: Detestation of the sin may well
stand with favor to the person, and those two not distinguished, cause great
wrong either in our charity or justice: for either we uncharitably hate the
creature of God, or unjustly affect the persons of Men.

IT is madness in a man not to be warned, but to run upon the same judgments
wherewith he sees others miscarry, and not to believe till he cannot recover.
Our assent is purchased too late when we over-stay prevention, and trust to
that experience we cannot live to redeem: Nor is it wisdom to stay till a
judgment come home to us, for the only way to avoid it is to meet it half
way. There is the same remedy both or war and of danger: To provoke an enemy in
his own borders is the best stay of invasion: and to solicit God betimes in a
manifest danger, is the best antidote against the greatest evils that can be
fall us.

IT is a good sign when God chides us: his round reprehensions are ever
gracious forerunners of mercy; whereas his silent connivence at the wicked
argues deep and secret displeasure. Fond Nature thinks God should not suffer
the wind to blow upon his dear ones, because her self makes this fond use of
her own indulgence. But wheresoever God chastises, there he is, yea, there he
is in mercy: Nothing more proves us his than his stripes, he will not bestow
whipping where he loves not.

HE that commonly gives us power to crave, sometimes gives us without craving,
that the benefit might be so much more welcome, by how much less it was
suspected; and we so much more thankful, as he is forward: When he bids us
ask, it is not that he needs to be entreated, but that he may make us more
capable of blessings by desiring them: and where he sees fervent desires, he
seldom stays for words: but how much more will he give when we ask, that so
freely gives before we ask.

BY contrary paces to ours it pleases God to come to his own ends, looking often
the contrary way to that we move. No man can measure the conclusion of Gods
acts by his beginnings: he that fetches good out of evil, often raises the
glory of men out of their ruin. We love to go the nearest way, and often
fail: God commonly goes about, and in his own time comes surely home.
Necessity will drive us to seek all helps, even those which our wantonness
despised. It is a safe course to make much of those in our peace, whom we must
make use of in our extremity: else it is but just that we should be rejected by
them we have rejected.

VOws are as they are made, like unto Sents, if they be of ill composition
nothing offends more, if well tempered, nothing more pleasant: either certainty
of evil, or uncertainty of good, or impossibility of performance, make Vows
of no service to God. When we vow that we cannot, or what we ought not, we
mock God in stead of honoring him: It is a vain thing for us to go about to
catch God hoodwinkt: for there is no comfort in Peradventure I may please God.

IT falls out often, that those times and occasions which promise most
contentment, prove most doleful in the issue: as contrarily, the times and
events which we have most distrusted, prove most beneficial. It is good in a
fair morning to think of the storm that may arise before night, and to enjoy
both good and evil fearfully.

AS it becomes not children to be too forward in their choice, so Parents ought
not to be too peremptory in their denial. It is not safe for children to
outrun their Parents in settling their affections; nor for Parents, where the
impediments are not very material, to come short of their children, when their
affections are once settled: the one is disobedience, the other tyranny.

THe courtesies of the world are ever hollow and thanklesse, neither does it
ever purpose so ill, as when it shows fairest: None are so near dangers as
those whom it entertaines with smiles. Whilst it frowns we know what to
trust to, but the favors of it are worthy nothing but fears and suspicions:
open defiance is better than false love.

INdulgences of Parents is the refuge of vanity, the bawd of wickedness, the
bane of children. How easily is that Thief induced to steal, that knows his
Receiver? When the lawlesnesse of youth knows where to find pity and
toleration, what mischief can it forbear?

GOod dispositions love not to pleasure themselves with the disadvantage of
others, and had rather be miserable alone, than draw in partners to their
sorrow: for the sight of another calamity does even double their own, and if
themselves were free, would affect them with compassion. As contrarily, ill
minds care not how many companions they have in misery; they can be content
all the world were inwrapped with them in the same distress.

IT is no love that cannot make us willing to be miserable for those we affect:
the hollowest heart can be content to follow one that prospers. Adversity is
the only furnace of friendship; if love will not abide both fire and anvile it
is but counterfeit: And in our love to God we do but crack and vaunt in vain,
if we cannot be willing to suffer for him.

THe Rich exchanging their alms with the poor for their blessings, have no
cause to complain of an ill bargain; our gifts cannot be worth their
faithful prayers. Therefore it is better to give than to receive; because he
that receives has but a worthless alms, he that gives receives an unvaluable
blessing.

WE cannot better please an adversary than by hurting our selves. This is no
other than to honor envy, to serve the turn of those that malign us, and to
draw on that malice which will weary us. Whereas care lesnesse puts ill will
out of countenance, and makes it withdraw it self in a rage, as that which
does but shame the Author, without the hurt of the Patient. In causeless
wrongs the best remedy is contempt.

GViltinesse is commonly clamorous and impatient; whereas innocence is silent
and careless of misreports. It is natural to all men to wipe off from their
names all aspersions of evil; but none do it with such violence, as they
which for most part are faulty. It Is a sign the horse is galled which stirs
too much when he is touched.

EVen the best may err, though not persist in it: when good natures have
offended, they are unquiet till they have hastened satisfaction. It cannot be
spoken how much ease and joy the heart of man finds, in having unloaded his
cares, and poured out his supplications in the ears of God, since it is well
assured, that the fruit which is faithfully asked, is already granted in
heaven. The conscience may well rest when it tells us we have neglected no
means of redressing our affliction: for then it may resolve to look either
for amendment or patience.

THose which are dearest to God, do often times with great difficulty work out
those blessings which fall into the mouths of the careless. The just disposer
of all things holds it fit to keep us short of those favors we sue for, either
for the trial of our patience, or the exercise of our faith, or the increasing
of our importunity, or the doubling of our obligation.

THose hearts which are truly thankful do rejoice no less in their restraint
than in their receipt; and do as much study how to show their humble and
fervent affections for what they have, as how to compass favors when they
want them. Their debt is their burden, which when they have discharged they
are at ease.

WIcked men are upon all occasions glad to be rid of God, but they can with no
patience endure to be rid of their sins; but whilst they are weary of the
hand that punishes them, they hold fast the cause of their punishment: their
false hopes cost them dear. They could not be so miserable, if their own
hearts did not deceive them with misexpectations of impossible favor.

IT is hard not to over-joy in a sudden prosperity: and to use happiness is no
less difficulty than to forbear it. Nature is too subject to extremities, and
is ever either too dull in want, or too wanton in fruition: it is no easy
matter to keep a mean either in good or evil.

THe mercies of God draw more tears from his children, than his judgments do
from his enemies: There is no better signs of good nature and grace, than to
be won to repentance by kindness. Not to think of God unless we be beaten
unto it, is servile; No warning will serve obdurate hearts; wicked men are even
ambitious of destruction: Judgments need not go to find them out, they run
headlong to meet their bane. God will never acknowledge any convert that stays
in a known sin: Graces and virtues are so linkt together that he which has
one has all: the partial conversion of men to God is hateful hypocrisy, and
the trial of our sincerity is the abandoning of our wonted sins.

PRide and wantonness have marred these times: Great Parents account it a
dis-reputation to employ their sons in courses of frugality, and their pampered
children think it a shame to do any thing, and so bear themselves, as those
that hold it the only glory to be either idle or wicked.

GOd never employed any man in his service, whom he did not enable to the work
he set him, especially those whom he raises up to the supply of his own
place, and the representation of himself. It is no marvel though Princes
excel the Vulgar in gifts, no less than in dignity: their Crowns and their
hearts are both in one and the same hand: if God did not add to their powers
as their honors, there would be no equality.

GOds children cannot by any means be discouraged from their honor and love to
his Ordinances, if they see thousands struck down to hell by the Scepter of
Gods kingdom, yet they will kiss it upon their knees; and though their
Savior be a Rock of offense, and the occasion of others falling, they feed
temperately on that whereof others have surfeited to death. Nothing but grace
can teach us to make use of others judgments: for wicked men are not moved
with ought that falls beside them, they trust nothing but their own smart, and
notwithstanding the daily representation of Gods judgments, their peremptory
resolution takes no more notice of them than if God had never shown a dislike
of their ways.

HOw easy is it for us to mistake our own estates? to rejoice in that which
we shall find the just cause of our just humiliation: the end of a thing is
better than the beginning: the safest way is, to reserve our joy till we have
good proof of the worthiness and fitness of the object: what are we the
better for having a blessing, if we know not how to use it?

GOd may be angry enough with us while we outwardly prosper: It is his wisdom
to take his best advantages; he suffers us to go on till we should come to
enjoy the fruit of our sin, till we seem past the danger either of conscience
or punishment, then (even when we begin to be past the feeling of our sins) we
often begin to feel his displeasure for our sins: but this is only where he
loves, for where he means utter vengeance, he lets men harden themselves to
a reprobate senselessness, and make up their own measure without
contradiction, as purposing to reckon with them but once for ever.

WE should ever dislike sins, but should not always show it: discretion in
the choice of seasons for reproving, is no less commendable and necessary,
than zeal and faithfulness in reproving. Good Physicians use not to evacuate
the body in extremities of heat or cold. Wise Mariners do not hoise their
sails in every wind. And as all times are not fit for reproof, so all
persons are not fit to be reprovers: he that casts a stone at an offender,
should be free from the offense, otherwise he condemns and executes himself
in another person. The conscience stops the guilty man's mouth, and choakes him
with that sin which lies in his own breast: which having not come forth by a
penitent confession, cannot find the way out in a reproof: and if he do
reprove, he does more shame himself, than reform another.

A Man's heart can best judge of himself, others can best judge of his actions:
As another man's conscience and approbation cannot bear us out before God, so
cannot our own before men; for ofttimes those actions are censured by the
beholders as wrongful, wherein we applaud our own justice. Happy is the man
that can be acquitted by himself in private, in public by others, by God in
both. Standers by may see more: it is very safe for a man to look into
himself by others eyes: in vain shall a man's heart absolve him, that is
condemned by his actions. A good conscience will make a man undauntedly
confident, and dares put him upon any trial: where his own heart strikes him
not it bids him challenge all the world, and all comers. How happy a thing is
it for a man to be his own friend and Patron: he needs not fear foreign
broiles, that has true peace at home: but he that has a false and soul
heart, lies at every man's mercy, lives slavishly, and is feign to daube up a
rotten peace with the basest conditions. Truth is not afraid of any light, and
therefore dares suffer her wares to be carried from a dim Shopboard to the
Street door. Perfect Gold will be but the purer for trying, whereas falsehood
being a work of darkness, loves darkness, and therefore seeks where it may
work closest.

THe greatest earthly Monarchs ought to walk by a Rule, which if they do
transgress, they shall be accountable to him who is higher than the highest,
and desires not so much their precept as example. For the sins of our Teachers
are the Teachers of sin: the sins of Governors do both command and
countenance evil.

HYpocrites rest only in formalities; if the outward act be done, it suffices
them, though the ground be distrust, the manner unreverence, the carriage
presumption. But God will have no worship of our own devising, we may only do
what he bids us, not bid what he commands not. Never did any true piety arise
out of the corrupt puddle of man's brain; if it flow not from heaven it is
odious to heaven: The only way to bring comforts, and to intaile a comfortable
prosperity upon our Posterity, is our conscionable inward obedience to God.

The services of our love to Gods Children are never thanklesse: When we are
dead and rotten, they shall live and procure blessings to those that never knew
perhaps, nor heard of their progenitors. If we sow good works, succession
shall reap them, and we shall be happy in making them so. Doubtless that
child is happy, whose progenitors are in heaven; for he is left an inheritor
of blessings together with estate: whereas wicked Ancestors lose the thanks of
a rich Patrimony, by the curse that attends it.

A Good heart has learned to frame it self unto all conditions, and can
change his estate without change of disposition, rising and falling according
to occasion: whereas the worldly mind can rise easily, but knows not how to
descend either with patience, or safety.

OF all creatures, Christians should have least interest in themselves, but
should live as given to benefit of others: not caring much for what they have,
and nothing for what they have not: seeing all worldly things, though they
require long labor in getting, yet afford but a short pleasure in enjoying
them.

WIcked men that know the filthiness of their souls, dare not so much as view
them, but shift off all checks of their former iniquity with vain excuses of
good fellowship. Whence it is that every small reprehension galls them, because
it calls the eyes of the soul home to it self, making them see a glimpse of
what they would not: Like a foolish and timorous Patient, who knowing his wound
very deep, cannot endure the Surgeon should search it: whereof what can ensue
but a festering of the part, and a danger of the whole body. The old proverb
is true, Often and even reckonings make long friends. Many prodigal wasters
run so far in books, that they cannot abide to hear of a reckoning. Happy
is he that sums up his estate often with God: he shall thereby know what he
has to expect and answer for: neither shall his score run on so long, that he
shall not know his debts, or fear an account, or despair of payment.

FEw men fear to do ill, every man to suffer ill: wherein if we consider
right, we shall find that we fear our best friends: for Prosperity usually
makes us forget our death; Adversity on the other side makes us neglect our
life. Now if we measure both of these by their effects; forgetfulness of
death makes us secure, neglect of this life makes us careful of a better: So
much therefore as neglect of life is better than forgetfulness of death, and
watchfulness better than security, so much more beneficial should we esteem
Adversity than Prosperity.

It Is a base thing to get goods only to keep them: we see that God (who is only
infinite rich) holds nothing in his own hands, but gives all to his
Creatures. But if we will needs lay up, where should we rather repose it than
in Christ's Treasury, which is the poor man's hand: There should all our
superfluity be hoarded up, where doubtless it shall be safely kept, and
surely returned us: If our money were another we could but keep it, only
expending it shows it our own: it is better to lay it out well, than to keep it
safely.

NO worldly pleasure has any absolute delight in it, but as a Be, having
honey in the mouth, has a sting in the tail. Why then should we be so
foolish to rest our hearts upon any of them? and not rather labor to aspire to
that one absolute Good, in whom is nothing savouring of grief, nothing wanting
to perfect happiness.

EVery man acts his part upon this worlds Theater: The good man is a Comedian,
who however he begins, ever ends merrily: but the wicked man acts a Tragedy,
and therefore always ends in horror. Who sees an Ox grazing in a fat and
rank pasture, and thinks not that he is near to the slaughter? whereas the
lean beast that toiles under the yoke is far enough from the shambles. The
best wicked man cannot be so glorious in his first shows, as he is miserable
in the conclusion.

THat affection which is grounded on the best and most Heavenly virtue must
needs be the safest; for as it unites man to God so inseparably, that no
temptations, no torments, no not all the gates of hell can sever him: so it
unites one Christian soul to another so firmly, that no outward occurrents,
no imperfections in the party loved can dissolve them. He that loves not the
child of God for his own and his Fathers sake, more than a friend for his
commodity, or a kinsman for blood, never received any spark of true heavenly
love.

IT happens to Christians in their pilgrimage to a better life, as it does to
Travelers, who meet with many hosts, but few friends. Good friends are a great
happiness, and therefore should not easily be lost; nor must they be used as
suits of apparel, which when we have worn threadbare we cast off and call
for new. Nothing but death or villainy should divorce us from an old friend, we
should still follow him so far as possibility or honesty can guide us, which
if he chance to leave, we should yet leave him with sorrow.

THere is no man so pure in whom we may not mislike somewhat: and who may not
as justly mislike somewhat in us? Our friends faults therefore, if little,
should be swallowed and digested: if great, they should be smothered, at least
winked at to others, yet lovingly notified to him.

WHy should we vex our selves because another has vexed us? Injuries hurt not
more in the receiving, than in the remembrance. A small injury should go as it
comes: great ones may dine or sup with us, but if they lodge with us, we shall
find them very irksome.

A Friends death as it may moderately grieve us, so it may another way much
benefit us in recompense of his want, for it should make us think more often
and seriously of earth and of heaven: of earth, for his body which is reposed
in it; of heaven, for his soul which possesses it before us: of earth, to put
us in mind of our like frailty and mortality; of heaven, to make us desire,
and after a sort emulate his happiness and glory: and it is a true saying, he
which has himself has lost nothing.

IT is better not know, than by knowledge to be made miserable: he that never
tasted the pleasures of sin, longs least after those deceitful contentments.
It Is easier to deny a guest at the first, than to turn him out having stayed
awhile. The senseless man knows not what joy he loses, when he fondly
lasheth into new offenses. While the Conscience is unspotted it can make us
smile even on the Rack, and in Flames; but that once wounded, our joys are
buried at once, and we throw a jewel from us which is richer than the worlds
wealth: happy is he that desires to die unexperienced in the sweets of such sin
he knows not.

HE is not worthy of thanks that professes kindness for his own ends: he
that loves me for my gift sake, loves my gift above my self; and if I should
happen to light on Adversity, I should not find him then to appear, there
being no hope of a gainefull requital: friendship won by large gifts resembles
a straw fire, that having matter to feed upon burns brightly, but let new
fuel be neglected, it dies, consumes, and quite goes out.

A Good life is a Fortress against shame, and a good man's shame is his
benefit; the one keeps it away, the other when it comes makes it prove
profitable: for nothing more saddens the soul of a good man, than the serious
apprehension of a just shame: and by how much his honesty was more noted, by so
much will his shame and grief be more; because all will now be ready to
brand him with the odious and stygmaticall name of an hypocrite. We should
first strive to be void of the act may bring shame, and next not to cast it in
the dish of the penitent. If our sufferings be unjust, we shall be sure in
the end to find them comfortable.

Between friends it cannot be but discurtesies will appear, though not
intended by a willing act, yet so taken by a wrong suspect, which smothered in
silence increase daily to a greater distaste, but once revealed in a friendly
manner, often meet with that satisfaction which does in the disclosure banish
them: There is not any thing eats out friendship sooner than concealed
grudges: Conceits of unkindnesse harbored and believed, will work even a
steady love to hatred. If a private thought of unkindnesse arise between my
friend and my self, I presently tell it, and be reconciled: If he be clear, I
shall like him the better when I see his integrity: if faulty, confession
gains my pardon, and binds me still to love him. Fire almost quenched, and
laid abroad, dies presently; put together, it will burn the better: a little
shaking helps the trees growth; every such breach as this may unite affection
faster.

Honor and high place upon earth can confer nothing unto us that may make our
life more truly happy: if it add to our joys, it increases our fears: if it
augment our pleasure, our trouble and care is the more: great persons are like
flags in the tops of Shipmasts, as more high and more visible, so more and ever
open to the wind and storms. What a snare has wealth proved to many? that
like the Sun, have in the morning of their time mounted themselves to the
highest pitch of perspicuity and brightness; which when they have once
attained, they decline, fall, vanish, and are gone, leaving nothing behind
them but dark night, black reputation. The Thief that meets with a full
purse, takes away it, and returns a stab; whilst the empty pocket makes the
life secure. He is not a complete Christian that cannot be content with what
be enjoyes: we should rather settle our minds to a quiet rest in that we
find, than let her wander in a wearied solicitude after ungotten plenty: we
should ever esteem that estate best which God gives us: though we cannot
think so, yet doubtless it is so, and to think against knowledge is a
foolish suspicion.

AS Providence is the mother of happiness, so Negligence is the parent of
misery: No vice so soon steals on us as the abuse of things in themselves: It
is good the Vine should flourish, but let it alone, and it ruins it self in
superfluous branches. Our pleasures are sometimes the inlivenings of a drooping
soul, but they easily steal away our minds, making us with a mad affection
dote upon them to our destruction: We should ever be most circumspect in things
veiled either with goodness or sweetness: for nothing steals more souls
from God, than lewd courses that are outwardly glorious.

THe formal amity of the world is confined to a face, or to the possibility of
a recompense, languishing in disability, and dying in the decease of the party
affected: It is true love, that, over-living the person of a friend, will be
inherited of his seed: but to love the posterity of an enemy, in a friend is
the miracle of friendship: That love was ever false, that is not ever constant,
and the most operative, when it cannot be either known or requited.

WE should not nourish the same spirits in our adverse estates, that we found
in our highest prosperity: what use have we made of Gods hand, if we be not
the lower in our fall? Gods intent is, we should carry our Cross, not make a
fire of it to warm us by: It is no bearing up of sails in a Tempest, nor is
there a more certain way to glory and advancement, than a lowly dejection of
our selves under Gods chastisements.

IT is one of the mad Principles of wickedness, That it is weakness to
relent, and rather to die than yield: even ill Causes, once undertaken, must be
upheld, although with blood: whereas the gracious heart, finding its own
mistaking, does not only remit of an ungrounded displeasure, but studies to be
revenged on it self, and to give satisfaction to the offended.

THere can be no fitter invitation to temptation, than the down-bed of
idleness: the industrious man has no leisure to sin; the idle has neither
leisure nor power to avoid sin. Exercise is not more wholesome for the body,
than for the soul, the omission whereof breeds matter of disease in both: the
water that has been heated, soonest freezeth; and the most active spirit
soonest tyreth with slacking: The earth stands still and is all dregs; the
heavens ever move and are pure. We have no reason to complain of the
assiduity of work; the toil of action is answered by the benefit: if we did
less we should suffer more. Satan, like an idle companion, if he finds us
busy flies back, and sees it no time to entertain vain purposes with us: We
cannot please him better, than by casting away of our work to hold chat with
him; we can not yield so far and be guiltless.

THere can be no safety with that soul, where the senses are let loose; he
can never keep his covenant with God, that makes not a covenant with his eyes.
It is an idle presumption to think the outward man may be free, while the
inward is safe: he is more than a man, whose heart is not led by his eyes: he
is no regenerate man whose eyes are not restrained by his heart.

THe grief that goes before an evil, for remedy, can hardly be too much; but
that which follows an evil past remedy, can never be too little: Even in the
saddest accident, Death, we may yield something to Nature, nothing to
impatience. Immoderation of sorrow for losses past hope of recovery, is more
sullen than useful: our stomach may be bewrayed by it, not our wisdom.

THere is no enmity so dangerous as that which comes masqued with love: open
hostility calls us to our guard, but there is no fence against a trusted
treachery. We need not be bidden to avoid an enemy, but who would run away
from his friend? Thus spiritually deals the world with our souls, it kisses
us, and stabs us at once: if it did not embrace us with one hand, it could not
murder us with the other. Only God deliver us from the danger of this trust,
and we shall be safe.

WIcked Politiques care not so much for the commission of villainy, as for the
notice: Smothered evils are as not done: If oppressions, murder, or treasons
may be hid from view, the obdurate-hearted offender complains not of remorse:
So vast are the gorges of some Consciences, that they can swallow the greatest
crimes, and find no strain in the passage.

THe perfections of speculation argue not always the inward powers of
self-government: the eye may be clear, whilst the hand is palsied: it is not
so much to be heeded how the soul is informed, as how she is disciplined: the
lighted of knowledge does well, but the order of the affections does better:
there can be no safety upon that soul where there is no strait curb upon the
desires: if our lusts be not held under as slaves, they will rule as Tyrants:
nothing can prevent the extremity of our miscarriage, but early and strong
denialls of our concupiscence: A competent estate well husbanded, is better
than a vast patrimony neglected.

THere is no presuming upon time, or means, or strength: how many have begun,
and proceeded well, who yet have shamed themselves in their last stage: If God
uphold us not we cannot stand, if God uphold us we cannot fall: when we are at
the strongest, it is good to be weak in our selves: and when at our weakest,
strong in him in whom we can do all things. Lord be thou strong in our
weakness, that our weak knees may be steady in thy strength.

THere are some whose speeches are witty, whilst their carriage is weak; whose
deeds are incongruities, whilst their words be apophthegms. It is not worth the
name of wisdom that may be heard only and not seen; Good discourse is but
the froth of wisdom, the pure and solid substance of it is in well framed
actions: and knowing these things, happy are we if we do them.

AS he is a fool that has a price in his hand to get wisdom, and wants a
heart; so is he unthankful that has a heart to get wisdom, and has no
price in his hand, a price not countervailable to what he seeks, but
retributory to him of whom he seeks: It is a shame to come with close hands to
them which teach us the great mysteries of salvation.

EXpectation is no better than a kind enemy to good deserts: We lose those
things we over-looke: Many had been admired, if they had not been overmuch
befriended by Fame, who now in our judgment are cast as much below their
ranks, as they were fore-imagined above it.

EVen our very permission appropriates our ruin: we need no more guiltiness
of any sin, than our willing toleration: Every accessory to sin is filthy, but
the first authors of sin are abominable. And if the followers and abettors of
evil be worthy of torment, no hell is too deep for the leaders of public
wickedness.

GEtting and saving are not ever the ways to abundance, but sometimes giving:
the merciful God crowns our beneficence with the blessing of store: It is a
good sign of a well meant devotion, when we can abide it chargeable: as
contrarily, in the affairs of God, a niggardly hand argues a cold and narrow
heart.

SOmetimes God strikes in favor, but more often forbeares out of severity: the
best are fittest for heaven, the earth is fittest for the worst: this is the
region of sin and misery, that of immortality: It is no argument of disfavour
to be taken only from a well fed life, as not of approbation to age in sin.

GOd often winkes at weaknesses, where he sees Truth: O how pleasing a thing is
sincerity, that in favor thereof the mercy of a God digests many an error.
Lord let our hearts go upright, though our feet slide, the fall cannot
(through thy grace) be deadly, however it may shame or pain us.

WE cannot easily put upon God a greater wrong than the alienation of our
trust: earthly means are for use, not for confidence: we may, we must employ
them, we may not, we must not rely upon them. Policy and Religion do as well
together, as they are ill asunder; the Dove without the Serpent is easily
caught: the Serpent without the Dove stings deadly: Religion without Policy is
too simple to be safe: Policy without Religion is too subtle to be good: being
matched they make themselves secure, and many happy.

THere is not always the greatest efficacy where is the greatest noise: God
loves to make way for himself by terror, but he conveyes himself to us in
sweetness: It is happy for us, if after the flashes and gusts of the Law, we
have heard the soft voice of Evangelicall mercy: It is fit they should be first
humbled by his terror, that would be made capable of his mercy; and by both won
to repentance.

NOthing is more odious to God, than a profane neutrality in maine oppositions
in Religion: To go upright in a wrong way is a less eyesore to God, than to
halt betwixt right and wrong. The Spirit wishes that the Laodiceans were
either hot or cold: either Temper would be better borne than neither, than
both. In reconcilable differences nothing is more safe than indifferency, both
of practice and opinion: But in cases of so necessary hostility, as betwixt God
and Baal, he that is on neither side, is enemy to both: Less hateful are they
to God that serve him not at all, than they that serve him with a Rival.

FOolish men are plagued for their offenses, and it is no small part of their
plague that they see it not. The only common disturber of Men, Families,
Cities, Kingdoms, Worlds, is sin: There is no such traitor to any State as the
wilfully wicked: the quietest and most plausible offender is secretly
seditious, and stirs quarrels in heaven. Our hearts are Wells of bitter and
venomous Water; our actions are the streams: In vain shall we cleanse our
hands, while our hearts are evil. If the fountain be redressed, the streams
cannot be faulty; as contrarily the purity and soundness of the stream
availes nothing to the redress of the fountain: Reformation must begin at
the Well head of the abuse: the order of being is a good guide to the method
of amending.

AS there are sometimes beardlesse Sages, so are there often times gray headed
Children: not the ancient are wise, but the wise is ancient. It is vain to
look for good of those Children we have neglected; and as vain to grieve for
those miscarriages in elder age, which our care might have prevented betimes.
Children are such as their institution: Infancy is led altogether by imitation:
it has neither words nor actions but infused by others; their full growth in
good or ill is but borrowed, and the shame or thank is due to those that lent
it. Next to being good, is the happiness of conversing with them that are so:
for if we be not bettered by their example, yet are we often blessed by their
protection.

THe contempt of honest callings in those which are well borne, argues pride
without wit: humble resolutions are so much the more heroical, as they fall
into higher subjects. We may freely come to God, but we may not come too near
him: when we meditate of the great mysteries of the Word, we come to him: we
come too near him when we search into his Councels. A man may be too lowly in
his dealings with men, even unto contempt: with God he cannot, but the lower
he falls, the higher is his exaltation: And I never find that any man
bragged to God, although in a matter of truth, and within the compass of his
desert, and was accepted.

IT is a great skill to know what is enough, and great wisdom to care for no
more. As in words, much talk argues a brain feeble and distempered; so
affectation of superfluity, is in all things a sign of weakness.

IN all humane things indifferency is safest: if our doubts be equal to our
desires, our disappointment shall not be grievous, because our expectation was
not peremptory.

DEceit is gracious company, for it always studies to be fair and pleasant:
but then like a thief, having trained us from the road, it robs us; where all
the benefit we have left is this, that if we have time to see how we are
couzened, we may have so much happiness as to die repenting.

SEeming wise men may make shift to get opinion, but I would wish no man to
choose them for employment: for certainly you were better to take for business
a man somewhat absurd, than over-formall.

THere is but one way wherein a man may commend himself with good grace, and
that is in commending virtue in another, especially if it be such a virtue
whereunto himself pretends.

HE that rests upon gains certain, shall hardly grow to great riches: and
he that puts all upon adventures, does oftentimes break and come to poverty.
It is good therefore to guard adventures with certainties, that may uphold
losses. *

FINIS.
A description of true Happiness.
LOng have I sought the wish of all
To find, and what it is men call
True happiness; but cannot see
The world has ought which it may be,
Or with it hold a sympathy.
He that enjoyes what here below
Frail Elements have to bestovv,
Shall find most svveet, bare hopes at first,
Fruition by fruition burst:
Sea-vvater so allayes the thirst.
Whoever would be happy then,
Must be so to himself: for when
Judges are taken from without,
To judge what we fence close about,
They err, judge not, but guess and doubt.
He must have reason store, to spy
Natures hid ways, to satisfy
His judgment: So may he be safe.
From the vain fret; for fools will chafe
At that which makes a wise man laugh.
Wealth to keep want away, and fear
Of it, not more: Some friends still near,
And chosen well. Nor must he miss
A calling, yet some such as is
Employment, not a Business.
His soul must hug no private sin,
For that is a Thorn hid by the skin;
But Innocence: She, being nursed,
Plants valiant peace. So Cato durst
Be godly good, when Rome was worst.
God-built he must be in his mind
So deeply, that his faith no wind
Can shake, when boldly he relies
On one so noble, he out flies
Low Chance, and Fate of Destinies.
Life, as a middle way, immured
'Twixt joy and grief to be endured,
Not spurned and wantoned hence: he knows,
In crooked banks a spring so goes
'Ore stone, mud, weeds, yet still clear flows.
And as springs rest not till they lead
Meandring high, as their first head;
So souls rest not till Man has trod
Deaths height; then by that period
They rest too; Raised as high as God.
Sum all: He happiest is that can
In this worlds jar be honest Man.
Be, since perfection is so high,
Beyond Lives reach; he that would try
True happiness indeed, must die.
Laus Deo.

