A DESCRIPTION OF THE PERSIAN MONARCHY Now being: THE ORIENTAL INDYES.

Isles, and sother part's of the Greater Asia, and Africa.

By Th: Herbert Esquire.

Repetunt proprios quaequae Recursus.

LONDON Printed by Will: Stansby, and Jacob Bloome*

An Abdall or Priest

A Coozel-bash

Wi: Marshall Sculps:



A RELATION OF SOME YEARS TRAVAIL, BEGVNNE Anno 1626.

Into Afrique and the greater Asia, especially the Territories of the Persian
Monarchy: and some parts of the Oriental Indies, and Isles adjacent.

Of their Religion, Language, Habit, Descent, Ceremonies, and other matters
concerning them.

Together with the proceedings and death of the three late Ambassadors: Sir D.
C. Sir R. S. and the Persian NOGDI-BEG:

As also the two great Monarchs, the King of Persia, and the Great MOGOL.

By T. H. Esquier.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby, and Jacob Bloome, 1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, PHILIP, Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomerie, Baron
Herbert of Caerdiff and Sherland, Lord Parr and Ross of Kendall, Fitzhugh,
Marmyon, and Saint Qvintin, Lord Lieutenant of Kent, etc.
Lord Warden of the Stanneries in Cornwaile and Devonshire, Lord Chamberlain
of his MAJESTY'S House, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD:
GOod wine needs no bush: but this Traveler wants a Guide, and as under age, a
Guardian too: In the wars a Beard becomes a Captain, and in travail years
do well, at least some years of discretion, to enable the looke^ on to mark
the most remarkable things, and those only.

My desire to see, took away my sight, as it fares with those who are suddenly
taken with a killing beauty, or gaze upon the Sun. Yet some glimmerings I have
observed, like an ill-sighted man, who sees with Spectacles or Perspectiues,
the rather, that your Lordships protection may have the same operation on me,
the Sun has upon barren ground, to call out some useful herb, and by
virtue only of your own influences.

At Tennis he that takes not the first ^ound, loses the rest, but in a
second or third place, a man may be the Instrument of good: and I care not what
room I fill up, nor what posture I stand in, so my Company be good and the
action Noble.

This casts me still upon your Honors goodness, as the Patron of Virtue, and
my safeguard both from the Ignorance of those who can find fault at home, and
the malice of such as carpe at any rate, and condemn before the Book be
printed, it may be before it is ended: who antidate their exceptions, and like
Merchants with their goods, enter them, before they ship them: Such impressed
money I do not like, but protest against it and the pay^master. Yet, why
should I fear have or Detraction, when your Honors favor is my Pilot.

To believe my self safe, is to be so: since Opinion strikes a great stroke
in the judgments and affairs of men, and that it is impossible in any subject
to find more safety or calmnesse for this poor Barque, which (I assure your
Lordship) has endurde many tosses at Sea, and is now tossed on Land to be
ploughed up in long furrows, and to bear the brunt of the coldest and hottest
Air, Summer and Winter censures. Which by the just Temper of your Lordships
good Name, (made surer by that discending Interest, you being our Chief) shall
be thawed and made gentle unto me, who have nothing more to boast of then your
Nobleness and the Title of

Your Lordships humblest Servant, Th. Herbert.

NO sooner welcome home from travel, then
Cos^n, thou do put forth to Sea again;
Is It not enough to have ventured life and goods,
But good name must be stak't: that box affoords
The precious ointment; Is the die cast, must
At this one throw all thou have gaind be lost?
The Worlds a Lott'ry; He that draws may win:
Who nothing ventur's; looks for nothing; Sin
Multiplies and shall thy honor barren be;
Lanch out and prosper, let not thy modesty,
Be counted a crime, or, if the fashion
Turn virtue into vice* thy observation
Shall an example be to modern wits
Who choose not what is good, but what best fits
Their appetites; whose faith is much or none
By others fancies or digestion:
Thy judgment rigged thee forth, made thee hoyse sail,
Put thee to Sea, made danger sport, bewail
Those who sit here to censure, and scarce know
Whether there be a Persia or no:
Sink not thy Barque with fear, brave confidence
Fill thy swelling sails; and may every sense
Joy in its subject; may thou better such
Who are content to judge, and think it much
Better for them to buy thy Book, and thence
To pick thy knowledge, at the small expense
Of the prise; many more there are to improve,
But if thy pains be lost, loose not thy love.
That Bottom took thee out, brought thee safe hither
And may it bear thee still; let no foul weather
Toss thee out of thy self, but as thy mind
May eau'n be in rugged way, so be kind
Unto thy self, and as thy end is good
So must it thrive, if rightly understood.
To his worthy Cosen, THOMAS HERBERT Esquire.
WHen first thou traueldst I dissuaded, then
Fearing thy youth, hot Climates, faithless men.
This second journey on the Scholars Stage
I fear: not for the weakness of thy age*
But for the frozen Zone thou did not (...)
Whence mystie wits may rise to darken thee.
But since thy first adventure proved so well,
Proceed, The Truth is great and shall prevail.
NEc te poeniteat duros subiisse labores
Aut operi insuetas attenuasse manus.
Dum iuga montis Aper, fluvios dum piscis amabit,
Dum Thymo pascentur Apes, dum rore Cycadae,
Semper honos, Nomenque tuum, laudesque manebunt.
To the Reader.
IN every Country, diverse wonders be
Not represented to the Ear and Eye
Of every Native, then hard doom forbear,
If from the Universe strange nowes you hear.
Those very children whom one womb does frame,
Vary shape, nature, use; to expect the same
In every work, is Gods great work to blame.
Since then Varieties please God and Men;
Thank him whose sweat and cost demonstrates them.
C. H.

AN ITENERARIE OF SOME YEARS Travail, through diverse parts of Asia and
Afric, with the description of the Oriental Indies, and some Isles adjacent.
Especially the Territories of the now Persian Monarchy: included betwixt Me
sopotamia, Indus, and the Caspian Sea.
THis Iournall was taken in danger, Begun in the Tear, 1616.
which admits of no curiosity, and craves but the same favorable light for
Approbation, it was drawn by. Many storms it has endured for company, but
more hot days, which have Sunburned my lines, as well as face. And though I am
on shore, yet I fear, the Sea is not yet calm; for each Book, sent into the
World, is like a Bark put to Sea, and as liable to censures as the Barque is
to foul weather.

When I landed, I thought to have hoyst sail no more; but Friends whose breath
is powerful, have once more lancht me into the deep (and may it prove a
fair gale) by commanding these jude and indigested notions from me, which
being accompanied with truth and simplicite (the soul of History) are then
like the Elements, In most splendor and perfection when least mixed and
troubled with Quotations or Observations of other men.

I challenge no thanks for what I publish, nor reward, because I plead guilty
to unworthiness, and all the imperfections you can throw upon youth or have.

None can think so ill of me, as I do of my self, the rather, that your
pardon may flow freely, and work a kind of miracle upon me, in raising my
dead thoughts to life. And that my wel-wishers (who have offered, a civil
violence to friendship, in forcing my private satisfactione, into public
shame) may own my faults, which must reflect upon them, since in my obedience,
I have made all my errors, theirs.

More Authors I might have used, and rendered my self, to some more useful in
this way. But I was on my way to many Countries, and Travelers have enough to
do with variety, In men and manners, which make up a Library to themselves;
besides the scituations and present beings of Cities and Territories, seeming
better then to labor in uncertain stories, which not only perplexe the
hearers, but beget incredulity, oftentimes amongst the credulous.

My other travails into some parts of Europe, I could have troubled you
withal, but I love not repetitions, nor to entertain you with that from my
self, I hate in others, besides, since all Travelers, are subject to
imputations of untruths, I had rather go far to fetch it, and send you far
off, to disprove it; then give you liberty of condemning me at home.

If my thoughts have wandered, I must entreat the wel-bred Reader to remember, I
have wandered through many deserts, as to afford me his help to call home my
Itenerant Notions, to fix them (by his favor) upon this Island of Isles, Great
Britain: which like a real Map of the whole World, contains the sum and
abridge of all sorts of Excellencies, met here like Paralels, in their proper
Center.

At Sea J learnt to pray, though I was taught it from my Cradle, and he that is
more given to swearing then praying may see the wonders of the Deep for his
recovery, and take the receipt from me, with a Probatum est.

This will serve for induction, that the Reader dwell not upon impertiencies.

The description of our Sea passage, is enjoined me.

Upon good Friday, we took ship at Dover, (...). 1626.
having six great and welmann'd ships along with us.

Next day we coasted by the I Will of Wight, where a sudden and violent gust of
wind ore-charged us, but in less then one hour, its fury was abated, and we
enjoyed a happy blast, whereby upon Easter day, being the five and twentieth
of March, we lost sight of the Lizard point.

At our entrance into the Spanish Ocean (which was three days after) upon the
Coast of Biskay, we descried seven sail of great ships, we bore up to speak
with them, imagining them Enemies and men of war, but they proved Flemmings and
our Friends.

The nine and twentieth day we had very raging Seas and tempests, but at night
a gentle calm ensued, and on the thirtieth day we gave chase to a Turkish
Pirat, after half a days chase, we gave him over, his celeritie so much
exceeded ours.

The first of April, we entered the great Atlanticke Ocean, where again a
Barbarian man of war at Sunrising came afterne of us; but upon better view
he feared and fled us.

The third of April, A Pirat fled vt.
early in the morning, we had sight of the Holy Port, belonging to the
Spaniard, which I Will at eight leagues distance, gave it self in this shape unto
us.



The sixth of April, we discried the Canary Islands, in former Ages called
Fortunate, they are seven in number, the first, (...) second, La Palma; the
third, Teneriffa; the fourth, Lancaerota; the fifth, Hierro; the sixth, La
Gomera; the seventh, Forte ventura; they are now subject to the King of Spain.
These Isles were unknown in Romes greatness, they were first discovered (as
Galuano writes) by a French Gentleman, called John de Be^ancour, Anno Domini
1417. though some report it of another, and another year, Anno 1330. At which
time the Inhabitants were rather monsters then men.

They knew no God but Nature, were ignorant of the use of fire, they shaued
their heads with flints and other stones. Their brutish knowledge.
Their children were given to Goats to suck, they cultured the earth with
horns of Goats and Oxen.

In Grand Canaria, Their common affections.
of all things, they most hated the slaughter of beasts which they accounted a
vile and base act, and therefore imposed it on their prisoners.

In Gomera, they used to have their Wives in common.

In Teneriffa, they ever had two Kings, one dead, the other living, they gave
adoration to all Aetheriall Bodies. Their Dead they washed exceeding cleanly,
Their Buria^^;
put the carcass into a Cave or Grave, standing upright, a staff in his hand,
and a pale of Milk and Wine was placed by him, good Coadiutors to his
Imaginary Pilgrimage.

These Isles were conquered by Don Henrico Infant of Spain, Anno 1418.

Grand Canarie at this day precedes the rest in greatness and excellency; for
thither all the other Isles repair for Trials and Justice. Howbeit Teneriffa is
thought to equal it in wealth and circuit, in height I am sure it does, and
not it only, but any other Land in the World, allowing its immediate ascent
from the Ocean. The high peak is by most Geographers reputed the highest in the
World, by some said to be fifteen miles high: though a third part may well
suffice to beget credulity and wonder. It is seen by Seamen, in a Serene
Sky, a hundred and twenty English miles, and serves as an apt Sea-mark unto
Passengers. The top of this Peake or Pyramide (exceeding those artificial
ones, built by the Egyptian Pharo^, for their Sepulchers) by reason of their
rare height and affinity with the middle Aerie Region are seldom without Snow.

This I Will is distant from the Grand Canarie, twenty leagues, or sixty English
miles. Hierro or Ferrum, bears from the Grand Canarie South, or South and by
West.

This I Will is high, and by reason of its extendure, toward the Tropicke of
Cancer, such time as the Sun is vernall, becomes exceeding hot and scalding*
and is blessed only in one Tree, A happy Tree.
which besides its shade (like the miraculous Rock in the Desert) affords the
Inhabitants fresh and delightful water, which by a heavenly moisture distills
it self, to the peoples benefit, the I Will having water no where els^, that's
potable.

The great Canarie gave its representation to us in this form.



The twelfth of April, we had the wind high and large; so that on the
fourteenth day we had the Sun in our Zenith, his declination fourteen
degrees, where note, that only then, when we are Nadyr to the Sun, we have
no shadow. And again, whereas to all Inhabiters in the Temperate Zone, their
shadows are ever North in the Suns Meridian. When you have past the Zenith,
the shade becomes just contrary, which made the Sunburned Arabs to wonder in
their descent to Europe, as the Poet speaks: Ignotum vobis Arabes, venistis in
Orbem,
Vmbras mirati Nemorum, non iresinistras.


And here (the wind something abating) we felt excessive heat, that, and the
loss of a Sailer falling from the shrouds into the merciless waves perishing
their, was all our sorrow. Yet a little was added, for under six degrees, at
midnight so violent and forcible a storm of rain poured on our Ships; that in
less space then two hours, the Skiffe, which was fastened to the upper Deck
was filled with it; and which aggrauated the gust, was the fury of Thunder and
flashes, which mightily raged with the rain. Nor is this weather rare about
the Aequinoctiall; by Marikers termed the Tornadoes: and it is so uncertain,
that now you shall have a quiet breath and gale, and suddenly an unexpected
violent gust, and storm, so fierce, that many times the ships will feel no
helm.

Yet in my judgment this is most unhappy to the Sailers, who in those raines
handing in their sails and standing on the De^kes, after the action, commonly
go to sleep (the weather being terrible hot) in their wet clothes, which
stink very much of that ill digested shower, and thereby beget long diseases
and mortal, as the Calenture, Scorbute or Scuruie, Feauers, Fluxes, Aches and
the like: which (did they but forbear Arack or strong liquours, and shift
themselves out of those nasty infectious wet clothes, when they take their
rest) might be prevented.

And besides these, they should be wary, where, and when they was^ themselves:
Many heretofore have been devoured by rauenours fishes, such as justly we call
Sharkes, whose cruel appetite encourage them to devour men alive, they are
always directed by a little specled fish, called a pilot fish, by guiding
their Monster-masters to a prey. Such attendants Lions have* like little Dogs
called Jackalls, and here under five degrees, the aduentrous ship-boyes were in
peril of those Sharkes, swimming so without heed; that some were in apparent
danger.

The shape of which fish I have here (though unskillfully) pourtrayed for your
better satisfaction.



In this latitude we were parallel to Sierra Leoou, a place in Afrique, strong
and something more famous for refreshing that aduenturous Captain Sir Francis
Drake, at his return from Circumnauigating the Globe of the whole Earth, and
note, that here and along the Coast of Guinaea, and Bynnyn, Cape Palmas, Lopez
Gonzaluo, and the rest. The inhabitants are coal black Moors.

An English ship not long ago, coasting out for discovery, here under the
Aequinoctiall and elsewhere he anchored, the Negroes repairing to our ship,
earnestly desired one or two of our men to go ashoare, leaving hostage in our
ship for their safe return: two Englishmen allotted by the Captain went with
them, who were no sooner ashoare, but thousands of the Aethiopians flockt about
them, extremely admiring their Color, so passing along, they were often
presented with Flowers, Fruits, Toddy, and like things, and having in some
measure satiated their immeasurable admirations, our men returned satisfied and
safe aboard.

The Inhabitants are Idolaters, Idolaters*
knowing no true God, only what nature and force aims at: such are they, and
such their customs and ceremonies.

And this is memorable, under sixteen degrees North, by which we traveled,
and close by the Isles of Cape de Verde, which head-land is commander of the
small Isles; Mayo, Bonauista, Sal, Vincentio, Iacobo and Fuogo, discovered Anno
1495.

In old times, some think, these were the Hesperides, The Hesperides.
so famous for the Garden of golden Apples, conquered by Alcides, in despite
of that hundred headed Dragon, engendered by aspiring Typhon and Echydna.

Here was the sumptuous fabric of Anthaeus, who was seventy Cubits tall (as
says Sertorius.) He was thrice thrown violently to the ground by Hercules,
and three times recouerd life, by the Earth his Mother, which seen by Jove's
son, he strangled him in the Air.

The Hesperides were the daughters of Hesperus, and of the same Mother
withall-bearing- Atlas. Their names Aeglae, Arethusa, and Hesperthu^a; which
three are concealed in the three Isles Mayo, Sal, and Bonauista: Howbeit some
Authenticks have reduced them to Lixus near Gibralter, where is the Ne plus
vltra. Others as Natalis Comes, and Pliny say, the Hesperides were part in
Lixus, part in Maeroae, and the Red Sea, but that I allow not of, the too great
distance arguing it. And Dominicus Niger ghesses them at Berenice, near the
Arabian Gulf, where stands the River Laethe so warbled out by Poets. But we
say they were here, and six in number, thought by Poets to be the Atlantiades,
and daughters of Atlas, and Hesperia daughter of Hesperus, his brother, which
six are named in the beginning of this superfluous discourse.

The one and twentieth of April, because we had no wind, and lying so near
the Sun, the weather was very sulphurous and raging hot, so that (albeit we
had Deckes and Awnings to shade us, and were almost naked) we could enjoy no
rest, nor eat, drink, lie still, or what else without excessive sweating day
and night.

This calm and immoderate heat continued with us seven days, only on the
five and twentieth day, when Phoebus was in his height and glory, a long spout
of stinking rain Pyramide wise, dissolved it self very near us.

This hidious Cataract, as I conceive is exhaled by the Suns powerful Attract,
and converted into an ill congested Cloud, wanting height and heat, is forced
into a violent eruption, which dissolved by the penetrating Sun, effudes it
self altogether (whence it had beginning) into the Ocean, and with such fury,
that many times great ships, are sunk or dashed in pieces by it, and when the
rain is spent, out of that Cloud is issuant so forcible a whirlwind, as
breeds fear and admiration; the wind and rain so impetuously tormenting the
Seas, that sometimes the surges or Sea-flashes do rebound top-gallant height.

Upon May day, we crossed the Aequinoctiall, Aequinoctiall Line.
the Sun then being in the seventeenth degree, thirty one minutes, Northern
declination and in the nineteenth degree of Taurus.

The Aequinoctiall, is an imaginary Circle, dividing the World into two equal
parts, and is equidistant from either Pole ninety degrees. For the Equator is
Horizon to both Poles, and note that at two degrees, South declination, we lost
sight of the Pole Star, which is of a third magnitude, Vrsa minor.
and fixed in the tip of the little Bears tail.

The sixth of May, we past by the I Will of the Holy Cross, Holy Cross.
or Santo Croix; every hour expecting those Anniuersarie winds, called by the
Seamen and Portugals, Monzoons; the property of which wind is to blow
constantly one way, six months, and the other way, the other half year.
Whereby the Merchants and Seamen are bound to a limited time to embrace them,
otherwise the passage to the East Indies is very difficult and uncertain.

Now how preposterous, the Year and Winds were elsewhere in the World, I know
not, this I know, that nothing is more inconstant than the Winds. The Monzoon
proved our Antagonist, whereby our passage to the Cape of good Hope, became of
six weeks longer continuance than our Captain looked for, and were forced to
run into much more longitude, than was desired.

The eight day, we were under eight degrees ten minutes latitude, and near the
Lands of Monomotapa, the Brazelian Coast in America, siding us to the West.

The Continent here in Afric, we call Congo, Manicongo, Longa, Monomotapa,
Benomotapa, Angola, etc. all which T^rritories you must pass by, ere you view
the utmost Promontorie of Afric, the Cape of good Hope.

Some attribute the Discovery of these Countries, to Bartholomew de Dios, and
others to Vasco de Gama, who sailing about the Cape, called it first Tormentozo
(by reason of those great and continual storms usually their) he was servant
to John the Second, and thirteenth King of Lusitania, or Portugal.

In Angola the people are fearful black, their Religion is Ethnic, their
Idols are of great esteem amongst them, Extreme Paganism.
and called Mokisso, generally they are so wedded to Superstition, that some
adore the Devil in form of a bloody Dragon. Others a Ram-goat, a Leopard, a
Batt, an Owl, a Snake or Dog, to whom they ceremoniously kneel and bow
unto, groueling then upon the Earth, they throw dust on their faces, and offer
Herbs, Rice, Roots, Fruits and such like, which is devoured by the Witches,
a Monster not a little feared and esteemed of amongst these Deuillish Savages.



The Female Sex against the appearing of the New Moon, assemble upon a
Mountain, where turning up their bare bummes, they contemptuously defy Dame
Cynthia, The Moon derided.
who has this despite, only for being causer of their monthly Fluxes.

They esteem much of novelties, amongst which, Dogs are of especial value
with them, Dogs esteemed.
Insomuch, that twenty slaves have been sold, The coin.
for an Europaean Dog. Their Come are beads of glass, she is, stones, and
the like. Their Burials thus They first wash the dead body, paint him, clothe
him, and so conueigh him to his Dormitorie, which is spacious and neat, ^uriall
of the people.
wherein they bury his Armolets, Bracelets, Shackles and such Treasure,
concluding their Ceremonies with Mimmicke gestures and eiaculations: which,
with the Sacrifice of a Goat, upon his Grave, puts a period to their Burials.

In Loanga and toward the Mountains of the Moon or Zair, (whence
seuen-mouthed Nyle, deriues his Origin drawing his descent into the Mid-land
Sea) their Ceremonies for the Dead are these. They bring the Body to an Idol
Altar, where placing it, they pacify their Dieties with the Sacrifices of two
Goats and a Ram, which are slaughtered, at the foot of their Pagothaes: the
blood they give unto the Devil, the rest they bestow upon themselves, all the
deceased man's kindred in thirty miles compass assembling to grace his
Funerals: and ere they depart, they repair unto the Sepulcher, most part of
the night using The aenodies and dolorous complaints, each day reuelling and
making pastime.

Next these, Bloody inhabitants.
inhabit the Anzigues, a Nation endued with many temporal benefits, as wealth,
health; gold, strength, valor, and the like, yet want these the virtue to make
them civil, for though they abound with Natures blessings, yet they delight in
eating man's flesh, more then other food. And whereas other people, infesting
them, content their appetites with the flesh of their Enemies. These barbarous
Anzigui covet their friends, whom they imbowell with a greedy delight, saying,
they can no way better express a true affection, then to incorporate their
dearest Friends and Couzens into themselves, as in love before, now in body
uniting two in one, a bloody Sophistry.

They have Shambles of men and women's flesh, ioynted and cut in several
Morsels and some (weary of life) voluntarily proffer themselves unto the bloody
Butchers, who accordingly are sod and eaten.

They are so expert in Archery, Good Archers.
and agile, that they can shoot a dozen Arrows on high, ere the first touch
ground.

Although they trouble themselves but little in devotion, yet do they
circumcise Males and sometime Females.

In adding to their beauties, they have two or three slashes in the face, and
(if to any) they give reverence to those two glorious Planets, Sun and Moon,
whom they suppose to live in Matrimony.

These and other black-faced Africans, are much addicted to rapine and the
every, they will commit a villainy sooner in the day then night, least Moon and
Stars give testimony against them. The Devil is no stranger amongst them,
whose Oracles they use, to offend an Amazonian people near them, valiant,
though naked, and not fearing them, as Odo. Lopez lib. 2. speaks of them.

The four and twentieth of May, we were under nineteen degrees and thirty one
minutes of South latitude, where one of the Sailors espying a Bird filty called
a Booby, he mounted to the topmast and took her. The foolish quality of
which Bird to sit still, not valuing danger, which Bird I have simply depicted
as you see.



Our observation was three minutes above thirty degrees, and early our Admiral
descried a Sail, and immediately made toward her with his Barge and long Boat
with eighty men. After two leagues pursuit, they knew her for a Portugal
Carrack of above fifteen hundred tun, she knew her weakness for fight, and
on the night escaped us, though we divided our selves all night, some of our
five ships hoping to meet her. On the seven and twentieth day we again espied
her, but after a little chase, she got from our view again, her journey lying
unto Goa.

The last of May after a storm we cut the Tropique of Capricorn, the utmost
limit of Apolloes progress, and note that upon May day we crossed the
Aequinoctiall Circle, and the last of that month the Tropicke.

The first of June, we had declination of twenty four degrees, forty two
minutes: the Sun then being twenty three degrees eight minutes North, in the
twentieth degree of Gemini.

In this latitude we had many sudden gusts and violent storms, and so
contrary, that we could not hold our direct course, but were driven to lee-ward
a hundred leagues upon the Coast of Brazil, Brazil.
twenty five degrees of South latitude, and near twenty seven degrees of
longitude from the Lizard.

On the seventh of June, we once more got sight of the Carracke, and lost her
for ever, in two hours after, but heard that she recovered India, a month
before us. Our course was East South-east, and four days after we had twenty
four degrees of latitude, ou^ longitude much varying from the Cape.

In the morning Watch, (...) 13.
we enjoyed that desired Fauonius, so long kept from us, but it came too
fiercely to us; for veering about, it converted it self into extreme fury, A
great storm^^
in such horrible blasts and storms, that the Mariners became exceeding
fearful, the Cape or Promontorie of good Hope, being so near us.

The wind so impetuously raging, that Heaven and Sea seemed vndevided, the
surges so sublime and terrible, that all these four days incessant Tempest,
our Fleet lay a hull, without any sail, driving whether Aeolus and Neptune
pleased, each shifting for its own safety, we lost each other, not meeting
again till we rode in the Souldania Bay.

On Midsomer day our observation was thirty four degrees of latitude, and
twenty five degrees of longitude, wanting three degrees of longitude from the
Cape.

The last of June we raised the Antarticke Pole, thirty five degrees of
longitude, and twenty six degrees, the variation of the Compass three
degrees, our course South South-east, the Suns declination twenty two
degrees, twenty six minutes, and twenty two seconds, in the seventeenth degree
of Gemini.

The seventh of July, very early we descried land, which proved (as we desired)
that great Promontory, the Cape of good Hope. The Land at twenty leagues
distance) gave it self very high.

That night not favoring us, we cast anchor before a little Island, which is by
Seamen called Cony I Will, where we landed and killed some conies, they are greater
then any in England, and something resemble a wild Cat, they eat waterish and
bad, and had they not so good a sau^^ as hunger, I persuade my self they would
not be commended.

This little I Will is distant from the main, fourteen leagues.

Nearer the road (is another small I Will) seven leagues at most distant from the
Bay, it is now and has time out of mind been called Pengwin I Will. So called from
a number of birds white-headed and black intermixed, which bird is rather
participant with the water then land, yet uses both, her diet is at Sea (where
she feeds and dives rarely) her nest ashore where she breeds and rests: they
have wings, but fly nor, they are better to satisfy the Curious, then to feed
the stomach, except Oil be delightful to it.

And indeed the Analogy of the word induces me to imagine, some aduentrous
Cambrian first arrived here, memorizing it by this name Pengwin in the British
Tongue, Etymologizing so much.

And can any think such a rare place could be buried in obscurity, till the
year 1497. by Bartholomew de Dios aforementioned.

Many we know allude the Discovery of the West Indies to Columbus and Americus,
though others know they had an Antecessor from whose Writings and Plats they
had their illuminations.

But will any honest man deny the first Discovery of all to the honor of our
Welsh Prince David ap Owen Gwined, David ap Owen Gwynneth, who descended from
Prince Rodorick the Great, from whom the Her^^rts are issued.
who lived Anno 1169. and if his Actions, extended so far as to this Cape,
who will envy him. J cannot prove it, but this we can, that he is ecclypst too
much in his Honor, wanting a fit pen to declare his towardliness and
Travailes.



The eleventh day of July, we came to Anchor in the Souldani^ Bay: at the Cape
of good Hope, which Cape by reason of the continual tempests about it, was by
Vasco de Gama, denominated Cape Tormentozo, but since by the Portugals De Buona
Esperanza, for this reason that it being the half way into India, when they
recover this Cape, they are confident of a good Voyage. Many having perished to
arrive at it, and more forced back, and lost their passage: besides the good
water and refreshing here obtained.

A Description of the Cape of good Hope in Aethiopia.
THe Cape of good Hope is a Promontory in the utmost point of Africa, (though
the Needle Cape, or de Aguillas, see me to branch out more Southerly, it
elevates the Antarticke Pole thirty four degrees three minutes latitude, and
has longitude from the Meridian of the Lizard about twenty eight degrees.

To what peculiar Potentate it belongs, I dare not determine, finding each
Town and Canton governed by peculiar Captains, though to say truly they have
neither Order, Policy, nor Religion.

If I should appropriate it unto Prester John, Emperor of the Abizines, it is a
question if he would own it, the two places so remore, and the Inhabitants so
indomitable; if to any, our King has most right to it. Captain Fitz-Herbert
some years since taking possession of it for King James, calling the ascent to
the Sugar-loafe and Table, two His so named) King James his Mount, and another
dedicated to Prince Charles, our now most gracious Sovereign.

Nor is the Land, not worth the challenging, for in all my life, I never saw
ground more pleasant for view, or healthful for use. September is their
Spring, the same time being Autumn in Europe.

The ground by Floraes mellifluent virtue, was ore-spread with Flowers which
only Dame Nature travels with: Art, nor knowledge have no being amongst these
Canibals; nor were Tempe and Alcedilion, but Emblemes of this Elisium.

Quamuis enim montosa appareat, and collibus multis distincta, interim tamen
multis vallibus, syluis, pratisque decorata est, gramina and flores suavissune
olentes, magna copia producit: Ceruosque and faeras, and Leones multo numero
nutrit, quae omnia visu and aspectu long incundissime existunt.

Praeterea limpidissimis fontibus scatet quamplurimis, qui non sine gratissimo
susurro, de montibas altis prorumpentes, fluminibus sese passim insinuant, and
cum eis postmodum in mare exonerantur.

A Description of the Savage Inhabitants.
THe people are of a swarthy dark color (I cannot say complexion) well limmed
and proper, nor want they courage (though discretion) to their limbs.

Their heads are long, their hair curld, and seeming rather wool, then hair;
it is black and knotty: no part of their attire showing like variety, in shape
and manner: some shave one side, and leave the other long and curled. A second
shaues all off (one tuft, a top excepted) a third makes five tufts, the skull
shaued between: others have a little hair before, bauld elsewhere, not
unlike occasion.

Some in opinion, finer then the rest, hang their hair with brass buttons,
pieces of Pewter, spur-rowels, or what else the mirthfull Sailors exchange for
Ostrich-egge-shels, Tortoises, Wood-so^ell, Beeues, Mutton, or the like.

Their ears are long and made longer by ponderous bables, they hang their,
extending the holes to a great capacity, some put a long link of Brass or
Iron, others Chains, Glass, Blew stones or Bullets in them.

Such as want that treasure, make use of singles of Dear, beaks of Birds,
Bells, stones of Dogs, or wild Catts: of which fopperies these Troglodites
esteem so much, as we of Gold, Pearl, Amber, or the like.

About their necks (for I omit their flat noses, and blubberd lips, big
enough without addition) they are ornified with long brass chains, or hoopes,
of Iron, such as Mariners afford them.

Others make shift with Tortoise shells and legs, with greazie thongs of
leather, wreathes of grass, birds guts, and some with Feathers.

Their arms are laden with pride, such make the Iron shackles, beads,
twigges of trees and brass Rings. The women imitate (or Ape) the men.

Both men and women hidiously cut and slash their flesh in sundry forms, their
brows, noses, cheeks, arms, breast, back, belly, thighs and legs, are pinckt
and cut in more admirable (then amiable) manner.

They contemn apparel, not comparable to the antiquity of their wear, Gold,
they value not as Gold, but for its color.

Their clothing at best is a stinking beast skin, the hair inuerted,
reaching from head to wast* and as a cover to their modest parts, they gird
themselves with a piece of raw leather, and fasten a square piece like the
back of a Glove, to it, which almost hangs so low as their pendants.

Most have but one stone, the other is forced away in their infancy, that
Venus allure them not from Pallas.

Their hummes and legs are naked, some only have a broad piece of leather,
which helped by a small string, is fastened to their feet, which too, when they
come into a strangers company, they usually hold them in their hands, whereby
their feet may have the greater liberty to steal, which with their toes, they
practice and can perform most cunningly.

During the night, they sleep round a fire in the open fields, the fire
secures them from their watchful, and hungry Neighbors the Lions (who are so
familiar and bold, that one adventured into our Tent, and stole some of our
Diet, though the Sentinel with his Musket acrocke was set to guard it) their
stomachs, diet, enmity, and policy are almost equal.

In dark weather the Lions use subtilty to catch and eat the Savages. In the
day time they dig pits, cover them with boughs, and train the courageous
Lions thither, where they receive destruction, eating them to day, who perhaps
were Sepulchers to their friends or parents the day before.

These wel-bred people, descend each morning from the Mountains, adorned with
two or three raw guts of Cats or Lions, serving for chains or neck-laces, and
breakfast too: and in their active complements, salute, eating and speaking
both together.

They are very ceremonious in thanksgiuings, for, wanting requitals, if you
give a woman a piece of bread, she will immediately pull by her flap, and
discover her pudenda. A courtesy commanded them, I suppose, by some
Dutch-ill-bred Sayler, for taught it they are, they say, by Christians. And
English men, I know, have greater modesty.

The female sex are for the greater sort excised in their hidden parts, but
the men know no such custom, for in place of Circumcision, they pull away one
stone, fearing to beget too many children. Those few not knowing well how to be
ordered, amity; extending their not to his Neighbor: where though all be Meum,
Tuum, yet they want all, rapine and cruelties, are so practiced in general.

These Troglodites live sometimes under ground, at other, in mansions like to
Ouens, round and without furniture, a whole Tribe usually live, associate,
commit villainies, feed and sleep together, the ablest in force swaying over
the other.

Their words are sounded rather like that of Apes, then men, whereby its very
hard to sound their Dialect, the antiquity of it whither from Babell or no.
The quality, whither beneficial or no, I argue not.

For the Readers content I have noted some of their Language, which I have writ
so near as J could pronounce it, their pronunciation is like the Irish: their
customs not much unlike the rude ones, of antique times. Their numbers exceed
not Ten, (like those, in some part of Madagascar) such as follow.

Istwee, is one. Istum; two. Istgwunuy, three. Hackey, four. Croe, five.
Istgunnee, six. Chowhawgh, seven. Chishow, eight. Cusho, nine. And Gheshee, is
ten.
A Knife, Droaff. A Quill, Guasaco. A Hat, Twubba. A Nose, Tweam. A Sword,
Dushingro. A Book, Bueem. A Ship, Chichunney. Water, Chtammey. Brass,
Haddechereef. A Skin, Gwummey. A Bracelet, Whohoop. Egge-shels, Sun. Seals,
Harkash. A Woman, Traqueosh. Bread, Bara. Give me, Quoy. The Genitor, Gwammey.
Men's stones, Wchraef. The womb, Wchieep. Paps, Semigwe. Yard, Istcoom.
One word of their food, it is dead Whales, Seals, Grease, raw Puddings, or man's
flesh, which rather then want they will dig Christians out of their graves.

They delight to dawbe and make their skin glister with grease and char-cole
beat together, which when half dried, they then indent it with their fingers.
In a word, they have all tricks possible to disfigure themselves, and to prove
their Patrimony and Reuersions in Acheron.

And comparing their imitations, speech and visages, I doubt many of them have
no better Predecessors then Monkeys: which I have seen there of great stature.

The women give their Infants suck as they hang at their backs, the vberous
dugge stretched over her shoulder.

And though these Savages be treacherous, yet doubtless they esteem more of
an Englishman then of Portugal or Flemming.

This is sufficient to speak of the Inhabitants. I will add one line of the
Bay, and so go on.



That the deceased men such as have the Scuruy, Aches, etc. so soon as they
taste the shore, and eat three-leafed-grasse, fresh meat, or the like, and
bathe: they become whole and frolic, in small space, as above three hundred
in our company found benefit in.

Many rarities might be observed, in what probably the earth affords them,
Beasts abound amongst them, brought from more inner parts of Africa, they
train them so to obedience, that with a Whistle they will make an hundred of
all sorts of cattle follow them. Which when they sell (for Iron Beads,
Looking-glasses, etc. unto Seamen, running away so soon as they have received
their bargain, and with a call, all the sold beasts will follow them like
Dogs, and use it so often that now the Sailors tie them to a stake, so soon as
they have bought them. Here are many rare sorts of Birds: Many we saw sold, one
only I have drawn, which though unworthy the labor, yet in that with us they
are not, and the color of their feathers so excellent Crimson and White: with
other colors, that they may compare with Birds of Paradise.



The ninth of June, we weighed anchor, bending our course toward Madagascar,
at the doubling of Cape Falso, Boraeas spoke lowdly and bid us expect a storm,
and this memorable, that about this remote Land, you shall see a small black
Bird long and sharp-winged, constantly flying upon the surface of the Ocean;
upon view of this Bird (which Seamen improperly call Devils Bird) an
infallible tempest and storm in less then two days, assailes the ships. By
which forewarning they have the benefit of prevention; and Gods mercy is yet
more, that after a storm, when the ships are tossed they know not where,
wanting their steerage, forty or fifty leagues from Land, they see many Pantado
Birds (so called from their Colors) flying about them. Whereby we know our
being near the shore, for in no other part, are those Birds resident, and the
like benefit is upon the Indian Coast. For they know assuredly by many Snakes,
swimming upon the Seas, they are not far distant from the shore, no where
else do these signs appear. And about the Cape Sargassoes and Trumbaes floate
fifty leagues into the Seas, eradicated by foul weather, which likewise gives
knowledge to Mariners in storms where-abouts they are driven.

The three and twentieth of July, the storm increased, the Seas sweld
extremely, our surging wave above the rest, hit our broadside so completely,
that it turned our ship above five points of the Compass at one push, giving a
crack like a Canon.

The eight and twentieth day, the Wind veered about, and the Seamen steered
East North-east.

The seventeenth of August, the Wind being East by North, our course was North
North-east. So on the eighteenth day we crossed the Tropique of Capricorn,
Trop. of Cap^^.
having Soffala and Mozambique on the left side, and Madagascar on the right;
the Sea thereabout having a great and insensible current.

Madagascar.
MAdagascar was discovered by the Portugal upon Saint Lawrence day, and by
them therefore denominated Saint Lawrence.

This I Will is one of the greatest in the Universe, its extendure is from Cape
Roma, under the Tropique to sixteen degrees of latitude from the Equator, it is
in length a thousand English miles, the breadth, in some part affording two
hundred and thirty miles. The best known Bay is that of Augustine where our
ships ride.

The Inhabitants are exceeding black; have limbs of great strength and
composure. Both sex go naked, a linen cloth only about their middles, which
styles them modest.

They use pinking and cutting their breast and faces; and dilate their ears
much, by those massy weights they fix there.

Gold and Silver is of no value amongst them; but the beads of Aggats,
Bracelets, Glasses, Bells and such like, they esteem well of.

They have cattle both great, many and good, yea, and good cheap; for a Bead or
two of twopence value, we buy sheep and beeues of good bigness and taste,
the sheep here (as in Abrabia, Syria, and Persia) are as heavy in their
tails, as bodies: some weighing sixteen some twenty pounds. And for Pins and
Needles, Bells, Glasses, and such like, they return Beeues, Goats, Sheep,
Hens, Eggs, Milk, Tamarinds, Coco-nuts, Palms, Orenges, Lymes, Lemmons,
Plantaines, Toddy, etc.

The Madagascars, are more addict to Mars then Mercury.

They are given much to wars, and their own I Will affords it them; they know
accuratly how to iaculate their Darts of black Ebony barbed strongly and
workmanlike, they use long Pikes and Targets of great length and defense.

Their Religion is Paganism, yet Circumcision tells us, they have heard of
Mohomet, some report of them, they neither pray, nor fast, nor feast: each
calls the days by several names.

They are of great stomachs in both kinds, no name terrifies them save
Taiuvaddai; which name in times past was wont to scare them more than thunder.

They live more by fishing then Agriculture, Thaetis commands them more than
Caeres.

They hate Poligamy, yet affect copulation too early, the youth scarce knowing
twelve, the maid ten years in the World, the title of Virginity.

Theft and Adultery they punish severely (Nature has taught it them) and
whiles the better sex seek prey abroad. The Women (therein like themselves)
keep constant home, and spin.

The I Will abounds with all good things necessary for man's use, as Copper, Gold,
Iron and Silver. Cotton they have store of, but most vberous in Fruits, the
Aerie Camelion and fiery Salamander are frequent there.

Here (as where not) they much delight in novelties, and dancing many times, a
great multitude pass together, and in Maeanders turn and wind themselves,
now beating, then clapping their breasts and hands. So with their Fleet they
spurn the yielding sands, often forcing the Spectators further off. During
which, the women with chanting melody, lift up their hands and eyes,
conioyning feet, in true measures, equal if not exceed the men in their more
laborious treadings.

They curle their hair and are proud of it, they love to make their bodies
shine with melted grease and ^allow.

Their Arithmeticke is soon attained to, their greatest number, not exceeding
ten. Numbers.
They are called, Isso, one. Tone, two. Tello, three. Effad, four. Fruto, five.
Woubla, six. Sidday, seven. Fonlo, eight. Malo, nine. Nel, ten.

Towns of note are Roma, Augustine, Point Antogil, Antabosta, Sa^to Iacobo,
Matatana, Angoda, Herendo, etc.



Nine leagues of Madagascar, sailing North-east we were near the shoales of
Iudaea, our Variation was thirteen degrees. Longitude eighteen from the Cape:
the Sun then being in the third degree of Virgo, and ten degrees fifteen
minutes, twenty six seconds of declination.

Then they steered North-east and by East toward Mohelia: Shoales of Iud^^,
dangerous.
that time the Sailors took a Sharke, a man-eating Monster, she was nine Foot
long and a half by rule, in her paunch were fifty five young Sharkes every one
above a Geometrical foot in length: that night we were under seven degrees of
South latitude, and twenty degrees, seven minutes of longitude from the Cape of
good Hope, our variation thirteen degrees and seventeen minutes.

And not suspecting danger, at ten at night, the wind blowing strongly; we were
cast upon the shoales or flats of Mozambique: Sh^^les or Flatt of Mozambique
dangerous.
where sounding, we had no more then eight fathomes. Whereupon we gave them
a-sterne, two Gunnes as warning pieces of great danger, and tackt about, at
next sounding having fourteen fathomes, then twelve, after that fifteen,
fourteen, twenie two, twenty four, thirty three, thirty five, and forty
fathomes.

Next morn we perceived the Coast of Mozambique, which in this form at Sea
appears unto us, under seventeen degrees, thirty seven minutes of latitude,
and twenty degrees twenty minutes of longitude: our variation thirteeue
degrees fifty two minutes, here the current is very violent, and sets, I
think, South-west.



Leaving that Coast, we saw another small I Will six leagues North-east from the
other land, full of Palmito trees, where being be calmed, the current set us
twenty leagues in twenty four hours, this I Will is called Castle I Will, and lies
under sixteen degrees, thirty minutes of latitude, and of longitude twenty one
and twenty eight minutes. The shape was this.



The seventh of September, we descried an Island called Maeottey, situate in
view of some three other (placed at the South-end yet out of view of
Madagascar, Mohelia, Ioanna and Chomroae, Maeottis rises very high with a Peake
or Pyramidall Spire, East as you fail to Mohelia: Its latitude is twelve
degrees fifty six minutes, its longitude, twenty three degrees, fifty nine
minutes South.



The eight of September, we sent our Boat ashore for refreshing to that I Will,
who for a trifle brought aboard two Buffols or Oxen, some Grates, Orenges,
Coco-nuts, and Plantaines.

And toward night got view of Ioanna I Will, and eight leagues from the first.
This I Will was then governed by a Queen, but the rule coheres at other times
with Kings, as are the rest.

Of these Jles Chomroe is both highest and best, but nourishes a people
treacherous and least sociable.

The eleventh of September, we anchored at twenty five fathomes, but all the
Morn wafted nearer the shore, and rode in seventeen degrees all the West end
of the I Will, where is built a strong Town called Meriangu^a, the chief
Captains name is Alicuzary, whose knowledge and property, precedes the rest
in courtesy and merchandise.



Mohelia, its description.
MOhelia is an I Will beneficial for such ships as sail for India and the Red
Sea, affording them water, flesh, fruits and Toddie. It eleuates the Antarticke
Pole twelve degrees fifteen minutes, her ^ongitude is twenty four degrees
from the Cape de buona Speranza, wose Variation is sixteen degrees twenty
minutes.

It Is seated in the Asrique Seas; is not above twenty miles in length and
breadth sixteen. Their Religion is from Mecha, whence they de^iue most of
their language and customs, and by converse with Mestizoes, and Portugals,
they can speak that tongue.

Their color is (answerable to the Zone they breathe in) black and Torrid,
their stature large, they are courageous, affable, and not very treacherous.
Their habit like to Adams, a few Plantaine leaves only fixed about their middles.

The women are of like complexion and attire. And to seem more amiable, are
pinckt and cut in several shapes, on face, arms, and thighs, they esteem
much of Tobacco, and drink it in long canes or pipes called hubble bubbles.

The I Will affords Buffols, Goats, Hens, Milk, Camelions, Rice, Toddie,
Coco-nuts, Orenges, Lemmons, Pome-citrons, Ananas, Plantaines, Cowcumbers,
Sugarcanes, Turtle Doves, Pease, berries, good Rock Oysters, Breames,
Tamarind, Poppaes, mother of Pearl (and good Pearl too, it is probable.)

Two Kings now command the I Will, though formerly but one, who left two daughters
co-heires, one married to a Native, the other to an Arabian Lord.

Their Priests are of esteem amongst them, so are their Moscheas or Temples,
kept clean and matted neatly, into which we could not enter with our shoes on.

They are superstitious and Magical: this partly cleares it, as my self, A
Magique Nation.
and another Gentleman, rested one Evening under a Palmito-tree, the weather
thundering and storming exceedingly. A Negroe standing by us in great fear and
agony lift up his hands, inuocating Mahomet or the Devil very seriously, then
in rage and sudden rapture drew out his Knife, which he flourished about his
head seven or eight times, murmuring his Orizons, that done, he fell upon his
face and rising, in great sobriety put up his weapon, yet gave not over
exorcising till the tempest ceased.

In these Islands, fruit is cheap and delicate, they will exchange thirty
Orenges and Lemmons, or six Cocoes for a sheet of paper, bells, or the like.
The Coco-nut, is admirable in quantity and use.

They are so big as a Cabbage, (nut and rind) the liquor in it is a pint,
and tasted like Wine and Sugar. The kernel is in taste better then our
Filberd, and enough to content two men: from this rare Nut the people receive
other benefits, as meat, and clothing, furniture for their houses, mast,
cables and ropes. The tree is straight and high, at the very top, swelling in
her beautifying plumes, like which, the leaves and nuts proportion themselves.

The Today is drawn out of the Palmito-tree, which has affinity with the Date
or Coco, the liquor at first, is unpleasant, but afterward becomes wholesome
and delectable: in the morn it is loosing, at Eve costiue, and in one days
(age) becomes good Vinegar. A top the tree is a pith, in taste better then
Cabbage; and eating it takes away the future benefit of growth or fructifying,
these and the Date-tree thrive not, except the male and female be united, and
have copulation: the she is only fruitful.

Their Canoes or Boats hued our of one tree, and capable of three naked men,
they fish in fair weather with the help of them, and in storms carry them
upon their shoulders, and though of no use with us, Yet for the raritie of them
I shall present their shape, that they may better be imagined.



The fifteenth day of September, we left those Isles, and four days after
came within four degrees of the Aequinoctiall: that night the Ocean was as
white as snow, A white Sea.
but how caused I am ignorant. The next day we had the Sun in our Zenith.

On the twenty three of September, The Aequinoctiall Circ^^.
we sailed under the Aequinoctiall Line, our course North-east, but under eight
degrees North, the Monzoon got into East North-east, whereby the ship could lie
no nearer then South-east. And here the Seamen fell into great extremes, as
Calentures, Fluxes, Aches, Feauers, and the like. They imagined, the raging
heat, stinking water and meat causer of it (though doubtless their too much
farcinating and late ore-charging their stomacke^ with fresh victual, at
Mohelia) acted rather their vnhealthinesse.

Here we were Parelell to Socotora, an I Will rich in Alloes, Gummes and Spices,
it is at the entrance into the Red Sea, where at Aden, the Turk has a Castle
well fortified. This Sea is no redder then others are, the sands are red
indeed, yet insufficient to beget that Epehite.

King Erithreoes, son of Persaeus and Andromida, in old times, swayed here,
and from his name (which signifies Red) gave denomination to this Sea. Some say
he lived before Moses, the great Prophet and first Historiographer.

The eighteenth of October, we found by observation, the Northpole elated
seventeen degrees. Our longitude from Moh^lia nineteen.

The fourth of this month, Mohomet a Persian Merchant died, it was thought a
Christian, he came into England with Nogd^beg, the King of Persia's
Ambassador, and returned so far homeward, with the Ambassador, and though
he gained richly in his Traffic, yet if he found this Pearl, true
Christianity, no doubt, he gained nobly, and with advantage, the Captain
gave him four Culuerin shot at his burial, his body was thrown into the
Sea, imbowelled in a spacious Coffin; the Ocean, a sure Treasury, for the
Resurrection.

The twenty sixth of October we arrived into nineteen degrees of latitude,
forty minutes; and twenty degrees of longitude. The ships steerage South-east,
where we had shoales of flying fishes (in bigness of a Herring, and who to
avoid the Tyrannicke Fishes, Dolphines, Bonetaes, and Albycores, make use of
the Ayery finnes, Nature has inrich^ them with, and wherewith, so long as they
continue wet, they fly above two hundred paces, and are caught by the hungry
Fowls, who houer above in hope to catch them.



On the seventeenth of November we discovered the Coast of India in fifteen
degrees of latitude, and thirty two degrees of longitude, where Goa is seated,
Goa.
a great and Metropoliticall City of the daring Portugalls, and the residence
of their Viceroy and Archbishop.

From thence, passing toward Surrat, a vehement and unexpected storm
ore-tooke us, for three days raging incessantly, so that we doubted a
Hero-cane, a Tempest of thirty days continuance, and of such fury, that
ships, trees and houses perish in it, it uses once in nine years to thunder
amongst them, but praised be God, we mist it; though not of a second
disaduenture, this last foul weather forcing a Iunck-man of War full of
desperate Malabars, a bloody and warlike people in view of us, our Skiffs
manned with forty or fifty Musketeers thought to board her, judging her of
small defense, which opinion deceived them. For they got fiery entertainment,
the Mallabars pushing them and throwing fireballs at us, forcing us to
retrea^, burnt, grieved and vanquished, above thirty hurt and scalded, this
skirmish was in nineteen degrees forty minutes of latitude, and twenty nine
of longitude, where the Sea changed color, and sounding they had ground at
forty fathomes; abundance of Shakes swimming by our ships, gave assurance of
the Coast of India.

The twenty four of November, under nineteen degrees thirty five minutes of
latitude, and of longitude, twenty nine degrees were descried near to the
East Indies in that part called Saint John's, a Town subject to the Lusitanian
fifteen leagues from Surrat. Saint John is high land, ambitious in a tall
rising of land, called the Peake, the land Towers along very high, so far as
Gundaue, a Hill six leagues South from Swalley Road.



Here we took a Fisherman, who told us of great Portugal forces near the
Road. We purposed a Combat and tyding, up with stream. Anchors, each six
hours weighing and dropping, in few days we came against Daman, a beautiful
and pleasant Town, conspicuous to passers by. At the North end is a Castle,
strong, and of white chalky stone, its Ordnance planted high to play in Mounts
upon the vantage. Opposite Southerly is a great Church edged a-top with white
having houses of like color, near her are three more Temples affording glory
to the heart and eye.

The twenty ninth of November, we descried thirteen sail in Swalley Road
whom we reputed enemies, yet feared not, in conclusion (past the bar) we
found them our friends English and Flemmings. The six English ships, three of
a thousand tun, the other three of seven hundred, good men of war, though
ships for traffic.

The same day we came to an Anchor in India. Nogdibeg the King of Persiaes
Ambassador gave up the ghost, Persian Ambassador poisons himself.
having poisoned himself wilfully in four days feeding only upon ^pium.

The truth is, he dared not to see his Master, nor plead his defense against
his Adversary Sir Robert Sherley, in our Company and thitherward, to purge his
honor. I can witness that at my being at the King of Persiaes Court (as I
shall discourse of in the fequell) the King said, it was well he poisoned
himself, for (...) come to Court, his body should have been cut in three
hundred sixty five pieces, and burnt in the open Mydan, or market place with
Dogs t^rds.

Anno 1612. after many conflicts, betwixt the Turk and Persian, they were both
so pressed by neighbor Countries, whom they had usurp upon, that they
propounded Articles of peace and friendship. To which end, King Abbas, sends
his Ambassador to Constantinople, in company of Nassuf Bashaw, the Vizier and
General to Sultan Achmat, the eight Emperor of the Turks, and son of
Mahomet the Third, which Nassuf in his Expedition into Armenia, Mesopotamia,
and Media, returned fortunately, and enriched with two hundred and thirty
Mules laden with treasure of Gold and Pearls.

The Persian Ambassador (being that Grand Signio^, was not then in
Constantinople) lodged himself at Scudaret, opposite to the City, attending
the entrance of the Great Turk, who three days after came thither, in
magnificent order guarded by twenty thousand Ianizaries, Agaes, their
Captains and Iemoglans, with many Bassaes of other Countries.

At whose entrance, there expected him Ambassadors from most parts of Europe:
from the Emperor, King of England, France, Poland, Hungary, Netherlands, and
from Venice.

The Vizier Nassuf, a while after received the Grand Signiors token of love and
respect, three Cabbaes or vests of cloth of Gold, a Sword, a Shash, and a
Courser.

Here the Persian Ambassador finding much ceremonious welcome from the Turks,
to show his bounty, as the Sultan Achmat in great bravery passed by his
lodging, threw amongst his guard a hundred bales of Silk, which got him much
love and esteem among them.

At his Audience he delivered his Masters present, four hundred bales of raw
Silk, a rich Dagger, many rich Persian Carpets, and Clothes of Gold and
Silver, a Bezar stone so big as a Hens Egg, nine bags full of Turquesses and
the like.

These gifts were acceptable to the Grand Signior (all the Princes of Asia,
affect complements of that nature) so after many Treaties, at length the
Persian Ambassador accepted of these conditions, that the King of Persia
should pay a Tribute of two hundred Camels load of Silk, that the Mirza, or
Prince of Persia, should content himself with the title of Bashaw of Tauris,
and that the Cadi, or Judge of Tauris should thence forth be elected by the
Turk.

He departed with these propositions, and at Cazbeen found his Master the King,
who perceiving the conditions dishonorable and unfruitful, denied the Turks
Chiaux, or Agent, to perform them, receiving them with much scorn, King of
Persia beheads his Ambassador.
and to recompense his ill-aduised Ambassador, in the open Market, made him
headless three days after.

The example of this severity and justice, so frighted Nogdibeg, that he chose
rather to be his own Executioner, then to entertain the cruel aspect of his
Master, and those certain tortures, he had doubtless received, had he stood
upon his Justification at the Court.

Abraham Bassa, Cycala, Synon Bassa and Nassuf, were all of them, so great and
potent with the Grand Signiors; that few Ambassadors could be heard or
dispatched without their license and good will; and which was accomplished by
briberies.

Nassuf, in the height of his fortunes, at the instigations of his wife (the
Grand Signiors daughter) was strangled in his bed by eight Caepigies, and his
treasure (no less then eighty bags of gold, and in stones then two bushels of
Diamonds and Pearls) fell to his Master, for which perhaps this unfortunate
Usurer, lost his life, a just recompense for thrusting Cycala Bassa, Vizier of
Babylon, from his principality, upon false suggestions.

At his burial, the Ship he died in, gave him eleven Culuerin shot.

His own people conueighed his body to Surat, ten miles from the rode, and
buried him, where not a stones cast further, sleeps Tom Coriats bones, Tom.
Coriats grave.
consumed in his pedestriall, ill contrived Pilgrimage.

The last of November, our ships came to anchor in Swalley road, so called
from a Town of that name one mile distant. We rode in seven fathom water,
and note that this road is not two hundred paces from the Bar, over which we
passed twixt two Boes placed in three fathomes and an half, the space from one
Boa to another, is an hundred paces or more.

The Bay is on the one side enclosed with the Continent, on the other, with the
sands, which toward Goga, at a low water is like an Island.

At my being in Surrat, I received courteous welcome from the English Merchants
their, whose Chief or President was Master Wild, a modest and understanding
Gentleman, and their we had certain report of Sultan Curroones Coronation, at
Agra, 1627. In joy of which, the English Merchants Ships, then in Swally rode
shot off two hundred pieces of great Ordnance. The story of whose being Mogull,
because happening at our being their, will be pertinent to rehearsal.

These Moguls or Emperors of East India, are descended from the Tartar, and
got the Dominion of these Countries, such time as Tamberlaine (surnamed the
Scourage of God) passed that way to fight with Bajazet the Great Turk, in
compassion of many distressed Christian Princes: Which attempt he gloriously
finished, overthrew the Turks huge Army, carried him captive in a Cage,
ouer-ran the Turkish Empire, and in eight years subdued more Kingdoms and
Towns, then the warlike Romans could do in eight hundred.

From this Tamberlaine (son of Ogg, son of Sagathay) the now Moguls fetch
their Descent. Curroone, now being in nine Descents extracted from him; named
thus. The first, Tamberlaine; the second, Allancham; the third, Barcham; the
fourth, Emanpaxda, the fifth, Shaugh Mahumed, the sixth, Adabar; the seventh,
Mahumed Selabdyn; surnamed Ekbar; the eight, Iangheer, surnamed Shaw Selym; the
ninth, Blockie; (slain presently after his Coronation) and the tenth, Curroon;
surnamed Shaw Iehan.

In October 1627. Shaw Selym (by some called Iangheer) the great Mogull died,
having been sick not above three days, and if the vulgar sort, may be
believed) he was poisoned. And that by his only friend and chiefest Favorite
his brother in law Assaph Chawn; whose greatness and pride was elevated both by
being brother to Normall the Empress, Iangheers last wife, and Father in law
to Sultan Curroon, who had married his daughter, and by her had issue, for
whose only advancement, Assaph Chawn, bent all his powers and entreaties with
Iangheer, his aged and enraged Father, to be Successor to his Dignities.

But though this Nobleman, was in great repute with the Mogull, yet Curroones
life was so dissolute and hopeless of bettering (having with some Rashbootes
or wild companies, offended the Moguls Friends and Neighbors, the Decans; the
King of Gulcunday, and several Princes in Narsinga, and toward Mesulipatan.)
That when his Father lay upon his deathbed, which was all Cashmeer, three
thousand miles from Surrat, he made all his Vmbrawes or Noble men, swear by
their Alcoran, to make his Grandchild, Sultan Blockee, Mogull, or Emperor,
after him, and to exclude Curroon for ever; who had most unnaturally five
years before caused his elder Brother, and Father to Blockee, be murdered at
Agra, by his servant Regea Bandor, who afterward was Executioner of Blockee
the son, in the same City.

According to which Oath, so soon as Iangheer was dead, Assaph Chawn, and the
other Nobles proclaimed Blockee their King (then, sixteen years old, and
well-conditioned) and which they durst not disobey, as well to discharge
themselves, from their obligation as to give satisfaction unto the people, who
affected him.

And with all speed Assaph Chawn (who now thought he had done his duty) sent a
Post with quick Expresses to Curroone, with what had happened, whom he found
retired, in a small Village near Daita, bordering the Decans Kingdom and
distant from Surrat, six small days travel.

So soon as Sultan Currone, received these packets, he intends a speedy
progress for the Crown, which he gaped for, notwithstanding all his Fathers
Legacies: and first imparts his resolutions to his companion Mahabet Chawn,
Champion to Shaw Selym, late Mogull, and to say truth, the best and most
approved Soldier through India, for many years a heavy and mortal Enemy to
Curroon, and but lately reconciled unto him, by great persuasions and
entreaties of Assaph Chawn, who wrought him, to be his Protector, and with his
Army to safeguard him to the Kings Metropolis and Royal seat Agray (a City
first built by Wine-god Bacchus) with this advantage, that in Mahabet Chawns
company (one much beloved and feared by the people) he might advance securely,
and without whom, he could never have passed Amadavad, the way to Agray, nor
had hopes to enjoy the title of an Emperor, Curroone was so generally hated by
the vulgar.

And that he might leave nothing undone, which might advantage his
resolutions, (according to the order of the late Mogulls) he changed his name
from Currone to Shaw Iehan (or King John) thinking by that in some sort to
appease the peoples hatred: whom as he past, he saw ill-willers to his
happiness, and entending to oppose him in a battle, being formerly a
proclaimed Traitor and a Rebel, which he wisely foresaw and feared, hoping
by policy more than force to win them to him: so that he sent them word, he
came in friendship, and that rather then offend them, would return, though his
journey was to submit himself to his Nephew, late made Mogull, from whom he
doubted not to receive forgiveness.

But when the people heard that Mahabet Chawn was in his company, and had an
Army, their thoughts were changed, such was the great and general love and
fear they bore that Champion; whom as they knew to be victorious, and
therefore durst not much oppose him, and most severe in justice and truth by
which they thought Curroone Inheritor, and without opposition, suffered him to
march, through all the Country unto Agra, eleven hundred miles, from that place
where the messenger found him at, and five and twenty hundred, from Cashmeer,
where Iangheer his father died.

In the mean time, Normall, when she saw her Husband the Great Mogull, was
dead, and that by his last Will, had nominated Blockee for Emperor (to secure
which, he had made all the Vmbrawes to swear) she was almost distracted.

Fearing her devices to Crown Seriare her Son (and youngest to Iangheer)
would be prevented, but assuring her self, fear nor wishes without action
could perform it, she assumes courage and with those forces, she then had
(which she ever kept about her for her safety) she hoped to effect her long
desires, which was to seize upon Blockee, the new King, and upon her Brother
Assaph Chawne, whom she resolved to strangle, knowing he was ever against her
Son Seriare, his Nephew, to make Emperor, Curroone, who had wedded his
Daughter: and the reason, why she ever had an Army about her, even in her
husbands time, was this.

Mahabet Chawn, being a most valiant and just man, and one who all his Masters
life time (whom he knew to be a quiet and good King) he had done faithful
service to, noting her abusiue carriage and command over her aged Husband the
Mogull, how she heaped up a mass of treasure, and apparently discovered her
aims to make her Son Seriare King. And that on the other side Assaph Chawn
did what he could to confer that dignity upon Curroon, and both of them
laboring to disinherit Blockee, the true heir to the Crown, both by blood,
nomination and descent, for these causes Mahabet Chawn, cries out upon them,
and to the World discouers their combinations and devices; whereat they were so
netled, that they got the good Mogull to banish him, hoping then, to perfect,
what they had begun.

But Mahabet Chawn, was no baby, nor would he suffer such indignities: And
thereupon, gathers an Army of twenty thousand Horsemen, with which he set upon
them all upon a sudden, as they were passing over a River, and so amazed their
Army, that he took the Mogull Prisoner, and conueighed him to a Tent (not for
all the world, purposing any hurt unto him) whom he knew to be good, and only
abused by Normall his Queen. Who in this interim had passed safely over the
River, with most part of the Lescar, or Army, which she immediately put into
Battaglia, and stood in her own defense, to expect her mortal Enemy Mahabet
Chawn, The Great Mogull and Empress taken prisoners by a subject.
that straight way gave her battle, slew most of her men, took her prisoner,
and commanded her head off, to satisfy his fury, with her brothers Assaph
Chawn, who being wiser of the two, in the skirmish fled amayne to a strong
Castle, where he entrencht himself till he had petitioned the Mogull for his
liberty and reconcilement, with Mahabet Chawn.

Who so soon as the Battle was ended, gave order to his Army to pursue
Assaph Chawn, and to behead him, and brought forth Queen Normall to receive
her judgment, but she got so much favor from Iangheer, the old Mogull her
doting Husband, That with tears he begd her life, from this his Champion, who
though he knew, would be destruction to him or his: yet to show his loyalty
to his Master, he released her, and became friends.

Then Assaph Chan, became so intimate with Mahabet, that he prevailed with him
to go into Decan, to Sultan Curroone, to conduct him to the Court, to beget
his pardon from his Father, which he accordingly did by his power and respect,
conueighed Curroone to Agra, and set the Crown upon his head, as is and shall
be better spoken of hereafter.

Queen Normall, euerafter, by license from her Husband, kept a a peculiar Army
for her safety, and under color of that, so soon as the great Mogull was dead
(as I have said before) she sought to seize the new Mogull, and her Brother
Assaph, to make them headless, and then doubted not to set the Imperial
Crown upon her son (Sultan Seriare's) head, his years being twenty, and
capable in her opinion to rule so vast an Empire.

But Assaph Chawn, not ignorant of her intents and malice to him, so soon as
Iangher was dead, and Blockie proclaimed Mogull, he forthwith raises an Army,
and approaches hers, where he pitched and sends unto her, to assure her of his
love and diligence to do her service, excuses what he had done, being bound by
oath, and that upon better considerations, he had forsaken Blockie, to
conioyne with her, not fearing any opposition, when both their Armies were
united, and that having the young King in their power, she might then commit
herself unto security, and rule as formerly.

The Queen, knowing who it was, that proffered this, even her own Brother, and
then far from his Son in Law Curroone, belieues him and admits of him.
Imagining this occasion, ministered security to her designs, and by which
(whiles she bleared him with show of friendship) she might more easily kill
him, and the new King, on a sudden.

But Assaph Chawn knowing her ambitious qualities, when he had well viewed her
several forces, and got out of her, where her son Seriare lay (which was at
Lohore, with four thousand horse, for fear of Mahabet Chawn, as was divulged)
he suddenly raised his Army and forsook her, desiring all the Nobles with
their forces to accompany him, and Blockie to Lohore, to apprehend the traitor
Seriare (as he called him) then in Arms and in competition for the Empire,
with those his forces, entending to strengthen Queen Normall, his mothers
Army, the better to attempt it.

When Normall perceived her brothers treachery, she blamed her credulity, and
sorrowed, that she had not strangled him: but hoping to confound him, she
followed with a resolved Army to encounter him.

But Assaph Chawn, though this power was more then hers, and therefore feared
her not, yet having other things to execute, and to hazard the victory at Sea,
might hinder his other designs, he passed speedily through the Mountains, and
to prevent her speed to overtake him, made great stones be cast down thither
to stop the passage, which is so narrow that scarce two men can pass together;
this so hindered his sisters speed, that ere she could clear the passage,
Assaph Chawn met with Sultan Seriare, who with eight thousand men, was coming
to join with the Queen his mother, as she had willed him.

His Army was small and quickly vanquished, himself imprisoned and sent so
back unto Lahore, where so soon as he arrived: Blockie was again proclaimed
Mogull by his Protector Assaph Chawn, who thereupon sent a Herald to Normall,
to come submissiuely unto the Court, and he offered her faithfully to have
remission, and that the Infant Mogull out of his clemency should forget all
former Quarrels, and that she should not want all honor due to so great a
Queen, with maintenance agreeable, for the wife of so great a Monarch.

Normall when she had wisely accounted her distresses and misfortunes, that her
son was a Prisoner, her own life in danger, and no possible means left to
make Seriare King: came and submitted to Blockie, who gave her assurance of
life and liberty, with the continuance of her former Guard or Army. And during
Blockies reign she lived happily and with content. But when Currone came to be
Emperor, he took her Army from her, ransackt her treasures, slew her friends,
and confined her to a private Castle for her life, where now she lives in no
small misery.

But to continue our History, Queen Normals misery.
when Assaph Chawn saw all the Princes of the blood then in his power, in
Lahore, to wit, the Mogull, Sultan Blockie, Sultan Seriare his Uncle, two
sons of Sultan Perues, elder brother to Sultan Currowne (and poisoned by
Azaph Chawn, the year before at Brampore) two sons of the old Kings elder
brother Morad, or Amurath, who because they should utterly be incapable of the
Crown and Kingdom, caused them to be baptized into the Faith of Christ
(against their wills conferring a greater glory on these two despised Princes
then the Monarchy and belief of all Mohammedan Dominions could do) by some
Portugal Jesuits. For the Alcoran (their Law book) forbids a Christian to
wear a Crown, where Mahomet is worshipped. These forenamed Princes who were
Christened, were by all the Indians, known to be of the blood Royal, and from
them therefore received esteem and good respect, but by all the Court, were
slighted, despised and called Christians, which title and other indignities (so
reputed of by them) they obediently suffered, expecting one day some
deliverance, which now was given them by Assaph the Duke, who sent them to
Lahore, and there destroyed them.

The other Princes were reserved to a more opportune massacre, until Sultan
Currown had entered Agra, and received the Imperial Crown and Scepter, with
other Ceremonious rites due to the Coronation, of the Great Moguls,

Which so soon as Currown's Father in Law Duke Azaph was certain of,
banishing all pity and loyalty from his heart, flesht in former murders, by
his traiterous killing and poisoning Sultan Blockies Father ( Currowns elder
Brother) and the Mogull himself Iangheer with some others, he gives order to
the same Rascal Reia Bander to come to Lahore, to perpetrate like villainy on
the other Princes, who according to his commission, and Currowns liking came
thither and found them in an Evening, bathing themselves in a secure Hummum:
whereinto Azaph Chawn (who only had the keys for entrance) admitted him, who
straight way cut all their throats, and carried their heads as a Trophie and
sure testimony of his villainy, unto Agra, where Currown expected them.

This cruel Act, A bloody murder of the blood Royal of Indostant.
was threatened, to be revenged by many Nobles, all imputing it to Azaph Chawn,
who swear his innocence, and that he had no hand, in the blood of these
slaughtered Princes.

The Nobles, when they saw no remedy, none else that had title to the Crown,
being alive: they unanimously traveled to Agra, and submitted to Curroon. Who
(for his greater safety) forgave them and embraced them, but awhile after, his
old humor showed it self, for by degrees, upon small occasion he beheaded and
strangled most of them, to the terror of the rest, and to settle himself in a
more quiet tyranny: after the murder of Father, three Brothers, three
Nephews, and two Cozen Germans.

Since which, his Queen ( Assaph Chawns Daughter) died, and he has taken his
own Daughter to be his wife. These crying sins, have apparently drawn down
Gods heavy judgments upon those Countries: by those immediate and late plagues
of Pestilence and Famine, never heard of the like in those parts before, the
Sword will doubtless follow in Gods appointed time. For he will have glory by
punishing those from whom he cannot have his glory. And Curroon (or Shaw Iehan)
is not yet sensible of those castigations.

At our being their Curroon came within two days journey to us, and in way of
congratulation, the English Merchants ships bestowed on him two hundred great
shot. He is the tenth in Descent from the Tartarian Tamberlaine.

Surat.
SVrat is situate within the burning Zone, in the Latitude of twenty one
degrees, twenty minutes, in the Kingdom of Guzurat, and tributary to the Great
Mogull: it is ten miles from the Bay, and is watered by a River (not so broad as
is our Thames) which I imagine deriues its original from some stream of the
River Indus. Inus.


The City of Surat is for quantity comparable to Plymmouth, her houses of
sun-dried mud, trellized and flat a-top: at the South end it enioyes a Castle
planted with great Ordnance and Ammunition, but of small use, in that the River
is not nauigable, but with Shallops and Frigots, that draw not much water.

There are many large and handsome Houses in it. And at the North-west end the
English Merchants have a residence, and under a President: The Merchants in
India courteous.
their House is very great and magnificent in bulk and entertainment, for any
Forreiner. I am their Debtor for love and courtesy,

The Inhabitants are alike in color, though different in Religion, they are of
three several compositions: Moors, Bannyans, and Persae.

The Moors are Lords, and Supreme ore the rest, their Religion is
Mahometicall. They affect much the Language of Persia, which has got the best
repute in the Mogols Court, most of whose Sultans and Captains are by birth
Persians, more resolute and victorious than these Indians, and no less
faithful to him; although mercenarie.

They regard not Letters, their Arms are Sword and Buckler, Bows, and
Arrows, Iauelins, Knives, and the like. The Indians are saucy, proud, bloody,
traiterous and cowardly; much addicted to Venery.

The Persae are relics of the old inhabitants, from Alexanders time, who
conquered them.

The Bannian Priests called Bramini, are the Pythagorian Sect of the
Gymnosophists. They hate Mahumed, and acknowledge one God and Creator of all
things. The better sort are called Mockadams, or Masters; their behavior very
good and tolerable.

I refer the description of their Religion to a Book late written by Master
Lord a Preacher to the Merchants in Surat. His Book is called A Display of two
Sects in India. Persae and Bannyans.

I shall represent the garb of the Bannyan, that it may the better possess
your imagination.

A Description of the Bannyans in India.
THe Bannyans are tawny in complexion, are crafty, fair spoken, exquisite
Merchants and superstitious.

They wear their hair long, paint their faces, and put Rice upon the paint, a
holy remedy for each days chances: their habit is a long coat of white quilted
Callico, tied under the left side with Ribbands, their head, has a Tulipant or
Shash, sometimes of one, sometimes of many colors. They wear shoes without
latchets, and often Sandals.

Their Religion is rare and wonderful, beyond apprehension, and scorn
Mahomet. The several casts of them are Cutteries, Shudderies and Wyses. They
never marry out of their own Triball vocation, as Bannyans, Bannyans; Persae,
Persaes; Moors wed Moors, and in their own Trades. They have many Taylours,
but no slaughtermen. For they so much detest the slaughter of any creature,
though a Louse, that they not only abhor to eat it, or destroy it, but buy
their lives, of those that would destroy them. Imagining as did Pythagoras, the
transmigration of men's souls into other creatures.

They will not feed on ought has blood and life. Their food is Rice, Plantaines,
and many other dainty fruits, their liquour, water and Rose Water, Sugar and
juice of Lemmons, which they drink out of a spout, and power it into their
mouths, without touching the pot to avoid pollution, some have been assest at
twenty thousand Mammoodaes, or shillings; by Judges of their own Religion, for
tasting Wine or strong Water.

The two Elements of Fire and Water, are of divine esteem amongst them, and
grieve to see those creatures abused in needless, or profane uses. So that at
their Funerals, their bodies are incorporated with those sacred flames, which
burns to ashes, those corpse which duly worshipped this consuming Deity. They
believe no Resurrection of their bodies, therefore give the four Elements their
peculiar dues.

Some of this Sectadore the Trees, and adorn them with Streamers of silk
Ribands and the like.

Their Priests are of venerable account their, and in some places have the
first nights embraces with the Bride, reputing their Issue holier and more
fortunate.

They come each morning through the streets, and bestow a Charm upon them,
beautifying their faces with streakes of red, blue and yellow paint, on which
they affixe Rice, which is the signal of their Baptism.

The women are of a little better color, some have lovely countenances, they
wear long hair and loose, and yet covered with a fine thin veil of Callico
Lawne. Their ears hung with five, six, or eight Rings, some so great and
ponderous, that their ears are extended and ^^acerated very much. They also
hang their noses with Rings and Jewels of Gold inammeld and set with stones of
worth and luster, the shapes of which you may see elsewhere depicted.

They worship the Devil, in sundry shapes and representations.

I have seen some of their Pagothes or Idols, in wood, resembling a man,
painted with sundry colors, his legs stradling, very wide, under him two
Lamps, not always burning. In other Fanes they have three or five great
Pagods, to which they pray, though they be misshapen and horrible.

They adore the fire also, and conceive divine thoughts of Kine and Heifers.

Their marriages are sometimes secret, other times performed with much
superstition. They hate Poligamy, but so extremely honor Wedlock, that they
seldom are unmarried at seven years of age. The men go in triumph about the
streets one day, and the Bride next, and if it chance, a child die, ere he be
married, the parents of him that died, procure some Damsel (to whom for a
Dowry, they give some Dynaes of Gold to betroth him) to lie one night with the
deceased.

Their Funerals are these, they bring the dead corpse near to their Churches,
where they sacrifice him to ashes, in costly perfumes, in Aromatique Gummes and
Spices. Sometimes the woman throws herself into the fire, and burns together
with her husbands carcass deriuing to themselves much reputation and glory
amongst the suruiuers. Indian Fun^ralt.
But at Surat, Brampore, Amadavad, Lohore, Agray or Cabull, where the Moors
predominate, they are not suffered, though in other parts of India, toward
Bengala and the Coast of Chormandell, they continue that loving custom
devoutly to this day, as shall be spoken of in my description of those parts
following.

Another Ceremony in Funeral pomp among the Persae is this: They put the dead
body into a winding sheet, all the way his kindred beat themselves till they
come within fifty or an hundred paces near the monument or burial place,
their the Herboods or Priests, oppose them, attired in yellow Skarffes and
Turbants, who take the dead body (leaving them their, where they stand, till
the action be ended) the Nacesselars, Priests carry it to a little shed, or
furnace, and exercise hidden raptures by fire, unto the fire. Which done, they
place the corpse, a top of a round stone building twelve foot high and eighty
about, the entrance only to the North-east side, where is a small grate,
through which they conueigh the body, into that monument: which is flat above,
wholly open, and plaistered with smooth white loame, in the midst is a hole,
discending to the bottom, which receives that putrefaction and uncleanness,
issuing from the melting bodies, which are laid there naked, and in a twofold
roundnesse, exposed to the Suns fiery rage, and devouring appetites of
Vultures and Cormorants, who usually prey their: tearing their flesh, and
disordering it, so that the ugliness and fearful stench of the unburied
bodies (in some Dormitories three hundred) is so violent, that (unless the
raritie of wonders urge a Trauellour to view them) they are better to be spoken
of, then seen. And note that after the corpse are laid there, the Persae will
never approach to see the buried, nor do they enquire after them, but grieve
exceedingly, that a Christian should go thither to view them, or tell them of
it. The good are laid in one, and the bad in others; all are carried in Iron
coffins, because wood is sacred to the fire, which they adore.



These Persae are descended of the ancient Persians, who adored fire. For the
Persians, that now inhabit Persia, are extract from Scythia, and came hither
with Tamberlaine, or the Turko-mans.

A like people now live among the Persians, called Gowers, who were of the old
inhabitans. They yet pray to the fire, and are much abased by the Moors.

The utmost point South of this Indian tract is called Cape Comri or Comrein from
the Aequinoctiall eight degrees to the North. That utmost point is in Mallabar,
a Kingdom ruled by the Sambreyn or King. On the otherside the point, is the
Kingdom of Narsmga Negapatan, and Maesulipatan. In which Countries are found
Wonders and heathen Entertainments.

So soon as a stranger arriues, of what Country soever, he shall presently
have his choice of many Virgins, and choosing one he fancies, for a small
price; she guides him to a lodging, and performs his domestique affairs what
ever, at bed and board, all the time of his abode their discharging her duty
and priuacie very punctually: and he during that season must beware of
familiarity with other women, which if he subject himself to, she aims to
poison him.

At his departure, Strange customs of the Indians.
he pays her wages to her parents, she returns home, with credit and
oftentation.

Here also, when any Noble or Inferior person enters wedlock, he takes it for
a courtesy, that any stranger will accept the first nights ceremony with his
Bride.

Some (but most are Peguans) wear bells of gold fixed to their Genitors, within
the bell is an Adders tongue dried, which sounds harmoniously.

The women go most part naked, except a cloth which should cover those parts,
made to be private.

In some of these Cities, the Paynym parents, sow up almost the womb of their
female children, which is only then dissected, when she is married.

Their vilest ceremony is this. That at the marriage of a Virgin, the
Bridegroom, to honor the Deuillish Idol, brings her before the Pagode, or
Idol; who commonly is of a tall stature, and shaped ugly, in his privy parts
he has a bodkin of gold or silver, an intended Instrument, to violate her
chastity. Which, they suppose obtained, by the Pagotha, such time, as she is
forcably put unto his Engine, the the sharpness being such, that the blood
issues not only thence, but from other parts of her wounded body, this done,
with great joy and applause she returns to her Pagan husband, and if she be
with child that year, it is supposed the Pagod got it.

The usual Coin in India, Moguls Coin.
within the Moguls Territories are Pice, Mammoodees, Rowpees, and Dynaes,
thick and round, and engraven with Arabique Sentences (for Mahometisme allow
not Images) a Pice is in English money, a halfpenny, a Mammoodee is twelve
pence, a Rowpee, two shillings three pence, a Dyna thirty shillings, an English
shilling values twenty two Pice, or a Mammoodee and one Pice. A Spanish
shilling (which is a fourth part of a Dollar) gives twenty five Pice, a Riall
of eight gives five Mammoodees wanting three Pice, and an English twenty
shilling piece (too many of which are conueighed among the Indians) will at
Surat give twenty two shillings six pence, and in Persia twenty five
shillings at least.

In Swalley Road (such times, the ships come thither) the Bannyans, have Tents
and straw houses pitched near the water side in abundance, their they sell
Callicoes, Cheney Satin, Cheney ware, Aggats, Turquesses, Sugar and such like.
Many little boys at your going ashore will desire to do you daily service,
which they will carefully perform for two pence a day, they prattle English
and Portugal prettily.

The usual sort of travel is by Coaches, poorly furnished and drawn with
Oxen and Buffols.

These people will neither eat nor drink, with any Christian, yet they will
converse and cozen one without scruple: the Devil warrants them.

They will not entertain a stranger to their houses, jealous of their Wives
and Daughters; who (as many report) are extreme venerous or lustful.

Cambaya.
THree days journey from Surat, is seated a pleasant City called Cambaya,
subject at sometimes to that potent Monarch the Mogoll, and in the Kingdom of
Gougurat: it is watered by part of triumphing Indus, and gives Amadavad (by
some wrongfully called Ardavat) supremacy ore all her Cities. The limit of this
Kingdom is from Sanga to Dulcinda, (a name invented by Maffaeus) North, on the
East it has Mandao, on the West Gedrosia, the South is terminated by the Sea.
It is a Kingdom of as great wealth as extent, of as great fame as wealth, and
of as sundry delights and rarities as fame. The Inhabitants of Cambaya, are a
mixture of Mahometans, Moors, Persians, Bannyans and from Arabia.

They are crafty and deceitful, the Priests are singularly reputed of, the
women proper, but veiled and obscure in their best aspect, their faces they
color, their teeth black, thinking that shows most delight and beauty, and
to differ from Dogs, whose teeth are white. Their apparel is like the other
Indians.

Hence went the Grecian Captains Nearchus and Onesecritus (sent out for
discovery by Alexander) up the Persian Gulf, as says Arrianus, in his eight
Book, the Kingdom is much populate, for the quantity, not any part of India
showing more men or Cities, for before its subjection, about an hundred and
ninety years, they have come into the field seven hundred thousand men; but
the City of Cambaya not exceeding three miles compass cannot contain eight
hundred thousand men, as some have guessed at.

This place was heretofore lorded over by the Kashboots, a noble and valiant
(but now a Theeuish) people, in the year of our Lord, 1423. they were expeld
their Country by one Mahumed an Arabian, who left his son Mamudeus (from
whence the Coin Mamudees has denomination) to succeed him, and see Badur who
out of a Tyrannique mind, sent defiance to Galgee King of Manda, who to make
his party stronger, inuites the Great Mogul Myramud a Zagatayan Tartar to his
aid, who came to help him, and in the battle slew King Badur, took his
Kingdom from him, and cut in pieces all his Army, which Histories report to be
an hundred and fifty thousand horse; and five hundred thousand foot, eight
hundred pieces of great Artillery, five hundred wagons full of powder and
shot, two hundred Elephants, and five hundred chests of gold and silver.

The City Diu.
Near this place, along the Gulf of Persia, is the City of Diu, it is in the
latitude of twenty two degrees, odd minutes North. It has a Castle of great
strength and beauty, built and possessed by the Lordly Portugal, it is placed in
a small peninsula made by the River Indus, which their ingulfes herself into
the Indian Seas, after her long and swift descent from Caucasus.

Muskat.
MVskat, is a City in Arabia the Happy, upon the Persian Gulf and almost
Nadyr to the crabbed Tropique, it is not far from that point of Land called Cape
Rozelgate and parallel to Surat, it is possessed by the Portugal, and is his best
Port and Defense, for their Frigots and Iunckes, Their Vessels of Traffic and
War. From Mallabar, Decanee, Gouzurat, Cambaya, and other places: it is
strengthened by a wel-built Castle, and peopled by the Relics of late
captiued Ormus, it is a place rather boasting of profit than renown, and is a
little obscured, by her opposite Antagonist Diu.

I will offer you a little of the Arabian Tongue as is now spoken in that
Country. English. Arabique. Sunday, Ahad. Monday, Esteaninea. Tuesday,
Salassa. Wensday, Arbaw. Thursday, Ghameese. Friday, is their Sabbath, Dumaad.
Saturday. Sabtu. The seven days of the Moguls and Persians.
Sunday, Yecksumbea. Monday, Dosumbea. Tuesday, Teensumbea. Wensday,
Charsumbea. Thursday, Panohsumbea. Friday, Yowma. Saturday. Sambea. English.
Arabique. September, Maharram. October, Sawfor. November, Rabbioul-owl'
December, Rabbioul-auchor. January, Yowmadul-owl' February, Yowmadul-awchor.
March, Radiab. April, Sabaan. May, Ramulan. June, Schowull. July,
Heidul-kaida. August. Heidul-beidghea. Arabique. English. Persian. Mallee,
Salt, Namac, Sammack, Fish, Mohee. Moyhea, Water, Obb. Narr, Fire, Attash.
Hattop, Wood, Yzom. Beet, A house. Conna. Degang' Hens, Morgh. Salet, Oil,
Rogan-cherough. Sammon, Butter, Rogan. Beddo, Eggs, Toughmorghwe. San, A Dish,
Shecky. Cobbeer, Great, Buzzurk. Sackeer, Little, Cowcheck. Annestre, I buy it,
Man Mechoree. Vntan-aphea. Have you. Dare Suma.

Iasques.
IAsques is a Town famous in nothing except her prospect into the Gulf of
Persia. Their the Pole Artick is elevated above the Horizon twenty five
degrees, fifty eight minutes, is now of no account, Ormus her near Neighbor
being desolate; it belongs to the King of Persia, whose Territories are, near
this place, and nearer Indus limited, a river dividing the Mogull from the
Persian. It Is from Ormus I Will forty leagues due South, is situate in the
Kingdom of Carmania or Carpella, no great matter where, only here lies buried
one Captain Shilling, vnfortuately slain by the insulting Portugal: but that
his bones want sense and expression, they would tell you the earth is not
worthy his receptable, and that the people are blockish, rude, treacherous and
indomitable.



Ormus.
ORmus is an I Will within the Gulf, in old times known by the name Geru, and
before that Ogiris (but I dare not say from a famous Thaeban of that name) its
circuit is fifteen miles, and procreates nothing note-worthy, Salt excepted,
of which the Rocks are participant, and the Siluer-shining Sand expresses
Sulpher.

At the end of the I Will appear yet the ruins of that late glorious City,
built by the Portugals, but under command of a Titular King a Moore. It Was once
as big as Exeter, the buildings fair and spacious, with some Monasteries,
and a large Buzzarr, or Market.

Of most note and excellency is the Castle, well seated, entrencht and
fortified. In a word, this poor place, now not worth the owning, was but ten
years ago, the only stately City, in the Orient, if we may believe this
universal Proverb.

Si terrarum Orbis, quaqua patet, Annulus esset,
Illius Ormusium gemma, decusque foret.
If all the World were but a Ring,
Ormus the Diamond should bring.
This poor City, was defrauded of her hopes, continuing glory, such time as
Emangoly-Chawn. Duke of Shyras or Persepolis, took it with an Army of fifteen
thousand men, by command of the King of Persia, who found himself bearded by
the Portugal. Howbeit, they had never triumphed over them, had not some English
Merchants ships (then too much abused, by the bragging Lusitanian and so
exasperated) helped them, by whose valor and Cannon, the City was sacked and
depopulated. The Captains (serving the East India Merchants) were Captain
Weddall, Blyth and Woodcocke.

Their Articles with the Persian Duke were to have, the lives of the poor
Christians at their disposal, some Cannons, and half the spoil, and
accordingly when the City was entered, after a brave and tedious resistance
(forced to yield by Plague, Fluxes and Famine) every house of Quality, Magazen
and Monastery were sealed up, with the Signets of the Duke and Merchants. By
which good order, the Company had no doubt been enriched with two millions of
pounds (though but their share) had it not been prevented, by a Rascal
Sailors covetousness, who though he knew the danger of his life and loss of
the Christians credit, yet stole into a Monastery sealed with both consents,
commits Sacrilege upon the silver Lamps, Chalices, Crucifixes and other rich
Ornaments and stuffed so full, that in descending, his Theft cried out against
him, was taken by the Persians, led to the Duke, confessed, and was drubd right
handsomely, but the greatest mischief, came hereby unto the English, for the
perfidious Pagans (though they knew the Merchants were not guilty of his
transgression, and consequently had not broke the Order.) Notwithstanding the
Soldiers went to the Duke, saying, shall we sit idle, whiles the English, by
stealth and secrecy exhaust all our hopes of benefit and riches, whereat the
Duke (glad of such advantage) replied, if so, then go and have your desires,
whereupon they broke open the houses, and store of what was valuable, and made
themselves masters of all they found, whiles the confident Sailers, lay
bragging of their victories a shipboard. And when they were possessed of what
was done, they exclaimed, as men possessed, but the Persians understood them not,
nor cared they what their meaning was, seeing they terrified the Adye, give
loosers leave to prate.

Yet they found enough to throw away, by that small, sufficiently showing their
luxurious minds and prodigality, if they had gotten more: dicing, whooring,
brawling, and tippling being all the relics of their husbandry and
thankfulness.

Only Captain VVoodcocke had good luck and bad, lighting upon a Frigot that
stole away, unwitting to the Enemy, laden with pearls and treasure, that he
took for prize and kept all to himself, perhaps worth a million of Rials, or
better, but see ill Fortune. The VVhale (of which he was Captain) rich laden
with his Masters and his own goods, hard by Swally Road without the Bar,
sunk and was swallowed by the Sands, occasioned by a hole, neglected by the
Carpenter, and failing to carine or mend her, the Ports were open and took in
water, which to prove that even Whales are subject to destruction perished in
that merciless Element, VVoodocke not long after ouerwhelming his life with
too much care, too unable to moderate so great misfortunes.

This poor City is now disrobed of all her bravery, the Persians each month
conueigh her ribs of wood and stone, to agrandize Gombroone, not three leagnes
distant, out of whose ruins, she begins to triumph.

Ormus Island, has no fresh water, save what the fruitful Clouds weep over
her, in sorrow of her desolation, late so populous, those are preserved in
Vrnes or earthen Iarres, and are most comfortable to drink in, and to give
bedding a cool and refrigerating-sleeping-place, to lenifie scorching Phaeton,
who is their potent in his flames and sulphur.

Gombroone.
GOmbroone, is by the Natives, called Bander, (or Port Town) it eleuates the
Articke Pole twenty seven degrees nine minutes. Is distant from Ormus nine
English miles at most. Is seated upon the Gulf and in the Ormusian Kingdom
(whose limit was of old into Arabia) yet some say in Carmania, and others in
Larr, which was a Kingdom.

It was a dozen years ago, so short from the title of a City, that it could
not boast of twelve houses, at this time, having very near a thousand.

It Is governed by a Sultan and Shaw-bander (or King of the Port) one has the
Sword of Justice, the other the Scale of Weights, both whose houses conioyne
the Marketplace or Buzzar.

In Iunuary here arrive yearly ships from India, English and Dutch, and here
the English Agents receive custom of all strangers, that honor being granted
them from the Persian King for their good service at Ormus against the
Portugals, yet I believe the Pagans are by this time weary of their courtesy,
and begin to deny the English that honor any more. The English and Dutch
Merchants Houses are apparent from the rest by their Ensigns flying a top
their Tarrasses.

The Town in Winter is inhabited by sundry Nations as Persians, Indians,
Arabs, Jews and others: all which fly away in Summer to avoid the intolerale
heat their, caused both by the burning sands and great height of a mountain
toward the North, anticipating the cool breath or air.

Of all sorts of people, the Bannyans exceed for number, they are the most
subtle and fair spoken Merchants in the Orient. Here they sell all sorts of
Fruits, Seeds, Roots, Drugs, and Rose Water. The Arack and Wine sophisticated
and brought from Shyras, is sold by Jews and Moors. The Bannyan is tied from
it by Religion, the Inhabitants are of an Olive color, and the poorer sort
clothed but to the middle. The women are attired in linen of white or other
colors, they wear, in their Noses, Rings of Silver and Buttons of Gold. As
also a Bodkin or long Jewel of Gold, enammeled and set with Rubies, Turquioses
and Garnats. The shape of which is here described.



Their Ears have twelve or fourteen silver rings, their arms laden with
shackles of Brass and Iuory. Upon their fingers they have many silver rings,
and on the thumb commonly one with a Glass to look in, and no wonder, their
beauties are so delicate and charming, and such as prevail in my judgment,
toward chastity, more then Ouids Remedy of Love.

They are the most ugly and impudent Whoores, in all Persia, and infect that
corporation with their Heathenisme and numbers.

The vehement heat something excuses them, and in Summer to cool their bodies
and affections, they sleep in Troughs and Tancks of water, which kind of
bedding was used very much when Ormus had any glory.

The houses are of mudde, thick and hardened in the scorching Sun, they are
flat and tarrased a top, where in hot weather, when Serenes fall not, they
sleep on Carpets. The Windows are large like those in Italy, and in stead of
Glass use wooden trell^^es or casements.

The people are superstitious and owe much ceremony to their Goddess Luna,
they are more valiant and generous then the Indians, affect complement, and
hate walking, all their delight and bravery is on horseback.

Though the Country about Gombroone be sterrile and sandy, yet in the Winter
season, there is abundance of all things necessary, chiefly fruits and flowers,
as Orenges, Lemmons, Pomegranats, Pomcitrons, Quinces, Pears, Apples, Almonds,
Currants, Figs, Dates, and Lillies, Roses, Tulips, with other things, as
abundance of Eggs, Hens, Kids, Rice and the like: most of which are brought
from other places hither.

In the Town are some Moscheas and Synagogues of Jews, and three miles from
Gombroon, right against Ormus I Will, grows a tree, which we call the Bannyan
tree, whose circumference in the leaves and boughs fixed in the earth, is two
hundred and nine of my paces, as I measured. Within, the boughs are lopt off,
so that it seems a Theater. And wherein, may ambush very privately three
hundred Horse.

A Chapel sacred to the Bannyans Numen, is built close to the bole included
and hidden, to those without, by her thick spreading branches, near which, is
the Cave or Hermitage of an ancient Braminy, a devout Wretch, A Monk of
Charity.
having constantly served his Master the Devil above threescore years. At the
Marriage of a Bannyan maid, the custom is, she sits the first night by the
Pagod (which is an Idol of ugly caruing) expecting some revelations. At
midnight the Bramini enters in a hidden ha^^^ and unresisted reaps her Virgin
honor, which is the more shame, in that at nine or ten years old, they desire
to lose it. The (...) Salli^n, sometimes will privately condition with a
Trauellor, to take his midnight Offerings, which (as I was told) none but
^ortugals do^ accept of.

The tenth of January, Sir Robert Sherley entered Gombroone, after our arrival
there out of the Gulf of Persia: Our Ambassadors entertainment at Gombroon,
Ian. 10.
which known, the Sultan of the Town came to visit him: Sir Robert Sherley
being Ambassador from the Persian, and speaking the Turkish Tongue, demanded
of him pomp and entertainment for Sir Dodmore Cotton, Ambassador from our
Sovereign, as also Horses, Mules and Camels for his journey to the Court,
which he grudged at* the King then being at the Caspian Sea. But upon sight of
his Phirman (or Letter of command) he agreed willingly and accordingly
provided for him.

At his landing, Cozelbashaes with the Persian, as the Spahi with the Turks.
the Captains of the English ships (riding their) gave him an hundred Culuerin
shot, for a farewell from them. At his going up to the Town, the Sultan, the
Shaw-bander (or King of the Port) and many Couzel-bashaes (or Horsemen of the
best rank) met him, and very ciuilly conueighed him to the Town. The Castle of
Gombroon gave him ten great shot.

All the way from the waterside to the Sultans house, (we rode twixt two
ranks of Persian Archers and Musketeers) where our Ambassador, the Gentlemen
his followers and Sea-captaines were welcomed to a very neat and curious
Banquet and music from the ships. Thence we rode to the English Agents house,
where we received a second entertainment.

And after fourteen days repose, we begun our Land Travail into Persia,
furnished with twenty nine Cammels, and twelve Horse, by the Sultan, who after a
Piscash or Present given him (five miles accompanying us) returned.

Our departure from Gombroone, toward Persia.
THe first night we lay at Bannarow, is sixteen miles from Gombroone, where
is a Carrauans-raw (as they call it) or common receptacle of all Travelers,
such being at every Manzeil or resting places, through these Kingdoms, in
regard their be no Jnnes, and unless they carry with them their Kitchen, they
are like to want provision to eat, in all places through their Journey. And
note that near all or most of the Carrauans-raws, are Tancks or covered ponds
of water, filled by the beneficial raines, for the use and drink of Travelers
and their Cattle: in very few places, Springs being found, except where Cities
and Towns are placed.

From Bannarow, next night we got five leagues (or fifteen English miles)
further* and next to a place called Cawrestan, their and at other places our
Mammandore or Harbinger, providing for us.

The fourth night we lay at Tangee-Dolon (or the narrow way) where is a pretty
Carrauans-raw and the more praiseworthy, for the excellent water we found
their: which issuing from a mountain three miles distant, has passage through
another towering hill where we lay, the Aqueduct being merualously cut through
the bottom of this mount, and thence runs into an Even and champagne soil,
which contains twenty miles circuit, surrounded with Hills of stupendous
height and unevenness to ascend, within which Tempe is a Town (of thirty
houses) called Dolon, possessors of that pleasure.

The first night our Manzeil (or Iournies end for that day) was at Whorwoote,
where a little from us, we viewed a Black Tent, and going thither found three
old Arabians, with each his Book, out of which they chanted doleful Requiems
to their Cozens soul, over whose grave they sat, and were to mourn their five
days for him, according to their Ceremony.

Next night we traveled six leagues further, and two days after into Larr,
into which old City, the Cawsee (or Judge) and Calen^ar or Governor, with many
other men of note gallantly mounted, with great courtesy brought us thither;
near the City a Persian, out of a Poetique fury thundered us a speech of
welcome, and thereupon the Kettle-drums and other their Iingling Instruments
strove to deaf us. After this a Venus (like in honesty, though not in
beauty) attired in an anticke fashion, presents her self, accompanied with
more Syluanes, where they danced Lauoltoes, their arms and legs were adorned
with Bells, which with the other music, made a consort. During this Anticke,
Bacchus (a great Dietie among those people) crept in amongst them: so that the
iangling of their discording pipes: the Whoores bells, roaring of the Mules and
Asses, with the shooting and clamor of two thousand people all the way before
us till we entered Larr, so amated us, that had Vulcan and his Cyclopes been
working there, there noise had been prevented. After we were lodged, they
without more ceremony (tired, I suppose, with the former) left us.

A Description of Larr.
LArr is a City under the Latitude of twenty seven degrees and forty minutes
North, it is under the Jurisdiction Royal of Emang Ally, the Chawn or great Duke
of Shyras, from whence it is distant fourteen easy days journey, and from late
passed Gombroon, seven days, or sixscore English miles or thereabouts: all the
Country for four hundred miles together, is desert, sterile and full of loose
sand and dangerous, it also shows huge high Hills, on every side, travel which
way you will: without grass, river herbs, or what else, a Pilgrim, in those
inhospitable Desert might desire (a few Date-trees excepted, which stand rather
as marks to pass by, than other service) and did not the Tancks (their watery
Magazens) assist them, neither were the people able to abide there, or
Travelers to find passage.

The City of Larr, is the principal place for Justice and Commerce within
that sandy Kingdom (called by some by the same name, though in my judgment in
Susiana) Shushan being not many days travel distant thence.

The City is very ancient, and thirty years ago had five thousand houses in
her, of which three thousand were turned topsie turuy by an Earthquake, two
thousand at this day is her number.

It Is now famous for nothing but a Castle and Buzzar, which is large, strong,
and beautiful, it is in a sort Quadrangular, though of unequal Angles. The
extent from North to South is an hundred and seventy paces Geometrical, and
from East to West, an hundred and ninety.

The Castle is built at the North end upon a high aspiring Mountain, well
stored with Ordnance brought from Ormus: the order and situation of this Fort
and Fabric, equalizing if nor preceding any other in Persia.

In this poor City is a Mesquite or Temple, framed in some part with Mosaique
work and round in Figure: at the entrance hangs a Mirror or Looking-glass,
wherein Mahometa^s behold their deformities, this Church lodges the great
Long-named-long-buried Prophet Emyr-Ally-Saddey a mere, whose sleep (they say)
has been fifteen hundred years long in that Sepulcher. They expect his
Resurrection shortly to wait on Mahomet (of whom he prophesied five hundred
years before his knaueries.) And it is sure great Pluto loves them so dearly,
that he will not part with them, because he expects these Mussulmen there also.

This Town affords Dates, Orenges and Aquauita, o^ Arack, the river water I
may call Aqua-mortis. The baseness of it such, that so little came in my
belly, as was possible, because it corrupts the body, hurts the eyes, and
breeds long Worms like a Lute-string in their legs that love it, these
Worms they unwind with a Pin and come out daintily: sometimes they break,
and then danger to that leg ensues it.

The people are black and needy, many miserable Jews inhabit there and have
their Synagogues, but their only receptacle is North-west from Larr sixty
miles, at Iaaroone, in which City are a thousand Families all Jews,
transported thither in the Babylonish captivity, and this they named in memory
of their old Kyria^h Iaarim.

About thirty years since, the Duke of Shyras (commanded by the King) subdued
this Kingdom, ruined one Castle and built another, slew many of the Citizens,
ransacke the Town and sent home to Shyras so much Treasure as burdened seven
hundred Cammels; much, in respect of the great famine and poverty of this
Kingdom, but most part raised, I believe, out of those great and many
Carrauans, from Babylon, Tauris, Cazbeen and Spawhawn, traffiquing to the
Portugal, while Ormus had Trade and Riches.

The poor King, though his life was granted him, when he was dreaming of
other matters, an unexpected Semiter, (to end his stratagems) cut off his head,
and by death of all his Progeny established the Sovereignty unto the Persian.

Some Maps place Larr by a great River, wherein they are mistaken so
exceedingly, that within a hundred miles is not any River or Riuolet.

After nine days abode in Larr, we continued our journey to Shyras, most of
us mounted upon good Mules, who though slow, are sure of foot, and Emblemes of
Sobriety.

Our first night we pitched our Tents not far from Larr, and could not travel
next day, by reason of an immoderate shower, that made the earth very slippery,
whereby the Camels could not foot it.

The rain as it seldom falls here (not a shower sometimes in five years) when
it falls, brings incredible joy and profit to this people, and Sunburned
Countries, and with which happiness, it often brings with it mischief and
sorrow, for we were told here, that six years since, such a violent storm of
rain unburdened it self near this place, and caused such a sudden Deluge
and Cattaract, that a Carrauan of two thousand Camels perished, and were cast
away by it.

Next night we slept in Techoa, or Ded-chow, (which signifies the Town under a
Hill) where the Calenter of Larr, Cogee-Obdruza took farewell of us.

At this Techow, are many pretty Tombs, not any buried without memorials, a
mile from this Town we see threescore black Pauillions, wherein we found
nothing, but what gave mirth and beauty.

These are a people, who live wholly in Tents, and observe the customs of the
Tartars, they have no certain habitation, they delight in motion, they graze
and feed here and there, with all their substance.

The Persians style them Vloches, or Shepherds, these Nomades are well
described by the Poet.

Nulla domus, plaustris habitant, migrare per Arua,
Mos, atque Errantes circumuectare Penates.
They have no constant dwellings, but delight
To wander with their House-gods, day and night.
Next day we road by a huge wall, cut by incredible labor out of the solid
Rock, as a secure defense against the inuading Persian, the Kingdom of Larr
their terminating.

Thence we came to Berry, a small Town, and School for the Arabique Tongue,
this has a Mosquit, or Church, promising much afar off, but deceiues the
expectation nearer hand, howbeit it is much honored by the people, for being an
everlasting Dormitorie as they believe, to their Learned Pseudo-prophet
Emaum-zaddey-a-meer-amaddey-Ally, a man of great length in name, power, and
eight hundred years antiquity: his Tomb is four foot high, and eight in
length, covered with a white linen cloth, the sides painted and set forth,
with Poesies of Arabique, near him are fixed two Spears and Ensigns curiously
wrought, and upon the Coffin lie a set of great Beads, with which he used to
work miracles, a top of the Chapel hangs a Globe to express his power and
greatness, in the wall are round Glasses (such as are in Doue-houses) in which
these people see representations of their sins. And (which is not least
esteemed) I perceived a stone pendent near the wall which they preserve for a
valuable Relic, they say, the Prophet used to lay this stone on the shoulders
of the erroneous, the miraculous weight and virtue of which was such, as
reduced him into a right path. A little pot comes next to our description, it
has an unguent of great virtue and Antiquity in it, which it seems cannot be
spent, and is of Sovereign force for weak eyes: The Alcoran, or Alfurcan, is
their Book of Religion.
to crown all, his Book, yet no Alfurcan, of devotion is laid upon him as too
worthy the use of sinners. The Church under foot is neatly matted* and as the
Church has superstition, so the Priests have ceremony, none can enter with
boots or shoes on, because the place, they say, is holy.

Hence we traveled to Bannarow, at which Town the Governor met us with
music and welcome; three Drums and six Muskets. The ruins of an ancient
Castle, lately demolist by the Persians, shows its ribs upon the top of a
stupendous mount, the view of one side inclining to the Town, the other to
the Deserts. Our next nights Manzeil was at Goyoam, a Town at least of a
thousand Houses, A Iugler.
after our reposing there, a Persian Hocus-Pocus, affronted us, he performed
rare tricks with hands and feet, he trod upon two very sharp Persian
Semiters with his bare feet, then laid his naked back upon them, and suffered
a heavy Anuill to be laid on his belly, on which two men beat two Horse-shooes
forceably: that trick done, he thrust Knives and Arrows through many parts of
his arms and thighs, and by mere strength of his head, took up a stone of
six hundred pound weight, which was fastened to the ring with his hair, and in
like sort tore asunder a Goats heads with his fore-locke, still crying Allough
whoddow, or great God to help him, we gave him particular requitals, and so
left him and the town, where lies entombed the Prophet Meleck Mahumet, one
very famous for fomenting the precepts of his master Mahumet, when opposed by
the Sarazens.

Thence our Travail was through the Wilderness, riding so long and carelessly
that some of us lost our company, straying in that comfortless Desert, but
next day we found out the Carauan, At this time such rain, thunder and
lightning fell upon us, that we were imprisoned in our Tents. Yet on we went
next day, and lodged at night in Whormoot (or Town of Dates) by the way was a
Tomb of the harmless Shepherds, hung with threeds tripartite, each thread
beautified with parti-couloured wool, and at each end was placed a Puppet or
Pagod to protect it.

The two and twentieth day we dislodged a wild Bore, but neither shot nor
Dogs prevailed against him. That night we slept in Cutbobbow, and next in
Mohouck, in which is a Monument of four famous Prophets, Hodgee, Mohomet,
Izmael and Ally, buried four hundred years ago.

Thence to Caughton, next night to Vngea, next to Moyechaw, thence to Pully
Potshaugh, so to Syras: the description of which it is now, and was, I have
here deciphered.

Persepolis.
PErsepolis (out of whose ruins is come Siras) was built by Sosarinus, as some
suppose, who lived in the Median Dynasty, he was the third Emperor from
Arbaces, who gave end to Sardanapalus, and the Assyrian Monarchy, which had
continued from Belus, Father of Ninus 1480. years, in succession of one and
forty Monarchs, howbeit she was most beautified by Cambyses, son to Cyrus,
and second King of the second Monarchy, which Cyrus obtained by overthrow of
Astyages, who had kept the Sovereignty to the Medes, from Arbaces, in nine
Kings, to two hundred ninety seven years.

This City continued mightiest in Asia from Cambyses, to Darius Codoma^^s
son to Arsamus in the line of thirteen Monarchs two hundred and thirty
years, at which time the valiant Greek Alexander, by conquest of all As^a,
more easily gave a Period to this glorious City, by one blaze, at the whoorish
council of Athenian Thao^, so that, through his riot and her villainy, this
Imperial City felt the flames of War, which Alexander afterward deplored
with tears, but helpless.

I cannot believe Quintus Curtius his report of Cedar trees, of which he would
have this City builded, the Country no where producing any, if he meant
Cypresses, it is credible, albeit they had whole mountains of excellent black
Marble joining to them, and out of which the Imperial Palace was extracted and
cut out, as to this day appears in that ruinous monument.

This City when the Macedonian Victor ransackt it, gave him in Gold a hundred
and twenty thousand Talents, his Soldiers having spoiled what they pleased.

This City, says Diodorus Siculus, was the richest and most lovely City under
the Sun. It had says the Historian, a high stately Tower, environed with a
threefold wall, the first wall was sixteen Cubits high, beautified with
battlements. The second, was as high again, and the third as much exceeded
that to sixty Cubits, composed of hard Marble (no^ strange thing, all the
mountain being the best black Marble in the World, in many of which polisht
stones I could see my face) fixed with brazen gates: to the East of which was a
Hill of four Acres, wherein were entombed the Monarchs of the World. Nor was
the glorious Temple of Diana, of less cred^t that being (as writes Josephus)
covered with refined gold, which greedy Antiochus thought to have ransackt, as
he did Jerusalem, from whose holy Temple he took no less then ten tun of Gold.

Arist. lib. de mundo auerreth, the admirable ingenuitie of the Magi, such,
combined with the immense Power of those Emperors, that they could hear in
one day, of all affairs, through that bulkie Empire, even from the Hellespont
unto India.

In this Palace, the Kings Throne was Gold and Oriental Gemmes, the Palace
roof shined with Gold, Amber, Silver and Iuory, his lodgings were rich too,
for in one Chamber was a Vine, studded with Pearls, the artificial clusters,
were Pearls and precious Rubies, his Beds pillow (says the Author) was
bolstred with five thousand Talents of Gold, his Beds feet with three thousand
both Gold and Vine was given Darius, by the Bythinian Pythius, many rare things
more are reported of this lovely Paradise. But how time has demolisht her
glory, as most of all the Wonders of the World, how she lies now subjected give
me leave a little to rest upon her pleasant banks of Byndamir, and I shall
truly set down what is now left of her.

Chil-manor, or forty Towers.
THe great Palace of Persepolis, is by the inhabitants (who little respect
Antiquity) called Chil-manor, (or forty Towers) by which, it seems they have
seen so many in their Predecessors, though now there be but nineteen
standing, and one below, to the East, howbeit the ruins and ground of
fourscore more, are yet visible, this great room was the Hall, and cut out of
the black shining Marble, wherein were placed a hundred white marble Pillars,
which gave admirable beauty to it, each Pillar or Tower is about fifteen foot
high, each in rotundity forty squares, each square three inches.



From this room, is a stately prospect of all the Plains thirty miles about
it.

The ascent to this is cut out of the marble Rocks, the stairs (reserving
their durance and beauty to this day) are ninety five, and so broad that a
dozen Horsemen may ride up abreast together; the immediate ascent is twenty two
foot high, at which is the gate (or entrance into the said Hall) the breadth of
the Gate is six of my paces, the height of each side or Gate (engraven with a
mighty Elephant on one side, a Rhynoceros on the other) thirty foot high, very
rarely cut out of the marble, fixed and durable for ever.

A little further from the entrance are two Towers of like shape and bigness.
Near which is another part of the gate, wherein is engraven a Pegasus: an
invention of the Sculptor, to express his workmanship, these are the portals
to that Apollo, supported by a hundred white marble Pillars, a top of which now
inhabit the pious Storkes: the fashion of this room exceeds all the other in
circuit, and bravery.

Adjoining is another foure-square room, whose black marble walls are yet
abiding. It Is I say four square, each square ninety paces, all four amounting
to three hundred and sixty, it has eight doors, four of which are six paces
broad, the other four of half that breath, every door has seven engraven
marble stones fixed one upon another, each stone in length four yards and
height five quarters, all which eight doors are exquisitely engraven with
Images of Lions, Tygres, Griffins, and Bulls of rare sculpture and proportion, a
top of each door is of stone the Image of an Emperor in state, holding in his
hands a staff and Scepter.

A third Chamber ioynes to the former, which (these people tell us) was a
receptacle for the Queen and Ladies, it is of a Quadrangular but not equal
form, two sides sixty, the other seventy paces.

A fourth Chamber is next, two sides twenty, the other two, thirty paces,
which Nurserie, though of black shining marble, is not yet obscured in her
glory: the walls are rarely engraven with Images of huge stature, and have
been illustrated with Gold, which in some places is visible, the stones in
many parts so well polisht, that they equal for brightness a steel mirror:
this Chamber has its walls of best luster. But Age and Wars, two great
consumers of rare monuments, has turned topsie-turuie, this, as many other
things, and left naught but walls to testify the greatness of that glory and
triumph it has enjoyed.

At the highest of this Palace, is cut, out of the perpendicular mountain, the
Images of a King (which may be Cambyses) adoring three Deities, the Fire* the
Sun, and a Serpent.

The mountain on the other side is also cut perpendicular, up which is no
ascending, this is sufficient for this Theme, on which I should not have so
much insisted, but for its worth, and that none has formerly in truth
described it.

These Persians say one Iamshet was the structor, whose Image is frequently
carved in most places, he ruled over Persia, in nine Discents from Noe, and is
by Historiographers supposed son of Ouchange King of Persia.

Half a mile from Persepolis, is a Town of two hundred houses, called Mardash,
whose inhabitants so little know or value memory, that they daily tear away
the monument, for Sepulchers and benches to sit upon.

Which they cannot do, where the Rocks are fixed, in one of which Hals
described, is excellently engraven, Battles, Hecatombes, Triumphs and the
like.

And though, some imagine, Persepolis to have stretched so far as Syras, which
now is thirty English miles distant. The distance does not so much diswade me
from it, as those high craggie mountains interposing them, and under the old
Persepolis is a plain Horizon East, another way.

No doubt, but Syras may have risen from her ruins, though built in a distant
place, as we see Tauris from Ecbatane, Bagdat from old Babell, Jerusalem
toward mount Caluary, Cayro from Memphis, Tunis from Carthage, Constantinople
from Bizantium, Rome now in Campus Martius, and many other Cities, which
altering their seats though but a league, some also have got other
denominations.

From Chihilmannor five miles West is the Image of their great Champion Rustan,
called Nocta Rustan: his Tomb is upon an apparent high Hill three miles from
Hispahan, they believe such Wonders of him, as our boys do of Bellianys, or
of the Knight of the Sun,

I come now to describe Syras, which though spoken of after Persepolis, yet in
our travel we came thither first.

Description of Shiras.
SYras or Sheiras (as the Persians pronounce it) has North Latitude twenty nine
degrees forty minutes. Some would have her built by Cyrus, and from him called
Cyropolis. Others from Iamshet, fist King of Persia, and so from Noe. But I
rather think its deriuation is from Sheir or Milk, as Aleppo from Halip,
which Synonymies are taken from plenty and pleasures: many Towns in these
parts agreeing so, as Whormoote, which is a Town of Dates, De-Achow, a Town
upon a Hill, De-Gardow (a Town of Walnuts, etc.

The compass of this City is about eight or nine miles, the greatest extent
from the South-east to North-west near three miles, a far less compass
then those that write, it has twenty miles compass, and in it sixty thousand
houses. It Is seated at the North-west end of a large even plain, twenty miles
long, and six broad, the sides environed with mighty Hills, under one of which
this City is placed. At the first view, it affords a very pleasing object, and
by reason of abundance of high Pyramidall Cypresse-trees, circumuoluing the
Town, it seems, a Garden, till at the entrance the Hummums, (or hot Baths)
and Moscheas, their Churches, by the refulgent splendor of their bluenesse,
gain admiration in the beholders. The prime beauty of this City* is her
Churches and Gardens.

Within the City are fourteen or fifteen Churches, most of which are round
like Theaters, their outside tyling, pargetted with azure stones, resembling
Turquoises.

Two of these are more eminent then the rest, the one, for bravery has two
Pillars or Steeples (as high as Paul's in London) covered and wrought with blue
and Gold, the Inside vast and unfurnished, showing only one small place
allotted for devotion. The other for use, whose superficies is Mosaicke work,
enterlaced with Arabian Characters out of their Alcoran, in the entrance, yet
speaks it self rather a Royal Carrauan-raw, then a Temple, though nightly a
thousand Lamps adorn it.

Other Churches, have beauty in them, and are most respected for the burial
places of some famous Prophets, servants to their adored Ally son in Law and
equal with them to Mahomet, whose Iugling tricks, have so bewitched these
Infidels, that Zeal and Wealth together have richly adorned their monuments
with precious fragments of Brass and Stone, and what Art is defective in,
Nature and Gold has made up its wants, each Sepulcher boasting of an hundred
Lamps and silver Sockets: in one of which is embalmed that Prophetic man
Shaw-Meer-Ally-hamzey, who this seven hundred years has waited upon Ally in
Acheron, for doing as was written in his Alcoran. The length of his Temple is
sixty paces, and the breadth so many.

In another, sleeps Sandan Emyr Amahow, a man who became Mahomets dear
Disciple, when he taught his own Law, and the longer time runs on, the more
increases this Sandants power and virtue, they say, to work Miracles.

The Houses are of Sunburned bricks, flat a top, the windows trellized very
curiously. And though generally they have within, no Ornaments after our
fashion, yet some peculiar Houses, as the Dukes. Shock-Ally-Beg. Ally-chon, and
others may be competitors for delicacie with most in Europe.

Sultan Shock-ally-Beg (in whose House we had a Banquet and civil welcome) his
Chamber was large, high, and round, the windows of painted glass (no common
ware) the roof and sides imbost and wrought with gold and Images most
exquisitely, the floor was spread with Carpets of Silk very rich and comely.

This Sultan had been twelve times in battle against the Turk, and most
times Victour, and in a single Combat with Aly Bashaw (whom he slew) received
a lamenesse.

I will added a little of the Great Dukes Entertainment to us, and go on.

He is called Emangoly Chawn (Chown is Duke) is now Protector of Persia, during
Soffees infancy. His Father and Grandfather were Dukes before him. A Genealogy
of that Antiquity as many Sultans and Dukes in India and Persia, cannot equal
it, they know so little that way.

He is one of the Kings four great Dukes, each of which has twelve Sultans,
each Sultan five thousand Couzel Bashawes (a better Warrior then the
Ianizaries) his Titles without ostentation, are these.

Emang Ally Chawn Lord of Persia (which they call Farsee) Great Duke of Shiras,
Titles of the D. of Shyras.
Sultan of Larr, and of the mountains of Iaaroon* Lord of Ormus, Ruler of
Carmania, Mergiana, Susiana, Gedrozia, Aria and Sigestan, Prince of the Gulf
of Arabia, Great Beglerbegg, Commander of twelve Sultans, Flower of Courtesy,
Second in Glory, Protector of Mussulmen, Nutmeg of Comfort, and Rose of Delight.

He got an Oath from the late King Abbas, that he never should be beheaded, a
recompense for small reason too usual from their Emperor, hi^ conquests,
He subdued all Larr, Ormus, and unto Iasques for his Sovereign, and got a
footing in Arabia, in this manner. Two Princes of Arabia, contending for
Soueraignetie, he that was vanquished, demands succor from this Duke, who
entertaines him willingly, and with twenty thousand Horse fights with his
Adversary, kills him and becomes Lord of both Territories. The relieved Prince,
thanks him and desires to return home. Emangoly Chawn cries fie, at that,
could he with any honesty leave him, perfidie
that so had succored him: the Prince must stay, and in fine, becomes his
Son in Law, and Father at one time, for he weds the Dukes Daughter, and the
Duke his Lands and Signiories, and keeps him prisoner.

His Revenues (as Merchants say) is four hundred thousand Tomaynes a year (a
Tonian is three pound six shillings) his Plate and Jewels valued at three
hundred thousand pounds, wealth
he has three hundred women in his Seraglio (called here Haram) when he hunts
the Tygre, Lion, Bores and such like (which, he does once in four years) he
sets twenty thousand men to rouse them, and when they are together on some
mountain, he impales it with a huge toil, of Wire, and sports.
Cords, and Wood, a toil and burden for six hundred Camels, and so commands
them.

At our entrance into his Metropolis, he was two days journey thence, at his
House of pleasure. Sir Robert Sherley rode to him, to acquaint him with our
Ambassadors being there: he knew it well enough, and thought we should attend
his leisure: so after we had reposed six days in the City, our Ambassador
acquainted Shocke-Aly-Beg with his desire to part. What; replied he, would you
go ere you see the Dukes face, he answered, his business swayed him to
another end, he came to see his Master. So the next day the Duke came to
Shiras, followed with two thousand horses, and rested two days without sending
or taking notice of us.

At length he sent a Gentleman to our Ambassador, with a complement of
welcome, and bade him to visit him: our Ambassador sent him word he had come
so great a Journey, as excused him, if the Duke would please to ride thither,
he was his servant.

The Duke stormed exceedingly to see his greatness slighted, and after a pawse
fearing to affront him (because the King of Persia, had before hand writ to
him, and others through his Kingdoms as we traueld to respect us) sent word,
he would come next day and see him, but he did not, his son (a Gentleman of
eighteen years old) came to excuse his Father, and without any stay departed.

Next day our Ambassador sent the Dukes son word by Shocke-Aly-Beg, he would
trouble him, the Duke was not well pleased his son should have the visit, so
that at our Ambassadors alighting, we were conueighed into the Dukes Gallery,
which was very long and richly furnished with Plate, rich Carpets, dancing
Wenches and Ganimeds.

The Duke was set at the very end crosse-legged like a Taylour, but his fierce
aspect and bravery denied that title, he stirred not one foot, till our
Ambassador was at him, and then standing up, embraced him, we had Wine, Women
and a Banquet to accompany us, and after two hours stay departed.

Next day (being the two and twentieth of March) we were invited to a Solemn
and Royal Banquet.

We were vshered into the Banqueting House, a large open room, and supported
with twenty Pillars richly gilded, the Roof of imbost gold, the ground spread
with rich silk Carpets, this looked into a large foure-squared Court, round,
in which were placed the prime men of the City, and in another Court five
hundred common people, all which the Duke had invited to declare his greatness.

The Banqueting Hall had a State at the end, of Crimson Satin, embroydered
with Pearls and Gold, under which he sat directly upon the Carpets
crosse-legged, on his right hand was placed the Prince of Tartarie, on the left
our Ambassador, next him sat the Dukes eldest son, or Beglerbeggee (whose
head three years after, viz. in the year 1632. was struck off, at command of
the young King upon small reason) and to him the captiued King of Ormus (who
has five marks a day allowed for his maintenance) near him sat the two
desolate Princes his sons, in whose company we were placed, such as were
Gentlemen.

On the other side next to the Prince of Tartary, sat the Prince of Georgia, a
Gentleman of as brave a look as ever lived, and no less brave in Arms; his
faith is Christian.

During their stay, they were sad and melancholy, whose being there, I could
perceive, was more to content others, then themselves.

The rest of the Hall was filled with Sultans, chief Merchants and
Coozel-bashawes, the Banquet was very costly and plentiful, of Candid dried
meats, Dates preserved, preserved Pears, Pistachoes, Almonds, Duroyens,
Quinces, Apricocks, Myrabilans, Iacks, and a hundred other Fruits and Spices,
the Ganymeds, young Boys in Wanton habits, powered out Wine to such as loved it.

At the end of the Banquet, the people without gave a great shout, crying Yough
Ally Whoddaw Bashat (which was God be thanked.)

Then the Duke himself entered, with thirty Gentlemen, viz. slaves, in
Crimson-satten-quilted-Coats and Turbants, every Turbant wreathed about with
chains of Rubies, Turquoises, Emeralds, and the like of great luster and value.

The Duke himself was attired in a Coat imbrodered with silver, upon it, he
had a Vest or Gown of great length, so thick powdered with Oriental
glittering stones that the ground of it could scarce be seen, and it was
inualuable, his Tulipant and Sandals had like luster.

His not entering till the Banquet was finished, so grieved our Ambassador; that
when he came (all the Company bowing their heads to the ground) he sat still
as discontened. For the truth is, the Duke forbear of purpose, that his people
might wonder at his greatness.

Sir Robert Sherley bending very low, made bold to drink to him, in a bowl of
pure gold, which the Duke bid him accept of for his pains: the Duke perceiving
our Ambassador so silent, smiled upon him, drunk his health, and after a few
complements, departed.

I had forgot the Trophies of his Ormus Victory, which is painted in Gold by a
Portugal Captive, wherein are set down the incamping upon the shore. The
assaults and massacres of the Ormusians, some beheaded, some led in chains
with their fellows heads hung at their girdles: as also the English Ships and
Colors, by whose assistance, the Town was taken.

I will speak a little of the City, and so pass on.

This City, A description of Shiras.
the Metropolis of Persia, (for Spahawn is in Parthia) is fabricated about with
spacious Gardens, some of which are eight hundred paces long and four hundred
broad, and that of the Kings called Honey Shaw, is twice as much. These Gardens
abound more in fruits then flowers, as Pomegranats, Pome-citrons, Musk and
Watermelons, Quinces, Pears, Apples* Orenges, Grapes, Almonds, Figs* Currants,
Pistachoes, Plums, Cheries, and Apricockes, to which are added the comely
Cypresses, Pines and Chenor-trees. And remember this, that though these things
be in the City, because they have a River, which procreates their Garden
delights. Yet if you exceed three miles travail from the Town, you shall
find no motives to beget Alexanders Riot, except barren Mountains, Sand and
salty Deserts, can procure Epicurisme.

Indeed within this City is the best Grape in Asia, the name of Sheraz Wine is
famous far and near. The Wine is like the French, but better tasted.

In a word, it wants, nothing so much, as water, yet wants not that altogether,
but I am of opinion, that this place for Wine, pretty Women, Fruits and
gallant People, compares with any part of Persia.

The five and twentieth day of March, or Lady day we left Shiras, and thence
the first night rode thirty miles, to old Persepolis, of which I have already
spoken.

From Chil-manor, we rode to Moyown, eight Farsangs, or four and twenty
miles, twixt which two Towns is a high impregnable Mount, at whose top has
stood a Castle, so fortified by nature and industry, that it was thought
impregnable.

A late rebellious Sultan, weary of slavery manned it against his Prince, the
late victorious Abbas, who in person came against him, and in six months
could see no sign of victory, A siege and victory.
whereat enraged, he proposed a great reward to him could enter it. An old
covetous Magician undertakes it* and wrought so by his damned Spells, that the
Sultan came down, forced by the Devil, who assured his pardon.

The Block rewarded him, and the old Wizard (ignorant of his end) demands his
gold, which the King grudgingly gave him, but secretly took off his head for
coniuring, a Quality, the King praised at other times, but now cried shame on
it, to recover his beloved Gold again.

Moyown is seated delightfully, it had good water, Woods, green Pastures, and
good Wine, it is a peculiar Town* given by ancient Kings to the Prophet Ismael,
buried there. His Scpulchre is called ^moom Ismael, or Prophet Ismael, the Town
pays yearly to the enriching and keeping this Prophet* twelve thousand Mawn
of P^ice and Barley (a Mawnd is six pounds.)

Next night we lodged in O-jone, a Village of thirty houses. This Town brags
not a little, of her holy Inhabitants, for they are all of them Prophets or
Prophets children.

Next night, to a place where is buried a great Uncle of King Abbas, near
whose Tomb we slept that night. Thence over the most craggie steep and dogged
Hills in Persia, that night we lay at Assepose, a small Town, yet has a Castle
and Garrison, for it holds some captive Sarcassens and Georgians, forty
thousand of which poor Christians are imprisoned, thereabouts forced from
their Country by the Persians.

They are fair, proper and comely people, and so valiant that they scorn a
Pagan. If the King can prevail with any to forsake his Savior, and
acknowledge Ally or Mahomet, he is preferred above common merit. The poor
souls hearing we were Christians, flockt about us and wept to see us.

Thence we rode to Commeshaw two and twenty miles distant, next day to
Cuzauzar two and twenty miles, so to Deagardow (or Walnut Town) four and
twenty miles, so to Yezdecawz (denominated, it may be from Yezdcawd, the five
and fortieth King of the Persians from Kayumarras) where is the best
Carrauans-raw about her. This Town is seated in a low narrow Valley, sunk
down in midst of a large Plain, whereby you cannot see it till you be at it,
did not an eminent Castle mounted higher, point it out.

Next night in Amno-baut, a place of thirty houses, included in one, the wall
about it, ore-tops the Houses, in it live thirty Apostate Georgians, the Town
is David Chawns, a Brother of the Duke of Shiras, and he is Lord of three
Titles. In this Town is a Carrauans-raw, and a pretty Garden Lodge, which has
five rooms, rich imbost with Gold and Pictures.

Next night we lay in Commeshaw, (four and twenty miles from Anno-baut) at
which Town the Authority and Territory of Emangoly Chawn Duke of Shyras is
limited. Commeeshaw has a thousand houses, it is distant from Spahawan, six and
thirty English miles, twenty years ago, it was under command of an Apostate
Prince of Georgia, called Chonstandoll-chawn, and under him Sir Robert Sherley,
but it seems, they are unthankful people, for though they knew of his being
in our company, and that an Ambassador was with him, they took no notice of
us, but let us go by without any Ceremony.

Next night we came to Moyeor, one and twenty miles from Commeshaw, that
Town has the like bigness of a thousand Families, and exceeds in this, their
Doue-houses, are so finely builded, that they excel their dwellings.

Thence we came to Spawhonet, a Town six miles distant from Spawhawne, we
rested in Spahawnet, three days, at the entreatie of Meloyembeg the Kings
Treasurer, that our Ambassador might be entertained into that City, with
greater triumph.

Our Ambassadors entrance into Spawhawn.
WE entered Spawhawn, the tenth of April, and I shall truly relate the order of
our enterainment.

Three miles short of the great City, we were entreated to repose an hour in
a Garden of the Kings, where we had a Banquet, thither came the Agent and some
English Factors to wait upon our Lord Ambassador, thence riding in good
Equipage, the Sultan of Spawhawn, Meloym-beg the Treasurer, Hodgea-Nazar the
Prince of the Armenian Christians, with all the Beglerbegs and Coozelbashaes of
the City, accompanied with four thousand Horsemen, came to welcome us.

The fields and streets for two miles were filled in our passage with Bannyans
and women from the City, ten thousand at the fewest, who as we past, cried
welcome* and shouted strongly: amongst the horse were above forty
Kettle-drummes and Tabrets, nor wanted the Whores and Boys their places, all
which with Antique Dances, made the Ceremony more notable.

After our arrival in the City, we alighted at the Kings Palace, which is in
the great Mydan or Market place, Meloym-beg and Sir Robert Sherley, kneeled
down three times, and kissed the threshold or ground, at the first entrance,
which done, a Soldier made an Oration, so past to our Lodging, which was one
of the Kings best Houses, and near the water.

The Emperor or Pot-shaugh of Persia, was then at the Caspian Sea.

The fourteenth of April* four days after our stay in Spawhawn, the Agent
for the English Merchants invited us to a Banquet, where he showed a hearty
Entertainment: and to honor his Feast the more, he had at night, a pond of
water set round with Wax-lights, and spent many Squibs and Fireworks which
flying high, made all the City wonder.

Next day we invited our selves to Hodgee Nazarr the Armenian Prince, who has
the sole rule of a small City called Ielphea, whose Inhabiters are all
Christians. This Ielphea, is on the other side the water, and seated in the
same sort, as Southwarke is to London.

Hodgee-Nazarr was glad to see us, and gave us royal welcome, amongst other
meat, we had a Pigge roasted (a meat abhorred by Mahometans and Jews) the
Wine bottles and flat cups we drunk in, were of pure Gold.

A Description of the Ielphelines in Persia.
THese Armenians, by some are termed Ielphelines, from their City Ielphee,
near to Ararat: they are one in habit with Mahometans, but differ in their
names and consciences (they adore Christ Jesus) who in old times has had so
many faithful servants here, that in Anno 430, when Sapor reigned, no fewer
then twenty thousand Christians suffered Martyrdom.

These Armenians, since their translation from Armenia by the Persians, have
been scattered up and down, and are without any certain abode or City, save
here at Telphee (so called in memory of their other Metropolis.) These here,
live in as great freedom and security as do the Persians, only their
Pole Money is rated at ^ higher tax.

Their Bible and Belief is as ours, they give credit to the three first
general Councels, they have two Patriarchs or Archbishops, one at Jerusalem,
the other at Ielphea, who sometimes resides at Syon, other times at Syna a
mountain in Arabid the Desert: they have been Metropolitans of Antioch, but
now are satisfied with another Title. They have twelve other Bishops, but very
miserable, most of them are seated in their unquiet Country, which lying twixt
two great Kings) is a prey many times to the Turk or Persian. Former times
have called their Nation by other names, some Colchos (now Mengrelia) the place
where Jason and his Argonautes obtained their Golden Fleece, from injured King
Aeta, undone by his subtle Daughter Medaea, who also betrayed her self.

Others have named it Iberia, and some Albania, (now called Zuria.)

It brings forth the brauest Warriors, in all the East, men so reputed of (for
constancy and valor) that the Sultans of Egypt had thence their Mamulukes,
and the Persian King has his now Coozelbashaes.

Their Country is full of Woods, Hills, Rocks and Ruins, it abounds with
Silke-wormes, Wild Beasts, Hawks and Fruits. It enioyes a stream of the old
River Cyrus, and viewes Araxis, which coming from Taurus, where Periardo and
Abo are set, runs through the Caldoran plains, and at last is swallowed by
the Caspian Sea.

Their Lent is very strict, they eat no Flesh, Butter, Milk, or Eggs, only
Oil, Water, Bread, Honey, Herbs, Fruits, and the like.

Upon Good Friday, they represent the Death and Burial of our Savior, during
which they weep exceedingly till Easter day, when they take up the
representative Body, intimating thereby his Resurrection, the salutation for
that morn (according to the Eastern wont) is (He is truly risen) which
Angelical news they celebrate unanimously with joy and feasting, all which
time, the Jews and Mahometans dare not mock nor intrude amongst them. The
King affords them this prerogative.

When they enter the Church, they bend low unto the Patriarch, who sits in
Majesty near to the Altar, and after Service give him like reverence.

In the year 1609. a thousand of these suffered martyrdom by bloody Abbas
King of Persia. Only (as he was falsely informed by a very Rascal, who in
envy to these Georgians and Armenians, had fained Letters from their Patriarch
to the Pope, that they were willing to become one, with the Church of Rome, and
to acknowledge the Pope their Head, and Vicar of the Catholic Church) at sight
of which counterfeit Letters, the Persian King grew so enraged, that no less
satisfaction then the lives of a thousand innocent Christians, could moderate
his Fury, threatening more bloodshed, if he should prove it more apparently.

Whereat, these distressed Christians send an Ambassador to the Turk to help
them, which he granted and raised a bloody Scene to ensuing troubles.

Their Religion, was sithence illuminated, by Lodouic Grangier a Jesuit and
some others, who hearing of their erroneous doctrine, in charity departed from
Pera, near Constanti^ople, crossed the black Sea, and landed in Mengrellia,
where Threbis Chawn Prince of Georgia entertained and encouraged them, to bring
salvation to the blind and irreligious of that Nation. Two of them live at
Mocaury in Iberia, the rest at Cazbeen and Babylon.

Threbis Chawn a whiles after, was imprisoned by Emangoly Chawn, and conueighed
to Shiras a prisoner, where we had his company at our Ambassadors
entertainment, before spoken of. The Georgians and Armenians have since been
often conquered, and again proved Conquerours.

Some of whose Tragical misfortunes, I shall speak of, entreating the Readers
patience, being the discourse of Christian miseries: and those whose Patron and
first Conuerter was Saint George, Bishop of Cappadocia, beheaded by Dioclesian
the Emperor for loving Christ, and from whom they are called Georgians. A
Saint of no small repute, and honored by the Order of the Garter in England.

Most of which troubles came upon them by Cycala Bassa, whose peculiar attempts
I will only write of, happening in memory of some to this day living.

This Cicala or Cigala, was son of a Christian Gentleman, whose life proved
him a professed Enemy of the blasphemous Turks, and in that profession and
Quarrel sacrificed his life, his wife was named Lucrece, there abode at
Messina within Sicily: both of them virtuous, and might have been counted in
the number of the happy, had not their sons ungracious life opposed their
best contentments.

He turned Turk, and was Circumcized by persuasion of Ozman Bassa, General
against the Persian, for Amurath the Third, and lay at Van, during those two
Battles, wherein Emyrhamze-mirzay the undaunted Prince of Persia, with his
own hands, struck off the head of the Sultan of Caraemit, General for the
Turk, and wherein died the Bassaes of Trepizond, and five Sanzacks with
twenty thousand Turks. And that other victory over them by the same Prince at
Sancazan, near Cazbeen, wherein for grief died Osman the Valiant Bassa and
above three and twenty thousand Turks, the Persians receiving very little
loss, this was in Anno 1586. and though he boasted of great matters, so soon,
as he descended into Media, the Persian Prince, hunted him back again, not
daring to abide a Combat with that happy Mirza. So that had not Ozman at his
death requested his good usage and continuance of Authority, the great Turk
had utterly discarded him. Howbeit all Amuraths Reign he was never put upon
any valuable Employment, till in Mahomet the third his rule, he helped them at
Karesta in Bulgaria, after the famous siege of Buda in Hungary, where, for all
their valor and policy, they lost not only sixty thousand able Soldiers, but
gave over their hopes of enjoying those parts of Europe.

Cycala after this, insinuates so far with Achmat the Great Turk, Successor
to Mahomet, that to be revenged upon the Georgians, he grants him (power, to
torture them, with) an Army of eighty thousand men, proclayming his cruel
intended revenge upon them for Rebellion, and agreeing with the Persian. But
after much labor and hopes, when it came to trial, his expectations and brags
deceived him, in that, sooner then he expected (forgetting both his former
mischances and Zellallybegs later overthrow) the Georgians (with whom the
Persians as in a common cause had joined themselves) set upon him, and wel-nigh
routed his whole forces, and two months after, by a supply of the Mirza, Shaw
Abbas his eldest son (and Father to Shaugh Soffee, now reigning) with twelve
thousand Horse, they chased him to the Confines of Armenia, where Cycala
resolved to try his fortune once again upon them, and the fight indeed was
terrible and bloody, but at last the Georgian and Persian Princes prevailed
over him and his amazed Turks, who seeing resistance of no worth, fled and
gave the Persians liberty to kill thirty thousand of them, the Persians in
the battle having lost nine thousand, which loss to the Great Turk was so
great and sensible, that to this day, he has cause to think on it. For upon
this Victory Cycala fled into Iberia, and Abbas the King of Persia slaughtered
all his Garrisons in Teflis, Tauris, Cazbeen and Babylon, that year regaining
no less, then they had anciently lost in the troublesome Reign of King Tamas,
1537. to Solomon the Magnificent, fourth Emperor of the Turks.

Those unfortunate attempts could not daunt Cycala Bassaw, but after his
Apology to the Grand Signior, he enters the Persian Territories in hostile
manner (the same time that Hussau Bassaw marched against the Bulgars and
Hungarians) but his arrival and forces were soon known too Victorious Abbas,
who with Aliculibeg Sultan of Syras, Lollabeg, Methiculibeg, and other his
expert Captains and thirty thousand Coozel-bashes, sent Letters of Defiance
to him, and at the time appointed fought with him, took all his Cannons, slew
fifteen thousand of his men, and put him to a shameful flight: which ill
fortunes, so soon as the Grand Signior, Achmat heard of he raged extremely,
vowed his reward, but first sends the Bassaw of Caramania to conioyne their
forces, to try all ways of recovery, but Abbas the King of Persia and his men
were so used to conquer them, that with Victory in their foreheads; they
courageously assaulted the Turks, and for seven hours the Combat seemed
equal, till toward night, upon an ambush of the Georgians, the day fell to
the Persian, the Turks very sorrowful turned back, and sought to save
themselves, vowing never after to be commanded, by that unhappy General. Some
of which Army arrived at Constantinople, and upon rehearsal of Cycalas
overthrow, the Great Turk, was so transported with rage, that he gave Cycalas
treasure there, to the Ianizaries and Spaheis to prey over, and that his memory
might be forgot, pulled down his Palaces.

The Persian King upon these his Victories, hearing of Achmats tyrannies and
Expeditions into Hungary and other parts of Christendom, to encourage the
Christians dispatched three Ambassadors into Europe, some to the Emperor, the
other to the Pole, his Ambassadors are Zeuall Chawn Duke of Tyroau (our small
friend, at our being in his City) Methicullybeg and Iusbassahossau, whose
news as welcome, so they returned home well gratified, and after these, when
he had assured himself of Babylon, he sent Ambassador into England Nogdibeg,
and Shaugh Suares Nephew into France and Netherlands, and Sir Robert Sherley
(to the Pope and other Princes of Italy) through Muscouia.

One passage more of the miserable Georgians, I will deliver you, related by
Sir Robert Sherley as we traveled, in which is apparent the insulting pride of
Mahumetan Kings over those that are christened, and in which is seen the danger
of a poor Nation, that would maintain its freedom, placed twixt two
powerful adversaries, distressed Georgians and Circassians.

A late Tragical History of the Georgians, Christians.
SKander (or Alexander) was of late years King of Georgia, and for his Valor,
Justice, Temperance, and other virtues, famous through most of Asia.

Skander, as fortunate in many things, had this to his contentment added, the
issue of three sons, got of his Wife, a Sarcashen, her belief Christian,
Descent Noble, and worth equal, to her other attributes, but to speak
poetically as the best beauty, wants not blemishes, the best wits, vices, nor
the fairest day its showers, so albeit he judged himself, right blessed and
happy in his children, to show perfection is not in mortality, the sequel
shows you the weakness of our joys, and uncertain hopes fixed to posterity.

His father was yet living, and participant in all his happiness, but
regarding his own great years and sons deseruings, conferred the Royalty
and cares upon Prince Alexander, whose two younger brothers knowing themselves
by law of grace and nature, much inferior to Prince Skander. Yet their own
ambition and others assassinations, begot great opinions of their merits,
though grounded upon no other, then tyranny and pale Envy: and neglecting the
names given them at their Baptism, the faith of Christ, wherein their famous
Predecessors had stood, with constant valor to become Martyrs, The profession
they had seen their parents, elder brother and kindred, yea, and themselves
thither to apparently rejoice in. All these despised, Thre-beg Apostatizes, and
turns Turk, embracing without their persuasions the abominations of Mahomet.
And Constandel-chawn flies to the Persian, both, by their Idolatry, customs
and modes of that Nation endeavoring to advance his thoughts, though thereby he
revolted from his Savior. In whose power it was, in this impiety, to have
sent him flaming to Hell, in choking Brimstone and other plagues of revenge
and punishment.

This Constandel-chawn (as Fame goes of him) was active and ingenious, nature
having sufficiently enricht him, with gifts unworthy such a Master. Yet some
report, by casualtie of riding, or like accident, his body in some sort became
imperfect. Which notwithstanding quenched not, but rather inflamed his daring
courage, maliciously looking upon the virtue and perfections of other men's
minds and bodies.

Abbas (then ruling over Persia) offended with the Turkish insolences,
resolves to beat them out of Samachand, to effect it, he makes Ally-chawn his
General (a tried Warrior) and to encourage Constandell, ioynes him in equal
command with Ally-chawn the Persian, the way to affront the Turks, was through
Georgia, which gave a fit occasion to the Apostate Georgians ancient practices.
So that, without revealing his intended Treason to Ally-chawn or others in his
company, and brazen-faced, not fearing to behold his grieved parents and
friends by his Apostasy, he visits them, and to stop their exclamations (which
he saw ready against his Mahometanisme and Circumcision) he begins to lay open
his receiuings, creations, favor, wealth, and trust, amongst the Persians, his
great command proving no less then he had cold them. What knew they, but he
did this to secure his Country, who knew his heart, but he that made it, to
whose rule he devoted all his actions. And with such heathenish and detested
Oratory, this wretch so blazed himself, and in requital, instead of joy and
applauses, had no other language retaliated him, save tears, sighs, sad
countenances, and strange fears in their distracted visages.

All which moved him to such condolings, that in place of asking pardon,
requesting prayers, promising amends, and sympathizing with their hearty
dolours, he beseeches them, to leave off wounding him, (those expressions being
more pungent then Swords or Arrows.) And if any love or pity remained in
them, to forgive him, who had vowed a satisfaction and preferment to each of
them, in memory of their true affections (Hypocrite, Villain, that only aimed
at their destruction, and unwittingly in despite of his hellish purposes) sent
them to receive a Crown of Martyrdom.

But to make his Tragedy the cleerer, after some cessation of their sorrows,
and to mitigate their ill opinions, he earnestly inuites them to a solemn
Supper, where after great variety of entertainment, by his appointment, The
Georgian King, Prince and Nobles murdered at a Supper.
which succeeded at his watchword (being the holding up aloft a silver Ewre,
after washing) immediately rush in, his veiled Servants, the Executioners of
blood and horror, who, to accomplish his commandment, without let cut all
their throats, this parracide, the new Mohammedan (unworthy the name of
Constantine or Christian) without ayding them, or flying at these murderers,
but as in astonishment, lift up his hands and eyes, as if transformed by a
Gorgon, that at least his dying friends, (if souls then continue memories of
sad Catastrophies) might in some measure opinionate, his innocence in that
murder.

So when he saw, they were immortal (unjustly made so by his villainy) without
least show of remorse or piety, ere his parents, Prince Alexander, Magar and
other Nobles were cold in death, he proclaims himself apparent Heir to the
Georgian Diadem. Which sudden and unnatural project, as he knew, carried with
it amazement and detestation, so to become sure in his devices, he places new
Guards of Persians, in each fortified place, and where such wanted, he suddenly
built some, and there bestowed Garrisons. After which, to show the modester
Persians his integrity to Heathenisme, he sacrilegiously ransacks the Temples
or Houses of Christian Devotion, trampling under. foot (so far as he was
able) all relics and useful Ornaments, belonging to Presbytery.

And forcing along with him some troops of Georgians, to increase his Army, he
and Ally-chawn, in haste and fury marched to Somachand, daring the Turks to
aset battle. Which the Turkish General (who was son of Cycala the Bashaw,
in this J^enarary some where spoken of) for the honor of his Master the Grand
Signior, and his own engagement, accepts of, and with a resolved Army
encounters them.

Where was fought ((...) these old and inueterate Adversaries) a long, and
famous battle, in heat of which the two Generals, full of spirit and
resolution, fought hand to hand, without distraction, and after equal hopes of
victory, at length they parted, but not without honorable characters of
emulation and dexterity. Constandel-chawn, was wounded in the elbow, and
Sicala's son in the thigh, the army in this interim on both sides, expressing
all ways possible to obtain conquest, which yet was anticipated by the nights
darkness (the Moon, it seems, unwilling to patronize their bloodshed) so
that the Turks, first made retreat, and entered the Town. Though the report
gives victory to the Persian (bought at a dear price and worth little, when
obtained.)

Constandell, when he saw the Turks were entered Samac hand, gives order that
his wounded Soldiers should be cured, and resolving afterward, to bid them
battle or besiege them, he entrencht himself, pitching his own and
Ally-chawns Tent, one near the other.

The Georgians (he had forced to this battle) though tired with travail, and
hurt in that days combat, sorrowfully remembering the cruel murder of their
aged King and good Prince Alexander, inhumanely perpetrated by this Mohammedan
Monster, fearing his apparent Tyrannies, and ioying little to be copartners
with Infidels and Agents of his base ambition: these and some other reasons
swayed them. That, not respecting his usurped Title to the Crown of Georgia,
his power with the Persian, the rigor of arms, forsuch reuolts, unanimously
and with a faithful courage, they assaulted the fearelesse Persians, (that
little dreamed of such Conspiracies) and after some slaughter they came to the
Generals Tents, who had escaped escaped thence, at first news of this sedition,
the Georgians, pulled down their new Kings Tent, and instead of Constandell
(whom they thirsted after) they cut in pieces a base Eunuch whom he of long
time against Laws of God and Nature had made a Catamite.

In this strange and unexpected trouble Constandel-chawn to (whose imagination
then were visible, the wounds and hated murders of his father, brother and
friends) after he had fled his Tent (in wonder how this tumult took beginning,
and by whose encouragements) armed with amazement and nake dues, he followed
after Ally-chawn, his neighbor and copartner. Whom so soon as he espied, he
threw himself at his feet (supposing this combustion came from his invention,
either to murder him, or at best, to manifest how little he accounted his
ambitions) and crying out with a loud and hideous voice, exclaimes against
cursed Fortune, who when he thought himself, most free from danger, and in
the next degree to security and promotion, had bitterly cast him down, and
made him more abject, then in his former beings before he had massacred, his
dearest friend^ to become advanced. And if that Ally-chawn desired his ruin,
he requested him with earnestness, his death might be given him, by such a
Heroicke hand as his, rather then perish by the rascal multitude, whose envy
and rage he knew, both insufferable and without mercy. Especially that his
Georgians (whom by this time, he saw were principal against him) might not
brag hereafter, of their fortune, and daring resolutions to cut off him their
Sovereign.

But Ally-chawn, who at first, thought this rebellion, began from Constandel,
when he saw it otherwise, his fear and amazement became greater, and
insensible how to qualify these bloudle (...), and seeing the fire and noise
grow higher, nothing but clangor and outcries possessing both sense and Tents.
He embraces halfe-dead Constandel, assures him of his innocence and
ignorance, bids him to take courage, and conuocate the Persian Horsemen, and
without more inquisition to post away a little further from the Turk, who
doubtless had he known of this conspiracy, had entered with them and routed
them utterly.

The two Generals having given signal to their Captains when and where to
follow them, upon two swift Arabian coursers fled away, the night and disguised
habit furthering their privy parting, where being some miles distant, the
ablest of their army followed them. The reuengfull Georgians also another way,
retyring into Georgia, displacing such Garrisons of Persians as Constandell had
seated there, and by each way fortifying all places of resistance and
advantage, assured of asecond entry of the Persian.

And indeed, this opinion, did not any whit deceive them, for Constandel-chawn
when he had recovered the rest of his distracted army, animating them with all
reasons possible to provoke revenge, upon these weak and treacherous
Georgians, rebels to the Law of Arms and Traitors in a high degree to him
their Sovereign. He protested to receive none into mercy, his former
indulgence of a father, should now perfectly convert it self into desire of
utter extirpation and tyranny, or rather Justice, that the Persians may see
his faith and loyalty toward them, and all the World be witnesses of just and
impartial retribution, to them his faithless and mad-brained slaves and
vassals.

The Persians, wisely conceiving, their former losses, weaknesses and remote
beings, and that Constandels late Parricides, were incomparable, able not only
to provoke loyal Subjects to revenge (and having indeed another King,
Temeriscus, son of Alexander) but even strangers, in way of pity, and to
divert like miseries from their own Nations, they were more addicted
homewards, and had returned quietly, had not Ally-chawns persuasion altered
them. Who being bribed or by great imprecations conjured by Constandel to
chastise them, at last they consented to go, if but to regaine their late lost
honors, and that the Georgian valor might not seem too terrible.

Glad of this resolution was Constandel, and no less glad, to see them engaged
in the Quarrel of their reputation, by this, not doubting to refeat himself,
and make advantage of the forfeitures of their weak inheritances. So to give
more vigor to this action, he, gives out great words against the Georgians,
desiring the Persians to enrich themselves with the spoils, of goods or
beauties, that they may see how truly he labors to content and satisfy them
to the full.

In this manner proceeds this imperious Constandel, daring to trample on his
Sires ashes, and rejoicing how he should see his Country in consuming flames,
with a hideous massacre of man, woman and child (but Almighty God who is the
Ancient of days whose arm is never shortened, nor power unable, or unwilling
to defend his servants, these poor Bethulians, gave way to this enraged
Holofernes, so far as for his glory he saw convenient, though, long patient
at length confounded him) for this Army of the Persians, so soon, as they
arrived near to Georgia, was affronted by the Queen, (wife of late murdered
Alexander, eldest brother unto Constandel) and being a Lady of faithful memory
to her destroyed husband, a very good Christian of great wit and courage, and
much beloved of her people, she rather chose to sacrifice her self (if that
would be sufficient) then see the downfall of the Georgians her Countrymen.) So
courageously entering the Persian army, discloses who she is, and as an
Ambassador required the sacred Law of Nations, to speak freely and return to
the King her son without disturbance, which granted her, she desires a
parlee with her brother Constandel, that hearing of her being there, issued
forth in bravery and show of insolence, demanding her business.

This poor Lady, after some signs of sorrow and respect unto his person,
begins to reprehend him mildly, sets before him, his late murders, how
odious they were to all the Christians (and as she believed) unto Infidels.
What could he expect, when he had ruined his countrymen, burnt all their trees
and Cities, he might easily know the Persians used him for their own
aduantagious attempts, and that he should never be without the brand of
Traitor and Parricide, that as yet, the means was open to redeem the good
opinion of his subjects, which he must look to do, if ever he would be
famous to fight against them, or secure to defend his own: say they had
offended him, yet no virtue more deified a Prince then Clemency and in some
measure they deserved mercy, the destruction of their beloved Princes slain by
him and vndeseruingly, moving their choler, and that it might be his own case,
which fidelity (no doubt) would please his soul, though in other joys, and
with the immortal, he knew the Georgians could never be vanquished, without
infinite murder, the valor of one Georgian, equal to contend with five
Persians, the very Mameluckes, Ianizaries, and chief Commanders of Persia and
India now being Georgians: and who doubtless would bear revenge in their
hearts, if he should be so cruel to their Kindred. She beseeched him (if he
could not be dissuaded) to condescend thus far, that they two might next day
meet, conveniently betwixt both Armies: where after discourse, they would
refer peace or war unto his judgment.

This parley ended, proud Constandell, after some notions of pride and
haughtiness, bids her rest confident of his resolutions, that, as Nature had
graced him with the dignity of being eldest (his brothers being murdered) and
the safety of Georgia depended upon the care and fame of such a person as he
reputed himself, he would, after some chastisement of his Rebels, take upon
him the defense and government of that Kingdom, and for Temeriske their
supposed King (her son) he should not want preferment, either the
inheritance of Mengrellia, (a forced right) Charsee or some such Dukedom,
should give him satisfaction, in the extreme of his desires or merits, his
infancy and doubt of legitimation, secluding him a while, from enjoying any
Sovereignty: and that his deserts and right might appear, perfect in view of
all men, he accepted of her motion, and would with twenty horsemen meet her,
in an appointed place twixt both the Armies, where his Title and plea of right
and entrance should defend it self, as well in conference, as battle.

This granted, after two days respire, according to the Articles,
Constandel-chawn and the Queen of Georgia met, at the place appointed: where
she begun, her promeditated Oratory, persuading him, to look with pity on
his Country, the Widows, aged men, Orphants, innocent Children, and such
Motives, begging mercy^ then she represented the weakness of his designs,
withstood both by the enraged Armies of the Georgians, resolved to maintain
their liberty to the last man, The favor Temeriske had with the Persian, (in
whose Court he was educated, and lived much honored and affected by the people
and King) who when Canstandell had discharged the utmost of his rage, was sure
of small thanks from Abbas King of Persia, In that there was no conquest (the
Georgian and Persian being friends) but a provocation against their loyalty
and alliance. This under (fraud she spoke that he might be reconciled, and by
fair doings, lay a better ground of his advancement, and retreat from Persia,
whereby he might become Commander, and have means, to recover his faith, which
he ought to look after repentantly and with more zeal, then the Conquest of
the Universe besides. The Georgians (passing by his irreligion and Mahumetisme)
had a very good opinion of his valor and knowledge in Arms, so that they were
desirous to entertain him as their Governor. By his expertnesse encouraging
them to a defense against the Turks and Persians, both whom in all occasions
were insulting over them, because indefensiue and without government, And that
she had faithfully spoke, what she desired, though it was in great part against
the dignity and security of Temeriske her son, as then in Persia.

Whereto, Constandel-chawn, beyond measure efflated with pride and high
opinions of his worth and conquests (judging his being their, no less) replied
in few words. That he was fearelesse of his establishment in his Fathers
Royalties, That amongst such haughty and perfidious people, he had rather come
in as a Conqueror, then by right of succession, that himself and his good
friends the Persians had suffered in their honor so exceedingly, that without
battle and blood they could not part well satisfied, that he had his Army in
Battalia; and resolved to execute, that (notwithstanding he perceived the
Georgians ready to receive them in sury) he doubted not to massacre the best of
them. For as he had incorporated himself unto another people in Religion,
speech, order and action, and such as loved him, he would never trust his own
Countrymen, who had with such peaceable faces so lately betrayed him, and whom
he knew, irreconcilable, and so assured her, in a word, he sought revenge
and murder, not excepting the innocents.

At which the Heroicke Queen, sighed, and shook her Iauelin (saying, if it
will be no better, then God destroy the Homicide) immediately upon that sign
he was shot to the heart, and sunk down dead, with a wrathful countenance,
Duke Constandel Slain by an Ambushment.
as only grieuing he perished in this base sort, without recompense. At sight
of which, the Queen, and the ambushed Musketeers (hid of purpose to destroy
him) forthwith with retired to their Army, who expected the event, and received
her joyfully.

Ally, chawn, when he knew, Constandell was slain: was cooled in a further
revenge, only that the King of Persia, might not impute cowardice or treason to
him, he speedily affronted the Georgians, who received him in warlike sort,
with such fury and have pressing on the Persians, that they desired to come
off without more venture, and so after loss of some common Soldiers retired
home, leaving the Georgians Victors, though defensiues, who without delay, slew
all such Garrisons of Persians, as eclypsed them, and by all industry of men
and moneys, made strong all such places of defense and refuge, as might defend
themselves, and offend their enemies.

So soon as Ally-chawn returns, he acquaints the King his Master. In what had
happened. He was no stranger to the Georgian humors, he knew well, tyranny was
of all things, most odious to generous dispositions, and that men's bodies
might, but never the minds of the Georgians be subiugated by violence, or
deceitful manners. Whereupon he studies how to pacify and draw them to him,
he knew policy was of more force then power, he assured himself, so ancient
a Nation required a Prince of their own belief and temper, he knew Temeriscus
was he, and thereupon encourages his progress, affords him many Complements of
Wel-wishes and Alliance, clothes him sumptuously, returns him all the
ornaments of Right and Royalty, were taken from his Predessours, and guarded
with a train of Coozel-bashawes, sends him home securely, where many thousands
of his people thronged to see him, ioying and enjoying his wished company. And
Temeriske to denotate himself a thankful person, requites with many favors
such Persians as accompanied him, and sends old Abbas word of his welcomes and
inthronization.

Now see how mischief appears in a lovely and vndistempered Scene, when all
Asia celebrated this reconcilement, and none could fasten upon any color of
futured coffeehouse.

An Ambassador of the Grand Signior, arriues at Spawhawn, and there under
pretext of other employments, by all private subtlety, labors to annihilate
this late made Friendship, being very prejudicial to the Turkish Empire: so
that he first sends secretly to young Temeriske and by his Sinon, possesses him,
the Persian would never digest their late overthrow near to Armenia, and that
Ally-chawn had a promise of being Vizier, or Lieutenant of those Countries for
the Persian, who resolved to make it a Province and to extirpate the Title of a
Kingdom. As he had done to Larr, Shushan, Babylon, Hircania, Candahor, Hery
and other Kingdoms, to the prejudice of their honor, and apparent ruin of
Christian Religion.

This inueighing discourse, so prevailed, with credulous youthful Temeriske,
that he resolves to defend himself, the maintenance of his true belief, life,
honor and freedom. The less fearing them. In regard the Turks had sworn to
help them upon all occasions.

Now when the politic Ambassador, had wrought Prince Temeriske, as he
desired, he then persuades with Abbas, that the Georgians hated him, that their
King had entertained discourse with the Grand Signior, and sought but an
advantage to betray his trust, that if his words seemed of no moment, the
matter was not consequentious, and his employment carried him, to other ends
then foreign Objects.

The King of Persia, says but little. Imagining the more, and being ever
jealous and apt for each suspicion, apprehends it fully, and though he knew the
Ambassador hated their agreement, and would rejoice to see them disunited, yet
to rest confident of Temerisks alliance and fidelity, and that the Turk might
see his error, he sends his Elchee (or Ambassador into Georgia, and by him
entreats Prince Temeriske to come and visit him.

The Ambassador found Royal welcome, but all his asseuerations and desires
could not draw Temeriske to visit Persia, he sends excuses, but those so weak
and unwelcome, that Abbas in no small choler, swears his destruction,
repenting that he had heartned him with too much clemency (a virtue very rare
in this old Abbas) and sending for Aliculibeg, Iolla-beg and other Captains,
with a potent Army he inuades Georgia, where finding small resistance, he gave
leave to his needy Army, to destroy and make all use and mean of benefit,
where ere they traveled, so that they fired their Villages sacrilegiously
profaned their Churches, defloured their Virgins, and committed all such
villainy, as lawless and barbarous enemies most hunt after: and having enricht
their Treasury, satiated Revenge, and fortified some defensive places, the
victorious Persians return, cross over Taurus, and leave their King at
Farabaut at the Caspian Sea, till more employment.

In this wretched time, Temeriske fled to the Turk, who readily received him
and assures him of re-establishment, this granted, that he would protest an
inviolable league with them against the Persian. To which the distressed
Georgian assents, and accompanied with a mighty Army of Turks and his own
Nation, reenters Georgia, in a battle, beats the enemy, and by a foolish pride
and security of the Persian Deputy, defeats their best and ablest forces
killing the Deputy, and recovering what formerly they had been put from, and
finding all things so well ordered the Turks return some unto Teflis, the
rest to other places.

The news of this came presently to Abbas King of Persia, and as Fame
increases in its progress, so without question, the Georgian outrage was
aggrauated to the height, by some, that hated them. He was as a man distracted,
his sweet ease and effeminate sports in Mozendram, so one way swayed him, and
point of Honor and Revenge the other way provoked him. At last, after a volly
of imprecations against them, for snatching him from his golden quiet and
recreations, flaming with cruelty, he sends for his Generals, and commands
them levy a mighty Army, vowing the utter destruction of these Georgians, and
attiring himself in red, his Tulipant, Cabbay, Boots, Scabberd, and other
furniture (as signals of blood and horror) In hasty marches he enters King
Temeriskes unhappy Country (who hearing of the mighty Army and undoubted
threats of the King of Persia had with all his friends and ablest men,
conueighed away their Plate and Jewels, retired into some protecting places of
the Grand Signiors Countries, not daring to oppose the huge Army of their
Adversaries at that instant.)

The Persian with like liberty to offend and spoil, slew all the aged and
infant Georgians they could meet withal: violated the chaste Matrones,
regarded no age nor sex, committed all possible villainy in the Churches,
utterly defaced and spoiled their Groves and pleasant places, massacred all
their Cattle, cut down their Mulberry trees, and wholly destroyed their
profitable Silke-wormes and many such like outrages, in so high a nature as
could be effected by renenge or tumult, and full gorged with blood and booty,
they returned home.

The Georgians and Temeriske their sorrowing King, thought this a stain unto
their Honor, but policy and discretion warranted them, that they might
afterward be even with the Persian, when least suspected, and so soon as they
heard of Abbas departure, they resolved to fight with or famish all his
Garrisons, and having obtained a good force from the relieuing Turks and
Tartars, he easily advanced homewards, in all places finding nothing but signs
of desolation and murder, by which this poor Prince refrained not from tears
and prayers to Almighty God, to punish those deuastating and merciless
Infidels, and that by his Omnipotency he might recover, what in right was
taken from him, and his miserable subiects^ which his desires, it seems, were
granted him. For in less then two years, he again became Lord of all his
Territories, expulsed the Persian, repaired his Cities, rebuilt his Temples,
and to his power distributed graciously to each impouerished, and strengthened
more then formerly, his defensive Cities, Castles, and Cittadels, ruling with
more fame and splendor then he had done before.

And in some measure became even, with some of their heauiest enemies, by
asubtle device of Morad-chawn a Duke of Georgia, who stomached exceedingly the
villainy they had acted in his Country, having destroyed two pleasant Castles
and fruitful Forests of Mulbery-trees, belonging to himself, which were both
his greatest profit and contentment.

He flies unto the Persian, assures them of his friendship and perfect hatred
to his unthankful Countrymen, tells them he would deliver not only King
Temeriscus and his valiant Mother prisoners to them, but also all the strength
of Georgia. And in this, he begets belief, associates twelve Persian Princes,
and an Army with him, to whom he adds some of his own: and after long
travail, so soon as he attained the Georgian Confines, in a dark night, such
time as the Persians slept, and least suspected Treason. Morad with his
Confederates issues armed from their Tents, making an Alarm, as if the Tartars
had come upon them: Eleven Dukes and 700, men slain by the Georgiaus, Anno
1618.
by which stratagem, the amazed Persians, fled, maimed and discouraged, eleven
Dukes slaughtered, and seven hundred common men: Morad returned joyful of his
victory and the Persians sad, and vowing never to credit a reconciled enemy any
more. Old Abbas himself, bit his lip when he heard this Tragedy, but
concealed his passion, forced to it by his present wars against the Turk and
Arab.

This shall be enough for this digression, I shall henceforth recompense the
Reader, with our successiue. Travails and descriptions of Towns, Customs and
Places. And (because falling in my way) will begin with the Metropolis, and
best built City of all the Persian Monarchy, Spahawn.

A Description of Spawhawn.
THe Imperial City Spawhawn is in thirty two degrees thirty nine minutes
North, is seated in the Kingdom of Parthia, in a fair Plain and pleasant
Horizon. It Is by some called Spaan, and by others Spahan and Hispahan, as their
several Dialects concorded.

It is a City of as great extent as Fame, and as ancient as famous, and no
less proud then ancient. At this time triumphing over those once more Royal
Cities, Babylon, Niniue, Shushan, Echatan, Pers^polis, Arsatia and Nabarca.

This City was in her infancy called Dura (but whither in that Dura where the
great Assyrian Monarch Nabuchadnez^ar erected his golden Coloffe, I know it
not.) But this is known, that it was called by the ancient Greeks
Hecatompilos, from its hundred gates. For Hecatonpolis was meant by the Craetan
I Will which had so many Cities.

The boasting Persians, named her, for her bigness (half the World) and this
greatness of hers was long ago, for these Scythopersae know her no longer,
then called Spawhawn, which has no signification. To say truth she is beautiful
and ancient, her circuit may be nine miles, and in that, the better half is
Gardens.

But he that wrote it was a days journey about on horseback, that it was and
is the most stately City in the Orient, that it has two impregnable Forts,
with great store of great Ordnance, a deep Trench and two Seraglioes, having
walls glistering with red Marble and parget of diverse colors paued with
Mosaicke work, every thing combining beauty and majesty, I cannot believe
him, for I was their above twenty days, and no time idle, and could see no
such strength, bulk or rareness in her, such as it is shall deliver you, but
first of her antiquity,

Before it had the denomination of Spahawn, such time as the World knew her in
her Greek name Hecatonpilon (or hundred gates) Demetrius Nicannor, son of
Demetrius Soter, never satiated with ambition and unjust desires, couets no
less (though none less able to encompasse it) the sole Empire of syria and
Jerusalem, willing he was to attempt it valiantly, but in equal valor and
resolution he saw many jealous Princes envious at him, which not knowing how
to withstand, rather then fail of his plot, he resolves upon unjust means,
perjury and murder (qualities degenerating from the nature of Royal Princes,
yea and valiant men.) And first he begins with Antiochus, son of Alexander,
whom unworthily he slew, because interposing the view of his ambition.

Which when valiant Tryphon heard of, he resolves revenge and accordingly
prepares to finish it, which Nicannor fearing, and laboring to make his
preparations stronger, posts into Media, where then he found Arbaces the
Persian King, who hearing his message, made him see his weakness, to fly for
aid to a reconciled enemy, for Arbaces, remembering some passed injuries,
though triuiall, yet to tax his insolence, without any intercession, sent him
prisoner to Hecatompilon (our now Spahawn) where for two years he was
strictly looked too, and thence, conueighed into Hircania (at that time subject
to the Persian) where for some months he used him hardly, and then supposing
he was even with him, gave him a little liberty, lest through grief and want
of exercise, he might hope to lose him, which he no way aimed at. For in his
heart he loved him, and the year after, forgave him his ransom, pitied his
hard fortune, and looking better into his youthful qualities and person
affected him, made him his son in Law, and with a potent Army fought with his
Opposers, and such as in his imprisonment had seized upon his Kingdoms, and
with great good fortune established him in his former royalties, where for some
years he governed happily. Which History I offer you only to memorize
Spawhawn in somewhat, out of her former Title. This happening before our Saviors
bodily coming into this World one hundred and thirty years, or thereabouts.

In the year after our Saviors birth 1030. (such time as Edward the Confessor
ruled England, and Griffith ap Llewellin, Wales. One Mahomet was Sauldan or
Sultan of Persia, who being distressed both by the Caliph of Babylon and the
Indians, he implored aid from Tangrolipix (or Sadocke, Prince of the
Zelzuckian Family) who accordingly came and immediately overthrew the
Babylonian Pysastris. For which good service Tangrolipix desires leave only to
pass over Araxis, with intent to see the Turks, which was denied him by the
thanklesse Souldan, whereat enraged, he lurkes in the Carmanian Desert, daily
doing much mischief, to prevent which, Mahomet sends against him twenty
thousand Soldiers, whom Tangrolipix by stratagem easily vanquished, and by that
victory grew so daring, that he affronted the Persian to his face, who fought
with him with three score thousand men, Sultan of Persia breaks his (...).
but lost the victory and flying to Spawhawn, twixt it and Rustans Tomb he
brake his neck, by which Tangrolipix got the Crown, and brought in the
Turkish or Scythique Race.

The City is round, like Paris, its circuit I have said about nine English
miles, her inhabitants three hundred thousand souls at most.

The chief Ornaments of the City are the Mydan, (or great Market, the
Hummums, or Hot-houses) the Moscheas, the Kings Palaces and the Gardens.

The Mydan or great Merkitt in Spahawne.

A. is a Mosque South.

B. is an archt way to the North.

C. is the Kings house.

D. is a Mosque East.



The Mydan, is in the heart of the City, and to say truth, all the bravery,
concourse, wealth and Trade is comprised in her. It Is built Quadrangular, though
of unequal Angles. From North to South; is seven hundred seventy five of my
paces, from East to West two hundred, but accounting the I Will to the North
issuing, is at least a thousand.

It is built in form of our royal Exchange, with four Isles, and a court
within, called the Hippodrome, so called from their running with horses there. It Is
stored with all Merchandises, chiefly Drugs, and to this place daily resort
most Nations, as English, Dutch, Portugals, Arabians, Turks, Jews, Armenians,
Muscouians, and Indians.

This City is distant from Shiras two hundred and odd miles, from hence to
Babylon three hundred miles; from hence to Cazbeen and Tauris two hundred
seventy miles, and to the Caspian Sea three hundred and thirty miles English.

The Hummums here are round, spacious and costly, one of which built by this
King, cost fifteen thousand pound sterling, ere it was finished, they are much
given to bath, and it is most of their Physic, it is preualent too against the
lues venerea, and that disease not a little infects the lustful. The men go
in the afternoon, the women at morn, and guided by the Eunuchs.

The Moscheas, or Churches are large and handsome, that at the West side of the
Mydan is most beautiful, it is round built with good white Marble five yards
high from the Sole, the rest is dried Bricks, colored over with Posies of
Arabique and like work.

In the midst is a Tancke of water, with which they purify their hands and
eyes, when they prepare to prayer: they perform their Orisons kneeling, and
ducking frequently. They turn their faces toward Mecha. Near which at
Talnabi rests the bones of their great Mohomet.

At the appearing of every new Moon, they go out to worship it, and each day
at S^n-set in every Ward of the Town or City they beat their Kettle-Drummes,
till he arise with the Antipodes.

At that time and at his looking in our Horizon, a well voiced boy from the
Tarrasse or top of their Churches sings Eulogies to Mahomet and Ally, their
voices are shrill and heard far off, and then each Laycke Pagan falls to
devotion, what exercise soever they then are acting.

Their Prayers are in the Arabique, their Negotiations in other Languages.
Their Alcoran contains many Canons for Devotion. Some of which in my Discourse
of their Religion I shall present you.

The Kings prime House is within the Mydan, yet no way entrenching further then
the other Houses, it is two stories high, gilded and wrought in antique works
and posies, to the outward view, within, the rooms are covered with rich
Carpet^, the roof embost and wrought with Gold and Blue, and tarrased above.

Before his door lie vnmounted forty three Demicannons, one and thirty are
brass, the rest of Iron, and are Culuerins. These were brought from Ormus or
Babylon.

At the North end of the Mydan, is eight or nine rooms, like Chapels hung
with Lamps, which being many and clear, give a dainty splendor; hither
sometimes the King repaires, and sees the Sodomiticall Boys and Wenches dance,
and sport together, and when he is away, the people have them.

At the furthest end, North of the Mydan, is the Kings Mint, wherein all
foreign Coins are new stamped, with the Persian Characters. One day is for
money, a second for Gold, a third for Brass, besides this he has fourteen
other Mints, at Larr, Shiras, Babylon, Tauris, Cazbeen, Candahor, and other
Cities.

The Gardens fall in the next place, to be spoken of, and in this, this City
enioyes many both large and delightful; I will content my self to speak of
one, by which you may conjecture of the rest.

It Is at the Southwest end of the City, to which you pass through a street of
two miles length and better, both sides planted with Chenor-trees.

The Garden is called Nazar-iareeb, it is a thousand paces from North to South,
and seven hundred broad. It has varieties of fruits and pleasant trees, and
is watered with a stream cut through the Coronian Mountain, and is forceably
brought hither, the first walk is set with pipes of Lead and Brass, through
which the water is urged* and gives variety of pleasure.

From the entrance to the further end, is one continued open ally, divided into
nine ascents, each mounting higher by a foot then other, the space twixt each
ascent, is smooth and pleasant. In the midst is a fair Tancke or pond of
water, of twelve equal angles and rows set with pipes to spout the water.

At the entrance is a little (but wel-built) house of pleasure, the lower
rooms adorned with Crystal water, immured with Tancks of rich white Marble.

The Chambers above, are enricht with pictures, representing sports, hawking,
fishing, archery, wrestling, etc. other places in use very richly ore-laid with
Gold and Azure.

But that which is of most commendation is the prospect it enioyes, for by
being seated so high, it ore-tops and gives the excellent view of a great part
of the City, which cannot be obtained elsewhere.

Returning to the City you pass over a Bridge, archt and supported with five
and thirty Pillars, under which is a stream of water, sometimes so broad as
the Thames at London, but other sometimes near dried up, and he that looks
to it is called Prince of the River, a name and employment of great honor and
benefit.

Abbas, the late victorious King, with whom few things were impossible. For
many years past, has endeavored, to cut through many Mountains (the Coronian
being next the Town) to bring the river to Spawhawn, by the daily labor of
forty thousand slaves) which of it self runs quietly fifty miles distant
thence, and has performed it almost successefully: which when it has
perfection, may well compare with that old wonder, intended by vainglorious
Nero; twixt Ostia and Auernus, now called Lycola.

Out of the City (behind that late described Garden) is a Mount rising in
midst a spacious plain) which by the Persians is called Darow, and supposed that
place where Darius (in imitation of his Predecessor Xer^ces) wept upon view of
his innumerous Army, so suddenly to become nothing.

A little further, upon a high imperious mountain is Rustans Tomb, more
eminent for height and perspicuitie, then beauty or admiration, his Image is
cut very artificially upon a black shining marble mountain near
Persae-polis, called Nogdi-rustan, he is of great account among the Gowers, a
people living subject to the Persians, though of old the sole inhabitors here,
till Alexander conquered them.

They are well grounded in Traditions, and can forge Lies without Authority,
beget wonder and belief amongst the admiring Persians.

They say Rustan lived, Story of Rustan.
when Artaxerxes surnamed Longimanus flourisht with the Persian Diadem. In the
year after the Creation 3500. he was son of Xerxes, who entered Greece to
ruin Athens, (which attempt, set Persae-polis on fire, not long time after)
with an Army of two millions, so great, that Historians report, they drunk
Rivers dry. And yet were vanquished at Sea by Themistocles at Salamis, and by
land at the Straights of Thermopilae by Leonidas, with a handful of men.

This Artaxerzes was that Ahashuerus, who married Hester, the great friend and
preserver of her people the Jews. And this was he who gave order to Esdras,
to re-build Jerusalem.

In his time this Champion Rustan lived and was of great account with his
Master, whose love a while protected him from domestique Adversaries,
other-whiles his own valor was his safeguard. By which two he enjoyed great
dignities and reports, till old age ouertook him, which killed him not, but his
traitorous brother Shawgad, out of no other cause then pale Envy, sought his
destruction, and effected it; by digging pits, covered with boughs, which
seeming harmless, gave him miserable ruin, into one of which as he was in
chase; he fell, and calling out for help, his deuillish brother affoorded it*
with death-bringing-darts, basely destroying a valiant Champion, and one who
most of all others, gave glory to him and his own Family, who notwithstanding
ere he died with two arrows shot out of the pit, slew his traiterous brother
and his father in Law. In memory of him, the people bestowed this erected
Monument, which by all ensuing Conquerours has escaped defacing, finding better
dealing, then the man himself could from his Fratricide.

These Gowers, are of the same opinion and antiquity, with the Persees in
India.

The Persians, now ruling over them, think basely of them, they adore the Fire
and other Elements: When they salute at morn, they sprinkle their urine, in
one another faces, they delight to have their apparel tinctured with yellow,
the women go vnuailed, and have a flame colored Scarf hanging behind them.
They never marry out of their own Tribes, Trades and Religion, the dead they
carry to a Tree, Funeral of the Gowers.
hollow within, in which they place the carcass clothed as he lived standing
upright, supported by the bole, each side releeuing him. Their he stands, till
his Son or Nephew (who diligently in a secret place is opposite) marks which
eye the Vultures (who smell him and come to prey there quickly) first feeds
upon, by which they undoubtedly imagine where his soul is. If the right eye
first, they feast for joy, presuming he is in Paradise, if his left, they
mourn, imagining the Devil has him, and this known, they in their fashion
bury him.

In Spawhawn (at our being there) were two Couents of Spanish Friars,
Augustines and Carmelites (which last if they eat no flesh, I fear, can here
get little fish, to grow wanton by.) They have a pretty Chapel there, gilt
and furnished with Church Ornaments, Tapers, Chalices, Crucifixes, Images,
Altars, and Organs. They would convert Mahometans to the knowledge of Christ,
but the Armenians love them not, nor do the Persians Images. They serve well
to give Intelligences unto God, and for Christendom.

In this City is a Column, compact of several heads, of men, Antilopes,
Buckes, Goats, Buffols, Elephants and Camels, it is at the Base about twenty
foot in compass, and, I suppose, the height threescore. It was erected upon
this occasion, when Abbas was proclaimed King, the Spawhawnians would not let
him enter, but charged him with the death of Mahomet his father, and the
murder of Emyrhamze the Prince, his elder brother.

This netled Abbas, and made him swear stoutly by his Crown, by his fathers
Soul, the eight refulgent Orbs, the eleven hundred names of God, and the
honor of his Prophet Mahomet, for this rebellion he would chastise them
bravely, cut off forty thousand of their heads, to raise a Pillar of terror
and admiration, as a ready sacrifice unto Mahomet.

After much Adoo, he conquers them, ransacks the City, kills a thousand of
them, and mindful of his oath, gives order to behead forty thousand, a
lamentable cry was raised, and much entreaty used, but to small purpose. The
vow of the Persians never alters, nor could he be dissuaded, till the Muftie,
or sacred messenger, assures him, Mahomet by revelation told him, his oath
might be dispensed with, so forty thousand were beheaded, no matter what, to
which at length he is content to, whereupon a general massacre of all sorts of
beast executed, the harmless often suffering for the nocent, and this
monument of merciless mercy, was reared higher then any Mosque in that City,
though now grown ruinous.



A like Trophee, was built by cruel Mustapha Bassaw, General for the Great
^urke Amurath the Third, who with a hundred thousand men entered Persia, and was
repulst by Sultan Tocomack the Persian General, where, in the Caldaran Plains
thirty thousand Turks lost their lives, and only eight thousand Persians, of
whose heads Mustapha made a monument for his dear bought victory, and horror
to the Persians.

Hence we iournied toward the Court which then was in Hircania, near the
Caspian Sea, first night to Reig, hence forward traveling all the night and
reposing (I cannot say sleeping, the Gnats so troubled us) all the day.

We had guides and a Conuoy to direct us, the Stars were theirs, without
whose aim there is no certainty. The Sun is so fiery and makes the Sands so
scalding on the day time, that it then prohibits Pilgrimages.

Hence to Sardahan, sixteen miles from our last Manzeil, next night to Whomg
seven and twenty miles, and next to Tawgebawt, a House and Garden of the
Kings, giving place to few in Parthia. The house is small in compass, not
affoording above a dozen Chambers, but the Ornament is Gold, enameled and
pargeted very daintily: the Garden is North from the House yet joining to it,
it has six several discents, each part giving eighty paces, and seventy
broad, it is watered by a clear riuolet (tho little) by whose virtue it abounds
in Damask Roses and other flowers, plenty of broad spreading Chenor-trees
(which is like our Beech) with Pomegranats, Peaches, Apricockes, Plummes,
Apples, Pears, Chestnuts and Cherries. It has Echoes, natural Grottoes and
Labyrinths, made by art and nature. It enioyes a Hot-house well built and paued
with white Marble, and these are the rarer, because they are seated and walled
about, in a large even Plain, rich in nothing but Salt and Sand.

Hence we rode to Bawt, (which signifies a Garden too) next in Obigarmy, both
these are Houses belonging to the King, who twixt Spawhawn and the Caspian Sea
has a House at every twelve miles for entertainment.

This nights travail was bettered by Cynthia's candor, and behooffull, because
we traveled through a miserable inhospitable wild Desert of Sand, A sandy
Desert.
ten miles broad, and the length ten times so much. The sands by the fury of
Tempests lies in great drifts, like mountains, so light and unstable, that the
high ways are never certain, whereby passengers are often inuolued and
ouer-turned, they and their Camels, and so perish in the merciless sands; to
prevent which danger (as much as can be) the King causes every three miles a
Castle to be builded for a safeguard against storms, which though strong and
spacious yet (because their foundation is sandy) are in March or September
yearly torn asunder in peece-meale, and no sign left of their once being
there.

That night we rode thirty miles, and next night to Suffedaw one and twenty
miles, next to Siacow, wherein is a Carrauans-raw of white free stone, and the
first building of that material, I saw in those parts of Parthia.

That night we rode thirty miles, most of which was over a broad causey built
by incredible labor and expense, over a miserable Desert, nothing but Salt
(not unlike pure Snow) where note that the whole Wilderness is so deep and
boggie, A Salt Desert.
that Horse, Camel, or Elephant, if they go from the Causey are plunged and
buried in the Salt and Bogge, yea, many out of curiosity and ignorance have
perished in it. The danger is added, by reason of Thieves who keep the passage,
no way but back upon the same Causey showing way for flight or defense, and so
soon as we had past securely the Salt Desert, we rode over, and about hills so
high and glomerating, as if Olympus had been cut into Dedalian Labyrinths.

From Siacow, we rode next night over another salt and vast Desert, the ground
of like danger and trouble, in which many thousands have also perished, and
would yet be lost, had not the King caused a like large and deep grounded
Causey be built for their security, this nights journey was two and twenty
miles.

Whence next night unto Gezz a Lodge of the Kings, eighteen miles distant from
our last days rest, which moonlight night, we rode through the bottomes of
transected Taurus, whose stupendous forehead, wets it self within the Airy
middle Region. The lane or passage is forty yards wide, the hills on either
side towering as I have spoken of, the inhabitants say that Mortis Haly (their
renowned Prophet) cut this marualous passage with his slycing Semiter, that his
people might pass more easily.

How false soever that be, this is certain, that twelve years past, a very
valiant and famous Thief, with five hundred horse and three hundred shot, was
Lord of this straight, and received tribute from all passengers.

This aggrated the Persian King exceedingly to be so bearded, A famous
Christian turns Mohammedan, and is slain.
and proposed a great reward and honor to any that could vanquish him. 'Twas
known to most of them, this Thief never refused the Combat against one or
twenty: Yet an Armenian Christian of more courage then grace affronted him,
fought with him a long space, and after much ado slew him. When suddenly the
Mountainers fell upon him, and to his succor an ambush of Persians opposed
them, overcame and cut them all in pieces.

The Armenian returns to the Court with victory, had his reward, and became so
full of vainglory, and hopes that he turned Mohammedan, and was made a Sultan,
but see the vengeance pursuing him (for who can be secure without a Savior) he
continued happy in many fights and employments against the Tartar, yet the
jealous King, notwithstanding his deserts and expectances, three years before
our being here, by secret warning from the Emperor, by Lolla-beg, had his head
cut off, and felt a terrible reward for his Apostasy, which drew aforetime
many a tear from the distressed Christians their inhabiting.

Hence we traveled to a Town called Hal^ary, eighteen miles from our last
Manzeil, this place affoorded plenty of good Water, Wood, Olives, Corn and
Walnuts.

Next night we came to Periscow, eighteen miles distant, which Town is in the
latitude of thirty six degrees: It Is famous through all Media, is governed by
a severe Justice called Mahomet-beg a Darraguod, who at our entrance, cut off
the nose and ears of one, the hands of a second, and hanged the third, their
fault only the stealing a trifle, of two shillings value from a footman serving
an English Merchant living in Spawhawn. Another piece of Justice happened that
eve. Justice of Mahomet-beg.
A Farmer for lying with a Whore (as she said) against her will, Mahomet-beg
commands an Executioner to geld him, the poor man, entreated hard for his
useful parts, so did his Wife, and by mediation of friends, and thirty pound
fine to the Darraguod or Justice, he satisfied for his error.

Periscow is famous for the Court often there residing, yet is the Kings House of
no great beauty, it shows the ruins of a Castle, and is most lovely in this,
that her water is sweet and the earth produces grass and fruits in some
measure, the Town is set upon the brow of a great Hill, and thence takes her
denomination.

On the fifteenth of May, as we ranged on some part of Caucasus, at our first
view of the Caspian Sea, so great a storm of wind and rain beat upon us that
we not only lost our way, Caucasi^ port^.
but our selves, and at length wrastled to Geer, having first past through the
Straits of Mozendram. That nights journey was four and twenty long miles,
next night four and twenty more, and next to Alliauarr, one and twenty miles
distant from our last nights lodging, which Town is full of wood and water,
and abounds with Partridge and Pheasant, next night to Nekaw, five and twenty
miles, and so to Asharaffe, where the King of Persia then was. The King hearing
of our Lord Ambassador, sent the Governor of the City and about fifty
horsemen to conuoy him to his lodging.

A Description of Asharaff in Hyrcania.
ASharaffe or Ahasuraffe, in the Kingdom of Hyrcania, is in the latitude of
thirty eight degrees seventeen minutes, and full North from Spawhawn, as the
Pole-starre (which is of a third magnitude, in the tip of the little Bears
tail) assured us; this City is distant from Spawhawn three hundred and thirty
English miles.

Hyrcania is now called Mozendram, is limited on the North with the Caspian
Sea, on the South with Mount Taurus, has Zagathia on the East (which is part
of Scythia intra Imaum) and to the West Media, or rather some part of the
lesser Armenia, upon whose tops the Arc rested. The Country is full of Woods,
amongst which are Oaks, though the people use them little on the Hyrcan Sea.

Araxis, from the Taurisian Mountains, (as Ptolomy writes from Sagapene,
Colthyan and Seducaene) waters and fattens this peaceful Country, to perfect
which, she is divided and sub-diuided so often and into so many streams and
Riuolets, that from an ample River, ere she kiss the Caspian, she loses her
pride and gives leave to wade through her deepest channel.

The Country of old, and yet abounds with Tygres, according to the Poets Songs,
Hyrcanaeque admorunt vbera Tygres, whose like companions, are Wolves, Lions,
Wild-cats, Bores, and Scorpions, amongst which rabble may be cataloguized, the
swarms of Gnats, Flies and Snakes, that pestered us to our woeful remembrances.

By some, this Kingdom, has been called Corca, by others Girgia (meaning
perhaps Georgia, which is Iberia, twixt the two Seas) some again Caspia,
Steana, and Diurgument, which Titles, as questionless they have been subject
to invention, so the error is not great, since we are sure it is old Hyrcania,
known with trouble to the victorious Macedohian Alexander.

The people are ciuilized (as say the Persians) since they have called Abbas
their Conqueror. Their Country is useful for passage into Tartarie and
Turcomania, and therefore has endured no small troubles to defend its right.
It Is pleasant and rich, and therefore a bait to allure her Sunburned and famisht
Neighbors to extenuate her plenty.

The people of old, Alexander the Great.
thought to forbid Achilles successor his desired entrance, by twisting one
tree to another, forcing the unwilling boughs to bad subjection.

But he that had dissected Gordions knot, though very mystical, with the same
sword annihilated their simple policies, and sub^ugated them.

The Country is (as I have said) full of Wood, which, both befriends them
against Winter colds, and shades them from the parching Sun, both which in
their seasons are there extreme; in those Woods lurk savage creatures,
Leopards, Tygres, Wolves, Foxes, Apes, Antilopes, Red and Fallow Dear and such
like, but in greatest number and offense, swarm of Gnats and Flies, and
stinging Scorpions: they are small in bulk, but fierce in their venomous
dispositions, he that is stung if he escape death, is frantique twenty hours
at least: and no better remedy then (like Achilles Spear) to turn a Scorpion
into Oil, Remedy against Scorpions.
and apply it to the place offended. The Hyrcanians think to prevent their
poison, by Charms which they tie about their arms, yet it sometimes fails
them, and then the cause is there that days sin, themselves excusing it.

The prime Cities of this Kingdom are Farrabaut, Asharaffe, Periscow, Omoall,
Barsrushdea, and Derbent, most of which places are watered by the Rivers,
Araxis, Connack, Obsel, Cyre, Rha and Cheisell, from the Deserts of Lorr, and
together with seventy mouthed Volga, from Muscouia, empty themselves into
this Caspian Sea, which though turbulent, we saw neither ebs nor flows (yet
never ouerflowes) and has no commerce or intercourse with any Sea, except (as
is credible) it be subterranean, into the Euxine: and is less wonderful,
remembering the flood Zioberis, which arising out of Taurus, hides it self
thirty miles under ground and opens it self again, and mixes with another
River in that Country called Rhodago, both which run into the Caspian Sea. And
Tradition tells us that the Monarch Alezander to find the truth of this report,
made two Oxen be thrown into Zioberis, who were seen to rise again at
Rhodago. The like is reported of the River Niger in Afrique.

The Caspian Sea is in compass near three thousand miles, it is from North to
South, seven hundred and odd miles, and from East to West six hundred, it is in
form Ouall.

Hyrcania affoords Rice (near which fields it is unwholesome dwelling, by reason
of the water which stands so long over it) with Barley and Rye, and fruits in
great plenty.

The people speak the Language of Persia, their apparel like the Irish
Trooses, their heads have a high woollen Cap, furred with their sheepskins.
They are affable, and delight in novelties.

Howbeit the Persians, if one may believe them, report merry stories of these
Hyrcanians, making the men brutish and the women unchaste, that they are very
fair and amiable (which we credit, finding so) and so kind and loving unto
Travelers, that upon any signal, they will receive them, and hold it a point
of rudeness in the Virgins, if they he coy or disdainful unto strangers, this
the Persians say of them: but in all such reports, sure I believe them not.

Asharaff.
ASharaffe has two thousand houses in her, she is seated in a Plain, and not
above two miles from the Caspian Sea, the Town has but of late got the Kings
residence there, and therefore is not so great nor beautiful as Farrabaut,
five miles West, where also the King has a stately Palace, but two miles from
Asharaffe he has a most pleasant house called Abassebaut, excelling all the
rest for prospect, imagery and devices by water-workes.

The Buzzar in this Town is but homely, nor enioyes she any Mosques, or
Prophets to be spoken of.

I will give a relation of the Court, and of our Ambassadors Entertainment and
Audience, and so will on, in the illustrating otherplaces.

The Ambassadors entertainment by the King of Persia.
AFter our Ambassador had reposed himself four days in Asharaffe, the King
sent a Coozel-bash to him, with commendations, and that next day he would give
him Audience, accordingly next day, which was our Sabbath, and with them a day
of Ceremony, being the first day of their great Fast and Feast (for on that
day it is not permitted to eat or drink, but after Sunset they do both
excessiuely) this Feast is called Ramazan, Ramdam, is their Lent, and Byram
their Easter.
Ramdam or Ramadan, our Ambassador, with Sir Robert Sherley, and seven or
eight English Gentlemen his followers, set forwards to the Court: and this I
remember our Ambassador took it ill, none came to usher him, or show the way.
For that morning having sent to Mahomet Ally-beg the great Favorite to that
end, the Infidel returned a footman, whom our Ambassador scorning, sent
back, and so proceeded with his own Company.

At our alighting at the Court gate, an Officer led us in to a little place,
having a pretty Marble Pond or Tancke in Center. The rest spread with silk
Carpets, where our Ambassador and the rest stayed two hours, and then were
feasted with a dish of Pelo, which is Rice boiled with Hens, Mutton, Butter,
Almonds and Turmerack: but how mean soever the diet was, the furniture was
excellent, pure beaten gold, both dishes, couers, flaggons, cups and the rest.

Thence we were led by many Sultans, through a large, delicate, and odoriferous
Garden, to a house of pleasure, whose Chambers both viewed the tops of Taurus
and the Caspian Sea.

Into this Lodge we entered, the low-roome was round and spacious, the ground
spread with silk Carpets, in the midst a Marble Tancke full of Chrystaline
water (an Element of no small account in those Torrid habitations) and round
about the Tancke, vessels of pure Gold, some filled with wine, others with sweet
smelling flowers.

Thence into a Chamber, furnished in manner as the former, The Kings (...).
but with three times more vessels of Gold, set there for pomp and observation.

At the end sat the Potshaugh or great King, crosse-legged, and mounted a
little higher then the rest, his seat having two or three white silk shags
upon the Carpets.

His attire was very ordinary, his Tulipant, could not out-value forty
shillings, his coat red Callico quilted with Cotton, worth very little, his
sword hung in a leather belt, its handle or hilt was gold, and in regard the
King was so plain attired, most of the Court, had like apparel on for that
day.

Yet the Plate and Jewels in that House argued against poverty, a Merchant
then there, imagined it worth twenie millions of pounds.

So soon as our Lord Ambassador came to him, he by his Interpreter delivered
briefly, the cause of his journey which was to congratulate his victorious
success against the Turk, to renew the Traffic of Silk, and other things
to benefit the Merchants, and to see Sir Robert Sherley purge himself from
those imputations laid on him by Nogdibeg the King of Persia his late
Ambassador.

The King gave him a very gracious reply, and whereas he thinks it honor
enough to let the great Turks Ambassador kiss the hem of his Coat, and
sometimes his Foot, he very nobly gave our Ambassador his Hand, and with it
pulled him down and seated him next to him crosse-legged, and calling for a cup
off wine drunk to his Master our famous King, at which he put of his Hat, and
the King seeing it, put off his Turbant, and drunk the cup off, which our
Ambassador pledged thankfully. And the people thought it a strange thing to
see their King so complementall, fortis a shame with them to be bare-headed.

The Chamber wherein he was entertained, had the sides painted and gilded very
beautifully, though indeed the Verse may be inuerted, Materia superabat opus,
and not materiam.

Round about, with there backs to the wall, were seated fifty or sixty
Beglerbegs, Sultans and Chawns, who sit like so many Statues, rather then
living men. The Ganymed Boys go up and down with flaggons of wine, and fill
to those that covet it.

The day before this Ceremony, the King rode to hunt the Tygre, accompanied
only with two hundred Women, his Wives and Concubines, most of them were
attired like courageous Amazons, with Semiter, Bow and Arrows, the Eunuchs
riding abroad to prohibit any to come in view of them, the penalty is no less
then loss of life, a dear price for Novelties.

And though for the most part, when the King is in a Progress, he has
sometimes ten thousand, other times twenty thousand Cozelbashawes, or
Soldiers of best reckoning, yet at our being then at Court, two thousand was
the most, then attending him.

I will relate his severe justice, acted at our being in Hyrcania, a poor man
who had traveled from Cabull in India a place though belonging to the Mogol,
yet Candahor and much of Arachosia conioyning it, is won from them by the
Persian) this poor man after so long a journey, got to the Court, and the
weather being very sulphurous, affected rather the grass to sleep on then the
Town, it is so pestered with Musketoes, Flies and other vermin, his business
was not much, yet had better, been none at all.

It was his ill fate, to be a sleep, as old Abbas was going a hunting within
the path, the King saw him not, but his pamperd horse startled at him, whereat
immediately the King sent a broad Arrow into the poor man's heart, and ere all
his followers had past, the man was killed a hundred times over, if so many
Arrows could have forfeited so many lives, in imitating the King, as if the
deed were good and commendable.

A Soldiers Wife abounding with more Lust then Love, complains to the King,
her Husband did not satisfy her, whereat he makes her be coupled to an
Asinego, whose villainy and lust took away her life.

A Cozel-bash here presented him a Petition, The Kings cruelty.
the writing did not please him, he sends for the Clarke, cuts off his hand,
and made the Petitioner be almost drubd to death.

Two needy Knaves were brought before him, and condemned for stealing.

The King threatened them more for being ragged and lousie, there by to disgrace
his Court, then for the theft. And that they might die neatlier then they
lived, he causes new Coats to be put upon them, and forthwith commanded they
should be carried out of Town and impaled upon two stakes, thrust through
their fundaments.

He has other tortures, as poisons, strangling with bow-strings, men-eating
Dogs (some of which the Merchants or Seamen bring out of England, and sell
there) and men from their infancy educated to Canibalisme, with many other
tortures rather beseeming a bloody Tyrant, then so famous a King.

A Duke who is his Viceroy for Hyrcania, seeing a Boy, whose Father was poor
(and under his command) against the Boys will, his parents knowledge and the
Law of Nature, makes him a Sodomite (which crying sin, though licensed by
their Alcoran, yet force is not to be used, and therefore have Ganymeds in each
great City tolerated) the Father of this wronged child prostrates himself
before the King, and acquaints him with that villainy, the King seeing sorrow
and truth in the Peasants look, demands of the Duke, who then was sitting
there, how true it was: his countenance bewrayes him. The King having at that
instant, a Knife in his hand, gives it the poor Father and bids him Eunuchize
him, punishing those parts, that had offended. The Duke durst not startle or
entercede the Law of the Persian, never alters the poor man, executes, as was
enjoined him. The King though, continues his jurisdiction to him, and has him
yet, his obedient slave or servant. His Seraglio only lost most by that
bargain.

The King by a Hyrcanian Lady (which Countri-woman the Beggoon his mother also
was, wife to Mahomet) had two sons, Ismaell and another, Mirza. Ismaell died,
having not attained twenty years, and the younger brother by right and law of
birth and Nations then became heir apparent to his dignity and expectations.

Shaw Abbas his Father by his other Paramours had many children, but this Mirza
as endued with the prerogatives of years and birthright, prevailed more in his
Fathers affection, and the establishment of succession, then the other
children, obtained by his affability (a virtue of especial luster and value
with the Persian) courage, bounty, experience in Arms and other Princely
Qualities requisite for the place he lived in, the son of such a father, and
the report he aimed at, to beget love and admiration amongst his friends, and
terror with his enemies. Whereby he got leave at sundry times, to command his
Fathers ready Armies, men apt for action, and no longer satisfied, then when
employed, either to enrich themselves by spoil or other advantages of War
and Fortune, and by whose skill and his own valor, he much enlarged the
Persian Territories, and got somewhat from the Mogull toward Candahor, from
the Arabian near to Balsora, and the Tartar East of the Hyrcanian Sea. So that
this Mirzaes prowess and good luck became news of joy and sorrow to the
Persian and their enemies. His friends from secret welwishes break out into
acclamations of praises and extreme Deserts, and in peculiar fancies elevated
him. Some commend his person, some his excellency and delight in arms, others
his eloquence and all his liberality and care. In a word they esteemed him
without comparison, and left nothing unsaid or undone that could add either
honor or contentment to him, who for all this (not like our common spirits,
who upon small advancement or other attributes deifie themselves and suppose
all such additions tributary, and under their deseruings) stood immovable, and
sorry they accounted him so worthy, in modesty blaming them for doubling his
merits, and accusing himself of hypocrisy and neglect, to suffer his Acts to
be so gilded, and least he might eclypse the King his Father either in his
splendor or content.

And to say truth, his popularitie begot jealousy and contempt in the King his
Father, who out of his suspicious nature, grounded on Tyranny, his fear of
the Mirzaes ambitious designs, the inconstancy of the Persians, and
irritations of some Cabinet Counselors (enemies to the Prince) about him,
began to fear him and desirous (though his son) to have him strangled,
thus we see how cruel jealousy is, more cruel then the Grave, and the
bloud-thirstie degenerating of Tyrants and cruel men from grace, who as they
are by Gods Sovereign pleasure seated in more eminency then others, to defend
and relieve the distressed and wel-deseruing, turn it into pride and cruelty,
dividing mercy and justice who delight each other, and such appears in this
old Abbas, that so far forgot repentance, for murdering his eldest brother
Emir-hamze-mirza, a Prince so completely valiant, victorious, and each way
worthy, that though the Turks (whose scourge he ever was like another
Scanderbeg) rejoiced at it, yet it drew floods of tears and incessant
lamentations from the Persians, for the untimely and treacherous downfall, of
such a hopeful, beautiful, and delightful Cedar, and in memory of whom
(being all and the utmost revenge they durst to expiate) they solemnized his
Funerals with annual tears, and for many years exceedingly hated his
Fratricide Abbas, then ruling over them and who by all acts of conquest against
their adversaries, and indulgence for their safeties labored his ingratiating
into their love, and by a counterfeit deploring what had been perpetrated, at
length obtained it: the thought of this, and posting his pur-blind Father into
Paradise, in time forgotten, especially seeing they enjoyed their several
pleasures in like sort as anciently, and that by Shaugh Abbas his victories
against the Turk and Tartars, they became redoubted and feared in most of
Asia. So that for many years he governed fortunate and justly, beloved and
honored, and never at a higher pitch attained it, then now, crowning his
hostile employments by the victory and bravery of his son the admired Mirza
(himself tumbling in wanton pleasures and variety of delights.)

The Prince in some attempts into Arabia, heard of, saw, admired, and after
some reciprocal favors, espouses an Arabian Princess to his Wife, a Lady
(if report of a Persian man of note, be worth the crediting) endowed with such
gifts and ornaments of mind, birth, beauty and loyalty, as parelleld the
best their living, and enstiled the possessor rich and happy. And the rather,
because without exceptions, in the quarrelsome opinions of the King his father.

By this Lady he had two children, Soffie and Fatyma: both accounted of, by
Parents and Grandsire, and pleasing to the Persians, who honor the issue of
such as descend from Ancestors of courage, high birth, beauty and the like,
all which flowed into these two Princes.

All terrene joys are mixed with discontent and periods, and old Abbas, day by
day increasing his jealousy and envy to his son, intends to hinder his
further progress into glory or other happiness* he durst not banish him, least
he should convert his rage, to affront his unnatural Father, and when he
thought of killing him by treason in his Army (the innocent Prince at that
time, sweating in blood to redeem the honor of his Countrymen against the
Turk) that frighted him, lest when his cruelty disclosed it self, upon
apprehension of the murderer, his men in revenge and detestation of his Tyranny
might rebel, or joining with the enemy, to his irreparable loss of purse and
honor. So that he resolved to execute him at the Court, when far from
friends and where he could best feign an invented crime, so without more
procrastinations, he sends a shooter or footman to him, and (all excuses set
aside) to post to Court: where the business should then be told him.

The Prince, to forfet their amazement and ill opinion of him, declares the
message and assures them of his flying speed thither and back again, and
without more ceremony hastens to receive instead of thanks, destruction.

His arrival was quickly known to his father Abbas, who sends him word he was
not very well, and desired him to repose where they should carry him, and ere
long he would come and welcome him.

The credulous Prince, without any suspect of treachery (invincible signs of
honesty and a sincere mind) follows the man appointed to show his lodging,
whereinto, (so soon as that servant was departed) enters at a trap-doore,
seven great Villains, deaf and dumb, armed with Bow-strings and bloody
minds, whose habit and weapons without other Interpreters, assured the amazed
Prince that he was betrayed, and sealed to destruction. If oratorie or other
submissiue signs of entreatie could have begot pity or intermission from
these hel-hounds, but only till he knew the cause of this unnatural project,
he had affoorded it, but knowing they were deaf in body and soul, inflamed
with rage and sorrow, that he wanted a Sword or other Weapon to defend
himself, he flew upon them all, one after another, offending them by rare
force and agilitie, a long time preventing the noozes to fasten on him, which
they threw incessantly toward his neck, presenting pale death in their
terrible twangs, and armed with integrity and innocence, ere they could
strangle him, he sent three of them to the Devil, to receive their recompense,
the other four seeing their danger, re-enforced their actions, and at last
fastened on him, who quite spent with rage and opposals, fell down dead, and as
craving a cessation of that horrible fight, and that they would not equallize
him in the manner of his death, to abject Dogs. But these Canibals continued
their cruel cowardice both dead and living, and had surely finished their
villainy, had not the King then entered and prevented them (who some say, was a
secret spectator of this unparalleled barbarism) he forthwith, commands his
tired arms to be pinnioned, and ere he had fully recovered his senses, makes a
hot flaming steel be drawn before his eyes, which though giving no great
pain, yet took away his eyesight: forbidding him for ever any more sight of
what he loved, wife, children, friends, and endeared Soldiers. And by this
excessive impiety, Asia lost her chiefest Jewel, Mars his Darling, and Persia
her incomparable treasure, now undone, blind, imprisoned, and hopeless of any
joy or honor ever after.

This could not be so secretly committed, but in time, all Persia knew it, and
lamented it with tears for him, and imprecations of all mischief upon the
Authors of it: his Army were of long time implacable, but when they saw it was
past remedy, and the King would in time, serve them with like sauce, if they
continued refractorie, they retired, and buried in murmr and forced silence,
what their hearts fully and freely discourst upon.

So soon as the blinded Prince, perceived himself imprisoned (which he saw
with the eyes of grief and understanding) he was more then half-distracted,
exclaimed upon his bloody father, cursed his birthday, and vowed the Kings
destruction and his Favorites, if it lay in his power to see or touch them:
but when he called to mind his impossible desires, he roared hideously, and in a
word, expressed all true symptoms of madness and desire of revenge, till his
afflicted Kinsmen and companions, flockt about him, and dictated patience:
which they bettered, by relating their own quondam greatness in blood and
offices, till by the like dislike and mutabilitie of Shaw Abbas his humors,
they were digraded, trod upon, mutilated, some their eyes put out, some their
ears and noses cut off, and others in other members, here captiued and almost
famished.

In those discontented times, the King moving like Saturn in the highest Orb,
deliciously took his pleasure, and on all sides stood free and firm against
storms or other accidental causes, able to withstand his quiet.

He surfeited in variety of pleasures, but none took him so much as the
beauty and pretty discourse he observed in Fatyma (daughter to his blinded and
enraged son) which Lady, though not seven years old, in such sort enchanted
doting Abbas, that nothing rellisht well without Fatyma, none gave him mirth,
save Fatyma, and if enraged against any, no better reconcilement then by
Fatyma, so that Court and Kingdom wondered at his love to this witty Lady his
beloved grandchild, whom when aged two years more, he purposed a marriage
with an Arabian King.

Nor had King Abbas all the benefit of this little Lady, for though she had all
possible delight and pleasure at the Court: yet neglected she no part of duty,
but came very often into the Cittadell to joy her father and relieve his wants;
for that none save she, durst ask the King for their allowances, without
apparent danger of displeasure and life withal, if it happened he was
displeased, though in other matters, whereby the royal (but most miserable)
prisoners at sometimes were near famished, none daring to relieve them, lest
the jealous King might have them in suspicion.

Thus by this good Lady gained they what formerly they pined for, even food and
comfort. But as the Devil is never filled with villainy, blood, or horror, so he
exasperates this blinded Prince her father to a strange revenge (son of a
father both unnatural) for thirsting after it though never so terrible, in a
Deuillish apprehension, hearing of his fathers immoderate joy and pleasure he
took in Fatyma, whom too (revenge excepted which whirld him headlong to
perdition) he affected exceedingly the law of Nature, (for we name not grace
in these Catastrophes) her infinite deseruings, as loded with admirable
beauty, a delicate spirit, sweet behavior and charitable acts surpassing
childhood, forced him to conceive well of her, and wish he had some means to
be revenged, but this word revenge he still harpt upon: it was his food,
raiment, sleep and chief delight, for all the rest were comprehended in
bloud-thirstinesse. Which wicked design at length he accomplishes, for one
time when his sad Wife and son were sitting by him, pretty Fatyma came in
with relief unto her father, and by all actions of love and duty to show her
self obedient, such time (cursed time) as this young Princess played about
him, the Prince called her, who readily came to be made much of, but see a
horred entertainment, for in stead of love and kindness, with admirable
celeritie and rage, grasping her tender neck with his strong and wrathful
hands, whirli^g her about, ere she could beg for pity or help, the cruel
father threw stark dead upon the floor his daughter Fatyma, and in her the
joy of parents, excessive delight of the aged King, and sole ornament and
comfort of all that Kingdom: the poor Princess strugled and cried out
against him, that it was Fatyma, little thinking, he therefore killed her,
because Fatyma. But he hearing his son Soffie was there too, in blind sort
pursued him, who to his good fortune escape down stairs, and some years
after at his Grand-sires death, was crowned King of Persia at our coming
thence.

So soon as old King Abbas heard of this sad accident, he fell into such
passions of rage and sorrow, that each man feared he would become his own
Executioner: and though many pitied him and were sorry for the cause, yet none
durst comfort hm, fearing his impatient nature, but left it to time and the
Kings own courage and providence to mitigate his dolours.

Yet, to express how ill he took so foul a murder (hypocritically masquing
his former cruelties) sends threats of terrible satisfactions, as famine,
strapadoes and other punishments to the enraged Prince his Son. Who, by the
Messinger retuned his father many curses, hopes of better revenge and wishes of
ten thousand miseries to fall upon him, and in this cholloricke and melancholy
temper he spent two sad days, and in the third gave a period to his miseries
in this World, by supping a delighted cup of extreme poison, and when his
death was told the King, he commanded some Noble men to see him buried, but not
where harmless Fatyma was entombed.

The sad Princess his wife, surfeiting with sorrow and discontent mewed her
self up, and since that time has seldom been seen to any, so that the
certainty of her life is doubtful unto many. Except now her son
Soffie-Shaw, (succeeding his royal Grandsire Abbas, in the Persian dignity,
and crowned at our coming thence) has since dissuaded her from that solitary
and unfitting life, and to afford her some joy then, rather then for ever to
live without it.

But of what courage, ingenuitie, or inclination King Soffie shows himself, I
cannot give the Reader satisfaction in, in that we parted thence, just at his
Coronation, and his years cannot yet beget discretion in full measure (being
not above fifteen) but it appears partly* that he is truly of the Abasian
pedigree, Mahomet the Great Favorite beheaded, and the Beglerbeg of Shir^^.
for so soon as he got security of the Diadem, he cut off Mahomet-ally-begs
head (his Grandfathers only Favorite) to be heir to his estate, and to
content his Guardian Emangoly Chaw^, Duke of Shiras, and since has showed his
Guardian such another courtesy, Anno 1631. by making headless the Beglerbeg
his eldest son, upon small ground of reason, except to beget terror in other
his high-minded subjects.

The beginning of June the King departed Asharaffe, by the straits of
Mozendram, going to Cazbeen, where he bid our Ambassador meet him for his
dispatch.

He sent us another way by Mount Taurus, that we might see the rest of
Hircania the better.

Sir Robert Sherley left us awhile, and traveled to the Court in company of a
Georgian Ambassador, and at this time an Ambassador from the Tartar, took his
leave and departed home by Samarch^nd.

From Asharaffe, we rode to Farrabaut (into which we entered upon Whitsunday)
a City extending to the Sea of Bacu, Hyrcan or Caspian Sea.



A Description of Farrabaut, and the Caspian Sea.
FArrabat or (Baut) lies one mile from the Caspian Sea, it is the best Town
for beauty, greatness and wealth in the Kingdom of Hircani^.

It Is watered with a stream of forty paces broad, which arising from Mount
Taurus, here embowels it self into that Sea, it abounds with fish of most
sorts, and is furnished with a few little Canoes or Boats made of one Tree, and
is capable to receive eight men in fair weather, in this River are some long,
deep prams, sowed together with hemp and cord (but vnpitcht or calkt.) In
these the Muscouian Merchants, sail down Volga, over the Caspian Sea, and
arrive at Farrabaut, to traffic for raw silks, which they transport to
Mosco, and through Russia. These ships ordinarily come thither in March and
return in July, so that with a fair wind from Farrabaut, they do cross the
Sea, and get to Astraoan in eight or ten days sail.

Farrabaut glories as well in her two large and beautiful Buzzars, and fragrant
Gardens, as in a sumptuous Palace of the Kings, seated near the river at the
North end of that City, the Court and shades of pleasant trees afford delight
from each Chamber in the House, the rooms are uniform, three of them
especially rich in furniture, the ground laid with Crimson Velvet, stuffed with
Down, the Casements of broad clear Muscouian glasse^ the top richly imbost
with Gold, the sides all Mirrours or Looking-glasses. And these Chambers are
his retiring parts for recreation with his Concubines, other Chambers in this
Palace, are wrought with Pictures of vile and unseemly pastimes, better forgot
then memorized.

From thence we traveled to a Town called Chacoporo, twelve miles from
Farraba^t, feated upon the Caspian Sea, it has a River a stone cast over, which
the people say is eleven months fresh and one extreme salt. Next night we lay
in Bar^rushdee, a Town both great and happy, in wood and water, but has no
wine, the reason is, the Law there takes away his life that drinks any, this
is from the last twelve miles:

Next night we got to a pleasant Town called Omoall, seated at the foot of Mount
Taurus.

A Description of Omoall.
OMoall is a City built under the North side of the Imperious Mountain
Taurus, has three thousand houses, and those not builded in the meanest
fashion. It Is inhabited by diverse Nations, Armenians, Georgians, Jews,
Persians, Hircans, Curdies, Taurisians and others whereby seven several
Languages are spoken in this City.

The place is fruitful and blessed, as well in her present prosperity as
antique greatness, she was anciently called Nabarca, and famoused for a
dreaming Oracle, long time of divine Aesteam among them. In which age it was
the Metropolis of that Kingdom, to this hour testified by her ruins about
her, howbeit as yet she excels in the rareness of a Castle (second to none
about her) which besides the well composed Architecture, affoording no small
pleasure to the eye, it has sweet Gardens, repleat with fragrant flowers and
choicest fruits. And for her defense is enclosed by a deep trench, which filled
with water yields as well profit as defense.

Close by is a Church or Mosque, in which lie intombed four hundred forty
four Princes and Prophets of that Kingdom, many of whose Tombs yield
admiration to the beholders, principally that of Mere Agowmaden, to whose
adored Shrine are daily offered serious Devotions; at my entrance I found
twenty ancient well apparelled Arabians, close by Prince Agoomadens Grave, set
round with each an Arabian Book before him, out of which with great Modesty
and wel-tuned Songs they celebrated to those dead Princes, a long continued
lamentation, wherein they were so serious, that though they saw me, they
continued their dolours till the end, and then very courteously arose and bid me
welcome, showing me all I desired in their Temple.

The people are very courteous and the women beautified with complement and
dainty feature: one day, when the weather was exceeding hot, I went to the
waterside (near the bridge over which the night before we entered the City)
where thinking by help of many Popler-trees to shade my self from outrageous
Phaeton, seven or eight beauteous (but not bashful) Damozels suddenly, naked,
came forth of the river to admire my habit, having never seen any European
there before, some wonders at my clothes, some my spurs, o^thers my hair
(differing from the mode of that Nation) by which I became jealous of their
honesty and left them, but by enquiry I perceived, it was an affected nouelty,
and when the men (such time usually as the son, is in his Meridian) go to
sleep, the women then enjoy the river, and cool their heat, in both kinds
too much abounding there.

Their habit is only a smock of Callico Lawne, wrought at hands neck and
skirts, with silk and gold.

From Omoall, we road to a place called Larry-Iohn, the distance thirty miles,
at which Town, ends the Kingdom of Hircania, and the entrance to Mount Taurus
takes beginning.

Mount Taurus.
Our journey lay sometimes through inhospitable Straits, other times over most
stupendous Hills, the breadth from one side to another near fifty English
miles, the length fifteen hundred, towering in a ledge of Hills from Armenia
unto India: indeed after two days ascent we got so high, that we might see the
middle Region under us, and we involued in it.

But the height did not so amate us, as the danger of descending, the path was
so uneven and craggy, and the Rocks cut so unskillfully, that great heed must
be taken in the treading, or a terrible downfall into a bottomless Lake will
threaten us.

Tradition tells us that Prometheus is chained here, his heart is gnawed by a
Vulture, his fault only for stealing fire from Jupiter, the Allegory is
familiar. Hence we pass on to a Village called Ryna, where is a Castle so
built, upon the best advantages of art and nature that it seems invincible;
above, it wants no ground for benefit and resistance, helped with Gardens,
flowers, and fruits, and is most happy in a Riuolet of pure water, which
pleasantly and plentifully streams through the Castle into the bottom.

In this place, five and twenty years ago ruled a King Meleck Bahaman by
name, who commanded like another Pluto, through these Hills and Dales in Taurus,
a Prince though confined to small limits, and forced with great cost and care
to maintain his Royalties against the Tartar and Persian, his great and
quarrelsome Neighbors, yet such was his good fortune, his policy, valor and
love unto his subjects, that though often invaded and by many Princes, he
stood secure, and lived to see the r^ine and downfall of many, his late
enemies. His only aim tending to preserve, what his Predecessors had made him
heir to, and that his gray hairs might go in peace to an eternal Dormitory.

Thus thought Bahaman, and added his endeavors to preserve his thoughts. But
Abbas the Persian and victorious King, whose resolutions were all for conquest,
whose doings were ever turbulent, and whose aspiring conceits most wonderful:
In his return from the conquest of Mozendram (or Hyrcania) which he got by
persuasion more then force, and by help of his Herians and Ouz-beg Tartars,
resolves to be no longer bearded by this mountaynous Prince, who from his
dwellings could not only view far into either Kingdoms Mozendram and
Sheirvan, but thereby took opportunity to ransacke his Carrauans, anticipate
his progress to the Caspian Sea, and turn those Rivers into other sources,
which springing from the Taurisian Hills, flowed through the Persian
Territories, and was the sole delight and wealth of all those Kingdoms.

Now though these reasons were coniecturall, in that he never knew Prince
Bahaman a deceitful or grating Neighbor, yet Abbas played the Wolf, who
drinking at the Fountainhead, quarrels with the harmeles Lamb for quenching
his flagrant thirst at the stream below. And impatient of longer trial,
conuocates a great Army of Timariots and Coozel-bashaes, over whom he appoints
Methiculi-Chawn and some other expert Warriors, to see his designs succeed
with good hap and victory over those defenced Nations.

This could not be so secretly intended, but aged Bahaman hears of his aims
and provisions, at which though somewhat terrified. In that his great years
were more propense to ease then tumult, yet that his faithful people might not
in any thing receive discouragement or cowardice from his example, whose
interest and honor was most, and most engaged: he prouides as a common father
for them, and performs each act, requisite in a careful and experienced
Soldier.

He plants Garrisons in places of defense and service, leaves naked and
destitute of all help his Country, lest the Persian Army might prey upon it,
and mewes himself, his Wife, two sons and ten thousand men in this
aforenamed Castle, stored with provision and victuals, sufficient for a five
years siege against the Enemy.

The Persian General with thirty thousand men, hasten toward Taurus, where
at their first ascent, they were troubled by some Mountayners, set their
purposely by King Bahaman, these with Darts, and rolling stones upon them, for
some time endamaged the Persian, but could not prevent their resolved passages:
and after some small skirmishes, encampt themselves before this Castle, having
heard by some prisoners, that Melech Bahaman, the two Princes and force of all
the Kingdom was there included.

Methiculi-beg, when he had well viewed this inaccessible Fortress, half
despayred of subduing him, for besides the strength of men and walls, he saw it
was impregnable, such was the great height of the Castle and the perpendicular
ascent, two main defenses wherewith nature and industry had graced it.

Some attempts he used but inualidable; to shoot Darts or Arrows at it, was
one with aiming at the Moon. Some small shot they had, but too weak to
penetrate Rocks, and great Ordnance (which only was auailable) they had not,
wherewith either to affright or batter them.

So after many tedious brauadoes (wherein the Persian received stones for their
arrogance) the General (not daring to return without the victory) finding
force nor patience of any value, turns Machiauillian.

He summons them above to parley with him, which being granted by his Herald he
presents him many protestations of love and desire of friendship, that his
War was grounded only to satisfy Shaw Abbas, who had sworn to be revenged
upon them, for offering in old times some hostile affronts unto poor
passengers, and to prevent his converting the Rivers other ways then he
enjoyed them, that seeing his surmises were without true ground or reason, he
saw no obstacle, that ought to forbid a new league of peace and unity, and to
strengthen his Embassage, that it might shadow truth, and beget belief the
readier, presents the aged King with Tulipants, Semiters, Pearls and some
other enticing Jewels, withal entreates him to come down and taste a Banquet,
swearing by Mortis Ally and King Abbas heads, by Paradise and the eight Orbs,
that he should return in safety, and he most desired it, that some Articles of
agreement might ensue their parley.

The King (who ever affected peace) hears his messages, receives his presents,
and becomes too credulous of the Persians honesty, his Wife and Sons
dissuade him from it, tell him examples of their hypocrisy, and by many ways
seek to divert his journey, but neither those, nor the tears his Soldiers
showred to beg his stay, (vowing to maintain the defense, to the last man)
could hinder his destiny, but down he goes, and finds the General ready to
embrace him, leads him to his Tent, bestows a Banquet on him, and at night
imprisons him, regarding neither his vow, honor, nor engagement.

Meleck Bahaman, perceiues the loss of his liberty when past recovery,
rememorizes his sons advice and tears shed by his loyal subjects to divert
him, which now he resents and terms Elegiac.

And in these fruitless sorrows, the Persian General summons the youthful
Princes to descend, if they respected the addition of new honors to
themselves, a period to this war, and (which was most) security and life to
their indulgent King and Father, all which by discord, and denying to come
down would be denied them, be an infallible Theme of endless troubles, and
beget an eternal monument of shame to their posterity.

The two Princes considerately first demanded their imprisoned father, and then
they might worthily credit the Persian, otherwise he might judge them, worse
then Idiots, the villainy and breach of promise toward their Sovereign, being
so true and fresh amongst them. They might as well desire the Castle and other
Royalties, as demand the Owners of them, and by whom subsisting, other answer
they would make none, this excepted, that the King of Persiaes ill-grounded
ambition would never prosper, that though of long time he had politely avoided
the Epethite of a Tyrant. This would rub afresh his former injustice and
anatomize him, so clearly, that all Asia, would not only suspect him, but
account him odious, that all men might see apparently his avarice, who
commanding over many and fruitful Provinces, could not be contented, without
subjugating a Nation, never wronging him, a King whose Ante-cessours had for
more ages governed Larry Ioon. Then the posterity of Ismael had done Persia*
and a Country so cold and barren, that more then title, the Persian could not
make any use of nor benefit of addition, save ostentation.

When these words were rehearsed to the General, he was mad with anger, and
(without more Ceremony) inuites them from their Castle, to view their Fathers
head off. They resolutely bid him do as pleased him, and remember, that
murder was not excused in their Alcoran.

This enraged the General more then the former, verily imagining they would
yield to any thing rather then the slaughter of their King and Father.

Whereupon, he again in utmost rage and fury assaulted them, and for a
recompense of his haste received, besides the loss of many Cozel-bashes, a
plain protest from his men, of returning homewards, arguing that they had got
the Country, that Shaw Abbas with more benefit and credit could employ them
against the Turk or Indian, that Meleck was with them, and by his persuasions
might recover it, without battle, as he had lately done Larr, at any time.

The General by this was drawn into a twofold danger, if he dissented from
their humors, he knew all past was to no purpose, and would infer dishonor
to his Master. On the other side, if he returned without victory, he knew his
head should off: so in great anguish, he first releases Meleck Bahaman, assures
him, he used this discourtesie but to try him, that if he pleased he should
safely return again or stay with him, where he should possess all content
and honor possible. That he was sent for by the King: and had order to
compound this difference: he desired the Princes his sons to descend and to
articulate, or let him go up and their seal an agreement, but that he judged
unworthy his good meaning, who thereby might be thought a Spy: with which
discourse, the old King was so ouer-joyed, that he referd the choice unto the
General, which happened as he aimed at, and so without delay desires the Princes
to come down.

A Messenger inuites them to it, assures them of King Bahamans welfare,
delivers them his doting letters and persuasions: enterlaces these with
Piscashes or gifts of worth, and shows them a pretended Copy of the easy
Articles.

The poor and wel-nigh distracted Princes, knew not what to do, on the one
side their refusal might cost the King his life, and irritate the Persian to
further mischief, on the other, their Descent, might bring deceit, distraction
and loss of life and liberty not only to the King and Princes, but to all
those loyal subjects pent above, and who undoubtedly after them must to the
shambles.

They argued long time too and fro, and though the Soldiers dissuaded them,
yet the Queen, to enjoy her Husband provoked them down. In obedience to whom,
and confidence in the Generals oaths and promises, they sorrowfully forsake the
Castle, and are securely guarded to the Tents, where they feasted, and upon
sight of their beloved Lord and Father, had noble entertainment from the
General.

But when these three were blessing their good destiny, smiling one upon
another, (the General then in company) at sight of a private token, three
Cozel-hashawes standing by, in an instant whipped off all their heads, with their
slicing Shamsheers or Semiters, and ere it was divulged abroad, The King and
two Princes treacherously murdered.
by counterfeit seals and signs, made them above, descend and yield the
Castle, some of which received destruction, others mercy. By this detested
policy the Persian got the Sovereignty, and yoakt in tyranny this late
thought indomitable Nation.

Such was the end of Meleck Bahaman, and two hopeful Princes, forgetful of
Wars stratagems, and how Aladules King of Anti-Taurus, for playing fast and
loose with Seylim the first Emperor of the Turks, in the end, crediting their
promises, gave a like period to his life and Kingdom.

Opposite to the Castle is erected the Sepulcher of Maleck Bahamans beloved
Queen, in sight of passengers, it is of four Aequilaterall squares, elevated
eight yards high of stone, and playstered with white, very apparent and comely.

A mile higher, we climed up with much difficulty, to the top of the high
Peake of Damoan, whose top like a Sugar-loafe is viewed above all the aspiring
Hills, on those defatigating ledges, and from whence we saw the Caspian Sea,
though a hundred an eighty miles distant; it is above composed of Sulphur, which
makes it in the night sparkle as does Vesuvius, it is so offensive to mount up,
that you cannot do it without a Nose-gay of strong Garlic, and hence all
Persia and Chaldea has their Brimstone.

Here are famo^s hot-baths, three of which are walled about, and two open, to
which resort decrepit and unsound people from afar in mighty multitudes.

Now whither this high Peake be denominated from the Town of Damoan five
leagues distant, or the Town from it, I cannot argue. But this is so, that
Damoan in their Language signifies a second Plantation, from which, and the
height of those Hills, with the uncertain place of the first Seminary from
Armenia, the Jews here inhabiting, say Noah's Arc there rested, and though the
Zone be good, the Country healthy, the Vines excellent, and the name point at
it, yet I refer my self here to the Judicious, it contents me only to recite
the Jews opinions.

Here the Hills conioyne of old called Amanus, Niphates, Choatras, Zagrius,
Oronti, Parathoatras, and which environed the Territories of Ragiana and
Sygriana.

Hence also run those titles of people, the Saces, the Saeres, the Messagetes,
the Taburaei, the Suebi, and the Alinorzi: which I suppose only Dukedomes,
confining Hyrcania and Sacazini.

On the other side of Damoan is the Town of that Persian Merchant that died in
England 1625, whose son Mahomet died in our travail. The Town is called
Noua, and has a hundred Families within it. A youth his other son, hearing of
our passing by, accompanied with all his kindred (who in these parts love one
another dearly) came to meet us; apparrelled in a long Roabe of cloth of
Gold, and on his head a Shash or Tulipant of Silk and Gold, he gave us a
Banquet, and thence we rode to Damoan, where descending a high mount, we rode
by a large black Tent, in which were about thirty women, and so many Taurisian
men, to solemnize a Wedding, the Bride was ten years old and beautiful, the
man thirty, in condition a very Carle, and in his visage ugly some of the
bridemaids came out unto us, and after a Sallam or Congee began a Morisko,
their faces, hands, and feet painted with flowers, Castles, and Birds, their
legs chained with voluntary fetters of brass and silver, with such they
performed the dance of Bac^hus, by inquiry we found these were pastoral, and
in their Genealogy from the Tartars, whose vagrant habitacles, are no where
permanent: in that part where those Nomades honor their descent, live those
Nations called by Authenticks, Essedones, Scytho-Tauri, Gryphaei and the
Tapereni, as also the Orgasi, Erymni, Norozbei, Nonossi, and the Catagi, placed
sometimes twixt Taurus and the River Iaxartes.

And more North toward Candahors and Arachozia, are accounted dwellers, the
Galactophagi, Azpisty, Tabureni, or Thabreni, Samnitij, Pamardi, and others,
whose strange names would rather burden, then profit the Readers memory.

Damoan.
DAmoan, is a Town well known among the Persians, more for its limiting of
Media, then other Rarities, it shows not more then two hundred houses, and
those few, are mean and most inhabited by hateful Jews, (whom the Persians
name Iehuds this Town is seated under the South end of Taurus, and has a
Buzzar aloft, but scarce worth the climbing too, unless to buy Wine, or
Fruits, both which there are valuable.

Media, now called Sheirvan (or milkie Plain) is by some derived from Madai,
third son of Iaphet, son of Noah, others from Medeus son of Jason and
Medaea, daughter of King Aeta, it is bounded on the North with the mountain
Taurus, on the South with Parthia, has to East Aria or Sablestam, and West
Armenia minor, or part of Georgia.

It was a rich and puissant Country in the Worlds infancy, but now whither by
the al-consuming hand of War (here ever acting) or by the Justice of God, for
massacring so many good Christians in Chozroes time, it is now a very barren and
miserable kingdom, chiefly if you compare it with our Phoenix great Britain,
who in her self exceeds, all the best compacted riches or pleasures, of these
Asiaticall Empires.

Media was first subjected by that simple husband of Semiramis, Ninus, who
lived in the age from Adams Creation, Anno 1900. he was son of Belus, by
some reputed Jupiter Babylonicus, a man deified by the Pagans of those times by
name of Bell and Baal.

This Belus was son of the great Hunter Nimrod, who was the only
founder-master of that monster Babell, the Assyrians (which name they took
from Ashur, second son of Shem) have called Nimrod, by other names, but is
chiefly taken for Saturnus of Babylon, sixth son of Chush, Chams eldest son,
from whom the Sunburned Aethiopians have a Pettigree and curse withal. His
Descent is this, Noah had Cham father of Chush, (begot, as some say, in the
Arc) father of Nimrod, father of Baladan or Belus) father of Berodach, of whom
descended Nebuchadnezzar, father of Euilmeredoch, father of Belshazzer, who
according to Daniels Prophecy was the last of his Family in the Empire, the
Medes and Persians falling from his rule into the hands of that great Warrior
Darius sirnmed Medus, Anno Mundi 3426. called by some Cyaxares secuudus, and
Grandchild to the first, his Daughter and Heir was married to Cyrus the
Fortunate, who after the overthrow of the Babylonian Balthazer or Belshazzer,
and that Monarchy, slew Astyages, by which he became Lord of Persia and the
Medes. This is he so famoused by Xenophon, and is father to that magnificent
Cambyses, of whom I spoke in the description of Persae-polis.

I will now speak of this kingdom, which I have said is barren, though if we
may credit Pius the Second, and other Writers of this place, one pastue has
heretofore nourisht fifty thousand Mares. They write of the Oil Medicum, which
doubles its flame in water of Naphta and some other Ceremonies. I will add the
description of the Villages and Cities which have been badly done by some
modern Authors, and leave the belief of those other rarities, to some more
credulous.

The great Cities of Media, are Cazbeen, Tabris, or Tauris, Ardauil, Tyroan,
Cashan and Coom, whose several descriptions truly follow.

From Damoan we rode through Bomaheem into Tyroan, five and twenty miles.

Tyroan.
THis City is situate in the midst of a fair large Plain, which although
environed in some parts, with Hills of stupendous height, yet some ways
affoords an ample Horizon, it is within the Kingdom of Media, Atropatia, and in
the Province or Shire of Sultania, a place famous for winds, and some
overthrows of late given the Turks, by the enraged Persian.

This City is now governed by a Duke, called Zenal-chon, a man of more title
then worth, as we found there by his discourtesie and entertainment.

This City is built of white Sunburned brickes, is watered with a small
stream, which runs in two parts through the Town, and meloes most of the
Gardens and Groves within her, whereby she yields a thankful tribute of
sundry fruits. The Town is most beautified, by a vast Garden of the Kings,
succinct with a great towred mud-wall, larger then the circuit of the City.

It has a Buzzar or Market, which though divided, shows a combined beauty in
her separation.

The House where we lodged, ore-topping all the other, from its Tarrases, I
could view over all the City, each house top spread with Carpets, whereon slept a
man and his peculiar Seralio, some had three, some six, others twelve female
beauties sleeping by him. It Was indeed rashly done of me to view them. Their
Orders punish it, with no less terror, then by shooting an Arrow into his
brain that dares to do it.

Tyroan has a sweet though hot air in the morning, but in the Suns ambition,
hot and fiery, she has three thousand dwelling Houses. In few of which are
fewer, then a dozen people. Her Carrauans lodge exceeds her Mosque, yet
neither, of power to beget admiration with the curious.



Thence we rode toward Taurus, the first night sleeping in Charah a filthy
Town affoording no relief against the frying Sun and hot sandy earth, both
which afflicted us. From Tyroan to Tauris is four good days journey.

Tauris, or Ecbatane.
TAuris deriues her name from her seat; near mountain Taurus is now a City
both great and famous, yet incomparable to what she was in Ecbatans time. Her
founder was Deioces, by some called Arphaxad and Arbactus, Predecessor of the
valiant and victorious Phraartes, (living in the year 3300. from the Creation)
and sixth in succession from Arbaces, who Anno 3146. begun the Median Dynasty.

Ecbatan was once in compass fifteen miles, her walls seventy Cubits high and
fifty broad, adorned within by a gorgeous Palace built of Cedars, the roof
studded and plated with burnisht Gold.

It Is distant from Jerusalem twelve hundred miles, and from Babylon four
hundred.

Here the Prophet Daniel, built himself a stately Palace, which remained
vndemolisht for many ages, and wherein for some Descents lay buried the Median
Kings, swaying in their successiue Dynasties.

Hither Tobias removed from Niniuie to Raguel father to his wife, where ere he
died he heard of Niniuies destruction, by the great Babylonian Monarch
Nabuchodonozer at that time Gods Instrument to fulfill his threatenings. Tobias
at a hundred and twenty seven years old died here and had noble burial.

Tauris, or Tabris, though builded from the others ruins, is comparable to
old Ecbatan neither in beauty nor greatness, her circuit now six miles at
most, and some miles distant from her Antecessor.

Being placed by a River, which some unjustly called Orontes, the Hill Baronta
shades her, and to the South shows a large and pleasant Plain.

It Is well peopled and much resorted to for traffic, which makes it famous
through all Asia, but her fame is larger by a Garrison kept there against the
daring Turks who too often have made this City, a subject of their bloody
cruelty.

It Is inferior to Spawhawn and Cazbeen, in circuit, wealth, and beauty it has a
small mud wall, of little service, the houses are flat above and built of
Bricks dried in the Sun, her Buzzar is inferior to some about her, her best
ornament is a Garden, to the South-east, which was planted by Shaw Tamas son
to Izmael, and great great-Grand-^ire to Abbas lately reigning.

This poor City has endured sundry violent storms of war, whereby though made
more famous, she is less flourishing. Anno 1514. it was ouerturned by Selymus
the Grand Signior, and sixteen year after by Solomon his Successor: when it
was wholly ruined by the insatiate Soldiers, who not only pillaged it, but made
a Chaos of those elaborate walks and sweet Gardens planted by King Tamas,
which together with the Buzzar was set on fire.

But the greatest ransack and villainy, was Anno 1585. by Ozman the luxurious
Bashaw and slave of Amurath the Third, and groaned under their subjection, till
thirty years after by Emyr-hamzae-mirzey eldest son of Mahomet the blind
(father of Abbas) it was relieved, rebuilt, and regained from Turkish
thraldom, and in memory of which tyrannies, Abbas the Hemirs younger brother
and late King, in few years following beat him out of Babylon, Bulsora, and
most of Mesopotamia.

Next night we lay in Sangurrabat, where we buried a civil Gentleman Master
Welflit our Comrade, under a broad-spreading-Chenor-tree, and fixed a brazen
Scroule over him, which spoke his name and Nation.

Next night we lay in the open fields under a bespangled Canopie the Firmament,
and next in Shawdee (or the Kings Town) a Town, none so covetous as to desire
it: for if that Kingdom have a purgatory, so a conspiracy of loose and
scalding sand, the burning Sun, and vn-receiueable Cottages, can make; one
there it is next day to Cazbeen.

Cazbeen.
CAzbeen, is that City which of past ages was called Arsatia, buile by that
famous Conqueror Arsaces, from whom the ensuing Kings were called Arsacidae, he
lived Anno Mundi 3720. and was the first that laid the foundation of that
Empire, in despite of Seleu^us, son of Antiochus Theos King of Syria.

The North Pole is there elevated thirty six degrees, Anno1517. Jews Messiah
receives them.
fifteen minutes. It was by Tamas son of Ismael, (the Jews reputed Messiah,
till they found him worse then Titus) made the Metropolis of his Kingdoms (as
Spawhawn by Abbas now) as well for the commodiousnesse of the place, as
bordering the Turks, his detested enemies.

By interpretation it is ( Exile) a phrase given of old unto the Parthian. By
some it is thought to be that City Rages, whither Tobias and the Angel Gabriel
traveled unto the Parthians, to demand the ten Talents (which is about two
thousand pound of our money) his father lent to Gabael son of Gabrias, nor am
I ignorant, that many imagine Edissa in Mesopotamia to be Rages, which cannot
be, that Rages was in Media and Edissa, is not above five hundred miles from
Jerusalem, no part of Media being so near by many more miles.

It was after that called Europus, by command of Nicannor, and lost that name
too, when other people came to conquer it.

Cazbeen is distant from the Caspian Sea, sixty five Farsangs, or a hundred
ninety five English miles. From Spawhawn two hundred and ten miles. It Is seated
in a fair even place, no Hill of note in thirty miles affronts it, it has
small quantity of wood or water, or such other blessings, as make a City
exquisite, only by the peoples industry, and help of a small Brook (scarce
worth a name elsewhere) it produces sundry herbs and fruits: as Vines,
Orenges, Lemons, Musk, and Water-Melons, Plums, Pome-granads, Cheries, Beries,
Figs, Apples, Pears, Peaches, Apricocks, Pistachoes, Nuts, Walnuts, Almonds
(but no Dates except brought from far) etc.

The compass of this City is seven miles: her Buzzarr is large and pleasant
(but not so regular as many are about her.)

The Kings House and Haram or Seraglio, are (near the Market) built of raw
Bricks, trellized with carved Windows, both painted and varnished with blew,
red and yellow, mixed with Arabique knots and poesies of Gold and Azure. Before
his door, is a great Tancke of water made at our being there.

Mosques and Hummums or Baths (which the Turks call Bannias) there are,
resplendent with the Azure paint wherewith they are ceruleated; for the other
buildings, they content the inhabitans, but to the affected Traveler yield
small wonder or amazement.

The King of Pers^a got into Cazbeen two days before us.

At this time, forty Camels laden with Tobacco, out of India, came hither,
which Mahomet-Alli-beg the Favorite hearing, acquaints the King with it, who
commanded forthwith the Camelmen to have their noses and ears cut off, the
forty load of Toback* (as they call it, or Tewton) was put into a large earthen
Pipe (the ground) and fired, whose black vapor upon free-cost, gave the whole
City infernal incense, two whole days and nights together. It seems some
late Edict had forbid it, and then it is death or as bad as death to drink it,
Forty load of Tobaccovaporized.
for he sometimes tolerates and forbids the same thing three or four times in
two years as the humor pleases him.

Some Occurrents in Cazbeen are note-worthy, and may be excused, if rehearsed,
because obuious.

Mahomet Codoband (or pur-blind) King of Persia, was all his reign much
troubled with the insolent attempts and brauadoes of the Grand Signior Amurath
the Third, son of Selym the Second, whose tyrannies and ambition made him
feared through Asia, entitling himself in his Letter to the Polanders, God of
the Earth, Governor of the whole World, Messenger of God, and best servant of
Mahomet his diuinest Prophet; adding to his Epithites such actions of war and
good luck, that his words unto the simple seemed modest.

His three great Captains (and to say truth, by whose sole valors he became
terrible) to the World: were Synan, Ferat and Mustapha Bashawes, of which last
I shall anon speak of, in a memorable matter, happening in this City.

I will first speak of the King of Persia (father of Abbas now reigning) he
was eldest son of Tamas King of Persia, who by a Georgian Princess had
twelve Sons, Mahomet the first, Izmael the second, Ayder-chawn the third,
Solomon the fourth, Emangoli the fifth, Mamut the sixth, Mustapha-chawn the
seventh, Ali-chawn the eight, Amet-chawn the ninth, Abraham the tenth, Hamze
the eleventh, and Isma-chawn the twelfth.

Mahomet by reason of some imperfections in his body was thought unworthy (by
his Father) to succeed him in his dignity, and thereupon made known unto his
subjects, the great deseruings of his second son Ismael, who at his fathers
death lay at Cohac, twixt Cazbin and Tauris, and upon news of the King his
fathers death hasted to Cazbeen, where he was joyfully received, both by the
Sultans and his virago sister, the Lady Periaconconna, whose love to Izmael was
more then to her other Brethren, notwithstanding was much perplexed knowing her
engagements and promises to Ayder-chawn his younger brother, who also aimed at
the Kingdom, and thought himself in some possession, having had the Imperial
Crown upon his head put their by his own hands, such time as his noble Father
lay a dying, and in these doubts, four days after, by means of Zal or
Zenal-chawn Duke of Tyroan his faithful friend, had his desires. The Crown
once more was set upon his head and he proclaimed King, but he enjoyed it not
above two days, for when he least suspected, his head was struck off, by his
Uncle Sahamal-chawn, and thrown in great contempt unto the people, Prince
Ayder slain.
as a just recompense, for his ill-grounded ambition.

The report of whose slaughter, came suddenly to Ismael his brother, who
without more fears or ceremonies, accounted himself no less then King led to
it by his Father will, his sisters desires, and the peoples expectations.

But to omit nothing that might strengthen his hold, he comes to Cazbeen, Eight
Princes beheaded.
where with wonderful joy and acclamation of the multitude he is saluted
King, after which by example of the bloody Turks, he causes eight of his
innocent brethren to be beheaded, all that were in his power.

His elder brother Mahomet he aimed at, whose fight though dim, yet in
judgment saw his danger, which happily he fled from, strengthening himself by
an assembly of his friends and kindred, who loved him (for his inclinations and
humors were good and tolerable) and every day his Army increased, into such
hatred was Ismael fallen among his people, for that beside his fratricides and
murder of thousand others, he endeavored all he could to apostatize their
great Prophet Mortis-Aly, affirming that Abubicher, Omer, and Ottoman
Successors to Mahomet at Mecha (the only hateful men unto all Persians) were
true Prophets, and to be preferred before Mortis Aly, which report of his and
others of like distaste and sorrow to the people, got him so much hatred with
them, that they cursed him deeply, amongst whom his valiant sister
Peria-con-Conna, confederating with four Sultans then in Cazbeen, Calil, Emyr,
Mahumed, and Curchychans, habited like four Virgins, entered his Bedchamber,
and with a silken halter strangled him, sending him to receive his deserts for
his unnatural bloody cruelties with his God Mahomet, whom he so favored. This
happened in Cazbeen the four and twentieth of November 1577.

This Monster being taken away, Mahomet, by persuasion of Salmas-mirza, his
dear friend, accepts the Empire, thereby annihilating the hopes and practices
of Emyr-chawn and Peria-con-Conna (second of them that murdered Ismael) and to
be even with his aspiring sister (who had made away the two last Kings his
brothers, and enterprised the like against himself) gave secret order to
Prince Salmas, that he should without much noise enter the City, and by some
means or other, behead her, which accordingly he did and sent her head, with
the hair disheueld about her shoulders, upon a Spears point, unto the King
her brother, to the terror and admiration of all men, especially her
accomplices, who thereupon fled, some into Georgia, and others unto Babylon.

Immediately after this (at the instigation of the false Armenian Vstrefbeg)
the Great Turk Amurath the Third sends Mustapha his victorious Basha, with
above a hundred thousand men, enters Media, and in the Caldaran-fields was
suddenly confronted by Sultan Tokomac the King of Persiaes General, who very
valiantly with twenty thousand men assailed him, whereupon ensued a most bloody
and furious battle, in which the Turks got the greatest loss, and were
disheartened to proceed further, six and thirty thousand Turks were slain,
and eight thousand Persians, with whose heads (to terrify the Persians
further, and to make his loss seem less) he made a fortification. But this
cruelty cost him dearly afterward, the same year (what against Tocomac and
Emangoly-chawn and what with passing Conac toward Hyrcania) he lost near
thirty thousand men, and returning out of these parts with conceited conquest,
lost all he got by the valor of Arez-beg, Emangoly Chawn, and other Persian
Captains his ancient enemies.

The Tartars (ancient friends unto the Turks) informed of Mustaphaes retreat,
and that his Garrisons were defeated by the Persians, they descend in great
troops into Hyrcania, where they committed many insolences, and in Media
sought to command the whole Country.

But their hopes deceived them, for staying to join with Osman Bassa, (left by
Mustapha, to guard these Territories) they grew so secure, that unawares,
Arezb^g with ten thousand Persians, routed a great part of their forces, and
had utterly destroyed them, had not their Captain Abdilcheri, came so suddenly
upon Arez-chawn, that in amazement the Persians fled, and Arez was sent
Prisoner to Ozman at Sumachia, Persian General hanged.
who cruelly made him be hanged for his former victories against them.

The news hereof came speedily to Mahomet the King of Persia, who sorrowed for
the loss of so good a Captain, and thirsting for revenge, sends his
victorious son (the brave Prince Emyr-hamzemirza) with twelve thousand men,
who from Cazbeen in nineteen great days travails so furiously and hastily
assailed the Tartars, that first he recovered the City Erez, and massacred the
bloody Turks, there too confounding Caitas the Bassa and his companies,
recovering also the two hundred pieces of Artillery, won from them formerly
in the Reign of Tamas King of Persia, which Ordnance he conueighed some to
Cazbeen, and the rest to Spawhawn, where above thitty yet lie vnmounted in the
great Mydan near to the Palace.

Thence this active Prince runs along, with his speedy Army and encounters
Abdilcherai and his Tartars, most of whom he cut in pieces, and sent the
youthful Captain Prisoner to Eres, where the Begun (or Queen mother) then
resided.

The Prince from thence hastens to Sumachia, where he besieged the Sultan Ozman
and his Turks, who seeing no resistance, pretending to yield next day, that
night stole away not looking back till they came into Hyrcania, to Derbent,
where they stayed in safety.

But Sumachia for her rebellion and perfidie was set on fire, and most of her
Inhabitants put to the Sword, which victories so suddenly and bravely finished,
Emyr-Hamze-mirza returns to Eres, taking along with his Army, his Mother and
the Tartar Captain, they entered Cazbeen with great joy and Triumph.

And during Abdilcherais imprisonment in Cazbeen, he got so much love and
respect from the King and people, that he became pitied and admired,
especially his valor and beauty took such place in the Queen mothers heart,
that of an Enemy she became exceeding amorous of this Captain (who was to
marry Emyr-Hamzes sister shortly) deserving her for these respects, that he
was very boble (as brother to the Great Cham) and that by this union, his power
might be joined unto Persia.

But the report of his unchaste conversation with the Queen, so exasperated the
Sultans in Cazbeen, that one day in great choler, they entered the Place,
Queen of Persia, and Prince of Tartarymurdered.
where finding him and the Queen together, they cut both their throats, but
first dismembered him, concluding so the end and triumphs of this Praecopensian
Tartar, Anno 1578.

Occurrents in Cazbeen.
AFter some stay in Cazbeen, our Ambassador, desirous of his dispatch visited
Mahomet-Aly-beg, and by him entreated answer of his Letter.

The Pagan in short told him, if he had any more to possess the King he
should first acquaint him, and consequently have an answer, to which our
Ambassador replied little, tho discontented much, perceiving by this, he
should have no further access unto the King, but willing to be gone, and loath
the Favorite should see him danted, he trusted him with his business. Some
part the continuation of amity betwixt their Masters, with some words of the
Merchants Traffic, and an acknowledgment from the King, that Sir Robert
Sherley was his true Ambassador into Europe.

To the two first Mahomet-Ally-beg undesired, bolted out, that he knew his
Master the King of Persia or Potshaw, stood more affected to no one Prince of
the World, then to our King: and that the Trade and Exchange betwixt their
Merchants, was both pleasing and profitable to his King: and for Sir Robert
Sherley (whose enemy Mahomet ever has) he knew and had heard the King himself
say, he cared not for him, and that his Ambassies and Messages to the Princes
of Christendom, were frivolous and forged, it is true, quoth he, the King gave
him (as an argument of favor) at the Caspian Sea, a Horse and Garment, but it
was more to satisfy the other Ambassador himself, then out of any respect
the King had unto him.

And when our Lord Ambassador told him, Sir Robert Sherley had the Kings
Letter of Credence or Firman, to testify the truth of it, and that's if he were
an Imposture, he were the veriest Fool living, to undertake a journey of that
length and danger, knowing with all the Kings severity.

To which the Pagan answered not, but told him, at their next meeting he would
give him ampler satisfaction, entreating him for a sight of Sir Roberts
Testimonial Letter, and a Copy of what Sir Robert Sherley had treated about in
England, or other places.

Two days after, attended by some Gentlemen, he visited Mahomet-Ally-beg
again, and gave him the Copy of what he last desired, and with all showed him,
Sir Roberts Letter of Credence signed by his King Shaw Abbas in Spahawn.

He bid him look upon it, and tell him if it had the Image of a Counterfeit,
the malicious Favorite thought it had, but being uncertain, craved it to show
the King, which accordingly he did (if we may give credit to an enemy and
Infidel) unto the King three days after, who (as he told Sir Dodmore Cotton)
viewed them, denied them for true, and in rage had burnt them, wishing Sir
Robert Sherley to depart his kingdom, as old and troublesome.

He was amazed at it, but knew no remedy.

For my own part I am verily persuaded, the Kings Seals and Phirman were
true, and that either Mahomet-Ally-beg jugled with him (for we had but his
word, for all we knew, and never more came in presence of the King) he might
forge other Letters to show the King, else why kept he them two days without
delivery, or he might have slandered the King, to say he burnt them, being an
act, not worthy so just a Prince as Abbas was reputed for.

This argument may prove his being true Ambassador, because the King hearing
he came in that defense, and to clear his honor from Nogdi-begs aspersions in
England, as the King gave him no apparent satisfaction yet because he never
questioned an injury done him (that had he been an Imposture had been one) it
follows he was guarded with innocence and truth.

And but that Nogdi-beg had done Sir Robert Sherley injury, wherefore should
Shaugh Abbas say, it was well for him he poisoned himself (guilty of revenge)
for had he come to the Court of Persia, he would have sliced his body into as
many parts as there be days in a year, and burnt them with Dogs Turds, in the
open Market place.

Again, his son in our company, durst not come at Court to account for his
unlucky Father, till Zenall Chawn the Duke of Tyroan his kinsman enterceded,
and bribed for his peace and entrance.

The truth is Sir Robert Sherley had deserved well from the Persian, but being
old and unable for further service, got this recompense, to be slighted in his
honor, even then when he hoped for most thanks and other acknoledgments.

The death of Sir Robert Sherley at Cazbeen.
THese and the like discontents (casual to mortal men) so much afflicted him,
that immediately a Fever and Apoplexy ouer-charged him, so that on the
thirteenth of June, he gave an vltimum vale to this World. And wanting a fitter
place of Burial, was put into the earth at the door of his own House in
Cazbeen where he died.

He was brother to two worthy Gentlemen Sir Anthony and Sir Thomas Sherleys,
his age exceeded not the great Clymacterick, his condition was free, noble, but
inconstant. He was the greatest Traveler in his time, and had tasted liberally
of many great Princes fanours: of the Pope he had power to legitimate the
Indians, and from the Emperor received the Honor and Title of a Palatine of
the Empire. His patience was better then his intellect, he was not much
acquainted with the Muses, but what he wanted in Philosophy, he supplied in
Languages. He had been servant to the Persian near thirty years, and merited
much better then you see, he then obtained when he most expected it.

Though, it may seem impertinent, I cannot pass by in silence, without injury
to her memory, whom I so much honored, the thrice worthy and undaunted Lady
Terezia, his faithful Wife, to this sad time, constant to our company, her
Faith was ever Christian, her parents so, and noble, her Country Circashia,
which joins to Georgia, and to Zuiria, near the Euxine and Caspian Seas.

At that time when her Husband, lay dead by her, and herself very weak by a
long Dissentery, a Dutch Painter (who had served the King of Persia twenty
years) complies with Mahomet-Ally-beg, and pretending an Engagement he was in,
to one Crole a Flemming (for some moneys Sir Robert Sherley had long since
borrowed of him) he is believed, and got a Warrant from the Cawsee or Justice
to seize upon the Ladies goods, which wicked plot could not be so private, but
was known by a faithful honest Gentleman Master Hedges, a Follower of our
Ambassador, who straightway acquaints the Lady with it, which as she knew was
false, so seemed it strange, yet recalling herself, she tore a Satin Quilt
with her feeble hands, and trusted him with her treasure, a Cabinet, some
Jewels, rich stones and the like, with which he was no sooner gone, when the
Pagan Serjants, with John the Flemming, entered her Chamber, carried away what
was valuable or vendible, his Horses, Camels, Vests, Turbants, a rich Persian
Dagger, and some other things, but after narrow search finding no Jewels, (for
they had seen him wear many and it was them, he had woorried in his Ostrich
appetite) mad, angry and ashamed, they departed unsatisfied.

The Gentleman when the storm was past, re-deliuered her her Jewels, of a
double value now, cause of that conquest, which had she wanted, I do not
think her fortunes left her would have made up fifty pound, a small revenue
for so deserving a Lady, and most useful in those uncharitable Regions against
Womankind, of whom though much esteemed by the Persians, yet seem rather, in
those parts created for slavery and fancy, then to enjoy liberty or praises,
prizes not a little sought for and desired by those female weak ones.

The death of Sir Dodmore Cotton Ambassador, at Cazbeen.
AFter some discontents and fourteen days sickness of a Flux, got either by
eating too much fruits, or cold on Taurus, that religious Gentleman our
Ambassador Sir Dodmore Cotton died in Cazbeen the three and twentieth of July
1628. we obtained a Dormitory for his Body among the Armenian Christians
residing there, who with their Priests assisted us. His Horse was led before,
with a mourning Velvet Saddle on his back, his Coffin had a Crimson Satin
Quilt lined with purple Silk, over him was laid his Bible, Sword and Hat: Such
of his followeres as were able, waited on it, and Doctor Goch (a reverent
Gentleman) put him into the ground, where though his memory and virtue cannot
die, yet I would he had a Monument, a more emient memorial.

After a months stay in Cazbeen, where we left buried our two Ambassadors,
the king sent each of us two long Coats or Vests of Cloth of Gold in sign of
favor.

And after much attendance upon Mahomet-Ally-beg, got license to depart with
Letters from the Potshaugh, for our safer Travail, he delivered us with all a
Letter to our Gracious King from the king of Persia, sowed up in a piece of
cloth of Gold, fastened with a silk string, and sealed with a stamp of Letters
after their fashion.

Where before we go on any further, I shall tell you of Mahomet-Ally-beg, his
rising and destruction.

His birthplace was Parthia, (called so from Parah, to fructify) and near
Spahawn. His parentage so worshipful that he knew no further then his father,
a man both mean and poor.

Mahomet, it seems, had no stomach for the Wars, and having a large Bulk
to maintain, and no Camelion, his education being simple, he became
Costermonger, and by that became wealthy and capable to maintain himself.

In a happy hour, the king (then in the Hippodrome, and in Spawhawn) took
notice of him, viewd him, liked him and prefered him, so as in small time he
became sole Favorite, and then was feared and honored every where among the
Persians, for so shall it still be done to him whom the king honors. Not any
Prince, Duke, Sultan or other, who depended upon the Potshaughs smiles, but in
an awful complement sent him yearly some gift or other to cherish his favor,
whereby his wealth became wonderful.

His presence was very good, a good and smiling countenance, big body, great
mustachoes, and full eyes (a great beauty among Mahumetans) his years under
forty, a third part of which age he lived in Honor and general account, till
to his utter confusion at Cazbeen, Abbas the king (though loath) gave way to
Atropos, who could she have been bribed, might yearly have got large Tribute
from now dead Abbas, till he had out-spun the years of old Methusala, so loath
are Tyrants to go to Erebus.

The king was low of stature, aspect quick, low forehead, fiery eyes, King of
Persia described and dies.
his nose long and hooked, over his eyes he wanted hair, his Mustachoes very
long and bending downwards, his chin sharp, his tongue fluent.

He was king of Heri (near Tartaria) by birth, but unnatural ambition (though
he removed father and brother for it) soon made him Monarch of Persia, and a
terror to the Turk, Arabian, Tartar and Mogull.

He dead, his Grandchild Shaugh Soffee is invested with his Diadem, aged
sixteen, his courage hopeful.

Emangoly-chawn, the brave Duke of Persae-polis, is by his Grandsires will made
his Protector, Mahomet beheaded.
which Mahomet-Ally-beg (now no Favorite) looking after, for his late ambition
and bribes even then was made shorter by the head. His estate was confiscate to
the young king for want of Issue in headless Mahomet.

Our Phirman or Letter to pass safely, is thus interpreted.

The Emperor of Persia's Firman.
ABBAS.
THe high and mighty Star, whose Head is covered with the Sun, whose Motion
is comparable to the Aaeriall Firmament, whose Majesty is come from Asharaff,
and has dispatched the Lord Ambassador of the English King: The Command of
the Great King is, That his Followers shall be cnducted from our Palace of
Cazbeen, to Saway, and by the Darraguod (or Mayor) of Saway to the City of
Coom, and by the Governor of Coom, unto the City of Cashan, etc. through all
my Territories. Fail not my Command, I also command them a peaceable Travail.

Sealed with a Stamp of Letters in Ink.
Titles of the King of Persia may be these.
ABbas is King of Persia, Parthia, Media, Bactria, Chorazon, Candahor, and
Heri, of the Ouz-beg Tartar, of the Kingdoms of Hircania, Draconia, Euergeta,
Parmenia, Hydaspia, and Sogdiana, of Aria, Paropaniza, Drawgiana, Arachosia,
Mergiana, and Carmania, as far as stately Indus. Sultan of Ormus, Larr,
Arabia, Susiana, Chaldea, Mesopotamia, Georgia Armenia Sarcashia, and Uan, Lord
of the Imperious Mountains of Ararat, Taurus, Caucasus and Periardo: Commander
of all creatures from the Sea of Chorazan to the Gulf of Persia, of true
Descent from Mortys-Ally. Prince of the four Rivers, Euphrates, Tygris,
Araxis, and Indus: Governor of all Sultans, Emperor of Mussulmen, Bud of
Honor, Mirror of Virtue, and Rose of Delight.

Although (to the modest Reader) a great deal of ostentation, appear in these
blustering Epithites and Titles, yet know that it is no newcustom used among
Pagans to this day in other places, and of old.

We read that after the Creation 3419, when Cyrus the Fortunate Persian,
wrested the Monarchy from Astyages, Ezra the Prophet to declare his greatness
writes thus.

The Lord God of Heaven, has given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth.

Domitian in all his Proclamations began thus:

I am your Lord God Domitian.

Caligula called himself, Deum optimum maximum, and Iouem Latialem, The great
and best God and safeguard of Italy.

And Sapores, son to Mizdates, Monarch of Persia, in the year after our
Savior 315. wrote thus to Constantius the good Emperor.

I Sapores King of Kings, Equal to the Stars, and Brother to the Sun and
Moon. And Chozroes (Father of Ormizda) who ruled Persia Anno Dom. 543.
enstiles himself thus, in humble manner to the Emperor Mauritius (Master of
bloody Phocas, who gave Pope Boniface the Antichristian Title of Universal
Bishop) in this sort.

I Chozroes, great King of Kings, Begler-beg (or Lord of Lords) Ruler of
Nations, Prince of Peace, Salvation of men, Among the Gods (a man good and
ever) among men (A God most glorious) the great Conqueror, arising with the
Sun, giving luster to the night, a Hero in Descent. These blasphemous
Epithites may accuse him of arrogancy, but when it is granted he was a Pagan,
it is less admirable.

For in these our times those foreign Potentates are so haughty and ignorant
of the World, that the China not thirty years ago, sending an Ambassador to
the King of Persia, Abbas. The Letter was thus directed To his Slave the Sophy
of Persia, the undaunted Emperor of all the world sends greeting. For which,
his Ambassador got durtie welcome. His thoughts are puffed up by his great power
and riches, for it is reported he has six hundred large Cities, two thousand
walled Towns, a thousand Castles, sixty millions of Subjects, and a hundred
and twenty millions of Zechynes or Crowns yearly.

They call him, the beauty of the whole earth, Heir apparent to the living
Sun and undaunted Emperor.

The great Cham or Emperor of Tartaria, The Emperor of China.
has no less ambition then the former, imagining all the World is tributary to
him, he is surnamed, The Son of the highest God; and Quintessence of the
purest Spirits, and every day so soon as he has dined; at his Court-gate
causes a Herald by sound of Trumpet to proclaim, that all other Kings and
Potentates of the Earth may go to dinner: supposing he affoords them no small
favor who perhaps are set at meat before him.

And as he assumes such majesty on the earth, so at his death, that he may
want no seruitors, a thousand or ten thousand sometimes are (unwillingly)
sacrisiced to serve him in another Kingdom, as Venetus assures us was acted
when Mango Cham was buried, in the Tomb where Allan Cham or Chawn, The
Emperor of Tartaria.
and Tamerlaine or Tamyr Cham, his Grandfather lie intombed.

The Kings of Pegu, Mattacala and among the Manicongoes, are so sublimated,
that when an Ambassador comes before them, they must do it creeping, and
hiding their faces with their hands, and so long as they be in presence, after
one look, they sit crosse-legged, their elbowes fixed upon their thighs, and
with their hands cover their shamefast faces.

Amongst which Ceremonious Princes, he of Monomotapa is not least, who when he
goes abroad, is not public to his people, lest his Majesty should too much
dazell them, and when he drinks or coughes, it is so remarkable among them, that
by mighty shouts and clamours they make the whole City sound again.

The great Christian of Aethiopia, vulgarly called Prester, Precious, or
Priest-Iohn, The Emperor of the Abyssi^^s or Pr^ter John.
has no less names of honor, then any yet, for besides the rehearsal of his
fifteen Territories, he calls himself, The Head of the Church, the Favorite
of God, the Pillar of Faith, descended from Solomon, David, Judah and Abraham,
Sions prop, extract from the Virgins hand, Son of Saint Peter and Saint Paul
by the Spirit, and of Nahu by the flesh. This great Prince appears among his
people not very often publicly to become a Nouelty unto them, his life and
government is not unlike the Tartars. He seldom resides in Cities, or any one
place long, but affects perpetual motion.

Our departure from the Persian Court.
WE left Cazbeen at ten at night (thereby avoiding Sols too much warmth) and
got by Sunrise to Perissophon, where we found good water to quench our thirst
(a thing not to be past over without memory through all Asia) next night to
Asaph) next to Begum, where is a goodly Fabric, built by King Tamas, for a
lodge to passengers, but the water there is brackish. Next night to Saway a
City of twelve hundred Families, seated under a rising Hill, and watered with
a stream flowing from Baronta. The Inhabitants are industrious, such as the
Turks call Tymariots: who for their Lands are bound to till the yiedling Earth,
and upon all occasions to bring each his light horse, and are curious to stop
insurrections or tumults at the first appearance.

Next night, we rode over Plains (in which are artificial Mounts and ruins
of War) unto a City called Coom.

In these Plains was fought that famous battle betwixt Lucullus and
Methrydates King of Pontus, wherein the Romans got the Conquest.

Marcus Crassus the rich Roman, after his impious sacrilege of the holy
relics and treasure in the Temple of Jerusalem, valued at six tons of Gold,
three and fifty years before the Nativity of our Savior Christ, puffed up with
his great wealth, and forlorn amongst the Jews with fifty thousand men
marched against the Parthians, who with Herodes their King, son of Mythredate
the third, Anno Mundi 3915. courageously came against this greedy General, and
encountered him at Haran in Mesque, The Town where Abraham lived with Terah his
Father, and successefully vanquished the insulting Romans, slew thirty thousand
of them and took Crassus prisoner, inflicting Gods just judgment on him, for
knowing what he had done at Jerusalem, and the covetousness of his mind, they
powered down his throat melted gold, bidding him quench his thirst, with that
he had so long lusted after, and by this victory the Parthians became Masters
of that Kingdom. Some notwithstanding refer the place of Battle to these
Plains, how true I know not.

But five years after Mark Anthony by his General requited the Parthian, not
only putting his men to flight who then could not make good that Proverb of
Seneca, Terga conuersi, metuendi Parthi, but besides their own destruction,
lost their succeeding hopes, Prince Pacorus slain with the rest by the chafed
Roman.

And a little after, Herodes whom though vanquished could not be taken by the
Romans, at home by the parracide Phraortes his unnatural son he lost his
life, to revenge which villainy and the rest, Anthony came against him with no
small force, but returned beaten and disconsolate. But Augustus (in whose time
our Savior took flesh of the blessed Virgin, and a general peace was through
the World) prevailed with Phraortes, to submit unto the Roman Empire, which he
did and gave leave after that to the Romans, to nominate their Kings, that
being all their tribute or acknowledgment. But for all this subjection, they
lost not their Empire wholly (for formerly sixteen several Kingdoms were
under them) till the year 230. or thereabouts, such time as Artaxerxes Father
of Sapores the first, and second of the second descent of the Kings of Persia
aimed at it, and though five hundred and thirty years were past, since Darius
slain by Alexander the Great had the Monarchy, yet no Persian borne got the
Crown, till this Artaxerxes by overthrow of Artabanus the third, (son of
King Vologesus the third) got the Kingdom and liberty of the Persians
restored, which from Arsaces in the year 3718. To this Artabanus, for above
five hundred years, had acknowledged the Parthian for their Governors.

And Artaxerzes, puffed up with this three days dear bought victory (for so
long the valiant Parthians fought resolutely against their Adversaries) he sent
a challenge to Alexander Seuerus (the four and twentieth Emperor from Julius
Caesar, and next to Heliogabalus or Bassianus the lustful Emperor) to restore
those kingdoms in Asia, anciently belonging to his Monarchy. Seuerus likt it
not, but came to correct his insolency, where arriving as far as Euphrates,
Artaxerxes met his divided Army and destroyed it. The Emperor, though he came
in anger and have, returned full of those passions in a double measure, and had
no better luck at home, for a while after the Thracian Maximinus took his
Empire from him, and to make his loss the greater, was by some Villanes in
Germany bereaved of his life as well as Empire. His virtuous mother Mammaea
(Origens Proselyte) now pertaking death with him, as she had done glory
formerly.

And about eighty years after, Lycinius Valerianus the Roman Emperor
(surnamed Colobus, the thirtieth from Julius Caesar) hoping to revenge these
losses by the Persians, entered Asia with a stronger Army. Slavery of a Roman
Emperor.
Where in this Country, by Sapores the then king, his Army contrary to his
expectation was utterly defeated, himself taken prisoner, and to his dying
day, made a footstool, when ever Sapores got on Horseback. And this was a
just judgment of Almighty God upon this cruel Emperor, who (amongst other
holy Saints and Martyrs) tormented Saint Lawrence on a broyling Gridiron unto
death.

This shall be sufficient in this place to renew the memory of the Parthians,
in whose kingdoms we now are entering. And first of Coom, where we reposed our
selves three days.

A Description of Coom.
COom is a City placed in the half way betwixt the two Royal Cities Cazbeen
and Spawhawn, it is situate in a fair and sensible Horizon, and in Front of
both Kingdoms, Media and Parthia.

It was in ages past called Guriana, and before that Arbacta, perhaps built by
Arbaces, who in the year from Adam 3146. gave end to the Assyrian Monarchy
(rapt from effeminate Sardanapalus, the six and thirtieth from Ninus, first
Emperor and Monarch of the World) and by which, a beginning to the Median
Dynastie.

The now ruins about her, may gain belief to the Inhabitants, who say it was
once comparable in pride and greatness to mighty Babylon, but what ever it
has been, it is now a pleasant fruitful and healthy City and the people
courteous.

By some it is called Coim and by others Com, unfitly, for they pronounce it
Coom. The City has two thousand Houses in her, wel-built sweet and
wel-furnished, her streets are wide, her Buzzar fair, and her Mosque of most
honorable esteem among them, therein is richly entombed Fatima, daughter and
heir of their greatest Prophet Mahomet, and married to Mortis Haly. Falimaes
Tomb.
The King and much reverenced Prophet of the Persian. Her Tomb is round like
other Mosques, the Ascent three or four steps of silver.

This City is watered with a sweet but small River, which deriues her spring out
of the Coronian Mountains, the air here is second to none for freshness, nor
wants this Town any fruit requirable for the Zone it is placed in it, has Grapes
good and great store. Melons of both sorts, Cowcumbers, Pomegranads,
Pome-citrons, Apricocks, Peaches, Plums, Pistachoes, Pears, Apples, Quinces,
Almonds, Figs, Wal-nuts, Cherries, Berries, and the best wheat bread in Persia
(Gombazellello excepted.)

Near abouts was that great and terrible combat of Hismael, and thirty
thousand Persians, against Selymus the First and three hundred thousand Turks,
where the victor Turks lost more then the vanquished Persians and had been
defeated, had not the great Ordnance terrified the Persian Horse: this battle
was fought Anno Domini 1514. begun at Coy in Armenia and ended here, and by the
Turks is called the Day of Doom.

From Coom we rode to Zenzen, and thence to Cashan six and thirty miles from
Coom.

A description of Cashan.
CAshan is a famous City in Parthia, whose Metropolis is Spawhawn, whence she
is distant sixty miles and odd.

The antiquity of it is not much, in this name, either taking beginning from
Cazan-Mirzey, son to Hocem, or from Cassan, who in the year 1202. was
utterly ruined by the Great Cham, the rule being kept but three Descents from
his Grand-sire Tangrolipix and his Father Axan: or from Cushan, which in the
Syriacke, is heat or blackness; but most likely from Vsan-Cashan, Anno 1470.
who from his Armenian rule, vanquishing Malaoncres, the last of Tamberlains
progeny in this Country, got the Crown of Persia, whose issue from Hismael
sway now that Scepter, of which alteration this City and Coom are joyful, in
revenge of that terrible and violent destruction Tamberlaine made in his
Expedition against Bajazet, Anno Domini 1397, whom he brought away imprisoned
in an Iron Cage; having overthrown him in that place where Pompey the Great
overcame Methrydates King of Pontus, at mount Stella: This Tamberlaine was
son of Ogg, son of Sagathai, and got the Crown by marriage of Gyno Chans
(Daughter and Heir) son of Bar Chan, son of Hocuchan, son of
Cyngis-chan, who Anno Domini 1162, subdued vn-chan, the last of the Kings of
Tenduck. These two Cities above others parched in his fiery anger.

Cashan is well seated, well peopled, and well built: ouer-topt by no Hill, nor
watered by no great stream, which augments the heat, chiefly when Sol resides
in Cancer, in which there is no less violence then the Sun, the stinging
Scorpion in too great plenty living amongst them, whose love and understanding
is such to Travelers (as say the Inhabitants) they never hurt them. Here the
curse (may a Scorpion of Cashan sting thee) is frequent among them.

The people are orderly and more given to trade, then in some greater Towns
about her. Silks, Sattens, and Cloth of Gold are here in great abundance, and
at reasonable prices.

The Carrauans-raw, the Mosques and Hummums or Banneas: are her only ornaments,
of which the Carrauans-raw not only precedes them, but all other I saw in
Persia, It Was built by Abbas, and is able and fit to entertain the greatest
Potentate of Asia. Yet built for Travelers to lodge in, upon free cost by act
of Charity.

It Is two large stories high, the material brick varnished and colored with
knots and Arabian letters poeses of azure, red and white, from its Basis it is
built six foot high of good stone. The Fabrique is Quadrangular, and each
proportionable Angle two hundred paces, in the middle is a fair large Court,
where, in midst is a four square Tancke, or pond of pure water, about it are
spacious and fragrant Gardens.

And though there be no affinity in the names, yet Ctesiphon was a prime City
of the Persian Arsacidae, and there are some who judge her revived in Cashan,
but I believe it not. Yet be it so or no, the memory of that infamous Apostate
Julian calls me to speak his end.

This Julian succeeded Constantius (the eight and fortieth Emperor from the
first Caesar) who deceased at Mopsocriue, Julian the Apostale.
a Town under mount Taurus) Julian was first a Christian, but revolted and
became a most bitter and constant Persecutour to all that honored Christ.

He thought to subiugate the Parthians, who proved his destruction, for in an
unexpected alarm and onset by them, he ran out of his Tent weaponed with
Sword and Shield, where rage transported him and ventured so far that a
common Soldier struck him into the guts with a Dart, whereby he was forced to
take his Tent, and entering the battle again, his blood issued so strongly
from him that he returned back, perceiving his end at hand, and as he had
lived a Tyrant unto Christians, so in his death throwing his blood into the
air, cried out, Vicisti Galileae. And at midnight under these walls, bequeathed
his loathsome soul and body to him he served, and his Empire to Iouinianus who
succeeded him.

On the three and twentieth of August we left Cashan, that night making
Bizdeebode our lodging six leagues distant or Farsangs, as the Persians call
them, a Farsang is three of our English miles. Thence we traveled to Natane or
Taken, the place where Darius last breathed at by the Bactrian Bessus his
villainy, after his three great overthrows by Olympias victorious son Anno
mundi 3635 at Granuicus, Cilicia, and at Arbela, where he consummated life and
Monarchy. The lodge here is in a craggie place immured betwixt two Hills, but
looking over, you see a large Champaigne ground full of streams and Villages.
This Manzeil was ten Farsangs or thirty miles. Next night seven Farsangs, next
to Reig, a place scarce worth the memorizing.

This place is from Spawhawn nine miles, and note that from Cazbeen to
Spawhawn, is eighty eight Farsangs, or two hundred sixty four English miles.

Hence (that I defraud the Reader no longer of his patience) to Babylon thus.
To Corranda, to Deagow, to Miskarroon, to Corryn, to Lackaree, to Corbet, to
Nazareil, to Sabber-Chawn, to Buldat, to Bagdat, or Babylon, a hundred and
thirty Farsangs, or three hundred and ninety English miles.

A description of Babylon in Chaldaea.
BAbylon (now called Bagdat) is seated in the Veil of Shinaar, whose first
inhabiter was Arphaxad, some of Sem, son of Noah.

The City Babylon has its signification from Confusion, because there first
happened the division of Languages from one (which was the Hebrew, though
Goropius will have it Dutch) to seventy two by Nimrods ungodly design, Anno
mundi 1788. A hundred and thirty years after the Flood, and before Christ's
Incarnation 2180 to frame a mighty building able to secure them against a
second Deluge, not regarding the Majesty of God Almighty. This building was
hastened by five hundred thousand men, so that in small time they made it rise
from its Basis (no less then nine miles of ground) to above five thousand
paces toward the Sky, so that the Poet tells us: The Heavens look pale with
wonder to behold,
With what attempts and rage the Giants bold
Seek to affront the Gods, by rearing hie,
Mount upon mount t'inhabit in the Sky.
intending to equalize it with the Stars, but he that sits above, and
accounts the best of man's judgment but mere folly, not only prevented this
design, but severed them into seventy Companies, and so many Languages.

The Tower, though it stood for ever unfinished, the City notwithstanding went
on in his greatness, and by Semyramis received most perfection, by whom it was
walled about, the circuit of which walls (as Solinus relates) were sixty
English miles (or four hundred and eighty Furlongs) Diodorus Siculus makes it
three hundred sixty five, each day in the year performing one Furlong, and
Quintus Curtius affirms it three hundred fifty eight, the thicknes and height
corresponding to its circuit. Some say two hundred Cubits high and fifty
thick, so that a-top might drive together six Chariots, and to effect this
miracle of buildings, three millions of men were daily laboring at it.

This Nimrod (son of Chush, or Jupiter ^elus, son of Cham the accursed
son of Noah) lived six and fifty years after his founding Babell, and was
buried there. In memory of whose acts and greatness the superstitious Chaldees
deified him, by the name of Sudormin, converted after by the Romans into
Saturn.

His son Ninus followed him, in his tyranny and victories is making complete
his fathers late intended Monarchy by conquest of his Neighbor Nations after
which he built Niniue, though some allude it to Assure, who gave title to the
Assyrian, and suppose by some to be this Ninus: who in his dotage gave Semirani
s his wife, so much liberty in his Imperial power, that it is thought she
deposed him, and during her sons infancy sat as Emperor, doing wonders,
walled Babylon, built Gardens in Media of admirable works and greatness,
conquered into India, and became feared throughout all Asia

And burning in lust with her own son, he to revenge his fathers death,
slew her in stead of her wished embraces.

This young Ninus is called Amraphell, and he who with Arioch, Tydall and
Chedorlaomer came against Sodom and captiued Lot, rescued by his Uncle
Abraham, with the slaughter of those Kings, in whose return Melchisedecke King
of Salem the High Priest met and blessed him.

But I cannot approve altogether of their Opinions, that make this Ninus to be
Amraphell, for we know, Ninus was but six Discents from Noah, and Amraphell
must needs be ten at fewest, except you will allow Ninus and Abraham, to live
in the same age together.

This City after sixteen hundred years tyrannical government, was subdued
by Cyrus, Anno Mundi, 3432. and before Christ five hundred thirty six years
(seventeen years after the Captivity of Israel and Judah by Nabuzaradan
General for Nabuchadnezzer, as in the last of Jeremy.)

In the seventh year of Artaxerxes Longimai^us King of Persia, A. Mundi, 3511.
and before out Savior Christ's Incarnation, four hundred fifty seven, the
Prophet Esdras went hence to Jerusalem to rebuild the Temple of God, and
thirteen years after that, Nehemiah went from Sushan to further it.

Of the greatness of Babylon, Aristotle reports, when Alexander took it, A.
Mundi 3633. one part of the City knew not in three days after, that it was
taken whereby though it may seem wonderful. It will seem the less, excused
either in their solemn Sa^rifices, or by comparison of other Cities in China,
and other places, the Imperial City Sun^yen, or Quinzay affecting no less
compass then a hundred miles, (if a Friars Travails can be credited) in which
is a Lake thirty miles about, and in which City are twelve thousand bridges.
Consider also the City Nanquin, (subject to the same Monarch) in compass
thirty miles, environed with three strong walls, and including two hundred
thousand houses, which Cities and wonderful reports of that Kingdom, as most
consequentious for knowledge and instruction, so I wish with all my heart, some
Gentleman of worth might from some Christian Prince be sent of purpose for that
action, that these doubts and wonders might be assured, and with truth
discovered.

The chief ornament in Babylon was two Royal Palaces, built by the
magnanimous Queen Semiramis, (daughter or sister to Euilmerodach slain by
Astyages) one in the East of the City of thirty Furlongs, the other West
comprehending sixty, immured with walls of wondrous height.

But of most admiration was the Tower consecrated to Jupiter Belus, or Cush in
the Center of the City, strengthened with brazen gates, the frame four
squared, each square a thousand paces, in midst elevated a strong built Tower,
on which were eight others one upon another, in top of all were set three great
golden Images sacred to Jupiter, Ops and Juno, statues laden with gemmes of
great luster and value, and which continued till Cyrus, after the Creation
3406. years, when he made himself Master of these and the Empire, by drayning
Euphrates into pits and other channels.

Yet some Historians, say Ninus and Semiramis, begun to make Babylon glorious,
and that Nabuchadnezzar and Nytocris his Wife enlarged it, A. Mundi 3350; she
was says Herodotus daughter of Alyattes. This Assyrian Monarch was so taken
with its bravery, that he could not forbear to boast, Is not this great
Babeil, which I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of my
power, and for the honor of my Majesty. At which instant God decreed his
transmutation and the renting away his Empire, which happened soon after by
Cyrus, when we got the victory at Borsippa. These state alterations no doubt
extenuated Babilons greatness, in the Monarchies remoouall. Yet Pliny in his
sixth Book and six and twentieth Chapter tells a greater cause of subiecting
her, occasioned by Seleuchus Nicanor, An. Mundi 3645. Alexanders Captain and
Governor after his death in Assyria, who to vex the Babylonians and impouerish
them, built a City after his own name called Seleucia, fifty miles lower
then Babel to the gulf of Persia, where because of his greatness, and the
wel-seating it (in the bowels of Tygris and Euphrates) he allured out of
Babylon six hundred thousand souls, so that the late triumphant City became
half desolate.

Alexander when he entered it, found to satiate his travel, two hundred
thousand Talents of Gold, delivered him by Bagophanes, where this Worlds
greatest Victor, in his return from India found his burial.

Another City in Egypt called Al-Cairo, is by some called Babylon, but that
name is not so authentical as the former, because built in emulation of the
others memory and quondam greatness.

Bagdat, or Babilons ruins.
OVt of Babilons ruins, is revived Bagdat, seated not far from the old
City: it signifies Arabically a Garden, but then it must be Bawdt-dat and not
Bagadat: it is with more reason denominated from Bugiafer Caliph of Babylon,
An. 758. who spent two millions of Gold, to rebuild it, after that cruel
deuastation by Almericke King of Iewry, An. Dom. 1170.

But long, she enjoyed not her glory, for An. Dom. 640. Chyta a Prince of
Tartary, sends his brother Alacho against it, who took it and sickt it, with a
Tartarian greediness, cruelly putting to death the then Caliph Musteadzem, the
four and fiftieth and last of the Abasian Pedigree. After which it was taken
by Tangrolipix or Sadot Lord of the Zelzucchian Family, A. Mun. 1031. and from
him descended to the Turks, and remained in the Ottoman tyranny till the year
1625. when Abbas the victorious Persian King beat them out of it* as also out
of Tauris, Van and the greater Asia.

And it is very probable, that if the King of Persia had not taken Babylon,
whereby he was forced to keep continual Garrisons against the Turk in many
places, he had made a conquest of all India. For he got Candahor and other
places from the Mogull, and kept them without any difficulties, the Indians are
so effeminate, and rule more by policy and money with the help of other
Nations, as Per and Geo. who are their Chans and greatest Princes.

The City is now of no great wonder, her circuit and building equal to
Cazbeen, rage and time gives her nothing to boast off, but her memory, but the
Bridge is eminent in her, so is her Buzzar and the Sultans Palace and Gardens,
more large then lovely, of more Quantity then use, showing no more artificial
strength, wealth, or beauty then neighboring and late start-vp-townes about
her.

Twelve miles thence is a gross confused Mount, which Tradition only assures
us of, was part of Nimrods Tower the place seems bigger at distance then near
at hand, slimy bricks and mortar are dug out of it: which are all the living
testimonials of this monument. To which I apply that old and much used Verse.

Miramur perijsse homines, monumenta fate scunt?
Interitus saxis, nominibusque veni^.
Why wonder we that people die? since monuments decay:
And flintie stones, with men's great names, Death's tyrannies obey.
A little lower is seated Shushan, a place (though signifying a Lilly, a Rose
or Joy) deriuing it self from the Kingdom in which she is placed, Susiana.

A description of Sushan.
SHushan was one of three Royal Palaces of the Median Emperors, one at
Babylon, another at Ecbatan, a third at Susa or Shushan.

This Palace is mentioned in Hester the first Chapter, that Ahasuerus An. Mundi
3500. ruling over the Medes and Persians and over one hundred seven and twenty
Provinces, made a feast in Shushan, lasting a hundred and eighty days (which
custom, it seems, is yet among them. For yearly to this day the King
celebrates a Feast of Roses, and the Duke of Shiraz or Persae-polis (who is
Lord of Susiana, a Feast of Lillies or Daffadillies of like continuance.)

Nehemiah and Daniel make it situate in the Province of Elam (or Persia, and
when Alexander took it, he found fifty thousand Talents of uncoined Gold,
besides silver wedges and Jewels in abundance.

Some say Laomedon built it, such time as Thola judged Israel, but more likely
it was first built by Memnon, son of Tython, (slain by the perfidious
Thessalians, sent by this Tewtamos or Tythonos, in aid of Priamus, son of
Laomedon, his brother against Agamemnon, Anno Mundi 2783. with twenty thousand
men, as says Diodorus Siculus in his third Book and seventh Chapter. This we
believe that Memnon so ioyed and gloried in this work that Cassiodore in his
seventh Book and fifteenth Epistle reports, he mixed gold with stones (a
costly mortar) and made it the glory of the World, which perhaps made out that
fifty Talents Alexander extracted out of it. And Aristagoras after him, told
his Soldiers, it would make each of them compare with Jove for riches. It Is
written that the three wise men went hence (where then flourisht a famous
Academie) to Bethlem with their gifts unto our Savior. Because it is not
probable they came from Aethiopia, which was North East from Jerusalem.

It is now called Valdack, is watered by Chooses or Choazpes, which in Meanders
circumuolues her, and at lenghth imbowels her streams into the Persian Gulf
not far from Balsora, where the two famous Rivers Tygris from Lybanus and
Euphrates from Taurus or Ararat, become one with the same devouring Gulf.

The River Choazpes was of such esteem with the Persian Monarchs, that no
other water would serve their pallat, no wine but the Chalybonian in Syria, nor
no bread but what grew at Assos in Phrygia, and their salt from Egypt, truly
verifying the Proverb (things far fetched and dear bought are rarest) for
Ormus nearer hand by much, affoorded much better.

This Choazpes is the same river which Pliny calls Eulaeus, and the same which
Daniel in his eight chapter calls Vlai, one stream of this River runs twixt
Syras and old Persae-polis, over which is a wel-built bridge, called Pully-chawn,
as we traveled in nine and twentieth degrees of latitude.

The ruins of this and other noble Cities about her are such that we truly say
with King David, Psalm. 46. Verse 8. Come and behold the works of the Lord,
what desolations he has made in all the earth.

I will add one side concerning Paradise, and then will go on without
digression.

Paradise.
THe true place of the Terrestrial Eden is much doubted of. Some confining it
to an Allegory, others to a local place. Some say it was East, above the Ayrie
middle Region, whence they will force the four great Rivers spoken of in
Genesis, to procreate their springs.

Some will have these four Rivers to signify four Cardinal virtues, and
that the word Paradise is only a place for delight and pleasure; man's fall, his
banishment, the torrid Zone, the fiery Sword. Others say all the World was a
Paradise till sin^e abrogated its glory. Some say it was in the mountains of
the Moon (those are in Aethiop whence Nilus runs) some place it in the circle
of the Moon (and those without doubt, first found out him, that drinks Claret
there.) other some under the Circle of the Moon, and that thence the four
Rivers begin their course, run under the large Seas, and so into Paradise,
these brainsicke fancies, sure made the Hermians and Seleucians, swear there
never was a Paradise.

But the more judicious allow the being, only vary in its place and progress.
Many imagining the true compass ten miles and in that I Will in Meso-potamia, as
yet called Edens

Some others give it more existence, that it stretched over the Veil of Shinar,
incircling Babylon, and went with Euphrates, comprehending Meso-potania,
Armenia, Seleucia, Mo^ut Taurus, and what was watered by Tygris.

Others yet and not a few nor those unlettered, carry it further, allowing the
limits so far as Nilus and Ganges hold in distance. Yet this opinion is
oppugned by many, agreeing unanimously that neither of those Rivers watered
Paradise, as too large a compass for any Garden. Nilus arising from Zaire or
the mountains of the Moon in Afriq^e, empties it self into the mid-land Sea.
And Ganges in the utmost India from Imaus the huge mountain ingulphing it
self in the Bengalan Ocean, places too remote and incongruent.

The Inhabitants in the I Will Seyloon affirm it was there, and to authorize their
Axiom show Adams old footsteps imprinted in the sacred ground, and preserved
since then by miracle.

Other-some include Egypt, Syria, and Iudaea, and say that the Tree of
knowledge grew on mount Caluary, in that very place where our Savior Christ
was crucified (the second Adam suffering, where the first offended) and there
want not others who imagine Paradise removed to a high mountain above the
middle Region, where is no alteration of weather, and there they suppose Enoch
and Elias are corporal to this day.

The best opinion is this, that Nile nor Ganges had no being there, and that
the Septuagints were troubled at it, in translating Pison to be Ganges and
Gyhon, Nyle: now this is probable, that Meso-potamia is East from Arabia where
Moses wrote, and that the River going out of Eden to water it is Tygris, which
conioyning there with (...) diuides it self into four branches. The first
being Pison, which compasses the land of Hauilah, it must be a branch of
Tygris called Hiddekel, or else Choaspes which encircles Hauilah, which is
Susiana.

The second is Gihon, which encompasseth Aethiopia or Cush, Gihon is the West
part of Euphrates and Cush not yet in Afrique is Susiana, or Chushiana, as some
Writers do well denotate.

And to make it easier, because many old Writers will have Hauilah to be in
India, that is not denied, but again it is proved there were two Hauilahs, one
took its name from Hauilah son of Ioctan, son of Eber, the fourth from
Shem; who with his brothers Ophir and Iobab Soon after the division of the
Earth inhabited India.

The other Hauilah from Hauilah son of Chus, eldest son of Ham or Cham, and
he before his Descent into Aethiope, gave name to Susiana or Chusiana, also
which is Hauilah.

Now the extent of Paradise may be allowed unto Indus, which terminates these
lands and the other way unto Hircania, watered by Araxis. Which if so, then
Tygris, Euphrates, Araxis and Indus, must be supposed the four rivers: I for
my own part, cannot maintain it but this I can, that even Hircania then and
now gives place to no one place in the Orient for delight and plenty, were the
Inhabitants agreeable to its worth, so that if it were no part of Paradise
then, it is now no whit inferior to any part where that pleasant Garden stood
for comparable qualities, which I refer to a riper brain for definition.
This being too much I fear upon this subject.

For the Readers easier understanding and memory I will orderly digest such
Cities and Towns now being, betwixt the gulf of Persia and the Caspian Sea
through which we traveled, as well to benefit the future Traveler, as to
furnish our modern Geographicall Maps with names of truth, being indeed
stuffed with false ones, and but invented, together with the Farsangs or
Leagues (each accounted three miles English) that the true distances may be
known, and the Caspian placed in a better height.

From Ormus to Bander-Gomroon, three Farsangs or Dutch leagues.
To Band-Ally 4 To Gacheen 7 To Cawrestan 5 To the desert of Tanghe dolon 4 To
Whormoot 11 To Larr 9
The distance betwixt Ormus and the City of Larr (from which the Kingdom is
denominated) is three and forty Farsangs or a hundred nine and twenty English
miles.

From Larr to Techoo, in the Wilderness of Larr four Farsangs.
From thence to Berry 4 To Bannarow 4 To Goyome 4 Three nights to the Desert 11
To Wchormoot 3 To Cut-bobbaw 3 To Mohack 4 To Coughton 5 To Emoom 5 To Vnghee 4
To Moyechaw 4 To Pully-pot-shaw 4 To Shyras or Syras, three and a half.
The distance betwixt Larr and the City of Shyraz in Persia, is sixty two
Farsangs, or a hundred eighty six English miles.

Frow Shyraz to Pully-chawn seven Farsangs:
To Chilmanor 3 To Camber-Ally 3 To Pull 2 To Tartang 4 To Deorden 3 To Cafferr
4 To Whoomgesh 2 To Baze-bachow 6 To De-gardow 6 To Gumbazellello 4 To Yezdecoz
4 To De-moxalbeg 6 To Comme-shaugh 5 To Moyeor 6 To Spahonet 6 To Spahawn. 3
The distance betwixt Shyraz and the famous City of Spahawn in Parthia, is
seventy four Farsangs, or two hundred two and twenty English miles.

From Spahawn to Reigue, three Farsangs*
To Sardahan 5 To Whoam 9 To Tagebawgh 3 To Bawt 6 To Obygarmy 10 To Suffedow 7
To Syacow 10 Through the Salt Desert to Gezz 13 To Periscow 6 To Gheer 8 To
Alliauarr 15 To Necaw 9 To Asharaff 4
From Asharaff to Farrabaut, a City upon the Caspian Sea, 10.

Distance betwixt Spahawn and the Caspian Sea by Periscow, (for another way is
by Cazbeen) is a hundred and eighteen Farsangs, or three hundred fifty four
English miles.

A discourse of the life and habit of the Persians at this present.
ALbeit I have (with what brevity I might) described our Manzeils, and the
best Cities and Palaces belonging to the Persian, yet I may say something more
compendiously of the habit, diet, customs and ceremonies of these Persians,
otherwise that which is written would seem harsh and imperfect.

I have formerly noted the Countries deriuation from Elam, son of Sem, son
of Noah, and then called Elamites, such time as Chedorlaomer of ten Disce^^s from
Sem ruled over them, slain by Abraham in rescue of his Nephew Lot. It was
after that called Panchaya, and by Seleuchus the Greek (...): profane History
deriues Persia from Persaeus, Jove's son by Danae. And although it has since
then been ruined and rigned over by Princes of many Nations, yet they have
never altered the Dialect from its utter sense, at this day being called Pharsee:
Frasie and by Mercator, Farsistan; in the Chaldee Tongue, implying a horse
hoo^^, a hooked nose, or a division. The Kingdom of it self is not much, not
were her Monarchs at any time content, with her bounds, but have ever either
been Victors, or vanquished

For before Chedo^laomers time, they became subject to the Assyri^ns, under
Ninus and his warlike Empress, Anno Mundi 1915. in which Empire it lay
obscured till the year 3146. at which time the vicious Emperor Sardanapalus,
by an abhorred life gave way to those two great Captains Belocus and Arbaces,
who rent away his Monarchy and life, which as he had prodigally spun out, so
died he no less costly, for perceiving no escape he burnt himself in his
Castle amidst his Women together with a hundred millions of talents of Gold,
and a thousand millions of talents of Silver, as Iustine relates.

Phul Belochus took Assyria, Mesopotamia, and Chaldae^.

Arbaces took Media and Persia, whereby he begun the Median Dynasty, and
continued Lords of Persia, till Cyrus established the Monarchy to the Persian,
by overthrow of Astiages his cruel Grandsire, Anno Mundi 3406. which Cyrus
son of Cambyses, and Mandana daughter of Astiages, is equalized by Xenophon
to any Prince before him for valor and bounty. He enlarged his Monarchy, but
at last fighting against Tomiris the Scythian Queen lost his life, but his
Monarchy endured till the year 3635. when Alexander the great and famous
Macedonian translated it to the Greeks, after his fatal Battles against
Darius, the last Monarch; and a few years after himself was conquered at
Babylon by deadly poison.

After whom for above five hundred years Persia groaned under many Lords and
Tyrants, till the year after our Savior Christ 228, Artaxerxes a Heroicke
Persian regained her glory and freedom, killing Artabanus, last of the
Parthian Monarchs, and the twelfth King from Artabanus, who by treachery took
the rule from Tyridates the last of the Arsacidae.

Since when it was vanquished by Tangrolipix the Turk, An. 1030. and after
that, in three Discents by the Tartars, who for two hundred years kept the
Diadem till the year 1430. Vsan Cassan an Armenian Prince took it from the
Tartar. His daughter (bego^ of Despina, daughter of Calo-Iohannes Emperor of
Trepizond a Christian) was married to Sultan Ayder, father of Ismael Sophy of
Persia 1495, which Ismael was a most victorious King, and descended lineally
from Mus^ Ceresin, the twelfth son of Hussan or Ossan, son of Mortis Haly
who married Fatima sole Daughter and Heir of Mahomet the great Imposture.
Ismael had Tamas, father of Ismael, father of Ayder-Mirza, father of Mahomet
called the blind, father of Abbas, grandfather of Shaw Sophy now reigning An.
1631. which Genealogy shall in this Bookeelfe-where at large be decyphered.

It remaynes now to speak of the habit and disposition of the Persians. It is
therefore first, to be noted that though the Turks be not comparable to the
Persian for magnanimity and nobleness of mind, yet are the Persian from the
Duke unto the Peasant slaves unto the King, who is Supreme in and over all.

That's the reason, having so much good marble, they build with unburned clay,
because their lands and houses be not hereditary. The King by a forced will,
becoming Lord and heir to all, both Mahometans, Jews and Christians living
under his protection (merchants excepted out of Europe.)

They are valiant, proper for the most part, Oliue-coloured, mirthfull and
venerious.

They have no hair on head nor chin, on the vpper-lip they have it very long
and turned down-wards. Some reserve a lock upon the top of the head, as a
certain note that Mahomet at Doomes Day, will distinguish them from
Christians, and by it lift them up to Paradize: their eyes are generally black
(the Georgians gray) their noses high as be their foreheads.

About their heads they wind great roules of Calico, some of silk and gold,
somewhat higher and not so bungy as the Turkish Tulipants. A little fash of
gold or fringe hangs down behind, as do our Skarfes, which ornament, they
lately borrowed from the Arabian.

Bands are not amongst them, they are signs of peace and quiet, the King
wears the contrary side of his Tulipant forwards, which is all the difference
in habit, twixt him and others.

In Triumphs I have seen them wreath long chains of Pearls and Rubies about
their Turbants, of great value and beauty.

Their out Garment or Vest is commonly of Callico quilted with Cotton, some
wear them of parti-colored silks, some of Satin and some of rich gold or
silver Chamlets, and other of cloth of gold and Tinselled: they affect variety
of colors as Emblemes of diversity of Joys and pleasure. Black is not
known among them, they say it is dismal and a sign of hell and sorrow: their
sleeves are strait and long (therein different from the Turks who have them
wide and short) the coat reaches to their calves and bears round, by being
ingirted with a towell of silk and gold eight or nine yards long: under this
garment they wear a smock colored like our Scottish plad, and in length
agreeing to our demi-shirts: their breeches are like Irish troozes, hose and
stockings sowed together, and sometimes they reach but to the ancles, two or
three inches naked to their shoes which have no latchets, are of good leather,
and what color you will (black excepted) they are usually sharp at the toe,
and turning upwards, the heels shod with thin Iron, and end with small nails
in seemly order. Some again (especially such as travel much) have short
coats or calzoons of cloth without sleeves, lined with Furs of Persian
Sheep, Sables, Foxes, Mushwhormaes or Squirrils, and can suffer short wide
stockings of English cloth or Kersies, the heels faced with colored leather
which too when they ride they make use of, their Boots are well sewed, but ill
cut, save that their wideness beats off the showers. They use no Gloves, nor
Rings of Gold, some paint their hands with an herb or juice, which colors and
keeps cool the hands. They commonly have their nails parti-colored,
Vermillion and white, they use silver Rings and Seals, the first set with an
Aggat, the other with Ara^ique letters, not one noble Warrior of a thousand
among them, knowing how to write.

They never go without their Shamsheers or Swords, which are crooked like a
Crescent (and is their Arms) of so good mettle that they prefer them before
any other, and so sharp as any (...), nor will they buy one, unless they can
cut an Asinego asunder at one stroke, the hilts are without ward, must have
them of steel some of Gold, the poor of wood, the scabberds well made and
fit: which in solemnities are set with stones of value.

They never ride without Bows and Arrows, the Quiver and Case, wrought and
cut ingeniously, the Bows are short and bended, not unlike a Crossebow, which
though not comparable to the Gun (an instrument they now make practice of) yet
they have been famous for their Archery. Such made Crassus, going to encounter
them cried out he feared Sagittarius and not Scorpio) when an Astronomer told
him it presaged danger respecting Sol, and accordingly he lost both life and
victory.

Nor are they now reputed of, except they can cleave an Orange which hangs in a
string, a-thwart the Hippodrome, and when past the mark, with an other ready
Arrow, can strike the rest looking backwards, which he easily accomplishes,
riding so short in his stirrops.

This is enough for description of the men, their form and habit. The women as
unseen may pass unspoken of, what may be expected I shall publish it.

Their stature is mean but straight and comely, and incline rather to
corpulency then leanness, their hair black and curling, their foreheads
high and pure, eyes Diamond-like, having black luster, their noses high,
mouths rather large then sparing, thick lips and cheeks fat, round and
painted, so that without error, their complexions cannot be deciphered: those
that come in assemblies are best reputed of, though by profession Whores, they
are rich habilimented, their heads rounded with a golden caul: their cheeks
tinctured with Vermillion, their noses and ears hung with Jewels of price and
bigness, and about their faces (tied to the chin) a rope of orient pearl of
exceeding value, if not counterfeit: their hands are painted with flowers or
posies, as be their feet and legs, both which are denudated in their dances,
which elaborately they perform with bells and antiques: their habit or gown is
to their mid-legs, some of Satin, some of Tissued-stuffes, of rich imbrodery
in gold or silver, these look wantonly, drink strongly, laugh extremely and
covet really men's moneys, esteem, reputation and honesties.

The other women belonging to Seraglioes or Haramms, live discontented. Eight
or ten lustful women, by the law subjected to one (and he perhaps an impotent
man) their only liberty is to haunt the Gardens, which being spacious, receive
many, where they parley at pleasure, but not free from Eunuchs their jealous
Argoes, whose sole care, is from out of the women's lavish abundant talk, to
screw out some thing may be grateful for the King, touching the Nobles
(anotomized by these women) by which many great ones come to unexpected
destruction.



Other women when they go abroad, wrap themselves in a large receiving sheet,
which tied to the head reaches to her feet, opening only to the eyes a very
little to beget passage, they pass and repasse unknown and unrespected:
nothing less among them then praise of beauty, because nothing so familiar
with them as cruel Jealousy.

Their houses (to speak generally) within are poor and sordid, a Carpet, a
Pan, and a Platter, epitomizes all their Furniture,

The better sort sleep upon Cots, or Beds two foot high, matted or done with
girth-web: on which a Shagg or Yopangee which riding serves as an Vmbrella
against rain, and sleeping for a bed and couerture.

Those that have slaves during (or rather to beget) rest, receive breath and
coolness from their fanning them, who also drive away those bold Muschetoes or
Gnats which too turbulently sting and buzze about them. Their diet is soon
dressed, soon eaten, soon digested and soon described.

The better sort sit upon Carpets crosse-legged, and feed soundly upon Pelo,
Chishmee-pelo, Sheere-pelo, Chelo and the like, that is, Rice boiled with
Butter, with Mutton, with Hens, with Almonds, or with Rice without Butter: they
use no spoones, for hands are ancienter: some color their Pelo black, some
yellow, some white, and twenty other ways, which though all but Rice, are
counted so many several dishes. But though the meat be parti-colored, or party
named. Yet the ground and meat is Pelo and no other. They use Sallads Acharrs
and roasted Eggs, all which are of sundry colors tinctured, sad and hard that
they may stay the longer in their bellies, and strengthen heat and moisture in
their stomachs. They drink cold water out of a Hussinee or Pitcher, but they
want no wine nor appetites to drink it, a sure sign Bacchus once conquered
them, and rules no less then their Alcoran: at meals they are merry and no
way offensive (if no women sit among them, who out of wantonness ouer-load
their mouths with Pelo or other meat, and by a sudden laughter exonerate their
chaps, and throw the overplus into the dish whence first they had it, which was
to us strange and offensive) they will be drunk, but it is voluntary, no man
compels it. Nor is it admirable or loss of credit with them, they are so quiet
and free from censure, and though with us drink irritates quarrels and
comparisons, yet here they never differ; the law is so severe, the act so
strange, and the unity of Mussulmen (or true believers) so joint and
efficatious: nor is this want of spirit in them, but order and conformity. No
Nation in the Universe has better nor more daring spirits in fight or exercise,
then Persia has.

They are very facetious in discourse, they are not very inquisitiue about
foreign affairs, they are content with home occurrents, and affect more
sensual delights for their lustf^^l bodies, then by uncertain stories to
perplexe their minds. When so ere they receive a mandate from the King or
Nobles, they kiss it in diverse places and then use it. They swear very
usually, and those Oaths are, by Serrey Mortis Ally, the head of Mortis Ally,
by Shawambashee or Serreyshaw by the Kings head, as by putting one finger upon
their eye. And then (if you please) you may believe them.

The poor eat Rice sometimes, but most commonly Roots, Melons, Fruits,
Garlic, Opium, Honey, and Fraize like to our Thlummery. These are seldom
drunk, but the cause is preualent, they cannot get it. They have Arack or
Vsquebagh, distilled from Dates or Rice, both which are Epidemick in their
mirth and Festiuals.

The sheep are sweet, and fattest in the tail, whose weight often ponderizes
twenty pound, and many times their whole body. Cheese and Butter is among them,
but such as squemish English stomachs will disdain at: Dates preserved in
sirrup mixed with Butter-milke, is precious diet: the Spoones to eat with are
half a yard in length, and ask a contented mouth to entertain their bigness.

They hate Swines flesh, Veale, Beef, Hares and Buffoles. Mahomet forbad it
them, and they observe it.

But Camel, Goat, Sheep, Hens, Eggs, and Phe^sants are tolerated: they are
no great Rost-meat-men. But it may be Ignorance more then disliking has made it
of some wonder there: In some Buzzars they have Camel or Mutton cut in
mammocks or small bits put upon scuets and carbonaded or roasted in the fire, of
this they sell three or four spits for two pence, some practice the art of
baking, and to prove it, put a whole Lamb into an Oven, without paste or
better cookery, when it is thoroughly tosted, though black, they eat it and say
it tastes daintily. The truth is, they are all Martialists and are not dainty.

They use another potion, fair water, juice of Lemmons, Sugar, and Roses,
which Sherbets are used more commonly in India.

Twixt meals (which are three aday at eight, twelve, and four) they meet
often in houses, like our Tauernes. Where is vendible Wine, Arack, Sherbet,
Tobacco sucked through water by long canes or pipes, issuing from a boule or
round vessel: they spit but seldom (the Jews less) and that liquour which
most delights them, is Coffa or Coho, a drink brewed out of the Stygian Lake,
black, thick and bitter; distrained from Berries of that quality, though
thought good and very wholesome, they say it expels melancholy, purges choler,
begets mirth, and an excellent concoction.

Opium (of which Nogdibeg took so much as poisoned him) is of great use and
virtue with them taken moderately, they are always chawing it, it is good
against vapors, cowardice and the falling sickness: it makes them strong and
long in Venus exercises, the footmen use it too as a preserver of strength, and
which is strangest, so giddies them, that in a constant dream or dizzinesse,
they run sleeping not knowing whom they meet, and yet miss not their intended
places: and by its power protract their travel, to deceive their body of
seasonable rest of lodgings.

Their Coins are Mammoodees, which value eight pence, Larrees fashioned like
point-aglets, and are worth ten pence, Shawhees four pence, and Bistees two
pence: etc, they have sundry Coins of gold, as Sultanees, etc. but I saw very
few of them. The Coz-begs or small Copper money is engraven with the Emperors
Coat Armor, a Lion passant, gardant, the Sun Orient upon his back.

The men account it a great shame to urine standing, and because they hate
pollution they after it wash themselves, for which end their slaves are ever
attending them with Ewres of silver filled with water. They cannot endure it in
themselves, nor to see others walking, so that when they go but to the next
door they do it riding. Their Horses are of Arabian breed, small, swift and
fiery, they have round cutting bitts, their bridles long and platted with gold,
as are their saddle-pomels and stirrops for the better sort, their saddles of
Velvet, some like the Morocko, others hard, small and close, which they borrow
from the Tartar.

The Horses feed usually of Barley and chopt-straw put into a bag, and fastened
about their heads, which implies their manger: they are strictly tied to
proportion of prouant, any surplusage brings death or diseases. Their mules are
of great price and virtue, chiefly where the journey is over Sands, Deserts, or
craggie Mountains. They serve better for patience and sure footing then the
Horses, but in Wars they are for baggage, wanting courage for more honorable
employment: the women of note travel upon Coozelbash-camels, each Camel
loaded with two cages (or Cajuaes as they call them) which hang on either side
the beastframed of four small wooden Pillars, boarded to sit upon, but so low
that they afford not standing, and are covered with Crimson Velvet or Kers^es.
They are guarded by Eunuchs weaponed with Bow and Arrows, and threaten death
to any bold opposer or such dare come within shot of their merciless shafts,
with which they are laden as they travel: so that the best and brauest
company, knowing the custom of those Countries and the Eunuchs iealousies,
give them larger and contented passages.

I might here content my self with this description, did not some expect a
little of their Religion: which being so often and so well related by others, may
warrant me to pass in silence, for which, I will run on more swiftly aiming
only to content the Ignorant.

The Religion of the Persians.
THeir belief is in Mahomet, yet have they Mortis Haly in no less account
among them. I will acquaint you with the tradition of them both.

Mahomet was by birth an Arabian, his father Abdar a Saracen (or rather of
descent from Ismael son of Hagar, and so a Hagaren) Emma, his mother a Jew:
from which two he sucked the knowledge of both religions, to whom was added
Sergius a Sabellian Heretic, that denied the Trinity, from him he received
Baptism, though formely circumcised. And from these three he deduced his
Alcoran.

This was about the year after our blessed Saviors Incarnation 597. at that
time Heraclius the Emperor and Chosroes King of Persia, contending for
Sovereignty, against both whom Mahomet set himself with a troop of Tartars
and Arabians, to whom he descyphered the Roman bondage, and though they seemed
willing to reject them, yet scorned they so unworthy a Commander, to effect it
be, being but lately from his prentiship, which Mahomet salued by his
ingenuitie, telling them of the manners of the Romans in their infancy, and
that though his knowledge and fame in Battles were not much, yet assured
them, he knew it by revelation, himself was borne to actuate no small matters.

The people both admire him and believe him, so that by his own wit and their
valor he became victorious in seven great and wel-fought battles, and
desiring to eternize his fame, in a more continuing way, perceiving most part
of his Followers, Heathens and profane wretches, divulged himself to be a
mighty Prophet ordained before Adams fall to come into the World to correct
the Law of Moses and the Prophets, and preferres himself before Christ, so
much as he preceded Moses, both whom notwithstanding he esteems of, and
tolerates them to help him at Doomesday to judge the World.

This advantage the Devil gave him, to show his people how divided and cruel
the Christians were. At that time, Boniface the third obtaining by grant of
usurping Phocas the bloody Emperor, over the three other Patriarchs and whole
Church of Christ, the Title of Universal Bishop: though but little before,
Gregory his Predecessor, branded him for Christ's enemy that went about it, in
that threescore and six Bishops formerly in that Sea from Lynus, seven years
after Christ to this Boniface never intended it: and whereby John Patriarch of
Constantinople gave it over because unjust, and no way agreeing with humility.

And that Mahomet might not want his lying Miracles, he persuaded them, he had
daily instructions from the holy Ghost, which he showed them to be the Dove,
accustomed when she was hungry, to feed in his ear, and that his groueling
and foming (a disease much troubling him) was caused by the exceeding glory,
the Angel Gabriel brought with him; who he pretended told him all that is
comprised in the Alcoran.

Though some, finding his subtletie gave no credit to him, yet he won the
hearts of most of those Idolatrous Pagans, then about him, and in time, by
money and force subjected the rest, so that he begun to broach his Traditions,
which after by Ozman his Successor, were compiled together and called an Alcoran,
writ in the Arabian Tongue consisting of eight Points or Commandments, and in
Verse, to which he added Miracles, Visions, Fables, and the like: many of which
are not authentical amongst the Persians.

The Persian's Commandments.
The first is that much sung Verse, a-top of Churches.
Llala-ylala, Mahummed-resullula: translated thus:
Their is one God, the great God and Mahomet is his Prophet.
ANd by this they interdict all superstitious worship of Images, Pictures, and
such like, hated exceedingly, and therefore have Popery in abomination, and
though Mahomet be supreme of all, yet the Alcoran commends many Fathers in the
old Law: as Enoch, Abraham, Moses, Elias, and as most excellent, Jesus Christ,
whom they repute a great and holy Prophet, but not to be the Son of God, or
that he died upon the Cross, but that it was another Jew whom the people
crucified in his place, they believe he was son unto a Virgin, but not
conceived by the Holy Ghost, but by smelling to a Rose given her by the Angel
Gabriel, and that he was borne out of her beasts, In some things they speak
very reverently of him, and punish severely, such as speak against him, so
that because the Alcoran styles him the virtue of God, a powerful Prophet good
and just, if they casually find a piece of paper that has his name in it, they
preserve it from all bad uses. And believe he shall appear again forty or
fifty years before Mahomet, like to Elias or John the Baptist.

The second Commandment.
It Is not good nor just, that any should live unmarried, lest the Professors of
Mahumetisme should thereby be diminished.
THis Commandment sprung most from his own carnal lust and ability, for as
Calius reports he had forty Wives, and liked so well of Venery, that he reputed
him best deserving and worthy most honor could play his part best in bed,
often glorying, that by divine strength, he exceeded any ten in that point of
valor, and that it was fit it should be so, that the greater number of
Prophets and holy men might issue from him. And in his Paradise he promises
them rare Women, strong and lovely, with eyes like sawcers, strength in Venery,
cool shades, rich Carpets, nimble Attendants, with Gold, Pearl, sweet
Flowers, Perfumes, Violets and such sensual pleasures in abundance.

The third Commandment.
It behooues Mussulmen (or true Believers) to be charitable, and to hate
Contention.
THis third Precept ties them to benevolence, and this is a main cause of
their pity to Storkes, Doves, and other Creatures. That there are such noble
places of Receipt or Carrauans-rawes for Trauellors to rest in, that such order
is taken for the poor and impotent: and that seldom or never any one jars or
wrangles with another.

The fourth Commandment.
It behooues all Musselmen to invoke their Prophet, each day five times with
Sobriety, and to expect his Coming patiently.
WHich they carefully accomplish, and have such regard to it, that when they
hear the Boy cry aloud upon the Steeple, they fall to prayer, though never so
busy in profane talk, drinking, wenching, or the like: they ever turn their
face to Mecha, (near which Mahomet is intombed in an old plain Monument) they
kneel, bend and ducke at every Epithet of Mahomet, and entering, wash
themselves: this is the most usual prayer with them.

IN the Name of the good and religious God, praised be the Sovereign of all
Worlds, the only pitiful and merciful God of Doom: thee we serve, thee we
call upon, show us the best way, that which thou have revealed to Mahomet, but
not that whereby thou punishest the ungodly. This they say at Morn, Noone,
Evening, midnight, and two hours after in these forms.

Prayers to Mahomet.
Lala ylala Mahummed resullula:
Another used by the Indians, Iauans, Arabians and Persians.
BIzmilla raugh mawn, arawheam Alhumdill Ally, Etto hyatto Almo Barachatto,
assulwatto, Attayo Batto, Leila, heessalam, Aleika, I, Iaanna, nebeen rawmaet,
Wallaw heeweeber-catto. Esselamalena, walla-Ebadulla, hesolaheam eshaddo,
awla-Elaha, El-alaho eshaddo Mahumed resullula, l'alla Essalamaleena,
Ebadulla-Solaheem, Essalamalekam, Essalamaleka, Aly homma Sullea. Allaw Mahomet
don wallaw, wessalam chamma Salleata, Alhumdillalley Whoddaw.

All or most of which, are Epithites of God and Mahomet.

The Alcoran bids a seuen-fold daily worship, they never pray with their shoes
on, and being entered sit without distinction of degrees or qualities (as things
not to be challenged in places of devotion) they never look aside upon any
occasion, till they are come to Mahomets All-humdillallaw, and then they look
over either shoulder, believing he will come to Judgment suddenly, just when
they are praying that particle.

Their service is sometimes performed by Songs and Rimes, but of unequal
numbers.

The Abdall a voluntary Monk amongst them, is reputed by the wiser sort a
Wolf in a Sheeps skin, but of the superstitious is reported holy and
venerable, he is clad with a sheep-skin and professes poverty, they will in the
Markets or Assemblies preach lying wonders, and expound the Alcoran according
to their inventions, supposing their spiritual abilities superior to others
in that exercise, his Image is in the Title page. Howbeit I refer the
discourse of these unto a fitter place, and will here go on with the
description of other matters.

The fifth Commandment.
See that thou observe yearly a month Lent, and a Byram.
THis they keep very wisely, all day they abstain from every kind of meat,
but until mights, for so soon as the Sunsets, and the Kettles beat, then they
bowze it lustily, with variety of meats and pleasure, only Travelers and
weak men, are ever exempted: And commonly Shaw Abbas during this Ramdam or
Rammazan (the month wherein Mahomet got the Alcoran from Gabriel the Angel)
did use to travel, to be privileged from fasting devotions. In this
solemnity they add a double proportion of Lamps about the Prophets, and hang
the Steeples with lights, which burn past midnight. Two more Feasts they have,
the Byram and Nowrowz: the former as our Easter, is celebrated by the Abdals,
Hodgees, Deruisses, and Frier^s, all which rabble receive liberally from such
as meet them, Offerings of good will and Charity. The Nowrowz is their
Newyeares day, beginning the tenth of March, such time as the Sun dwells in
the Aequinoctiall. At which Feast the Sultans and Chans bestow Pishcashes, or
gifts one on another.

The sixth Commandment.
Reverence thy Parents.
WHich though they commend in others, they seldom practice in themselves. Many
late examples accusing them, treated of in most Histories where Mogul, Tartar,
Turk, or Persian Soueranize, few of them attending patiently the death of
their Predecessors, but by impious means labor their untimely establishment.

The seventh Commandment.
Cursed be the Slayer.
ANd truly this is kept unanimously, this precept and the rigor of the Caddies
or Causae in the Divanoes, or Judgment Hals so bridle them, that among the
Inferior and better sort of men I never saw a combat or causeless brabble,
though they be very apt in prompt occasions, to demonstrate valor and
resolution. Only the King and great ones flight this Law, for they delight in
tyranny, and account Emperializing a quality proper for great Personages, who
otherwise are no Nymrods upon earth, in their opinion, utterly ignorant of true
Humanity and Philosophy, which commands clemency and virtue in them, as
public examples to all Inferiors.

The eight Commandment.
Do so to others as thou would have them do to thee.
BY which he wills them to be loving, just, and wise, and the keepers of these
his Laws, he rewards with Paradise, which he thus brings them too. He
transformes himself at Doomes-day into a great Ram, and all Musselmen into
Fleas, they shall hide themselves in his spacious Fleeces, and thus burdened,
shall travel till he come where he can skip into Paradise: there he assumes
his proper glory, and gives them new shapes, new strength, Wine, brave Women,
infinite of Treasure and Ptouisions, Rivers, Trees, Amber, Gold, Odours of
Arabia, and continual joy, all new and better then now imagined: they exclude
no Religion^ out of their heavenly Paradise, Moses shall bring the Jews,
Christ the Christians, and Mahomet Mahometans: but the chief place and glory
shall be theirs: theirs is the best Gold, sweetest Rivers, and the most
beautiful Damozels.

These are commanded in the Alcoran, and for the Author himself, Bonfinus
writes that he permitted Sodomy: and lay with beasts. So that Master Smith
arraignes him of blasphemy, pride, lies, Sodomy, blood, subtlety, and entitles
him heir apparent unto Lucifer, no less then twelve thousand falsehoods
contained in his fabulous Alcoran.

This false Prophet (sore against his will) died in his sixty third year (his
great Clymatericke) and gave his seduced Followers a sure promise of his
miraculous Resurrection the third day after; till when they kept it unburied,
and as Authonius writes, thirty days above the reckoning, but this is
certain, that smelling he was a liar, they kept him no longer, forced to it by
a monstrous and filthy stink proceeding from his carcass: yet by Abubecher
his Father in law and successor in the Popedom of Mecha, he was purified,
entombed and laid in a new built Sepulcher at Medina Talnaby, three days
journey from Mecha: to which place is daily resort, by such of his Religion as
have zeal to Pilgrimage: and those not only, are ever after accounted Syets or
Holy men, and cannot fable from that time forward, but their Camels and
Apparel also are of such esteem, that they never after do them service in
vile carriages or occasions of that quality.

Mahomet promised them his second glorious coming after a thousand years,
which they seriously lately looking for, and seeing themselves guld by such
credulity began to stagger, till the Mufti assured them, the figures were
mistaken, and that upon better view of the Original he found two thousand for
a thousand, when he would not fail to visit them: till which first thousand
years, the Kings of Persia, ever kept a Horse sadled and well looked too, which
with one of his daughters, he reserved for Mahomet, or for
Hoce^^-Mahumed-Mahadin, last son of Mortis Haly, who the Persians to this day
verily judge yet living: first come, first served. So that for above eight
hundred years the Turk and Persian, differed not in points of Religion, til
Siet Guynet a Persian born at Ardouile in Media.

Anno 1375. (a little before Tamberlaine ouer-run Asia) sought how to recover
Halies memory, as a plot to make a perpetual hatred twixt the Turks and them,
and to re-establish the Scepter in the time of Mortis Haly, from whom he
lineally derived his pedigree) This his project was begun by Gunet, but
accomplished by Ismael his Grand-sonne King of Persia, who got the Kingdom by
overthrow of King Jacob his mothers brother, son to Vsan-Cassan an Armenian
Prince and Emperor of Persia: Siet Guynet, I say persuades the Persians that
Abubecher, Omar and Ozman, the three immediate Caliphs or Successors to
Mahomet, were Villanes and Impostures, that most unjustly they opposed Mortis
Haly, Mahomets son in Law, and heir by Legacy. Which till they were all
dead, he could never enter into: and that Osman who compiled the Alcoran out of
Mahomets loose paper, had put in new inventions of his own, that he had put
out some and added other stories at his pleasure, that in comparison of Haly,
they were Knaves and Impostures, and though the Turks pray to them, magnify
them above Haly, and think them holy. Yet let all true Persians think
otherwise of them, as enemies to Mahomef, and all good men, and that all their
Disciples were Toades, the of-scum of the earth and vile Apostates, and so
framed this Prayer, Cursed be Abubecher, Omer and Ozman, and God be gracious to
Haly, and well pleased with him, and all true Persians. Which Prayer and
opinion they have since maintained stiffly, and (in some sort not only to make
him excel the three great Turkish Prophets, but even to equallize the great
Mahomet himself) as the whole rabble of them elsewhere say to Mahomet, lala
ylala, Mahomet resullula.

The Persian new composer Siet retorts the like echo to Mortis Haly, and since
some others to Izmael Siets Grand-chile in this sort, lalay-lala Mortis Aly
Vellilula. For which the Turks hate them like Dogs, and call them Rafadi and
Caffarrs, or Schismatics, and themselves Sonnj, and Mussulmen, which is truly
faithful.

This aforesaid Ali had by Fatima his Wife, Daughter of Mahomets two sons
Hussan and Ossan, Hali after his victory against Maui Lord of Damasco lost his
life by Muavias, who succeeded him in the Sea at Mecha, and to establish his
Title, slew Ossan and eleven of his sons, all whom with Hali, were buried at
Massad, Hali, Telnab near Cafe, two days journey from Babylon: where the
Kings of Persia descended from him, oftentimes were enthronized and kept their
Coronation Ceremonies.

The twelfth son of Ossan, Hussan, or Hocem escapt slaughter, his name was
Musa, or rather Mirza Cherisim, or Prince Chersim, by some called Mahumed
Mahadin, who had issue, and from whom this Siet, Guned or Iuned, Grandfather of
Ismael did descend, and from him the now ruling King of Persia.

The Persians themselves contract their Alcoran into a lesser Volnme then do
the Arabians, rejecting most of those Commentaries or Glosses made by Ozman and
Ibnul, and content themselves with Gunets reformations, preferring the Imamian
Sect which is their own from Hali, before the Melchian, Anefian, Benefian, or
Kefayans broached by Abubeche* Omar, and Ozman, and from which four are sprung
above seventy several sorts of Religious Orders, as Morabits, Abdals,
Deruisses, Papassi, Rafadi, Cobtini, etc.

Their greatest Doctor of Antiquity is Elhesin-Ibnu-Abilhasen, borne at
Balsora in the Persian Gulf, he taught the Persian and Arabs eighty years
after Mahomets death, and by his fluent language and austere life got no small
reputation with those pur-blind Nations, yet could his Disciples never prevail
with him to register his doctrine, so that leaving all to their memories, so
soon as he was buried, they grew among themselves to an immediate difference,
which could not be reconciled till a hundred years after a Babilonian Siet,
called Elharu-Ibnu-Esed, employed his utmost wits, not only to agree but eternize
the forenamed Elhesius Paragraphs. Howbeit the Mohammedan Doctors of other
parts bended themselves against this late Opinionist, and by a common vote
condemned them all as Heretics and Villains to the Alcoran, so that about
ninety years after by their instigations, Melick-shaw the Turks Antecessor
came against them, and utterly confounded them, men, Books and all other
monuments of their reformation.

Howbeit a while after they got breath, and screwed into their good favor and
opinion King Cazell, Nephew to their great enemy King Meleck, and by request
and valor of their noble friend Nydam-Emul, they got the dignity of their
former Treatises and points of Religion restored again, so that Elgazzuli a
man of no mean fame and ingenuitie was employed by them, not only to
apologuize but to dispute strongly against their opposites, which he did at
first, and after that moderated twixt the Cadies and his own Reformatists:
After which general agreement they fell into abundance of errors and obscene
opinions, turning most of their doctrine into lascivious Poems and Songs of
lust and carnal pleasures, alleging for themselves even Mahomets own Tenants
for authority: to correct which, start up a severe Scholar Essebrauer
Diserauerd of Chorasan who tooth and nail, cries out against their
filthiness, against whom arises Elfargani. and takes upon him to defend his
brethren, by a charitable Commentary of their discourse and actions, so that
some applauded, and other-some exploded this busy Cabalist.

At last to conduce things to some order out of this Chaos of confusion, their
most learned Historian Elifarni, took upon him to make straight these crooked
postures: so that of seventy two feuerall Sects of Heresies he reduced all to
two, the Leshari and Imamiae, the first magnifying eulogically their Great
Mahumed, and received by all his Sectaries in Thrace, Aegipt, Greece, Palestine
and Syria. The other no less eleuating Mortis Ally his sonne-in-law, (who with
a Sword of a hundred Cubits length, cut off at one blow ten thousand Christians
heads, and transected Taurus, as I have formerly noted) and his worth and
equality is received by all the Persian Empie and some Indians: And this is
able to give reason, in the understanding their debate, and of their Alcoran.

This added that as we compute from our Saviors Nativity, so they begin from
Mahomets compiling his Alcoran, delivered on a Friday, then made their Sabbath:
that accout (they call) the Hegir^^ or year of deliverance.

Emperors, Kings, and Caliphs of Persia successively.
I Dare not go about to trouble you, with the Chronology and succeeding
Reigns of such Monarchs and Kings as have swayed Persia, without a requested
pardon, as well demanded, In respect of many that formerly have named them, both
Chaldee, Greek and Latin Writers, as for the incertainty of most Historians.
And although to some it appear not pleasant, not much profitable, it may
notwithstanding happily add some content and ease unto a Traveler, if he have
it upon the report and credit of their Native Authorities.

Their own Traditions writ long ago, and preserved hitherto amongst them, is
that Kayomarraz first wot a Crown and commanded over them, and foolishly they
imagine he was Adam, but I will rather begin with Elam (from whom the people
were called Elamites and Persae-polis from them denominated, Elanis) son of
Sem, son of Noah. And if we may believe those Authors that suppose this
Patriarch Sem, was that Melchisedeck, who blessed Abraham, then may Kayomarraz
be reputed Noah: but the Scripture tells us that Abram was in a lineall line
from Sem, no less then ten Discents, and though Noah himself, lived till the
confusion of Languages at Babylon, (happening a hundred and thirty years after
the Flood) yet it is not probable he was Melchisedecke, by that description of
him in the Hebrews, that he was without Parents, Descent, beginning or ending,
most of which are apparent in this Sem, or Shem Predecessor to our Savior in
humanity.

I will begin with Kayomarraz, next whom ruled these succeeding Emperors.

1. Kayomarraz. 2. Syamech. 3. Owchang. 4. Iamshet, first Founder of
Persae-polis. 5. Zoak. 6. Fraydhun, from whom descend the Sacae, Saxons, and
English men. 7. Manucher. 8. Nawder, or Chedorlaomer, one of those Kings slain
by Abraham. In rescue of his Nephew Lot. 9. Asraciab. 10. Bazab. 11. Kaycobad.
12. Solomon. 13. Chozrao. 14. Lorazpes. 15. Guztap. 16. Bahaman Ardchir ( or
Axtaxerxes Longimanus.) 17. Queen Omay, Wife of Ochus. 18. Darab. 19.
Darab-kowcheck (or little Darius) who after a careless security and scorn of
Alexander the Great (or as the Persians call him) Askander Buzzurk, lost unto
him the Monarchy of Asia, in his last battle near to Taken.
And in him ended those Kings or Monarchs of Persia, begun in the year after
the Creation 1700. and ending, Anno mundi, 3636.

Askander Buzzurk, fell in love with Rowchank, King Darabs Daughter, but left
no issue, whereby the government of Persia (as all the other Countries) fell
amongst his Captains, so that confusedly for about fourscore years they were
pressed by Greeks and Syrians, and four hundred and fifty by the valiant
Parthians, who recovered the Monarchy to themselves, under Arsaces (after whom
the Kings were called Arsacidae) in the year after the Creation 3718. and kept
the Diadem till the Reign of Artabanus, slain in the year after Christ two
hundred twenty eight by Ardchyr, or Artaxerxes a Nobleman of the descent of the
subjected Persians.

But we will follow the Persian tradition, which reports that after Alexander
(buried at Babylon) the Persians nominated themselves a King, who by reason of
his spirit and force was called Shaw-pur, he was brothers son unto Darius,
and according to that order so called himself: he lived seventy years after
the valiant Macedonian.

1. Shaw-pur, or Sapor 2. Ardchir-baba-chawn (or Father and Lord) in whose
time, was incarnate our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Augustus Caesar the
second Emperor then swaying ore the World. 3. Shaw-pur the second surnamed
Zabell. 4. Cherman-Shaw. 5. Yerzdgerd. 6. Baharan. 7. Yezgird. 8. Hormuz, from
whose name perhaps Ormus took her name. 9. Feruz. 10. Belax. 11. Chobad. 12.
Chezer. 13. Hormuz. 14. Chozrao, where note, that though these differ from some
other Authors, yet they may be reconciled with very little industry. Next
Chozrao reigned 15. Chobad. 16. Ardchir. 17. Shawryr. 18. Ioon, first planter
upon Taurus. 19. Shin-shaw. 20. Turan Daughter of Chozrao. 21. Iasan-zeddah.
22. Shezir. 23. Ferrogzad. 24. Yezdgird. 25. Bornarint, and 26. Hormuz, or
Hormisda the last of the Persian Princes of true Descent. This Prince ruled
Anno Dom. 630. In whose Reign sprung up Mahomet; borne at Itrarip in Arabia,
from which time begins the Hegira, or Mahomet an account.
Next these came in the Babilonian Caliphs, who by persuasion to obey the
Alcoran, were forced to accept the Saracens, though at first unwillingly, at
last, were compelled to it by Omar, that pretended all those Countries
Tributarie to the Caliph-ship, and Sea of Mecha (near which, at Talnabi, is
buried their greatest Mahumet.) Albeit we bring in Mahumet himself as Regent
here, and succeeded by his three fathers in Law, Abubacher, Omer, and Ottoman,
yet by some he is left out, the Regencie beginning in those three successiue
and only enemies of Mortis Ally (Mahomets son in Law) Prophets for long time
honored with the Persian, but now grown extreme odious, albeit wonderfully
reputed of by the Turks, as good and holy men, this diversity of opinion
causing that great opposition and hatred twixt the Turk and Persian, apparent
to this day, to the general good of Christendom.

1. Mahumet. 2. Abubecher. 3. Omer, 4. Ottoman. 5. Mortis Aly slain by
Muavias, and buried at Cafe near Babylon, where the Persian Kings have ever
since used to be consecrated. 6. Acem, or Hocem Mahumed Mahadin, son of Hali.
7. Muauias, first of the Race of the Ben-humians, A^no Dom. 657. 8. Yhezid, who
ruled the Caliph-ship in Arabia. 9. Muauia, Abdalla, or Mutarr. 10. Meruan. 11.
Abdelmalek. 12. Oyledore. 13. Solomon. 14. Omer the second. 15. Yeyzd. 16.
Ebrahim, or Euelyd. 17. Maruan, last of the blood of Ben Humia, slain by
Soffa, or Salin, son of Saint Azmulli, a Lord of Candahor, who with Lamonit
invaded Persia, and put to flight Hiblin, Maruans General and a hundred
thousand men, and after that, Maruan himself with three hundred thousand,
forcing Maruan into AEgipt, where the said Soffa Azmullis son met, fought
with and foiled him utterly, by which encouragements, Azmulli seized on Persia,
and revived Muters tenants. In which were anathamatized the three successors of
Mahomet, and renewed long time after Siet, Gunet of Ardouile.
This happened in the year of our Lord, 750. and of the Hegira, 131. in which
time Carolus Martellus King of France, plagued the Mahumetans, in the Quarrel
of Christ's honor through Christendom,

Thus the line of Ben-humia, being extirpt, begun by Muauias, Anno Dom. 657.
ending Anno 750. in Maruan: where note that these were not all fathers and
sons, but such as occasion and the voice of men made choice of, as are the
Popes of Rome.

And now speak we of the Family of Ben-Abbas, the first of whom we account
Safa or Salim, son of Azmully, son of Hocem, son of Aly.

1. Safa or Salin. 2. Abubecher, Bugiafer or Abbiafer is next, this repaired
Babylon and made it be called Bagdat, Anno Dom. 758. 3. Mahady. 4. Elady-mirza,
or Musa. 5. Arachid, or Aron. 6. Mahamed Amin. 7. Mahamun Ben Amin. 8.
Malla-chawn. 9. Vuacek. 10. Almoto Vuakell byla Iafar. 11. Montacer. 12.
Abul-Abbas. 13. Mustad-zem. 14. Almatez-bila. 15. Motadi-Bila, flourisht Anno
Dom. 870. 16. Almat Hamed bila hamed Eben Emoto V^akell. 17. Matzed bila, or
Mutezad. 18. Muctafy bila. 19. Mocktader bila. 20. Iafar ben Matazed, or
Elhaker. 21. Ratshaw, or bila Mahamed. 22. Kazi bila. 23. Muctafi bila. 24.
Mostachfi Abdula. 25. Moriah. 26. Tayaha Abdell carin. 27. Kader Hamed. 28.
Alkahem Abdula. 29. Almoctadi bila. 30. Almostazer, or Albumazer. 31.
Almostarched, or Musterashaw. 32. Rached bila. 33. Almochtafi, or Mustenged.
34. Almostawget. 35. Almostauzi-Benur-Elah-Acen. 36. Nacer, or Narzy. 37.
Altaher Mahumed, slain at Spahawn, by Tangrolipix or Sadoc Princes of the
Zelzucchian Family. 38. Mustenatzer, or Almonstaucer, and 39. Mustadzem, or
Almostacem bila Abdala, the last of the Caliphs that ruled Persia, Arabia, and
Babylon: he died Anno Dom. 1258. and of their Hegira 655. Mustadzem was thrust
out by the Tartars, vndet command of Allan-chawn, or Cyngis-chawn, son of
Badur, son of Partan, son of Phil-chawn, son of Fonama-chawn, son of
Byzan-chawn, son of Shawdub-chawn, son of Tomin-chawn, son of Buba-chawn,
son of Buzamer. Next to Cyngis or Allan-chawn is rallied, 2. Octaka-kawn. 3.
Gwioc-kawn. 4. Vlakuk-kawn. 5. Habka-kawn. 6. Nikador-oglan (or youth) 7.
Tangador, or Argon-chawn, an extreme enemy of all Christians, and being
overcome by Argonus son of Abaga, in revenge of his cruelties, he commanded
Tangadors belly to be cut open, and his bowels cast unto the Dogs. 8.
Giuiatuc-chawn or Regato. 9. Badu, or Baduham, of whom many good things are
spoken, and died a Christian. 10. Gazun. 11. Aliaptu Abuzad. 12. Hobaroc-mirza,
slain by Tamerlang, or Tamberlan. 13. Tamerlange. 14. Olough mirza, father of
Abdel, father of Abdula, (or Malaoncres) slain by Vsan Cassan an Armenian
Prince, Anno 1470. yet Tamerlaines issue ruled toward Candahor, in more
splendor, even in the Moguls now being. For Abdula had Sultan-mirza, father of
Hamed-mirza, father of Babermirza, father of Fidiager, father of Ocem, father
of Bahadi, father of Homer-mirza, father of Mirza Abubecher.

For then came in the Family of the Guzpan chara chy onlu, or black Sheep,
viz: 1. Karassaph. 2. Emir-ascander. 3. Ioon-shaw. 4. Acen-ally, to whom
succeeded the Race of white Sheep, or Guzpan Acuculu.


1. Ozun Azembeg, or Acembeyus, and by some called Vsan Cassan. 2. Sultan
Chalile. 3. Iacup son of Ozun or Vsan Cassan, and poisoned by his wife. 4.
Baysangor mirza. 5. Rustan-beg. 6. Hagmat-beg, these three last intruded. 7.
Aluan-beg, son of Iacup, and slain by Izmael his Cousen Germane. 8. Sultan
Morad, or Amurath. 9. Abdel son of Olough, and father of Malaoncr. 10.
Chugcubeg. 11. Abuzed-chawn. 12. Obed-chawn. 13. Abdula-chawn. 14. Adelatif,
who died Anno Dom. 1499. and left the Empire to Ismael, surnamed Sophy, son
in law, though some think Grand son to Vsan-chashan, which he got having
slain Iacup son of Vsan, and Eluan his son.
This Izmael Sophy is famous for his victories against Bainzet the second, and
Selym the first, and Emperors of the Turks.

He was son of Cheque Aider, son of Siet Guinet borne at Ardouile, that
first altered their Religion the better to be revenged of those Prophets who
opposed Mortis Ally his Ancestor, his Genealogy is thus: Izmael was son of
Aider, son of Siet Gunet, son of Cheque Ebrahim, son of Cheque Ally,
son of Cheque Mucha, son of Cheek Sofy descended in a right Line from Mirza
Ceresin the twelfth son of Hocem or Hussan, (and only of all the twelve who
escaped murder from Mnauias) and Hussan was son of Mortis Haly. So from
Izmael descend lineally the Emperors of Persia, to Abbas late reigning, thus
1. Izmael. 2. Tamas. 3. Izanael the II. 4. Mahomet Codoband, or purblind. 5.
Abbas who died Anno 1629, leaving the Empire to his Grandchild Soffy-shaw, or
King. 6. Soffy aged about twenty years, Anno Saluationis 1634.


They celebrate the death of Hussan eldest son of Hali, yearly with many
Ceremonies, I have seen them nine several days in great multitudes, in the
streets all together crying out Hussan, Hussan, so long and fiercely, that many
could cry no more having spent their voices, they ninth day they find him (whom
they imagine lost in a Forest) or one in his place, and then in a huge hurly
burly, men, girls and boys, crying out Hussan, Hussan with Drums, Fifes,
and the like, they bring him to the Mosque, and so after some admiration and
thanksgiving they put an end to that their Orgee.

Other Feasts are performed by the Abdals, (who take their name from Abdala,
father of Mahomet) these have no abode, vow poverty, lodge in Churches (which
made our Lodgings louzie after them) and have provision brought them by the
charitable, they are covered with a sheep-skin, and though poor, yet travel
with dangerous weapons, with which it is thought they often do villainy and get by,
a horn is tied about their neck, which they use to blow in Markets, when they
would have the people to hear Orations, their picture is in the Frontispiece.

The Circumcision of their male children, is at eight years old, but some at
eight days, most commonly when he can in some sort render his profession.

When they purpose it, they conuocate his Kindred, who with themselves present
him gifts, and what may then delight him. That done, they all mount and carry
with them the boy bravely mounted and attired, a Sword in his right hand, the
Bridle in his other. Before him are carried a Spear and a Flambeaux, or torch
linkt to it, the Music accompanies him, with the father next and according to
blood or degree, the other follow. The Hodgee or Priest meets him at the
Mosque, and takes him down, and entering the Church, one holds him on his knee,
another vnclothes him, a third holds fast his hands, the rest give some
triuiall discourse to diminish the expectation of his pain: and then the
Priest dilating his prepuce, in a trice with his silver Cissers circumcises
him, and applies a healing powder of Salt and Marmalate of Dates, which
stanches the blood and mitigates his grief, thence-forward he is called
Mussulman, or true Believer, sometimes they elate a finger, smile and pray to
Mahomet.

The poorer sort want Circumcision, and are ignorant wholly of the Alcoran.

Such women or girls of Christians that live in slavery, by price or conquest,
are excized forceably, by which they repute them Mahometans, though their
belief and heart be otherwise

Their Marriages have not much Ceremony, Poligamy is tolerable. Their Burials
are exactly performed by hired women, who for five hours space, scratch their
ugly faces, howl bitterly, tear their false hair, swoone and counterfeit
sorrow abominably, these their ejaculations continue till his placing in the
grave, which is after they have washed him (for they think purification in life
and death is very necessary) they persume him, wrap him in fine linen, bid him
commend them to all their friends, lay him with his head to Medina Talnabi,
place him where never any was formerly buried (because they think it an
extreme injury to molest the bones of such as sleep) place two stones writ
with Arabique letters, to signify his lodging, its length and breadth, then
bid farewell.

After the death of some noble Gentleman, The Authors sickness.
my course came next, though not to die, yet to go near the Grave, whether
the cause was cold got upon Mount Taurus, where we exposed our heated bodies
to undigested vapors which easily penetrated us, or rather our immoderate
gormundizing their delicious fruits, which abounding we affected in too great
measure, these and Gods will first so ordered it, that I begun a tedious
sickness, in twelve days I had a thousand bloody stools (which excess killed
our Lord Ambassador Sir Dodmore Cotton at that time, and for forty days more,
continued with such cruelty, that never any man was brought lower and into
greater feebleness than I was.

I wanted not the help and opinion of the Kings best Doctors, who though they
hoped of my recovery, gave me small appearance of it, yet I took what they
prescribed me, and gave them Gold what they desired, so that it became a hard
question, whether my spirits or Gold decayed faster.

In this weakness, I was forced to travel 300. miles, hanging upon a Camel,
and when I most hoped for recovery, Morod their famous Aesculapius, seeing no
more money, limited my life to five days more existence, It was the more
terrible, cause he had seen Mecha and never after lied, as was told me.

But he that sits on high, and accounts all humane reason but mere folly, in
four and twenty hours after proved this great Oraculizer a complete lier.

For at that time, an old Tartarian Hecate my servant to whom I allowed eight
pence daily, inuocated her Succubi to succor me, which not a little hurt me,
by forcing me to rail and curse her Orisons, she whether to hasten the
Doctors sentence concerning me, or rather to possess my linen (of which I
had no small store) aimed to poison me, and she knew strong drink was utterly
forbid me, for fear of inflammation, yet forced by inordinate thirst to call
for water, she returns me old intoxicating Shiraz Wine, which insensibly I
powered down, and so immeasurably, it immediately ouercharged my vital senses,
and put me for four and twenty hours into a deadly trance, so that it was a
thousand to one, but it had killed me: yet by Gods mercy after a virulent vomit
and sleep (which for a month before I tasted not to any purpose) I recovered
(in that time once destinated to be buried by the Natives, for few friends I
had to help me) but when they saw me live, they both admired and rejoiced at
it, so that by the binding quality of that wine and sleep, I became bound and
in small time got strength and action; the old Whore in this season, opened my
Trunckes (while my other servant sorrowed form) took away my linen and some
moneys, and run whether I never pursued her: this sickness happened to me, in
my age of one and twenty, which is one of the Clymactericks.

I will show the Persian Alphabet, and so continue my travail. They have nine
and twenty Letters which they write, as do the Arabians and Hebrews, with
which they have affinity in Prayers and Language.

Aleph. bea. tea. sea. Icam he^ chea* taul. zaul. rea. zea. zean. sheen. saut.
zaud. (...) ctea. zcea. ine. kine. phea. caufe. coffe. Lom. meam. nuen. wow.
hea.

(...) Loomealephloy. yeae.

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 (...)

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 (...)

Cumque supeeba fo^^t Babylon spolianda t^op^^eis.

And as I have in some order given you the description of these people and
Countries. It will not offend all (in that useful to some) if I add a little
of their language in most familiar Dialogues, the English, and Persian
explaying one the other, in these agreeing sequences.

The Persian Language.
English Persian. GOD WHoddaw The Sun Afta The Moon Mawe A Prophet Emoome A
Prophets son Emoomseddy The Earth Zameen Emperor Pot-shaw King Shaw Queen
or Empress Beggoon Prince Mirzey Duke Chawn Marquess Beglerbeg Earl Sultan
Lord Beg. Lords Son Beg Zedday Gentleman Awgam Merchant Soldager Soldier
Cowzel-bash Lord Ambassador Elchee-beg President Visyer Justice Darraguod.
Constable Calentar Purueyour Mamendar A Christian Franghee A Pagan believer
Mussulman A Jew Iehewd An Armenian Armenee Persian Farsee Indian Mogull
Georgian Gorgee Sarcashan Carcash Turk Turk Judge Causee Lady Connam A holy
man Hodgee a Friar Mendicant Abdall a Saint Mere a Prophets son Siet a holy
Father Padree a Mother Madree a Mother Mamma a Boy Pissar a Girl Daughter a
Woman Zan a Wench Whotoon a Servant Marda a Slave Colloom a Footman Shooter a
Taylour Chiat a Groom Myter-bashee A Horse Asp a Saddle Zeen a Saddle-cloth
Zeen-push a Shoe Cosh a Nail Cheat a Cook Ashpash a Barber Cyrtrash a Butler
Suffragee A Friend Memam a Sister Quar A Scribe Vikeel an Interpreter
Callama-chee Wine Sherap Water Obb Fire Attash Wynd Bawd The Sea Deriob a Ship
Kishtee a Boat Kishtee-cowcheok Fish Mohee a Sheep Guspan a Goat Booze Roast
Meat. Cobbob Rice Brindg Boyld Rice Peloe Wood Yzom Apples Sib Pomegranads
Narr Muske-Melons Corpoos Water-Melons Hendoon Dates Wchormaw Almonds Bodoom
Raisins Kishmish Walnuts Gardow Sugar Sucker Small Nuts Pistachoes Sirrup of
Dates Dooshab Pleasant liquour Sherbet Bezar Pezar a Rose Gull Grapes Angwor
Figs Anger Orange Noreng. Lemmons Lemoon Carroway seed Gizneese Anny-seed
Zera Nutmeg Goose Cloves Mekut Mace Basbas Cinnamon Dolcheen Spice Filfill
Nightingale Bulbull Ginger Gingerfill Pepper Pepperfill Ophium Triacke Rubarbe
Rhubarr Onions Peose One Year Yeck Sol One month Zeck-maw A day Rowse To day
Amroose Yesterday Diggroose To morrow Subbaw Two days hence Past-Subbaw Soon
Zood Much Pishaar More Digger Good Cowbass Bad Baddass Naught Cowb-nees Great
Buzzurck Little Coucheck Small Cham Less Andack Bread Noon Butter Rogan Cheese
Paneer Milk Sheer Sower milk Moss Honey Dowshabb Salt Namack Water Obb Rain
water Ob-baroon Salt water Ob-namack Hot Garmas Cold Sermawas A Book Catobb A
Chest Sandough A Carpet Collee A Man Addam A League Farsang Half a League
Nym-Farsanga^ A resting place Manzeil Common Inn Carrauans-raw A Nursery Haram
A house Conney A place Joy Straw Io Barley Cow Wheat Gandowm Money Zarr White
Seuittas Red Sourck Iron Pholot A Knife Cord A Sword Shamshere A Gun Tophangh A
Needle Suzan A Glass Shusha A Cup Paola Shoes Cosh A Candle Sham A Bed
Mafrush A Pillow Nazbolish Paper Coggesh A Quill Callam A Garden Baugh A Town.
De The Devil Shitan Hell Iehendam Rogue Haramzedday Slave Colloom Whore Cobba
Cuckold Gyddee Fool Dooanna Villain Haramsedda Base Whore Mother Cobba The
Kings evil Boagma Dog Segg Horse Asp Mule Astor Cow Gow An Ass Owlock
Camel Shouter Mule-man Astor-dor Camel-man Sheuter-dor Horse-keeper Myter
Sheepherd Vloch Bird Quoy Beef Goust de gow Hen Morgh Hens Eggs Tough morgh
Boyld Poactas Half boyld Nym-poact All boyld Hamay-poact Kitchen Mawdbaugh A
Cook Ash pash A Tower Manor A Needle Suzan Thread Respun A Looking-glass Oyna
A Whip Chawbuck Rose Water Gul ob Vinegar Cyrca Old Chonnay New Nou^s I Man
Thou, he San O Even so Hamshe Beat him Besome It is day Rouse have It is night
Shab have It is dark Tareekas Write Binweese Sing Bowhoo^ Say thou Gu^ta Oh
brave Shaw Abbas Bravely done Barra-collas. Brave Game Tama^sha^ A Towell
Dezmall Nothing Heach A Garden Baugh A high way Raw A Tree Drake A Turquoyse
Pheruzay A Pasport Phyrman A Cap Mandeel* A Coat Cabay A Key Cleet A Glass
bottle Suzan A riding Coat Bolla-push A hill Achow A hot-house Hummum A Sweet
heart Ionanam A Physician Hackeam The stones Sechim The Yard Keeree Matrix Cus
Belly Shechem The Market Buzzarr The great Market Mydan You lie Drugmagues You
say true Rosmaguee Very right Dreustas Near, far off Nazeecas, duras Bring
it higher Bear ingee Go, call him Bro, Awascun He is a sleep Cobbedat He is
abroad Swarshudat He is not within Conneyneese He eats and drinks Moughwhorat
Come quickly Zood beaw Go quickly Zood burro Know you, yes, Medanny baly Where
is he Quo iaas Who, my father Che, pader man I know not Che medannam Can I tell
you, Che cunnam Not far off Dureneese God bless you Wchodaw bashe I drink
to you Esco-sumaw I thank you, Bizmilla With all my heart Allhumderalley Much
good do it you Awpheat Do you love me Dooz me dare Strength, soon Zoor, Zood
Full Pooras Fill full Poorcunne Boil the meat Goust buppose Strait Tunghea
Weak Sangheneese In health Choggea Sick Na chaggea Dead Mordasse Gone Raftas
Here Ingls Above Bolla Below Pvin Angry Ianghea Hungry O lam A Color Raugh A
Misbeleeuer Caffar A Privy Adam Conney A Close-stoole Obb Conney Soap Saboon
Broken Shekestas Laden Barkonnas Lost Gumshottas Found Paydcun A Cradle Caguey
Tobacco Tombacco Give me Bed Stop Bast Wash Bushure Take away Verdure You
trifle Basim^cunne A Gift Piskash A Platter Langaree A Pl^te. Nalbuchee.
Persian. English Turkish. Yeck One Beer Do two Echee Se three Ewch Char four
Dewrt Panch five Beash Shesh six Altee Haft seven Yedte Hasht eight Seckez No
nine Dockoz Da ten One Yezda eleven One-beer Dozda twelve One-eche Sezda
thirteen One-ewch Charda fourteen One-dewrt Pounzdata fifteen One-beash
Shoonzdata sixteen One-altea Haft-data seventeen One-yedte Hasht-data
eighteen One-setkez No data nineteen One-dockoz Be twenty Ygarmy
Yec-beest twenty one Ygarmy beer Dota be twenty two Ygarmy echee Se be
twenty three Ygarmy ewch Charbeest twenty four Ygarmy dewrt Pouncbeest
twenty five Ygarmy beash Se thirty Otooz forty Coorgh fifty* Ally Babylon
Bagdat Tauris Tabris Syras Shyraz Jerusalem Kursakaleel Constantinople
Stambull Alexandretta Skandrown Grand Cairo Al-Cayr English. Persian. A good
morrow or God bless you Sir, Sallam-alleekam The like I wish you Sir
Aleekam-sallam Whether do you go? Quo ia merue? Not far Dure neese How do
you to day? Chaldery Amrooz? Well I praise God Choggee Shoochoro-Whoddaw Good,
I am very glad thereof, Koobas, Whowddaw bashat Where have you been? Quo ia
boodee? Now I am your servant Hali man Merda sumaw Welcome, Sir, heartily
welcome. Hoshomedee, Agaw, Suffowardee Tell me, how you do, healthy, Gufta,
chehaldery? choggee Where is your house? at Babylon, Quoiaas chonna sumaw?
Bagdat Have you a Wife? Zan darre? Yea truly, fifteen Sir, Bally, pounsdata
beg How old are you? twenty four. Chan sol daree? char-beest How are you
called? Che nome Daree sumaw? My name is called Teredoro, Noma mannas Teredore
Is this the way to Tauris? Eeen raw have Tabyris? Yea, but how many leagues
thither? Bally, o chan Far sangas vntraf? I suppose, it is twenty, Man medonam,
be Is the way good or bad? Raw koob o baddas? Is there good Wine? Vnjee koob
sherabbas? Yea, in the high way. Bally, raw have Whose Garden is that? Even
baugh mally chee? It Is the great Kings, Mally-pot-shaughas Know you Cazbeen?
Cazbeen medanny? I do Sir, have you seen it? Manbali beg, sumaw dedee? Why
not, I know all Persia, Cheree-na, hamma Farsee dedam Come hither good Boy,
Ingee bear koob pissar Give me some Wine soon Sherap bedee zood Fill me but
one cup Pourcun yeck paola Then saddle my Horse Asp zeen pushee I thank you
Sir Whoddaw-negaturat It grows dark, I Will sleep Tarreekas, man mechobed Give
me some water slave Ob bedee colloom Here Sir, take it Ingee Agaw, have bid
Much good do it you brother Awpheat bashat-broder What business have you? Che
Corr daree sumaw? Little, but stay a little Coocheck, andac wist I have some
occasions man corr daram Tell me where is the King Gufta? pot-shaw quo iaas? I
believe in Hyrcania, Man medonam Mozendram God bless you, Whoddaw bashat.

On the thirteenth of April, we set sail for other parts, when being three or
four leagues at Sea, the wind came fair, so that on the fifteenth day we
were parallel to Saint John's, seventy miles from Swalley Road, on which day the
expedition bearing up to speak with us, the ships fell foul or thwart one
another, whereby her bole-sprit broke our mizen shrowdes, no more harm coming
to either at that time.

The nineteenth of April we made our selves Nadir to the Sun, which had
Northern declination fifteen degrees at which time we sailed close by the
Island and City of Goa, the seat of the Archbishop and Viceroy of Portugal
in the East Indies, this time being becalmed and without wind, we had the
weather exceeding sultry and hot, our course lay still from Swalley Road all
along the Coast of India, Decan, and Malabar, South and South and by West, as
far as the utmost Cape of India, called Cape de Comerin under seven degrees
North, and all the way we failed close by the shore, having fourteen, fifteen
and sixteen fathom water.

The three and twentieth of April being Saint Georges day we sailed close by
Mangalor, a City of the Mallabars, where were riding thirty or forty Frigots
Malabars men of war, who all hoyst sail toward Goa, we steering contrary,
only one Frigot came by chance near the Jonas, who sent her Barge after her,
but she both rowing and making large sail got away, howbeit the Barge once
gave her a volly of small shot, but to small purpose.

On the three and twentieth of April we came to an Anchor at Mount Elly, or
Delyn, a Town belonging to the Malabars, and in that Country, our Anchorage
was nine fathomes, but at the shore was only three.

We durst not land, the people are so treacherous, and bloody, howbeit they
came aboard us in their small Canooes, and sold us for other trifles,
Coco-nuts, Mangoes, lacks, green Pepper, Carauances or Indian Pease, Hens,
Eggs, and Buffols, which because rare are dear. And for every tun of fresh
water, they demanded and was paid a Royal of eight, or four shillings and
four pence.

The Bannians of these parts, as they live in superstition, so they affect
Ceremony in their Burials. For according to the quality and wealth of the
deceased, such and so costly are their Funerals, above those that be inferior.
Many sweet Gummes and Aromaticke Odours from Arabia, are incended and put in
flames about the dead body which is inuolued in linen pure white, sweet and
delicate, or Taffataes of transparant finenesse: amongst other Wood^ both rare
and precious, they affect that called Aquila and the older Calamba, trees of
admirable height and evenness, found most commonly in the lofty Mountain of
Chaemoys, in Cochin-China, which those people sell at excessive rates, both in
regard of the Bannian Obsequies, and esteem, the Inhabitants of Iapan hold of
it, imagining no pillow wholsomer nor more efficatious for health then that to
sleep upon. For they extremely hate such as their heads may sink into, which,
both heates the blood and perturbes the fancy.

And amongst other fruits as Orenges (which are sweet, succulent and dainty)
of so pleasant a taste and relish, that they affect the eater wonderfully
offering the rind with no less pleasure then the juice, both which seem to
have dulcitie and Acrimony mixed together, are Lemmons, Pappaes, Cocos, both
sweet and great, Bananas or Plantanes (the supposed fruit that Eve was temped
with, and with which Adam clothed himself to avoid the shame of nakedness)
which Tree mounts to no great height but spreads in comely manner, the fruit is
long in fashion of a soulsage, they will ripen though you first pluck them in
their greenesse, and become of a dainty yellow, the rind or skin peeles off
most easily, the fruit then put into your mouth, melts with mellow ripeness,
and gives a most delicious taste and relish, not much unlike our choicest
Pears in England.

The Iacks or Giacks (which the people brought us) deserve description, they
grow upon high trees, straight and uneasy to be ascended, the Jack is for
bigness comparable to a Pumpion, without it is yellow and shows some veins,
but within is soft and tender full of golden colored Cloves including grains
flat and globous, each of which comprehends a white bone, not eaten with the
fruit but being boyld give food no less pleasant and useful to Kine and such
creatures then do the Date-stones of use in Persia, the Jack is at first
taste somewhat unpleasant, but that is caused rather by its rareness and heat
then other reason, it is glutinous and leaves a clammy farewell in the mouth, but
adds a double benefit to the stomach, being restoratiue, pleasant and good to
strengthen a weak back, and therefore not ill for that disease, by us
denominated French, but first called Indian.

The Ananas for goodness and shape may crave attention, which though it be not
inferio^r to the Giacke, for bulk and roundnesse, yet is the plant she comes
of, no way equal, this grows nor from Tree nor sowing, but of a root
agreeable to our Arthi-choake, they appear above ground at maturity, and
affect not above two foot height, the better and with less labor to enrich
the gatherer, it is armed on the out side with a rind moystlesse hard and scaly,
the fruit within good, wholesome, and pleasant, which though too soon satiating
the appetite, yet experience tells us the stomach couets it, and admits
digestion easily.

They have here Silke-wormes, though not in that plenty we saw in Hircania, nor
in the Coast of Cochin-China, and Chormandell, they will be no where merry nor
useful, but where are store of Mulbery Trees, from which they pluck their
nourishment, bettered with that refrigerating air whispering among them,
whence with delight they spin out their Silk, and actuate their variable cods,
bladders and bottomes in great abundance of pleasure and pureness.

If it were not troublesome unto the Reader, I could add some other worthy
Fruits into this Caralogue, but I fear to be offensive, so that I will
conclude all in one more, and refer the rest to a Discourse fitting for that
subject.

The Duroyen, one only coming to my view, because rare here, but in Malacca,
some parts of Iana and Malabar, are in no scarceness.

This fruit is not much unlike the Jack, but lately spoke of, the shape round
and outside beauty no way equal to the inside goodness and virtues, at first
opening it gives a smell like that of a rotten boiled Onion, and to many seems
odious and offensive, but proves as an excellent foil to make it rarer. For
the meat is whitish and seems divided into a dozen several Cells or partitions
filled with many bones or stones white and restoratiue, in bigness like a
Chestnut, the fruit in a word is pleasant, nutritive and dainty and may be
called an Epitome of all the best and rarest fruits in all the Orient.

These Negroes you see have no famine of Natures gifts and blessings, and to
let pass their perfidie (taught them by the auaritious, proud and deceitful
Portugal) impart freely of what they have to any civil Traveler, expecting
some small retribution for their courtesy. After some small acquaintance, they
will allow you the common courtesy, Arecca mixed with Betele, which they make
use of in all kinds of Exercise and Complements (a little resembling the Irish
wild ones with their sneezing-tobacco-powder.)

Arecca, the trees are high as Cedars, but are liker to Palmetotrees, are of a
fuzzie concaue substance, and decorated with boughs only at the very top where
hangs the fruit in clusters, shaped in bigness of a Walnut, white within, not
easily penetrated and without all taste, odor or moisture, in which respect
they, never eat it alone, but cover or rap it about with leaves of Betele not
unlike the Iuy, so laying upon each piece of the dissected Betele, a little
Arecca, chaw it into many and several morsels, to which (as I observed
formerly amongst the Mohelians) they often add a kind of lime made of white
large Oister-shels, all which together cures the wind Collicke, remoues
Melancholy, destroys Worms, increases Venerie, purges the maw and stomach,
and preuents hunger.

On the five and twentieth day at the Bay point, we espied a Mahlabar Iuncke of
seventy Tons, bound for Acheen in Sumatra, near this Iuncke lay a Frigate
man of war, with intent to take her, supposing her loading worth the
aduenturing for, to avoid which Charibdis she fell into as bad a Scilla, the
Jonas Barge saw her, chaste, boorded her, and towd her to the Admiral, where
after a consultation amongst the Merchants, and Sea-captaines they concluded
she was good prize and worth the keeping, in her was great store of Cotton,
Opium, and Onions, but what was under the Cotton, the Captain and Merchants
know best: eighty able men were made prisoners, the Jonas men not content with
their wealth and conquest, unworthily and without cause beat the miserable
Blacks that showed no resistance, so that sixty of them desperately threw
themselves into the Sea, where truly it must needs move compassion in any, to
see so many wretched souls (upon the cruelty of the Sailors) rather to expose
their tired bodies, to the merciless fury of the Sea, then to be insulted over
by their raging Victors. Some of which sixty Negroes were drowned, unable to
swim to shore occasioned by age, and violent course of the Sea, but the Blackes
Canoes took up some and our Boats others, carrying them away to Bantam in
Iaua, where each of them are sold for fifty or sixty Rials of eight. This done
they weighed anchor and steered away South and by West: the Jonas towed the
Iuncke after her, but their Boat we sent away; and five Blackes in her. That
night we had a stormy gust and thunder, lightning and rain, being weather not
unusual so near the Sun, which had three degrees of declination from us
under twelve degrees of latitude from the Line.

These Mallabars are cole black of color, well limmed, their hair long and
curled, about their heads they tie a Handkerchiefe wrought with gold and silk,
and about their middle a cloth which couers their priuities, their Religion is
Mahometicall, their Priests understand the Arabique, in which Language are all
their Prayers, they die circumcized and live subject to the great Samoreyn, or
King of Calicut, but in some measure at some times are tributary to the great
Mogull. They are to say truly a warlike and valiant but desperate Nation,
excel in the euing, are enemies to the Portuga^; and four leagues South at
Cananor they have a Fort, nigh which the Portugalls have another, they use both
great and small Ordnance, but have no great store of them, or art to make them
useful, but of Fire-workes, poisoned Arrows, Darts and Targets, they have too
great plenty, and offered to sell us some; the Country is woody and mountainous.
The Road where we anchored represents this protraict.

Mountelly is under twelve degrees six minutes of latitude, variation
thirteen degrees.



Thence we sailed still South, and by the Indian Coast passing by Cananor,
Callicut, and Cochin, great and ancient Cities, at one of which the King
commonly resides, or near about, the Mallabars call their King Samoreyn, and
here the Portugals had their first trade in the East Indies, before they found
out the other Oriental places. This day we were under nine degrees fifteen
minutes North, our course still lay dew South. Next we had eight degrees of
latitude, when toward Snn-set we see the Coast or high land of Brin John,
nearest Cape Comereyn, which lies under seven degrees, thirty minutes, the
variation is fourteen degrees.

Of Mallabar.
Obseruare modum laus est, nimiumque mouende In dubium trahitur religiosa fides.
ANd that we are now in sight of Mallabar, a famous and weal thy part of the
Oriental Indies, let the patient Reader suffer me to lead him along in the
description of this and other no less famous (then honorable Kingdoms,
different in Elevation, power, Language, Religion, and other heathen
Ceremonies, which tho they proceed from an uncertain Observation, yet the
author can assure him most part truth. And in this may receive some immediate
benefit, if by contemplation, he behold the variety of temporary blessings,
no part in the Universe exceeding these, not withheld from Pagan people
afforded by Gods al-knowing and guiding Providence, which notwithstanding being
mixed with unthankfulness, damnable Idolatry, and variety of carnal objects
turn to their greater destruction, and endless miseries. And by these we see
Gods infinite mercy toward our selves, to whom he has vouchsafed not only a
sufficient portion of wealth and worldly pleasures, but enriched us above all,
with that inualuable Pearl the Gospel, and benefit of his sons satisfaction
for our sins, by which (though to a Carnalist those triumphs of nature may
seem incomparable) we see our own happy difference with their conceited
Paradise and Trophies of consuming pleasure.

I account so far of East India, as is from eighteen degrees North latitude
to the utmost point called Cape Comr^in, under seven degrees or thereabouts (by
the Seacoast) the Kingdom of Mallabar, in the first place presenting it self
unto description, wherein are many well built Cities and great, as Goa, Dabull,
pertaining unto the Portugal, Callicut, Cochin, Cananore, Mangalore and
others, it is governed by a King whom they call Samorein, his best sort of
people are termed Nairos, the great Samorein or Emperor commonly resides at
Cochin, under whom rule many Vice-royes, they are of Mahomets Sect, but dissent
much from the Turks and Persians, and differ much from that kind of Idolatry
Lodouicus Vertomanus reports them for. Their color is black (living in the
scorching fry of the Torrid Zone) go naked from the waste upwards, save that
their heads are covered with a low Tulipant (or wreath of silk and gold) about
their middles, they have a cloth of parti-colored plad, like that with us in
England.

Their thighs and legs are naked, yet have the poorer sort nothing more then a
small veil over their priuities wholly naked elsewhere, their hair is black
and crispe. And in augmention of fashion, they very orderly cut and pinke their
skin of sundry forms in sundry places.

Their Marriages are rare and ceremonious, one same observed from King to
Pesant, for who so marries, has not the first nights embraces with the Bride,
but very honestly bestows her mayden-head on the Bramini (or their Priests)
who well perform it. And truly these Idol Priests are in such great esteem
among them, that it is usual with them to enter the Kings house or any others,
discourse at pleasure with their females, and to use (I might say abuse) them
with discretion. And note that at such time as the Bramini enters, the good man
of the house leaves him possession, ioying not a little, that the holy (so
reputed) man discends to teach and accompany their wives and daughters.

When the King dies, they forbear to crown his son, but accumulate that
honor on his Sisters son (and good cause for it) for they say who knows
truly, whether his son were of his own begetting, but the Sisters boy is of
his blood and infallible Descent, whereby they scorn to err according to
their own assertions.

The women here (as in other places of India, where we traveled) dilacerate
their ears to a monstrous proportion, for by the ponderousness of their ear
Jewels they tear their ears to that capacity: that I have easily put my arm
through their eareholes. The Gentry are styled Nairos, are a valiant and well
made people, pleate their hair very decently, and their naked arms are only
clothed with Bracelets of silver and juory, they never walk the streets
without Sword and Target, and if any vulgar fellow meet them, they presently
shake and vibrate their Swords upon their Shields, crying aloud Nayroe and so
obtain the way without opposition.

But whereas some have reported that no poor man dare look a Nayro in the
face, or meet a Priest or Nairo within fifty paces, thereby securing themselves
from the others fury, it may well be it has once been so, but now it is not
altogether true nor fabulous.

In Calicut, a great City ten leagues whence we took our price, the people
are reputed Paynims. For their King adores the Devil (whom they call Deumo)
the Chapel where this Monster sits is uncovered, and in height about three
yards. As they go in, the wooden entrance is engraven with hellish shapes.
Within, their beloved Deumo is imperiously inthronized upon a brazen Mount. His
head is advanced with a rich Diadem, from his head issue four great horns
(such as have the Rams of Persia) his eyes gleering, mouth like a port Cullis,
beautified with four tuskes, his nose ugly flat, his look terrible, hands
like claws, has Lions thighs and legs, and feet not unlike a Monkey. And
besides this Grand Pagod are lesser Deumoes glistering like Glowormes. Some of
which are pictured devouring souls.

Each morn the Braminy or Priest perfume and wash them, not going away without
craving his malediction, humbly prostrate he requires it (and it is granted
him.) For every Moon they solemnly bequeath a living Sacrifice unto their
Deumo, which usually is a dainty Cock. The Priest in his Sacrifice is
apparelled in fine Lawne, and with a sharp silver Knife, he nobly destroys the
yielding Cock, whose warm blood is offered to the Devil, the Sacrificers
arms, and legs are garnished with round silver plates and other trifles,
which as he moves makes a gingling noise. The Ceremony ended, he fills his hands
with Rice, and Crab-like goes retrograde from the Idol, all the way steadfastly
fixing his eyes upon his Deumo, when being come to a Lake (like Acheron) there
he embowels his Rice, therewith aduanceth his hands above his head, he returns
and makes himself heir unto the Offerings.

Nor sits the King to meat till such time as the Deumo has it offered by the
Priests, and having spread it, with Acheronticke murmors return it to the
King, but what is left is given to the Crows, whose modest appetites, make
those pretty Birds be dedicated to the Devil.

The people in way of mutual love and amity, use to exchange their wives, with
which the women seem contented, and here Poligamy is not forbidden; for as the
men have many Wives, so have the women many Husbands. But the children are
given to such the woman fancies and bequeathes unto, and he is thereto right
well contented, nor doubting, nor questioning his best right unto the Infant.

It is an ordinary custom here to wash the body wholly every morn, that done
they go unto the Idol, where, with unspeakable ill-fauoured gestures, and
writhing of their mouth and eyes, they continue their inuocations wel-nigh an
hour, which ceremony is so hideously acted that it raises no small
stupefaction in the beholders.

This superstitious people frequently resort to the City of Callicute, in the
form of sober Pilgrimage, which Idolatry deriues not a little wealth to the
Deumo their and his Agents, Concomitants in his knaueries.

Of the Isle Zeyloon.
THis famous Isle is not far distant from the point of India called Cape
Comrein, it eleuates the Articke Pole seven degrees, by which we closely
traveled, leaving the Asiaticall Continent. It abounds with Cinnamon and other
odoriferous and Aromaticall Spices. The people (for the greater part) are
Paynims, and know no God. Some have a smacke of Christ, others of Mahomet, but
those are very few. The people go naked, not forced to it by poverty but heat,
they are Owners of the best Smaragds, Rubies and Amber-greese through Asia. Yet
want these inestimable stones that virtue in their Orient luster; to lighten
them the way to perfect glory (poor wretched creatures) they are too zealous
(foolish zeal) in their bewitching cursed Jdolatry. For it is apparent, that
on the high peake (called by the Europaeans) Columbo, it is orthodoxally held by
them, that Adam was their Created and lived there, they believe it rather in
regard his vestigatings are yet imprinted in the earth, but generally the
Inhabitants are egregious Paynims. As testifies the Apes tooth, so highly so
generally esteemed, so fervently prayed unto, which tooth was taken from them
not long ago, by the aduenturous Lusitanians, and carried to Goa, where the
Archbishop and Viceroy burnt it, although the people to redeem it offered an
incredible mass of treasure, refused unwisely. For by a crafty Bannian an
other like to the former was brought forth, which he protested was the same and
recovered miraculously, thereby infinitely enriching himself, and joying not a
little these credulous and well contented Zelonians.

Pilgrims from remote parts apace flock hither, where a top a high Mount is
conspicuously set the Idaea of a horrible Caco-demon, touching which Pagod, the
Syngales (their Priests) Cronography. That once Iohna their King held this
monstrous Demon in derision, but entering the sacred Temple, he (in great
agony) beheld the Idol Devil breath forth fury against him, showing it by
his fiery eyes and flaming Semiter (threatfully held against him) whereat the
relenting King amazed returns, becomes penitentiary, and echoes sorrow for
his former errors,

The Isle is repleate with innumerable abominations, for in most corners are
seen one ugly monstrous shape or other, which as they are diverse, so do they
diversely infect the humors of diverse men, and to which (as particular fancy
feeds them) they bestow Orizons upon.

The place where the great Pagotha stands, is inueloped with a cloud of arms
and as sedulously looked unto (and good reason) for they verily believe that so
soon as that tottering fabrique falls, the final ruin of the World shall
immediately come after.

And though this Nation disagree in sundry fantasies, yet cohere they in this
one, that when one proves diseased, he procures some worthy thing for a more
grateful Sacrifice, reputing the same meritorious and preualent in their
decaying healths, but such as want memory take a wiser course, by inuocating
the head of an Elephant (an understanding beast) to ease them of that art,
taught by Simonides with greater trouble.

A description of Choromandell.
THe Coast of Choromandell stretches, from the point called Cape Comerin, and
so runs along Northerly toward the Bengalan Gulf and Ganges, by the Towns
Negapatan, Narsinga, Armagun, Meliapore, Mesulipatan, etc.

At Negapatan and other places inhabit Pagans (howbeit about Meliapor, where
lies martyred Saint Thomas, are Christians) and in many other places great
Rulers of the Sect of Mahomet and under the Moguls command. The people are of a
duskie complexion, and wear little clothing, save what is thin and delicate,
Gold nor Copper want they, or fruits, or meats that be right good, the Braminy
are with them in great plenty, who very readily teach and instruct the perfect
way unto damnation. Their belief is beyond their own expression and others
apprehensions, nor use these people Circumcision, which tells me that they love
not Mahomet. They allow Poligamy, and in their Weddings afford observation for
a Traveler. The Priests and (to be) married couple, A Wedding.
with a fair fruitful Cow (a beast of Divine repute amongst them) repayres
unto the water side, where after Prayers to their Infernal Guiders, they link
their hands uniformly in the Cowes tail, on which the Braminy powers a Violl
of hallowed Oil and Water, and after Ceremony drives the Cow into the water,
who enters many times so far that they are covered to the middles in the Sea.
During which they hold fast their hands, till the Cow fearing Neptune, wisely
returns, they then disunite themselves, holding that conjunction sacred and
powerful ever after.

Their Epithalamies are done, lets hear their Funerals; such time the Husband
dies, he is embalmed, and shortly after, his dearly loving Wife in company of
parents and children, wanting no attendance of Music and Boals Priests, all
decked in neat attire, her head, arms, neck, nose, ears, legs and toes, each
charged with Amulets and Bracelets of silver, A Funeral.
with other Jewels, her hands hold fragrant flowers, which as she goes she
sweetly gives to all she meets withal, and which distributed, the Bramini
shows her a Magique glass, whose art represents unto her, frolique Birds,
fragrant trees, and sensual pleasures, at which view (poor soul) she grants
a modest smile, interpreted, as longing to possess them, and in her hands they
fix a gilded ball, which (with her body) she rowles in antique form and
order, in the way (still gazing in the mirror) the Bramlni whispers in her
ears, telling her of wonderful matters* and ineffable joys she should
possess, which so tickle her, as transported she shows herself beyond all
measure, so that being arrived, she sees the fire whereinto her late dead
Spouses body is put (a hole of two yards depth and equal wideness) environed
with sweet wood and other perfumes, entranced, she sees, she leanes into, she
incorporates herself with fire and husband (merciless too much adored) fire,
which leaves nothing extant save fame and ashes, immediately she is consumed,
and for her Auc her sacrifice is bettered with a number of Annulets and Jewels,
her Kindred throw upon her* which done, the living Spectatours return well
satisfied.

But such as deny to burn, are shaven, put away and hated like a Dog, yea,
live hourly in danger to be slain by their own issue, a just revenge, for
their former too much abused liberty, grown so audaciously impudent, that upon
the least distaste nothing but the harmless lives of their too much loving
Husbands, would satiate their lustful boldness, procured by poison, till by
Parliament this course was taken (to burn their Wives with their dead bodies)
to secure themselves from future dangers.

Again (O grief to speak it) in these parts, the people are so extremely
Idolatrous, and ouerswayed by the insatiable gulf of perdition the Devil,
that they adore a great massy Copper gilded Idol, whose Statue is gloriously
mounted upon a Chariot which mooues with eight mighty wheels, ouerlaid with
Gold, the ascent up to the Idol upon the Chariot is spacious and easy by many
and enlarging steps, on which sit with sober visage, the Priests and other
little Girls who in way of devotion (impure sanctity) prostiute themselves to
the libidinous heat of wicked men, the better thereby to enrich their Pagode,
or adored Devil, and for which their dutifulness, they are entitled, the
Pagodes children: these Nemeses with their Priests give Sacrifices to the
Devil (fond zeal of their besotted Parents to destinate their pretty
children, from their infancy, to such an abominable liberty.)

The story follows, when the Idol goes on procession, the prime men of the
place assemble together, in company of many others to draw the Chariot, happy
is that man or child can lay a hand to help to draw it. For in this his
triumphant progress, many men and women (more forward then wise) throw
themselves voluntarily in the Chariots way, who by the ponderousness of the
Idol have their poor wretched bodies miserably crushed in pieces, thereby
becoming vainglorious Martyrs, but more unhappy men.

Yea more, such is the stupid folly of the men their in these parts, by
compelling their Virgins to become base prostitutes (their Religion shadowing
all deformities) that it is a great wonder to behold so many Girls of so small
modesty, to proffer themselves at such tender years.

A description of Casta.
ILL agrees this name with the Quality of that place.

It is a City in Chormandell, adjoining Narsinga, where the people differ not
in color nor condition, from the other before spoken of, but their Funerals
diffent from the rest. In that these build to themselves Sepulchers deep and
narrow, and wherein the dead bodies lie entombed, but (to prevent his
melancholy) the too long, too much, liuing-louing Wife is put therein too,
where-out she cannot move, but this poor creature is forced to be partaker in
her Husbands destiny, till Atropos with a dull Knife coequalizes her warm
composure with her mates infecting carcass.

And it is note worthy that in these parts one trade marry with another, and
never out of their own Triball Vocation.

Their Religion is austere (but irreligious) agreeing with our old Adage, Quot
homine^, tot sententiae; some adore a Cow; others a Snake, other-some the
Sun, Moon, Stars, Water, Trees, and other Idols. And it is usual, that
what they first meet withal at their going forth of doors at Sunrising, that
same thing (be it bird or beast) they make their Numen and tutelary God for
that day.

Solemn Feasts have they likewise, in one of which they erect a Tree, with a
crosse-yard fastened to it, nigh thereto is a Pagod (or Devil) placed: upon the
yards are nailed two small hooks of Iron, So that when any vows (vows they
have many) unto the Pagod occasioned either by sickness or disaster, piety
(pity to see) so eleuates them, that they readily proffer themselves unto the
Priests who ingeniously as readily fasten their naked shoulders to the hooks,
and then hoise him up to his greater height of view (but greatest view of
torture) and being down, the blood issuing from his tortured carcass, is
preserved, and by the understanding Braminy dashed against the Tree in honor of
the Idol. Then (Caitiffe like) he is drawn before the Idol, to whom
submissiuely he attributes serious (but ill deserved) praises, Which done he
has free leave to recure himself and look better to his needfuller cure then
Vows for future.

Ceremony they have also in the night, during which, the streets are splendide
with gl^tering Lights and Torches then eight or more of them filling their
hands and pouches full, with Rice and other meats, they dance together amid
the flaming Lights, th^^wing their meat (as they run along) upon the ground
(as an Offering to the Devil) not daring look black least the Devil should
therefore kill them (whom they imagine follows them the whiles they run) such
is the power of this old Inchanter the Devil, such the misery of these
fuliginated creatures, who as they use all Ceremonies of devotion usually on
the nights and not at day time, it is they say because the Devil is then sole
Rulor and delights in darkness.

The shape of their Boats or Curricurroes have this representation.

A description of Pegu.
NOw I go further on, to speak a little of this as famous, as remote
Territory.

Pegow (so they pronounce it) is a mighty Kingdom extra Gangem but by late
affronts some part is subjected to the great King of Syam (thought the true
Cham) I let pass what others before me have repeated, or to particularize the
great riches and majesty he has and lives in. Or of his Elephats, four
monstrons great ones, three milk white, one cole black, all which (poor
Prince) he divinely worships.

I might speak of his wars and power, or of his apparel, albeit who is
ignorant that travels their, how he is roabed and laden with rich oriental
glittering Gemmes, on head, ears, arms, legs and feet, whereby a good eye
is dazeled, a good sense amazed with the glory of them, and on the night (each
night he shows himself) by Torches, he is wonderful to behold. Such, yea so
powerful are the refulgences of those Carbuncles, Rubies, Diamonds, Smaragds,
and Saph^res, and such the treasure and wealth of those Torrid Regions, that
afford it him.

The Religion of the Peguans is Exh^icall, knowing many but false Gods, they
have among them (inseparable companions of wicked men) many ugly and deformed
Pagods, to whom they pray to, of great height and bigness, hels they have also
of like assize, whose only tolling beings st^pefaction enough unto the hearers.

The Priests are called Tallapois, who though they seem like Friar mendicants,
yet what by awe (for the very infernal Spirits obey their in ohantations) and
what by policy (for they contempla^^ humility, externally very much) the
people have them in (...) repute and reverent estimation. I will speak further
of them in Syam.

A description of Syam.
SYam is a Kingdom conjoyning Pegu, and part of the Oriental I^dia. Patonia
and other Kingdoms near Ganges and Be^g^la, are tributary to him.

The people are included within the burning Zone, therefore not fair.

They have limbs and hearts able enough to style them proper* Mahomet has a
little crept among them, but for the most part, they know him not.

They have been (in foregoing times) wicked Sodomites; which filthy sin was
since corrected a Queen Rectrix, commanding upon palne of death, that all male
children at their births, should have a round bell of Gold (in it an Adders
tongue dried) put through their foreskin and the flesh, so that if they demand
why it is answered them for deterring them the hateful sin of Sodomy.

At such time as the desire of copulation wills him get the bells away quite from
the flesh, only unto the foreskin, which known, he is brought before some
expert Mid-wiues who present him Virgins, one whom he likes, he chooses,
returns and drinks a somniserous potion, whose operation puts him in a
sleep, during which the bell is loosed from the flesh, and only fastened to the
prepuce, an unguent is applied, the cure is ready, then is he at liberty to use
his body, but some in way of pride have four or five bells, which harmoniously
resound their melody in the streets, and preserve them there of purpose,
as well for ornament, as titulation in venerious exercises.

Moreover, (which is pity) a Virgin here, at Virgins years, is resembled to
a black Swanne: in regard at very green years, they guie the too forward may
dens a virulent potion, which being drunk, by its efficacious power or diste^^^
their (...) to such a capacity, that bells and all may find too easle entrance,
and which is as bad (dull memory compels me write it) the worden are not
ashamed here (the easier to illure the men from Sodomitry) to (...) in those
parts) into their middles, where with a fine (...) they are covered, for though
the loins are girded with a dainty I^wne, yet (...) device, it is (...) made
to open, that as they go along, the least air gives all to all men's immodest
ve^wes, (...) those parts, which every modest eye most scomes, each thought
more hates to see and think upon.

The boys are foolish too, they paint themselves from top to toe with a
coeruleall color, which cannot be washed off, till time prove coadjutor to him
in it, the ordinary trick of cutting and flashing their skin, they excel in,
which (contrary to their assertion) rather breeds horror, and admiration, than
delight and affectation in the beholders.

The Priests here as in Pegu, and termed Tullapoi, they every (...) day in the
open market, (...) mind of their charity. Upon those day (...) arise
rightearly and go through all the streets in the City, w^th^^ Copper Bafon in
their hands, on which they beat aloude, thereby giving notice of th^i^ intent
to preach (but the Abdals in Persta ^inde a great hoine like a Sow-gelder) in
their Sermons aduising them to lone one another, and to forbear
bloud-shedding, etc. These Tallapois houses are in trees, to secure them from
the Tygres. They eat once a day, are clothed with a Robe of a red and black
color (but the Abdals in Pe^siae use a sheeps skin, with the hair upon it)
they have no hair (...) any part of their body, they lead an austete but
hypocritical life and are outwardly seeming chaste, So are the Abdals in Persia
twixt whom because I see such vnisornitie. I the better call to mind what past
twixt me and one of them near old Persae-polis, which was thus. As I was
musing one euenieng our Garden their (which wit^ Cypress and other trees was
like a Wilderness) their came toward me one of these seemingly deuost Abdals,
in his sheeps skin and horn about his neck and barefooted, espying me, he
blessed himself and suddenly began to mutter his prayer to Mahomet with fervent
ardencie, but seeing me not move, he came unto me and prayed for me, to
requite his love I proffered him some wine which he (contrary to his Law)
tasted of, and liking it, bid me fill his horn, I did so, and he bedlam-like,
made but one draught of it, then gravely elating his eyes, hands and one leg,
he cried out to Mortis Ally his Propher, in the Arabian tongue, and with a low
Sallam, he bid me Adeiu, but by and by he came again, and pointed to one end
of the Gatden, where covertly I espied three ma^dens, to whom he willed me go
(...) not a little wondering at him, I denied him, bating his ^ibaldry and
fearing his rillany departe^^ such are the Tallapois of whom I speak now.

They make vows in their sickness unto the Devil, whom they account sole
author of evil, yet dar^^ not displease him. In their vows they build a small
Altar before the Devil, on which they strew flesh and flowers, thereby (for
that season) appeasing his implacoble malice. And many times, they bring sweet
music to him, with which, and their harmonious voices they chaunt most
pleasantly, thereby to delight his melancholy. Each year they choose a man to
look unto him, and to safeguard the Devil, and he is rightly termed the Devils
Guardian.

Others so soon as Aurona she was her golden tra^mols, fill a basket with Rice
and other meats, and lighting a (...), they swlloly run through the streets,
to give their Devil his breakfast, be ^^^ching him to do them no mischief
that day. But, if by chance a Dog came by, they give him the offered meats,
being persuade he came there by instinct of the Devil.

A description of Patania.
PAtania is a Town in the gulf of Bengala extra Gangem, about eight degrees
toward the Antarctique, from the Equinoctial. The people are very black and
go naked in all parts, save a small wreath upon their heads, and a lung or
cover to conceal their privy members: have Sandals for their feet, they are
very humane and indulgent unto strangers. Mahomet has a little made himself
famous among them, but the greatest part are Heathens and extreme Idolaters.

This City is betwixt the I Will Malacca and Syam, subject to a King or Queen,
who live and fight with great state and power of men and Elephants, which they
use as well in war as triumphs.

They hate and punish Adultery very sore (howbeit there are great multitudes of
Whoores among them) and suffer none to see their Wives except of Kindred. They
take great delight in eating Betele and Opium, and love Arack (or strong
liquour exceedingly) they usually eat in plates of Gold, and frequently speak
three languages, the Malay, Syam, and that of China. Their writing differs, one
which is the Malay from the right hand to the left, as the Hebrews, another
which is the Syam, from the left to the right, as we, a third which is the
China, right down, and bending to way, all very usual and affected by the
darefull.

In the City are twelve pieces of great (...) of brass, one of which is six
and twenty foot long, very well proportioned in board ^^^quaring.

They come (...) from another in (...)

The (...) allows them (...) from one to (...) them.

Yet such is the it good opinion of Strangers, Travelers of what Nation color
or Religion soewer, (...) first (...) many (...) of note repair unto him, and
bring along with them their young Daughters or (...) and friendly (...) them
their to his desires. First (...) a little money* which done, the foolish made
goes with him to his house, whore (...) (...) performs all Ceremonies at bed
and board (...). And at the end of the fixed time goes home with her wages,
well contented, and (...) taken as a credit then infamy for her, no way
preventing, but rather furthering her future marriage.

But note, that during this time the stranger must beware he be not amorous
elsewhere for (...) at home will seek to poison him. Contrary he, if he find
defect in her may ^igorously tortute her. This Ceremony though to Libidinists
may seem mirthfull and charitable, yet a perfect Christian values his
salvation at a higher rate, (...) by a Deuillish (...) with Pagan beauties or
forceties to (...) his dear soul into endless tortures and perdition.

A description of Macassar, or the Celebes.
MAcassar is an Island and Citle, a little South of the Equator, and not far
from the I Will Sum^tra, or Taprobane, which cuts the Line.

The I Will is fruitful, but very hot, the people of a duskie color, but
inwardly much more ugly as being too much ensnared with Mahomets Religion.

They are beneuolent and bold in their behavior, admit Poligamy, and being
dead like all Mahometans, are laid with their heads toward Meccha, near which
at Medina is the Pseudo-prophets Sepulcher.

They we are a small linen roll about their heads, a thin cloth about their
middles, go naked elsewhere. The women are neatly adorned with Bracelets,
Rings and other things, and well perfumed, they wear a large long cawle or
sack, liknet-worke, which as a garment hides them wholly, and is so capacious
that two more may creep into it, as witness the use of it, that as a stranger
(not strange enough to vice) goes in the streets, meets one, shows her a piece
of Coigne, which without Interpreter speaks her wished language. She agrees,
and receives him (hell-like) into her sack, or net, wherein they keep like
Mars and Venus, and pity it is they have few Vulcons.

They drink Tobacco exceedingly, and such is their base art in horrid venom,
that they can drink in a poisoned pipe with a stranger, kill him, and hurt not
herself (it is very good to hate it in those parts, to avoid the Dilemma.)

But which is rarest, yet very true, they all use long Canes (they call them
Sempitans) like our shooting Trunkes, out of which they can blow a little
pricking-piercing quill, which, if it draw the least drop of blood in any part
of that body, twill make him (though the strongest and ablest man living) die
immediately. Some poisons operate in an hour, others in a moment, all the
wounded body (by the virulent strength of the venom) in that small space rots
and consumes most rufully and not without much wonder.

A description of Sumatra.
SVmatra is an I Will right under the Aequinoctiall Line, anciently called
Taprobane, and by some taken to be Ophir, whence King Salomons Navy from
Ezion-geber or the Sues at the Red Seas vpmost channel, in three years made a
return not without wealth and triumph. It Is now a place where many several
Kings sway their Seepters, the greatest is he of Acheen, who as he precedes the
rest in state, wealth and power, so is he foremost in tyranny, exaction and
cruel resolutions. He has many Eliphant^ with whose Majesty he greatly
delights himself, the Rivers abounds with Crocodiles (whom Seamen improperly
call Alligators) they grow from a small Egg to five and twenty foot in
length, their condition is subtle (such their bloody tears when they have
devoured a man p^oue them for) cruel and yet valiant.

The Talupoi, their Flameus by Magique sp^ls (the Devils virtue) can command
them at their pleasure.

The people are in greatest number Mahometans, observe like Rites and
Ceremonies with the Indians, but exceed them in giving divine honor to
Aetheriall bodies, supposing them Deities so transcendent, pure and virtuous,
that they merit no small repute and adoration with the holiest.

The women here (not differing from all other parts of the Pagan World) are
much unchaste, heat of Phoebus prouokes them more then Thunder can assuage,
both which here rage terribly. They marry at tender years, are strictly looked
to by their galled Husbands, and though living in excessive slavery, they
endure it patiently, supposing that all other women in remoter Countries taste
like thraldom.

Their color is quite contrary to white, which darkness they think without
apparel obnubilates their nakedness. The women are for courage, Amazonian,
and of such account with their tyrannique Lords, that the safeguard of their
bodies (...) committed sometimes to their care, often to their valors, but mo^^
to enjoy perpetually their company. For society with that sex, is much lusted
after by all inflamed Asiatiques.

A description of Poligundee.
Near to Sumatra is Poligundea, an I Will where not long ago the English
Merchants intended a Plantation, bringing thither all such necessaries, an
action of that nature and been fit required. But whether the heat (which is
there extreme) whether immoderate Venus, or other laborious exercises overthrew
them, who knows it. This is sure, that the Flux and other diseases so troubled
them that they died in abundance. So that this Monopoly, became of no price nor
reckoning in very small space, adding no alteration to the Island, save a new
denomination, kill abundance.

A description of Iaua Mayor.
IAua is an I Will both great and famous, declining seven degrees from the
Equator toward the Antarctique Pole, is judged to stand in the gulf of
Bengala, wherein the holy (so reputed) Ganges loses himself after three
thousand miles descent from Scythia or Sarmatia.

In it are many Kings, most of which are tributary to the Emperor entitled
Mattaran, next whom in honor is the Viceroy of Bantam, whose honorable title
is called Pengran, and in authority of Arms precedes all other Substitutes or
Deputies within that I Will, for at our being in these parts, with a great and
sudden Army he entered Iackatra, a Town re-edified by the Dutch, and called
Batauia, a second Sodom.

In which ecstasy the English Factors fled to Bantam, not thirty miles thence,
where they live in more security and account, then formerly in Iackatra.
Amboyna too apparently proves the horrid villainy and hate, they bear an
Englishman, where with safety they can shadow their bloody cruelties though
acted upon them, by whom they have been nourisht in their infancy, and live
yet subsisting.

Iana is ouall, and in circuit not much inferior unto England, abounds with
sundry sorts of Aromatique Spices, of which store, Pepper is their best and
most seasable merchandise.

The Inhabitants are for the greater (not better) part Mahometans, poligamy
delights them, and Cock-fighting and Rams affect them in no less measure.

Their color is like night (if black, may properly be called a color) such is
their hair and actions, black, dismal, strong, impatient and subtle. Tygres
and they at hap-hazard, destroy each other.

Their apparel is not costly, their black-long-shag-curld heads, are wrapped
about with valuable Tulipants, the rest, naked unto the waste, where they gird
themselves with a parti-colored mantle, reaching to the knee or a little lower.

They are strong limbed, and expert swimmers, their best weapon is a Faulchion,
or Crest, with which in desperate fights, they defend, and offend too readily.

They have a custom, a condemned man may take his flight, from an appointed
place, his Crest in his hand, striking at his opposers, through whom if he can
pass, he saues himself, which is but seldom.

The King of Tuban here in times past was potent.

I will insert some words of the Malayan Tongue spoken in many Islands of the
Orient, especially in Malacca, Iaua, Sumatra, Macassar, and indeed no less
general then the Arabique, Latin and Sclauonian are in other Kingdoms.

The Malayan Tongue.
English. Malay.
MY father, Beta-babpa. A brother, Addal-ally. A sister, Adde-Paparas. An
Uncle, Niana. A youth, Monda. A boy, Catsyon. An infant, Buda. A Priest, Cadda.
A Merchant, Fetor. A man, Oran. A woman, Paran-poan. A Nobleman, Orankay. A
Chyrurgion, Goetheing. An Iron-smith, Goada. A friend, Marty-lowty. A
Muske-nut, Palla. A Muske-cat, Gatto Dalgalia. A Dog, Hanghee. A sort of
Crabs, Horra. A Hen, Ayam. A Ducke, Bebee. An Elephant, Catgha. A Goat, Carbow.
An Ox or Buffle, Camb^. A Lamb, Domba. A Bird, Borron. A stone, Batu. A Cap
or Turbant, Cayo. A ship, Capall. A Ring, Chinsim. A shoe, Upon. A Wimble,
Alforees. A Sword, Ita, or Padang. A Knife, Pieson. A Boat, Praw. A Boat, Paca
Suyra. A warm thing, Penas. A Lamp, Pulita. A Coat, Nassee. A Needle,
Naroen. A Gun, Bedyll. A barrel of a Gun, Sombo-bedyl. A custom, Negry. A
King, Rutgee. A Lord, Queay. A Iauelin, Tomba. A shield, Saluack. A
Looking-glass, Sarmi. A Sow, Sabi A hand, Tanga. A beard, Tianga. A command,
Tsuyka. A year, Tauwa. A day, Aris. A rope, Tali. Fruit, Tacat. A foot,
Backie. A marriage-maker, Coemod^. Copper, Tambagle Lead, Tyma. Iron, Negle.
Glass, Lora. Ink, Mangsy. Blood, Darno. Merchandise, Dyman^. Pepper, Lada.
Lignum Aloes, Garro. Cloves, Chocho. Sweet Gummes, Daringo. Sweet Spices,
Dingyn. Cynamome, Cajumayns. Ginger, Alia. Mace, Bengo. Tamarind, Assa. Rice,
Brass. Chalk, Capier. Nuts, Calappen. Salt, Garram, or Matary. Flesh Lalier.
Oil, Nuagia. Gold, Maz. Silver, Peca, or Salacha. Money, Sarsi. Arack,
Pinanga. Eggs, Teloor. Mustard seed, Sajani. A fish, Ican. Water, Eyer. A
Water-pot, Laud. The Head, Capell. The Eyes, Martic. The Neck, Goulon. The
Teeth, Auton. The Eyelids, Alys. A Tongue, Ilatt. The Lips, Lambider. Ears,
Talinga. A back and shoulder, Balacca baon. An Arm, Backeyen. The Fingers,
Iary-laree. A Foot, Backie. The Belly, Penot. The privy part, Perot. A Toe,
Goumo. An Herb, Oberbedil, or Lancuas. Death, Mattu. Night, Malam. To stretch
out, Dusta. To remember, Engat. An Interpreter, Iorbissa. A Book, Naymoda.
Better, Parma. Great, Bazaer. Paper, Cartas. Quils, Cazamp. Plates, Pienig. To
eat, Makan. Give place, Lalan. To choose, Damare. Come ye, Maree. Regard ye,
Nanthy. Friendship, Pondarra. To live, Iagaua. Let pass, Ganga. Near hand,
Gila. It is, Dalan. Require it, Mynta. Go ye, Pegi. We, Dep. Ye, (...)
She, Dya. It is found, Botonvum. To beat one another, Baccalayo. To pay,
Chyny. What say you, Abba-katt^. To give, Berui. To ashame, Malon. To arise,
Passai. Early, Pagi. Yesterday, Bulmari. The other day, Bulmari-dula. I have,
Ada. To buy, Bilby. Strong, Cras. Heavy, Brat. To destroy, Ilan. We will go,
Maree. I see, Green. Scarlet-cloth, Facca lata miera. To be silent, Dyem. To
observe, Doduer. These, Itouven. To gain, Menang. To live, Iagana. A Book,
Katab. Sunday, Ionmaheet. That couers the head, Kokodang. Where is it,
Manauten. Leave it, Iamgemast. To poison, Ampo. To burn, Baccar. Bring back,
Combali. Fire, Api. To kill, Benue. Needles, Caluenetten. Bags, Corni.
Merchandise, Bayick. A Bed, Bantell. Sloth, Checho. How much, Bar appe Itu.
Take it, Ambell. What Is done, Bigimana. Hard Wax, Caju-^^cta. Now, Baca-baren.
To swear, Sempa. To help, Touloug. To sell, Iouwall. To do, Bretoon.
Melancholy, Chinta. Is he not here Bees. To know, Kyunall. Well done, Soosa. I
understand not, Tyeda taw. To us, Quia bota. Woe, Saya. A good day, Tabea. To
let blood, Bewangdarner. Not good, Tieda-bayck. Betimes, Ysouck. Give thanks,
Tarrima, Casse. Hair, Ramboyet. To die, Bantaren. I am sick, Bite-secata. To
question, Betangia. I care, Tage. I have not, Tyeda-da. I desire not,
Tyeda-^aw. All, Samoanga To spin, Tyeda. Little, Kitchill. Farewell, Tyngall.
The people in Iaua call these thus, somewhat differing from the Malay.
English. Iauan.
PEpper, Syhang. Mace, Massa. Sweet Nuts, Pall^. Cloves, Syanck. Water, Eyer,
or Baya. Silver, Salorcka* A Royal of eight, Serpy. Fish, Iuack. Champions,
Crissen. A Ship, Capell^. English. Iauan. It is the least, Courang. A great
torment, Bedil besar. A Gun, Py^sil. Meat, Mackan. Paper, Cartaes. Wine,
Arack. A Sow, Sieleng. An Ox, Alomba. Christians, Vrangy. Strangers, Oranleya.
These are the numbers in the Malayan Speech.
English. Malay.
ONe, Satu Two, Dua. Three, Tiga. Four, Enpat. Five, Lyma. Six, Nam. Seven,
Tousiou. Eight, De lappan. Nine, Sambalan. Ten, Sapola. Eleven, Sabalas.
Twelve, Dua-balas. Thirteen, Tiga-balas. Fourteen, Enpat-balas. Fifteen,
Lyma-balas. Sixteen, Nam-balas. Seventeen, Toufiou-balas. Eighteen, De
lappan-balas. Nineteen, Sambalam-balas. Twenty, Dua-pola. Twenty one,
Dua-pola-satu. Twenty two, Dua pola-dua. Twenty three, Dua pola-tiga twenty
four, Dua pola-enpat Twenty five, Dua pola-lyma, etc.
If I should speak of Iapan or China, I should ouerslip a thousand lies, and
go but by relation.

A Flemming in my company told me this, that the Iaponian Emperor, usually
resides at Meacco, in which City is a great (...), or Statue of gilded Copper,
to which they pray, and by th^^ and other things declare themselves extreme
Idolaters. To extenuate the bulk of this their Pagod, they place him sitting,
his chair is eighty four foot broad, and seventy high: his head so notable
that without trouble there upon may stand fifteen men, his body may be known
by his proportlonable thumb, forty inches about, Geometrically measured.

The City has seventy Temples, in one of which are set three thousand three
hundred thirty three gilded Idols. The I Will (if it be one) has many poor
Christians in it. The form of their executions are upon crucif^tes, in which
sort very lately five thousand have at one time suffered.

Of China.
CHina exceeds the limit of Travelers, it is by common vote, reputed the
greatest Empire in the Orient, chalenging no less circuit then eight thousand
miles. We call it China, from Synarum or Chinarum Regio, they Tabenzoes and
Sanglians.

The inhabitants are numbered by some presuming Suppositist above sixty
millions: have nine Cities, the least containing fifty thousand Families, of
which their heavenly City Quinza is called the Metropolis, in old times a
hundred miles about, now not much lessened. Next which is Pazquin where the
King himself is commonly resident.

That wall built (against the Tartars by Zaintzon their one hundred and
seventeenth Monarch) nine hundred miles long of brass and stone, is of no
small wonder.

These people are crafty Merchants, but bad Warriors. They pretend their own
Country and speech, for the anclentest through all the World, and repute all
matters of excellency and knowledge amongst other Nations, deducted and
borrowed from their inventions. They challenge the first art of Printing and
invention of Guns, and say the virtue of the Adamant was first by them
discovered, howbeit to this day they have but eight points unto their Compass,
except very lately taught them by some Christians.

They say the World is above a hundred thousand years old after their
Chronologies, and accordingly derive a Pedigree and tell of wonders done
nin^tie thousand years before Adams Creation.

They are great Idolaters, subtle and cowardly, their color rawny, their
chins, holding five or six long hairs apeece.

They are tulipanted about their heads, their other habit not much differing
from the civil Indians.

They are facetious, given to Epicurisme, and delight in many but small dishes,
the meat they take and eat with two sticks, hating with their fingers to
touch their mouths. Venery allures them mightily, they delight much in
May-games and such devices, and generally love play: so that at Passage, or In
and In, they will hazard all their worth, themselves, wives, children and other
substance.

They have many Mosques beautified with as many richly gilded Idols, to which
they act as sundry ^orts of Superstition.

They have among them many young youths, condecorated with propheticke
gestures, who, when many are together, go unto the Pagod, and sit demurely on
the ground, not much distant from the Idol, gravely and right soberly do
these spectators note the Antique gestures of these Vaticinating Boys, who
with their longspread hair fall flat before the Idol.

In this their Ecstasy, the lookers on incessantly warble out soft trembling
Music, till such time as the boys arise, who anon (as from a divine trance)
raise themselves and lie down again some what more leasurely, then suddenly
in great have and fear with ghastly amazed looks, vibrate a ready sword
against the beholders. The people submissiuely bow unto the Idol, till the
boys speak unto them some ingenious invented matter, they harken, believe,
and then depart well satisfied.

Pectoribus mores tot sunt, quot in Orb figurae,
Qui sapit, inumeris moribus aptus erit.
Man's heart commands as many ways, as stars find resting places,
Who travels must disguise himself each way with Ianus faces.
Upon the seventh of June, sailing from these parts we descryed land bearing
from us North North-west, and next morn knew it to be the I Will called Dygarroys,
under twenty degrees South latitude, from which I Will to Mauritius, the course
is West North-west, and distant ninety leagues, or two hundred and seventy
English miles or thereabout.

This I Will was first discovered by the Portugal, as Mariners report, howbeit
the name comes fitly from the Welsh word Dygarad, or desolate.

^Tis full of Wood, Tortoises, Dodoes and wild-fowle, but no humane
inhabitants, it gives it self to our view, not very high, six leagues
distant, and to the South-west end are long shoales and dangerous.

Thence, after some patience and benefit of good Winds, we arrived at the
Mauritius, a place not unworthy the remembrance, or to be spoken of.

A description of Mauritius.
MAuritius is an I Will situate within the burning Zone close by the Tropic of
Capricorn, but in what part of the World it is questionable, participating
as well in part with America, in respect of the immense South Ocean, as bending
toward the Asiatique Seas from India and Iaua. But most properly adjoining the
great I Will Madagascar, from which it is distant two hundred leagues, or six
hundred English miles, whereby I judge it placed in the Afri. que Seas, and
thereby incorporated into Afrique. But how ever doubtful of what part of the
three it is, of this I nothing doubt, that for variety of Gods temporal
blessings, no part of the Universe obscures it. For what I affirm, I do it
not by fame, but being an eyewitness in part, and partly expert in the rest,
I may affirm the whole, scarce to be paralellized.

Its latitude twenty degrees five minutes, longitude from the Meridian of Cape
Comrein, twenty degrees, twenty minutes, Variation, twenty four degrees
nineteen minutes.

It first was discovered by the Portugals, who (not unlike a second Adam,
denominating all new places and things) gave it the name of Do-Cerne, by some
Cygnaea, but since by the Hollanders, Mauritius; either from the name of Grave
Maurice, or more likely by the shipwreck of a Dutch Ship called the Mauritius,
that laid her bones here, dead through rottenness.

It is an I Will abounding with all good things requisite for man's use, and
requireable for the Zone, it is placed in, the Land is high and mountainous,
chiefly where it beholds the Sea. The compass or circuit of the I Will about a
hundred miles. The greatest extent declining from North-east to South-west: it
procreates a healthy nourishing air, the flourishing fragrant trees, as well
lenifying the burning heat, when Phoebus embraces the Goat, as helped by the
sweet mollifying breath of the Noto-Zephirus, such time as Sol adheres to
Cancer: And as that body is best compounded that partakes indifferently of all
the Elements, which either super-abounding, or wanting begets defect. So to be
blessed in all, this place is abortiue in none.

For water is here in plenty, nor is its goodness, and sweetness, excelled by
plenty, but as it gently drils it self from the high Rocks, so it trickles
down the Valleys, as it were besotted at the delightful murmr it lives
in, and in some places spreads Meanders, till too secure in his own mildness,
he is ingulpht into the all-deuouring Ocean.

It is abounding in diverse sorts of trees, which are as plentiful, some good
for timber, other for food, all for use, here is store of box trees, whose
growth and greenness, afford profit and delight, here is also great store of
Ebony both black, red, white, and yellow, the tree is outwardly covered with
barque, but within digests her Ebony: the best is cole black, and good for
Mathematical Instruments, playing Tables, Bowls, etc.

And as it is plentiful in all things, so no one thing exceeds the wood, which
is in so great quantity, that I could hardly procure passage. But the most
beneficial tree to Travelers is the Palmeto* it grows like the Date or
Coco-tree, save that her boughs are more large and round. The tree is long,
straight and very soft* having no leaves, boughs or branches, save at the top*
which are but few, yet those good to cover Tents, or to shelter us from the
raines, at the top whereof is a soft pith, in which consists the soul and
vegetative virtue of that tree, which cut out, the tree expires, its taste is
like a good sweet Nuts kernel, and boyld like Cabbage, but the best commodity
is the Wine issuing from the tree, which is sweet, pleasant and nourishing as
Muskadine or Alligant, thus we drink it: we come to a place where two or
three trees grow together, and with a Hatchet cut a small hole in every tree,
into which immediately effudes the liquour, so that suddenly all the holes I cut
are full, then with a cane or quill we suck the Wine first out of one tree,
and then the other, and still one trees hole is full again by that time we had
drunk out of the two other, thus in three trees in less then one hour three
of us bowzed our bellies full. This Palmeto Wine, is cold in digestion, purges
the belly and helps obstructions, and let stand, in two days becomes good
Vinegar.



Again, such is the life and pleasure of this Ambrosia, that (as I have noted)
we were no sooner gone from the trees, though scarce three yards, but diverse
Birds as Parrats (which here are store of) Kites and Lizards (of whom here be
plenty, and those not a little curious) would speed to suck the distilling
Nectar.

Diverse other trees here be, strange both in shape and nature, one out of
curiosity I tasted of, which for half an hour so malignantly bit and wronged
my mouth and lips, as if Vitrioll and Sulphur had been imbrued. This tree
procreates nothing that is green or good, is wholly naked, without leaf or
flower, and the body very soft and penetrable, in so much that I think a
Mukset bullet would wel-nigh pierce through a tree of five yards circuit, whose
softness, one of those invited me to write my name in, which my Knife as
easily performed, as with a stick you may do in sand.

Another tree bears a codfull of sharp prickles, wherein are hid a round
fruit like a Doves Egg, which broken has in it a kernel, in taste, not unlike
an Acorne, but in digestion, if not the same, little better then poison.

Other trees have fruits like Pine-apples, like Arthichokes, like Plummes,
others like Nuts and Berries, but what virtue, the fruits or names, or trees
do challenge, I must plead ignorance. This Jobserued that of these, what the
Birds eat not, the Tortoyses do, and what they refuse, the Swine devour, so
that by one or other all is tasted of.

And again, as the I Will is prodigal in her water and wood, so she corresponds
in what else a fruitful mother labors to be excellent in, not only boasting
in that variety of feathered creatures, but in the rareness of that variety,
which if run over briefly, yet may be thought too tedious, I fear by some on
such a subject.

First, here and here only and in Dygarroys, is generated the Dodo, which for
shape and rareness may Antigonize the Phoenix of Arabia, her body is round and
fat, few weigh less then fifty pound* are reputed of more for wonder then
food, greasy stomachs may seek after them, but to the delicate, they are
offensive and of no nourishment.

Her visage darts forth melancholy, as sensible of Natures injury, in framing
so great a body, to be guided with complementall wings, so small and impotent,
that they serve only to prove her Bird^*

The half of her head is naked, seeming covered with a fine veil, her bill is
crooked downwards, in midst is the thrill, from which part to the end it is of a
light green, mixed with a pale yellow tincture; her eyes are small, and like to
Diamonds round and rolling: her clothing downy feathers, her train three small
plumes short and inproportionable, her legs suting to her body, her pounces
sharp, her appetite strong and greedy, Stones and Jron are digested, which
description, will better be conceived in her representation.



In this I Will are sundry other Birds, as Goshawkes, Hobbies, Parrats, Reer-mice,
or Bats so large as Goshawkes, Passe-flemingoes, Geese, Powts, Swallows,
Kites, Black-birds, Sparrowes, Robbins, Herons (white and beautiful) Cacatoes
(Birds like Parrats, fierce, and indomitable: and may properly be so called
from the Greek (...) proceeding from an evil egg) Bitters, Hens and such
like, which I name, for some men's better information.

Fishes are in huge numbers here, fresh and Seafish, of which the Mannatee or
Cow-fish for taste and shape can pose both feeders and beholders, who because
using the shore; on which she creepes upon her paps, tastes like Veale, though
not so delicate. Captain Euans having struck one with a Fiz-gig lept upon her,
and with his Dagget after fifty wounds, got conquest over her. He bought it
dearly, for she so crushed him with her tail, that he spit blood until he
died, being three weeks after. The head of this Monster is like an Elephant,
some say a Cow, that's no small difference, her eyes small, body three yards
long and one broad, her finnes so little that they are like the Dodoes wings,
more to look at, then for execution, it is a gentle fish unmoved, and some say
affects the visage of a man exceedingly, yea have succored some that were
wounded and like to perish, more charitable and merciful then reuengfull man.

In his head is a stone which being pownded, and put in wine, is very
sovereign for the Stone and Collicke, that is of more value then his other
six, which yet to him are far more useful.

If I name what fish we took, twill help my memory. One speckled fish the
Seamen fed upon unwarily, and for its naughtiness is called the poison fish,
it is shaped like a Tench, but meazled, the rest are Breame, Tench, Trowte, Eeles
(excessive great) Crabs, Lobsters, Oysters, Caualloes, Porpiece, Grampasse,
Whales, Bonetaes, Albycores, Flying Fish, Gar-fish, Rock-fish, Lympits,
Sharkes, Pikes, Skate, Crafish, Cuttlefish, Soles, Tortoyses, (in which I have
seen above a thousand Eggs, great and manducable) and Dolphins, with many
other, whose simpleness, give leave to the starued Traveler to banish famine
and hunger.

The I Will affoords us withal Goats, Hogs, Beeues, and Kine, land I ortoyses,
(so great that they will creep with two men's burdens, and serve more for
sport, then service or solemn Banquet) Rats and Monkeyes, all which becomes
food to such ships as anchor here. They were first brought hither by the
Portugal, who may truly say of those parts, as some before times of other.

Quae Regio in terris nostri non plena laboris. Though now for the English and
Dutch forces, they dare not rest there, nor own their firstlings.

The birds are so unused to tyrannicke people, that I have shot one Heron in
six, and killed them all one after another, the one not knowing or valuing the
others danger, but beget destruction to themselves, by condoling their late
dead associates.

The like for the fish, only the Goats are wary and have their sentinels.

The Hens in eating taste like parched Pigs, if you see a flock of twelve or
twenty, show them a red cloth, and with their utmost silly fury they will
altogether fly upon it, and if you strike down one; the rest are as good as
caught, not budging a jot till they be all destroyed.

The Bats, some case like Rabbets, though in my judgment, worse meat cannot
be tasted of. They sqweake and call one the other, in most offensive cries, and
hang in swarms upon the trees (by claws fixed to their wings) with their
heads downwards, they are faced like Monkeyes. Their Images upon the
Coco-trees, will speak best concerning their description.

One fish like to a Skate we caught, tailed like a Monkey, his eyes five
quarters asunder, his finnes ends four large yards, his mouth like a
Port-cullis, a creature rather made to wonder at, then feed upon.



One word of the soil it self, it is stony and troublesome toward the shore,
but within, fat, even and pleasant, full of shadowing trees, and drilling
Riuolets which give both deligh and taste to the eye and tongue (some few places
except) which either storming at the aspiring height of the adjacent
mountains, or proud in his own noise, discends so violently, that it makes
mere Cattaracts by its motion. Yet this fury adds to the benefit of the
earth, making it sweet and mellow, which otherwise would show too full of
stones and sandy.

At some times Amber-greese is found here, which whether coming from the
Whales sperme, Sea-froth, or other ways, I leave it to other satisfaction, for
there are several conjectures about it, here is Coral, white and lovely.
Tobacco is here also but whither by the labor of man or from Dame Nature, that
I know not certainly.

The I Will has no humane Inhabitants. These creatures that possess it, have it
on condition, to pay tribute (without exception) to such ships, as famine, or
foul weather force to anchor there.

Hence our journey led us homewards in five days sail descrying land, which
bore from us Southwest, and next day attained it, by its latitude, knowing it
for Englands-Forrest.

It Is exceeding high, full of wood, water, Birds, great Eeles, but without Hogs
or Goats, till our Captain bestowed some there now as we passed, it is in
compass fifty miles, has latitude from the Equator, twenty degrees fifty
five minutes, longitude from Mauritius one degree, five and twenty minutes, and
distant thence thirty seven leagues. Its Portugal name is Maskarenas.

Hence in seventy days more we arrived at Sancta Helena, an I Will in sixteen
degrees South latitude, in longitude from Soldania Bay twenty two degrees,
Variation of the Needle five degrees and some few minutes.



A description of Sancta Helena.
SAint Helena, was so denominated by Iuan de Noua, the Portugal, in regard he
first discovered it on that Saints day.

It is doubtful whether in adhere to America or Afrique, the vast Ocean
bellowing on both sides, and almost equally: yet I imagine she inclines more to
Afer, then Vespusi^^.

It Is is circuit thirty English miles, of that ascent and height, that it is often
inueloped with clouds, from whom she receives moisture to fatten her: and as
the land is very high, so the Sea at the brinke of this I Will is excessive deep,
and the ascent so immediate, that though the Sea beat fiercely on her, yet can
no ebb nor flow be well perceived there.

The water is sweet above, but running down and participating with the salt
Hills, tastes brackish at his fall into the Valleys which are but two and those
very small, having their appellations from a Lemmon-tree above, and a ruined
Chapel placed beneath built by the Spaniard, and delapidated by the Dutch.
Their has been a Village about it, lately depopulated from her Inhabitants, by
command from the Spanish King, for that it became an unlawful Magazin of
Seamens treasure, in turning and returning out of both the Indies, whereby he
lost both tribute and prerogative in apparent measure.

Monuments of antique beings nor other rarities can be found here. You see all,
if you view the ribs of an old Carrick, and some broken pieces of her Ordnance
left their against the owners good will or approbation: Goats and Hogs are the
now dwellers, who multiply in great abundance (and though unwillingly) afford
themselves to hungry and Sea-beaten passagers: It has store of Partrich and
Guinea Hens, all which were brought thither by the honest Portugal, who now
dare neither anchor there, nor own their labors, lest the English or
Flemmings question them.

The I Will is very even and delightful above, and gives a large prospect into
the Ocean. It Is a saying with the Seamen, a man there has his choice, whether
he will break his heart going up, or his neck coming down, either wish
bestowing more iocundity then comfort, and here we left buried our honest
Captain Andrew Euans.

After six days commorance in Saint Hellen, we sailed thence North-west, and
on the sixteenth of October, had latitude thirteen degrees fifty minutes, the
Sun then being in our Zenith, and in his progress into Capricorn, then
whose station he never travels farther South.

Three days after, we were by Ascension I Will, in seven degrees fifty minutes,
its compass is thirty miles, and from Saint Helens two hundred and forty
leagues or seven hundred and twenty English miles.

On the seven and twentieth we crossed the Equator, where we had too many*
Tornat^oes, and to nine degrees, had little other or beter weather then high
storms, (...) ra^nes and Iowd thunders* On the eleventh of No^ember, were
Parallel to the green Cape, and to the Gorgades, Isles famo^ed by Poets for
their Princess Gorgon and Meduza, slain by Pers^^, that made a defenside and
offenside shield of her Head, whose hairs being curled like to Snakes, made
them as stones by admiration of (...) beauty or horror, that did behold them.

And with a beneficial gale past by those parts of the Western World so
lately discovered, and much written of, the river of Ama^^nes, Guiae^, Florida,
and other parts of Mexico, (and into some of which I s^thence traveled) where
I will a little defranude the Reader from concluding with a few lines touching
the first Discouerer of th^se Countries.

A Discourse and proof that Madoc ap Owen Gwynedd first found out that
Continent now called America.
FOr albeit I have formerly in two lines vindlcated the honor of our Country,
lost in the greater part by protract of envious time, or want of wel-willers to
defend it. I shall here somewhat more largely show the ground of our
conjecture, which which with the most censorious may happily beget admittance,
if analogy of Language and authority of good Authors may find it, touching
the first Discouerer of the Western World, commonly (tho improperly) called
America, and to redeem an error formerly by a printed mistake of David for
Madoc, of whom we treat of.

We may entertain some lights out of authentic Story, and peradventure
whereby at first Madoc, and his brother David aduenture^ upon those
Discoueries, and since them, Colon, vesputius, Magellan, and others.

Plato may be brought into our first rank, in that writing Dialogue wise of
Tymaeus and Crici^s, he discourses of a great vast I Will, West of the Atlantique
Ocean, and denominates it from Mount Atlas, supposing the extendure, comparable
to Astique and Asia, joined together.

In the next place we may observe, some small conjectures out of those Books
of Rarities, writ two thousand years ago by Aristotle and Theophrastus,
wherein is set down a relation of some Merchants passing from the Straits of
Gibraltar, by tempest driven to the West where they at length found out an
Island uninhabited (which I imagine the Azores, many ages after discovered by
the Flemmings, and from them called the Flemmish Islands.)

And others that suppose Hanno the Carthaginian, light their after much peril
and industry, but though some would have the great I Will West from Carthage, yet
others as Pomponius Mela, and Lampridus affirm it was South where he
discovered, which granted, it could be no part of the West Indies, but some of
the Canarie Isles, Atlantiades, Saint Helena, or Ascension I Will, which though
they carry not the Epethite of great, yet in respect of the novelty, great
adventure and distance, may affect that style, Madagascar if he got so far
(as some are of opinion) will clear it. Only then it seems to me, that after
so long a Sea journey four mouths at least, and escape from such terrible
storms as constantly are noted in doubting the Cape of good Hope, he should
have added a little more, and found out the Red Sea (not distant very much) and
abreuiated his progress home, through calmer Seas and less difficulties every
way.

Seneca, Nero's Master in a Prophetique way, points out at the discovery:
Extant in his Medaean Tragedy. -- Venient annis
Secula seris, quibus Oceanus
Vincula rerum laxet, and ingens
Pateat tell us, Typhisque nouos
Detegat orbs, nec sit terris
-- Vltima Thule.


Mark well my speech: -- The time will one day be
(Guided by providence) when you shall see,
The liquid Ocean to enlarge her bounds;
And pay the earth a tribute of more grounds
In amplest measure: For the Sea-gods then
Shall show new Worlds and rarities to men.
And by his leave who all great acts commands.
See Thul less North by far, then other Lands.


To fulfill which, we must introduce our Madoc ap Owen Guynedd, who (to say
truth) was the first and sure discouerer of those Countries, his Plantations
and other Reasons proouing it, which I trust will not offend any, because
hurtful to none, that wish well to us or our Country, being withal a great
Honor buried in modern silence and rapt from us, by all the Christian World,
who unanimously accumulate the glory of it to the aforenamed Columbus. Americus
and many others.

And least any may think the person to whom we attribute a Trophee of so
great honor subject to invention or not worth a memory, I will first give you
a word of his Descent, with the occasion of his honorable Voyage and so go on.

His name was Madoc brother of Prince David, and son of that famous Owen
Gwyneth Prince of Wales, who for above thirty years governed their with great
wisdom, courage and good fortune: his Father was that Gruffith ap Conan that
did homage to William the Conqueror, at Saint David's for his Principallties in
Wales, and other places, and lineally descended from King Rodri-mawr, or
Rodericke the Great, who in many conflicts beat the Saxons, especially is
renowned by those overthrows he gave Burchred King of Mercia, Athelwolfe King
of the West Saxes, and Merick a valiant Prince amongst them in four several
Battles at Gwerthen, Bangelu, Monegid, and Anglesea, Anno Dom. 846.

Enough to satisfy the modest, touching the worth and value of this Madoc,
this added, that so soon as his Father Prince Owen was dead, a great and
implacable enmity arose between Iorwerth (surnamed Drwyndwn, by reason of his
broken nose) Howell and David sons of Owen.

Iorwerth (or Edward) was thought unworthy the Crown and dignity both in
respect of his deformity and simpleness, Howell was excluded by vote of the
common short in that his mother was an Irish woman, and David though inferior
in years, yet by marriage of Emma Plantaginet, sister to King Henry the
Second, by general applause was judged worthiest, and secured himself not
long time after, by that victory he got against his opposite Brethren, wherein
Howell was slain and Iorwerth escaped, by which Prince David became secure,
till Anno 1194. Llewellin ap Iorwerth recovered his Fathers right, helped by
those active Gentlemen, Howell up Meredith and Conan ap Own Guinedd, his near
Kinsmen.

During which turmoiles and unnatural strifes, the said Madoc loath to be an
Agent of Discord to either party, and seeing propositions of peace
ineffectuall, studies by all good means to avoid the knowledge of it, and
aims at some foreign place of ease and profit, neither discouraged by
improbabilities nor likely disasters.

These (no doubt) were causes moving Prince Madoc to this Heroicke Employment,
added by those foretelling Southsayes, before named, and which without question
were known unto this Madoc, who according to his dignity was instructed, in
several sorts of a^ and learning. And it may be he called to mind that
Prophetique Song made by that honorable Bardh or Poet Ambrose Teleyssen, who
flourished in the time of Aurelius Ambrosius, brother to Vther-pendragon,
called hither out of Armorica, by the distressed Britains, to revenge them
upon the uncivil Saxons in the year 490. after Christ. Teyleyssen in that
Song first reprooues the Clergy of Avarice, Pride, and Superstition (though
they boasted of a conversion made awhiles before by Augustine the Monk sent to
that end by Gregorit the Great.)

It seems ignorant that long before, our Countrymen had embraced Christ by the
preaching of Joseph of Arimathea and Zelotes in this manner.

Gwae'r offeiriad bid
Nys angreifftia gwyd
ac ny phregetha.
Gwae ny cheidw eygail
Ac of in Vigail
Ac nys areilia.
Gwae ny theidw ey ddeuaid
Rhae bleidhic, Rhufeniaid
A'i' ffon gnwppa.
Thus in English:
Woe be to that Priest yborne
That will not cleanly weed his corn
And preach his Charge among.
Woe be to that Shepherd I say,
That will not watch his Fold always
As to him does belong.
Woe be to him that does not keep,
From Romish Wolves his silly sheep
With staff and weapon strong.
And then goes on vaticinating,

Eu Nar a folant
Eu hiaith a godwant
Eu tir a gothlant
And gwyllt Wallia.
Vsque laudabunt Dominum creantem
Vsque seruabunt Idioma linguas
Aruaque amittent sua cuncta
Praeter Wallica rura.
Whiles Cambray's issue serve the Lord their Maker*
And with no other Language be partaker
So long, with glory they their own shall keep
Whiles other Nations in oblivion sleep.
Madoc ingeniously perusing the older illuminations and seeing in some things
the prophecy of this authentic Bardh, accomplished (for till they forgot God
no strangers infested them) employing his Patrimoniall Estate upon men, ships
and provision, scarce bidding farewell to Brother or Kindred, lest his
honorable designs by preposterous ceremony and complement (actions when
affected, sure remonstrances of shallow brains and vanity) might find lets or
discouragement to himself or servants, Anno 1170. he left his Country, and
after long sail and no less patience, blessed with some happy winds, at last
they discried land in the Gulf of Mexico, not far from Florida, a land
affoording health, air, gold, good water and plenty of Natures blessings, by
which Prince Madoc was ouer-ioyed and had reason to account his happy estate,
superior to that his brothers strove for, so eagerly emulating with ambitious
hate and blood each other, even for a little Territory, incomparable to that,
good destiny allotted him, being a vast and wealthy Kingdom, obtained in some
part without opposition, and able to satiate the most covetous. There he
planted, fortified some aduantagious places, left a hundred and twenty men to
finish what he had begun and returned home after some bad winds, guided by
supreme providence (his large compass) and the benefit the Pole-starre gave
him on the night. Gods prouidenc^ the best compass


When he was landed and had accounted his happy and miraculous Voyage, told the
hopes of succeeding Conquests, and other motives of persuasion and admiration,
these and the worth of Madoc himself drew so many willing minds and purses to
a return, that he attempted it with ten good Barques, loaded with all
necessary provisions, a matter of that consequence required. At his arrival
he found many of his Britains dead, caused by the Nati^es Villainy or
alteration of the Clime, which notwithstanding he digested patiently, and with
Edwell and Eneon his Brothers, bettered the first intentions, living with
content, and dying in no less distance from Heaven, then when at home,
unhappiest in this, that their own Nation forgot them quite, either judging
them lost, because never after hearing from them, or because their own Beings
were turned topsie turuy, by the fatal end of that last unhappy Prince
Lluellyn ap Gruffith (who married Elianor Daughter of Simon Mount fort Earl of
Leic^ster) slain at Buelht by Francton an Englishman, in base and cowardly
fashion, Anno Dom. 1282.

And though the Cambrian issue in the new found world may seem extinct, the
Language to this day used amongst those Canibals, together with their adoring
the Cross, using Beads, Relics of holy men and some other, noted in them of
Acusano, and other places testified by Franciscus Lonez, by Columbus and other
Spaniards at their first Discovery, points at our Madocs former being there,
being impossible these ceremonies should come amongst them without instruction.

For Ferdinando Curtez Ambassador and General for Ferdinando King of Spain,
confesses that Matezuma (second son of Antzol, and Father of Quabutymoc, last
King of Mexico) told him, upon demand how such venerable things came first
amongst them, that they had it by tradition that many years before, a strange
Nation lived amongst them, but whence derived or how named, he could not
satisfy, though by any indifferent man it may be granted, it could be no other
save Madoc, confirmed by the Records yet extant, writ by Cynuric ap Grono and
Guten Owen, and no less orthodoxall, by that language left by the Cambrians to
Birds, Rivers, Rocks, Beasts, and the like.

Some of which words are these Gwrando, signifying in the Cambrian speech to
give ear unto or hearken. Pen-gwyn, with us a white head, referd by the
Mexicans, to a Bird so called, and Rocks complying with that Idiom. Some
Promontories had like denominations, called so by the people to this day, tho
estranged and concealed by the Spaniard. Such are the Isles Corroeso. The Cape
of Brutaine or Britain. The flood, Gwyndowr or white-water, Bara bread, Mam
mother, Tate father, Dowr water, Bryd time, Bu or Buch a Cow, Clugar a
Heath-cocke, Llwynog a Fox, Wy an Egg, Calaf a Quill, Trwyn a Nose, Nef
Heaven; and the like then used: by which in my conceit, none save detracting
Opinionatists can justly oppose such worthy testimonies and proofs of what I
wish were generally allowed of. And if recital of Authors may beget more
credence, were refer the Reader to those Records writ two hundred years ago
and more, by Cynwric ap grono, Gutyn Owen who lived in King Edward the Fourths
time, Humphrey Lloydd, David Powell Sir John Price, Richard Hackluyt, Purchase,
Dauis and others Enough to the wel-willers of Truth and Justice, too much for
carping Zoylists, and such as take pleasure in sophistry and opposition.

This, no doubt, had it been so faithfully known and believed amongst
foreign and modern Writers as is merited, then Christophur Columbus (a man
in truth worthy and industrious) Americus Vespucius, Magellan, and many others
had not wholly carried along with them the immortal honor of that happy
enterprise, nor had Prince David and Madoc been defrauded of their claim into
those Countries, nor had the Pope nor Spaniard had that immediate interest
grounded upon their first Discovery as very many Jesuits and Statists have late
disputed for.

We allow no less (I dare say more) honor to Columbus then they or any other
can, but this withal. That this his Navigations succeeded Madoc ap Owens, three
hundred two and twenty years, and the advantage is this, he prosecuted his
intents in a happier Age, and when the World was more addicted to foreign
Employments, and abler by Navigations to attain with less peril, actions much
more difficult.

Columbus was borne in Cugureo, not far from Genoa, a man both modest and
expert in Sea affairs, his helps left him by a Pilot dying at his house,
soon after his return from those parts forced thither by storm and destiny,
and comparing those proofs with the conjectures of ancient and grave
Philosophers, and it may be not wholly ignorant of Madocs former being there
(for what Nation formerly knew not the Acts of Englishmen better than
themselves, else had not Pollidore Virgill (to our shame) undertook our
Chronology with Verstegan, alias Rowley, from both whom we suck too many
untruths and coniecturall testimonies.

Columbus armed with hopes and some assurances repaires to some Christian
Princes for his undertakers, King Henry the Seventh loving money too well, and
observing simplicity, in the Messingers delivery and looks (who unfortunately
had been detained prisoner by some Rascals in his passage hither) denied him
so that immediately upon the Kings refusal and the French Kings, his brother by
that time had drawn on King Ferdinand (though first against it, having his
hands full, ere he could utterly expel the Saracens, too long among them) so
that upon the commends of John Perez de Marchena, Rector of the Monastery of
Rabida, Colon was trusted with two small ships and two hundred men.

With which after sixty days sail after much patience, and no less ado to
quiet the discontented Spaniards, they descried land in some part of Mexico.
Infinitely ioying himself and them, and by this good luck deriuing no less
Gold unto the Spaniard, than all Europe enjoyed formerly, but how meanly this
worthy man was after that rewarded, I leave it to the Reader to satisfy
himself in others Writings concerning it.

Not long after Americus Vespucius (before his Oriental Nauigations) aduances
Southerly, where with small toil he found land enough (but part of that
Continent formerly discovered) to glut ambition, howbeit judging his labors
more excellent then the others, he denominates that vast and spacious Continent
from his own name, America, injuriously assumed and unwisely given him by
other Kingdoms, being that others had the glory of first finding it, and might
more justly have called it Madocya, Brittania, Colonia, or Columbina.

But we see by general assent Americus has got the honor of it, and thriues
better (tho deserving equally) then Bathillus the Poetaster, who thought to
have defrauded Virgill of his elaborate Poem, and there want not some (yet
those not envious) that wish his reward agreeable.

Magellan soon after sails yet more South, and passes that Fretum or strait,
with more reason called Magellan, a hundred others have since that gleaned
several additions of Titles and new names their distributed.

Only he that in truth most of all deserved it, Madoc, sleeps, ambitious of
quiet more then vainglory, yet those that love his memory will not pass by
such living Monuments of his deseruings (my own case at this present) without
some small testimony of their affections and zeal to worth and equity, and
leave it to a better Author, in a better method, to revive him clearlier.

I will lead you through no more extrauagancies, lest your entreated patience
turn into exoticke passion: being jealous I have mounted higher then can
become modesty and small desires, and in truth am no less desirous of home
(tired in a double Travail, by scor-Zones and surfer of presuming ignorance
which add nothing, but detract from better Notions.)

On the last of November, after much struggling with contrary winds and some
tempests, we got sight of the Azores known by other names, as the Western or
Flemmish Islands. In their Origin known best to Flemmings, though now subject
to a higher command, the Imperious Portugal. They are nine in number, of which
Tercaera is (if not greatest) most famous for a defensive War the Prior Don
Antonio, Titularie King of Portugal, made there against the insatiate and
inuading Spaniard, who finally got that and the rest of Don Antonioes
territories claymed by right of blood and conquest, as the Historian Cunestagio
in his union of the two Kingdoms treats of.

They are abounding, with no rich Commodities, their victual is small, Wine
bad, and water not very excellent. They afford much Oade, which has made them
most famous and best enriched them.

This added, that the old account of the first Meridian is transferd hither
from the Canaries, or Isles once Fortunate, for twixt Flores and Coruo, the
Needle finds no Variation, elsewhere save in that parallel increasing.

The other seven are these, Saint George, Saint Michael, Saint Mary, Fayall,
Pyco, Gratiosa, and Tercaera. Some of which I here tho vn-usefully demonstrate.



Leaving these, we entered the Spanish or Cantabrian Ocean, where thinking our
selves past all danger (such joy the sight of the Christian World and affinity
with our own Country enricht us with) when lo to show there is no constancy
nor trust in incertaine Seas and terrene pleasures, an horred three days
continued tempest (not without much fear and doubt) threw us upon Vshents
point in Brittany (a marittime part of France) and immediately again, when we
expected most danger, the weather favored us, and with a smiling gale
affoorded us in few watches, sight of our long-lookt-for Ithaca: And the more
desired, that these Relations might find acceptance from that most noble Lord
the Earl of Pembroke, Lord Steward (now with God) and my Lord of Powys, from
whose encouragements I affected Travail: which I cannot pass by without
acknowledgement.

To conclude, we came safe to an anchor in Plymouth Haven, where (not without
great cause) we gave God hearty thanks, for his former mercies and our
present safeties.

The End.
Stat sua cuique dies: breue and irreparabile tempus Omnibus est vitae, sed
famam extendere factis Hoc virtutis opus est:
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF SOME MATTERS contained in these Travails, for the
Readers better ease and direction.
A
ABbas, Emperor of Persia his Image, page 128. His cruelty in Hyrcania, p. 98
his receiving his Majesty's Ambassador, p. 97. his cruelty to the Georgians,
p. 81. his victories against the Turks, page 71. his severity to his
Ambassador, page 29. his speech concerning Nogdibeg, p. 124 his cruelty to
his son, p. 99. his tyranny to Emyrhamze-myrzey his elder brother, p. 89. his
descent from Mortis Haly, p. 167. His letter given to us, and titles of Honor,
page 128. His death, p. 127. Abbas-ebaut, a house of pleasure near the Caspian
Sea, belonging to the King, p. 96. Abrahim Bassa, a great Favorite to the
Grand Signior, p. 29. Acheen a City in Sumatra, p. 199 Aden, a Castle and Town
near Mocha, at the entrance into the red Sea, belonging to the Turks, p. 25.
Agray, the Moguls chief seat in India, first built by Bacchus, p. 30. Albania
spoken of, p. 68. Alexander the great his death, page 138. Alliauart a Town in
Hyrcania, page 93. Amadauad the Metropolis of Guzurat in India, and under the
great Mogull, p. 42. Amazonian women, p. 200. Amboyna, p. 201. Amnobaut a
pleasant Village in Persia, p. 66. Ambassador of Englands entrance into
Spahawn, p. 67. his entertainment at the Persian Court, p. 96. his death at
Cazbeen, p. 126. Aequinoctiall Circle, p. 7. Americus Vesputius taxed, p. 223
Angola, a Kingdom in Afrique, the man depicted and described, p. 9. Anthaeus,
a Giant and Tyrant slain by Hercules, p. 7. Antogil, Antabosta and Angoda,
three Towns in Madagascar, page 20 Anzigues, a men-eating Nation, page 10.
Arabique Language, page 43. 45. Araxis a River near Armenia, running into the
Caspian Sea, page 95. Arethusa, the daughter of Hesperus, p. 7. An Armenian
Christian in single combat, kills a famous Rebel, turns Mahumetan, and is
slain, p. 92. Armagun a Town in Chorman. dell, p. 190. Artaxerxes Emperor of
Persia, p. 137. and 132. Arbaces King of Persia, page 145. Assaph-kawn, an
Indian Duke is father in law to Curroon the now Mogul and brother to Normall
the last Empress, he plots the young Moguls destruction, the fall of his
sister the Empress, and her son Seriare only to advance Curroon, he is put
to flight by Mahabet-kawn, is reconciled unto him, sends for Curroon, murders
the Emperor and other Princes of the blood at Lahore, and proclaims his son
in law Curroon, Mogul: from p. 30. to 35. Astra-kan a Town on Volga, p. 105.
Assepose, a Village in Persia of imprisoned Christians, p. 66. Asharaffe a
City on the Caspian Sea, p. 94. Atropatia, Media so called, page 115 The
Authors sickness in Media, p. 168. The Azores depicted and described, p. 226.
B
BAbylon described, p. 136. Badur a King slain by Myramud the great Mogul, p.
42. Balsora a Town where Tygris and Euphrates empty themselves into the gulf
of Persia, p. 99. Bannarow a Carrauans-raw, pa. 51. and 55. Bannyans, or Indian
Merchants depicted and described, p. 37, 38. Bantam a Town in Iaua mayor, p.
201 Barbarian Pirat chased, p. 3. Bawt, a Parthian Village, p. 91 Bengala, p.
200. Benomotapa a maritime part of Afric, p. 8. Bertholomew de Dios, a
Discouerer of many parts of Afric, p. 8. Berry a small Persian Town, p. 54
Bizdebode a Parthian Village, p. 135 Blockee ( grand-sonne to Shaw-Zelym the
great Mogul) is proclaimed Emperor, is abused by Assaph Chawn, and his mother
in Law, is defended by Mahabet-chawn, fights with the Empress, and is murdered
trecherously at Lohore by his Guardian Assaph-chawn, from p. 33. to 35
Bonauista, one of the Hesperides, p. 6. Boobie a bird depicted, p. 11. Brazeel,
ibid. Braminy, Priests of India, and relics of the old Gymnosophists p. 36
Buzzar, a Market place, p. 46 Bynnyn, a sunburned part of Afric, p. 6.
C
CAmbaya described, p. 42. Canary Isles depicted and described, p. 3 Canoo, or
Indian Boat depicted, p. 25 Cape de Verde in Afric, page 6. Cape Roma, a Bay
in Saint Lawrence I Will, p. 19. Cape of good Hope depicted: the utmost Promontory
of Africa, in the Kingdom of Caffaria, p. 14. 17. Cape de Aguillas, and Cape
Falso, two points near Cape de buona speranza, p. 1^. Callicut, p. 188.
Cocheen, p. 187. Carrauans-raw depicted, p. 116. Cashan a City twixt Media and
Parthia, p. 134. Caspian Sea depicted, p. 105. Cazbeen, the Metropolis of
Media, p. 118. Casta a Province near Narsinga, p. 192. Castle-Iland depicted,
p. 22. Caucasus a mighty Mountain, p. 93. Caughton a Village in Persia, p. 56.
Chilmanor, or forty Towers depicted and described, p. 58. Chormandell a
Kingdom in East India, p 19. Cycala-Bassa, his parentage, turns Turk, is
beaten by the Prince of Persia, returns with eighty thousand men, and again
is vanquished, he flies into Georgia, thence with another Army inuades Persia,
and is put to flight, is out of credit with the Grand Signior, his house and
treasure are ransackt by the Ianizaries and Spahy in Constantinople, page 70.
and 71. Column of heads in Spahawn depicted, p. 90. Coin of the Indians, p.
41. Coin of the Persians, p. 151. Conny I Will near Cape of good Hope, p. 12.
Cowrestan a Town in Persia, p. 51. Constandell-Kawn, a Christian Prince of the
Georgians, becomes Mohammedan to beget preferment, p. 72. Murders his father,
brother, and other Nobles trecherously at a Banquet, p. 73. Crowns himself
King, inuades the Turks, and is assaulted in a dark night by his own men, p.
74 He flies and with an Army of Persians reenters Georgia, is confronted by
the Queen, who entreates for peace, he scorns her and it, and is slain by an
ambush, p. 78. Coom a fair City described, p. 133. Coco-tree, depicted and
described, p. 214. Columbus not the first Discouerer of West India, p. 217.
Crassus the wealthy Roman slain by the Parthians, p. 131. and 147. Curricurre
depicted, p. 194. Curroon, second son to Iangheer the great Mogul, rebels
against his Father, is disherited by his Fathers will, is called from Decanee
to Agray by Azaph-Kawn his Father in law, and in company of Mahabet-chawn goes
forward, conspires the Moguls death his brothers son, and Nephews, imprisons
the Empress Normall, is saluted Mogul, beheads many Noblemen, his wife dies
and he marries his own daughter, from p. 30. to 35. Cuzcuzar and Commeshaw,
two Towns in Persia, p. 66. Cut-bobbaw a Village in Persia, p. 56.
D
DAmoan a Town under Mount Taurus, p. 113. Daman a Town in India, near Goa,
and belonging to the Portugals, p. 27. Dabull a Town in India near Surat,
ibid. Deal a Town twixt Dover and Sandwich, where the Ships bound for India
use to ride, p. 2. Darius his death, p. 135 De-gardow a Town in Persia, p. 66.
Dew or Diu, a City upon Indus, p. 43. Discourse of the life and habit of the
Persians, p. 144. Discourse of the Religion of the Persians, p. 152. Discovery
of the West Indies, by Madoc ap Owen Gwynedd, p. 216. Dotho described and
depicted, p. 212. Dygarroys an I Will near Madagascar, p. 207.
E
ECkbatan or Taurys, the late Metropolis of Media described, p. 116. Edwall and
Eneon, sons of Prince Owen Gwyneth return with their brother Madoc, to
better their Plantation in America, p. 221. Emangally-Kawn the Duke of
Persae-polis or Syras, his titles, p. 62. Wealth, and how he entertained the
English Ambassador, p. 63. Englishmen wondered at, for their color by the
Sunburned Africans, p. 6. Englands Forest, p. 214. European Dogs sold each of
them for twenty Slaves, page 9. Ezion-Geber, or the Sues, a place in the Red
Sea, or the Gulf of Arabia, whereabout Moses and the Israelites passed over,
flying from the Egyptians, whence Salomons Ships went for Gold to Ophir,
page 199.
F
FAtyma, or Falernia, Mahomets only Daughter, (married to Mortis Aly or Hally
Caliph of Mecha, and King of Persia from whom is descended the now Emperor of
Persia) her Tomb, page 133 Farrabaut a City near the Caspian Sea, p. 105.
Fayall and Flores, two of the Flemmish Isles, p. 225. A Fish depicted, p. 214.
Fitz-Herbert a Captain, p. 13. Forte-uentura one of the Canarie Isles, p. 3.
Fuogo an I Will in Afric near Cape Verde, p. 6. Flying Fishes depicted, page
26. Funeral of the Indians, page 191.
G
GAnges a famous River in India, discending from Sarmatia, into the Bengalan
Gulf, p. 200. Gedrozia the old name of Ormus, p. 42. Gee^ a Village in
Hyrcania, p. 93. Gezz a Town in Parthia, page 92. Genealogy of the Emperor,
King and Callphs of Persia, page 161 Grand Canaria depicted and described, p.
3. Great Britain, a Compendium of the World for variety of Excellencies, p.
2. Gombroon or Gummeroon a City near Ormus in the Gulf of Persia, p. 48.
Gods of the Persians, page 59. Gowers the ancient Inhabitants of Persia their
Adorations and Funeral, p. 89. Gomaera one of the Canary Isles, p. 3. Goa a
Portugal City in East India, p. 26. Gratiosa one of the Western Isles, p.
225. Gulcundah, where the mines of Diamonds are, it is at some times tributary to
the Mogul, p. 30. Gundauee a Hill six leagues from Surat, p. 27. Guten Owen,
p. 224.
H
HAluary a Town in Hyrcania, p. 93. Henrico Prince of Spain, conquered the
Canarie Isles, page 3. Herberts Mount depicted, page 17. Hiero-cane an extreme
Tempest, p. 26. Hesperides Isles in the Atlanticke Ocean, p. 7. Hiero or Ferrum,
one of the Canary Isles blessed only in one Tree, p. 3. History of Sultan
Curroon, p. 30. History of the Georgians, p. 72. History of the King of
Taurus, p. 108. Hodgee-Nazar, an Armenian Prince meets the English Ambassador,
p. 67. Holy-port depicted and described, p. 3. Holy-crosse, an I Will in the
Atlanticke Seas, p. 8. Hony-shaw a famous Garden, p. 64. Hyrcania described and
depicted, p. 95.
I
IAarown a City in Persia, full of Jews, p. 53. Iacobo an I Will near Cape
Verde, p. 6. Iackatra, a strong Town in laua, built by the Dutch, p. 201.
Iamshet a Persian King first founder of Persae-polis, p. 59. Iaua major,
described and depicted, p. 200. Iangheer the great Mogul his Descent, I^wis: 53:
page 30. He banishes his Champion without cause, who takes him and his
Empress prisoners, p. 32. Falls sick at Cashmeer, and bequeathes the Empire to
his grandchilde Blockie, dies and is buried, p. 30. Iasques a Town and Haven
in the Gulf of Persia forty leagues, from Ormus, p. 45. Iberia or Colchos, p.
68. Idolatry of the Mallabars, page 188. Of the Seilonians, p. 190. Of the
Chormandalians, p. 192. Of the Peguans, Chinese, etc. page 95. etc. Ielphee a
City in Parthia, inhabited by Armenian Christians, p. 67. Ielphelynes
described, page 68. etc. John de Betancoeur Discouerer of the Canary Isles, p.
3. John de Noua, p. 216. Julian the Apostates death, p. 135.
K
KIng James his Mount, page 14. King Charles his Mount, page 17. Kings,
Emperors, and Caliphs of Persia sucessiuely, p. 161. Kishmee Castle, p. 45.
L
L Oanga a maritim Country in Africa, p. 8. Lolla-beg a Pagan Captain kills an
Apostate Christian, p. 93. Lancerota one of the Canarie Isles, page 3. Language
of the Persians, page 171. Of the Arabians, Of the Cape of good Hope, p. 16. Of
the Madagascar, 20. Of the Malayans, page 202. Larack an I Will near Ormuz, p.
46. Larr a City described, page 52. Larry-Iohn a Territory upon Taurus, p.
107. Lescarr the name of the Moguls Army, p. 32. Lodouic Grangier a Jesuit
instructs the ignorant Armenians, p. 69. Lopez-Gonzaluo a place in Afric,
inhabited by Negroes, p. 6. Lycinius Valerianus, a Roman Emperor made a slave
by the Persian King, p. 132.
M
MAcassar and Malacca, page 198. Madoc ap Owen Gwynedd Prince of Wales,
discouers the West Indies before Columbus three hundred years, his Parentage
and reasons of Discovery, p. 217. Madagascar a noble I Will depicted and
described, p. 20. Magellanus, p. 223. Magique people, p. 23. Mallabarr
described, p. ^87. Mahomet a Persian Merchant dies, p. 25. Mahomet-Ally-beg the
great Favorite beheaded, p. 104. Mahabet-chawn the Moguls Champion is banished
by the Empress Normals means, he raises an Army and takes her prisoner,
commands her to be beheaded, but is spared at the Moguls entreatie, he ioynes
with Curroon, and travels with him from Daytae to Agray, from p. 30. to p. 35.
Mamut Souldan of Persia breaks his neck at Spahawn, p. 84. Mangalor a
Portugal City in India, p. 182. Mandao, p. 42. Mardash a Town adjoining
Persae-polis, p. 60. Mani-congo a Country in Afric, p. 8. Matatana, a Town
in Madagascar, p. 20. Mayo, an I Will near Cape Verde, p. 6. Mascarenas an I Will
near Saint Lawrence, p. 117. Mauritius depicted and described, p. 210. Maria
and Michael, two of the Azores, p. 225. Marriages of the Indians in
Chormandell* p. 191. Meacco the chief City in Iapan, p. 205. Media whence
derived, p. 113. Meleck Bahaman King of Taurus slain villanously with his two
sons by a Persian General, page 111. Meliapore, p. 190. Meloym-beg Treasurer
of Persia, p. 67. Melchisedeck King of Salem, p. 161. Mesulipatan, p. 41. and
190. Meso-potamia, p. 118. Meottey and Mohelay, two Isles depicted, etc. p. 23.
Mohack a Town, p, 56. Monk of Charity, p. 50. Mokisso an Idol or Devil
worwipped, p. 8. Monzoones, anniuersary winds blowing constantly one way six
months, p. 8. Monomotapa, part of Africa, p. 8. Moyechaw a Village in Parthia,
p. 56. Moyowne another Village there, p. 65. Moyeore a Parthian Town, p. 66.
Mount Elly a Road and Town in Mallabar described and depicted, p. 186.
Morad-chawn a Georgian Duke and Christian by stratagem kills eleven Persian
Dukes and seven hundred men, p. 82. Muskat a City and Portugal Town in the
Gulf of Persia, and on Arabia the Happy, p. 43. Mydan or the great Market
place in Spahawn, depicted and described, p. 85.
N
NAdyr, the place under us and directly opposite to our Zenith, p. 5. Narsinga,
a very rich and noble part of the Orient all Indies, p. 190. Nassuff-bassa,
General to the Grand Signior Achmat, the eight Emperor of the Turks, spoils
Armenia, Media, and Meso-potamia, loads two hundred and thirty Mules with gold
and precious stones receives a Vest, a Sword, a Tulipant, and a Horse in token
of favor from his Master, is strangled by dumb men in his bed by practice of
his wife the Emperors daughter, p. 29. Nearchus and Onesecritus two of
Alexanders Captains sent to discover the remote Seas from the gulf of Persia,
p. 42. Nega-patan a part of India adjoining Narsinga, and Mesulipatan, and in
Chormandell, page 190. Nocta-Rustan, his Image, page 60. Nogdibeg the
Ambassador of Persia into England poisons himself, not daring to appear at
Court, is buried at Surat, 28. The Kings speeches concerning him, ibidem. Nylus
a famous River, arising out of Lunae-montes or Zayre in Afric, and emptying
it self in seven months into the midland Sea, p. 10. Normall Empress of
Indostant and wife to Iangheer, strives to crown her son Seriare great
Mogul, but is opposed by Mahabet Chawn, who is therefore banished, and is by
him taken prisoner with the Mogul her husband, is spared execution at his
entreaty, flies and proclaims her son Emperor, practices her own brothers
destruction, and the new Moguls is withstood by Assaphchawn, and after a
battle is imprisoned, and finally, after her sons murder is shut up in a
Castle close prisoner by Curroon, from p. 30. to p. 35. Nimrods Descent and
Tyranny, p. 136.
O
OBigarmy a sandy Desert, page 91. O-Jone a Town in Persia, page 65. Omoall a
City under Mount Taurus, p 106. Ophyr, where, p. 199. Ormus an I Will in the
Persian gulf, possessed by the Portugal, sacked by the English and Persian, p.
46.
P
PAgothaes, Idols or ugly representations of the Devil, adored by the Indians,
to whom they sacrifice Goats, Cocks, Rice, etc. p. 10. Palma, one of the Canary
Isles, p. 3. Palmeto-tree depicted and described, p. 214. Pasquin the City of
usual residence for the Kings of China, page 206. Patania a Territory in
India, p. 197. Paradise spoken of, p. 141. Pengwyn I Will and a bird depicted, p.
13. Pegu, and Ceremonies, p. 41. and p 194. Persian Ambassador beheaded for
agreeing with the great Turk, p. 29. Persian man and woman depicted and
described, p. 49. Persees Tombs depicted, p. 40. Perse-polis described and her
ruins depicted, p. 56, 58. Periscow a Town in Hyrcania, p 93. Persian
General hanged, page 122. Persian Lady represented in a figure, p. 148. Peria
con-connah sister to Mahomet the Persian Emperor after many prankes is
beheaded at command of the Emperor, page 120. Prince Ayder slain by his
sister, ibid. Princes of Mount Taurus murdered, p. 111. Prince of Persia slain
by his brother, p. 100. Prince of Persia made blind by his father, kills his
daughter and poisons himself, p. 102. Prince of Tartary and Persian Queen
murdered, p. 122. Prester John, p. 13. Phul Belochus, Emperor of Assyria, p.
145. Poligundee an I Will in India, page 200. Portugal Carriack chased, page 11.
Pyco one of the Azores depicted, p. 224.
Q
QVabutimoc, p. 120. Quinzac, p. 137.
R
RAshboots a theeuish but valiant people in India under the Mogul, p. 31. and
42. Red Sea, so denominated from King Erithraeus (son of Perseus and
Andromida) whose name from (...), signifies red, page 25. Regia-Bander an
exquisite villain, murders the old and young Moguls with other of the blood
Royal, at command of Assaph-Kawn, p 35. Rustan a heroicke Persian, above two
thousand years ago, slain by his persidious brother, his Tomb, p. 60 and
80. Religion of the Persians, p. 152. Ryna a Villageneere to Taurus, p. 107.
S
SAint Thomas martyred, and where ever since the people have one leg bigger
then the other, Christians their, p. 190. Saway a sweet City in Parthia, p.
140. Saint Lawrence or Madagascar, p. 20. Sal, one of the Hesperides Isles, p.
7. Salt and sandy Deserts, p. 91. Sangherabawt a Town in Media, p. 118.
Sanga, p. 42. Saint Ellens I Will depicted and described, p. 130. Sardahan a
Parthian Village, p. 91. Saint John in India, p. 27. A Sea Fight, ibid.
Sharke-fish depicted, 6. Syerra-leoon, a Bay in Africa where Sir Francis Drake
refresht himself after his Circum-nauigating the earth, p. 6. Sir Robert
Sherleys death, p. 124. Sir Dodmores Cottons death, p. 126. Scorpions and their
remedy, p. 95. Shilling an English Captain, p 45. Shaugh-meer-All-hamzy and
Sandant-Emir-amaho, two old Prophets, p. 61. Shyraz or Syras described, p. 60.
and 64. Shushan described, p. 140. Slavery of a Roman Emperor, p. 132. Shoales
of Iudaea dangerous, p. 21. Souldania Bay, p. 13. Soffala a part of Africa,
near Mozambique, p. 19. Sheir-uan or Media so called, p. 116. Shawdee a small
Town in Media, p. 118. Socotora an I Will at the entrance into the red Sea, p.
25. Spahawn the chief City of the Persian Emperors, p. 82. and 85. Spahawnet
a Village near Spahawn, p. 66. Surat a City in Gugurat in India described, p.
35. Sultan Seria^e, youngest son of the Mogul takes upon him the title of
Mogul by Normals persuasions, is vanquished by his Uncle Assaph-chawn,
imprisoned and murdered at Lohore, p. 30. and p. 35. Sues a Road in the Red
Sea, where the Israelites passed over, p. 199. Sultan Shock Ally-begs house, p.
61. Sumatra a noble I Will under the Aequinoctiall Line, p. 199. Swalley Road in
India, p. 27. and 29. Syacow a Village in Parthia, p. 92. Syam a famous
Kingdom described, p. 195. Syet Gunet, the reformer of Mahomet, p. 159.
T
TAleissen an honorable Welsh Poet, p. 220. Tanghe Dolon a place near Ormus,
p. 51. Tallapoi, Indian Priests and Idolaters, p 196. Tangrolipix a Scythiqu^
Prince ouer-runs Persia, etc. p. 84. 139, 145. Taprobane, S^matra so of old
called, p. 199. Tauris a great City in Media, p. 116. Taurus a great
Mountain, page 107. Tartarian Prince, p. 64. Techoa a Persian Town, p. 54.
Teneriffa, one of the Canaries depicted and described, p. 3. Temeriscus son
of Alexander King of Georgia imprisoned and enlarged: refuses to come to the
Persian Court, has his Kingdom foraged, flies, returns, is again expulst,
and returns again, aided by the Turks, p. 80. etc. Tercaera one of the
Western Isles, p. 224. Tom Coryats Grave p. 29. Tormentozo, the Cape of good
Hope, so called p. 8. Tormathoes. p. 5. Tragic History of Georgia, p. 72.
Turkish Pirat chased, p. 2. Tropic of Cancer, p. 11. Titles of several great
Princes, p. 130. Tyroan a City in Media, Atropia, p. 114.
V
VAsco de Gama a Discouerer of diverse parts of Afrique, p. 8. etc. Vincentio an
I Will in Aethiope, p. 6. Vloches or Shepherds of Persia, p. 54. Vnghee a Town
in Parthia, p. 56.
W
VVHite-Sea, p 25. Whoomg a Parthian Village, p. 91. Whoomgesh a Town in
Parthia, p. 143. Whormoot, p. 143. Welsh words in Mexicana, p. 122.
X
XErxes, p. 145. Xenophon, p. 114. and 145.
Y
YEzd-cauz a Town in Persia, p. 66. Yezdgird King of Persia, p. 163. Yhezid
Caliph of Persia, page 164.
Z
ZAyntzon the 117. Monarch of China, p. 206. Zenith is a point direct over us,
p. 215. Zenal-chawn, p. 115. Zenzen, p. 133.
ERRATA.
Page 23. grats read goats, page 23. for 17. degrees all read 17. fathoms at.
p. 23. for strong Town read strawy Town: page 33. for compition read
competicion: page 89. for powers read Gowers: page 13. for montibas, read
montib^s: page 42. for see Badur, read be Budur: page 47. for terrified the
Adye, read verified the Adage: page 60. for Sofarinus, read Sosarmus: page 71.
for hope, read Pope: page ^5 for (...) Lopp* page 51. for R^^xarow read,
Band-Ally: page 131, for forlorn read ^ortune: for Mosque read Mesopotamia:
for David ap Owen Gwynedd, read Madoc ap Owen Gwynnedd: the word Diriad in page
220. is to be left out.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by William Stansby, 1634.


