THE TRIVMPH OF THE CHVRCH OVER WATER AND FIRE.

OR A Thankful Gratulation for that Miraculous Deliverance of the Church and
State of Great Britain, from the Romish Tophet: or, that barbarous and savage
Powder Plot.

As it was delivered (for substance) in a Sermon at Black Friars in London on
the fifth of November. 162^.

By THEODOR HERING, Minister of the Word of GOD.

ISAI. 29.15. Woe unto them that dig deep, to hide their council from the
Lord; for their works are in darkness, and they say, Who sees us? Who
knows us?

PSALM. 66.12. We went into fire and into water, but thou broughtest us out
into a wealthy Land.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne, at the South entrance of the
Royal Exchange. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JAMES, LORD LEE; Baron of Lee, Lord High Treasurer of
England, one of the Lords of his MAJESTY'S most Honorable privy Council, my
dearly honored PATRON.
RIGHT HONORABLE;
IT is an Aphorism of State, delivered by a great and wise King; When the
Righteous are exalted, the City rejoices. A good Man, (especially, if a Great
Man) is a common Good. Where Goodness and Greatness, meet together, that
Happy conjunction promises a Gracious aspect. Give me leave (being received
into and shrouded under the wings of your Honors Protection) to congratulate
that High Honor which His Majesty has so worthily conferred on your Lord-ship.
I know not whether the Place does more Honor the Man, or the Man the Place.
Your Honors Wisdom, Experience, Justice, Gravitie, Piety, what good do they
not presage? If the world fail not exceedingly of their expectation, none more
like, to do God, the King, and his Country better service. Your Honor has the
prayers and hearts of the best, and therefore need not (being armed with such a
Coat of Male) fear the calumnies or opposition of the worst. For my-selfe,
your Honors favor and countenance afforded me in private, has obliged me to a
public Gratulation, and emboldened me to dedicate these my Labors to your
Honor (to whom I have given my self) as being a chief Member of this State,
and therefore knowing the state of this Story, better then my rude draught can
pourtray it; wherein your Honor shall see the Combat, Conflict, and Conquest,
as of the Church in general, so of this Church, this State in special. Never
any Nation so embroiled, so entangled, came off so fair. Never any intended
bloody Tragedy, shut up with such a real joyful Catastrophe. The Matter
cannot but yield delight to a Christian, especially to an Englishman: If the
Manner please not, I have done my endeavor to cloth it with the best Suit my
homely Wardrope could afford, more in so short a time, and on so sudden a
warning I cannot promise.

The Grecians delivered it as a Proverbiall Precept, that who ever speaks to
Great Men, his words must be (...), Suauissima and breuissima, as we English
it, Short and sweet: What my Discourse wants in the one, (if it be not so
sweet as I could wish it) it shall make up in the other, and be as short as
your Honors more weighty employments require, to which I remit your Honor,
wishing many a happy New-yeare to your Noble Lordship, and my Honorable Good
Lady, with all increase of Honor and Happiness here, and here-after, remaining

Your Honors humbly devoted in all faithful observance, THEOD: HERING.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, Little did I dream, that these private Meditations, intended
only for a particular Congregation, should be made thus public, to the view
of the whole world. Homo proponit, Deus disponit, Man purposes, but God
disposes. Importunity wrung them from me, not only beside, but against my
intention. My pleas were many, if they might have been heard. The shortness
of time allotted for preparation, multitude of other distractions, which would
scarce give me leave either to write what I had Preached, or to review what I
had written before the publication.

The curiosity of the times, and various humor of men, what one likes,
another dislikes, one thinks it too curious, another too careless; one too
facile, another too obscure, one too loose, another too elaborate. So
impossible is it for any one man, to please all men. The same sentence which
pleases one, dislikes another; the same man, that receives content this hour,
is out of charity the next; so various is man in his thoughts, so unconstant
in his censures to others and himself. Add to this beside the fickleness of
some, the perverseness of others, who Malchus-like, hear all with the left
ear; and as if the right hand were withered, like Ieroboams, take all with the
left.

If some passages accord (in substance) with certain material points that are
delivered of other Writers, though never so different in the carriage and
circumstance, they must needs be transcribed. As if diverse men, building on
the same foundation, guided by the same Spirit, may not in their Meditations
border each on other, unless they borrow one from another.

All these just allegations were urged by me, but in vain; I did but surdo
narrare fabulam, my friends would have no nay; for their sakes have I ventred
to put my finger once again into the fire, though already scorched with the
slame. Happily the subject matter of this Discourse will procure better
intertainement.

Many, I confess, have written of this Theme, and as our Adversaries
querulously complain, too many. Wherefore else do they say, What? nothing but
the Powder Treason? nothing but the Powder Treason? When will you have done
with your Cole-worts, twice thrice sodden over. It vexes them to the Heart,
that we should rub this Soar, and make this wound bleed afresh, but by
their leaves, GODS goodness, and Their wickedness deserves a Monument of
Marble, and let them have it. They love the Treason, but hate the Memory of it.

Istis siquidem pudor est audiendi quae secerunt,
Nullus faciendi quae erubescant.
Let all Ages ring of this transcendent match-lesse merciless Plot. Let every
true-hearted Englishman, tell what great Wonders the Lord has done for this
Nation, how He carried our Fathers in the year Eightie-Eight through the
waters: how He carried us their children this fifth of November through the
fire. Let this be graven with a Pen of Iron, with the Point of a Diamond, on
the Tables of our hearts, on the Posts of our Houses, on the Horns of our
Altars, in such Capital Letters, as he that runs may read them. Let the
Fathers report it to their children, and the children to their childrens
children, that the Generation to come, as yet unborn, may discern the
malicious mischievous attempts of Roman Catholics.

That Law of (...), let it not here take place; but by tradition let it
successively descend from hand to hand, from mouth to mouth, from penn to penn,
least in time, Histories, Chronicles, all Narrations hereof, seem to
after-Ages incredible, and this Truth be entertained for a Fable, which
indeed exceeds all Heathen Poetical Fictions as far as they exceed the
Truth.

Their Tenet is, that the Bread is transubstantiate^ into the body of Christ.
No marvel if they who crash their Savior between their teeth, make no bones
to crush their Sovereign. No marvel if those (...), GOD-eaters, (that make
and bake their GOD, and champe him when they have done) prove (...),
MAN-eaters (worse then Cannibals) STATE-devourers. What may they not do to
advance the Catholic Cause?

I shall not need to aggravate their Cruelty, Treachery, their own Acts
proclaim it to the World. Store of this Coin is daily Minted at ROME. New
proiects are daily forged on the Anvills of the Jesuits brains: So just is it
with GOD to give them over, that their own tongues and hands, should be the
chief Heralds to blazon the barbarous and savage disposition of these
Blood-suckers to the whole World.

Thus do they paint themselves in such Orient colors, that no Orator can
more lively set them out, whose Mercy is Cruelty; Piety, Butchery; Religion,
Vide Acts of Parliam.

Witness Garnet and others, who being justly executed for Traitors in England,
are Canonized for Saints at Rome.


Faction; Devotion, Sedition: whose Zeal is Fire; Prayers, Powder; Tears,
Death; Martyrs, Traitors; Saints, Devils Incarnate.

But my lines swell, I must break off, though abruptly, least the garment
prove too wide for the body; least the Preamble exceed the Treatise; Judge

(...) THE TRIVMPH OF THE CHVRCH OVER FIRE AND WATER.
ISAIAH 43.2. When thou passest through the Waters I will be with thee, and
through the Rivers they shall not overflow thee; When thou walk through the
Fire thou shall not be burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.


IN this Chapter we receive some Sermon-notes; the Preacher was Isaiah, the
Hearers, the Inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem. The Sermon is worthy such a
Teacher; for descent, of the blood-royall; for Oratory, he goes beyond all the
Prophets of his time, in elegancy of style. His discourse begins (as learned
Iunius observes) at the two and fortieth Chapter, and reaches to the fourteen
Verse of this Chapter, which howsoever unjustly out and dismembered from the
former, must be redintigrated, and added to the precedent Chapter, to make up a
full and entire discourse. The maine passages of his speech may be reduced to
three Heads.

A Prophetical Prediction. A sharp Reprehension. A sweet Consolation.
In his Prediction this Evangelicall Prophet, and Prophetical Evangelist, (not
unworthily so styled by some of the Ancients) as having the Honor of all that
ever went before him in his clear Revelations, (seeming rather Histories of
what was already past, then Prophesies of such things which after many
Centuries of years were to be accomplished,) gives a lively and excellent
description of the Messiah, from the last Verse of the fortie-two Chapter to
the seaventeenth of this Chapter.

1. His Qualification in the administration of his office, Verses 1.2.3.4.

2. His Commission to warrant the execution of his office, grounded on the
vocation of his father, from the fifth to the ninth verse.

3. The reciprocal office of the Church toward Christ, breaking forth into
Songs and Hymns of praise and thanksgiving, verses 10.11.12.

4. The effect of all, in respect of the Church and the enemies of the Church;
which are laid down inner so ordine, The last first.
(...). Touching his enemies; their Confusion is threatened in a high
Rhetorical strain, verse. 13.14.15. Touching the Church; her Conversion is
promised in a Metaphorical allusion, verse. 16.17.18. Then he falls very
appositly by way of interrogation into a sharp Commination (his second maine
passge) laying down the sin first, the blindness and heedlesnesse of those
careless and secure both Priests and people, who profited naught, neither by
the mercies nor judgments of the Lord, ver. 19.20.21. The judgments next;
which (for the further aggravation of their sin and punishment) are amplified
first from the Greatness of them, in many phrases very Emphaticall, they were
robbed, spoiled, snared, made a prey, verse. 22. the wrath of God poured upon
them, like water, consumed them like fire, verse. 25. Secondly, from their
senseless stupiditie; they could not read the indignation of God in those
desolations; so much is intimated in the question propounded, verse. 24. Who
gave Jacob to a spoil? So much is expressed in the reason annexed, verse. 25.
He set him on fire round about, yet he knew it not, and it burned him, yet he
laid it not to heart.

Now least the children of God should be discouraged and frighted too much,
with those blows that were dealt so thick among the wicked, he hastens with
all speed to strengthen the heart of the righteous, and reaches them this
Cordial to reviue their drooping spirits. But now, says the Lord, etc. The
Prophet to approve himself a wise workman gives mercy to whom mercy;
judgment to whom judgment belongs: and as he had showed himself a right
Bonoarges a Son of thunder, so now he will approve himself a true Barnabas
a Son of consolation. He was not so terrible in his Commination, but he will
be as sweet in his Consolation. This Consolation is delivered by way of
Iniunction fear not. Then the reason is annexed, or certain grounds
propounded why we should not fear, from verse the 2. to the 14. verse.

The reasons are drawn partly from The Nature of God, His Works.

From his Nature; he is Jehovah, constant to himself, ever as good as his word.

From his works Past, Future.

Past he instances in three great and grand works of Creation. Redemption.
Vocation.

Future, of Direction, he would guide them through the Water. Future, of
Protection, he would guard them in the Fire.
All this Summarily propounded in the first and second verses. The Iniunction,
or inhibition is repeated v. 5. The Arguments of confirmation they also are
again and again urged by former experiences and proofs of the power,
providence, and goodness of God: v. 3.4.5.6.7. etc.

Notable it is to consider how these promises are pressed, iterated,
inculcated: such is the diffidence of our nature that in our extreamities we
are apt to reject all comfort, and therefore the Lord by his Prophet labors to
force them on us. I have dwelt too long in the confines, and borders, now let
us draw near to the body of my Text; Consider briefly the scope and parts of
it.

These words carry in them a promise of Protection, an engagement royal,
where in the Great Lord of Lords, King of Kings, the High and Mighty, Monarch
of Heaven and Earth, gives a safe convoye to his Spouse passing through the
Arabian desert, the vast and roaring wilderness of this world, that
notwithstanding all oppositions and encounters of fire and water, he would set
her safe in the Heavenly Canaan. This is the sum. The parts into which the
sentence naturally breaks it self, as the principal branches are two. Behold
here, the wrestling of Jacob; the Conquest of Jacob after his wrestling: behold
the Affliction of Joseph; the evasion of Joseph out of his affliction: behold,
the troubles of the Saints, the Triumph of the Saints after those troubles:
Behold, the Dangers of the Church; her Deliverance and rescue from those
Dangers. In the wrestling note the certainty of those In the wrestling note the
variety of those In the wrestling note the extremity of those
afflictions with which the Israel of God do encounter. Their certainty in
that he must pass through fire and water; the variety, in that he must pass
not through water only, but fire too, not through fire only, but water too;
under both all sorts and kinds of affliction are comprised.

The extremity; fire and water are those merciless elements, yet they must not
pass by these, by the fire, by the water, but through the fire, and through
the water; what greater danger then (as we say) to run through fire and water?
Neither is here water mentioned only, but floods or rivers of water, nor fire
only, but a flame too, so the words of the Text carry it; When thou passest
through, etc. The Triumph follows, where we may observe The victory acquired.
The floods, etc. The Author to whom the glory of this victory must be ascribed,
I will be with thee. Therefore the floods shall not overflow thee, the flame
shall not kindle upon thee.


Thus by way of resolution have we taken this frame asunder, now let us view
the several parts, and then set it together joint by joint. We will begin with
the connection, which I cannot pass over, seeing it affoords an excellent
instruction; Gods former mercies are pledges of his future favors: by what he
has done, he shows us what he will do: whom he has created, whom he has
redeemed, whom he has called, (they may build on it) they shall be preserved,
protected. Thus it holds usually in temporal mercies; the blessings of God
never go single: we cannot say to the Lord as Esau to Isaac, have thou but
one blessing my father, but rather (as Leah of Gad) a troop comes. Genesis 39.11.
The story observes how he blessed Joseph in his fathers house, in his Masters
house, in the prisonhouse, in his own house, when a slave, when a Lord, in
the stocks, on the throne, Genesis 30.42.
where ever he goes, what ever he does, still Joseph prospers. See it in
Jacob; though Laban change his wages ten times, yet the weakest sheep go to
Laban, the strongest fall to Jacobs share. See it in Abram, in Lot: the Lord
reueales himself to Abram, does that for Abram, Genesis 12.1.
as he had not done for any person or Nation. Is that all? No, he blesses him
as in his Soul, so in his estate too: Genesis 13.2.9.
Abram grows exceeding rich, Lot and he their wealth parts them, one Country
cannot hold them: But this holds especially, and infallibly, in spiritual
mercies, one blessing here ever draws on another, so chained they are, and
linked together, as one still treads on the heel of another, the lesser makes
way for the greater. Take one famous instance, in stead of a thousand. It is
presented by Paul, in that Golden chain with the linkes of it knit together,
Romans 8.29.30. Those which he knew before, he also predestined, moreover those
whom he predestined them also he called, whom he called, them also he
justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified, Lo here is that
Adamantine chain, one link so fastened to another, that Hell-gates cannot
sunder them. So Philip. 1.6. the same Apostle persuades himself, that he that
had begun that good work in them, would finish it; to one favor of
Inchoation, he will add the other of Consummation.

The strength of this diduction was notably emproued by David and Paul both. 1.
Sam. 17.34.35.36.
David reasons thus, he that rescued him from the claw of the Lion, and the paw
of the bear, would not leave him as a prey in the hand of that uncircumcised
Philistim. Paul thus, he has delivered us, he does deliver us, 2 Cor. 1.10.
in whom I trust he will deliver us; if this will carry force in temporal,
From the Greater.
it holds a Maiori in spiritual cases; as in privatiue, so in positive
blessings.

The reasons hereof may be drawn, partly from the bounty, partly from the
Immutabilitie of the Almighty. His bounty is such, that where he begins (I
will not say he knows not) sure I am he cannot or at least he will not make an
end. First he creates them, then redeemes them, then calls them, then protects
them; and yet comes not to a full period. The Lord is no niggard in bestowing
his favors, but liberal and frank. His Bounty like a perpetual Spring, runs
continually, over-flowes all banks. He gives exceeding abundantly above all
that we are able to ask or think: Ephesians. 3.20.
observing His Measure is without measure.
Modum sine Modo.

The second ground is his Immutabilitie, whether of his Nature or Decree. Exodus
3.14.
In regard of his Nature, he is ever (I am): if merciful in former times, he
is as merciful for the present, and will be for the future. (...).
Iam. 1.17. He is without variableness or shadow of change. His Decree is as
unchangeable as his Nature. His promises, his purposes are not unstable, yea
and nay, but yea and Amen; yesterday, to day, the same for ever. 2 Cor. 1.10.
He does not love one day, hate the next: Bless one day, curse the next; assist
this day, forsake the next.

Jehovah ( Exodus 34.6.7.) ever the same constant to himself and his servants.
Remember the days that are past, look back to the times of old: has he
been the God of thy fathers, he will be thy God also, Genesis 13.15.17.7.
(the promise is made to them and their seed) has he delivered their
forefathers, he will not flinch from their children, if they degenerate not,
but tread in their fathers steps.

Let us apply this to our selves first in particular; to our Nation next in
general. Has he created thee? has he redeemed thee? has he adopted thee?
he will deliver thee, he will sanctify thee, he will glorify thee. Treasure
up experiences of forepassed favors, it will keep thy head above water from
sinking in present evils: needs must that Man swim, which is held up by the
chinne; that Soul cannot stagger which is underpropped by such presidents and
patterns, I may not dwell in specials, this reaches to our whole Nation. Good
the more common, the more Good.
Bonum quo communius eo melius. Never any people enjoyed more and greater
testimonies of his favor, why may not we exspect the continuance of his love?
He has created us after his own Image, redeemed us from the slavery of sin,
from that worse then Egyptian bondage, from the yoke of Rome and tyranny of
Antichrist; he has called us by name, entered into covenant with us, stricken a
firm League; He has taken us for his people; Hosca. 1.10.
we challenge him for our God. Let us but keep to him, he will not start from
us. Let the Church of God ever magnify the riches of his super abundant grace
that ladeth us with his blessings, and not only cherishes us with the
remembrance of old favors, but doubles the Benefits, by giving them as pledges
of future and greater. As the first fruits promised a plentiful crop, and as
the earnest (though small) assures us of the whole bargain: so the least
mercy is great in this, that it is but the first fruits, but a beginning, but
an earnest, a pledge of more and greater. Thus may we in general, in
particular, if the fault be not our own, from that we have already received,
promise to our selves far greater matters for the time to come. But what do
I staying so long in the skirtes, let us now as Moses ascended Mount Nebo,
Deuteronomy. 32.4.
so climb this Mount in my Text, and there take a double prospect: first we
may look backward, and there view the Israel of God now passing through the
Red Sea, now stung with fiery Serpents in the wilderness of this World: we may
then look forward and see them victorious over fire and water, in their
heavenly Canaan, like their Lord and Master, as here crowned with thorns, so
there crowned with victory and glory. It seems good to their heavenly Father,
to entertain them wit storms first, and after they have run some dangerous
hazards, to bring a gracious calm.

The affliction of Joseph, is not nakedly propounded, but notably amplyfied,
from the certainty, the variety, the extremity of it. The certainty is
intimated, this the Lord takes for granted, that his Spouse must through fire
and water. When thou passest etc. As if the Lord had expressed his mind in
other terms. Mistake me not, I never intended to secure my chosen wholly from
danger, or to set them out of the reach of affliction; that the water should
not touch them, nor they touch the water; at the fire should not come near
them, nor they come near the fire; but to get my self a name and glory, to
magnify my power and pity, by securing them in the water, that the floods
shall not overflow them, by securing them in the fire that the flame shall not
kindle upon them. The Saints must have their Purgatory on earth, that of water
to wash off the filth and soil contracted by sin; that other of fire to
purge out the dross of corruption. The Conclusion stands as firm as Heaven
and Earth.

The Church Militant, while she remains in this veil of tears, and valley
of misery, is not privileged from miseries and calamities. Let her be the
Darling of Heaven, the favorite of the great King, the work of his hand, his
Redeemed, his adopted, his Beloved one, no bonds, no entirenes with God can
plead an exemption. She is the Lords Ship, his Marchant-royall, and
therefore must expect storms while she Sails on the tempestuous Sea of this
world. His Lilly, and therefore must grow in the midst of thorns; his Rose,
and therefore must be environed with prickles; his Gold, and therefore must be
cast ever and anon into the fiery furnace; his Campe-royall, and therefore must
be ever skirmishing; his vine, and therefore ever and anon must be pruned. This
is the place of her Labor, no rest from her labor, till her work be at an
end; no end of her work, till an end be put to these days of sin. Blessed
are they that die in the Lord, Rev. 14.13.
for they shall rest from their labors. So much was shadowed out and typified
by the Riding of Noah's Arc on the Waters; by the smoking firebrarnds, Genesis
7.17. Genesis 15.17.
presented to Abram; by the wrestling of Jacob; Gen 32.24. Exodus 3.2.
by the Burning Bush, presented to Moses: so much is plainly expressed by our
Savior; In the world you shall have trouble. Ioh. 16.33. He that will be my
Disciple, must take up his cross and follow we.

The ground hereof may be drawn, partly from the appointment of God, partly
from the malice of Satan; partly from that correspondence which should ever be
maintained between the Head and the Members.

First, It is that Decree enacted by the High Court of Parliament in Heaven, a
Statute more firm then the Laws of the Medes and Persians, that the way to
Heaven shall be strawed with crosses; that every one that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.12.
shall suffer persecution. This is that thorny path which is chalked out as the
common Rhode, leading to Glory. No man must expect two Heavens, one here,
another hereafter. Would you know the ground of this Sanction? though his Will
be a Law, Sic volo, sic iubeo; stet pro ratione voluntas. Eccles. 8.4.
though it be a sauciness to say to the King (much more to the King of Kings)
What do thou? Yet since the wise God is pleased to condescend so far unto
our weakness, as to yield an account of his actions, know it tends much to his
glory, and the good of the Saints. It tends to the Glory of his wisdom, that
fetches light out of darkness, life out of death, Heaven out of Hell; to the
glory of his power, that brings strength out of weakness. So the Oracle to Paul,
2 Cor. 12.9.
My grace is sufficient for thee. My power is made perfect through weakness.
It turns to the good of the Saints, who are corrected with his children, that
they might not be condemned with the world. Prove. 3.12. Heb. 12.6. Revel. 3.19.
Prove. 22.15.
Whom the Lord loves he chastens. There is much folly bound in the heart of the
child (as that Mirror of wisdom gives out in his select divine Aphorisms)
but the rod of correction will fetch it out. Blessed is the Man whom thou
chastisest (O Lord) and teach thy Law, so David the Father of so wise a
Son. These Nocumenta are Documenta, his Corrections are Instructions. We see
by experience these Stars shine brightest in the darkest night; these sheep
thrive best in the saltest Marshes, and tread surest in the roughest way; Vide
Christians sovereign Salve for every Soar.
these Diamonds glitter most in the night; this corn is purest from chafe
when under the staile: these torches blaze most when they are most beaten.
Abrams faith, Jobs patience, David's Repentance, Salomons Recantation, Manassehs
humiliation, all these, with thousand more, give evident demonstration, that
the graces of the Spirit (like the Arabian Spices) never yield a more fragrant
smell then when they are punned and bruzed together in the Mortar of
Affliction. This is the first reason, God has appointed it, and that for his
glory and our good. Deus enim adeo bonus est, vt nihil mali sineret, nisi etiam
adeo esset potens, vt ex quolibet malo possit elicere bonum. Thus Austin, Such
is the Goodness of God, that he would permit no evil, unless he knew his
Power to be such, as he could draw good out of evil.

Add to this (in the second place) the envy of Satan and his Instruments. The
Devil will at least make us have a wet seede-time, if he cannot hinder our
joyful harvest; he will be sure to make us live discomfortably in earth, if he
cannot hinder us from reigning gloriously in Heaven; he will bruise our heel,
if he cannot break our head. His instruments carried with the spleen of their
father the Devil, will trouble us, though they cannot hurt us, with
Midianitish wiles, they will vex the Israel of GOD, whom they cannot Conquer:
these snarling, bauling Curres will bark and snatch at the Moon, though they
cannot stay her course. If we do but set our faces toward Jerusalem; if we
but steal a look to Heavenward, these Samaritans will be straight on our
backs.

Heb. 5.7.8.
The last Reason stands with equity, that we might be made conformable to our
High Priest, who was consecrated by afflictions. The Head was a Man of sorrow,
and shall the body know no sorrow? The head was crowned with thorns, and all
goare blood (tota cicatrix) shall the body be decked with Roses? Ioh. 13:16.
Shall the servant look to fare better then his master; Luke 24.26.
if they called me Beel-zebub, how much more those of my family, as the Lord
fore-warnes his Disciples. If that hold, Opertet Christum pati, then much more,
Oportet Christianum pati, so one of the Ancients. Must Christ suffer? is there
not the same Must, for every Christian? Whence another of the Fathers descants
on the name, Christianus quasi Crucianus.

tempestuous Seas of this world, and never meet with a storm; as if all
crosses to them were turned into roses and rushes; as if the servant should be
more cockered then the Son: Austin put this out of doubt, Vnicum filium habuit
sine peccato, neminem habuit sine flagello. God had one Son that knew no
sin, never any that felt no smart. What is, if this be not repugnant to the
plain Text, and strong current of holy Writ? Which prophesies not of peace but
of war, not of security but of calamity; not of sleeping in a whole skin,
but of bearing in our bodies the wounds or the Lord Jesus, not of a smooth
gale, but of many cross, nay, adverse blasts. It is given a note rather of
that Whore of Babylon, to sit as a Queen, a Lady, Revel. 18.7.
having her mountain so strongly founded, so rarely assaulted, that she never
dreams of a change, When the Daughters of Sion; hang their Harpes upon the
Willowes, and sit weeping at the waters of Babel: It is for Moab rather to be
settled on her lees, Iere. 48.11.
because she is not shaken from vessel to vessel: When the Israel of God are
tossed from post to pillar: Psalm. 129.1.2.
from my youth up have they afflicted me, will Israel say from my youth up,
etc. It is for the Generation of Esau to carry the world before them in a
continued line of succession, Duke upon Duke. Twelve Dukes were found in Edom,
when the children of Jacob were laboring at the Brick-kils in Egypt. Luke
12.19.20.
It is for the fool in the Gospel to sing a lullaby to his Soul, Soul take
thine ease, etc. Who had his Paradise, his Consolation here. We that expect
that Glory to come, must not look for an Heaven upon earth.

fire and water. Oppositions, troubles, and persecutions. God will allow no
peace to the wicked, the wicked will afford no peace to the godly. In the midst
of our discomforts, let this be our comfort, it is the common Lot of the
Saints, why should we shrug at it? When so many have broken the ice before us;
since it is no new thing; why should we think it a strange thing to hear or
feel the fiery trials? Since it is the will of God, bear it patiently, since
it makes for the Glory of God, glory in it exceedingly; since the Good will be
our own, take it thankefully; so shall your Cross be your Crown, so shall
you be as glorious in your greatest misery, as the wicked are miserable in
their greatest glory.

I have done now with the Afflictions of Joseph; and yet I have not done
neither; give me leave to recall my self, the Spirit pulls me back, this is
not all. The Spouse is not subject to affliction only, (this is but the
beginning of sorrow) but to many and great afflictions. Many for variety;
great for extremity. She must through fire and water. Both these streams
run into one and the same fountain; the matter will be Co-incident, that we
may not enter fiere, let us wrappe both in one, and give you the Doctrine in
the words of the Kingly Prophet.

Many are the Troubles of the righteous; that is, many and great, Multa etc
magna, so much the Original word does intimate. Psalm. 34.19. For their number
many; for their measure great; for their nature weighty. Take the (...) first,
that it is so, and then the (...), why it is so, as they speak in the Schools.

To begin with my Text, here is not fire only, but water too, not water only,
but fire too: fire and water comprehend all sorts of trials; there is the
variety. Again, here is fire and water; those two merciless Elements, (good
servants, but cruel Masters) which comprehends the greatest danger, the
extremest misery that can befall a man. When the tender Father in the Gospel
(seeking the cure of his possessed son) would stir up the bowels of our
Savior to commiserate the distressed Daemoniaks, how does he paynt out the
cruelty and tyranny of the Devil? delivers it to the full in these
emphaticall terms; Lo, Mat. 17.15,
He casts him sometime into the fire, sometimes into the water, and not able to
hold any longer, he bursts out into tears, Lord take pity on my Son. Yet to
add to the heap of their misery, here is not water mentioned only, but
waters, rivers, floods of water; not fire only, some few sparkles, but flames
of fire, there is the extremity.

To this of Isaiah answers that complaint of David. Psalm. 42.7. Abyssus
abyssum invocat; one deep calls upon another deep. Here is a depth of
misery to note the extremity; deep and deep, to note the variety: neither
was this to some one member that might fall into these quag-myres, but the
whole Church makes her moan; Many a time baue they afflicted me from my youth,
may Israel now say, many a time have they afflicted me from my youth up. Psalm.
129.12. That chosen vessel forewarnes the Antiechians, that through many
tribulations, they must enter into the Kingdom of God. Act. 14.22. As for the
Apostle himself, he had his share as deep as any, perils by Sea, perils by
Land, etc. Strange it is to see what variety of troubles, what a world of
afflictions (as it were can Army of Pykes, 2 Cor. 6.4.11.13. 2 Cor. 4.9.13
or a thicket of thorns) Paul ran through. David, a Man after Gods own heart,
what troubles underwent he at home? What dangers abroad? What from his
enemies? What from his friends? What inward affliction? What outward
persecution? As a man borne to sorrow, that scarce ever came where tranquillity
grew. So that Mirror of patience Job, how came his crosses and losses thick
and threefold, like showers of haile-shot; Job. 1.14.15.
Velut vndam vndam sequitur, as wave follows wave in the midst of the Sea.
Solomon (Proverb. 24.16.) tells us they come by troops, by seavens, a certain
number put for an uncertain; many come, that is, certain; but how many, that
is, uncertain.

Who can number the stars of the sky? Who can number the drops of the water?
Who can number the sparkles of the fire? Who can count the dust of Jacob? Or
who can number the fourth part of the afflictions of Joseph? But it is their
nature I must insist on rather then their number; did not Experience (the
Mistress of fools) save me that labor.

The dearest children of God (as we often find and feel) are they not put to
great extremities, to shrewd plunges, to desperate pinches? What a strait was
the Church brought to, think you, when the Edomits cried, Down with it, down
with it, even to the ground? What should I protract time to instance in
persons, in places? What mean these and the like phrases; The plowers have
ploughed on my back, they made long furrows. Psalm. 129.3. And again, Psalm.
66.12. Thou have caused men to ride over our heads, we went through fire and
water; the same allusion which is here in my Text. This is that bread of
affliction, that water of affliction; that gall and wormwood wherewith he
feeds his; that Baptism which our Savior forespeakes to the Sons of
Zebedeus; Mat. 10.38.39.

Luke 12.50.


Ye shall drink indeed of that cup that I shall drink of, and be baptized
with the baptism wherewith I shall be baptized. If you take it literally, was
not Noah carried through the water? Genesis 7.18. Exodus 1.22.
and the Hebrew babes did they not pass through the floods? The three Children
went they not through the fire, Dan. 3.23.
howbeit the flame kindled not upon them? Those blessed Martyrs, how many
thousands were sent up to heaven Elias-like in fiery Chariots? If you take it
spiritually, these waters had even entered into David's soul, he was not
drenched only, but almost swallowed up of those waves. Ps. 69.1.2. Job. 16.13.
Job. 7.12.
Job complains that the Lord had set him as a Butt; that the arrows of the
Almighty stuck stuck fast in his ribs, the venom whereof had drunk up his
blood; he was hedged in as a Whale. Jonah cries from the bottom of the Whale,
from the belly Hell. Jonah. 2.3.4.5.

More General, Genesis 4.8.
when holy Abel lay bleeding under the bloody knife of his butcherly brother
Caine, was not the Church at a desperate pinch? When Isaac lay bound on the
Altar, Abraham's hand now stretched out, and up ready to give the fatal
stroke, Gen, 22.10,
was not the Church at the last cast gasping for life? When the Hebrews were
pressed, in a manner oppressed with that sore intolerable Egyptian bondage,
when forced to march through the midst of that red Sea, (figuring the blood,
Exodus 14.22.
red Sea of persecution, through which all the Israel of God must wade) when
those Assyrian Bands, the Caldean armies, brake their banks, and like a
violent ouerswelling torrent swept all before them as a general inundation, 2.
Kings 18.11.
was not Gods Ston in the midst of the waters? when the Roman Troops put all
to the fire and the sword, not leaving one stone upon a stone, of that famous
City and Temple, (the wonder of the world) not thrown down: or rather in the
times of those ten fiery persecutions, when Nebuchadnezars Oven was heated
seven times hotter then ordinary, was not the Bush all in a flame? was not Sion
in the midst of the fire?

What might be there reason will some demand, that the troubles of the
righteous should be so many and great? the same in a manner with the former. It
falls out thus, partly in respect of God, partly in respect of their enemies; in
respect of themselves partly, not principally.

Jehovah permits it, ordaines it, orders it. Why? the more and the greater
their afflictions are, the more does his mercy shine, the greater does his
wisdom and power appear in their deliverance, in their rescue. When Israel
was every way distressed, Exodus 14.12.12.
the sea before them, the army of the Egyptians behind them pressing at their
heels, the high towering Mountains hemming them in on all sides; now will the
Lord get him honor upon Pharaoh and all his host. Exodus 14.4. Now will the
Lord of Hoastes march valiantly, and overthrow the horse and the rider. When
the people of God were scattered over the four corners of the world: now for
God to turn again the captivity of Jacob, Isaiah 43.12.14.
as the stream back-ward; to bring them home weeping with their faces toward
Sion, this shall be to me (says the Lord) an everlasting name, joy and honor,
now he shows himself a God.

The greater the stream is, the skill of the Pilot if he steer the ship
aright, appears to be the greater; the more desperate the disease is, the cure
is the more glorious; this may be one ground, why the troubles of the righteous
are many and mighty, that the mighty and manifold wisdom, power, goodness of
Jehovah, might shine out in their full glory, to the admiration of Men and
Angels.

Another reason follows, because their enemies are many and great; Their
malice great, their subtilty great, their power great, their sedulity great,
their cruelty great. Consider their subtilty, the sly Midianites have a
thousand wiles and ways to vex and beguile the plain hearted downright
Israelites. Consider their malice; there is an eternal enmity put by God
himself between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent, which
how ever smothered sometimes as it were in the ashes, yet ever and anon is
blown up by the bellows of unplacable malice, Genesis 15.
and breaks forth into an open flame, so insatiable it is, that nothing but
the heart-blood of the Lamb will content those ravenous Woolues. Consider
their cruelty; as for craft, they are foxes, and for subtilty, Serpents: so for
cruelty, roaring ramping Lions, that will leave no design be it never so
barbarous unattempted, but will prosecute it to the utmost of their power.
Consider their sedulitie, as the Devil their Master himself goes about
continually, seeking whom he may devour; so his Impes, they compass Sea and
Land to make a Proselite of their own, and to render him ten-sold more the
child of the Devil. Their Enemies are many, their name is Legion; their
enemies are mighty, Ephe, 6.12.
they fight with Principalities and Powers, which are in high places, no
marvel if their troubles be many and mighty. Their enemies are many and
mischeiuous, cruel and barbarous, needs must their trials be many, their case
grievous, their estate dangerous.

Finally they may thank themselves for it; their sins are many, their sins
are mighty; many sins cause many afflictions, mighty sins procure mighty
troubles. Lay not the blame then on Religion, but on thy Corruption. Gods
dearest children will venture on noisome meat and hurtful poison; they will
drink down the very gall of Aspes, they will be walking near Hels mouth,
their Father therefore takes them by the heels and makes them believe he will
throw them in. They will be dallying with the fire, no marvel if they be
scorched with the flame; they will be running into the water, no marvel if
they be drenched in the waves: they will be laying the Serpent in their bosom,
no marvel if they be stung with that Scorpion. They defile them selves with
gross sins, and therefore must have much washing; they take in the deadliest
poison, and therefore must have working Physic: while coruption is so strong,
let them look for it; many and mighty corruptions will procure many and mighty
afflictions.

1. Pet. 1.7. chap. 4.13.
think it not strange, concerning the fiery trial, so Peter; Count it great
joy when you fall (...) into diverse temptations, so James. James 1.2.
If we pass under severe sharp corrections, and be forced to drink of gall
and wormwood, this is no new thing. Those whom he loves most he corrects
most; and if we feel not the rod at all, Heb. 12.8.
well may we suspect we are bastards not children: when we read of the
troubles of David, when we hear of the afflictions of Joseph, when we hear,
or see, or read of the calamities of our Brethren, let it not dismay us too
much: What though the Churches in Bohemia, in the Palatinate, in the
Low Countries, be now floating in the midst of the water? What though in the
midst of the fire, in thee furnace? What if that fire which was kindled in
Bohemia, which flamed in France, which has burnt up and devoured the
Palatinate, some sparkles thereof should fly ouer-sea? ( quod omen Deus
avertat, which God forbid) why should they or we, think much to pledge our
Savior, in that cup which he began to us? he drank the very lees and dregs
of that mixed wine, we do but sip and taste the top of it. Let our troubles be
never so many, Christ's were more; never so great, Christ's were greater. He went
through the water, when he sweat drops of blood; he went through the fire, when
like that good Phoenix, he continued on the cross, fluttering his wings over
the burning coals of his Fathers indignation, till by suffering the extremity
of it, he quenched that flame with his own blood, which else had burnt to the
bottom of Hell.

Baptismo sluminis, or baptismo slaminis, with this Baptism of fire or water;
so especially to these our Churches, and this our State of Great Britain in
General. If the mighty God of Jacob had not called us by name, and given to
this Joseph that parti-colored coat (the livery of his love) the Covenant of
grace, we should never have been so maligned by Satan, so hated of the world,
so persecuted by Sea and Land, so driven through fire and water; we should
never have been hated so mortally, handled so cruelly, butchered so
barbarously, plotted against so divellishly: If any Nation under the Cope of
Heaven can apply this prophecy, this promise, to themselves, we may challenge
it, and find it verified literally, spiritually, every way of these Churches
of this State; we have gone through the fire, Psalm. 129.1.2.
and through them water; Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth up
may England now say; many a time have they afflicted me from my youth up:
Remember Edom (may England cry) remember Edom, O God, which said, Down with
it, down with it, even to the ground; we will raze out their name and
memorial from under Heaven. True indeed, while we carried the mark of the
Beast in our foreheads, while we bare (like Balaams Ass) that Balaam of Rome,
and suffered his intolerable exactions, giving up our selves, our states,
goods, souls, as slaves and vassals of Antichrist; who but the English? Who
more favored at the Court of Rome? While our treasure was inexhastus puteus
(as that Pope scoffingly) a Mine that could not be dreined: that which the
Indies are to Spain, that was England to Rome, now we were his Holiness white
Sons, he our Ghostly father, what blessing had we from him? What Immunities?
What red hattes? What Indulgences? What not? the Devil smiles while he is
pleased; but ever since the time of Reformation; so courageously attempted by
King Henry the eight; so devoutly prosecuted by that Noble Josias, whose early
holiness, King Edward the sixth.
and timely seeking of the Lord deserves an everlasting Monument; so happily
seconded, promoted (after some interruption) by our famous Deborah, that late
match-lesse, peere-lesse Queen of ever blessed memory; Queen Elizabeth.
so constantly perpetuated, consummated, and to this day continued by our most
wise and Renowned Sovereign Lord, King JAMES. Ever since we have shaken off
that thousand times worse then Egyptian bondage; ever since we brake off that
iron yoke of Babel, that so long held us under; the Devil has showed himself
in his likeness; what Bulls have roared from Rome? What Excommunications? What
Anathema's have bin Thundered out by that Man of sin? What cursings, with
Bell, Book, and Candle? How have we been adjudged for Heretics? sentenced
to flames, reputed worse then Infidels, then Dogs. Vide Dr Hall.
One of their Jesuits gives up himself for damnd, if such Heretics as we
can be saved. How is it made a meritorious Act, a work of super-errogation, to
murder our King, to blow up our State, to desolate and depopulate our
Kingdom. Many have been our Troubles, many and great; many secret
conspiracies, many open incursions, many foreign attempts of enemies abroad,
many intestine insurrections of bosom vipers at home: How long have we
carried fire in our bosoms? and do not our feet yet tread upon Scorpions? As
many, so great have been our Troubles. Great enemies were stirred up; mighty
Princes, the most potent, and puissant Kings of the earth, friends to the
Beast, Psalm. 2.
how were they enraged? How did they bandy together against the Lord, and
against his Anointed? Great Stratagems were laid, even as deep as Hell, to
the utter ruination, both of Church and State, to the final extirpation of our
name and memorial from under Heaven. How often has the knife been at our
throat? What treasons? What conspiracies were hatched in the days of our late
Queen Elizabeth (that wonder of Women, and mirror of her sex)? No sooner was
the fire quenched in one corner, but it breaks forth in another place; no
sooner was one wound closed, but another bleeds afresh: Many a time were we at
the pits brinke, and knew it not, destinated as sheep to the slaughter; our
Land quartered, Dr Hall in his Panygericke.
or Doom prophesied; When that Snow melts (as they gave it out triumphantly)
we shall see a flood, and pointed to the Gray-hayres of that then living
Empress. But above all, two especial dangers (never to be forgotten) did
threaten this Nation; never any people under Heaven were put to the like
straits. You cannot forget that famous Climactericall year Eighty-Eight; That
Senacherib of Spain, how confident was he to have swallowed us up quick at
one morsel? How did he presume to command with his Invincible Navy Sea and
Land? How did he presume to put a bridle and make a bridge over the Ocean, to
overrun this spot of earth in one instant? Now I trow you were in the midst of
the waters. This fifth of November minds us of another pinch as great, if not
greater then the former; there wanted but the kindling of a match, to have set
this City all in a flame of fire; this Country and Kingdom all in a flame of
Combustion. Were we not now in the midst of the fire? If the Lord had not
been with us, that water had overwhelmed all; if the Lord had not been with
us, that fire had been kindled, and we all had perished in that flame.

And thus are we fallen suddenly, from the danger to glance at the
Deliverance, (blessed be That Jehovah, that has linked them so together, that
we cannot speak of the one, but we must acknowledge the other.) Now since I
am fled into this pleasant field, I will not step back; but entreat you to
follow me with your attention, and as you have tasted of the bitter, so now
close your Stomachs with the sweet; which I have reserved for the last, as
being the best and chiefest matter intended for this days discourse, and most
suitable to the occasion of our present meeting.

Hitherto you have heard only of the troubles, now follows the triumphs of
the Saints; wherein was offered to our consideration, as we found in the
resolution of the Text.

1. The victory it self, which is acquired; The floods shall not overflow
thee; the flame shall not kindle upon thee.

2. The Author of this victory, to whom the glory of the day must be ascribed,
in those words; I will be with thee.

The Conquest is further commended from the time; When thou, etc. It shall come
seasonably, opportunely, when they were in their greatest difficulties, in
their greatest perplexity; then, even then I will be with thee, etc.

The afflictions of Joseph are never so many, never so great, but they shall
find an evasion. The Church can never be so straightened, but first or last, it
shall be enlarged; the Church can never be so distressed, but sooner or later
it shall be relieved. Her case is often dangerous, never desperate. Let her walk
in the valley of the shadow of death with David; Psalm. 23.4.
let her be cast into the Den of Lions with Daniel; with Jeremy, Dan 6.16.
let her be plunged into the deep dungeon; let her be projected with the
Hebrew babes (as was noted) into the midst of the waters; with the three
children, and with those innumerable troops of Martyrs, into the midst of the
fire; what though the members of her body with Isaiah pass under the Saw? with
James, are cut off by the sword? let their carcasses be mangled and chopped into
pieces, their bodies scorched, burned, racked, roasted; come what can come,
Premi potest ecclesia opprimi non potest. Psalm. 30.5. Psalm. 112.4.
the Israel of God may be pressed, cannot be oppressed; though sorrow may
befall them in the evening, joy shall arise in the morning. Unto the righteous
arises light in darkness.

This is the Close, as David had learned in the School of Affliction, Many are
the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all;
delivered they are not from one, or few, or many, but from all. Mark the end
of the upright man, his latter end is Peace; there may be storms in the way,
but in the end there will follow an eternal Calm. This Ship may be tossed,
cannot be drowned; Psalm. 112.6.
this Mount Sion may be moved, cannot be removed.

Jehovah to secure her, a word more firm then Heaven. The Lord of Hoasts will
come in to her succor, He comes with salvation under his wings, He comes in
seasonably to help at a dead lift. Man's greatest extremity is Gods fittest
opportunity; when no hope in earth, then exspect help from Heaven, then the
Almighty comes riding on the Clouds, and commands deliverance for his Jacob:
let the Sea work and rage, and boil and foame, and swell up to Heaven, his
word makes all hushed. But what do I preventing my self? Let us leave dilating
on this Subject to his proper place; and now make application of the point, and
grow to that conclusion which this day does witness, and proclaim to the
whole world.

Look back my Brethren, remember those Marian days, that bloody
Quinqueinium, Nero his Quinqueinium famous for those sparkles of humanity;
that of Q. Mary contrary.
what a desperate pinch were we brought to in time of that persecution? What
massacring? What butchering? What Bonnering? What burning of those chaste
Virgins that would not prostitute their souls to that Whore of Babylon? that
would not lick up their filthy vomit, disgorged in the days of King Edward?
What streets did not flame with fires? What faggots did not fry the bones of
those mis-called Heretics? What City? What Town? What Village was not
watered with the blood, Sanguis Martyrum; semen Ecclesiae.
enlightened with the flames of those constant crowned Martyrs? The mercies of
the wicked are cruel, (as the wise King observes,) as those barbarous savage
Tygertyrants, made it too true, who to show themselves more merciless then the
merciless Elements (fire and water) retorted that Infant into the Mothers
flames, Fox in his Acts and Mon.
which the very fire as a merciful Midwife had delivered from the Mothers
womb. Now they insulted, cracking what a sure foundation was laid for
vnder-setting, and propping up their newly repaired walls of Jericho; now they
applaud their own wits, that had undermined the Gospel (under the name of
Heresy) so as it should never be able to peep forth, or hold up head in the
professors thereof.

Thus when all was desperate in the eye of flesh, how suddenly was the stream
turned? So the Father of Julian the Apostate; nubecula est cito transibit.
how suddenly was that storm of blood blown over? their high walls so lately
daubed up with untempered mortar, how did they fall in a moment, being quashed
to powder? and themselves with all their rubbidge sent packing over Seas. What
a desperate exigent were we brought to, when that strange Horned Moon appeared
on our Coasts; when that Invincicle Armado of Spain (as they styled it) was
ready to encircle our Nation. Their ships were cast into the form of a
halfe-Moone.
The enemy like that great Levi^than had in conceit drawn up our Jordan into
his nostrils, so had he devoured us in his hopes, that already (ante victoriam
triump hum canit) he sings the Triumph before a stroke was stricken; and at
the putting on of his Armor, The Church of Rome.
boasts as he that puts it off. The mother of Sisera looked out at the Window,
and cried through the Lattesse; Iud. 5.28.29.30.
Why is his Chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the Wheels of his Chariot:
Her wise Ladies answered, yea, she turned and answered her self; have they
not sped, have they not divided the prey to every man a damsel or two? to
Sisera a prey of diverse colors, of diverse colors needle-worke, fit for the
necks of them that take the spoil. Thus they solaced themselves, when lo how
all their hopes vanished into smoke. The Sun, Moon, and Stars in their
courses, the winds, waters, all fight for our England. The Lord over-throwes
the horse and his rider, and drownes this blazing Comet in the wide Ocean,
which drew the eyes of all the world to see the success of that prodigeous
meteor, that as some dreamed, others feared, Babylon wished, presaged a fatal
period to the English Isle and Empire. So true is the word of the Lord by his
Prophet; WE passed through the water, yet did not the floods overflow us.

What a desperate pinch were we brought to this fifth day of November? Now we
were in the fire indeed; a fire kindled in Hell, a sulphurean fire, into which
not Three Children, but the Three States of our Realm, were enwrapped and all
bound together, to have perished with one crack. Let us pause here, and
consider the Danger of our extremity, that we may be stirred up the more
feelingly, and heartily, to magnify the mercy, power, and goodness of the
Lord, manifested in out delivery.

Consider
How cunningly it was contrived. How cruelly it was intended. How nearly
achieved. How miraculously discovered.
For the cunning in contriving; what secrecy of place? What secrecy of person?

The place, a place of darkness, and therefore fit for a work of darkness;
the secrecy of the place seemed to invite them to this bloody design; even as
the opportunity of time, smiled upon them, and promised to be the unhappy
Midwife to deliver the Actors (now big with their conception) of this
monstrous burden. Let me now take you hand in hand, and lead you to this dark
Cave, this hollow den, this fiery Aetna, this tormenting Tophet; I know not
what to call it, Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, all are posed, no Art can yield
a word emphaticall enough for this Artificial Phalarian invention. A strange
Engine, it was invented for the torment of Innocents, but (as that of Phaleris)
turned to the torment of the Inventors. See here what Barrels of Powder packed
close together? What piles of wood billetted over those Barrels? What bars of
iron mingled with those piles? Of all resemblances methinkes a Tophet sits it
best; See the description of Tophet, Isa. 30.33.
and parallel them. Isaiah. 30.33. Tophet is ordained of old, yea for the King
it is prepared, he has made it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and
much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it.
Lo here a right Tophet, ordained of old, hatched in the latter years of the
reign of our late Queen Elizabeth; prepared not by God, but by Men; not by
Men, but by Devils; Was it not dug deep? and made large, made for the King,
yea and Queen, Prince, Prelates, Lords, Commons, all; the burning of it was
fire and much wood, a stream of Powder, as a river of brimston was to kindle
it, a right Tophet. Some place Hell in the Center or midst of the earth, here
you might have found it somewhat beneath the superficies of the earth. Thus
were their villainies buried in the bowels of the earth, Isa. 29.15.
they dig deep to hide their Council from God and Man.

The persons will be as secret as the place; these Catholic conspirators, to
make all sure, to sow their lips fast, swear a silene, and bind that Oath
with the Sacrament. O flagitious unheard of impiety! God himself (will he,
nill he) must have as much as in them lay, an hand in this transcendent
Treason; let no man henceforth wonder at the fury of that Romish Cataline, who
forced his followers to pledge each other in Healths of humane blood. Behold
here that Romish Catesby, with his Accomplices, take the Blood of God (at least
his Body) and (...) they maintain it, the real essential blood of (...) of
God must be caroused, to glue up their lip^ (...) the discovery of this Hellish
Design.

Thus closely and covertly was it carried, so lapped in the mantle of
darkness, that none but the Devil as they gave it out (the Lord was far
from their thoughts) could vnvaile it, and pluck off the mask from this
Hagge; yet was their cruelty no whit inferior to their secrecy. Let me begin
in the words of Moses; Deuteronomy. 4.32.
Ask of the days of old that have bin since God created man upon the earth,
from one end of Heaven unto the other, if there came to pass such a great
thing as this, or ever the like was heard of; Search all Chronicles, turn over
the Records of all Nations; no age, no story, humane or divine, can match this
matchless president, so that we may well take up the Heathen Poets complaint.

Audax, omnia perpeti gens humana
(...) vetitum (...) nefas.
2 Samuel 16. 2 Samuel 15.31.
The Treason of Absolon; the Conspiracy of Achitophel; the Coniuration of
Cataline; the Machination of Haman, Esth. 3.8.
to root out the whole Nation of the Jews; the Massacre of France; the
slaughter of the Indies; wherein worlds of people were most cruelly made away:
all heinous transcendent crimes, all fall short of this Nero that Spung of
Blood and Monster of Men, as the Stories record, wished, all the people of Rome
had had but one head, that he might chop it off at a blow; that which was but
desired of Nero, was not wished only, but plotted, and attempted by these
Sanguineous Antichristian Neroes, had their plot taken effect, not the head of
Rome, but of England had been cut off at a Blow. Nero caused the City of Rome
to be fired, and laid the blame on the Christians. If their train had blown
up our Church and State, the imputation of so foul a fact by these
equivocating Catholics, must have been cast on the Puritans. Three famous
kingdoms by a blessed Peacemaker, united into one happy Monarchy, Vno actu
tactu ictu, with one blow, and blast in a day, an hour, a moment, had
perished, ere they knew who hurt them: no sect, no sex, no person, nor age
might be spared, no not those of their own Religion, the Powder, like the Duke
of Medina his Sword, These be your charitable Catholics.
would have known no difference between Protestant and Papist. The Kings
Majesty, the Golden Head of this Land, the Lords Anointed, and the breath of
our nostrils; His dear Queen, the Root that bare so royal stems; His
Princely heir, the pledge of our succeeding hopes; the Honorable Council, the
eye of our Land, the Noble Lords and Baron, the Shields and shoulders of our
Land, the Reverend Bishops and Clergy, the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel;
the grave Sages and Judges, the Hands of our Land for execution of Justice;
the flower of our Gentry and Commons, the feet of this Land; root and branch,
Priest and people; Head, root, branches, eyes, shoulders, arms, tongues,
hands, feet, all, all should have been torn up and mounted on high, to fall
headlong, their carcasses mangled, the sheep brained and burnt by an
unheard of kind of execution. In their wrath they dug down a wall, and in
their anger would take away a whole nation as one man, Cursed be their anger
for it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel; into their secrets let
not the righteous enter, my soul be not thou joined with their Assemblies.

How near was it come? even to the point of execution? the Children were at
the birth; we had but the burning of a match to live; not a haires-breadth
between us and this Death, these flames.

How miraculously was the plot discovered rod? how opportunely were the
traitors defeated? the wisdom of the King came from the inspiration of the
Almighty; strange it is to consider, what English his Majesty did pick out of
a dark and Aenigmaticall letter, going against all Grammatical construction;
He that sits in Heaven, made their own hands and Pens to bewray all; so the
Preacher, Curse not the King, Eccles. 10.20.
no not in thy thought, for the foul of the Heaven shall carry it; and that
which has wings shall declare the matter. If the Lord had not now been with
us, Prove. 16.10.
among us, for us, and put a word of Divination into the lips of our gracious
Sovereign, we had all been long ere this as Sodom and Gomorrha. King,
Prince, Noble, Peers, Prelates, Judges, Gentry, Commons; Our peace, plenty,
the Gospel of peace (the comfort of our lives, and the life of all our
comforts) all had vanished into Ash-heapes. Thus am I fallen upon the Author of
this Great Deliverance; who kept us in this fire, that the flame did not so
much as kindle upon us. So literally are the words of this Prophecy fulfilled
of this Church and State, who kept us? Jehovah, says my Text, Jehovah says
this day; I will be with thee.

The safety of the Church consists in the presence of the Lord. Jehovah is
that Cloud which gives light to the Israelites, Exodus 14.25.
strikes terror into the Egyptians, and takes off the Wheels of their
Chariots. Jehovah is that Wall of fire that fenceth his elect, and consumes his
enemies; the Lord is my Rock, my Fortress, so David. The name of the Lord is
a strong Tower, Prove. 18.10.
into which the righteous Nation shall enter, so Solomon. This Tower is
invincible, this Bulwark impregnable; this Fortress is out of Gunshot, and
therefore cannot be battered; this Wall reaches higher then the Heavens, and
therefore cannot be scaled. The Lord is ever with his Church, what he speaks of
the Temple, the type of the Church; Mat. 28.20.
needs must it be verified of the Church, the truth of that type. 2 Chro. 7.16.
I have chosen this place, that my name may be there for ever, and mine eyes,
and my heart shall be there perpetually. There is he present and resident, and
that not as a naked Spectator, to behold their miseries, but as a tender
Father, as a mighty Savior. As a tender Father, commiserating their
distresses, caring the cares, grieuing the griefs, and fearing the fears of
his chosen; Isa. 63.9.
In all their troubles he is troubled. When the foot was trod upon in earth,
the Head cries from Heaven, Saul, Saul, Acts. 9.4.
why persecutest thou me.

He is present, secondly, as an Almighty powerful Savior; is there any thing
too hard for him? Is his arm shortened? Did not he wound Rahab? Smite the
Dragon, overthrow the horse and his rider, make a path in the great Water, and
allay the heat of the fire? He works with means, without means, against
means, and does what ever he will in heaven or earth Has not he set bounds to
the Sea, Job. 38.11.
though it rage and foame, here it must stay, thus far it shall come, and no
farther, here the proud waves must be broken. Has not he Satan in a chain,
Job. 1.
and all his instruments, that they cannot pluck a hair from the head of his
servants, without his leave and license?

Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? Romans 8.31.
Behold now the safety, the security of the Church: if God be with us, who
shall be against us? If God be with us, what need we fear what man can do
unto us, men or Devils? No marvel if the Prophet command, fear not. He that
is thus guided, thus guarded, how can he fear or faint? So the same Prophet,
Isa. 51.12.13
Chap. 51. Verse. 12.13. I, even I am he that comfort thee, who art thou that
thou should be afraid of a man, and of the son of man, which shall be made
as grass; and forgettest the Lord thy Maker, etc. Jehovah has undertaken to
be the Lord Protector, or Lord Keeper of his Red vine. Isaiah. 27.3. I the Lord
do watch over it by night and by day; He will defend it against secret
trecheries, these are night-assaults; against open Hostilities, these are
day-assaults. What though the Ramping Lion go about continually, 1 Pet. 5.8.
seeking whom he may devour? Is not the Lion of the Tribe of Judah as vigilant
to defend, as Satan to assault? The destroyer of Israel never slumbreth nor
sleeps; no more does the keeper of Israel, Psalm. 121.4.
he also never sleeps, never slumbreth. Let their enemies be never so many,
all nations to him are but as the dust of the Balance, Isa. 40.15.
the drop of a Bucket, as nothing, less then naught. Let their enemies be
never so mighty, he has their hearts in his hand, can turn them as the
Rivers of waters, and make our enemies at peace with us, Ier. 33.4.
changing their stabs into kisses: he has their heads in his hand, and can
infatuate the wiliest Herod, the craftiest Achitophel, turning their Counsels
into folly; he has their Hands and Horns in his hand, and can either bind
them to their good behavior, or knock out the Teeth of grators before they
bite; let them dig dippe, to hide their plots, the Lord will go beyond them;
let them join hand to hand, they shall not prosper: Prove. 11.21.
We may say it, we may swear it, we must believe it, we have had
experience (never any Church more of the like) what it is to have such a
Protector, whose power is irresistable, his will unchangeable, his skill
unsearchable; whose Greatness is such, that he can do what he will; whose
Goodness is such, that he will do what he can; and ever magnify both his
Greatness and Goodness, in the protection of his Israel, and in the
conversion or confusion of his enemies. Witness this day of days: on the
morning of our fifth of November, they would have blown us up; on the evening
of their fifth of November, God beat them down.

Jehovah the Deliverer of his Israel? Why let God then have the Honor of his
own work; not our wit, not our wealth, not our goodness, not our greatness, not
our friends, not our Bulwarks, but the Lord only; it was the Lords doing,
Psalm. 118.23.24.
let it ever be marvelous in our eyes: This is the Day which the Lord has
made, let us be glad and rejoice. Let the wicked Politician, the Machivilian
Atheist sacrifice to their own nets. We will cry with that Kingly Prophet,
Psalm. 115.1.
not unto us, not us o Lord, but unto thy Name, we give the glory. (Totum hoc
quatumcunque sit quod certe miximum est, totum est tuum) the whole praise of so
glorious a rescue, how great so ever it be, which indeed is exceeding great,
is only due to Jehovah. Let the King say it is the Lord that gives great
deliverances unto his David, Psalm. 18.
and shows mercy to his anointed, and his seed for ever. Let the Great
Peers and Princes say it is not our Arm that has saved us, not our mighty
strength, but the Strength of Israel Jehovah. Let the House of Aaron say and
sing praises, sing praises unto the Lord that has done wisely, discovered our
enemies, broken their snares, and we are escaped. Ps. 124.1.2.3.
Let all England say if the Lord, had not been on our side, if the Lord had
not been on our side, when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up
quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Praise waits for thee O God
in Sion, who is like our God who does great and wondrous things. Honored for
ever be that Noble and Honorable Society (The High Court of Parliament) that to
all ages has set a Day apart, for the Honor of that God, who is the Protector
of his Sion, the Detector the Destroyer of his and their implacable enemies:
Go on still O Noble Senate, let King, Prince, Peers, Prelates, Commons, all
conspire to honor the God of heaven by enacting such solemn Panagerickes to
Jehovah; and the God of honor will honor You, this Church, this State, your
Posterity; the Generation to come, shall bless God for the deliverance of this
Day; for the Record of this Deliverance, for this public gratulation upon
Record. Blessed be that God which has put it into the heart of that Great
Assembly, with an unanimous and free consent to enact it for a Law in Israel,
and an Ordinance in Jacob for ever. If ever we forget this mercy, let our
tongues cleave to the roof of our mouths, and our arms rott from our
shoulders, Let all faithful, loyal, true hearted English Protestants, with
one heart and voice cry, Amen, Amen.

Finally, does the security of the Church, State, all, lie in the presence of
God? Where God is, there is no danger; as where he is nor, no safety; O keep
him while we have him, drive him not from you, who is our Buckler, our shield,
all in all unto us: keep him in his Word, in his Sabboths, in his Ordinances,
and he will keep you. Would you know in a word, what drives the Lord from a
land, a people, sin; nothing but sin can do it, and sin will do it;
Isa. 59.2.
your sins have separated between me and you; where sin is countenanced,
maintained, multiplied, there is no Harbor for the Almighty. He is a God of
purer eyes then to behold iniquity, what communion between God and Beliall,
Hab. 1.13.
2 Cor. 6.14.15.
light and darkness, Christ and Antichrist? Sin chases the Lord away, and
leaves that person, that Nation naked, unfenced, exposed to the malice of men,
to the fury of Satan, to the flames of hell. Every wilful sinner is a Traitor
to God, his King, and Country, as well as to his own soul. Away with beloved
darling sins: away with those wasting King-killing State-ruinating sins:
Idolatry, contempt of Gods word, worship, Sacraments, Sabbath, Ministers;
scandalous enormous impieties, out-facing Authority; these if they should be
found among us, will kindle a flame in our City, Country, a worse then
Powder-flame, that shall burn to the bottom of hell.

If we our selves betray not our souls, our Church, our State, our Kingdom,
in vain shall the Gates of Rome repine at the prosperity of England; if we
pull not down our own walls with our own hands, no Engines of theirs shall
ever batter them; if we do not open the sluices, and floud-gates, the
Inundations of that Romish Nilus, with her marish waters, shall never overflow
our banks; If we carry not Flax, Tinder, Gunpowder, in our own bosoms, and
strike not fire with our own fingers, their matches shall never take, their
sparkles shall not burn, the flame shall not kindle upon us.

For Gods-sake therefore, for your soules-sake, for your Countreys-sake; if you
love your King, Country, peace, plenty, the Gospel of peace, your goods,
friends, children, away with the toleration, dispensation of known, gross,
scandalous, notorious, enormous Impieties; maintain a perpetual
correspondence with your Heavenly Father; be in league with Heaven; delight to
Honor him, his Name, Word, Worship, Sacraments, Sabbaths, Messengers, that
he may delight to Watch over you; Serve him who saved us, and therefore saved
us (that we being redeemed from the hands of our enemies, such subtle,
cruel, barbarous, savage enemies) might serve him without fear all the days
of our life, in holiness and righteousness before him. Blessed are the
people, who are in such a case, who have the Lord for their God.

FINIS.

