THE RIGHT RVLE of Christian Chastity: Profitable to be read of all ^dly and
virtuous Youths of both ^e, be they Gentlemen or Gentle^men, or of inferior
state, whatsoever.

Collected and written by one studious to gratify his friends, and profit his
ki^ed: First (privately) for the instruct^), forewarning and forearming of
certain young Gentlewomen his near and dear Cosins: and after published by
the same, in hope to profit the Church and common wealth, according to his
Talent.

The ^thode whereof is to be (...)mediatly after the Preface to the Reader.

Imprinted at London by Richard Johnes, and are to ^olde at his shop over
against S. Sepulchers Church without Newgate.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, godly and virtuous Gentleman Master Henry Bromley,
Son and Heir apparent of the right Honorable Sir Thomas Bromley, Knight, of
the Queens Majesty's most Honorable privy Council, and Lord Chancellor of
England, and to all his godly and virtuous Brethren and Sisters: William
Hergest, their Honorable Fathers most humble Servant and daily Drator,
wishes all temporal prosperity in this life, and in the life to come
euerlast, inge blessedness.
AFter I had delivered this Pamphlet to certain learned, profound, and grave
persons (right virtuous and worthy Gentlemen and Gentlewomen) to be perused,
that I might understand and receive their judgments touching the same:
whether it were to be consecrated (if Christians might so speak) to Feigned of
Poets to be president of the fire.
Vulcane or One of the nine Muses supposed to be president of celestial
matters, such as are most worthy the meditation and practice of all chaste
persons, but specially of Virgins and single folks.
Urania. And after that they by favorable sentence had not only acquitted it
from the fiery flames of vulcane, but also adjudged it to be enlarged out of
the dark prison of (if I might so term it) vnknownnesse, to walk at liberty
in the light of edition, as being profitable in their indgement to confirm
chaste minds in their godly purpose, and by Gods grace to stop and stay such
as be not altogether graceless, from being carried hedlong into the deep and
dangerous Sea of raging affection: and so (except God in great mercy stay
them) into the bottomless gulf of endless perdition. After these euentes (I
say) so fallen out, I studied with my self to whom I might most fitly dedicate
the same: And pondering the matter deeply in mind, in respect of duty,
matter, and persons, I found i^ in a manner due unto you (right worshipful and
virtuous Youths.) For respectinge my duty unto the right Honorable your
Father, my very good Lord and Master, and his bountifulness toward me of
his mere benevolence, without any deserts on my behalf: What can be more
due then that the person maintained, defended and preserved in such commodious
and quiet state, as by Gods favor and providence he enjoys, though in it
self it be but poor, mean and simple, should bestow and imploye all his
study, endeavors, and labors, to the use, commodity, pleasure, or contentation
of his maintayner and defender? Or if his preserver and protector in such quiet
state should be of such excellency, praeeminence, and dignity, and himself
of such baseness, poverty and inability, that in no wise he should be able
to pleasure him: yet to assaye and endeavor to the uttermost of his small power
to profit his, especially his Children, in time to come, supplyers of his room
here upon the face of the earth, and Heirs of his virtues, Renown, and
Honor? Again, having relation to the matter and persons, what is more fit,
mere or convenient, then that a Discourse or Treatice of Christian Chastity,
collected and written by a Batcheler and singleman, by vocation and profession
studious of chastity, should be dedicated to young virtuous youths, not only
chaste, but as yet even Maids and Virgins? I thought it therefore, no less
convenient unto my bounden duty, then meet for your persons, and professions,
to present the same unto you. Not for that I am so rude or senseless that I
think any of you to stand in need of any such discourse or admonition, whom I
know by the great wisdom and prouidente care of my good Lord your Father,
and by the dilligente instruction and nurturinge in the Lord, of my good Lady
your Mother, and by the godly and virtuous domestical examples of them both,
together with your own good natures, virtuous dispositions and rare
towardnesses, to be so grounded and settled in all godliness and vertuousnesse,
as you need not greatly any exhortations to the same, especially such as are
destitute of Rhethoricall exornations as this is: but as a token of
thankfulness, or signification of a grateful mind and humble duty. Neither
yet (peradventure) shall you at any time repent you of the reading hereof, or
think it a loss time, be it never so destitute of eloquence, trapped words
or filed speech, as tending rather to plain profit then vain pleasure. For
besides the method and order beeinge such, as the like whereof I have not as
yet seen in our English tongue, I hope the pith and substance of this matter
is so plainly set down, as it will delight your virtuous and chaste eyes, to
consider and view the show, sight and prospect thereof, seeinge your own virtues
so plainly displayed, and the dangerous Rocks of the contrary vices whereupon
many lusty youths now a days (alas for pity) do make woeful and vnreparable
shipwreck, and which you by Gods grace, virtuous education, and the prudent
and careful providence, and domestical example of your honorable Parents,
and godly kinsefolkes, have hitherto (and I trust ever shall, prosperously
escaped) so clearly discryed. This much I dare be bold to affirm, because I
know the Authors wherout I collected the greatest part of this Treatice, to be
godly, virtuous and learned, yea and eloquent also, though in this matter for
the most part studying Brevity and perspicuitie they neglect and omit the
same. But in reading hereof, this I am most earnestly to request: that though
in some place vice be induced and represented in its lothly form and shape,
and with terms and Phrases unfit for Worshipful ears, yet that you would of
your goodness, bear with the same, seeinge it was first written for Children,
mine own near and dear kinsewomen, for who^ I thought it was expedient, that
vice and the filthy practices of the vicious, should be set out in their
black, and lothly colors, to the intent that youth might even from the very
heart shun, hate, abhor, and detest the same, as of all the godly and virtuous
it is, and ought to be. And that which the Axe of courteous interpretation,
and of taking and construinge of things in the better part, which is an
excellent virtue, especially beseming all Gentlefolkes, in Latin commonly
called (Candor) a proper name in English, for the which virtue (such is the
barennesse of the tongue in some parts) we lack, you would at once shred away,
and cut of all suspicions, and not once to think or suspect that I wrote and
collected this discourse or treatice of Christian Chastity, for that I saw
any more inclination to the contrary vices in my said dear Cosins, then is in
the best natures since the general corruption of the same, in the root of the
two first created, the origin of al human nature: For certainly, to speak as
we use to speak of the best natures: they are all of a rare towardness in
that sex, very godly and virtuously brought up, but yet subject to the
dangers of youth and prosperity. And therefore for the natural love I bare
unto them, being my near kinsewomen (for it is the natural property of true
love, for to forewarne the parties beloved of all such perilles as it foreseeth
may fall upon them without diligent caution or circumspection:) I wrote this
treatice to enarme them against that time of their age, which the very Paganes
by the only light of nature saw to be most dangerous and perilous, as may
plainly appear to all such as have read or sensibly heard the story (or
Poetical Narration) even of Hercules the Son of their great God Jupiter (as
they propound it) in his budding years sitting in the Wilderness in a maze
whither way to take, that of vice, or that of virtue. And therefore, seeing this
happened in the heroical nature of Hercules, commen (as is affirmed) of
progeny divine, I thought it not superfluous to admonish my kinsewomen, be
they never so good a nature and inclination, to decline the way of vice, and to
take the proved Path of Virtue, trodden out unto them by their godly Parents.
And though this Syeth of admonition seem to some, to be whetted sharper then
needed, yet charity procured it, to mow down at once all the weeds of the
ouer^ertile soil of youth and prosperitic (if it might be) as I trust it has
in them. And the like effect that it has wrought by Gods grace in them, I hope
it will in other, and to that end chiefly have I ventured the edition hereof.
Not of any fond presumption, as some Zoyluses (peradventure) will object. For
I am not ignorant of mine own poverty, weakness, and inability in matters
of wit and learning. But as I have due proof and experiment hereof, so do I
know that the gifts of God are diverse, and severally bestowed according to
his good pleasure, without being tied to person, place, time, or other
circumstaunce. And that of his bounteousnesse and unsearchable wisdom, he
many times favorably uses even contemptible instruments to the bringinge to
pass of lawdable things. But how so ever it be, the Talent that God has
bestowed on me I have spent and employed as faithfully and to as great gain
as I can. Hide it in the ground I could not withont clogge of conscience and
expectation of the execution of that terrible sentence.

Take the Talente from him, Math. 25.
and cast the unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be
weepinge and gnashinge of Teethe. I know the witty, wise, and such as have
been brought up in learning all the days of their life, and have received
many Talentes and great guiftes, are able to do many and great things: But yet
that ought not to let him that has received but one from occupyinge the same.
Neither (I suppose) will any godly or reasonable person be offended that any
that believes the Truly and ^ightly to believe the communion of Saints, is
for a Christian to be fully persuaded that such gifts and grates as he has
^eceaued, is ^o the use and o^nifit of Christ's Church, which is the ^ormmunion
of Saints
communion of Saints should participate or communicate unto other that which
has don himself good, and that which he is persuaded will do the like unto
others. And therefore I was imboldned to make a private benefit, common, and
that under your names, hoping that it will therefore be the more accepted, and
so to do the more good, which God grant for his Christ's sake. Thus craving
pardon for my boldness I most humbly and earnestly beseech the Lord Jesus that
Archangel of God, who pitcheth his camp round about all those that fear him,
to preserve my good Lord and Master your honorable Father, and my good Lady
and Mistress your Mother, and all you their godly and virtuous Children long
and many years, in all prosperity, and true felicity, to the glory of God,
the comfort of the godly, and the vtiliti^ of the common wealth.

From my poor Cottage at West Herg^st the.12. of July, in the year of our
Lord God.1580. and in the.22. year of her Highness Reign. Your Honorable
Father, his most humble Servant and daily Orator, William Hergest.

The Authors Epistle to his well-beloved Cosins, for whose praemonition,
forewarning and forearming, he first collected this Discourse or Treatice.
Being appointed (dear Cosins) by the right Worshipful your Mother, then my
reverend Mistress, to enstruct you according to my small skill in the Science
of Writing: And knowing yt, Mat. 10.2^.
not as much as a Sparowe falls on the ground without Gods providence. I was
fully persuaded yt I was specially called for the time to be your Scholemaister
or spiritual Parent. And remembering therwithall that it is the special
vocation of a Schoolemaister, instructor, and reformer of the mind, or
spiritual Parent (for these and such like are diverse names of one thing) to
study by Gods grace to reform and regenerate, and as it were to beget anew
their Scholars as much as in them lies, (for regeneration to speak properly
is the only work of Gods Spirit) in all godliness virtue and honesty. I
purposed to bestow that short time of one hour in a day that was allotted me
for your instruction as profitable as I could devise for your increase and
enri^ching in knowledge and virtue. And therefore for your examples and coppyes
(as they term them) for wry^inge. I selected such sentences, councels and
precepts, as might inflame your tender minds with the love of virtue and
harred of viee, (one or two whereof I have added to the end of this Treatice
that they that have skill and judgment may judge of them, whither they des^rue
favorable acception, seeinge they proceeded from a christian and charitable
heart, or disdaynful contempt, for that (peradventure) is the ingenious Poet
writes: they rubbed to roughly tender ears with the viting Auden' ^^ teneras
more daci radere vero?
troth) that with one labor you might adorn the body with the necessary
exercise of writing, and bewtiffe the mind with the precious Pearls of the
love and study of godliness and virtue, and of the hatred and detestation of
vice and impiety. Liberalium artium Octaua, Ars Adulandi.
And though some too ^udious of the Eyghthly berall Science, persuaded your
Mother that thereby I did you no good, yet if you could remember those godly and
virtuous sentences that I picked out for you, out of good Authors: Ag^. Wit,
and experience, would in time to come, teach you the contrary. And in the mean
time I can not but be wayle their ignorance and blindness, which is more
palpable then that of the Pagans, which knew not God, for they by the dim light
of natural reason only, saw that the godly and virtuous instruction of the
mind was a greater good, and more excellent benifit, then the procreation of
the body: And therefore some of them, common even of Princes progeny, and
enstructed of men but of base birth, thought it no shame liberally and frankely
to confess, that they had received greater good of their base borne
instructors, then of their Noble and royal Parents, 1 Simpliciter viuere
quid. Simplely to live what it is.
whose grateful confession they confirmed with this reason: For that of their
Natural Parents they had received but the benifit of living: but of their
Schoolemaisters and instructors they had received the benefit of well living.
Which their reason in my opinion is great yea vnconfutable and invincible. For
simplely to live is a thing come mon with us too brute Beasts. And to live
wickedly and ditiously which commonly falls out without diligent and
faithful instruction, is to be in state far inferior to brute beasts: for
they answer the end of their creation, 2. Male vel turpiter viuere quid. Euely
to live or to lead an ungodly life what it is.
which is to serve man, and when they dye they feel no misery. But the evil
wicked and vicious liver is both unfit and unmeet for the purpose that God
made him, which is to serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all
the days of his life, and also subject to eternal torments after this life:
For if he dye in this his miserable state without repentance, the wise and
just God finding him unfit for the use he made him, will cast him away as a
reprobate stone, unapt for the reedislynge of the decayed walls of his
heavenly Jerusalem, and as a withered brounch or dried stick fit only for
the fler, will throw him into the Lake that burns with fire and Brimstone for
ever and ever. 3 Been viuere quid. To live well and godly what it is.
But to live well (which comes by teaching, instructing and nurturing in the
Lord, the ordinary means that God has appointed for the obteyning thetof) is
a thing far surmounting the nature of man, an heroical thing, an Angelical
thing, yea a divine thing and nearest approaching unto the glortous Godhead,
having communion and union therwithal through the Mediator Christ, which is
the cheifest end, and good of man, his only happiness, felicity and
blessedness inchoat and begone in this life, and shall be made perfect and
confumate in the other in all such as by Gods grace shall perfeuer and continue
therein to the end. And therefore this found indgement of a blind Pag^n
otherwise, that never saw the light of the Gospel might make many that
profess the truth of the Gospel to blush at their own ingratitude, and
corrupt and affectionate indgement. Morcouer, for the further discharge of my
conscience, and for your greater conflimation in godliness and vertuousnesse,
and more rasle adnoyding and declyaing of all such stumblinge blocks, as the
Devil or the ^ngodly his members, or your own inborne concupiscence might
cast before you, walking in the way of godliness and virtue: knowing that in
the very entrance of the coming Sea of raginge youth, you should be encountered
with the foul stithy and mighty monster, sensual Lust, that flukes and
deusures many utterly unskillful, even in the first setting out. And having
some experience by observing (...) of the corruption of the world in this
poince, especially amongst ignorant and unlearned This is not spoken (nor any
thing in this Trcatice contained) in contempt or disdain of any right
Seruingman, who is to be had in estima tion for his worthiness and calling,
and for the virtues to that vocation apperteining which are godliness,
clenlinesse, fortitude and diligence gentleness, trustines, and carfulness.
And who of any sound judgment or good nature can disdain or dispraise a
godly, cleanly, valiant, diligent, gentle trusty and care full person? But
this reprehendeth only counterfaites and shadows of Seruingmen, ye being (in
deed) sinckes of vice, will yet arroga^tly and presumptuously thrust them
selves into that lawdable society, utterly vnfur nished of the virtues there
unto requisite which are rather to be termed binds drones, or disguised car
ters, the^ true Seruingme^. Which vocation, in deed, includes in it the true
service to God and man, to Prince and Country, to Church and common weal,
and therefore in it felt not to be contempned, but the svvarm of the vicious
thear kno^ted, now adays make it despicable, the more is the pity.
Seruingmen, amongst whom you must be many times conversant, for the special
good will and love I bear unto you both, for the late Right Worshipful your
Fathers sake, my late dear Master, and your own, b^ing my near kinsewomen,
I collected and wrote this discourse or Creatice of Christian Chastity, to
sense and fort^ru^e you against assaults and dangers to come: wherein I have
disclosed and laid open before your eyes, amongstother things needful for
you to be known, the perils and dangers of youth and prospetity, the subtle
and filthy practices of the vicious, and the terrible judgments of God,
against the wilful contemners of his renealed and known will. To hedge and
keep in your young and tender minds, within the lystes and bounds of
Godliness, they deserve honesty. And though it has been objected against me,
by some humor feeders, that christian lout is not suspicious, as though
Christians should suspect no danger nor pretient any peril, till it dowst
them in the necks, or pat them on the pates: yet in urging one property of
charity ill applied, dissembling ye rest which are many, and whereof some might
be retorted upon their own heads for their uncharitable interpretation of
charitable dralings, they bewray and discover their partial and affectionate
indgemente, or rather if they speak according to their conscience (as I am
persuaded they do not) erroneous opinion. For if they look in Gods book with
a single eye, they shall find that charity among other effects, offices and
properties has these, to wit: To take pains, to profit and better other. To
study to make other commendable, to aid with saythful council such as need.
And I would feign know of such meal mouths, and pleasant speakers, what
better council can be given then to dehort youth from at kind of vice, and to
exhort the^ to all kind of virtue, then to discover unto them the subtle
sleights of Satan, the deceitful allurementes of the world, ye honyed snares
of voluptuousnes, ye reatchelesnes of youth, the slippery stay of prosperity,
the dangers of temptation, the wiliness of the vicious, the terriblenesse of
Gods ^udgements, and such like, and the means to escape al these mischeetes?
And I would further know of the^ whither al ye dehort from all kind of vice,
such as they know spotted with no kind of hayuous vice, and exhort them to
all kinds of virtue, do lack Christian charity because charity is not
suspicious or nor if they do, great lights of Christ's Church, and Captains
of his Army lack Charity, to whom notwithstanding God grant that I may
study to conform my self, let pleasant speakers speak what they lust, as
I have in this Treatice assayed to do: (For where I have hard often in my time of
shameful blottes and staynes that have been done even in worshipful houses,
by the lewd and vicious practices of unfaithful servants and some of the
rascal sort, and knowinge that that which has happened to some may happen to
other, without Gods grace, carfulness, circumspection, and wary prevention.
And having had experience of the carelessness of youth, and security of
wealth, how hard a matter it is for youth and prosperity to keep them selves
within the lystes and limmits of Gods sacred will, and not to transgress the
bounds, nor leap over the hedges of his eternal decrees, statutes, and
ordinances, unless they be clogged with some cross or other, as I know you
are not: I have not of suspicion, but of careful circumspection, and
charitable affection to prevent dangers that have heretofore happened to
others of good parentage, and well brought up, through subtle assaults of the
graceless. For this cause (I say) I have set before your eyes the rewde and
filthy practices of the vittous rascal sort in their own right colors, that
you may see how they are to be esteemed and see by, that is with
entertaynement due to infernal furies or Devils limbs. And also somewhat
showed unto you the dreadful and wonderful indgements of God which he uses
to execute from time to time against such as wantonly abuse health and wealth,
or other the good guistes of God. Finally, though it seem sharp and sower,
yet refuse it not. Be assured the world is contagious and never (I think) more
infected. And against a strong infection, there must be given a strong
preservative, or else it will do no good. I pray God through his grace and
protection it may preserve you from all the flery darts of Satan, from the
snare of the hunter that continually hunteth after your souls eternally to
destroy them, mentioned in the foureseore and eleventh Pfalme, which you
commonly repeats once a Month in your daily service, and from the noisome
pestilence there also speccifled. From the terror by eight, and from the Arrow
that flees by day, from the pestilent that walks in the darkness, and
from the sickness that distroyeth in the noone day: yt is, from all secret
and subtle sleyghtes, and from all open practices, whatsoever. From all the
vicious examples of the world, and from all the poisonous contagion of corrupt
nature, that you may continue to walk warely bee^ore your louinge God, that
has done such great things for you, and blamelefly before his Church to his
glory and the others ediflynge commodity, and your own praise, commendation,
preferment and advancement in this life, and in the life to come, eternal
glory and endless joy in Christ our Savior. Amen.

Your Cousin German removed, by lineage and consanguinitie, your Parents late
painful Servant of.20. years continuance, your late Schoolemaister and
spiritual Parente for the time, and your faithful (not flattering) friend for
ever. William Hergest.

Certain sentences declaryng the property of Virtue in adversity, both in
Latin and English.
NAtura virtutis in aduersis, in quibus (vt metalla in fornaci) probantur animi:

Surgit sub pondere virtus.
The nature of virtue in adversity that tries minds as fire does metals.

The godly and the virtuous minds
in trial great does grow:
So that no wanes of worldly Sea
can once it ouerflow.
Quaerela in duritiem temporis, ex poeta quodam graui:

Virtus laudatur, et alget.
Expounded as follows in prese and Meeter.

A brief complainte of somes ingratitude toward such as have well deserved of
them twenty years together, taken out of a grave Poet.

Virtue (in deed) is of many praised and well lyked of, and yet for lack of
warmeth and chearishing, frozen as hard as Ise, so that it is unable to show
forth his force and lively natural action.

The thing that is most worthy praise
we blush for to defy:
And yet benommed, cold and frosen,
we still do let it lie.
decorative border

Author in Authorimastigem, The Author to his envious detractor.

If multiplied thy Talentes be
and manifold thy gifts:
From profiting the church of Christ,
unjust are all thy shifts.
But destitute if thou remain
of meet and fit ability:
At him that uses that he has
shoot not thy Darts of envy.
THE AUTHOR to the godly Readers.
VHen I had collected and drawn (dearly beloved and courteous Reader) this
Treatice or discourse of Christian Chastity, out of Chitraeus, Strigelius,
Musculus, Calvin, Hemingius, Bernardus Cantabrigiensis, Erasmus Roterdamus, and
other learned and Godly writers of this age, for the further instruction,
premonition, and forearming of my near and dear Cosins, against such sore and
dangerous assaults and temptations, as commonly even in the very entrance of
the tempestuous and stormy Sea of raging youth are to be encountered withal.
And had found and perceived through Gods grace both mine own mind and theirs,
not a little to be confirmed in the purposed race of chaste and unstained life
(most fit for single persons) by the collecting, writing, and often readinge of
the same: I thought it contrary to the rule of Christian Charity to hide or
with hold that from my christian brethren, that I was persuaded might do them
good, without any (I hope) my great loss or hinderance. And though I am not
ignorant how dangerous a matter it is for the unpracticed, in this learned age
furnished with such sage and grave heads, with so many fine wits, and with
youth of such rare towardness, and wonderful forwardness, and so beautified,
and adorned with all kind of Science so exactly known, to commit any thing
unto the open view of the eyes of the world: Yet seeinge this is written for
the unlearned only (whom I trust it will profit) and not for the learned who
need no instruction, I feared not to prefer common utility, before prinate
danger. And be it that all lawdable attemptes are subject to Enuies stinge,
yet am I not so white liuered, or faint hearted to desist from dooinge good to
my power, and according to the uttermost of my gift and Talente, for fear of
the barking of Dogs. For none other account do I make of the undeserved
defamations, and causeles detractions of Zoylus and his cankred crewe: As for
the good (I doubt not) but they will take good endeavors in good part, though
ability be not altogether answerable to good will. Finally, whereas it is
truly affirmed and even in the best learned verified: Humanum esse errare,
That, it is a thing incident to man to err, and therefore it cannot be, but
the unlearned (among whom I supply a room) must now and then miss the
quishin: I crave thy gentle patience and favorable correction therein. Which if
I shall obtain will be an encouragement unto me for thy further use and
employing of my small Talent hereafter to thy further benefit as health, money
the senowes and strength of things to be done, leisure, and the state of a
Servant will permit. Farewell in the Lord that lives for ever and ever.

Iohannis Cooci Odoastichon in Guilielmi Hergesti de Castitate librum.
QVae decoret mores, atque ornet vita pudicos
Perdocet hic summa cum ratione liber.
Hinc aberunt Thaides metetricia lucra sequute
Hinc MEDIA procul fiet and ipsa leuis.
Penelopas contra complectitur iste pudicas,
Iste modo castas laudat amatque liber:
Nec Sexus quicq^; distinctio poscit in isto,
Quod pariter casti non decetesse viri.
VTile si quicquam scriptis tibi lector in ipsis
Occurrat, vere dicito iure tuum.
Non iter Erroris describit, scelerata relinquit,
Nugas indignas non docet iste liber.
Castus casta petat, contemnat faeda pudicus:
Foelix, qui sacras pectore condit opes.
AVTHORI faucas lector pro munere tanto,
Causaque sit vitae lectio pura piae.
Rod. Waddingtonus.

Ad lectorem Hexasticon.
ADsis Christicole, and praecepta haecperlege casta:
Discas vr cast, tempora casta dare.
HERGESTVS voluit, casto haec conscribere stilo.
Sic voluit castos admonuisse animos:
Vt fugerent causas facerent quae turpia facta:
Et vellent omnes optima quaeque sequi.
The contents, of this short Treatice, concerning Christian Chastity.
FIrst, the Virtues commanded by the seventh commandment, are plainly and
breefely described and set down, and also the ^ices by the same forbidden.
Fol. 1. Secondly, the causes why we Christians must practice and use Christian
Chastity, are recited and declared. Fol. 14. Thirdly, ensue the causes, why
Temperance and Sobriety, the preseruers of Christian Chastity must of
Thristians be used. Fol. 22. Fourthly, the causes that procure whoredom and
adultery. Fol. 2^. Fifthly, the gree^onsnes, enormitie, and haynousnes of
Whoredom, Adultery, and al impuritie: And what wretchedness, misery, shame,
confusion, mischief, calamity, and destruction it brings, Fol. 30. Sixthly,
Remedies for this mischief, and how we may withstand and expel the filthy
spirit of Whoredom, or Fornication. Fol. 61. Seventhly, and lastly: a Prayer
for the guifte of Christian Chastity, against Whoredom, Adu^terie, and all
kind of impuritie. Fol. 87.
A TREATICE OR DIScourse of Christian Chastity.
The Preface to the first part
FOr as much, as every Christian of what sex or degree soever they be, man or
woman, bound or free, Yeoman or Gentleman, Prince or Poysant, King or Keasar,
when he was received into Gods house and service, the Church and christianity
by baptism, did make a solemn covenant and bargayne with God, their Lord
and Master, to war and fight val^auntly under his standerd against his and
their spiritual ^nemies, the Flesh, the World, and the Devil: that is,
against their own corrupt nature, affections, Flesh, what it is.
lusts and desires, which is understood by the word (Flesh) against the usage
and custom and pernicious examples of wicked life in the ungodly, World, what
it is.
which is noted by the word (World.) And against the suggestions and inward
intisementes to cuil, of Satan, The word Devil, what here it signifies.
which here is signified, by the word (Devil.) For as many times in the
Scripture by the word (Holy Ghost) is not signified the substance of the holy
ghost, but his efficacy, power, and operation in us, so hear by this word
(Devil) is not signified the substance of the Devil, but his seerete working
in our minds, by entycing us willingly and wittingly, to tread under foot the
sacred Laws of the most highest, and so to work our own damnation. The
Devil, in deed, is an in^i^ible substance that can not be seen, but yet
we may soon know, whyther he be in our heart, mind ^^soule, or no: for that
motion that moves us to we may be sure comes of the Devil, though we can
not see his substance, nor form or shape which our spiritual enemies as the
Apostle tells us do fight against our soul to destroy it eternally if they
finally overcome. And this fighting against the world, the flesh and the
Devil, is to forsake the Devil and all his works, the Pompes and vanities of
the wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh: Mentioned in the
common Cathechisme of the Church of England. And for that every Christan then
further cou^naunted that he or she should keep gods holy will and
commandments, and walk in the same all the days of their life. And finally
for that the flesh, the world and the Devil, do tempt and entice us, (but
especially young folks) to the breach and transgressio^ of the seventh
commandment, cheefely and most earnestly, and so to incur Gods heavy
displeasure, wrath, anger, curse and malediction: It is expedient for youth to
know what virtues are principally required and commanded by the said seventh
commandment, and what vices or sins are by the same prohibited and
forbidden. And also the ways and means that God has appointed out for us, to
tame our unruly flesh, to bridle our lust, fancy, desire and concupiscence,
and to keep it within the lystes and limits of this his most holy Law, of the
seventh commandment.

1. What virtues and vices are commanded and forbidden by the seventh
commandment.
THe seventh commandment, or the thir^^ Law of the second Table: Thou shall
not commit Adul^eri^, but (...) chastely and ^o^yly as beco^^th the Child and
serua^^t of God, requires and commands (cheely and principally) these ^re
^ert^es, that is to wit.

1. Virginity or Mai^hoode. 2. Chastity. 3. Sham^fastnesse. 4. Temperance or
moderation. 5. Honest and diligent labor. 6. Modesty in apparel.
ANd prohibiteth and forbio^eth theefely and princip^lly the contrary vices,
and all other vices that procure, nourish or maintain those coutrary vices, as
are.

1. Adultery. 2. Whoredom or fornication. 3. Incest. 4. Drunkenness. 5.
Gluttony. 6. Intemperance or lack of moderation. 7. Wantonness. 8.
Unshamefastness. 9. unlawful love. 10. Filthy talk. 11. Hypocrisy or
dissimulation.
2 What the virtues of the (...) Commandment be.
FOr the better understanding and declaration of which Virtues and Vices you
must consider, mark and note diligently their several descriptions following.

VIRGINITY Maidenhoode, is a virtue of the mind or soul, granted unto some
(especially to such as cratie it, by continual prayerin Christ's (...)) by the
g^i^t of God, to bri^^^ fleshly lust, and to auoy^ al contaminations and (...)
of the ^^inde and body, whatsoever, that ^^ey may (...) the more gooly, beeinge
chaste and pure both in body and mind, or soul, without polutions, (...) or
^^thy cogitacions, speech or actions.

How this virtue is kept and maintayno^
THe chief preseruers and mainteyuers of this virtue, and without the which it
is impossible to be kept, are these ^ol^wing, to wit. The continual call^^^ in
Christ's name for the help, (...) Vice ought (...) be set out (...) Children,
(...) whom (...) Treatice (...) first (...)) in (...) (...) to (...) them (...)
(...) moved (...) (...) odious (...) in (...) ^iseourse
aid, and direction of gods holy Spirit, ^y earnest, faithful, and fervent
pra^er; Pa^nefull labor or a voyding of ^^^enesse: The daily reading and
mc^^tation of Gods word: Temperance and Subrietie in meats and drinks:
Modesty in apparel: A^oyding of ^ngedly company; and the other exercises and
meditations hereafter in this present Treatice mentioned: And they time use
this virtue are Virgins or Mayde^ (...) But they that do not, and yet will
pretend to be Mayden^e ^^monly counted pri^ie whoores * or counter^et m^^des,
^ee ^ng of the female kind: and se^^et Harlots or ^is^red r^baldes, if they
be of the male kind. I hope there are none amongst us of so corrupt a
judgment, yt they will rather flee the name of a filthy vice, then the filthy
vice it self. That is, that will more ^e^est in be called (...) or
whoremongers, then to be (...). But how ^ocuer it is, with such (...) not to
m^dle: for as the Prouer^e in P^litik^ matters is: Those things that are
secret unto us apperteyne not unto us. And therefore what so ever (...) this
present Treatice is written of the vices, contraris to (...) and Chasti^i^, and
of the persons infect^^ with the same, is to be (...) and applied only to open
and known malefa^ours, among whom this vice reigns, and rages manifestly:
the secret to the Lord, they faul^ or (...) I m^^le not with them, but leave
them to the Lord.

Chastity, the second virtue of this commandment, what it is.
CHASTI^IE, is a (...) of the feuenth com(...), Cisti^^^.
(...) you (...) that after some, there be three kinds of Chastiti^, that is.

1. One appertey^ing to (...), 1. Vaginalle.
(...) (...) till his or she^ (...) married according to Gods Laws, which also
is called Virginity or Maydenhoode.

2. Another belonging to married ^olkes, 2. Coiugal^^.
which ought to be (...) in (...) of all married persons.

3. And a third kind of Chastity perteyning to ^idde^, 3. Vidu^li^.
which they should keep during their widdowhood and they that thus divide or
distinguish Chastity, des(...) it as follows:

Chastity, is either to liu^ in stugle life without carnal knowledge of any
person, without burninge of sensual lust, and without any abuse of mind or
body: or else in Marriage to keep the ordinance instituted of God. And they
that thus do, are chaste persons, and they that do not, and yet pretend
Chastity, use ^ipocrisie: from the which vice, in the common prayer, was pray
to be delivered, but like Popiniayes we pray without understanding, without
considering what we ask, or sense of our necessity, to ask the same, for
we are all naturally inclined to hypocriste and dissimulation, more or less.

Shamefastness, the third virtue, commanded by this commandment, what it
is.
Shamefastness, Romans, then Lords of the whole, world did paint and grave
Chastity and Shamefastness, with a couere^ face, and other people did painte
these virtues with a Snayle hard by, because as they affirm: It is the part
of a shamefast and chaste woman not to be gadding abroad but to keep
themselves at home, and to avoid places ^aunted with great resort, companies a
assem^ties, where commonly Chastity is in great peril, fore assaulted, and
some times vanquished and put to flight.

Other define shamefastness, thus.
Shamefastness is a virtue that fears true infamy, or shameful report,
that follows shameful and filthy acti^^s or ^oinges. And therefore, for fear
of Gods indgem^ts, for fear of trouble and vexation of conscience, and for
fear of the reprehen^ion of the godly, anoydeth and shunneth such reprochefull
dooinges, and governs our speech, gesture and manners, according to the order
of nature time, place, and persons, that we do nothing vncumply, or unseemly
for our person, nor for the place, nor for ye time nor for our profession. And
they that use this virtue are shamefast, but they yt do not are impudent and
shameless.

What Temperance the fourth virtue of this commandment, is.
TEmperance or Sobriety, is a Virtue that Graetians call it (...), which is by
interpretati^: a vert^ that keeps, continues, and preserves wisdom, for the
wisest that is, vulesse he or she can by temperance ^rydle and rule their
corrupt affections, ^aucie, lust, will, and concupiscence, will in many
points and things become stark ^oles. And as some expound the Greek term
(...), Temperance may ^ee termed: a preserving prudence, or a kind of wisdom
that keeps and conserueth the health of the body, the soundness of our
natural powers, and the purity of lyse and conversation, without shame or any
vndecencie. For temperance is a faithful keeper of nature vnappayred. Whit^he
Virtue who so truly uses without dissimulation or hypocrisy, feels and
perceaueth Nature to be in quiet state, without any tempestuous tossinges
thereof, by raging and turbulent affections.

Paynefull labor, the fifth virtue of this precept, what it is.
DIligent, (...).
faithfully, and constantly, (...) conscieuce sake, because it is our ^utie and
pleafeth God, for the good example of others, and the ornament of the (...)
wealth, wherein (...). And for the pu^^ding of idleness the Mother and Nurse of
all mischee^es, and to the keeping forth of Satan, that he except not into
us, by filthy and wicked ^ogitations, as he accustometh to do, into such as
are (...) to stearth and yolenesse, (...).
according^ to the common Prouer be: By sloth and doing nothing at all: we
learn ^o do evil, great and small. They that use this virtue are diligent and
payneful persons, but they that do not: idle, lazy, lyther, and slothful
sifter flackes, or lumpish luskes, and unprofitable burdens of the earth.

Modesty in apparel, the six virtue commanded by the seventh
commandment, what it is.
Modesty in Apparel, (...).
is to use and keep decency and comeliness in our apparel, that it be fit
for our ability; state, and person, agreeable to our age, and not vnseemrely
for the place and time, and decente and honest rustome, or fashion, that i^
argue not pride, wantonneste, folly, nor lightness, but rather virtue,
godliness and stayednes, and in no points offend the eyes of honest, stayed,
grave and wise persons. And they that use this virtue are modest, sober, and
staie^ persons, but they that do not: are commonly counted cintous, unstaid,
and unconstant light heads.

Vices for bidden by the seventh commandment, what they be.
Adultery, the first vice o^ sin; forbiden by the seventh commandment, what
it is.
ADultery, is a wicke^ and misch^^^^^^ (...), ^
they that (...) it this sin are adulteters or (...).

Whore dorne, the second vice against this commandment, what it is.
V^Horedome or (...), Shameful and reproachful vices, are more to be shunned
and avoided then shameful and reproachful names, and easelyer: for always one
or an other will call a Spitle a spitle either openly or secreatly.
knaves, varlets, and barleter: if they be men. And therefore if we desire to
avoid these foul and reproachful names: we must shun the shameful vice it
self that brings and procures such shameful and odi^us names.

Intest, the third vice or sin forbidden by the seventh commandment.
INcest,

Drunkenness, the fourth vice or sin forbidden by this commandment.
Drunkenness,

Gluttony, the fifth sin or vice, forbidden by this commandment, what it is.
GLuttony, Gormandice, is a Vice, sin and offense against the seventh
commandment, whereby one fiueth vntemperately, without the virtue of
Temperance, Sobriety, Abstinence or moderation of appetite in seedyng, and
ouerwhelmeth nature (that is content with few things) with too much meat, and
does as it were, afflict, grieve, and trouble health with abundance and
superstuitie of meat. They that use this vice, are Gluttous.

Intemperance, the sixth vice, against the seventh commandment.
INtemperance, they are absent, and we cannot have the use of them. And they
that use this vice are Intemperate persons riottous and unstayed.

Wantonness or Malepertnesse, the seventh vice or sin, against the, vij.
commandment.
Wantonness, or Malepertnesse, is an offense against the seventh
commandment, spronge Vice should be set out in its own black and ugly
colors before the eyes of youth that they may hate and detest the same.
if they be men. Nay, if they be of ye Male kind, for such are vmdorthy the
name of a man, whose principal property is, a The chief note or property of
a man, what it is.
to disdain to be bo^de slave to beastly pleasure. He will by Gods grace,
keep it within the compass of religion, regenerate reason, and honesty: b
Woma^lynes vvherin it chiefly consists, to wit, in repressing of fleshly lust.
And so will she that is a Woman in deed.

Impudency or unshamefastness, the eight vice against the seventh
commandment.
Impudency, unshamefastness, or shamelesnes, is a vice, sin, or offense,
against the seventh commandment, sprung up of stubborn

Unlawful love, the nynth vice, by this commandment forbidden.
Unlawful love,

Filthy speech or bawdy, or ribawdous talk, the tenth vice, forbidden by the
seventh commandment.
OBscoenitie, use (...) good (...) into (...). As the (...) do many (...)
pr^ise and use ((...)) good to an ^uill (...): Forewarthed, half harmed.
But they tha^ p^^ in bre this vice (...) any others as Flattery, (...), double
Diligence, and such like, as an Angtinghooke or bayte, to A poisonous kind of
people, more to be hated, shu^ned and detested of god ly youth, then Todes or
scor pions.
to (...) that (...) in indgement, nor hand any (...), that yet know not what
is to keep^ or forgo, possess^^y (...), an incomparable Jewel, the Virginity
((...)) of filly souls, that yet know not vice from virtue. Such stye suttel
flanes may justly be (...) brothe^s.

Hipocrifie, the eleventh vice, forbidden by this commandment, what it is.
Hypocrisy, Dis^imulation, is when a man or woman pratendeth to be honest and
chaste, and yet will play the Wh^re, or Knave, privily and secreatly: when a
Woman is chaste and hon^^ in opinion, and outward apparaun^e before men but
(in very deed) and before God is a foul filthy strumpet. This vice is
contrary to every virtue, and is most odious and ab^ominable before God. For it
i^ (...): yea the breach and transgression of two command (...), yea of both
Tables: for it offends against this commandment of the second Table, in
very deed and action. And against the thirds commandment of the first Table,
In feruorum fecem inu^ctio. Against the dross and dregs of decemblinge
scruants, a short inue^ture.
(...) taking the name of God in (...) that is by taking the name of virtue
which is proper only to God, the Well head, Author and giver thereof, and
puttinge it upon their privy vice or sin, calling them selucs Virgins and
chaste persons, whereas, in very deed, they are strong whores, and bawdy
kna^es. And ^eeings displeased with their equalles or interiors, would not
stick so (...) call them if they could prove so much by them, as they know by
them selves. But such should remember that the estimation, valuation, account,
and judgment of God alone, who sees, marketh, and judges, even the very
se^^ent thoughts of the heart (so far of is it that he is ignorant of
wickedness done in corners out of sight and view of men) is infinitely of
more value, of more exedite, and more to be feared, then all the sightes,
viewes, opinio^^, and judgments of all men, and therefore should rather studis
to thun, decline and avoid the shameful actions them selves, that procure and
bring such odious titles, then the reprochful names by all ye godly and
virtuous given unto the same, and that by the judgment and (...) of all good
and civil honest persons condingly, aptly, and worthily. Such Hipocrites as
more fear the smeake and wind of the mutable multitude, and dregs of the
people, then the sound judgment of the thundering God, and more dread a mortal
creature, that can annoy but only the body for a time, then the immortal
Creator that can cast both body and soul into Hell fler (...) ever: And
finally, more fear to be counted vicious and infamous then to be so in deed,
are so far from remembering, keeping, and followinge Gods word, that they
forget even the grounds and principles of nature, whereof this is one: Be in
deed as thou do preten^. And (...) as it were lay the Devil in Gods Robe,
or (...), and hide a stinking carrion in a beautiful Tomb, whose portion is in
the Lake that burns with fler and Brimstone, which is the second death unless
they speedily repent. They that use this vice, (...).
and yet will pretend to be Christians, are hypocrites, dissemblers, and
stinking swine or rammish Goats in sheep skins before God, what so ever
the world account of them, or they of them selves.

A short Preface, to the second part of this Discourse.
SO surpassing and (...) ^erable goodness of God, that all that he requires at
our hands, is for our own good, and benefit, and not for any thing that he
is the better thereby: for he being absolute felicity, or blessedness it
self, can not be any whit bettered of all his creatures, and therefore needs
not any of them, but all need him. This considered, and for that it is the
property of reason and wisdom (wherewith God of his bounteous lyberalitie
has endued man kind) not rashly to do any thing without good cause and
consideration. Let us therefore a little consider what good, benefit and
commodity, redowndeth unto us, by ^^rginitie, or Maydenhood and Chastity: The
words (world) in the Scriptures has diverse significatio^s: among which one
is that it signifies the whole number of the wicked: and so is it here taken.
And what causes should move us Christians to keep, continue, use, and
practice the same: Seeing all the world almost in these his aged and dotinge
days, wherein the Devil the Prince thereof rages, knowing his time to be but
short, and that Christ is ready to appearoin the Clouds to shut him (...) with
all the ungodly, his members, (...) and instrumences, into eternal torments:
and to carry the godly his own members, Servants and Instrumertes, to live
and reign with him for ever in everlasting glory. Seeinge the whole world (I
say) in these perrilous and last times, when iniquity shall abound, and true
faith searce be found, is drowned, overwhelmed, and in a manner, buried in
corruption, in Adulrery, Whoredom, fornication, and in all kind of
filthiness and abomination: Mayor pars, peior. The greater number ungodly in
all ages.
Let us consider what should cause us true Christians to row against the
stream, and to take a course contrary to the swaye of the multitude, yea to
the whole world. To recite all the causes that should move us so to do:
neither memory nor leisure will now serve, but these following be the cheifest,
and may suffice and satisfy any godly, and virtuous mind, seeinge they are so
weighty, great, and urgent.

Causes for the which Virginity and Chastity must be Practiced and put invre
of (...) Christians.
THe first cause, (...).
why we should be (...) CINS, or (...) till we he (...), and ^^ter (...)
chaste with one in Marriage is (...) me may do our duty of obedience toward
God: for it is Gods will that there sho^ld^ shine in Mankind the virtue of
Virginity and Chastity, that we may know that God is a chaste mind, and
loves Virginity, and Chastity, Virgins and chaste persons. And by the
mention of this virtue w^^ may discern him from vncleans Natures Of this,
cause it is written. 1. These. 4. This is the will of God, even your holiness,
that ye abstain from Whoredom or Fornication: and that every one know how to
possess th^^ vessely that is their body, (...) holiness and honor. (...) the
(...) Testament, there is a plain pre^^pte and (...) (...) of Holiness, and
Purity of life given to all Gods people, in these words or the like in effect
Be holy, as I am holy, faith the Lord unto his People, Or as some read: For I
am holy, and cannot abide an unholy and profane people.

THe second canse is, (...).
that we may continue in Prayer, which (as S. Augustine affirms) is to ye
faith full person praying: An in^incible Fortres and Hold, unto god, an
acceptable sacrifice, unto the Angels that attend upon us, a solace and
comfort: and to the Deuell and wicked Spirits, a whip, and torment: which we
can not do, if we pollute and defile our selves, with Whoredom and
^ncl^anesse. For God being a pure and chaste mind, and spirit, will not
bear the Prayers of such, but does abhor and detest them. And therefore
says the same S. Augustine: That the barkyng of dogs, and the bellowyng of
Bease, and the grunting of Swine, is more acceptable to God, then the
invocation and ^ng of un^ persons.

THyrdly, least we loose the excellent gifts, 3. The reteyning of Gods grace
and favor, and of all good gifts that flow from thence.
that God

FOurthly, 4. the fourth cause why we should study and endeavor to keep and
retain virginity and chastity, to wit for that it is the ornament of all
other qualities, and the force, and strength of reputation.
is a great and necessary ornament of al other virtues and gifts, which being
once lost, and taken away all other Garnishments of wit, learning and virtue,
are disgrated, and defaced. And therefore (...) and (...) unto the head and face
in the body of man. For as the head and face being once cut of, the rest of the
body is but a dead car^as, without any grace, comeliness or decency,
ignor^ous and contemptible: so when (...) other gifts and virtues in that
deformed person; are contempned and despised, and the person (...) and worthy
of no estimation.

FIfthly, 5 To avoyde gods plagues and punishments.
or in the (...), that we may avoid eternal, and present (...) and (...),
are oppressed, or at the least (...) time or an other. For God is immittable;
(...) but does (...), and uncleanness, one (...) here in this world, or in
(...) eternally (...). For this is an eternal (...), that is set down (...)
and Adulterers God will judge. That is, will plague and punish. A figurative
spee^he taken of an earthly Judge, whose office is to appoint what plague and
punishments shall be executed upon offenders, and guilty condemned persons.
Touching the eternal plagues of whoores and whoremonges, Cor. 6.
the holy Apostle S. Paul does preach with great seucritie. 1. Cor. 6. Be
not deceived, neither Whoores, Whoremongers, nor Adulterers so all possess the
kingedome of God. (...). 5.
And Gal 5 The works of the Flesh are manifest: Adultery, Whoredom, Vns
hamefastnesse etc. They that do these things shall not possess the kingdom
of God. (...) 5.
Ephesians. 5. No whore, whoremonger, nor unclean person, shall have any heritage in
the kyngedome of Christ and of God. Let none lead you out of the way of the
Lord, with bayne and filth^e talk, for because of such things, the wrath,
anger, indignation, and curse of God comes upon the disobedient and stubbern
breakers, and violaters, or transgreffers of Gods law. And of the plagues and
punishments of Whoredom, and of (...) of postution of the body, in this
life, both Public and Private, the whole History of the world does
Preach. For many times for Whoredom, whole countries are bestroyed: as the
must fruitful and fortilest part, sometime of the whole world (Sodom) with
the towns and Cities adtoyning: (...).
As the city of Sich^m. Genesis 54. As the most famous City in all Asia, (...).
yea, in all the world at that time, Troy and the countries adioynyng. And as
the renoumed Citis in Greece, Thebes, and infinite more. Al which florishynge
Cities, with the Countries wherein they stood, were burnt and vt^erly
destroyed for Whooredme and unlawful L^stes. And many times, for this filthy
sin, whole Hosts and Armies are killed and flayne: As three and twenty
thousand at once, of Gods own people, by profession in the Wilderness.
(...). 25.
Number. 25. As the whole Tribe of Benjamin, being so poy^^^^s, (...) so many
thousands. (...). 20.
Judge. 20. The banishment also of (...), 2 of Kings. 11.15. And the captivity
of Babylon were bitter buddes of this cursed root. And if we mark, we shall
see from time to time, daily examples before our eyes, of Gods borrible plagues
against Whoredom, and uncleanness: Punishments pass, plagues, miseries, and
calamities, even through the houses of Princes, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Yeoneen,
and private persons, for this filthy sin, because Gods rule remains
vnremooueable: Every foul that shall commit this abominations shall be
rooted ^ut, from of the face of the earth, or as some translate it: The earth
shall vomit and spue out every one that shall do any of these abominations.
Again: Whoores, whooremongers, and adulterers, God will judge and punish, and
not them their selves only, but also many times their posterity and offpringe.
For God does commonly punish the unlawful lusts of Parents by the
infelicitie, unhappiness, talamities, miseries, and shame of their Children, God
herein keeps the Rule, Wis. 11.16.17.
set down in the Book of Wisdom: The. 11. Verse. 16.17. By what things one
sins, by the same he is punished. A plain example of this Rule we may see
in the Tragedy of King David, that for abusinge his seed, in pollutinge and
defilinge his trusty servant Vrias his Wise, was by his own seed Absolon
his Son, thrust out of his Kingdom, his dearly beloved Spouses poluted and
defiled in his own Pallaice before the Son, and the people brought to great
calamity, misery and distress: yea he him self put to great fear and
danger of his life. And many times the Children for the secreat sins of the
Parents are given over into a reprobate sense, so that they are not ashamed to
play the whores or who^remaisters even openly. And therefore if ever you hope
to have godly Children your selves, you must take beede you abuse not your
seed, nor in any wise pollute the Well head of generation contrary to Gods Law.

Sixthly, 6. The sixth cause, of care full keepinge of virginity. (...)
chastity (...) the retey^ing of Gods (...), the ^ntaine of (...) good, and
^etcyning ^ll good (...) and gra^ that ^inge and (...) from ^ence. Romans 7.
Ephe, 4.
that we may retain and keep the light of true blindness, erringe and
beeinge deceaned in our opinions, counsels and business, in our actions,
dooinges and affairs: for commonly they that are given to lechery and bodily
lust, are stricken with the spirit of blindness, amazedness, drowfinesse,
giddiness, and hardness of heart, that like frantic and mad Men or Women,
beeinge accursed of GOD, and cast out of his favor, they without shame or
remorce of conscience, do, and commit such things as tend to the
destruction of them selves, and of other. Of this punishmente of Whooredome and
uncleanness, preaches Saint Paul. Romans 1. Because they gave them selves to
filthy and abominable lust, God gave them over into a reprobate sense or
mind. Ephe. 4. They are become strangers to God, (...). 4.
for the blindness of their heart, that have yielded them selves to
wantonness or fleshly lusts. Ose. 4. Whoredom and wine, take away
understanding: and we may see by dailye experience, such as are possessed with
the spirit of fornication, to be as blind as Beetels in things belonginge
to their faluation. Wholesome instructions to their minds and souls (unless
GOD in mercy turn their hearts) is as pleasant and delightful, as the
bright Beams of the Sun unto a bleare eyed person, they are so nooseled in
the wicked works of darkness, that the works, yea, and Children of light,
are hateful and odious unto them. On the contrary part Virginity and
Chastity, amongst other rewards, obtain a greater light of the holy Ghost,
that does kindle in them a brighter knowledge of GOD, of virtue and godliness,
and that governs the counsels, studies and labors of their vocation, that
they become happy and prosperous, both unto themselves and others. Hither
appertains the saying of Christ. Math. Math. 5. Heb. 12.
5. Blessed are the clean in heart, for they shall see God. Again: Hebru. 12.
Follow and practice holiness and chast^ie, 1 Cor. 6.
without the which none shall see G^d. And. 1. Cor. 6. Of chaste persons it is
said: know you not that your hearts are the Temples of the holy Ghost? who
is the Author, giver and continuer of all good and commendable gifts, graces,
and qualities whatsoever. Who woorketh most effectually in Virgins and chaste
persons, and augmenteth his gifts and graces, in and toward them. An example
hereof we have in Joseph: Who by his virginity or chastity, refusinge his
Mistress filthye offer, obtained of God, increase of all spiritual gifts,
graces, and commendable qualities, as appears by the first Book of the
Bible, Genesis: Wherefore be you all well assured of this: that if by
profanation, and vnhalowinge of your bodies, which are the Temples of the Holy
Ghost, the giver and preserver of all good gifts and qualities, you expel,
drive from you or extinguishe his operation in you, which is done by
whooredome, and such like uncleanness, for the holy spirit of sanctification
will not abide in a profane, unholy, Wisdom. 1
and defiled Manston. Then will all your good gifts and commendable qualities
dailye decrease, and deminishe in you, and you your selves wax dailye worse
and worse, till you become plagues, and Fierbrandes of your house, Botches,
infections, and corruptions of such as you shall be conuersaunte withal: and
finally, odious and hateful both to GOD and all godly persons, which GOD
forbid should ever come to pass.

But on the other side, if by possessinge your bodies in holiness and honor,
you carefully and earnestly study, decently and comely, and as much as in you
lies, woorthely to entertayne and keep with you so Noble, excellent, and
worthy a Gueste (Christ's Spirit I mean:) Then will your guiftes and
commendable qualities, daily increase in you, and you wax better and better,
and so become profitable members of Christ's Church, ornaments of the Common
wealth, and bright lights unto other in this World, and Citizens of Heaven,
yea fellow heirs with Christ and partners of his kingdom and glory, in the
world to come.

And therefore disdain not to follow wholesome and faithful council, and in
any wise beware of the knauish council and subtle sleights, Fistula duled
(...) volucre^ dum decipit auceps. Impia sub dal^^ melle, venena latent
of filthy lecherous villains, that they shall give or practice with you
secretly or openly to the contrary, to your perpetual shame, confussion and
destuction, if you fellow it, and do thereafter. Beware of their poisoned Honye,
for it will be your bane if you taste of it, though it be agreeable, and
passing pleasant to corrupt nature, fleshly fancy, lust and appetite.

Seventhly, 7. the leue^th cause is, least we give offenses voto others. etc.
we must eschew unlawful lusts, and keep the vessel of our bodies in
honor, sanctification, and holiness, least we deforme, and bewray with
offenses our holy profession of Christianity, and doctrine of Christ, and the
Church the house of God, wherein we live, as David by his unbridled carnal
lost gave an occasion to the Countries adioyninge to speak evil of Gods
religion which he did profess.

Eighthly, 8. The eight cause, why we should keep whole and vnbroke^ the band
of (...) common ^^cietie and fellowship with god, which is cha^, ho^esse, and
(...) of body and (...), that is least thereby (...). the destruction and utter
sub uersion of our conntrey and common wealth vvher in we live.
least we heap up public plagues or punishments, and procure the
bestruction and utter subversion of our Country: For untamed fleshly lusts
are the procuringe causes of burninge of Cities, and utter destruction of
Cruntreyes, as appears in diverse places of the Bible, where the wantonness,
niceness, and whooredome of the Women of Jerusalem is alleged for a cause of
the burninge and utter defaminge of that goodly, famous, peerless, and
glorious Temple, builte by King Solomon, of the ransackinge, spoylinge, and
utter subuerting of Gods own City and whole Land, and of the leadinge of
all his people into capti^itie, bondage and slavery, and the lechery,
wanderinge lust and concupiscence of Paris, and Helene, brought to ruin and
utter decay, the whole Kingdom of Troy, and caused Priamus the King thereof
to be (...) in his own Pallaice, after he had seen his chief regal City
burned, and all his people put to the Swoorde, yea and his own Children also,
and that before his face most miserably and lamentably, and all the whooredome
or adultery of one Queen. Wherein as in a Glass you may plainly see how
pernicious and detestable whooredome and adultery be.

NInethly: The nature or condition of true, lively, 9 The nature or condition
of true faith, which has alvvayes sanctification the fruit of election, or
her inseparable companion
and Chastity. For whosoever seareth to displease the most holy and chaste
God, must of necessity endeavor to live holily and chastely knowing that
(otherwise) he or she shall provoke his high displeasure and never see him, for
he has given forth this special commandment and degree, by his select and
chosen Ambassador: Hebru. 12.14. Heb. 12.
Follow diligently holiness, without the which none shall see the Lord: But
fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, Ephe. 5.
let it not be once named among you, as it becomes Saints. Ephe. 5.3.

TEnthly: our vocation, 10. Our vocation.
for we are called to holiness

ELeueuthly, 11. The glistering beauty of this rare virtue.
Chastity it self is of it self an amiable Prosopopoeia.
whom the saying of Plato by Tullie alleged in the beginning of his offices
may justly be applied: chastity is of such an excelling beauty, as if she
might be seen with mortal eyes the whole world would be in love with her.

TWelftly, the Form of Prayer, 12 12. The form of Christian Prayer.
which Christ our Master has prescribed unto us Christians: whereby we are
commanded to dester. The will of God to be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
Now seeing the Angels of God are most temperat and chaste, we desire to be
conformed and made like unto them in temperance and chastity.

LAstly, 13 ^ (...) of Christ, (...) confor^ation of (...) ^clues (...) him, by
^tating his moral virtues as near as (...) can.
the example of Christ, of whom we are called Christians. To whom to be
conformed is the chiofest good of Christians, and their perfect felicity, in
this world Inchoate, and in the other Consummate. Wherefore when Christ (of
whom, every action is our instruction) was most temperate and chaste. It
becomes us doubtless, if we will be his Scholars and Disciples, to follow
and imitate his temperance, chastity, and moderation, in affections, attemptes
and actions, what soever.

Many other causes there be, but these may suffice, to such as have the love
and fear of God in their bartes, which we ought daily to pray for, by heart
and faithful invocation. For if the Devil, through our own security,
carelessness, The love and (...) of God are not only the foundecions, but also
the stays and (...) of all godliness, (...) and ^onestic.
or negligence, can by any slight pull the love and fear of God out of our
hearts, and place in their steed and room, the love of Fleshly pleasures and
vanttie: there is no cause, reason, or persuasion, will be any thing
avayleable, to stay the fluddes of vice and iniquity the banks and stays of
the love and fear of. God once thence removed.

Here ensues the third part of this present discourse.
CAuses which ought to exhort us to Temperance, Abstinence,

The first motive cause, (...) To obey (...) commandment
to Temperance, Abstinence and sobriety.
THE first cause, why we Christians should use Temperance, Abstinence, and
Sobriety, or mode rate use of gods creatures, is the commandment of God,
that severely commands this virtue, and forbids the contrary vices, as
Luke. 21. Luke. 21.
Be ware least your hearts be ouercharged with excess in meares and drinks.
Ephe. 5. Be not dronken with wine, wherein is riot, excess and luxury: Oras
some expound it, deprivation of salvation and utter destruction.

The second cause.
SEcondly, we must be temperate, 2. To continue prayer the mean of supplye of
all our wantes.
least true innocation of God, or seruent prayer, which is the only mean where
by we obtain strength and power from above, to stand against all our
spiritual enemies, be let and bindered. The which cannot be done in such
sort as it ought to be done, of such as use excess in diet: And therefore
says S. Peter. Be sober and watch unto prayer, whereby he signifies unto us,
that without famings and subd^ng^ of our fleshly appetites by abstinence,
watching, labor, meditation, and such godly exercises: we are as unapt for
prayer as a Cow is for a sadle, or a Sow for a cage. And therefore one being
demaundes, whers vertn and (...) wisely and truly answered: The next do^^ to
Temperance or Sobriety: meaning that without Temperance, it is impossible to
continue in virtue and godliness.

The third cause, why Abstinence, and Sobriety must be used.
THirdly, we must be temperate, 3. That virtue may be plantid in us which will
take no root in a riotous soil.
lenst the (...), there virtues be let and (...). For in the ^yngdom of
intemperance, where (...), rio^, and excess here sway, there is no place lest
for true wisdom, Justice, inodestie, virginity, chastity, and the other
virtues. For as gluttony, drunkenness, pleasure, and deliciousnes, ure the
(...) welspringe of all (...), and (...) they yt lettes and hindrances of all
(...) virtue and godliness. Impedimenta virtutum.


The fourth cause.
FOurthly, 4. To escape Hell fire.
that we may escape the everlasting plagues and punishments that God has
prepared for impoenitent dronker^s, Turfetters and betty gods, as ye Apostle
declares. 1 Cor. 6. Ben nor d^^^^ed a neither whores, whoremongers, not dronk
aids shall possess the kingdom of God.

The fifth Cause.
FIfthly, 5. Least we should abuse gods creatures, created to gods glory and
the profit of the godly. Math. 14. Mar. 6. Luke. 9.
we must be Temperate, and use Abstinence and Sobriety, lest we abuse the
Creatures of God, contrary to his commandment: Gather up the fragments,
least any thing be lost. Math. 14. Mar. 6 Luke 9. Which is our master
Christ's precepte of Parstimonte and religious use of things. And includes a
prohibition of the abuse of all gods Creatures.

The sixth cause, of Abstinence and Sobriety,
SIxdy, ^. To maintain and continue the health, strength, vigor, and good
states of (...) bodies.
we must use Temperance, and Sobrietle, Abstinence and Continence, least we
hurt, decay, and bestroy our own bodies. For Lecherous persons, gluttons, and
dronkardes, sin against their own bodies, that is: they do afflict, vex,
trouble, torment and grieve their bodies, by (...) pera^inge the constitution,
or good and (...) thereof, by over charging the same with meats and drinckes,
by decaying the health thereof, and by proturyng and fetchinge, through
distemperance many sichenesies and diseases. And do contumeliousely, and
spitefully, abuse their bodies, and do let and hinder them, and keep them from
(...) the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and instement^ of divine actions, that in:
of virtue and godliness, which (...) before is declared; cannot be ^rought of
them, which like Swyne wallow in the miry pu^dels of Gluttonis, A^esherie, and
such like vices. And herefore, as they that kill and murder themsel^es are
greater senuers, then they that kill (...) ^o are Le^cherous persons, (...)
terers, a^ Bellygods, greater offenders then others, because they efile,
polute, and destroy their own bodies which should (...) the Temples, and
dwallynge places of God. And therefore, count not fleshly pleasures, bodyly
lust, and excess in diet, small saultes that bring unto us su^ch great
mischiefs, misery, woe, and calamitis.

The fourth part, of this Discourse, which entreats of the causes that
procure whooredome and uncleanness.
BEcause (as wisdom teaches, and experience proves.)

THe first, and principal cause, (...) Original ^in or our natural pronce
nes and readiness to sin and vice.
is the general corruption of our nature, which we draw from Adamour first
Parent, by means of his transgression, and falling from God, the which is (as
it were) the Welspring and root of all evil, from whence whooredome and all
other sins (...) spring and flow. The Apostle S. Paul. Romans 7. where be
complains of this welheade of mischief, calls it sin dwelling in our
flesh, which is our crooked nature prone and inclined to all naughtines, the
which he well calls finne, both because it is an enemy, and contrary to the
law of God: And also because it is the root of all other sins whatsoever.
This is the original corruption and filthiness of our heart, from whence
proceed signs, gestures, words and works, that utter and show our inward
uncleanness. This inward corruption felt the Prophet David, when, heeing
admonished of his sins, he cried out unto the Lord and said: Psalm. 51.
A clean heart create within me O God, and a right soirit renew in my inward
parts. Psalm. 51. Where he destreth a clean heart to be made within him, he
does manifestly confess yt his heart is polluted, and that his former sins
did proceed of an unclean heart. All the godly do daily pray to be cleansed
from this impuritie of heart, and do watch the same as diligently as they can,
and study to suppress it, and keep it under, The difference (...) the godly
and ungodly.
that it break not out into wicked words and works: whereas the wicked and
ungodly stir it up, and study to put it in execution or action. And this is
the difference between them both. The one studieth to bridle their lusts, and
the other to fulfill them. And therefore if you will be of the number of the
godly and partakers of the reward prepared for them, and avoid the
punishments made ready for the wicked, you must study daily to bridle your
fleshly lusts, and fight continually against your own corrupt nature.

THere be other secundary causes, 2. Idleness, ^ndernes and ^^oyding of
^^nest labor
whereby this evil that lies hid in the heart is fostered, fed, and stirred
up, as idleness, and eschuing of honest labor, tenderness, and delicateness. An
idle and full belly commonly as it were, fometh out all unlawful lusts: we
see daily examples hereof before our eyes, which I now omit for breuity, and
for that hereafter more shall be thereof spoken in that part of this Discourse
which entreats of the remedies of sensual lust.

THis corruption, (...) Hearing se^ng, touching ^^uncinge, and. reading, bavvdy
books or ^llades.
this pronenes, and readiness of our nature to filthiness and uncleanness, is
stirred up also, by hearing, by seeing, by touching, by dancing, and by
readinge of wanton and bawdy Books, or Ballades. The strongest poison of this
infection is drawn in at the eyes. And therefore it is said in the book of
Wisdom What is created more wicked then the eye? And therefore, they that
study to live a pure and chaste life, must moderate and refrain their eyes,
that they wander not to much abroad, no pass the bands of modesty. Wherefore,
this sentence is often repeated in the Scripture by the godly: I have made a
covenant with mine eyes, that they behold not vanity. It is also stirred up by
hearing, and therefore, youth when they hear bawdy persons (who are the Devils
bellows to kindle the ^^er of wanton lust in the hearers, unless they be
assisted by Gods special grace) blow out their filthiness, by ribawdous talk
or Songs, they must stop the ears of their mind, least they hear that by
day, which they can scarce put out of their mind by night. Great danger
comes also by touching, and therefore it must be anoyded of such as study to
preserus their Virginity and Chastity.

OCcasion also is a great cause hereof, 4. occasion and opportunity.
whither it be by dwelling together in one house, or by being long together
alone without company, and therefore is to be shunned, of all those that have a
care to live honestly.

FIfthly, 5. The cherishinge of vvanton thoughts.
the continuing and cherishinge of soul and filthy thoughts and cogitacions,
for such a thought or cogitaciou, if it be suffered to tarry any space, it
moves the affection, or the desiring part of our soul or mind. The
affection if it be not forthwith repressed and kept under, it is inflamed and
set on fire, then the affection being inflamed and set on fire, compels the
will to consent: and after follows the shameful deed. The filthy fact often
committed (is turned) as it were into Nature, so that then it will be a barde
matter to step back, but the party diseased, is commonly without Gordes
speartall grace, even as it were compelles to fall, contrary to the counsel of
the minds, countrary to conscience and reason: As appears in the history of
the filthy Queen Medea, (though co^en of great parentage) whose desperate
complayus was thus: I see the things that are better, and I allow well of them,
and yet I follow the things that are worst: which is al one in affect, as if
she should have said. I know and see the way to felicity, and yet I run
headlynge into misery. And therefore, let them that be wise, resist the
beginning of this disease, before it grow interrable. And as soon as the Diueli,
the Flesh, or their own lust, or the world by lowds examples, shall put into
their minds, any wanton and filthy thought, or cogitacion, let them forthwith
without any delay, expel the same by thinking of some good and virtuous
matter, by Praying, by Readyng the sacred Scriptures, and meditatnug thereon,
or of some other godly and virtuous book: by Temperance, Sobriety, honest
labor, or some other of the exercises hereafter in this present Treatise
mentioned.

THe sixth cause of this malady is the fosterynge and norishyng of our natural
lust, 6. The sur^ng thereof by forbidden ^ces.
by Gluttony, Surfeting, excess of strong and hot drinks, bankettinges
out of due season, wanton or ouergay apparel, uncomely gestures and futch like
instruments of Lust, and ceremanies of Venusses sernice: and therefore all
carefully to be avoided of the professors of Virtue and Honesty.

THe seventh cause, (...) compa^y or wicked (...).
of this lothely disease of the Soul, is the keepyng, bauntyng, and
frequentyng of wanton ungodly company, Which danger in this ^orrupt age is
easily incurted of youth, for la^ke of (...) and found indgement. For as
Pithagoras was wont to say^ Commonly in a mul^eude, the flock of the wicked is
most, and the number of the godly least. And as a learned man of out country
of late wrote: Where there is one man in these our days encouraged by the
rewarne of Virtue to forth^ out the secreates of wisdom: There are many which
no doubt allured by the smilyng lakes of Vanity, do spends their whole time in
contemplation and peactise of folly.

Hereof comes Sloth, the non^ce of Need: Pride, the thiese author of
Penury, and Filthy lust, the mother of all mischiefs. And a little after there
be some, I fears to many, that know not what Goodness means, heither will
they come where Honesty dwells. Vnthristinesse, is their hauntyng house,
Uncleanness, their delight, Quarrelyng, their exercise, Disdain, their
companion, and Blasphemous swearyng, their common talk. This dangerous goulf
to Perdition, of all the godly and virtuous, must as carefully be shunned as
the Mariners do the Syrtes, Scilla and Caribdis (most dangerous places in the
Sea, and full of deadly peril) for fear of shippewracke and loss of all,
their Ship, Goordes, Bodies, and Lives.

THe eight cause, 8 Hope of impunitic and concealemet.
of this reprochefull vice in some persons, is dope of scapyng unpunished, and
of hydynge and concealyng the same. But such, Cicero. Honesta bonis viris non
occulta petuntur. The Heathen that knew neither God nor them selves aright. But
(as S. Paul declares Romans 1.) became vain in their imaginations, and whose
foolish heart was full of darkesnesse yet save this.
neither know God nor themselves: for if they did, they would believe and be
fully persuaded that God cannot abide Iniquity, but is a severe Judge and
punisher thereof in the impenitent, either in this world, or in the world to
come. And that they that are not punished therefore in this world, have a
greater testimony of Gods eternal judgments, against them in an other
world. And that God is the searcher, knower and iudger of the heart, and
therefore that no secreates can be bid from him. And that the Creator of all
is more to be feared, then all creatures. And consequently, that there is no
dalying with GOD, and that though they can bleare the eyes of men, yet that God
can never be deceived, nor mocked withal. But sees an Hypocrite, where soever
he be, and will pull of his Visour and defect him, one time or an other,
either in this world or in the world to come.

THe ninth cause of this mischief, is the forslowynge and omittyng of Prayer,
9. Omission of prayer, and the other remedies for this inward disease.
the neglector contempt of Gods word, yielding to slothfulness and
idleness, by declining honest labors, and the lack of using and practicing
of other remedies, appointed by ye learned and godly: yea, commanded by God
himself in his sacred word: for the cure and bealynge of this spiritual
malady, the chiese whereof here after are remembered. Many more causes of this
mischief or deadly disease of the mind or soul there be, which to reeite
would be too long. But these are the chief. And if (by Gods grace) we a void
these causes, we shall also a void this mischief and malady it self. For to
avoyde the causes: is to avoid the effects yt come thereof.

The fifth part of this Discourse, which entreats of the greeuousnes,
haynousnes, and enormitie of whoredom and Adultery.
FOrasmuch, as in these last days and perrilous times, fore-shewed by the
spirit of God, wherein (for the most part) men and women be disobedient,
unholy, intemperate, despisers of them which are good, headie, high minded,
lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God, or louinge pleasure more then God,
having a show of godliness, but denying the force and power thereof.2. Tim. 3. 1.
Tim. 3.
This detestable and pestilent peruersitie is grown into a custom, that the
more whoredom and uncleanness do abound, the more secure and careless men
and women offend, so that whoredom and adultery among wicked worldlings,
faithles persons, is counted almost no sin, but daliance and pastime, though
in very deed, none is able sufficiently to consider the haynousnes thereof. The
fault whereof, in the terrible day of judgment shall be laid on their necks,
which by the authority of their power, might and ought to remedy this
mischief that daily grows. It is a thing therefore worth the labor, for
their sake at the least that have not cast away all the fear of God, breefely
to set down how grievous and mischeeuous, how full of mischief, misery, and
calamity, this sin or vice is; and what plagues and punishments follow the
same.

FIrst, 5. 1. It resists Gods will and ^arieth with (...) a manifest contempt
of Gods com^^ndeme^t.
let that person that fears God, think of the common and general
greeuousnesse of sin, or contrarying of gods will reuaaled, which is, that it
does not only resist the will of God, but has with it a manifest contempt of
Gods commandments, which despising of gods precepts, how horrible a thing it
is, no heart is able worthily to conceive, much less tongue to utter, or pen
to write. A godly man will not do any thing that should displease God, although
be were not forbidden the same by any express commandment, how much more
then ought we to take heed that we commit not any thing contrary to the
manifest* commandments of Gods Majesty? It easily appears how great the
contempt of Gods authority must be, when wittingly and willingly we tread
his commandments under foot: If you should disobey but your Mothers
commandment, you should (if it were in a godly and reasonable matter) be
counted but foolish stubberne wilful Girls: Thus sharply I wrote, to this end
and purpose, that I might (by Gods grace) so deeply imprint the fear of God
and the hatred of this filthy vice into my dear cosins minds: that no spo^ge
of concupiscence norany rags of wicked example or lewd company, might at any
time wipe cut or rub away the same, out of the new Tables of their tender
minds and hearts, as I hope it never did no^shall.
and (peradventure she) would so use the matter that you should repent it
every vain of your hearts. But if you should disobey the Queens Highness,
the Prince or chief Magistrate of the Country, or Realm, why: it were death:
and thinks you that you shall long vnchecked disobey God, the Lord of Lords,
and King of Kings, that is able to rent the earth and sincke you down to
Hell quick and alive, as he did Core, Dathan, and Abiron? Number. 16. with all
their disobediente company? do you think (I say) that you shall disobey this
almighty God, and wittingly, and willingly tread his sacred law under your
feet, and that (scotfree) without any plague or punishment? No, no, never
think it, though you stand now in such wealth, prosperity, and security, that
you think it impossible to decay, and to come to adversity: yet God is able
(and will if you anger him) to turn all up side down, he can take away your
good Mother in his displeasure, and send you such tutors and governors as you
deserve, (if you willingly of deliverate purpose disobeye your bounteous
heavenly Father, that has done so great things for you) that is such as will
use you hardly, roughly, and (peradventure) in such sort as Peysauntes and
flaues are used. Yea, and (perchance) marry you to some waiward, crabbed
churles, or to some deformed lothly persons, or to such like. This can god do
to displease you, if you should study to displease him, as whoores, and
whooremongers and other wilful violators of his sacred laws do, or else he
can send you such a Stepfather that shall keep your Mother so short that
she shall not be able so to prefer you as she now intends. (...) Forewar^
half (...).
He is able (if with whooredome, filthiness or otherwise you provoke him to
displeasure) to whistle for thieves, that shall cut your throats in your
beds, and so by sudden death without repentance to send you packing to the
Devil, whose service you preferred (if as God defend you should fall to such
wickedness) before his: for whoores and whooremongers as long as they continue
in their filthy mind and purpose, are not the servants of God, but the
bondslaues of Satan. He is able (if his fury be once kindled) to send the
distroyer, and that swiftly like a whirle wind to set on fire the fair houses
that you now dwell in, in revenge of the wickedness, wrought in ye corners
thereof, if (as God forbid) you should give your selves to such impiety and
wickedness, as is whooredome, adultery, and such like vices, as I have better
hope of you. * But you had need to beware of it betimes, for the Devil has
his Children, his Peysants, rascals and flaues in corners privily to allure you
to it: If it may be, I mean to commit folly and abomination in corners: which
if you do, you may provoke God in wrath, to give away all the Land whereof
your Marriage money should be made, to your enemies: yea, and your fair and
beautiful bodies (if as God forbid you should abuse them) can he also give
into the hands of your enemies, to be subject to the filthy and beastly lusts
of vile slavish rascal peysants, to fowls deformed stinkinge, weather beaten,
warpe faced Soldiers. b This is not (...) incon^ or repre^sion of any ^nous o^
godly Souldis (...) who^ this Author know (...) to be ^ight profita^ and very
necessary members, defenses ^mentes of the common wealth, and who^ heere^enceth
with all his (...): but for (...) admenition and amend meant of such base
conrages (...) yield them sel^^es cap^iues to filthy (...), contrary to the
nature and property of true for titude, and to the valiant ^age of: right
Soldier, and of such as like beasts prefer beastly pleasure before the flying
fame of (...) worthy warrior, and for to awake the careless out of the deep
sleep of security. Thus has god in his just judgments and unsearchable
ways dealt of late with some of our Neighbors, and that which lights on
one, may fall on an other, if God in mercy auert it not which ought to awake
us out of our drovvsie sleep of carnal security, and to cause (...) to look
about us, and admonished to learn and study by due obedience to retain gods
(...), howsoever otherwise we fare in this world.
And afterward when beauty is faded, to be thrust into some Kitchen or
scullery to wash dishes, or into some Dongchill bare footed and bare legged to
fill the donge Pot, or to some such like villainous drudgerie, to dishonor the
bodies that dishonored him. For, as God has promised to gloziste them that
glorify him, so has he likewise promised to despise, bring to shame and
confound them that despise and contempne him. But why begin I to measure the
Sea, and to include it in a Cockle shell? Or why go I about to reckon the
means how the infinite and incomprehensible God can punish the wilful
contempners of his will, pleasure, and commandments? seeinge he has
infinite thousands of ways and means to punish the disobedient, that we
never think of, till we see it come to pass before our eyes. And as he has
such means to punish you, if of set purpose you offeud: so has he the like,
or some far more greeuouser and sharper for such vile varlets, and slauishe
rascals that do or shall entise you to lewdness. 1. The favor of god: the
fountain of prosperity and felicity.


Therefore, let the love and fear of God be always before our eyes, to
restrain and withholde us Christians from evil, and to keep and preserve us
in his * favor and fatherly affection toward us, 2. The disple sure of god
is the welspring of all woe and wretchedness, of all misery and infelicity
from whence all prosperity, good success and felicity flow, as from a
Spring or Fountain: as all adversity, ill hap and miserye does from his
wrath and displeasure, which is cheefely procured through abuse of our bodies
by these heinous sins of Whoredom, Adultery, and such like.

SEcondly, Let us remomber that this precept: 2. It breaks the league and
covenant between God and us.
Thou shall not commit Adultery, which includes an affirmative commandment,
and is, as much as to say: thou shall live chastely and holily, is a precept
that has respect to the covenant that God has made with his people, which
covenant is expressed. Genesis 17. I will be the God of thee and of thy seed or
posterity: (says God to Abraham, the father of the faithful) and thou shall
walk before me, and be * All gods people aspire to holiness and perfection.
holy and perfect. So that if we sin against our holiness and
sanctification, by whooredome and uncleanness, we break covenant with God,
and cease to be his people and confederates, and become the filthiebondslaues
of Satan: which, how detestable a thing it is, god give us grace to see, and
thoroughly to consider, that like Esawes we sell not our heavenly enheritance
for a mess of Pottage of short and filthy pleasure.

3. The grea^e (...) of (...) from (...) (...), that is (...) the son, (...)
Cause, (...) Time. ^he place.
The greuousnesse and haynousnesse of this sin gathered of circumstances.
THyrdly, the hatefulnes and detestablenes of this filthy sin is to be
considered by the circumstances thereof, whereof these chiefly are to be wayed
and pondered: to wit.

1. The Person. 2. The Cause. 3. The Time, 4. The Place.
Which if you apply it to your selves, will be thus, or the like in effect.

1. The circumstance of person applied to you.
IF any of you (which God forbid) should stayne and defile your selves with
whoredom, ^om the (...).
it would be mutche more shame for you, being Gentlewomen, which should
excel and shine before the common sort in Virtue and godliness, like the
sun amongst other celestial bodies, planets and stars: or at the least,
like the moon and day star, among obscure stars of the firmament. More
shame (I say) would it be for you, that so should excel, then it would be, for
one of obscure and base birthe, of whom no such excellency is looked for.

Again, (...) must (...) wise (...) and (...) care (...) least (...) and
(...) deaily ^ ^y, ^ ^ch as ^ ^ golden cup of flattery, pretended love or
service.
if any of you should stayne or blemish your selves with any of the mean,
base, or rascal sort, or entangle your selves, with any of obscure and bace
birth, or with such as were not able to maintain your state and degree,
unawares, or contrary to the good will of your good mother, and such your
friends, as intend your preferment, good, and advancement: your worldly shame
would be the greater, that would so far beneath your degree abuse and
disgrace your selves, and show your selves so disobedient, unkind and
unthankful, to so loving a mother, and to so careful, provident, and
faithful friends.

Again, it is more shame for a woman to commit this vice, then for a man. For
ye chief, and almost only virtue, that above all things is required in a
woman, is Virginity and Chastity, which being once lost, her credit is
crackte, especially among the wise and godly.

Again, if you being sayre and bewtifull, should commit such filthiness, it
would be more shame for you, A foul mind in a fair body, what it is
then if some foul slut should do the same: For beauty and comeliness of
person in an whore or harlot, bravely apparelled, is like a ryng of gold in a
swynes snowte. And a filthy beastly mind, whorish or knauish Bear with my
playnesse gentle reader: for vice, to youth should be set out in its black and
ough colors to breed contempt and hatred thereof within their tender breasts,
and least they should be deceived with shadows and subtle shows, as (...)
fore is (...) ^.
qualities, in a bewtifull or comely person, finely or trimly arrayed, is (with
reverence be it spoken) like stinkyng ordure in a golden bore, beset withal
kind of precious stones, and costly ornaments.

Again, more shame would it be for you to lose your Virginity forthwith,
without any striuynge with your, lust and concupiscence, then if you should
tarry a dosen years, lookyng for a good husband, and then slide, being
overcome with many assaults and temptations, though that too, would be
excedyng shameful, and a perpetual blot, stayne, and blemish to your house,
stock and progeny. But of two evils and mischiefs, the first is far
greater, and more detestable, and therefore a wonderful shame would it be, to
make shipwreck even at the first setting out, or to fall in the beginning of
our course, and like a rotten Apple to drop of the tree green before it be full
ripe.

Again, if you yt have been so godly enstructed of your Mother in Christ's
true religion, and have heard so many good Sermons and Lectures, should now end
in the flesh, where you began in ye spirit, your shame and confusion would be
too to exceeding, wonderful, and far greater then if some ignorant asses should
commit the like solly and impietic.

This circumstance of person, is very ample and large, consider that thy mind
is so much the more excellenter and liker unto God, and therefore the more
unworthy such a foil, (...).
such a filthy spot, stain, and perpetual blemishe.

If thou be a young body, have an eye to the end before thou begin unadvisedly
to devour and swallow down the Devils hook, (...) ma^o^^ ^lup^as. ^sualitie
or ^up^no^s^es is the di^s bayted ^oke, where with he eat^th soul^^ (...)
fishers do (...) with an ^ooke plea^tly bayted
bayted with dyre and deadly pleasure. Take heed what thou do, and beware
that thou do not rashly beray and spoil the flower of thy youth, that will
never spring again, least thou loose and consume thy golden time and best
years in a most filthye and abominable vice, which fly away most swiftly,
but return never, and which God in mercy has lent thee to work out thy
salvation with fear and tremblinge, and not thy destruction and damnation,
stubbernly and desperately. Take heed (I say) least in this youthful age for
lack of knowledge, experience, and good aduisement, thou commit the thing that
will mollest and vex thee all thy life long, the grievous remembrance of the
shameful crime always knawing thy conscience, and those deadly stinges still
tormentinge thee, which filthy Pleasure at her departure, will leave in thy
mind.

If thou be old, (...)
wish that thou had other folks eyes a while, that thou might see how
vncumly fleshly pleasure is for thee, the which even in young folks is
lamentable, and with seucre punishments to be restrained, but in an old
dotinge fool, be it man or woman, is prodigious, and even to the followers of
sensual lust, ridiculous and scornful: for among all mousters, there is none
more monsterous then an owe Leachour. O witles waltham, O doting dolte, and to
much forgetting thy self. At the least, take a Glass in thy hand and behold
thy hoare hairs, vewe well thy forehead plowed with wrincles, as with
furroughes, and thy face most like to a dead carkas, and now being at the
pits brinke, take other things in hand more fit for thy years. At the least
d^o thou, by the admonishment, or rather enforcement of years, that which it
had becomen thee to have done, by the persuasion of reason. If God and his
word can with thee nothing prevail, Pleasure her felse has thrust thee
away, saying neither am I seemly for thee, nor thou fit for me. Thou have
played enough, thou have eaten enough, thou have drunk enough, thou have
dallied enough: it is time for thee now to be packkinge, hence with thee, why
do thou as yet graspe and hold fast the fleetinge delights of this
transitory life, seeinge this life it self has forsaken thee? and so of the
persons of all other degrees, and several callinges, for to prosecute all,
were endless. This much for example sake.

Secondely, from the Cause.
A Gain, if no cause should move you to this vice, 2. From the cause.
but prosperity, case, and your owue beastly appetite (as there can be no
other cause in you) then would your offense be greater, thou the crime of
common strumpets that are driven thereto by poverty and penurre. The which, how
shameful and reproachful it would be, wit and discretion with riper years
will tell you.

The greeuousnesse of this opprobrious offense, drawn from the circumstaunce,
time.
Moreover, 3. From the circumstance of time.
if in the time of such great light of the Gospel, that through Gods merciful
providence shines upon you, you should commit this abominable work of
darkness, it would increase the punishmente of your sins wonderfully. If in
this dreadful time, wherein appear manifest signs and tokens of Gods wrath
and indignation against us for our sins: as blazing Stars, Monsters, terrible
sightes in the Air, supernatural Earthquakes, and such like prodigous
wonders, you should be so careless and so full of contempt of his dreadful
Majesty, that you should with this sin, increase Gods wrath, already kindled
against us, your plagues, one time or an other would be horrible.

Again, apply the circumstance of time, of ye week, and of the year to your
solues: and you shall find no time for such uncleanness, but shall perceive it
heinous, shame full and unseemly, for a faithful Christian at al times thus:

1. ON the working day, Not on the working day
is no fit time to commit whoredom or filthiness in, for it would be a great
shame for us that when all other give them selves to labor and to please the
Lord in their vocation, with honest and virtuous exercises: we alone should
give our selves to slothfulnes, wantonness, vice, filthiness, and abomination.

2. The Sunday and holyday is no fit time for the profanation and vnhalowinge
of our bodies by whoredom or Adultery, (...). Not on the Sabothe day and holy
day.
and such like impuritie, for that day above all other the Lord requires that
we should keep holy, and dedicate and consecrate the same to his service, and
in no wise that day to serve his enemies, the wortoe, the flesh, or the Devil.
Besides, the very name (Sabbath) does admonish us to rest from our own filthy
will, to d^ the will of the Lord. For (Sabbath) in Hebrew signifies rest.
Moreover that day is a tipe and figure of our eternal life wherein we shall rest
from sin for ever. Which we must begin in this world, by resting from our
corrupt will, lust, and desire, or else we shall never come to it. And therefore
no day to work our damnation and eternal death, by such dead works as is who
redome. etc.

3. The morning when the Sun shyneth, (...). Not in the (...).
clearly casting forth her bright Beams, is no fit time for the works of
darkness, and then we should give thanks unto our heavenly Father that he
has so lovingly preserved us from all dangers of the night past, that has
not suffered the Devil to pull down the house on our heads as he did on
Iobe his Children, nor suffered our thretes to be cut in our veddes, as manies
be, and so forth of other his irrecompensable benifites bounteously bestowed
upon us without any our besertes. And not to ^ee so unthankful for his divine
benificence, as by and by to prouo^e him to wrath, through out filthine^^e in
steed of thanks for the same his great mercy.

4. But (peradventure) you will think the night and darkness a fit time for
it. No, Not at night.
not for For God has ordained the night and da^kenesse, not only that we might
take our rest and sleep: but also to set before us a type and shaddowe of the
everlasting borro^ and darkness that he has prepared in Hell, for such as
contempne him, and disobey his word and commandment. And what impudente
b^ldenesse were it, (...) to provoke God to wrath, when he sets a sign
and picture of his wrath before our face.

5. After Dinner or Supper is no fit time for it, Not after dinner or supper.
for that were as if a shrewd Girl, after she had been well fed and
cherished of her louinge Father, would^ come to him, and in stead of thanks,
spitte in his face: who would not count such a one worthy to be (...),
scourged, and plagued? hut so do all such as being liber^ly sed of their
heavenly Father, run by and by and (...) steed of gininge him thanks, by
livings to him and his Saints, commit who redeem, or such like (...) which he
most abhoreth and detesteth.

Now proceed, and apply the circumstance of (time in the year) to your
selves, and you shall, find the like, that is, that there is no time of the
year fit for a Christian to commit who redome in, thus:

1. NOt at Newyeres tide, Newyeares tide.
for that is the feast of Circumciston, when all fleshly lusts and vanities
should be cut from our hearts. And therefore no time then, to let the^ ^uergrow
our hearts and minds so much that they carry ve even to commit the outward
external filthy (...).

2. Not at Twelfe tide, Twelfetide.
for then God appeared and shown him self to the world, and therefore no time
to commit such vucleanenesse, in the Lords prefence.

3. Not at Candlemas, for that is a time of purif^y^ (...) ^lensing of our
souls and consciences, Candelmas.
and therefore (...) time ^o pollute and defile the same with such abomination.

4. Not at Shroftide, ^yde.
for that is a time of honest mirth and recreation, and we Chistians are
commanded that when we will be merry, we should be merry in the Lord.
Now, now great a shame would it be for us, if that when all other rei^yse in
the Lord, in virtue, honesty, and lawdable recreations, we alone should
rejoice in the Devil, in the spirit of fornication, in vice, dishonesty, and
villainie.

5. Not at Lent. Lent.
for that is a time of fasting, praying, repentance, and studyinge to pacif^e
Gods wrath, and if we then should provoke him to wrath, we should show our
selves too desperate.

6. Not at Easter, Easter.
when our head Christ rose from death to life, after he had conquered finne,
the Devil and all the insernall Atmie, and therefore the Church has
appointed, that time special to rise from sin and corruption. Now it were to
much shame for us, when all other rise from sin, that we alone should fall
to sin, vanity and corruption.

7. Not at Whitsontide, Whitsontide.
for that is the Feast of the Holy Ghost, and then eveefely we should subdue
the flesh to the spirit, whom then (specially) we profess to worship and
honor.

8. Not in Summer, Summer.
for then all things flourishe and grow to persection, and it were
intolerable shame for us alone then to wyther in virtue and godliness, and to
tend to destruction.

9. Not at Lammas, Festum seacti (...).
for then S. Peter suffered bands and imprisonment for Christ's sake. And
shall not we be able to bri^le our wanton lusts, desires and pleasures for
his sake, that left his beauenly glory, and celestial pleasures for our sake?
and for whose sake this holy Apostle suffered bands and imprisonmente? yea,
and at the last, spente his heart blood too, as many thousands (...), of our
Brethren and Sisters in Christ have done? if we should not, with what face
could we profess to be Christians, that is Christ's Scholars, and Soldiers?

10. Not at Michaelmas: Michaelmas.
for the^ do we celebrate the feast of that victorious Michaell tharchangell,
that fought with the Devil and overcame him. Apoc. 12. And therefore great shame
would it be for us, then to yield to the Devil, and to become his vassals, and
bondflanes, and to suffer him to rule and reigue in us by his filthy spirit
of Fornication and whoredom.

Moreover, we then celebrate the least of Angels, which God of his marvelous
bountifulness and fatherly good will toward us, has appointed to watch
over us, to keep and defend us. And therefore, horrible ingratitude would it
be, then by our lewd life to drive them away from us, for the holy, pure and
chaste Angels can not abide such profanation and pollution, as is whoredom,
adultery, and such like uncleanness.

11. Not at Alhalowentide, for then all should be saints, Alhalowentide.
and holy, to celebrats the Feasts of all Saints, and therefore great shame
would it be for us then to unhallow and profane our bodies, and to make our
selves of Saints, dongeons of Devils, and Mansions and dwellinge places for
the filthy spirit of Fornication, through Whoredom, Adultery and such like
wickedness and pollution.

12. Not in Winter, Winter.
for then all things wyther and decay, and what shame would it be for us, if
this filthy vice should then flourish and war green in us, contrary even to
Nature, and the time of the year?

13. Not at Christmas, Christmas.
for then cheefely should Christ be borne in us, and live and reign in our
minds and souls, so that then there can be no room for the filthy spirit
of Fornication, for they two can not dwell together, one expels the other.

Thus if we consider things well as we should do, we should find no time
for this filthy abomination, 4. The great nesse hereof drawn from the
circumstace of place.
neither yet (place) if it were well waighed, for:

FIrst, the Haull and Parlour, is a place of resort, and therefore no place
fit for this filthiness, which you would be ashamed to commit before one
poor witness besides your copesmate. (...) helord (...) (...), the ^rder of
^dly. S^ (...) of ^lted, ^ched ^ough ^weth ^ough ^weth down ^g and up ^g, he
vn^andeth out ^es, he ^t out (...) and (...) our bed ^ieth ou^. (...) ways:
can go no th^^ (...) ^tite (...) can we ^de his ^uce, or (...) and ^pe
eve(...) who (...) in the (...) as plain ^n the (...) well, (...) to him ^he a
(...) 13 9


But here, those that yield to this beastly vice should remember how corrupt
their judgment is, that count it a shame to commit such filthiness before a
silly scullion, of a Kitchen, or in sight of the vilest rascal that is, and
yet count it no shame to do it * before our glorious God, and all his heavenly
hosts of innumerable Angels and saints, who beholds even the secreat
thoughts of their hearts, so far of is it, that he is ignorant of their
dooinges, (...) they never so privily done in corners, and before innumerable
wicked spirits their enemies, which laugh at their overthrow, and will be
their accusers at the dreadful day of judgment. Those things I say they
should remember, and learn not so much to fear man, as him that can cast both
body and soul into Helster Math. 10.28. Beeinge fully persuaded that Gods
word abides for ^euer, which is: that there is nothing covered that shall
not be disclosed, nor his, that shall not be known. Math. 10.26. The Chamber.

SEcondly, the Chamber is no fit place for it: for that is appointed only in
this respect by Gods ordinance for lawful Matrimony, who has also commanded
to keps the bed and Chamber vndeftled: but whoredom deftleth all, and therefore
has no place there. Again, our Chamber unto us, is as nestes unto Birds: now
the common Proverb, in every Tapsters, Clown, and Carters mouth, tells us,
and that truly: that it is a silthy birds that berayes his own nest. Buttry,
Pantrie. etc.

THirdly, the Buttry, Pantry, Bruehouse, Backhouse, Larder, Seller, and
Kitchen, are no fit places for it: for all these are rooms of provision and
nourishmente whereby our heavenly father sustaineth, cherishes, comfort, and
maintains us in life, health, strength, and good liking: and if we should
offend and displease God there, it were as if a louinge kind hearted Father
should make much of his Children, and provide all things abountantly for them,
and they in stead of thanks, A gross sim^ litude, but yet plainly
describing detestable ingratitude.
would get up their handesful of stinking Dr^ure, and clay in his face. Who
would not thinks such churlish children worthy to be disenberited and thrust
out of door?

Finally, if any unmarried persons, should defile them selves in any place of
their Parents house, and make as it were a privy Stews there, it would
aggrauate and exaggerate their offense exceedingly. For as common sense and
experience teaches us: It is a foul Spaniel that scombreth in his own
Caniell: Which horror of nature, it would seem that God respected, when he
made a Law, Deuteronomy. 22.
that the woman that had played the whore in her Fathers or Mothers house (the
matter not beeinge known before marriage, when her husband taking her for a
Maid, should sinde her the contrary) should be stoned to death at the door of
her fathers or mothers house, Deuteronomy. 2^.

Thus, if you woulder things aright, you should find neither time nor place
for this filthy fact. The multitude of circumstances whereby this sin is made
more gr^tuous, are more then I can rehearse: all circumstaunces notwithstanding
may easily be observed in every finne or vice, if there be present a mind
endued with the love and fear of God, and go^ly circumspection. But these many
for a taste or show? Now to the rest that is needefulll to be known herein.

Yet more of the evils, mischiefs, miseries, and calamities, that come by
whoredom, adultery, and such like uncleanness: First, to all persons in
general, and after to Chrstians in special, and to such as take upon them the
name of God.

HOw great the evil and naughtiness of this sin is, and how hurtful, no
man is able sufficiently to consider, yet to moon us to the hatred and
detestation thereof, it were good to note some en^s, mischeefes, and miseries
that are proper and peculiar to this sin. This it has common with other
heinous crimes: that it excludes from the kingedome of God, that is: It
breaks the vande of our communion or selowship with God, (...) ^om, and it is
to (...) our (...) king(...) of god.
which is holiness of life: for God will have no fellowship with filthiness and
iniquity, that is done of deliberate and set purpose. It cutteth us from
Christ's Church, the communion of Saints, and makes us to be of the Devils
Sinagogue or company, the communion of the wicked, or to utter it more
plainly. It makes us of the children of God, the bondflaues of the Devil,
for so affirms the Apostle.1. Cor. 6. Be not deceived, for neither Whoores
nor Whooremongers, nor Idolators, no Adulterers, nor weakelinges, nor
tenderlinges. etc. shall possess the kingdom of Heaven. It must needs be a
great evil and mischeese, that makes a man or woman the dear creature of
God, subject to eternal destruction, by excluding them from the kingdom of
God. Therefore, this evil and mischief in this sin and offense, ought not
therefore to be counted the lighter, because it is common to other great
sins: but ought rather to be counted most heinous and grievous, because it
makes a man or a woman most miserable and wretched of all: But (as I said)
let us view the evils and mischeefes that come with this stinkinge sin
peculiarly, and with none other.

Evils and mischeefes proper to Whoredom, Adultery etc.
FIrst, (...) (...), and (...) the (...) and (...) man (...) (...) woe (...).
it troubles, muddeth, poysoneth, rotteth, and infecteth the Well head and
root of our nature: for the strength and force of generation, wherewith all our
bodies by the great and wonderful counsel of Gods providence, ar endued,
whereby our stock and kind is increased, and enlarged, and whereby we leave
other in our rooms to worship God when we shall be translated and carried to
Christ, is by this filthy sin perverted, polluted, defiled, and phrophaned,
whiles it is flauishly subject to the corrupt and wicked affections of
forbidden lust and concupiscence. Who is able sufficiently to weight what a
detestable crime it is, to beray and make filthy the origin, beginning root
and Well heads, of the sacred Nature of mankind, whereof the glorious Son of
God (now raigninge in Heaven with his manhood) is partaker?

SEcondly, Whoremongers and Adulterers do violate, It breaks the band of
public honesty.
corrupt, and forcibly break the band of public honesty whero? great regard
ought to be had. It is Gods will that mankind should have a lawful and
honest beginning, and that our life should not be polluted and destled in the
root and beginning thereof. And therefore has forbidden all kind of
vucleanenesse. For what profit could we have of honest parentage, if the
society of our life be defiled, and public honesty violated? for what greater
shame can there be in stock and parentage, then to be the issue and offpring
of a whore and knave? as therefore they are unworthy to live amongst men, that
are touched with no care, nor study to retain public honesty: So this filthy
sin is peculiarly detestable, and to be hated before all other sins,
because thereby the honesty that ought to be among such as line together, is
dissolved and brought to naught.

THirdly, they that haunt whoordome and adultery, By this beastly vice we
sin against our own bodies, by un halowyng and dishonour^g the same thereby.
do run into this mischeese ye other sinners do not, to weet, that they do sin
against their own bodies: hereof does the Apostle admonish us.1. Cor. 6.
After this manner: Flee whoredom, for every other sin that man or woman
commits, is without his body, but they that commit whordome, sin against
their own body. To sin against our own body, is to do injury to our own body,
and that is done two manner of ways: either by hurting the constitution,
complexion, or good and healthful plight and state thereof: How many ways we do
injury OF wrong to our own bodies.
or else by pollutinge and prophaninge the holiness and purity thereof. The
constitution, good plight or healthful state of our bodies, is hurt and
impaired by surfettinge and drunkenness, as before is showed. The purity and
holiness of our bodies, is contaminated and destled by whoredom, adultery,
effeminatenesse, incest, and such like beastlynesse. The purity and
holiness of our bodies, If whoredom ^olute the ^udie^ of chri^ (...) (...) of
^thwicke^.
is the honor of our bodies. Now our Purity and Holiness is poluted, berayed
and defiled, by such sin as the act and doing thereof, is s^tche, that it
makes our bodies (that were made to reygne without head Christ, in eternal
glory) polluted and filthy, which is done by such sins as are last
before named. Hitherto has the Apostle a regard. 1. These. 4. Where he says:
This is the will of God, that you his people be holy, and that ye abstain from
whoredom, and that every one of you be skillful to possess his vessel
(that is his body) in holiness and honor, and not with the desire of lust, as
do the Heathen that know not God. Here we see in this place, how the
whoremonger, and lecherous person, do sin against their own body: whiles by
committing whoredom and uncle anes, they do pollute and defile the holiness
and honor of they^ own bodies. For to the holy Apostle Saint Paul: To
abstain from whoredom, is to possess our bodies with holiness and honor.
And to commit whoredom, is to forgo or forsake the holiness and honor of
the body, wherewith it is adorned.

FOurthly, (...) dye^th a^ (...) and ^emaddeth the followers thereof.
this mischief and misery, does the filthy spirit of Fornication, Whoredom
and Adultery bring always with him, that whom so ever he does possess, he
does so blind and bemadde, that they have small or no regard to their
reputation, good name or fame, neither to their Health, wealth, nor
substance: and this do^ they admonish us of, that paynte Cupid, the son of
Venus blind, without eyes. For certeynly, Sensual lust, is the mother of
Blindness. And in very deeds Whoores, or Whoremongers, and Adulterers, are as
^lynde as Bussardes: They neither see their own shame, nor their copartners,
whereof at the last, if GOD give them grace to repent, they will be greatly
ashamed. They think they are in some pleasant Paradise of pleasure and
delights, whereas in verys deed, they wallow in the myer of filthiness,
shame and confusion like Swyne and rammish Goats. They are so beblinded, that
they can not see, what an unseemly, miserable, and phrenticke a thing it is,
to love beastly pleasure, to ware pale, wanne, and coursely colored, to
beecome lean, and out of all good plight and likinge, to weep, to blother, to
year, to sobbe, to brall, to chyde, to currie favor, and flauishly to be
subject to a filthy sincke and stinking strumpet, or to some beastly doung^
hill Slave, berayed and overwhelmed with all kind of villainous vice.

FIfthly, this detestable sin has this property also: It brings with it
a defire to sin, and offend still without cea^singe.
that it is not ended with once or twice committinge the fli^hy fact, but is
carried with a certain continual study of sinninge, and holds a Man or
Woman (as a Captine) Prisoner, or Bondflaue, and wearyeth their snared and
entangled minds both day and night, with most vain and filthy cogitacions,
thoughts and destres. So that they feel as it were a kinds of Hell within
their minds, they are so vered and tormented inwardly with the troublesome
spirit of Fornication or Whooredome, Two mischiues or vvoc^ whereof one
always way teth on unlawful lust.
and so shall continue for ever, (...) GOD in mercy mightily renew them by his
principal spirit of repentance. And therefore whosoever do intend, to yield
them selves to the f^ithie spirit of Fornication, let them make this
reckoninge with them selves before hand, that one of these two miseries most
certain^ly will follow and come to pass: 1. The one.
Either that the poisoned Cup of fleshly pleasure beeinge once tasted of, will
so bewitche, obscure, duske, and darken their minds, that they shall go from
filthiness to filthiness, from shame to shame, and from villaing to villanye,
until they beeinge utterly blinded, fall into a reprobate sense, and seared
conscience, that can feel no difference beetweene Vice and Mertue, Godliness
and wickedness, honesty and dishonesty: And so being incorrigible and obstinate
in evil, lewdenesse, and naughtiness, can never leave beastli pleasure, no,
not then when it has left them. The which we see to come to pass commonly in
the folowers of ^lthy pleasure: that when the body, touching the act of
generation is utterly dried up, bewti withered, their blood cold, their
strength faylyng, and their eyes daselyng, yet they never leave itchyng. And
then with more wickedness they beecome baudie talkers, then in times past they
were shameless deers, then the which thing what can be more detestable, or
more monstrous? Or that if it come to pass by Gods special favor, ^. The
other.
that they come to their right mind again, and repent them of their
wickedness, filthiness, and folly, yet that short and fugitive pleasure
must be sorrowed for, with great grief, and veration of mind, with mutch
labor, and many salt and brinish tears. How mutche better therefore were it
not to taste at all of this dangerous cup of deadly poison (forbidden lust I
mean) then either to be brought into so incurable blindness, or to buy so
far too dear, so faulse and fleetpng a shadow of pleasure.

Sixthly, It makes a (...) or wo^an light, un (...) and un profitable.
it makes a man or woman not only vain and light, but al together (in a
manner) unprofitable. For it cannot be that that person can be profitable,
either unto himself or other, that is possessed with the spirit of Fornication
or whoredom, of what degree so ever he or she be. For what excellent thing
can that mind bring to pass, that the Devil has snared, bewitched, and
beeblinded?

Seventhly, (...) into great perils and d^ungers of body and (...) foul.
it casts a man or woman into great dangers and ieoperdies of body: both
of sickenesses, and diseases, as of the Palste, Phrenste, French pockes, and
diverse other horible and lothely maladies, and many times of life and limme
too, as witnesses Solomon, in his Proverbs: Zeal and fury shall not spare
them in the day of vengeance, neither shall it hear anies prayers. And in an
other place, Solomon compares the followers of this vice, unto an Ore led unto
the Shambles, and unto a Bird, making haste unto the Suare: For as the Bird
with a little corue is entised into the snare, and so caught and destroyed: so
does the Devil with the hayte of filthy pleasure, catch many, and lead them to
misery and wretchedness in this world, and endless perdition in an other world:
And as the Ore is first pleasantly fed, and then drinen into the Shambles,
and knocked in the head: so the Dinel ^des many with pleasure and vanity, to
prepare them and make them meet for his Hellishe shambles of endless torments.

Eighthly, this sin is of this Nature, 8. It brings two to the devil at
once, unless god in mercy dravv them back.
that it brings two persons to destruction at once. He that otherwise
Anneth, because he sins alone, repenting alone is restored, and in his
conscience by Gods grace qui^ted, but the Whoremonger, Whore, and ^ulterer,
when they repent, if they truly repent, they can not be but greatlys troubled
and vexed in conscience in their behalf, with whom they have offended, and
whom they caused to (...) with them into the Devils claws, out of the which
God in mercy has delivered them.

NInethly, it takes away our good name and fame, 9. It loses our good name.
which as the wise man says, is better then gold and precious stones, and
makes us infamous, odious, and hateful to God, and to all godly and virtuous
persons. For the brute and rumor of no vice stinketh more caryonlike unto
them, then that of Leachery and beastly lust.

These and many other mischiefes^, does this finne of Whoredom and Adultery
draw with it, 1. It dismembreth Christ and makes us of the bevvtiful children
of God, the ugly elfs of Satan, that is It dissolueth our commu^ion with
christr, and ma ^eth v^ members of the (...) Syna^ge, ^he congregation of the
wicked and ^mned.
of whom soever it be committed, but these hortible evils and mischiefs that
follow, concern Christians only:

FIrst, Christen men or women, by committinge whoredom or adultery, or such
like uncleanness, take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an
Harlot. For we Christians by faith and sanctification, are so joined to
Christ, and Christ to us, that we are knit and grow together in one body,
and by stickinge and cleaving unto him, are made one spirit with him. And
because they that do commit whoredom, are made one body with the Hoore (...)
Harlo^ (...) they do commit the villainy withal, a^ the spirit of truth
tells (...) by the mouth of the holy Apostle. 1. Cor. 6. Know you not that
your bodies are the members of Christ? should I then take the members of
Christ^, and make them the members of an Harlot? God forbid^ Therefore, that
christen man, that coupleth him self with a whore and tha^ christian woman
that joins her self with a v^^let, (...) Christ and his church are one
mistic^ll body and therefore they th^^ pluck any mem^re of the church, that is
any christian fr^ christ (which is done by whored^, etc. pluck a sun^ Christ,
or dismember him as much (...) them (...).
dismember, and pluck a s^^der Chris^e, as much as in them lies. For it is
impossible to draw Christ to be partaker, and have communion with such
p^llution and ^^lthinesse, who is not only pure and holy, but pureness and
holiness it self. And because it is an abominable thing so to do, the Apostle
uses that word that is only used in matters of great absurdity, saying as it
were: God forbid that the thought of any such abomination should ever enter
into the the hearts of any Christian. Here ought we christians to mark well,
that our spiritual vnitis that we have with Christ, is not only of soul,
but pertayneth also to our body, so that we are flesh of his flesh, and bones
of his bones, as we read in the sayds chapter, otherwise the hope of our
resurrection would he but weak, unless our con^^nction with christ were such
that is full, whole and perfect. Our coninnction with Christ, and Christ with
us, is far straighter and nearer their is the conjunction of man and wife
together. And therefore, we must make more account of it, then of the other,
that we may keep it with very great ^elitie, and chastity. For if they that
are joined together in marriage ought nor to ^oyne them selves with wh^^es and
harlots, much greater unlawfulness is this in christians, to rent the
communion and conjunction with Christ, that are not only one flesh with
Christ, but also one spirit. And where the Apostle says in the place
aforesaid, that be that cleaneth to an whore, is made one body with her, and
for confirmation thereof, brings this sentence out of Genesis: For they shall
be both one ^^^she. Which Sentence God pronounced only of Marriage: you must
note, that whooredouie is the corruption, marringe, or destruction of Gods
institution, Marriage (...) and therefore, that which may be spoken of
marriage, may in some respect be applied thereto. The Harlot and his whore
are coupled together, and so are married persons, that marry according to
Gods word. But here is the disser^uce: the harlot and his whore, have a
polluted and unpure communion, whereas the other is pure and sanctified by Gods
word. The unity of whores and whorem^ngers, is in Gods wrath, displeasure,
and turse: But of the other, in his favor and blessing: The copulation of the
one accursed: but of the other blessed, if they be joined together, in the
love and fear of the Lord, according to his word, in deed and sincerity,
without hypocrisy, carnal lust, or worldly respect. The remembrance of this,
should never go out of the minds of us Christians, which if we could always
heepe in mind, and not suffer the internal Puttocke the Devil to pick the
seed of Gods word out of our hearts, it would make us always careful and
studique to possess our bodies in hotinesse and honor, and not to pollute and
defile them with whooredome and filthiness, which we hope shall reign with
our head Christ, and all his glorious Angels and Saints, in Heaven
eternally. What greater injury, spite, or contumely then this ran we do to
our bodies, The profanation and vnhalowinge of the temple of the holy ghost,
and making it a dongeon of d^ucls.
that were made to live and reign with Christ in bliss unspeakable, world
without end?

THe second horrible evil, or mistheese that whoeredome and vucleanenesse
brings to Christians, is the profanation and vnhalowinge of the Temple of
the holy Ghost, which is their bodies, and the converting and turninge of the
same into a Dongeon of Devils: for so says the Apostle in the place above
recited: The body of a Christian man or woman is the Temple of the holy Ghost,
which they have in them from God.

Now how horrible a thing both these crimes be:

First, 1. The dissol^ing of our Comm^nion with Christ: and the grow ing in
communion with the devil, and all the damp^ed 2. The profanation of gods
temple, and making i^ the devils takes.
of the me^thers of Christ, to make the members of an hoore or harlot, and to
be made one body with them: yea, to dissolve the Communion, that we have with
Christ, with his holy Angels, with all Saints, and with the whole number of
such as shall be saved: and to grow in communion and fellowship with the Devil,
with filthy spirits, with the malignaut Church, the congregation of the
wicked, and with the whole rabble of the dampened. And moreover, to profane and
pollute, not a material Church, builte of dead stones, but the true spirtuall
and lively Temple, wherein the holy Ghost dwells, and to turn it as it were,
to a Iakes for Satan, and filthy spirits to lay their filthiness in. Now
horrible and detestable (I say) these (...) cursed crimes (yea and those that
ensue also) be, 3 The plucking of (...) out of the rule and gouernemet, of
christ our ^emer, that bought us with his heart bl^d, to serve him in holiness
and righ^^ousnes, before him all the days of out li^e^and the s^^ring of ^s
under the rule and guidyng of ^atha^ to (...) him, in filthin^sse, and
abomination: which is to sin against the blood of our redemption: * our
spiritual ^^cruie^, who and what they be. 1. Flesh, what. 2. world, what it is.
a Christian heart can easily conceive.

The sinninge against the blood of our redmption.
THe third evil, and mischeese that whoredom and vnclean^nesse brings unto
Christians, is that thereby they sin against the blood of their redemption,
and against the right interest and title of their redeemer. You are bought
says the Apostle, with a great price, and you are not your own, glori^^e
therefore God in your bodies, and souls, which are Gods. And in the Him^s that
you say commonly at Service, is plainly declared unto us, why, and to what
end and purpose we are redeemed: which is, that we being * deli^ered out of
the hands of our spiritual enemies, sin, the world, the flesh, and the
Devil: that is, from our own 1 corrupt desires, and filthy concupiscence or
lust, contrary to Gods will and word. And from the 2 contagion and infection
of the wicked, or from followinge their wicked examples of life, and from all
the 3 snares, temptati^s, suggestion^, and inward motions, 3. Devil, wh^^
that the Devil shall from time to time put in our minds, cogitacions and
thoughts, that we I say beeings delivered from these enemies of our soul,
might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all
the days of our life. Therefore, they that be Whoor^s and whooremaisters,
Harlots or Adulterers, that give them selves to whooredome, adultery, and such
filthiness, do take away them selves wholly, both body and soul out of the
hands and jurisdiction of Christ's their redeemer, and yeeld^ them selves
bondslau^^ to Satan, to be ruled by his filthye spirit of Fornication, and
so do unto God great spite and villainy, whom they ought to glorify both in
body and soul, by the cleanenesse, purity, and h^llynesse of both.

FOurthly, 4. It drives away the spirit of prayer so that we cannot pray to
any our profit.
this filthy sin makes that Christians can not pray, it takes from them
their armor and defense, which is Prayer, as the Prophet tells us: A strong
Tower is it to the faithful, to call upon the name of the Lord, it defends
them against all temptacions and assaults. This defense it takes away from
them, and leaves them vn^ensed, and helpless, to be a pray to the Devil and
wicked spirits. For as Saint John says: 1.10.3.8.
1.10. Ca. 3. Verse. 8. He that of deliberate purpose commits sin, and of
purpose continues therein, without repentance is of the Devil. And the
Scripture says in many places, that God bears no sinners: that is that have
a purpose to continue in sin, but that their prayers are abomination unto
him, as we read in the Psa^mes. And for confirmation hereof, I will not
stick to set down word by word, the judgment and sentence of the great
Prophet of this age, of that bright light of Christ's Church, and worthy
Instrumente of God, by ^^om it pleased his divine Majesty, to bring again the
light of the Gospelle into the world, in these last days. D. Martin Luther,
who expoundinge the.134. Psalm uses these words following: (...) and li(...)
diabol^ (...).
(...) prays, and is possessed with the sin of Couethusnesse, Fleshly lust,
or any other Devil, to him the Lord says, Psalm. ^0. What have thou to do,
to declare mine ord inances, that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth,
seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my woo^des behind thee? For
when thou see a Theife thou runnest with him, and thou art partaker with the
Adulterers, Whoores, or Whoremongers, etc. Such was the Prayer of the
Phariste, whiche^ departed out of the Temple vninstified, Luke. 18.14.
Luke. 18. And in this place the Prophet inueygheth against Myperrites, which
think, that when they pray, GOD sees not the vncieanesse of their hearts.
This is (therefore) a necessary prayer, that first GOD would give us his
word, and defend the same against all vain spirits and Heresies. And
secondly, that he would preserve us in Innocence, and keep us from
Hypo^rifie. These be the very words of this Reverend Father, constrmed and
ratified by Gods word, wherein we have flue things to mark and consider.

First, that by the judgment of this Prophette or * Sy^^ima ^ (...) Proph^a,
(...) Vide^s, Verevidens quia plas co^^cris, ^^ae aeta^^is vi^debat. ^^^oque
me^^^o propheta (...).
Seer: Fleshly Lust is a Devil, and co^sequentlye, they that are possessed
with it, are possessed with a Devil, and therefore had great need most
earnestly to Pray to CHRIST, the driuer out of Devils, to expel the same.
And the self same thing, signifies the Scriptures vute us, by calling it the
spirit of Fornication, or Whored^me.

Secondlye, that GOD refuses and rei^^teth the Prayers, Wors^ippe and Ser^ice
of such as will not be reformed, but despice Gods wor^ (...) take par^^
with the wicked and ungodly.

Thyrdely, that the Prayers of fles^ (...) sous, are but mere, Hypocrisy and
dissembly (...) therefore well compa^ed to the prayer of the Phar^

Fourthly, that fleshly minded persons depart (...) prayinge unjustified, that
is, baninge all their sins upon their own back vnforgiuen, for as to be
justified, is to have all our sins forgiven us, and we to be counted just
and in^^ocent: So to be unjustified is to have our sins vetayned, and, we
to be counted guilty and worthy eternal damp^ation. Which, how borrible a
thing it is, I leave to your considerations, when you come to ripe years.

Fifthly, we have hear set down a short and pithie definition or
description of Hypocrites, or countersaite Christians, thus:

Hypocrites are su^che, Hypocrites who.
which think that when they pray, GOD sees not the uncleanness of their
heart: A more fuller description of Hypocrites may be geathe, red not of the
same place, of the words a little before, thus: Hypocrites are such as hauings
commitied some notable or baynous sin, or of deliberate purpose, leadings any
part of their li^e contrary to Gods word, are not only without all rem^rse
of conscience, but also make a great shew^ of Religion and holiness, presume
without repontaunce or purpose of amendment, even in the holy Lords preseuce
to pray, who has protested in many places of his word, that the prayers of
the impenitent are abominable in his sight, and not lyuinge the Gospel, but
rather leauinge the Gospel: especially in life and conversation, yet brag of
the Gospel as though they were true Christians. This description may plainly
be geathered out of that reverend Father, his Exposition upon the said Psalm.

Finallye, we can not pray, but according to the form that our Master
Christ's has taught us, whose Scholars we profess to be: Our Father which
art in Heaven. etc. But look all the whole Scripture throughout, and you shall
find that we can in no wise call God our Father, but only in respect that we
have communion and union with Christ, his only Son, in who^ alone rests our
adoption, and title of sonship to godwarde, or toward God. Which communion and
unity, if we dissolve and break (as before is said) by whoredom and such
like wickedness, we cannot call God any more our Father, but our dreadful and
terrible judge, for so is he to all such as are no members of Christ's: For
without christ we are under the law, and subject to all the curses thereof,
which are horrible. Deuteronomy. 28.
Deuteronomy. 28. The reading whereof would make a Christian heart to quake and
tremble, once to think to dissolve the Communion with Christ: in whom alone
he is delivered from those curses, and without whom all hang over his head.
And therefore, whores and whoremongers, when they pray (if they will say true)
they can not say: Our father which art in heaven: But rather our fearce,
angry, and terrible judge and revenger. Neither can they say with a sencere
and no double heart: Hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come: Thy will be done
etc.

For Whoares, Whoremongers, and such like, as as long as they are of that
mind, be determined not to hallow and sanctify Gods name: but to profane
and unhallow the same: Not to have Christ ^^igne in them, by his spirit of
Chastity, and Sanctification, but the devil by his filthy spirit of
Fornication. Not to do Gods will, which is their holiness, and that they
should possess their bodies in holiness and honor, but to do and execute
their own filthy lusts and pleasures: And so of the relt for to presequnte
all, it would be too long, but this mutch, for a taste.

Likewise, of the Creed, or form of christian Faith: No Whore, nor
Whoremonger, can, or does rightly beeleeue any one article thereof: For how can
such look for any good at Gods hand, whose wrath, anger, curse, and
malediction, (...) in the Father. Not in the So^.
hangs over their heads. In the Father they cannot beeleeue, for the cause
above said. In the Son, if they did beeleeue, they would as Christ
testifies, follow his doctrine, which is to repeut and beeleeue the Gospel:
neither of the which will they do.

In Jesus they believe not, Not in Jesus.
for he is a Sau^ur of his people from their sins. Mat. 1. But whoores and
whoremongers have such a deadly delight in their sin that is so pleasant to
the flesh, that they will not be saved from it, they make more account of it,
then they do of their own salvation and redemption by Jesus the Savior. In
Christ nothing at al
In Christ they believe not: for all that truly believe in christ, are by
faith made partakers of his triple or threefolde Office. 1 prophets.
They are made prophets, to know what is Gods will, and to study to do the
same. 2. pre^stes.
They are made Priests, to kill in sacrifice their fleshly and beastly
affections, and to offer up their own bodies a lively Sacrifice to God. 3.
Kings.
And finally, Kings to rule and reign over sin and corruption, over all
lust, pleasure, vanity, concupiscence and all uncleanness. Neither do they
truly believe that christ dyed for them, rose again, and ascended into
Heaven: for if they did, they should seele in them selves the force and
efficacy of christ's death, in dying to sin: of his resurrection, in rysinge
up to virtue and godliness: and of his ascencion, by having their conversation
in heaven: and by contempning the world, and the vanities thereof. Neither do
they believe that christ shall come to inudge the wicked to eternal
torments: For if they did, they would leave their wickedness. Neither in the
holy Ghost: for he sanctifies all the faithful, and gives them grace, to
love and follow holiness, virtue and godliness, and to hate and detest
profanation, corruption, vice, and impiety. Neither the holy Church do they
beeleeue, which would be none at all, if every one were or should be as they
are. Nor the communion of Saints, seeinge they have communion with the Devil
(as before is said) and with all the wicked and dampened. But specially, they
believe not the resurrection of the flesh: for if they did believe that it
should rise again to everlasting glory, and to reign with christ in
Heaven, they would not pollute and defile it with whoredom, filthiness,
sin, and wickedness, as they do. Dr if they were persuaded that they should
receive according to their deeds wrought in the flesh, whether it be good or
evil, vice or virtue, wickedness or godliness, 2. Cor. 5 10. Math. 16.17.
Romans 2.6. Gal. 6.5 1. Pet. 1.17. Revel 2 2.3. and 20.12 and 22.12.

Thus you see, that Faith, Prayer, and Whoredom will not stand together. For
whoredom expels them both, and therefore is as a perilous and venomous
Cocatrice, that, so, as before is declared, eats up, poysoneth, infecteth and
consumes all virtue, godliness, religion, and christianity. Now if whores,
whoremongers, and all other fleshly minded persons, had the grace, deeply to
consider these things:

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly, Revelation, Chapter. 4.

And

FIfthly, (...).
it does not only sweep clean away Faith and Prayer: but also the true
knowledge of Gods whole religion, and all godliness, virtue and goodness, out
of our hearts. For as Saint John in all his first Epistle does inculcate, and
beat into our beads: No man can be of Christ's religion, unless he does
endeavor himself to keep Christ's commandments. Now Christ's will and
commandment, is as you have heard, that we should possess our bodies in
honor and holiness, not in lust and concupiscence, as they do that know not
GOD. 1. These. Cap. 4. For the Lord is a revenger of all such things. For God
has not called us unto uncleanness but unto holiness.

Here I might go throughout all the ten Commandments, in like sort as I
have done before, almost throughout the Lords Prayer, and confession of our
faith, and so prove that whoores and whooremongers keep none of them all. For
example whereof, let us take the first commandment: If they did love God above
done by whoredom and such like beastliness) is to kill and destroy the same,
and so to commit spiritual murder. If the scuenth: they would live
temperately, modestly;

These things might be amplisied, and drawn out at large, with horror and
detestation. But my leisure (as I said) will not suffer me to prosequute all.
Thus much (for assay) may suffice, for godly, diligent, and virtue ous minds.

And thus you see that whoores and whooremongers, do neither believe, nor pray
aright, nor keep any of gods commandments, and so consequently, that
christian Religion and whooredome, can not be in one person, at one time and
instant. And therefore, as long as we are possessed with the filthy spirit of
Fornication, we are for the time as Infidels, and strangers from God, and
without a God, which how miserable a thing it is, I pray God open the eyes of
our minds, that we may see, and deeply consider.

These things I thought good, breefely to note, to the intent that I might
give an occasion to you, and to all that are Godly disposed to think on, and
to consider the peculier, proper, and special naughtines and hurtfulnes of
this beastly sin, which other sins have not, to the intent, that as it is
singularly burtful, so it may be shunned, and avoided with a singular hatred,
and detestation. For it is more (...) to be hate^, that has more evil,
malice and force to hurt, then any other sin.

There be many kind of venc^nou^ beasts, all which are shunned and avoided,
but those that are most poisonous, or fullest of poison and venim, are most
bated, and with greatest diligence auoyden, such are Uipers, Sco^pions, and
such like venomous Scrpentes.

Let a godly person therefore, think that whoredom is a most poysonfull viper,
Cocatrice, or Scorpion, full of deadly poison, though sweet and pleasant to
the taste at the first. And for this cause most detestable, and to be eschued,
because it does abound with a certain peculiar naughtiness, that other finnes
have not, as hitherto in this part has been showed, at large.

The sixth part, which entreats of remedies against these mischeefes.
A short Preface to this part.
NOw you have seen the dangers, evils, 6. Remedies agayost this mischief.
and mischeefes of this most hurtful and poisonous sin, though yet to the flesh
most pleasant and delightful: It is expedient and needful, (because we are
a^^^ naturally thereunto enclyned) to show you how by Gods grace you may
overcome and subdue this filthy vice, be you never so much by nature thereunto
addicted. For the better understanding whereof, you are to note (as before is
declared, but can not be too often repeated, especially to youth) that we
Christians are in this world, as Soldiers in a Feelde or Camp, to fight
against our spiritual enemies, the world, the flesh, and the Devil, that is:
1. World, what it is.
against the vicious examples of wicked and worldly minded persons which is
signified by this word (world. 2. The Fle^ what it is.
) Against our own fleshly lusts and desires which is understood by the
(flesh.) And against all idle, (...) De^ul.
sinful and wicked thoughts cogitacions, ^emptations, suggestions, and
motions, which the Devil sha^ move us unto. And for this cause, the Church
here on earth, or the company of the faithful, such as shalve faued, is
called the Church Militant, that is to say, which is in Camp, battle,
warfare, and sighting. For (in deed) unto true Christians, that are so in
deed, in heart, and verit^e, and not in countersaiting distimulation and
hipoeriste, this world is nothing else but a Feeld, Camp, battle and warfare.
We must fight stoutely and valiauntly against all kind of sin, vice, and
corruption, and what so ever rebelleth against the most holy will, Law and
commau^dements of the glorious God, or any part of his word revealed unto us,
by our gra^^d Captain Christ, under whose Ensign and standerd we fight, and
into whose Muster book we gave our names, when we were baptized. In which
conflicte and batfayle if by following our Captain Christ, we shall get the
upper hand and victory, we shall be crowned with an ever flourishinge crown of
eternal glory, and reign with our captain Christ, in unspeakable bliss,
for ever and ever.

But on the other side, if like dastardly cowardes we shrink and flee away
from our captain Christ, yield to filthy lust, pleasure, vice, and vanity,
and follow the suggestio^s of the Devil, and the evil examples of life showed
unto us by wicked worldlings, his servant and instruments: then must our
portion be with the Devil and his Angels, and with the ungodly, his ministers
and subjects, in the Lake that burns with sier and Brimstone, whose smoke
ascends world without end.

Now, amongst al vices and stunes, whereby the Devil catches us, and rules
and reigns in us, he prevails with none so mutch, as he does by this
sin of bodily lust, commonly called Lecherye, because it is most agreeable
and pleasant to corrupt nature, yet most hurtful and peruitious, as before is
declared, and sends more packing to death, Hell, and destruction, then any
other one kinds of vice does. Mark well therefore, ye wales and means how you
may subdue it, and keep it within the bedges, bounds, and lystes of Gods holy
will and commandments. That is, to use it only for the lawful procreation of
children, to continue and enlarge christ's Church withal, and that you may
leave some behind you to worship and glorify God in your stead, when you
shall depart out of this wretched world, and for the avoiding of fornication
solelie with your husband, to be taken in the fear of the Lord, according to
his word and ordinance, and none otherwise. The chief and principal ways
or means are seven, that is:

1. Ardent, true and sincere prayer.

2. The study knowledge and meditation of Gods word.

3. Temperance, Abstinence, Sobriety, Modesty, and Moderation or keepinge of
measure in diet, appar^ell, and lawful pleasures.

4. The continuance of labor and honest exercices, and the avoiding of
idleness, the Mother and No^ of vice.

5. The perpetual having in mind of Gods promises and threatninges.

6. The choosing of godly and virtuous companions, and the avoiding of ungodly
company: the a^g and encouraging of our selves to this virtue, by the example
of others, that are chaste and virtuous, and the refraining and restraining of
our selves, from this pernicious pre^sure and reprochful vice, by others
harms, woes, miseries and ralamities, which we know to have been through this
deadly delight, by them bedlemly procured, as we see daily before our eyes,
such woeful examples to our forewarning, admonition, heedfulnes, and
enstruction, if we have grace to note and mark the same to our behalf and
benifite.

7. The continual remembrance, of the last things which are 1. death. 2.
judgment. 3 reward and 4. punishment. Or as some term it: to remember
always thy end, and to meditate and consider well, the vanity and frailty
of beauty and of all transitory things.

Of these seven way (...) means (...) bodily lust, for your better
instruction, I will write somewhat more: but yet briefly, for the avoydyng of
tediousnesle.

The first, Prayer.
THE first and thiefest way to tame this fierce wylds beast (bodily lust) is by
earnest and seruent prayer to call for the aid and assistance of Gods most
holy spirit, Agdent ^er, espe^y, for the (...) of sanc^^ation.
the spirits of sanctification and holiness, the author and stirrer up of
Virginity, Chastity, and all other virtues, in our minds and souls. That
makes us with an high, stout, courageous and invincible mind, to despise,
contempne, and tread under foot, the pleasures and danities of this
fransitorie life, especially, the beastly pleasures of the flesh, that
disorderly used, lead to death and destruction: which spirit is promised by
Christ, to all his true and lively members, true Christians, especially,
such as shall with ardent prayer, and true say the, ask and crave the same
in Christ's name.

The second, Gods word.
THE second way and means to rule and reign, (...)
over our filthy lusts, concupiscence and corrupt desires, is to read
continually, to follow and meditate the sacred scriptures, and incorruptible
word of God, which is the Armerie of true Christian soldiers, where they
shall find sufficient munition and defense against all the subtle, fierce, and
cruel assaults of their spiritual enemies, the world, the flesh, and the
devil. And from thence it is our parts, to bring forth such munition and
weapons, defensive and inuasiue, as the present time and occasion shall
require: and to make strong that place of the hold and Fortres of our mind
and soul, where our spiritual enemies shall make their assaults, and say
their battery As for example, if Satan or his adherents, the flesh and the
world, (that is our (...) filthy in (...), or any (...)ly person) by their
subtle sleight^^, shall go (...) to ^^^^^mine the walle^ of our Virginity or
Chastity, we are to forti^^e the some with sentence^, and examples out of
Gods book, the Bible. We, must remember the said general commandment, of
hol^nesse and purity of (...) and mind, ^^^en by God him self, generally to
all that will (...) his (...). The precept or commaudment of holy nes given by
god himself, to all such as profess to be his people.
(...) and (...) 7. Be ye holy (say^^ God (...) his people) as I am holy:
(...) after so (...) translations, Be holy, because I am holy: for I the
holy God, can not abide an unholy and profane people: (...) commandment
(...), to all the spiritual (...) holy, and ^^itate and follow in life and
conversation, (...) God him self, as far as is possible in this corruption of
nature: which precept of holiness, and studying, and endeavoring to be like,
and rescriable God in holiness and righteousness, is repeated and inculcated,
throughout all the whole ^ible, though in diversity of words and phrases, yet
(...) seem but one, and the same. ^lee must also remember Gods dreadful
judgments, punishments, and horrible plagures, against such as with
filthiness and uncleanenesse of lyse, profane the Temple of the holy-Ghoste,
their (...) ^yes sanctified and dedicated unto Christ and his (...), in
holiness and honor, by the sheddinge of his most precious blood, as the
drowninge of the whole world, not so much as one half score excepted, Genesis
6.7.8. Genesis 6.
The burning up and utter consuming of the most fertilest and frutefullest
part thereof, and all the goodly and famous Cities thero^ (...) with her and
Brimstons from Heaven. Genesis 19. Genesis 19.
The flayinge of (...). thousand xxii^, thousand sodaynely, and the hauginge of
their Rulers and governors (that should have punished them in time, for the
intransgression) even against the Soune, in sight of all the people. Number. 25.
Number. 25.
The overthrowing and destroying even of the whole Tribe of (...), being so
populous, and of so many thousande^ as appears in the Book of Judges, where
you shall (...) that the (...) of God was so hotly kindled against his people,
for ab^^mination committed with one woman, and for cloaking and defendinge the
same, that there was slain of Gods own people (by profession) for that one
offense, (...) score and five thousand, of mighty and daliaunt men of Arms,
besides the destruction of Women (...), and the utter subversion, sacking,
burning, and putting so sword, of all the Cities within the whose Tribe of
Benjamin, and all the inhabitaunts and dwellers therein, man, woman, and (...),
and Cattle, and all things (...), (...) flame, (...) cruel sword, by the
just judgment of God, (...) them up all. An bearible and terrible example of
(...) dreadful judgments against the vnhalowing and (...) ling of his people
by whoredom or adultery. The (...)inge, burning, and utter des^^oying of the
City of Siche^, and the putting of all the inhabitaunts thereof, even their
King, and all to bloody (...), for the (...) Maid, (...)
Genesis 34. Such like examples and sentences of Scripture, must you remember in
time of ^^^ptation, and not yield by and by, like a white liuered (...). And
so forth of other sins, vices, and following^ of (...) and his adverentes,
the would, and the flesh, for to prosequnte all, would be infinite: thus much
for (...) and example may suffice.

Temperance and Sobriety.
THe third way, (...).
and mean to bridle and tame this fierce, wanton, and vuruely coulte of our
own flesh, winsinge will, and kickings affection, is sobriette of life,
watching, fasting, and temperance. To keep a mean and moderation, in meats,
drinks, sporte^, plays, and apparel. For commonly fleshly lust, follows
excess in diet and apparel, as the (...) does the body, or rather as the
effect follows the cause. For as the P^^t ^yth, and that most truly: When
the body is low and cool, Sine cerere and baccho, friget venus.

Unapt it is for Venus School:
But when it is well pampred and full,
In Venus lap it loves to lull.


When this wild Coulte of our flesh is pricked with prouender of Lururie,
riot and excess, it is impossible to (...) him without a fall. It is then so
fierce, savage, skittish, and ^^ruly, that it gives many a break neck fall,
so that they never rise again to Salvation. An horrible things to be spoken,
yet more horrible to be seen before our (...) daily, if we had spiritual eyes
to see it, but most borrible to seele and suffer in our selves. God in mercy
keep us from such falls. But because this matter is debated above, in the
title of Temperance, I will say no more of it, but knit it up with this
approved sentence: Leachery is always the companion of Gluttony, and therefore
(...) that he marriage able, but not yet married, and intend to lead their
life in pure Virginity till they he marrye^, must not eat what they lust,
till their bellyes be full, but must use such sobrieti^ and moderation in
diet, (...) may best cool the flaming (...) of youthful lust, otherwise
(though the best fall out, as many times the contrary does) they will be but
half, Maidens, corrupt in the most principal part, which is, the soul and
mind, which when the body is ever deliciously and intemperately sed, boileth
and burns in lust and concupiscence, though sear of shame, abasing of (...)
and dignity, less of estimation, account, and reputation, or some other
worldly and fleshly respect, re^^^ayn the body from the external act and
filthiness of the fact. For this, all learning a experience boldeth and
teaches: that Sobriety or Moderation in diet, play and apparel, is Mother
and Nource of Virginity and Chastity. And that without this Sobriety, or
Moderation of diet, and measure keepinge in Apparel, sport and play (for
those things also are great prouokers of fleshlye lust, unless they be
warely and circumspectly used) and without the other exercises of
christianity, here mentioned, Virginity and Chastity will not louge endure
or continue, especially if it be tempted and assaulted, as the Devil never
lacks some of his Servants and members in place pressed, and ready, either
secreatly, or openly for that purpose. And that by Gods permission, or rather
dispensation, for the trial and seperatinge of the (...) from the corn. For
the chaff with every wind of temptation, flees out of the Lords flooer, that
is, out of Christ's church and christianity, out of the faith and (...)
worshipping of God, out of godlynes, virtue, and piety: But so does not the
Wheat and corn which shall be prescrued and kept in the Lords Garner, when the
chasse shall be burned with unquenchable fler.

The continuance of labor and honest exerci^es.
THe fourth way, (...).
or mean to fame our (...), and to make it subject to the spirit, is godly
exercises, honest accupations, serious study, earnest (...) and commendable
business bestowed on learning, godliness and virtue. And upon such things as
^ende to the aduaunceinge of Gods glory, the profitinge of common sacietie,
especially of the church of God, the members and (...) of Christ, (...).
and of our own salvation, and about at things the fleeing and eschuing of
ydlenes, the Mother and Nource of all vice, for by dooinge nothing we learn
to do evil: and this is most certain, when the Devil finds (...) idle, he
sets us on work about his (...), that is, to think and muse on vice and
wickedness.

The continual remembrance of Gods promises and threatninges.
THe fifth way, (...).
and means to bring under subjection, and to conquer all kind of vice, and
fleshly lusts, which are the mortal foes of our souls, and eternal
falnation, is to (...) that God in mercy for Christ's (...) all such as shall be
conquerours and (...) in this great Battle of the Lord, against the world,
the flesh, and the Devil: that all (...) in Baptism have vowed and promised
to ^^ght to the last gasp, (...) 19.19.20.21. And in diverse (...) places of
the Scripture. (...).
How they shall attain unto such eternal (...), and pure pleasure, as no
corruptible eye was ever able to beholve, no earthly care ever able to hear,
no mortal heart once able to (...) is plainly set shorth, And described, in
(...) ^ (...), the (...) of such as shall be euercome, and (...) in this deadly
and mortal war. That (...) shall be east into (...) Lake that ^urneth with
(...) and (...) afcen^ ^ the pain to (...) in one view.

6. The esch^yng of godless company. Basilius mag nus. Prauorum hominum
conuersatio via quaedam est ad turpitudinem b. To be conversant with wicked
and ungodly persons, is the pathevvay to shame and villainy.
The keeping of godly and ^^tuous company, and the auoydinge of the conerary.
THe sirte way, or (...) the avoiding of (...) company^, such (...) are fleshly
(...) worldly minded persons, (...) make beastly pleasure their God: (...),
that with there (...) God at all, to (...) and (...) of God, and yet (in
(...)) ar^ the (...) carnal Gospelle^, that prose^ Christ in (...), and yet of
let purpose, willingly serve the Devil: world^inge, fleshinges, ^^^^eglorious
(...) that (...) speak French, clawbackes, (...), and all the whole (...) and
(...) of ramishe rascals, filthy and heastly minds villay^es, that like
cu^purses and c^^throtes, by the high way side, lie in wait to spoil and
undo silly souls, witless girls: weak vessels and unskillful things, of
all their riches, treasures, jewels and ornaments, I mean (...) leacherous
^arlets, that sooke all the mean (...) they can to deceive, spoil, and bereue
youge Maids of their may^ denhead, (...).
and ^irginitie, before they know what an excellent treasure it is to have it,
or what a loss it is to l^se it. Sut^he bawdie brothels that per^^ryng their
beastly pleasure, and filthy lust, before the glori^ of God, before the
edif^yng of Christ^^ church, before the profit of the common (...) that
fastered and brought them up b^^fore all honest is and reputacion, (...) and
before their alone ^aluation, will not stick, nor make (...), to destroy the
harvest of the common wealth, even in the blad^, before it be ripe, that is to
have no (...) of conscience, to dishonest and d^flower (...) come to years of
perfect discretion^ and so make (...) subjects to shame and contempt all their
life lo^ge^ (...) and in danger to become the botches, pla^ues, and fire^
brandes of their house and family: yea, and sometime of the whole common
wealth, for what (...) is a whore co^ monly to the countr^p that bred and
fostered her, to the house that nourished her, and to the company that she is
canner sant with all is Was not the fair (...) Holen, she that set all the
world in an ^prone in herti^e? And a^ the Rings, Princes, and mighty men of
that age together by the ears (...) it not for (...) that so many bluddy
^attayles were foughten, so many princes and n^bles (...) so many Barks,
(...), to (...), and countries spoiled, burnt and utterly destro^ed (...) and
mortal war for whole ten years space, most exuelly continued? And was it not
for her that all the ren^w^ed worthies of ye time, Hector, Achilles, Ajax,
Diomedes, Rhesus, Troylus, and many mo, were killed and slayue and And-finally
the whole country vt^erly destroyed: (...) and all the people slay^^, or led
into ^ ^ mult^s, (...), (...)
and (...) (...) and destruction^. Likewise (...) and many (...) (...) you
(...) ^ ^ plagues and (...) in them he^ (...) these (...), which otherwise
(...) the common (...) and (...) ^ (...) and times such (...), by their (...)
and (...) (...) of (...), (...)
and (...) of ^.

These (...), ^orrupters and poysoners of youth are the seed of the old
venomous serpent that poisoned and corre^ted all mankind.
(...) pers, (...) the (...) of the (...) great (...) destruction, and (...).
For (...) ^ (...) that (...) will, they should (...) Devil in the serpent) that
is not so, if you (...) this, (...) be Gods. But whether said true, (...) great
(...), and should have d^^e to (...) if christ (...) had (...) ^eastly (...) of
ye (...), by his holy word and (...), and also (...) plainly and (...), ye
(...) (...) ye whore(...) and (...) unto his (...), that he will not (...) it
once named among such as (...) his ^ol^name, worship, Ephesians. 5.
seruite (...) religion, that is among Christians. Ephe. 5. Whereas God has
thus decl^red his (...) unto us: These impudent (...) (I say) will (...) (...)
to set them selves (...) the Almighty, (...).
and say unto you: Tush, you are (...) andins^^, take ^our plansure whiles
(...), you shall (...) to harken to Gods (...) ly for you (...) time is, for
time will away. (...) but daliaun^^, pasti^^, and a trick^ of (...). Let (...)
fore ^nioy our pleasures, and (...) together, you can never do (...), and
(...) (...), these sinkes of (...) that thus (...) are nothing else but the
(...) blows abroad his (...), to (...) to eternal damnation, (...) heed,
and call to God for grace, to re^used (...). And therefore when you (...) unto
y^^, (...)
in (...) (...) the (...) and call to God for grace (...). And (...) that when
God calls you (...), you must come, though it (...), that is, in your youth.
(...) that now you are (...) to the great Supper, (...) in the (...) to the
(...) ding, if you refuse to (...), you (...) and other set in, to supply your
(...) Math. 22. Luke 14. Consider, (...).
that as (...) comes (...) to the Markat, as the (...) the ^^ng as the (...)
in the state of ^oredome (as (...) state, but (...) for youth) without
repentance, which (...) can take of themselves, but wh^ God gives it, you
should be damp^ed for ever. And whether he will (...) it, it is uncertain, and
therefore is it (...) a ver^entie for (...) for (...) better instruction her^in,
I will not (...) to write (...) wore for word, a piece (...), it agrees ^o
well with this place and purpose. Ex homill.
Co^stder further the uncertainty and britlenes of our lives, which is such as
we can not a^^are our selves, that we shall live one hour, or one hal^e
quarter of it. Which by experience we do ^lude daily, to be true in them,
that being now ^erry and lusty, and sometimes ^easting and banketting with
their friends, do fall (...) dead in the streets, and other whites under the
Boorde, when they are at mea^^. These ^aily examples, as they are most terrible
and dreadful, so ought (...) to monk us, to seek for to (...) Judge, that
we may with a good conscience appear before him, when soever is shall
please him for to call be, whither it be suddenly or otherwise, for we have
(...) charter of our life then such had. But as (...) are most certain that
we shall (...): so are we most (...) when we shall dye. For our life does
lie in the h^ne of God, who will take it away when it pleases him. And (...)
wh^ the highest Soumer of all, which is Death, shall come, he will not he
said nay: But was must be forthwith packing, to be presented before the
judgment Seat of God, as he does find us, according as it is written:
Eccle. 11.
Where the Tree falls, whither it be toward the South, or toward the
North, there it shall lie. Whereunto agrees the holy Martyr of God, S.
Ciprian, saying: As God does find thee when he does call, so does he judge
thee. Let us therefore fellow the council of the wise man, where he says:
Make no tarryinge to turn to the Lord, Eccle. 5.
and put not of from day to day, for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord
break forth, and in thy security, thou shall be destroyed, and thou shale
p^rishe in time of vengeance.

Which words I pray you mark diligently, because they do most linely put
before our eyes the ^ondnesse of many men and women, which abusing the long
suffering and goodness of God, do never think on repentance or ^mentment of
lyse. Eccle. 5.
Follow not says the spirit of Wisdom thine own mind, and thy strength
(...) in the ways of thine heart, n^ther say thou (...) being m^^ under for
my work (...) the revenger, will ^euenge thing iniquity. And say not: I have
finned, and what evil has come unto (...)? for the Almighty is a patin^^
rewarder ^ but he will not leave thee vnpu^gshed. Because thy sins are
forgiven thee, be nor without (...), to ^eape sin upon sin. Say not
neither, the mency of God is great, he will forgive my manifold sins. For
merey and (...) come from him, and his andiguation (...) upon v^repentant
sinners. As if he should say: art (...) and mighty: art thou young and (...)
the wealth and riches of the worl^^ or when that thou ^ast (...) have you
received no punishment for it Let none of a^ the so things make thee to be
the ^lower to repent, and to turn with speed unto the Lord. For in the day
of punishment and of his sudden vengeance they shall not be able to help thee.
Wherefore, specially when thou art either by the preaching of Gods word, or by
some inward motion of his holy Spirit, or else by some other means, called
unto the Lord: neglecte not the good occasion that is ministered unto thee,
least when thou would repe^te and turn to the Lord, thou have not the
grace for to do it. For to turn from evil to good, from the Devil to God,
from concupiscence to Christ, is a good gift of GOD, which he will never
grant unto them, which living in earnall security, do make a mock of his
threatninges, or seek to rule his spirit as they lust, as though his
workinge and g^iftes were tied unto their will. And thus much out of the said
godly and learned Homily. (...).


COnsider and remember furthermore, that god requires of his people, the first
fruits, yt is: the flower of their youth for his (...), and so commands in
m^nye places of the Scripture, So^^e, thy GOD in thy lustye years. Remember
thy maker in the days of thy youth. Ecclesiaste^. 12.1. etc. He will not take
in good part^ that his enemy the devil, should have the fresh fragrant, (...)
flowers of our age, The first fruits that God requires of the jews was a type
(...) figure her^
and (...) the foul fading stinkinge wythered weeds thereof: That is, he can
not bro^ke that we should serve the Devil, whiles we are able to do
ser^ice, and to serve him when we are (...) and vnwealdy and able to do none.
Neither is it any reason that (...) good God, our ^^unteous rewarder and (...)
tell (...) whom comes alour (...), our age, time and service, (...), our
dire and de^dly enemy, (...) and cruel destro^^^, from (...), and endless
calamity, the best and fa^est. That the Devil (...) have the (...) GOD, cast
ware, (...) This vva^ signified in the old Testament, in that that gorefused
for his sacrifice any thing that was blind, lame, sick, or blemished.
re^use, (...) for no purpose. Naturecas corrupte^^ it is, does abhor such
iniquity and (...), in corporal matters, (...) men and men. And why should
we not (...) belonging and (...) seeinge the Nea(...), and estimation, does
(...) excel, ^urmount and surpass the earthly and corruptible body, then
pure Gold does (...), the (...): yea more then Heaven, (...).

(...) finally, (...) willyngly, and of set purpos^ serve (...), to serve the
Devil, whereby he rules and reig^eth in them. And therefore weigh and ponder
well, how (...), witt^es^^, (...), mad, and bed(...) a ch^yse it is, at (...)
time, or in any age, in anyg place, or for (...) cause, to choose and delight
rather to (...) the Devil, then to (...) God.

The ground therefore, does greane to be disburthened and vnleded of such
^lthye slaves, and vile villains that thus go about to corrupt youth, and to
make Nouices for the Devils College, Abbey, or Society. Such rotten Roots,
and vnpro^itable burdens of the earth, dee much more deserve to be hanged at
Tyborne, then those that rob and ^ut man's throats by the ^igh way side:for
such take away ^^t m^ney, that might soon be restored sundry ways: but these
pri^ie filthy thieves, rob silly souls, poor weak Girls, of such a Ie
well and treasure, that if all the wise men of the world would lay their
heads to (...) it, if all the (...) and princely power of the (...) regeather
to restore it, if all the ritche of the world would giu^ all their rytches and
treasures to buy it again: yet it would be to no purpose. It ran^ner be
restored, it is a loss unrecoverable.

Moreover, they by the high way (...), cut but the (...) of meus bodies: These
to (...) filthy ^inking (...) bu^chers, cut the throat of the soul too, and
bring both body and soul to eternal destruction, vnie^ Go^ w^orke at
wonderful work, in their conversion. And therefore, these Thieves, these
cutthroats, these butchers, these (...), these corruptious, these rags,
shre^^rs, (...), that are the dregs and peyson, the venim, and (...)on of the
world, ought to be of any godly barte and in (...) most hated, detested and
abhorred, as inferual infections, firebrandes of Satan, helhoundes and Din^ls
(...). And here the English Proverb takes place: One sca^bed sheep, is
enough to infect a whole flock. One bauing the spiritual botche and plague of
(...), and filthy pleasure running an him, is able to infect an whole City.
If we had spiritual eyes, to see the spiritual Leprosies, and other ^ugly
and lothely diseases and infections of the soul, that are this way taken,
through keeping of godless company: (...) would more es^^ue, shun, and avoid
the companies of fleshly and worldly minded persons, for the preservation and
continuance of the health and beauty of the immortal soul, then we now dee:
the contagion of such as are infected of the plague, leprosle, or French
pockes, or any other contagious and loathsome disease, for the preservation and
continuance of the health and beauty of the corruptible bodies, that shortly,
we^ know not how soon, will we or (...) we, must be worms meat, and subjects
to such corruption as the eye can not without horror, sustain to behold. And
yet so corrupt and preposterous is our indgement and understanding: So the body
be in health, and in good plight and lykinge, in prosperity, merry, lusty,
and in ^^lytie, we care not what becomes of the soul, no, though it bes
infected with all kind of spiritual lepro^^e, botch, pockes, and plagues, yea
rot and stink in all kind of corruption and lothelynes, before God, his
heavenly Angels and Saints, to ye eternal death of the same, except God in
mercy mightily raise it up again, from his spiritual death, to life.

^^es ought also to (...) out folues from this ^illainous vice, by others
examples, who (...) have known to have been (...) ^y it, either through
poverty, or some lothely disease thereby taken, or by some other notable plague
of God, thereby ^en upon them selves. Whereof if we mark, we shall hear and
see ba^^ye examples, and the same notable and lamentable.

On the other side, we should animate and encour age our selves to
continency, Virginity and Chastity, by the examples of so many Godly and
virtuous young men and women: and comparinge circumstaunce with circumstance,
twite, exprobrate, and vpbrayds our selves of slothfulness, cowardice and
dastardlinesse, expostulatinge thus with our selves: Why can not we line as
vertuoufly, continently and chastely, as such young men, and such young
women? of such beauty? of such flourishinge age? of such wealth,
prosperity, and tender bringing up? And finallys, persuade and resolve our
selves, that if we love virtue as ardently as they do, and hate vice as
deadly, we shall by Gods grace be able to live as godly and virtuously as
they, be they never so rare, excellent, or in appearance, peerless.

Let ve further remember how honest, how amiable, delectable, pleasaunts, and
flourishings a thing is the thastitie, and purity of body and mind. This
makes us very familiar to the good, chaste, and temperate Augels, and most
apt for the working of the holy Ghost.

For, from no vice does this holy spirit, the lover of chastity and purity,
so far flee, as from shamelessness, and leachery. Neither does he so
delight, and quietly rest in anyes minds, as in the minds and souls of
virgins, and chaste persons.

And finally, let us not forget that it is the thief ^urty of Christians, and
almost the only thing that Christ requires of them, to refrain their minds
from the dire. and deadly allurementes of fleshly pleasure: and to set their
minds wholly upon the cheifest good, and most surpassing beauty, which is God
him self, most good, amiable, ^eantifull, and glorious, in finitly abaue all
creatures, without any comparison, respect, or colletion: For what co^pariso^
is there between goodness, and naughtiness? amtablenesse, and vileness?
be^utifulnesse, and lothelinesse? Glory, and ignaminie? all thing, and
nothing? ^^itis, and vanity? felicity, and misery? between the Patter, and
his pottes? the Creator, and his creatures? and so forth.

The remembrance of the last things, and godly Meditations concerning beauty.
THE seventh and last way, (...) A perperu (...) minding of the last ^inges,
and a ^dly specu^on, and ^templa^on of bevvti
and mean to suppress and keep under the lust and concupiscence of the
body, is to have always in our minds and remembraunces, the last things, or
as some call it, the end, which are in number four: that is.1. Death.2. The
general and particular indgement.3. The reward of the godly, and.4. The
punishment of the wicked, To have always in mind and remembrance, that in
what state soever we dye, in the same we shall continue for evermore, without
end, be it in the state of damnation or salvation, in Good favor or wrath,
benediction or malediction. To remember that it stands (...) know, therefore,
seeing we have no certainty of our life (no, not an hour, for the (...) of
life can take away: our life, in what minute or (...), it shall please him); so
to line and lead our life, that come death never so suddenly, yet, we, may
dye in the (...), and state of Salvation. To remember that was must render an
account of all that we have ^oone in this body, be it good or bad, And that
we shall be rewarded accordingly, that is: To them which by continuance in well
dooynge, seek glotie and honor, and immortal^, eternal life; bu^ unto them
them that disobey the (...), smne and vice, shall be indignation, and wrach,
tribulation, and anguish. Romans 2. That we^ must all appear before the (...):
Judgment seat.
Tribunal seat of Christ, to render an account of our do^ings, yea, and of
our (...) words too, and that then Christ will not know them that profess
him, but yet lead a wicked life: Math. 7. Verse. 21, 22 23.

And finally, to have always a right account, estimation, indgement, and
reputation of beauty, How we ought to think of bevvtie, vvh^ it draws
v^from God, to va^irie and corruption.
which is in two fortes, that is to wit: to coutempue and despise it, if it
draw us from God, and to esteem it as an excellent guist of God, if it lead
us to God. For the true use of beauty is to make us careful, that the beauty
and fairenes of our life and conversation, be agreeable, or rather excel the
beanty of our bodies: for it is a great shame that a fair body should be
stained and berayed with a soul and filthy life. And therefore, in diverse
respects, we ought to meditate and consider of beauty, cumlynesse, and
amiablenes, of favor and personage, diuersely, and first thus:

When we are tickled with fleshly pleasure, How bevvtie is to be considered,
vvhe it moves us to vice and levvdenesse.
or tempted by the object, view and sight of any cu^ly, or beautiful
personage, to wish, desire, de, (...) commit any thing contrary to Gods most
holy will, renealed unto us in his sacred word, forth with to count beauty (as
it is in deed) a frail and transitory thing, and to imagine in our minds and
cogita ti^, that we saw the self same body lie rotting in grave hereft of all
beauty and comeliness: yea of life and motion, and changed into filthe and
corruption, and use this or the like spiritual meditation secretly in our
minds? O Lord, thou have commanded mes by thy sacred word, and given me
great charge to keep clean thy Temple, my body, and in no wise to profane
the same, with any unlawful lust, or filthy pleasure: assist me therefore (O
Lord) in this conflict, that the temporal and saving beauty of this vanishing
creature, which though outwardly it appear bewtifull and amiable, yet inwardly
is naught else but a well colcared shin stuffed with corruption, you a very
dungesacke filled with such, and which, thought it flourish to day like a
flower in the field, yet to morrow it may wither: yea, shortly rot and ^inke in
grave, and be turned into such filth, and corruption, that no eye without
turning of stomach can endure to (...) it: So constrme me (I befeeche thee O
Lord) with thy principal spirit, that the glitterynge of this temporal
beauty, do not so dazel and blind mine Eyes, that I should bester or attempt
any thing contrary to thy holy will and word, whereby I might lose thy grace,
favor and fatherly love, which is eternal life, or purchase or incur thy
wrath and displeasure, which is eternal death and destruction. And that I
never become so mad and distract from my right understanding, as reprobate
Esau, that I sell mine beaue^ly enheritance, for a mess of Gruell or werish
pottage, of fleshly pleasure.

Or else contrariwise, (...) How we should me^^cate and ^ke of beauty, that it
may dravv us to God and (...) us to ^e and serve him the^^ al (...) ^ures.
taking (as we should do) occasion to glorify God in all his gifts and
creatures, we may sometime thus meditate:

If this spark, or as it were drop of beauty in a corruptible creature, so
move me to the desire and fruition of the samo: How mutche more ought the
beauty and amiablenesse, of the welhed it self, from whom this and al other
beauty flows and comes, which is the glorious creator himself, move and
stir me up, to the desire and fruition of him, being so bountiful, bewtifull
and amiable: This bewtifull creature then ought to draw me to the love of the
bewtifull and amiable Creator, whose beauty so shines in this and other his
creatures, and to the gloriflyng of him in his creatures, by the modest, sober,
religious, and holy use of them. And not to withdraw me from him, by
dishonoryng him in his bewtifull creatures, whiles I should abuse them, to the
satisflyng of mine own filthy lust, and con^piscence: and not to the glory
of the creator. For the true use of bewtifull creatures, 1. The true use of
bevv a tie.
is to moous and inflame us to love the bewtifull creator, from whom that
vewtie proceeds, which we se present before our eyes. And this use has bowtie
only in the godly, who use all Gods creatures and gifts to his glory, to the
good example of other, to the profit of the common wealth, and to their own
salvation. On the other side, 2. The Abu^ of bovvtie.
the abuse of beauty is to cause the maruelers thereof to decline and fall from
God, and to cleave to his creatures, contrary to his will and word. Which
takes place in the ungodly: wh^^abuse all godde^ good tr^utures and gifts, to
the dishonoryng of God. To the enell example and offense of others, to the burt
of the common wealth and country where they live, and to the workynge out of
their own ^ust ^ampuation. For this you must be well assured of: that as the
godly in this world, by proceeding from virtue to virtue, from faith to faith,
and front godliness to godliness, work out their faluation: So do the
ungodly and reprobate, by guying on from vice to vice, from infidelity to
(...), and from filthiness to filthiness, work out their just dampnation.
Doubtless these or the like cogications, and meditations will in such
assaulces, (unless (...) ^e (...) too graceless) well cool our courage.

Other ways and means to subdue our fleshly lusts may be noted and observed
in attentife and diligent rea^yng of good and godly books, as: Loremember and
(...) consider; the nature and condition of the filthy pleasures of the body,
which make us that are predestinate and appointed to be Citizens of beauen,
companions with Saints, Vincere (...).
fellows with Angels, Brethren and fellow heirs with Christ: yea, to have
communion and unity with the glorious Trinity, and that not for a day or two,
but for ever, into all eternity: this filthy pleasure (I say) makes us (that
are called to such excellency and dignity) to be like and equal in that
respect to Horses, Mules, Swyne, Goats, Dogs, and to the most brutish
beasts that be, yea, to become fatre inseriour unto them. For in this
sensual lust, base and savage delight, many kind of beasts far surmount man,
both in the longer continuance, and ability of oftener doing it: and for that
if through pleasure common to us with Bease, we neglecte our recemption and
salvation, our state is far worse then theirs.

To consider how unseemly and reproachful a thing it is, for this excellent
creature, man, to set his whole delight and study, and to vex and trouble his
bean day and night, upon a thing so base and vile, that a heast can do it
better then he, and oftener for his life. A goodly study and delight (God wot)
for so excellent a creature.

To remember how short, how momentane, how vanishing, and how insincers the
pleasures of the flesh are, and how they always bring with them more
Wormwood then Honey, and more hitternes then sweetness. And again, to
consider what a noble thing the soul is, what a holy thing, the body of man
is, being the Temple of the Holy ghost, and withal to cast in our minds,
what madness it is, for so little a morsel of fleshly delight, for so filthy a
tickling of momentane pleasure, shamefully to beray and defile both body and
soul. To suspend and profane the Temple of Christ, which he bath cousecrated
and ballowed, unto him self with his precious barte blood?

To reckon with our felues what a band and troops of mischeefes, this pleasant
pestilence pleasude brings with it, the immoderate use, or rather abuse
thereof, destroys both the strength, and also the beautye of the body. It
hinders health very mutede, (as they that write of it affirm and declare) and
experience in many does avouch the same to be most true. It brings
innumerable diseases, and the same foul and filthye as the Canker, the French
Pockes, the Consumption, and such like perrillous, lothely, and deadly
diseases. It wythereth the flower of youth before the time. It basteth
wrinckled and renealed old age, it takes away the quickness of wit, it
dulleth the edge of the mind, and understanding, and graffeth in the
unlawful and immoderate users thereof, a filthys and beastly mind. It calls
the followers thereof at onte, from all honest. Godly, and ^ertuous
cogitations, ^^^ies, actions and exercises, and as it were, (...) a man or a
Woman, be they never so great, wholely in spiritual puddle, mire and dyrte,
that they willingly think on nothing, but that which is filthye, hase, and
unseemly for any grave person to speak (...) utter. And to be short, in
manner; it takes away the right use of reason, that is, the chelfe propertye
of Man or Woman, whereby they differ from brute Bease. And makes youth
contemptible, abiecte and hateful, and old age to be despised, shameful,
odious and miserable.

These (I say) and vinerse other (...) and means to abandon (...) pleasure,
may be observed of viligoute Readers of Godly and learned Books. But these
before mentioned, are the most principal and cheifest, and comprehend under
them all the rest, yea, and are sufficient with Gods grace, for the obtayninge
of victogye, in this our spiritual Battle, if we use and puanise them
daily, as occasion is offered.

Beeinge also well armed and Tensed with the complete Armor, The co^plete
armor of a christian soldier. 1. The girdia of truth.
that our graund Captain CHRIST has appoy^^ted out for all his Soldiers, in
the Armerye of the ^ybl^ (...) That is, the Gyrdle of truth, and tree
knowledge of GOD and our solues, which binds together true Godliness or
religion, as boopes do a vessel, which otherwise would be dissolved and
serve for no use. For without the true knowledge of God and our selves, The
breast(...).
all true godliness and virtue vamishe away: the breast plate of holy and godly
behavior, of christian life and conversation: for unless we have the the
spirit of sanctification in our bartes, all the rest that appears outwardly,
be it never in show so godly, is but mere Hypocrisy and dissimulation. The
(...) and ^ation (...) (...) Chost ^head.
The shues of readiness and preparation to stick to the Gospel to the end, to
take up the Cross of Christ, and willingly to bear and suffer all things
that shall be laid on us, for the profession of the Gospel and propagation of
the same. The sheelde of faith, The shield (...).
wherewith all the Darts, blows andprickes of temptation what so ever, may be
declined put by, or borne of. The helmet of hope of glorification, after all the
miseries, The Hell(...) hope.
The helmet of hope of glorification, after all the miseries, crosses troubles,
persecutions, contempts, and ignominies of this wicked world. And the swoorde
of the spirit, ^ The sword (...) the spirit.
or spiritual swoorde, which is, the word of God. The double Cannon of
prayen, that battereth down all the munitions and counterfortes of our said
spiritual enemies. And the cloak of watchful perseverance to keep this our
spiritual Armor from rusting.

And beeings thus arme^, and vsinge the said seven, rules, sleightes, feats,
or tricks of wrastlinge, striving, and lawful fighting against the enemies of
our soul, the world, (...) in (...) most (...).
the flesh, and the Diuelt, there is no doubt of the victory. It shalve ours,
in fine, most certainly.

If we stick to our Captain Christ couragiousty. Me has already vanquished
and overcome all our said spiritual enemies, for us in him self. And so shall
(...) in, him, if we stick to him.

But if like dastardly cowardes, hartlesse Sourldiers, and faithless traitors,
we lean our Captain Christ, shrink from under his shanderde; forsake his
Camp, whereunto we are sworn by (...) and (...) his enemies, the world, the
flesh, and the Devil, and take part with them against Christ and his
Soldiers, fully resolved there still to remain: Then are we wilful
castawayes. And as we willingly forsake and decline from God, so does God and
all goodness from us. Then we declare our selves to be Apostat^as, back
fliders, reuolters, and rank perjured traitors, that have falsifted our faith,
covenant and oath, so solempnely professed, vowed, made and taken before God,
and al his heavenly hosts, of Holy Saints and glorious Angels, in the face
of his Church and congregation of the faithful, at what time we were baptized
and received into the Lords camp, and became his sworns Soldiers, dalyauntly
to fight this great battle of the Lord, duringe life, even to the last
gasp, against his and our spiritual enemies, the world, the flesh, and the
Devil, without any shrinking reuotting or back slyding, which covenant, now,
promise and bargayne, we must daily study to stand to, and perform, if ever
we hope to triumph and to rereaue the flourishing and glistering crown of
unspeakable glory, in mercy of Gods bounteous liberality its Christ,
prepared for all those that shall be conquerers in the warfare of true
christians, and great battle of the Lord, mentioned in the Revelation, or
foreshewinge of the state of Christ's Church, until the worlds end.

And as for the last remedy of all, and as it were, the strong shoots Ankor,
that beeings faithfully cast in the love and frare of the Lord, holds in all
storms and tempests, honest and lawful marriage, and what dangers and
pertils are adjacent, if it be not heedely handled, and what cautions,
warines, wisdom, circumspection and discreation, is to be taken in making
chaise of our consort, or partner of both states, as well adverse as prosperous,
as long as we live, I will say nothing at al, for diverse causes, whereof I
will rebearse some First, for that I have no experience in that kind of life,
state, or vocetion, and he that writes of that us bath no experience of, may
casily err, and miss the mark. Secondly, because it is matter suffici^t of
it self, for a large and ample discourse and just treatice. And thirdli and
chiefly, because there are diverse and sundry godly and learned treatises
thereof extant even in our english tongue: to the diligent and attentive reading
whereof, I renut and exhort you: for these and other causes I have not here
meddled therewith. In this present discourse my purpose only is, ^monishing,
warning, and forcarming you of, and against all perils, dangers, assaults,
and temptations of virgitutie and chastity, as far as my ability and smals
furniture will extend: to show you, how you may by Gods grace pass over
your sengle life, not only irreprchensibly and blameless^ (...) also lawdably
and commendably with praise and commenslation of all the virtuous and godly.

The last part of this Treatice.
But finally, because that although we know what is good and what is bad yet
our will is so crooked, froward and perverse, that naturally we choose the
evil, and refuse the good, hate and refect true godliness, and love and embrace
ungodliness: practice vice, and neglect virtue, unless we be aided and
strengthened from above, by gods special grace. And for that God has prounsed
to grant us what soever we shall ask of him in christ's name, and has
commanded us to call upon him in the day of our trouble, and promised that if
we so do, he will hear and deliver us: and finali, to the intent that when you
are fiercely assaulted of your fleshly lusts, and in danger to be overcome,
you might call to God for strength from above, to subdue them and to keep them
in subjection, that they cause you not to do any thing contray to your calling
and profession of sengle life, virginitle of chastity. Nor consequently,
against gods glory, the profit of his Church, or your own salvation: I have
translated for you, a Godly and learned Prayer for that purpose.

A godly learned, and fruitful Prayer, worthy to be say de every Morning, and
Evening, of such as intend to lead their life in pure Virginitte or
Chastitic, and so to possess their bodies in holiness and honor, according to
Gods will and commandment set down. I euit. 11 g. 44.45. Item. 19.4.2. Item.
20. b. 7. d. 26. Ephe. 5. a 3. Phil 2 b. 15. Hebr. 12. d. 14 la. 1. d 27. and
in many other places of his Book to us delivered, for our eternal salvation
or condempnation.
O Most merciful God, we wretched sinners acknowledge, and confess that in us,
Romans 7.
that is in our flesh, there dwells no good thing, for we are borne wholly
in sins, and our Mother conceived us of corrupt and unclean seed: Psalm.
51. Genesis 8.
For all our nature is corrupt and bent to all evil, so that by the strength
of our reason or understanding, we can not understand, nor find any taste in
the things that appertain unto the spirice. For a earnall man speaks of
earthly things, and delights in the same, or of him self is not fit, no not
as much as to think any thing that is agreeable to thy holiness, Justice, and
wisdom, unless he be helped by thy spirit. Unto thee we cry with our whole
heart, and most humbly beseeth thee to reneale and show unto us the true
knowledge of thy effence and will as thou have made thy self, known in thy
word, that we do not follow the sense and iudgemen^ of our flesh in judging
spiritual things, werther measure thy godly word or any other thing by our
blind reason, corrupt custom, or worldly facion, counting that but past^ and
daliance, which thy words shewoth to be accoursed and abominable. Romans 8.
For flesh and blood do not perceue the things that are of the spirit and the
affection, will and desire of the flesh, is even enmity against God, for it is
not subject to the Law of God, neither can it be, and they that are in the
flesh can not please God. Seeing therefore there is in us the origin, fountain,
and welspring of sin, that is to wit, lust and concupiscence it self, and a
pronenesse and readiness to vice, that is ingraffed in us, and even borne with
us, from the guiltines and damnable state of our first Parents, oftentimes
styrringe us up to evil. For every one is tempted whiles he or she is drawn
away, (...).
and taken as a fish with a bayte, of his or her own concupiscence or lust:
morcouer, concupiscence, or lust, after it has conceived, brings forth
sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth death.

Grant us therefore thy grace, that we follow not the concupiscence and lust
of our Flesh: neither provoke our senses with an unbridled licentiousness,
but that we may resist them valiently. For except vicious lust and desire, be
put out of our minds, it grows and waxes strong by little and little, like
seed sown, until it bring forth deadly sin: such sin, (...) 9.
that unless God in mercy mightily deliver us from it will bring us to
everlasting death and destruction. Help us therefore (O Lord) to tame our
bodies, and to bring them in subjection, least our flesh giving it self to
lowsenesse, and licentiousness, we transgress thy holy law, and leap ou^r
the bonds and limittes of holiness, justice and honestic. Help us moreover,
to crueifie our wanton flesh with all the affections, lusts, and
concupiscences thereof, that we may live to thee our alsufficient God, (...).
and merciful father. And that we may walk in the spirit, for we are
debtors, (...).
not to the flesh to hue after the flesh, but to mortify and kill the works
of the flesh, and to live conformable unto the holy spirit, in true holiness
and righteousness, before thy divine maieshie all the days of our life.

Sanctify us therefore (O holy father) separate us, (...).
and put us a part from the wicked world, consecrate and dedicate us to thy
use and ser^ice, that we be not defiled with carnal and fleshly vices,
Lechery, Gluttony, and such like: and that we do notexpell and thrustout
of us the holy ghost by unlawful lusts and pleasures, and make our bodies an
habitation of filthy spirits, which violently carry, and thrust hedlonge into
lamentable filthiness, and eternal destruction, such as are dronken with
lust, pleasure, and vanity, and careless of their salvation.

Turn away from us therefore (O most merciful father) (...). 6.
this mischief that we make not our members (which are the members of
Christ) the members of an harlot: out of the which the holy ghost is cast
forth, and so become dens of spiritual Thieves, which are Devils that rob
and spoil us of all virtue and godliness. Grant (Lord) that we become not
dens of these Thieves (that rob us of Gods favor, and all spiritual
treasures) and so sinkes of all filthiness.

Govern us with thy holy spirit, Gal. 5.
that we may eschew the works of the flesh, and become watchful and careful
to show forth in our life and conversation the fruits of thy spirit, as thine
inheritance and possession, and habitation of thy Divinity.

Forasmuch then, as the flesh lusts against the spirit, 1. Cor. 6.
and the spirit against the flesh, so that these two, the flesh and the spirit
are adversaries one to another: Help and succor us therefore O most merciful
God, with thy divine help, that the holy Ghost (whom thou gave and
bestowedst upon us when we were baptized in thy name) may beard rule in our
members, and may prevail and master the flesh, and all the affections thereof,
least the wanton and leacherous flesh beeinge driven, and pricked forward with
the furies of fensuall lust, the mind be dissolved and pulled a sunder with
carnal pleasure, and wantonness, when the motions of the holy Ghost, be once
kept down and suppressed.

Quench in us (we beseech thee) the flames of carnal concupiscence, and
repress the wandringe lusts of the body, least we being overcome of them,
do follow our own pleasure and corrupt nature.

Grant us (most loving Father) that we being subject to the spirit, may
crucify our flesh, least hereafter we walk in the vanity of our mind.
Suffer us not, dear God, to seek after the desires of our will, to bring to
pass the councels and wicked works of our own heart. And if at any time,
being predented by flesh and blood, we starte aside and swerve from the right
pathe and governance of the spirit, to do any thing unworthy our vocation,
impute not unto us (for Christ's sake) that offense, but remember that we are
flesh, and lift us up being fallen with thy divine power.

And because the flesh of it self is unruly and untamed, impatient of
discipline, like a wanton fat Caulfe that was never under hand, put upon us (O
Lord) thy yoke, and tame our flesh by the spirit, that by living foberly, and
moderately, we may bridle the same, and when we have humbled it, and pulled
down the pride thereof, by withdrawinge from it such things as it delights
in, we may bring it in subjection to thy commandments, leaft cockeringe our
selves to much, and cherishing our flesh to tenderly, we add unto it the
nourishings and burnings of pleasure, and least stuffing the flesh with pyked,
selected, chosen, and devised dainties of meats, and likerous dishes, we make
it more malepers, wanton, and lascivious, and cause it as it were impudently
and shamelesly to crave and require of us, that which without the breach of thy
sacred commandments, loss of thy favor (which is the foundation of al
foelicitie) and incurring of thy wrath and displeasure, we can not grant unto
it. For with to much plenty and abundance of meats and drinks our minds
become wanton, leacherous, and dissolute.

Help us therefore (O most merciful Father) that through temperance,
frugalitie, and abstinence from superfluous meats and drinks our flesh may
be bound to the government, rule, and leading of the holy Ghost: that the body
of sin may be mortified and killed in us, and that thou may live and reign
in us which alone art to be praised, honored and glorified for ever and ever.
Amen.

The will of God revealed and to us declared not only by his word and voice but
also by examples of most horrible plagues, in all the History of the world,
but most notably in Genesis, a clear Glass of Gods government in both his
houses, the World, and the Church, by rewarding the godly, and punishing the
wicked: Gods revealed will, touching Chastity.
AS God himself i^ a chaste mind or spirit: so will he that all reasonable
creatnres do serve him in chastity, and avoid all confusions of order by him
instituted. Chitraeus in Genesis cap. 34.

The same in effect comprehended in Greek and Latin verse, by the great and
famous Clarke Phil. Melancth: The sense whereof is after set down in English.

(...),
(...).
Casta deus men's est, casta vult mente vocari.
Et Castas iussit pondus habere preces.
God being a mind both chaste and pure,
with chaste minds wilve cauld on:
And to persons pure and chaste,
with favor graunts peticion.
Verses declaringe that as Chastity is the ornament of all other good
qualities, so without it, that al other, are contemptible and naught set by.

Vt cum de statua facies formosa revulsa est,
non decus in reliquo corpore truncus habes.
Sic reliqui mores spreti sine honor iacebunt,
ni fint ornati laud pudicitiae.
The sense whereof is thus in English, the simititude somewhat altered.

As when the body and the head, are separate in twain,
No grace nor beauty in the corpse, does any more remain:
So other guiftes and qualities, that can in any be,
Without the use of Chastity, contempned still we see.
A notable and singular Latin Uerse, which the Author once englished for his
said Counsins, three sundry ways in sense, though not in words, as follows.

Venture, pluma, Venus, laudem fugienda sequenti.

The first way.
She that louts to lead her life, with praise and commendation,
Must sloth subdue and giuttony, and carnal delectation.
The second way. S. In crucifiyng his old man, fleshly lust.

She that to perfect happiness, will study to attain,
Must labor use, and abstinence, and sometime suffer pain.
The third way.
AFter death who makes (...)
Must paynefull be, and temperate, and (...)
Bonum biantis consilium, omnibus (...) speculo semetipsos intuentibu^ (...).

IN speculo teipsum contemplare, and sif^ apparebis age quae deceant formam Sin
deformis, quod in faci^ minus est, id morum pensato Pulchritudine.

The good and wholesome counself of a natural wise man, beeinge but a Pagan,
worthy to be remembered always of young Gentlefolkes, especially of
Gentlewomen, when they look in their attyring Glasses, least at the general
judgments Pagans (as Christ (...)
says) shall arise up to their comdemnation: Englished by the Author, in Prose
and Meeter (...) applied to his said Cousins.

VIew well thy self in a Glass, and if thou appear fair and beautiful, do
such things as become a fair and beautiful personage: but if thou seem
soul and ill favored, then recompense the foulene^^^ of thy face, with the
fairness of thy manners.

IN crystal Glass, with (...)
behold thy face and phifu^
And if thou see by Gods good grace,
thy self t'excell in beaufie.
In virtue and in godlynen
endeavor thou likewise,
Among them all that line with (...),
to bear the prick of price:
But if therein to view of eye,
thou ^^^st appear deformde:
For recompense, let all thy lyse,
with virtues be ad^i^de.
(...)

