PHYSIC FOR BODY AND SOVLE.

SHEVVING THAT THE MALADIES OF THE one, proceed from the sins of the other:
with a remedy against both, prescribed by our heavenly Physician JESUS CHRIST.

DELIVERED IN A SERMON AT BVCKDEN IN HVNTINGTONSH, before the Right Reverend
Father in God the Lord Bishop of Lincoln then being, by E. Heron Bachelor of
Divinity, and sometime fellow of Trin. College in Cambridge.

Vtteipsum serves, non expergisceris? -- LONDON, Printed by John Legatt for
Francis Constable, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's Churchyard at
the Sign of the White Lion. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, one of his Majesty's most
Sacred Council the increase of temporal, and complement of glory eternal.
Right Honorable,
IN the general concourse of those who run to do your Lordshippe honor, I,
(who have tasted as freely of your former favors as the most of them) could no
longer contain, but with Ahimaaz must run also, though without a full
erraund; persuading my self that the swift wings of sincere affection would
carry me beyond the foremost Cushi. Pleases it therefore your Honor to accept
this first argument of my vowed duty, uttered sometime at one of your places of
residency, graced by the audience of one of your predecessors, but now pressed
for your Lordships service. It can add nothing to the magnitude of your
honor, no more then a drop to the Ocean, but by your Lordships acceptance it
may increase the honoring multitude by One. The Lord of Lords who has begun
this great work in you, perfect the same to the glory of himself, the
advancement of his Church and disrespected Churchmen.

Ever at your Honors service in the Lord, E. Heron.

PHYSIC FOR Body and Soul.
Ioh. 5. part of the 14. verse. Behold thou art made whole: sin no more, least
a worse thing happen unto thee.


HE that promised to make his Apostles Fishers of men, Matthew. 4.19. Used A
twofold net wherewith to catch and draw men unto him says S. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom. in 22, Luc.
(...) (...) (...)
the net of wonders, and of words. By the first He caught those many who
believed in his name, when they saw the miracles which He did. Ioh. 2.23. (b)
By the second He enclosed his very enemies, those Officers who were sent to
apprehend and bring him before the High Priests and Pharisees. They were so
entangled in the net of his heavenly doctrine, that they had no power to lay
violent hands upon him, but returned with this answer, never man spoke as that
man did. Ioh. 7 46.
Our blessed Savior uses both these nets in the recovering of a certain
poor, lame, and diseased man, the subject of this Text. First He heales him
with the the bare word of his mouth, Surge and toll grabatum, verse 8. Him who
by ordinary means could not be healed in 38. years before, verse 5. Secondly
He leaves him not here, but that He might be wholly taken as well in soul as
body He casts upon him the net of his words and doctrine. Behold thou that were
thus many years scourged for thy sins, art now through mercy restored to thy
perfect health, take heed least falling into the same sins again thou pull
down Gods judgments after a more fearful manner: where our blessed Savior
puts him in mind of his long desired recovery, shows him the cause of his
misery, and gives him an item, to prevent a worser calamity. Behold thou art
made whole, etc. Out of which words, without vexing them either with curiosity
or multiplicitie of division, arise naturally these 3. parts 1. Commemoratio
beneficij. Behold thou art made whole 2. Commonitio, officij. Sin no more
3. Comminatio supplicij. Least a worse thing come unto thee.


The commemoration of the benefit contains the Manner and Matter: Behold, The
manner: Thou art made whole: The matter. To begin with the first.

This demonstratiue Ecce, Is not a note of approbation in the Receiver of the
benefit, as if through his long patience He had merited this favor at Christ's
hand, being set out unto us as a grievous sinner: Iam. 1.5.
Nor a sign of exprobation in the Giver, For God gives freely and vpbraideth
no man with his gifts: Nor a vain repetition of ostentation in our Savior,
for the^ it would have run in the first person, Theophrast. in charact. superbi.
Ecce sanum te feci, as it is noted in the character of the proud man. But it
is a note of Remembrance and consideration uttered to this end, that the
benefit of God so plentifully bestowed upon him should not now be written in
the dust to be blown away with the slight blast of forgetfulness, but remain
fixed, and settled in his heart written as the Prophet speaks with a pen of
iron, and the point of a Diamond to continue for ever: And with good reason,
for the very Heathen could tax the whole kind for want of this virtue,
comparing man in this regard (...), Epigra. Anthol.
to a bottomless vessel that transmits what ever is put into the same. A sin
begotten in our first parents and propagated in their posterity. Take a taste of
it in the Israelites, Gods most obliged people, who had such sensible feelings
of his favor as they might be justly termed by the Philosophers word (...)
burdened with his benefits: Aristotle Ethic. Seneca de benef.
yet with the^ it fared, as with those of whom Senec. Apud quos non diutius in
animo donata quam in vsu. Witness that God rebuked the red sea, and it was
dried, led them in the deep as in the wilderness, causing the waters to cover
their oppressors, etc. Then believed they his words and laud praises to his
name, Psalm. 106.12. But incontinently they forgot his works and would not
awaite his counsel. verse. 13. Therefore least we should deglutire beneficia
Dei swallow down the benefits of God without ruminating on them by due
meditation: or least we might impute them to our own deserts, sacrificing to
our own nets and kissing our own hands as the Prophet has it for catching and
procuring the same, our blessed Savior stirs up this restored man, and in
him all that enjoy the like benefit to taste and consider how good the Lord has
been unto us. Behold. The matter follows. Thou art made whole.

The benefit of health may challenge all possible thanks at any man's hand --
Vt corpus redimas, Ovid.
etc. skin for skin and all that a man has will He give for his life, was
the last and the best argument the Devil could use to infringe Jobs faith and
confidence: Job. 2.5.
Stretch out now thine hand upon him and see if He will not blaspheme thee to
thy face. But health is the life of life, Senee.
Since non viuere sed valere vita est, life without health is but a lingering
death: and therefore the Prophet makes it a great part of his happy man (...)
to be sound of wind and limb, Thales ap. Diog Laect.
for -- Si capiti been, etc. If it be well with us in the whole structure of
our body can princely riches add more, yea they cannot yield so much
happiness of themselves, (...), Plutarch (...).
etc. Neither can the glorious Diadem of a King assuage one whit the ach of
his head, nor the precious signet command the least disease from the finger.
Yet howsoever the benefit of health be great in it self, it was here greater
if we review the former condition of him one whom it was conferred. Whereas
Seneca makes but three things grievous in every disease which are either Dolor
Corporis. Affliction of body. Intermissio voluptatis. Intermission of all joy
and pleasure. Timor mortis. Fear of death.


Beside these this diseased patient was overcome.

1. Of poverty, as great a disease as the former, Menander.
-- (...), no burden more burdensome then poverty, insomuch as Hecuba being
brought to that extremity calls her misfortunes; Euryp. in Hecubae.
-- (...). such as surpassed the sufferance of nature: being numbered among the
curses of the Law, Deuteronomy. 28.22.
yea accounted so great a curse with the Heathen that Plutarch reports many to
avoid the same, have been content to throw themselves headlong from high
rocks into the sea preventing that misery of life by a sudden and certain
death. Now of this disease labored this poor creeple who wanted means to
procure a man to put him into the poole when the water was troubled.

2. He was accompanied no doubt with pouerties necessary attendant Contempt,
Iuvenal.
-- Nil habet infaelix paupestas, etc. The poor man is despised of his
neighbor, says the wisest of men. The Jews according to their received
opinion, Ethniorum opinio miseros esse. Diis invisos henisius in Theocrit.
accounting him Gods enemy because of his great misery, as they did those
Galileans whose blood Pilate mingled with their own sacrifice (for refusing to
offer for the the health of Caesar, Theophylact in 13. Luc.
as Theophylact notes it.) They cared not to reach unto him their helping hand
of pity.

3. The long continuance in his infirmity, made it the more incurable in it
self, and the more insufferable to the patient being of no less then thirty
eight years regiment, whereby it had gathered together such a multitude of
ill-affected humors, as they not only surprised the whole body, out were able
to oppose the strongest art of the most expert Physician, since Sero madicina,
etc. Inveterate Diseases which have placed their garrisons in our mortal
tabernacles cannot be displaced by ordinary means.

4. Such a grievous disease of the body could not but cause as grievous
diseases in the mind by reason of that Sympathy or compassion between these
two yoake-fellowes: the first whereof is a longing expectation of the bodies
ease and her quiet from the troubled water, Tertul. de bapt^ (...) Seall. (...)
dorp.
for Quatannis id factum, and it cured all manner diseases whatsoever, verse. 4.
Now Carnifices a^mi mora and expectatio. Expectation is as the hangman of the
mind torturing the same between the two gives of hope and despair, He well
hoped that after the many nights of sorrow, the mourning of joy now approached
wherein he should be restored to his perfect strength, but his expectation was
wholly frustrated, his hope was with so many deceiuings quite tired that it
became hopeless, which brought one his soul the last of all her diseases, a
final despair of enjoying that miraculous benefit of healing, for he
concludes with our Savior, that he was always prevented by others who stepped
in before him, as it is in the seventh verse of this chap. Recollect we then
the greatness of this benefit bestowed on him. Besides that his body is no
more afflicted, his joy and pleasure no longer intermitted, and the fear of
death ouerpassed, his poverty is hereby relieved, his contempt salued, the
long continuance in his disease ended, his racking expectation fully satisfied,
and his final despair finally prevented. Behold thou art made whole. Wherein
the bounty of our blessed Savior is yet further extended to him, who in this
our example shows sufficiently that he is the only true Physician of man's
soul, in that he makes this man's bodily cure but a preparatiue to the cure of
his sick soul, Ang. in lec.
Fecit quod videri poterat, vt savatetur quod videri non poeerat. He makes a
cure upon that which was obvious to the eye of man, the body that so he might
make way for the invisible cure of the mind, Dat viuendi morem, dat
innocentiae legem postquam contulit sanitatem. Cyprian.
and therefore in the next place he shows him the cause of his misery which
was sin, for his humiliation, and admonishes him to sin no more for
prevention of a worse evil, and that is the second part under our
consideration. Viz.

2. part,
The commonition, Sin no more.

He had sinned or else he had never been afflicted, for Paena non praecedit
culpa. Punishment never goes before, but dogs sin at the heels: wherein he
had sinned is only known to him that knows only the diverse windings of man's
heart. To think with some in Saint Chrysostom that his sin was the
manifesting of Christ his Physician to the Jews, as a transgressor of the
Sabbath, besides that the lettar is opposite to that conceit, it incurs the
soloecisme of (...), For this sin (if there had been any such) must needs
be committed after, it could not be before his healing: Et fi accusandi gratia
dixssit, Chrysostom in locum.
says Chrysostom having relation to the 15. verse, Timuisset vtique peiora,
cum minantis potestatem esset expertus. We rather join with the Apostle, In
multis impingimus omnes, Iam. 32.
All of us offend in many things; These many things then at the object of this
admonition: Look therefore how diverse sin is, but sin is (...), Peccare
est tanquam linias transire, Cic. Parad.
like the continued quantity admittes infinite sections and divisions, even so
extensiue is this admonition applied to us, prohibiting all manner of sin
incident to the nature of man. I will confine the infinitenes thereof to these
terms.

Either Quodcunque Quantulumcunque Qualecunque


For the first, whether it be a sin against the first or second table,
Obseruatio legis est copulatiua; Holiness and righteousness are joined together
in the Benedict, holiness toward God, and righteousness toward our neighbor,
according to the commandment in Saint John, 1. Ioh. 4. Vlt.
that he which loves God should love his brother also: so that an Indulgence
cannot salve up the breach of any part of the moral law which is perpetual,
nor a dispensation from any mortal man give liberty to the least sin which
is against the same. And the reason is for that the dispensation against the
law must be granted by as great authority as the law was first made, but the
moral law grounded on the law of nature, was founded by the author, and
creator of nature God himself, and therefore by him only may it be dispe^sed
withal, which the schoolmen acknowledge in that theological axiom, Altified.
Praescripta legis naturalis non sunt dispensabilia: But the moral law of God
what is it but the law of nature written in tables of stone.

2. Quantulumcunque, Not only those monstrous sins of the old world, or
those crying sins of Sodom, Gomorrha, Niniuie, which were so bold and
impudent as to advance themselves before the face of Almighty God, Nescio non
possumus leave aliquod precatum dicere quod in Dei contemplum admittitur.
Hieronym. Ep. 14. August. Ep. 108.
but even small sins as we esteem them, for the small egg of the
Cockatrice will in time prove a devouring serpent, and if the little thieves
get once in at the windows, they will soon set open the doors for the great
ones to enter and despoyle us, Quid interest (says S. Augustine) vtrum vuo
grandi fluctu nauis obruatur, etc. what skils it whether the shipsuffer wrack
from one huge billow that ouerwhelmes her, or by some few small leakes which in
time sink her, seeing the wages of this little as that great sin in its own
nature is eternal death. Romans 6.23


2. Qualecunque, of what nature, quality, or condition soever the sin be. As
first, whether they be sins of age or sins of youth, Detur aliquid aetati
was but a heathen man's divinity, Christ shed his warmest blood for them, and
requires that they above al others should not spare their best years in his
quarrel, and therefore Saint John writes to the young man especially because
they are strong and able to bear the burden of the day, 1. Ioh. 1.
yea Contra assiduum Antiochum generose pugnet emnis aetas, As it is rendered
out of Nazian. For such is Gods husbandry as no season proves unseasonable for
sowing the seeds of piety, sow thy seeds in the morning and in the evening let
not thy hand rest.

2. Whether sins issuing from the temperature of man's body. If the choleric
were privileged from the praedominancie of that humor to cast forth his
sudden flashes of wrath and revenge, Genesis 4.23.
Lamec might justify the killing a man in his wound and a young man in his
hurt. If the sanguine might beguile the time in dalliance, in chambering and
wantonness: S. Ambrose had spent his oil vainly in David's Apology. Dictum
de Vacia ignavo civc. Vacia hic situs est. Sen. Ep. Prou. 10.
If the flegmatique might bury himself quick in the grave of idleness, He
need not put it of, By a Lion in the way, a Lion in the street. If the
melancholicke might harbor dark and dismal thoughts and bring forth
desperate effects, discontented Achitophel might make a long letter of himself
without praeiudice to the letter of Gods Law. But nature must be subdued by
grace, It being the first step into Christianity to deny our selves, and
yield all subjection to the will of God.

3. Whether they be sins of conformity, Romans 12.2. (...).
As to pride it with the Spaniard, to drink drunk with the Dutch, to be light
of promise with the Carthaginian, to play the liar with the Cretensian, or the
lying Aequiuocator with the Iesuited Roman; Punica fides.

Proverb.


For the time was when Regulus would rather return to Carthage upon his faith
given though to the most exquisite torments then to have slipped away by a
mental elusion. We are taught in Gods School though Israel play the harlot,
yet Judah should not sin; Thus we read of the river Alphaeus that it
conuaies it self through the Sea breaking forth to his beloved Arethusa,
Lucian dialog.
and yet participates no whit with the seaes brackish humor; Thus Lot was found
chaste in the midst of Sodom, Job truly religious in the idolatrous land of Vz,
and many Saints in Caesar Neroes household.

Lastly, whether they be sins proceeding from a good intension, even that makes
not simply a good action; for Bonum est de integra causa says Aquinas: both
beginning, means, and end must be right, or else the whole action will prove
wrong, because the least leaven of evil sowres the whole lump of goodness;
Take it in Vzzahs staying the Arc ready to fall, it was well meant as He
thought and intended to a good end: yet forasmuch as He did it neither
authoritatiue, being no Priest, 2. Sam. 6.
nor ex mandato speciali, by any special command or secret insinuation of Gods
Spirit moving him thereto, but his own appetiue will, God slew him in the
same place. Here then, Fines and que sunt ad finem debent esse eiusdem generis.
In ordine ad bonum spirituale for the Popes power in temporals over the Lords
Anointed to uphold the Arc of Gods service will prove but ordo inordinatus,
being neither primative in himself, nor deriuatiue from the true fountain of
all power. The first is wisdoms peculiar, Per me Reges regnant, Prou. 8.15.
and it is the Lord that puts down the mighty from their seat: and
therefore Super aspidem and basitiscum was as violently rent from Christ by
Pope Alexander, as injuriously put upon the sacred neck of the Emperor by the
foot of more then Luciferian pride. For the second Christ himself had it not
qua homo, Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo, Delegatus nihil facit authoritate
propaeia Penormitan.
my kingdom is not of this world, how then can the Pope Vicar that which was
never committed or transmitted unto him: It remains, that this indirect
intension proves a direct usurpation. And here likewise falls their opinion
who are so far from upholding as they bend all their intensions to the pulling
down of the Arc of Gods service in regard of decent orders, comely rites,
beutiful ceremonies, etc. Let us begin with the fountain from whence these
unhallowed intensions have their origination, we shall find that to be an
Erroneous conscience spurred on by unadvised zeal, I call it erroneous quia
co^scientia nunquam obligat in virtute propria, Aquinas.
sed in virtute praecepti diuini, it binds not by virtue of its own direction,
but in the virtue and strength of Gods commandment, but Gods commandment is,
that all things be done decently and in order, and that every soul be subject
to the higher powers in things not opposite to the high est power, Romans 13.5.
The very Geneua note in 5. Act. 36. Is, that in matters which concern religion
we must not attempt any thing under color of zeal beside our vocation.
not so much for fear as for conscience sake, For in such things plus obligat
praeceptum principis and praelati quam propria conscientia, (says Hales) Our
conscience in such cases must be captiuated to lawful authority. And
therefore the stream of such intensions must begin at this true fountain,
and not issue out of the broken pits of every mechanical fancy and invention.

Secondly, for the mean furthering this intention, That's no less (say they)
then the Scripture, but the Scripture is the Canon by which all our actions
should be squared: Arist. Rhet. lib. 1.
Yet as the Philosoper said of a law political though it be in it self most
perfect and straight, the Judge by his wresting interpretation might make it
(...) perverse and crooked: so may we say of Gods law, especially if unlettered
folk have the interpretation thereof in their hand, to the which is required
the greatest art and science. If any say the text is plain, the letter
apparent, S. Nazian. answers that Studium litterae est pallium iniquitatis, the
sticking too much to the letter in general is the cloak of much impiety,
Sic. Chiliastae ex Apoc. 20.2
Did not Arrius fall into his haeresie by holding himself to the letter, Pater
mayor me. Ioh. 4. Did not the Donatists go about to prove theirs to be the
only true Church by the letter of the text. Cant. 1.6. Tell me where thou
feedest and where thou lie at noone, Vti cubas in meridie, Alphonsus de
Castro in verbo Ecclesia.
They would prove from hence Ecclesiam ad solam meridionalem plagam quam ipsi
incolebant redactam, that the True Church was only to be found in those
Southern parts which they inhabited, but it fared with them as it did with
those of whom Solomon, Prou. 30. vlt.
They that wring their nose fetch out blood, which S. Gregory interprets, That
they who wring, wrest, or misinterpret Scripture (a thing incident to unlearned
people as appears in the 2. Pet. 3.16.) they bring forth aut haeresim aut
phrenesim, either an haeresie or a frenzy. And therefore the H. Ghost gives
an item to such daring Prophets. The time shall come that they shall be ashamed
of their visions, Zach. 13.5
and shall say I am no Prophet, I am an husbandman, man taught me to be an
heard man from my youth up. So that this medium cannot be a rule to them who
have not true and universal knowledge to use the same.

Thirdly, for the End terminating, what is their scope but Innovation A monster
in a well established Church breeding more evils then ever did the lake Lerna.
Vincent conrra haeres.
In matters of doctrine noue non noua, we may handle the point after a new
manner so that we infer no new and exorbitant matter; but in matter of
Church order nec noue nec noua, neither novelty of manner nor of matter ought
to be enforced, August.
since ipsa mutatio consuetudinis, etc. the change of an ancient custom in the
Church, if it should somewhat help by the vtility, it would hurt as much, or
more by the novelty, and therefore primo diuinae legis authoritate, etc. says
Vincent. First the Word of God written must guide, but where that is silent,
Tunc ecclesiea Catholicae traditio, Then the institution and tradition of the
Church must take place, Hence is it that the holy Ghost bids us not to remove
the ancient bounds which our forefathers have set, Pro. 22.28.
teaching by this allegory not to bring innouations into the Church contrary to
what we have received from godly antiquity, and there is a curse annexed to such
Innouators. He that breaks down the hedge, him shall a serpent bite, Eccl.
10.8.
the hedge of godly order as well in Church as commonwealth, as Lirinensis
expounds it, him shall Satan the subtle serpent bite. This was the case of
Donatus, first he breaks down the hedge by innovation, then the serpent
bites and stings him on forward to fall into open scisme with Caecilianus the
godly Bishop of Carthage and his orthodoxal Church, Alphonsus de Laistio.
Postea scisma in haeresim commutauit. In the Swinckseldians, the Anabaptists,
Brownists, Familists.
He turned scisme into plain haeresie, and then this gangrene spreads it self
so far, as the contagion thereof has reached even to our times. This may be
the cause why S. Paul does earnestly wish, Gal. 5.12.
that they were cut off who did disturb the Galatians foreseeing that by the
Schisms and dissentions the seamelesse coat of Christ the Emblem of his
Church (as S. Cyprian has it) might by these means be rent and torn
asunder. Cyprian de Vast. Ecclesiae.
These intensions therefore cannot attain their wished end, but according to
the saying of Gamaliel because they have proceeded from man and not from God
they have never taken place but received Vzzahs doom Perez-Vzzah to be
divided and scattered even from our late Queens regiment unto this present
time and therefore let such Innouators apprehend this admonition: 2. Sam. 6.8.
Act. 5.38.
Sin no more.

But if no more, then our spiritual resurrection from the grave of sin must
be speedy and constant, speedy even from the present period of time constant,
to the last point of life; (...) non amplius, No more imploies both. For the
first, that it ought to be without delation the bodily, Physician teaches that
(...), Hypocrat. aphoris. 9. lib. 2.
the infected parts of the body, the more they are cherished, the more they are
endamaged: so fares it with a soul habituated in sin by a frequent custom
in sinning, the conscience becomes so seared and the heart so hardened as they
will not receive the soft impression of Gods spirit, Consuetudo altera natura.
it proouing as easy to recover a dead man in body as a sick man in soul who
is grown into years of sin, and so goes on from darkness to darkness until
he come to the utter darkness where he finds no other comfort, but weeping,
wailing and gnashing of teeth. And as it must be speedy, so must it be
constant, for Non initia Christianorum sed fines coronantur, Bern.
because one may begin in the spirit but end in the flesh, Arist. eth.
and therefore as in the Olympicke games not the fairest nor the strongest
(...), etc, but of those which striued, they that continued to the end won and
wore the garland: so in the Christian warfare against our ghostly enemies, sin,
hell, Satan, if we continue faithful unto the death, God will give us the
crown of life. Sin no more.

Reu. 2.10.
The admonition is both just, and necessary. Just for we are for the most part
no sooner confirmed in health and strength but we are ready to summon up our
forces, (...). Nazian (...).
and give up our members as weapons of unrighteousness to sin, as soldiers
do yield themselves to their captains to war under their banner: Thus the
Israelites when they waxed fat, and in good liking spurned with their heel,
Deuteronomy. 32.i5
therefore they forsook God that made them and regarded not the strong God of
their salvation: To such the saying of Seneca might fitly be applied Tutius
aegrotassent when they turn this gift of God into wantonness and abuse their
strength to the pouring in of much wine and bearing strong drink. And
necessary, i Tim. 5.6,
for (...), the life of sin is the death of the soul, and therefore the
widow that gave her self over to lustful pleasures (...), her living body was
but the sepulcher of her dead soul, Bern. med.
But how shall wretched man -- Cuius conceptio culpa est. Who even in his
conception is warmed in unclean blood through original contagion, Augustine.
and stays not there but in a short progress of time does ponere Adam super
Adam by his actual transgressions being more lame in his soul, then this lame
man was erewhile in his body be capable of Christ's admonition? Can a badde
tree bring forth good fruit? Do men gather grapes from thorns, or figs
from thistles? I answer.

1. If a man have a fervent desire not to sin, as the prophet David said, Oh
that I were so upright that I might keep thy commandments and as the Heart
brayeth after the water brooks, Psalm. 42.1.
so pants my soul after thee oh Lord, Magna pars bonitatis velle fieri
bonum, it is a great step unto goodness to desire to be good.

Act. 24.16. sc. pro Statu viatorum.
2. If he have a constant endeavor not to sin, as Saint Paul had who
endeavored always to keep a clear conscience both before God and man, and
as Zachary and Elizabeth are said to walk in all the ordinances and
commandments of the Lord without reproof. Luc. 1.6.


3. If when he sins he does it not with a full force but with a reluctation
-- (...), Homer. Il. Romans 7.19.
doing evil, but the evil he would not do -- Cum trahit invitum nova vis.
Then God accepts the will for the deed, then is he pronounced blessed, because
his wickedness is forgiven and his sin is covered in which sense Saint
Augustine, Tum tota lex impletur, quando quicquid non fit, ignoscitur. So from
sin I am led to the punishment of it, to terrify us from meddling with the
pleasing baytes thereof, which is the third general part. Viz.

The commination, 3. Part. Herodot,
Least a worse thing happen unto thee. (...). Great sins deserve great
punishments. The sin of recidiuation was thought so great that the Nouatians
would yield no place for repentance to such delinquents grounding their
assertion upon the 6. of the Hebr. and the fourth verse. It is impossible that
they which were once enlightened if they fall away should be renewed by
repentance, whose eyes (say they) were twice opened, whom did our Savior raise
the second time from death to life, not Lazarus whom he loved, nor the widows
son whom he pityed. Howsoever their position be heretical, that place being
meant not of falling simply into sin, but of falling away from God by a
general and final apostacy as some of the Jews had done, who after they had
given up their names to Christ, to fight under his banner revolted to Iudaisme,
renou^cing that part which they might have had in Christ the son of David:
Yet surely this often relapse into sin is exceeding dangerous, Vulnus iteratum
sanaetus tarduis. August.
if we argue by way of comparison with those diseases of the body, they do for
the most part in short time deprive it of life it self, because by the often
assaults of the same diseases nature is tired, and exhausted, his strength
wholly spent, and therefore she is forced to yield up her hold as not able to
hold out any longer again their violent invasion upon her: Gutta cauat lapidem
non vised sepe cadendo.
So fares it with the soul through the manifold batteries of the same sins,
the life of grace may be quite extinquished, what was the end of that man whose
unclean spirit being gone out returned again, (...), the last of that man
was worse then the beginning: Such was the case of Julian the Apostate after he
had revolted to paganism then the Devil made him his own, Nazian. calls him
(...). Orat. contra Iul. 1.
then he plunged him in all those diabolical arts which those instruments of
Satan Porphyrie and his associates taught him, then he plays the part of a
savage beast against the poor Christians, being joined with the devil against
God and his Christ, dying with that blasphemous scoff in his mouth Vicisti
Galilaee. So we read in the life of Lucian the Atheist after his Apostacy
from the Christian profession, he falls blasphemously upon Christ, calls him
(...), Luciau in Peregrino.
floutes and scoffs at all religion, and is angry with himself for being so
unadvised as to take that profession upon him which got him nothing but an
elongation of his name from Lucius to Lucianus. This sin therefore of
backsliding, of returning with the dog to the vomit, and the swine to her
wallowing in the mire of sin, by how much it exceeds in greatness by so much
it deserves a greater punishment, almighty God as that heathen Plato could
note, Plato in Timaeus.
it does (...) always play the Geomitrician, not dividing by lot or by chance,
but proportioning his punishment to the measure of sins. He that is angry
with his brother unadvisedly is culpable of judgment, Math. 5.22
He that calls him Raca, (which Theophylact translates (...)) shall be
punished by the council, Quiea impuus est in rellig. Th. Morus.
but he that calls him fool shall be punished with hell fire. So in the prophet
Amos for three transgressions and for four, that's for seven, Amos 2.4.
a finite for an infinite, God will show no favor, He will not turn unto
Judah, but will send out such a fire as shall devour the palaces of
Jerusalem. Vid. Leuit. 16.18.21.24. verses.
And in Hosea 5. from the 10. ver. almighty God follows the pursuit of sinning,
by a gradation of punishing Judah was like them that removed the bounds, that
is, subverted all order of true religion, Ephraim walked after the
commandment, to wit, of Jeroboam which made Israel to sin, therefore will I
be to Ephraim as a moath, and to the house of Judah as rottennes verse 12. the
moath frets by degrees insensibly, but rottennes ruins at once suddenly,
further Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah his wound, then went Ephraim unto
Ashur and sent unto king Iareb, forsaking God and making flesh their arm,
resting themselves upon the brittle reed of man's strength, therefore will I be
to Ephraim as a Lion, and to the house of Judah as a Lions whelpe, the Lion is
fierce and cruel but the Lions whelpe is more bold (says Pliny) for want of
experience, and more ravenous as being but newly blouded in the natural course
of devouring. This for temporal punishment. As for eternal, S. Aug. tells us,
Si impius peccat in suo aeterno, Impij amhulant in circuitu.
Deus puniet in suo aeterno, if wretched man make no end in sinning (walking in
a circle of sin as David speaks of the wicked (with his amplius, Psalm. 11.9.
yet a little more sleep, at least a little slumber in sin, God for justice
sake must make no end of punishing with his deterius, worser and worser, making
those temporal plagues but as a praeludium to those aeternall ones, where the
worm of conscience never dies and the fire of Gods vengeance is unquenchable,
Therefore if thou be made whole sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto
thee. Out of all which praemises let us deduce these brief conclusions.

1. From the commemoration of the benefit received, It teaches that Beneficium
excitat officium, Gods bountifulness ought to stir up our thankfulness. For
as in every donation there is a Giver and a Receiver, so there ought to be a
thanksgiuer, otherwise the knot of the three Graces is unloosed and virtue is
dishonored. What if we compare our condition to the case of this diseased
man, we were bruised and wounded by that subtle Serpent, who supplanted the
first Adam, and behold we are made whole by the precious balm of the second
Adam his righteousness, He was broken for our sins and by his stripes we
are healed: Esaias 53.
What remains but that we should apply this note of remembrance to our selves,
and so be stirred up to offer always to God the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving for our happy deliverance, and so much the more, because it is
more thanks-worthy that Christ has healed our diseased souls, quam quod
sanarit languores corporum moriturorum, Aug. in Locum.
then if He had restored our mortal bodies to perfect health. Ingratitude
being so odious a vice, as the Heathen Orator, Cicero.
said all other vices were comprehended in that one, as Irreligion toward the
Gods, disobedience toward our parents, neglect of the welfare of our country,
Ethic. 4.
which caused the ancient Graecians says Arist. to place the temple of Thanks
in the midst of the street (...) that being obvious to theeie it might
always put men in mind of remuneration: This temple was placed even in the
midst of David's heart, who pondering with himself the infinite mercies and
benefits He had received at Gods hands, breaks forth with A Quid retribuam?
What shall I render unto God for all the benefits, etc? and resolves the
question with this Accipiam calicem, I will take the cup of salvation and give
thanks: And with good reason, for even the senseless creatures may teach man
his lesson, Eccles. 1.2.
All the rivers go into the Sea (says Ecclesiast.) showing themselves
tributaries to that place from whence they have their original: So every good
gift temporal; spiritual, eternal, flowing unto man from the Ocean of Gods
goodness, man is bound by the law of retaliation to return unto him with all
possible thanks for the same.

2. From the Commonition, Sin no more: the conclusion is, That sin is the
cause of all affliction and diseases of the body. The ancient Heathen dreamed
that many maladies were of a divine nature, and from thence had power to subdue
the strength and courage of the strongest body, whereupon Pliny notes it that
the Romans dedicated a Temple to the Goddess Fever to the end, Plin.
Nati-Christ. lib. 2. Such were called (...). Dij averun. cantes.
that whereas her Deity could do them small good, yet that she would be so
good as to do them no hurt. Others ascribed them to constellation of Planets,
and to the apparition of Comets -- Nocte comaetae.

-- Sanguinei lugubre rubent, aut Syrius ardor.
Ille sitim morbosque fereus mortalibus aegris. Virgil.

Blasphemous Porphyrie referred the contagion of the city to the profession of
Christian religion, because after that had once gotten head Aesculapius the God
of health was neglected. Ex Moru. de Rellig. Hesiod. (...).
The Greek Poet -- (...). they walk broad of their own accord uncontrolled,
but the Philosopher more truly yet after his natural manner that diseases are
not (...), Ex Caelio Rhodig.
after the determinate council of nature: because Nature is not a stepmother
seeking to destroy her children, Sed (...), by a certain consequence which the
Physician teaches to arise from the disproportion of the four Primarie
qualities Hot, Aristotle de morte and vitae.
Cold, Moist, Dry, especially heat and moisture, when any of these usurp a
tyranny over the rest, the whole fabric of this little world our body is put
out of frame by the rebellious humors, striving to ouer-master one another.
But the sacred word of God conducts us to the head and fountain from whence
all our diseases have their issue, and that is from the sin of our soul; 1.
Cor. 11.
for this cause many are sick and weak amongst us. Sin, a thing so
contagious vt vi, and exuperantia sua corpus quoque inficiat; Chrysostom. in Cor. 11.
it flows with such a sourse as it ouerflowes the whole vessel, who if He had
not sinned, he had never been subject to the arrest of any disease whatsoever:
Biel in sent. Lumbard.
For whereas the Schoolmen observe but three ordinary ways open to his
destruction, either the violence of man, cruelty of beasts; defect in nature,
against the 1. universal justice should so have prevailed with men, that
neither offense should have been given, nor defense required. Again, the
second the fiercest of beasts should have been in such subjection to man that
the little child might have played on the hole of the Basilik without hurt: Esa.
11.8.
Bonad. Arnob. lib. 6. calls man's body domicilium morborum. Horat.
and against the third he should have had optimum qualitatum temperamentum
perfectae sanitatis, Such an equal temperature of these prime qualities as one
should never have bin praedominate over the other, the humor radical being
maintained by the tree of life: But by his disobedience forfeiting this large
charter of his immunities to his soueraign Lord, Tunc noua febrium, Terris
incubuit cohors, a whole army of maladies seized one man's body tugging and
hailing him to his long home, the Palsy shakes him the crampe pinches him, the
megrime possesses the head, the squina^cy seazes the throat, the fever
hectique apprehends the whole body, Eccl. 12.
until the keepers of his house begin to tremble, and the strong men bow
themselves, the grinders cease, and they that look out at the windows wax
dim, and the golden ewer and pitcher is broken, and then dust returns to
dust, and the spirit to God that gave it; The best elixor that we can extract
out of this miserable condition, Romans 5.12.
is, that whereas sin is the mother of all sorrow, yea of death it self: we
should for Christ's sake set the daughter against the mother, by sorrowing a
goodly sorrow unto true repentance, so may we happily prevent that tribulation
and anguish that hangs over every soul that sins, at leastwise make death
become no death unto us, but a happy passage to a more happy life.

3. From the Commination, Least a worse thing happen unto thee. The conclusion
is, That multiplication of sin does necessarily infer multiplication of
misery, and that in regard of punishment both Temporal and Eternal. For the
first the Heathen said it, Arist. Eth.
Qui alium ebrius percusserit, and that whosoever being in his cups did strike
his fellow should receive double punishment, because his sin was doubled: Genesis
18.25.
shall man be thus just, and shall not the judge of all the world do right? yea
surely, the sentence is already gone out of Gods own mouth, Reward her double
according to her works, Reu. 18.6.
and as much as she has glorified her self and lived in pleasure, so much
give yea to her sorrow and torment. And S. Chrysostom renders a reason on Gods
behalf why he should thus prosecute revenge upon refractary sinners,
Chrysostom in locum. (...). Aristotle.
Si grauem priorum sceleru^ paenam dederimus, etc. If we have been formerly
chasticed for our faults and no whit bettered, we prepare for our selves the
seuerer punishment because we seem either Stupidi senseless stocks more dull
then the Ass who will hearken to the admonition of the whippe though he be the
dullest creature: Or else Contemptores, contemners of the chastisement of the
Lord, spurning at Gods punishments as obdurate Pharao did, who though
admonished by many plagues, as so many summons to call him to repentance, yet
would not relent and let Israel go, and therefore as he multiplied his sin
of obstinacy, so God measured out his punishment with greater severity.
Secondly, for eternal, Math. 16.17 2. Cor. 3.10
when Christ the righteous judge shall come in the glory of his father, then
shall he give to every man according to his deeds, not only in quali, evil
for evil, malu^ paenae for malum culpae, sed in quanto, the greater evil of
punishment for the greater evil of sin. As it was a paradox with the Stoics to
hold (...), that all sins are equal, so is it as great a paradox with us to
hold that the hellish punishment admits no difference, or degrees, Vnus ignis
(says S. Gregory) omnes concludet, sed non aequaliter omnes comburet, One fire
shall encompasse the damned crew, but shall not work upon all alike, It shall
be easier for Tire and Sydon then for Corazin and Bethsaida, yet all four
shall meet in one place, Hell. The servant that knows not his masters will,
etc. shall be beaten with few stripes, but he that knows it and does it not
shall suffer many: if those barbarous nations shall one day wring their hands
and weep and wail because they have known so little, and practiced less:
much more shall we Christians for knowing much, to little practice. All which
may give advertisement to two sorts of sinners, Desperate ille vt peccet: Sperat
iste vt peccit. Aug. in Psalm. 144.
The first would seem to despair of salvation and makes that an encitement to
him to take a full draught of the pleasures of this life, because they continue
but for a season. The second rushes upon all manner of sin, presumption of
pardon though he drink up iniquity like waters, and deuoures sin with
greedines. S. Augustine concludes, Vtrumque metuendum, Es. 5.8.
the case of both of them is most fearful, because as they draw on iniquity
with the cords of vanity and sin as with cartropes: so are they drawn says
Clemm. Alexan. (...), like staled oxen to the slaughter, with cords of their
own making; treasuring up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath: which
is all one as if a man should be every day gathering of sticks and fuel to
make the fire greater wherewith himself should be burned.

Seeing thererefore we are by nature forgetful of Gods benefits, Seeing that
all kinds of sin are to be avoided by us, whether against the 1. or 2. table,
whether small or great, whether sins of youth, age, complexion, conformity,
intension, either by a fervent desire, settled reluctation, or constant
endeavor, as the only cause of all woe and misery incident to the nature of
man. Let us always be mindful of God the giver, to render due thanks for all
his blessings, let us so demean our selves in all godly conversation, that
though sin must dwell in our mortal bodies so long as we dwell in this
earthly tabernacle, yet that it may not reign in the^ to the obeying it in the
lusts thereof: So may we prevent sins attendants affliction of body, grief, and
anguish of soul, yea that last of al punishments eternal death. Which that
we may do, Christ Jesus our heavenly Physician who has left unto us this
wholesome prescript, of sinning no more, grant unto every one of us: To whom
with the Father and Holy Ghost three Persons in Unity and one God in Trinity be
all praise, and power ascribed now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

