MAVSOLEVM OR, THE CHOICEST FLOWERS of the Epitaphs, written on the Death of
the neuer-too-much lamented PRINCE HENRY.

Cosa bella mortal passa, e non dura. EDINBVRGH Printed by Andro Heart. ANNO
DOM. 1613.

MAVSOLEVM* OR, THE CHOICEST FLOWERS OF the Epitaphs, written on the Death of
the neuer-too-much lamented PRINCE HENRY.
EPIT. 1
Lo here entombed a peerless Prince does lie,
In flower and strength of age surprys'd by Death,
On whom, while he on Earth drew vital breath,
The hope of many Kingdoms did rely;
Not without cause: for Heavens most liberally
To him all Princely Virtues did bequeath,
Which to the worthiest Princes here beneath
Before had been allotted severally.
But when the world of all his Virtues rare
The wished fruit to gather did expect,
And that he should such glorious works effect,
As with the worthiest Fame might him compare
Untimely death then from us did him take,
Our loss, and grief, Heavens gain, and joy to make.
W. Q.

2
OCcidit ante diem juvenum flos, gloria stirpis
Regalis, Patriae spes, columenq suae.
Occidit ante diem patri, populisque Britannis
Flendus, and his junctis foedere, amore, sacris.
Occidit ante diem, gesturus Principe digna,
Accelerasset et ni fera Parca necem.
Occidit ante diem, virtutis and ubere fructu,
Et mundum exemplo funere destituens.
Occidit ante diem, si vota and commoda spectes
Publica, vel vitam si brevitate notes.
Sin vitam spe^tes partam illi morte perennem,
Haud jam, par Superis, occidit ante diem
Walter Quin.

3
STay Passenger, see where enclosed lies,
The Paragon of Princes, fairest Frame,
Time, Nature, Place could show to mortal eyes,
In Worth, Wit, Virtue; wonder unto Fame.
At least that part the Earth of him could claim,
This Marble holds hard like the Destinies:
^o^ as to his brave Spirit, and glorious Name,
The one the World, the other fills the Skies.
The Immortal Amaranthus, princely Rose,
Sad Violet, and that sweet flower that bears
In sanguine spots the tenor of our woes,
Spread on this stone, and wash it with thy tears.
Then go and tell from Gades unto Inde,
Thou saw where Earths perfections were confinde.
W. D.

4
A Passing glance, a lightning long the skies
That vsh'ring thunder dies straight to our sight,
A spark, of contraries that does arise
Then Is drowned in the huge deepes of Day and Night:
Is this small small called life, held in such price
Of blinded Wights, who never judge ought aright.
Of Parthian shaft so swift is not the flight,
As life, that wastes it self, and living dies.
Ah, what is humane Greatness, Valor, Wit?
What fading Beauty, Riches, Honor, Praise?
To what does serve in golden thrones to sit,
Thrall Earths vaste Round, triumphall Arches raise?
That all is a Dream learn in this Princes fall,
In whom sade Death naught mortal was at all.
W. D.

5
OF JET,
Or PORPHERIE,
Or that white stone
PAROS affoordes alone,
Or these in AZVRE dye,
which seem to scorn the SKY:
Here Memphis Wonders do not set,
Nor ARTEMISIA'S huge frame,
that keeps so long her Lovers Name:
make no great marble Atlas tremble with gold
To please a vulgar eye that does behold.
Phoebus, the Muses, Love, has raised of their tears
A Crystal tomb to him where through his worth appear
W. Drummond.

6
Fair Britains Prince in the April of his years,
The Heaven [enamour'd with his springing grace]
Rest to her self, for to enriche the Spheres,
And shine next Cynthia in the starrie chase.
And well enjoy he might so high a place;
For frowning Neptunes liquid field of fears,
And this poor mote of dust that all vpbeares,
To his great mind seemed too too small a space:
Yet it his coarse does keep; [deare pledge] over which
Affections flammes huge Pyramides does raise,
All graven with golden letters of his praise.
But ah deprived of a gemme so rich!
Great Britain now but great to all appears,
In her great loss, and Oceans of tears.
Ignoto.

7
Cio ch' il Pianeta che distingue L'hore
Alluma e cinge, e cio ch' il gran Mar laua,
Tutto quel e la sepoltura cava,
Del magnanimo ARRIGO, ricco d' Honor.
Ignoto.

8
WHy Pilgrim do thou stray
By Asia's floods renowned?
Or where great ATLAS crowned
With clouds, him reaches boue Heavens milkie way?
Strange Wonders to behold.
By Isis streams if thou'l but daigne to stay,
One thou shall find surpassing all the told.
For there is in little room,
The PRINCE of men, and Man of Princes Tomb.
Ignoto.

9
HEre lies the Worlds delight,
Dead to our sight, but in Eternal light.
These nine who by him moan,
The Muses were (alas)
But through his fatal case,
Are changed like wailing Niobe in stone.
She clad in Sable roabes,
Who in a deadly sleep
Such pearlie streams poures from her Crystal globes;
Is Virtue that complains
She wants Argos hundredth eyes to weep;
Or Iris silver raines.
That winged Penthasilea in the Air,
Fame is, his praise who roles,
Twixt both the starrie Poles.
With earnest eyes to skies, and Bay-crown'd hair,
Enstall'd on Virtues throne,
This Ghaistlie Sire that tramples pale Despair,
Brave Honor's called, who scorns to give a groan,
For in the Programme of his life he reeds,
Men's Hopes of him surmounts ALCIDES deeds.
Ignoto.

10
CRudeli crudaque Patri, Patriaeque ruina
Raptus, ut aethereis insereretur avis:
HENRICUS modicae (Sanctum Caput) inditur Vrna,
Maximus Ille, suo ni genitore minor.
Hugo Hollandus.

11
DEath (that by stealth did wound Prince HENRY'S heart)
Is now taken Captive, and does act the part
Of one overcome, by being too too fierce,
And lies himself dead under Henry's Hearse:
He therefore now in Heavenly runes does sing,
Hell where is thy triumph? Death where is thy sting?
George Wyther.

12
TWo Kingdoms strove for Intrest in one Prince,
Heavens claimed me from them both, and rest me hence:
Scotland my Cradle, England has my Hearse,
The Heavens my Soul, my Virtues live in Verse.
13
I lived three Kingdoms hope, foes terror, parents life,
I di'de their dearest loss, their joy, their endless grief.
Robert Allyne.

14
WHom all the vaste frame of the fixed Earth
Shrunk under: now a weak Hearse stands beneath:
His Fate he past in fact, in hope his Birth,
His youth in good life, and in spirit his death.
15
Blessed be his great Begetter, blessed the Womb
That gave him birth, though much too near his Tomb.
In them was he, and they in him were blessed:
What their most great powers gave him, was his least.
His Person graced the Earth, and of the Skies,
His blessed Spirit, the praise is, and the pryse.
Geor. Chapman.

16
DId he die young? oh no, it could not be,
For I know few that lived so long but he,
Till God and all men loved him: then be bold,
That man that liv's so long, must needs be old.
William Rowley.

FINIS.

