Panacea Christiana.

OR A CHRISTIANS SOVEREIGN SALVE FOR EVERY SOAR.

DELIVERED In Two several SERMONS, and now digested into one Treatise:
published for the use of all distressed Christians.

Esaiah 50.4. The Lord has given me a tongue of the Learned, that I should
know how to Minister a word in time to him that is weary.

AVGVSTIN. Tam bonus est Deus vt nullo modo permitteret malum nisi inde nosset
elicere bonum.

LONDON, Printed by Isaac Iaggard for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Cheapeside, at the Sign of the Bible. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir EDWARD COOK, Knight, one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable:
BEsides those common enducements which prevail with others (your Honors more
then ordinary zeal and affection to Learning and Piety) there are some
private obligations which have moved me to consecrate the first fruits of my
Labors, to your Patronage. It was their command, to whom I owe not obedience
and respect only, but my-selfe also, that first exposed these lines to the
censure of the World, and then shrouded them under the shelter of your Wings.
For the subject matter, Vtinam tam commodum quam accomodum.
as it suites well with the times; so I presume it will not be unwelcome to
your Honor. A word in his place, as the Wiseman observes) is like Apples of
Gold, Pro. 25, 11.
with pictures of Silver. If this Theme be not now seasonable, when will it
be? The Church of God goes to wrack abroad: many miseries and calamities
press us sore at home, and our sins threaten more and worse. Satan rages,
because his time is but short; his Instruments flourish: the wicked are in
their ruff, the godly underfoot, despised, trampled upon. The old complaint is
not unjustly renewed, that it falls out, Bonis male, malis been, Well with the
Bad, ill with the Good. Is it not now high time to minister a word of comfort
to them that mourn in Sion? What greater comfort then this Oracle from Heaven;
All shall work to the Best of them that love God? Of which number, the Church
of God has good cause to esteem your Honor, who have tasted with your
Brethren, this bitter Cup, and therefore can relish these Sweetes the better.
For my part, I know not how to testify my respects otherwise, then in these
kind of Presents, and my hearty prayers for the increase of your Honor and
Happiness, which shall never be wanting from

Your Honors most humble observance, Th: Hering.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader; This small Tractate was so penned, as Preached; and so Preached,
as thou may easily guess, it was never intended for ostentation, but for
aedification. Jf thou look for many Citations and Quotations of Authors,
thou deceyuest thy Self. It was my Ambition (J confess) to draw water out of
the fountains, rather then out of the streams. Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur
aquae. Man purposes, but God disposes. The truth is, violence and importunity
wrung this for the Press, which was intended soly for the Pulpit. I know there
is great difference between a living vice, and a dead Letter, as between a
body animated, and a painted body. I know this Critical and Censorious Age,
will give but harsh entertainment to such a rude and unpolished Treatise, and
deem it more fit to be suppressed in a corner, then to be published to the
World; yet my comfort is, A Widows Mite will find acceptance with the
Searcher of the heart. Besides, J had rather seem too forward in putting out
my Masters money to the Bankers, then to undergo the Doom of an evil Servant,
for smothering his Talent in a Napkin. All Stars are not of the same
magnitude, yet every Star shines in his own Orb. If some beams of Comfort
conueyghed in these cursorie Meditations, may warm and enliuen any poor
drooping disconsolate Christian, J have my aim, let God have the Honor and
Glory. As all things, so this (J hope) shall work to the Best. Read, and
consider. Farewell.

T. H.

Panacea Christiana. OR A CHRISTIANS sovereign Salve for every Sore.
ROMANS 8.28. For we know that all things work together for good, to them that
love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.


HOweuer the whole Scripture (as S. 2. Tim. 3, 16.
Paul to his Scholar Timothy) be given by divine inspiration, and is
profitable, to teach, to improve, to correct, to instruct in righteousness,
that the man of God, may be made perfect to all good works. Yet as in the
large folio of the book of Nature, though every Creature carry in it the
sparkles of the power, goodness, and providence of the Creator; those rays
shine out more brightly in some, more dimmely in others; so in the lesser
Epitome of the Scripture, albeit all the parcels of sacred Writ, breath forth
one and the selfsame divine truth in a most sweet and heavenly harmony; yet
in some passages the Spirit of God takes to himself (as it were) the wings of
an Eagle, soaring aloft above the capacity of the highest: in others he creepes
(as it were) on the ground, stooping to the shallow conceit of the meanest.
Sometimes he couers himself with thick clouds, Ps. 8.18, 12.
and darkness is his Pauillion; other whiles he speaks to us familiarly, Exodus
33, 11.
as to his servant Moses, face to face, mouth to mouth. The new Testament by
the consent of all, in this respect carries the pre-eminence beyond the old.
The gloss must be clearer then the text. Among the Apostles, Paul outstrips
his fellows; who for his labor, or his learning, was ever held the chiefest
of the Apostles. Among the Epistles of Paul, his to the Romans (if such
invaluable Jewels may be valued one with another, if one star may differ from
another in glory) bears the name from the rest; whether we respect doctrine of
faith, or good manners, matter of instruction, or exhortation, of confutation
or consolation; so largely discussed, so pithily pressed, so wisely managed. In
this Epistle, this chap. is of most admirable use: being placed as the Sun in
the midst of the Firmament, and containing in it a rich Mine of consolation. In
this chap. this verse is placed as the heart in the midst of the body, that
gives life to all the members. There are two professed enemies which lay
perpetual siege to the bulwark of true Christian consolation: Sin and
Affliction. These like troublesome guests, and unwelcome Inmates, so disturb
the peace of the Saints, while they lodge in these cottages of clay, that it
makes them weary of their houses, and themselves to, putting them often to
Rebeccaes complaint, Genesis 27.46.
Would to God I were dead. These are those Sanaanites and Hittites which are
perpetual goades in their sides, perpetual pricks in their eyes. Numb. 33.55
Here is that Gall and Wormwood which embitters all the sweets this world can
afford. To shut up in a word, here is that Coloquintida which matres the other
herbs, and makes the^ that tastes cry, Mors in Olla. 2. Kings. ^.40
Death is the pot. Against both these, Paul addresses his discourse in this
chapter, wherein like a valiant champion, expert in the Lords battles, having
mustred up his forces, and marshalled them in battle array, in the
Forefront, he affronts sin, the head of this Serpent, in the Rereward, he
encounters with Affliction, the tail of this Serpent, the after a long
skirmish, wins the field, and sounds the Triumph; Neither life nor death,
things present, nor things to come, shall separate us from the love of God in
Christ. More plainly, here is an Antidote, a Cordial proposed an Antidote
against the poison of sin; a Cordial against the anguish of the cross. The
Antidote against sin is propounded, verse 1. confirmed verse 2. prosecuted,
applied in the sequel to verse 17. The Cordials to mittigate the anguish of the
cross, are threefold. The first is, drawn from the end of it, our conformity
to Christ verse 17. The second from the guide we have in it, the Spirit
helps (...) infirmities, verse 26. The third is taken from the good issue we
shall have out of it, verse 28. So that these words carry in them, a sovereign
Cordial against all miseries, crosses, calamities, whatsoever, wheresoever, how
many, how great soever, which may or shall vex the Israel of God, while they
soiourne in this valley of tears, and vale of misery.

In treating hereof (that I may acquaint you with my method) we with consider
the connection first, then the proposition. In the proposition the Circumstance,
the substance is obserueable. The Circumstances will lead us into the
consideration of the persons to whom this Cordial is intended restrained; (We)
of the manner how it is delivered, evidently, confidently (We know:) for the
substance in it you have first the generality (all things) then the Harmony,
(work together:) thirdly, the scope or drift of their working (for good:)
lastly, the description of the parties whom this concerns, from their inward
affection (they that love God) from their effectual vocation (that they are
called from their eternal election (that they are called according to his

These be the rude lineaments of our present discourse, which we intend (by
the Divine Assistance) to prosecute and pollish over with a second, and more
accurate draught. That which first offers it self to our Meditation, is the
Connection, which shall be dispatched in a word (Also:) this copulative
particle like some corner stone in a curious structure, knits this verse to the
verses immediately preceding; as if the Apostle had delivered himself more
plainly and fully. If this be not sufficient to strengthen your feeble knees,
to erect your dejected spirits; that suffering is the way to glory, that by the
Cross you do but climb to this Crown; that Mount Caluary lies only in the
rhode to Mount Tabor; that herein stands your conformity to him, who was
consecrated your High Priest by Affliction. If the sweet meditation of the
glory to come, cannot digest the present bitterness of the Cross; if the
presence, the assistance of that Spirit of Consolation, that Comforter, who is
Comfort it self, cannot cheer your disconsolated spirits, nor assuage your
sorrow; add to the former heap a serious meditation of the power and
ouer-ruling Providence of your heavenly Father, whereby all things are so
wisely disposed, so sweetly carried, so cunningly contrived, that what-euer
happens in the world, all work together for the best of them that love God,
etc. All things and among the rest your afflictions which are so far from
preiudicing your fatuation, that they advance it; so far from being (as your
deem in your weak distempers) clogges to wedge you to the earth, that they
prove after a sort as wings, whereby you soar aloft to heaven: so far from
being Scala inferni, a p^acipice from whence your souls should be tumbled
headlong into the infernal Lake, that indeed they prove to be a Scala coeli, a
Iaakobs ladder, upon whose stairs the Angels of God are continually ascending
and descending, by which steps the Elect mount into Abrams, bosom. These tall
Anakims serve not to tread you as mire under their feet, but to lift you up
(as Kings and Princes) upon their shoulders nearer heaven. He that has but
half an eye, may now see the drift of the Apostle, which is to reach forth a
strong Cable of Consolation; unto those poor Saints and servants of God; who
sailing in the troublesome Sea of this tumultuous world, having encountered with
great storms, and now almost ouer-whelmed with the succession of many hideous
waves one pressing on another; are laboring for life, ready to be plunged into
the gulf of despair. A strong Cable it is, composed of many threads, so
twisted together, that all the Devils in hell shall never be able to break it.
Eccle. 4.9.12
Two (says Solomon) are better then one: a threefold cord cannot easily be
broken. In that our Apostle contents not himself with one Argument of
Consolation, but to the first adds a second, and strengthens the second with a
third; the observation is plain and evident. As, many are the Crosses of the
Righteous; so, their Comforts are many; the Afflictions of the just go not
single, but by throngs and troops: one following on the neck, one treading
upon the heel of another: Velus vnda vndam, as waves seconds wave in the Sea;
neither are their consolations single. Lo here is a double, nay a trebble
ground of solid comfort; Psalm. 34, 19.
Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord will deliver them out of
all. Many troubles, many deliverances; so many troubles, so many deliverances;
every several trouble has a several rescue, till he be delivered, not from
some, or from few, or from many, but from al. Every proper temptation has it
own proper issue. 1. Cor. 10 15. So Zach. 1.21. Look how many horns were
raised to push at the Israel of God, so many Carpenters were appointed, so many
hammers lifted up to break those horns in pieces. John. 16, 33.
In the world you shall have trouble; (there is the cross.) In me you shall
have peace; there is the comfort. Act. 14, 22,
Through many tribulations you must enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Tribulations, many Tribulations; there is many crosses; these tribulations
minister a passage by which we get heaven; there is many comforts, if with Paul
we have terrors without, and terrors within, we shall find comforts without
and comforts within: if we be distressed on all sides with him, with him we
shall be comforted on all sides. Notable to this purpose is that of the same
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. We are afflicted on every side: there is cross upon
cross: yet not in distress, there is comfort. He goes on, we are in doubt,
but despair not: we are persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but we
perish not, etc. It is very remarkable to observe how the crosses and comforts,
with which that chosen vessel was laded, poised, and balanced each other: yet
in the end, verse 17. the comfort infinitely weighs down the cross, and
therefore he calls it a light affliction, but a weight of glory. Let me shut up
the proof of this point with the Epiphonema of the same Apostle. 2, Cor. 1,3.
Blessed be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who comforts us in all our
tribulations, that as our suffering for Christ has abounded, so our joy might
abound much more.

You have seen God doing his part: our parts now must follow. This serves
(that I may descend from the confirmation of the point unto application, which
is the life of all teaching) to minister matter of Thankfulness, of
Instruction, of Meditation. Of Thankfulness first. How should every Christians
heart be ravished with this consideration and transported even beyond it self,
with the grateful acknowledgement of so high a favor? The God of Consolation
is no niggard of his Cordials; he pinches not, he spares not, but gives us into
our bosom a good treasure shaken together pressed down, running over and will thou show thy self a niggard in the retribution of Thanks? Is Gods hand
opened and thine shut? Is Gods heart enlarged and are thy bowels strained?
Shall the Creator give unto the Creature a Cup of Consolation, a Cup brimfull
an ouer-flowing Cup, and shall not the Creature take up (with the Princely
Prophet) the cup of salvation? Will ye thus requite the Lord, O ye foolish
people and unthankful? Si ingratum dixeris omnia dixeris. Give unto the Lord
all ye his Saints; Give unto the Lord. Psalm. 29.1.
What will you give? thanks: what less can ye give? not verbal only, but
real; not in word alone, but in deed and in truth, as the Apostle wishes the
Ephesians to walk worthy of their vocation: such is my counsel to all that
have tasted of this sweet marrow and fatness; Ephesians. 4.1.
Walk worthy of so great Consolation.

It serves secondly, for instruction, to make us enamored with the book of
God, that rich wardrobe, and abundant storehouse of divine comforts. If any
be merry, James. 5.13.
let him sing Psalms, if afflicted let him pray, and read too. Whether should
we go for light but to the Sun? Psalm. 42.1.
for water but to the Wel-head? Lo here is that fountain of consolation: As
the Heart brayeth after the rivers of water, so let thy disconsolated soul pant
and thirst after these Crystal streams of living water, Psalm. 46.4.
which issuing from the threshold of the Sanctuary, makes glad the City of our
God Here be those Apples of Paradise, those flaggons of Wine, Cant. 2.5.
the true Aqua vitae, which can fetch us again in our deepest swoundes, which
alone can refresh us in our greatest Agonies. Here is the oil of gladness,
the balm of Gilead; here we may suck, and be delighted; here we may milk
and be satisfied. As for all other waters, either they are but streams issuing
from this fountain, and howeuer pure in the head, yet may be corrupted in the
channels or pipes through which they are conveyed unto us: or if they flow from
any other spring, they are not living, but dead waters: not sweet but bitter
streams, corroding not comforting the bowels into which they descend. All
these comforters are miserable comforters, Physicians of no value, drugges of
no virtue. These sacred volumes are not unfitly resembled by one of the
Ancients, to an Apothecaries shop, richly furnished with salues for every sore,
with receipts and remedies for every malady. Our care and wisdom must induce
us so familiarly to acquaint our selves with the several compositions, that in
all our extremities, we may be able on a sudden to fetch and cull out proper
salues for any sores; fit receites against any distemper. Psalm. 119.92.
I had fainted in my affliction (says the Princely Prophet) if thy word had
not stayed me up. A wise man will have his plaster ready, though his head be
not broken as yet.

The last use serves for meditation. If there be such store of comforts
suggested to us on earth, what think you is reserved for us in heaven? The
greatest measure of consolation we can have here, is nothing in comparison of
what we shall have there. The disproportion is only not infinite: here we
have but the first fruits, there is the harvest; here our comfort is but in
the seed, there is the full croppe; here we have but the earnest, there is
the inheritance; here but a few sparkles, there is the flame; here but a few
drops, there is the Ocean. Now it is distilled into our narrow mouthed bottle,
as we are capable to receive it, drop after drop; then we shall be bathed;
yea, drenched over head and ears in a Sea of comfort. This joy is so great,
that it cannot enter into us, but we must enter into it. Mar. 25.21.
So much that phrase of speech implies: Well done good and faithful servant,
enter into thy masters joy. There is fullness of joy, there are rivers of
pleasures for evermore: such comforts as eye has not seen, ear has not
heard; neither ever can the heart of man conceive; Lord, Give us evermore of
this Comfort. So much, if not too much of the connection. We come now to the
words in themselves considered; where the circumstances first offer themselves
to our meditation: the first is, the person to whom this privilege is
entailed; (we.)

We that are made partakers of the Divine nature; we that are borne not of
water but of the Spirit; We that are advanced to be a holy Nation; a peculiar
people, a Royal Priesthood: We that have tasted of the bitter waters of
Marah, We know etc. There lies a notable Emphasis, (if you mark it) in this
particle We; it is a word of restraint, and shuts up the door against all
carnal. Wordlings; and will not allow them the apprehension of so Divine
truth. This Christian Aphorism cannot be conceived; much less embraced, much
less digested by a Naturalist. Wisdom has hid these things from the Wise of
this world, Luke. 10.21.
and revealed them unto Babes, and Sucklings: to such Babes are desire the
sincere milk of the word, that they may grow thereby. The natural man
perceives not the things of God; neither indeed can he: So Paul, 1. Corinthians.
2.14. He perceives not the things of God: there is his inability; neither can
he, there is an utter impossibility. As soon may a brute beast conceive,
discuss, reason, and discourse of the things of men, as a man in his mere
naturals, comprehend the things of God. This knowledge is beyond the sphere of
Nature; and we are guided to it by a higher principle. This is one of those
deep mysteries of Godliness, into which the very Angels desire to pry; an
unwise man knows it not, a fool cannot understand it.

These Celestial thoughts, transcend his dull capacity: tell a worldling of
the Peace of God which passes all understanding; Philip. 4.7. 1. Pet. 1.8.
mind him of a joy which is glorious and unspeakable: assure him, there is a
royal privilege peculiar to the chosen of God; that All things shall work
together to the best of them that love God, Act. 17.18. Act. 20.24.
etc. You shall seem to him a Barbarian, or (as the Athenians censured Paul.)
you must pass for a babbler and broacher of new Doctrine; nay, Festus verdict
will be your lot, much Devotion has made thee mad. If he himself discourse
of them, it is but Parrot-like, he speaks by rote, he know's not what; uttering
the Sentence, when he understands not the sense. Let his Wine and Oil
increase; Let his Cowes Calue and cease not; Let him have his portion in this
life, Esaus Patrimony, the fatnes of the earth, and fulness of bread; like the
Cock in the Fable he will prefer one Barleycorne before the richest Jewel
which the earth can afford. Give him Hay, Prouender, Husks, and Acornes, the
Leekes and Onions of Egypt; he will not stick to bid much good may your
Spiritual consolations do you; let me enjoy the present comforts of this
life: I shall neither envy your hopes for the future, nor desire them. Let me
have the Res, the possession and fruition of my desires, take you the Spes, the
expectation of I know not what golden Mountains, which your cracked brains
promise to themselves. One Bird in the hand, is better then two in the bush. As
our Savior spoke sometimes to the woman of Canaan, if thou knew the gift of
God, John. 4.10.
and who it is that speaks unto thee, thou would have asked and be would
have given unto thee of the water of the Well of life to drink freely. So say
I unto thee, O thou silly sottish Muck-worme, if thou could but taste the
delicacy of this hid Manna, this Angelical provision, this super-coelestiall
and soule-rauishing consolation, with which the Righteous Man is daily,
hourly, solaced; how would thou loath the dirt and dung of this world? 2.
Sam. 23.16.
How would thou (with David's Worthyes) break thorough a whole host of
Philistims to get but a few drops of the water of this Bethel; which now is
powered forth unto thee (as it were) by pale-fuls, and thou suffer it to be
spilt on the ground; nay, tramplest it as mire and dirt under thy feet. But
what do I wasting my spirits, and abusing your patience, while I direct my
discourse to the belly, which has no ears? I will now address my self to
the hungry empty soul. Is there any here whose bowels are kindled, whose
affections are enflamed? Is there any, that longs to have a share in this
inestimable Treature? That longs to sip of this cup? I know no surer way, no
better counsel can be given him, then to interest himself in the society of
the Saints. Labor to be of that communion; be one of that Incorporation, and
this praerogatiue granted to them, will not be denied to thee. If thou be
involued in this (We) if made partakers of this Divine nature, thou shall be
made partakers of this divine Consolation: the Saints are indeed the only true
Good-fellowes which have all things common. This (We) is not only an
exclusive particle, to shut the door against the wicked and profane hand that
would be snatching at these dainty morsels, but also an inclusiue particle,
opening the door wide to the feeble hand of all weak palsy Christians; for
whom God has spread this Table, furnishings it even in the wilderness. Least any
should think this Table common for all comers, tagge and ragge: Paul
appropriates it, points us to the guest invited, (We, and we only:) Least any
should think this Table proper to Paul only; he enlarges himself to show
how it is common to all Christians: (We, and all We.) Hitherto of the parties
to whom this truth is intended and entailed; it is more then high time that we
proceed to the manner how it is delivered, employed in the next word (Know.)

(We know:) a word that imports both the perspicuity and certainety of this
divine Aphorism. This knowledge was no bare speculation, but a practical
observation; not a mere Notion or naked conception of the brain, but a well
grounded and settled persuasion of the heart. We know not theorically only,
but really; not speculatiuely only, but experimentally; every day, every
moment is this Scripture fulfilled in us, and upon us, that all things work,
etc. Again, (we know) that is; we may know it, we must know it, we shall know
it We may know, if we do not wilfully shut our eyes; if we do but carefully
observe the carriage of God toward our selves, or any of the Saints, trace him
in all his passages, you may easily sent out the print of his footsteppes;
Things revealed, belong to us and our Children. We ought, we must know it.
Every trade and profession of life, Citizens, Scholars, Soldiers: the
Gentry, Comminalty, Nobility, have certain prerogatives annexed to them (not to
touch upon the highest rank.) What man so simple, as to be ignorant of those
privileges which are granted by custom or favor to the meanest occupation?
What a shame were it then for any professed Christian to be utterly
unacquainted with so maine a privilege proper only to those of that coat?
Proprium Quarto modo (as Schoolmen deliver it) omni Soli semper. Agreeing to
all Christians, only to a Christian, and to a Christian always. Nay, We shall
know it. How ever in the times of our ignorance it may be hid from our eyes,
that we cannot conceive it; howeuer in the time of temptation, our hearts may
be so unsettled, that we cannot but doubt of it, yet sooner or later, first or
last, we shall attain to this plerophory of our Apostle, we shall see clearly,
believe confidently, and acknowledge feelingly, that All things work together,
etc.

This Mystery is not revealed fully at the first dash. The bright luster of so
glorious a light, if it should suddenly break out upon us, would doubtless
dazzle our dim Owlet eiesight. We see it first darkely as in a cloud, confusedly
(as it were) a far off in process of time, more clearly, more distinctly, as
years and experience should teach an aged Scholar.

The reason hereof is evident. This Knowledge is the Mother of all spiritual
Courage, Constancy, Patience, and Perseverance. This is the wise man's harbor,
which secures him in the greatest storms. What though the earth be moved?
What though the Sea rore and make a noise? Psalm. 46.2.3
The mountains be tumbled into the midst of the Sea? What though the whole
world be in a tumultuous uproar, running into a Chaos of Confusion? That heart
which has planted it self on this Rock, is no whit afraid of evil tidings,
stands as Mount Sion, which cannot be moved. Why? It knows that wise Pilot
which sits above, does not only see whateuer falls out in the glassy Sea of this
world (amiddest all the weltrings and changes of the same) but so disposes of
every particular accident, that it turns to the general good of his servants.
The Merchant venturer puts to Sea, rides out many a bitter storm, runs many
a desperate hazard, upon hope of a gainful return. The stout Soldier; takes
his life into his hand, runs upon the mouth of the Canon, dares the Lion his
own Den upon hope of victory. Every man hazards in his calling, yet are but
uncertain Venturers, ignorant of the issue. The Greedy Aduenturer, seeking to
increase his stock, loses many times both it, and himself. The Covetous
Soldier, gaping after spoil and victory, finds himself spoiled, captiuated.
But the Christian runs not at uncertain, he is sure of the goal when he
sets forth. We are sure of the day before we enter into the field: we may ante
victorian Triumpham canere, sound the Triumph before the victory. When we put
on our harness, we dare boast as he that puts it off before a stroke be
stricken. We know we shall be more then Conquerours, thorough Jesus Christ.
What made that stripling David (that Noble and Divine Spark of Magnanimity)
run hastily to encounter with that Gygantean Monster, 1. Sam. 17, 37
Goliath? He knew Jehovah would close his Enemy in his hand? What whetted
Gedeons valor to march on so boldly with a handful of men, and a few earthen
pitchers, against so numerous an host of armed Midianites? Judges 7, 15.
He knew the event, God assured him of victory. What encoraged the three
Children, and so animated them, that they ran as willingly into the hot fiery
Furnace, as it were to a bed of Down, or Roses? They knew their God was able
to deliver them. Dan. 3, 17.
Why should we then be affraide (if our Lord and Master call us forth) to
grapple with the Goliath of Affliction, to encounter with a whole host of
crosses, to drink of the bitter water of Marah, or to undergo the fiery
Trial? Lord strengthen our faith, that we quail not in the day of Battle,
but rather by that Eagle eye, piercing through the uncomfortable mistes and
clouds of Affliction, we may behold that comfortable close, how this bloud-red
Sea shall but minister to us a passage to our heavenly Canaan Pardon my just
indignation, if in the falling off from this point, I fall foul upon those
fresh-watered and white liuer'd Soldiers, who sailing upon the rough seas of
this World, are gashed with every storm, and frighted with every gust. The
least apparent danger settes them quite besides themselves, and drives them
into David's dissident conclusion; I said in my have all men are liars: Psalm.
116.11.
Or makes them cry out with Peter, Master save me, Mar. 14.30.
I perish. Whence this? but because we look only on things which are seen, not
on things which are not seen; 2. Cor. 2.18.
because we live by sight and sense, not by faith. (Hinc illae lachrymae.)
Hence those fears, those fears, those unlawful shifts plotted and practiced
to wind our selves out of such grievous perplexities. These have no faith, or
at best are but men of little faith, as our Savior increpates his Disciples,
Mat. 8.26.
if their (...) were come to full growth to a (...): they would doubtless stand
still and behold the salvation of the Lord. They would say with Paul, Exodus
14.17.
we know that al things etc.

Thus are we fallen ere we are aware, into the body of our Discourse, these
Skirts and Subburbes have led us into the heart of the City. If any think I
have dwelt too long in the Portall, let this content them, we are now in the
Palace: we have been long in cracking the shell, that your appetites might be
whetted to long for the kernel.

(All things:) Now, few not many, but (All) none excepted (work together.)
Many and sundry Agents are found in the world, whose course and scope, whose
aim and ends, and actions are not the same; they communicate not their secrets
each to other; yea, their intentions are diverse; nay adverse, one thwarting,
crossiing another; yet the ouer-ruling Providence of that supreme Moderator and
sole Monarch of Heaven and earth, so swaies all subordinate and inferior
instruments, that in the midst of their mutual iarres and oppositions, they
conspire in a sacred Harmony; as if they were entered into a holy league, or
some sacred combination for the good of his chosen: where ever they be in
respect of their places, whosoever in regard of their persons, howsoever
dis-ioynted in regard of their affections; all their proiects and practices
tend or shall turn to the good of the Elect. If I were discoursing among
Philosophers, me thinks they might excellently be shadowed out by the
Revolution of the Heavens. Every Planet moves in it own proper Orb; their
motions are not all alike, but various; nay, opposite each unto other. Hence
those different Conjunctions, Oppositions, and Aspects, of the Planets; yet by
the wheeling round of the Primum Mobile, they are brought about to one
determinate point. If I were to discourse among Statesmen; I would wish them
to observe the wise and politic carriage of a Provident Prince; who meeting
with opposite factions in his State, while each man takes his own way, one
seeking to undermine another; he serves his own ends, of both so wisely
managing the good, so powerfully ouer-awing the bad, that all turns to the
common good: I leave the (...), to the judicious Reader.

(For good:) so some Interpreters; for the Best so others: the former
exposition is good and warrantable; the latter, I take is Best and most
Emphaticall. There is a fourefold good incident to mankind; Natural, Civil,
Spiritual, Eternal. Natural, which respects the good of our bodies; the
Civil, the good of our states; Spiritual, the good of our souls in this life
Eternal; the happiness of body and soul both in the life to come. The
Natural good is common to man and beast; the Civil is common to the wicked
with the Godly; only the Spiritual and Eternal, aduances the righteous as
much above the profane, as the Civil aduances a Man above a Beast. It is
apparent enough what Good the Apostle drives at, not every good but the best
good; not the Natural or Civil good: (both these vanish as dross in the
furnace of affliction:) but the Spiritual, the Eternal good, which abides the
fiery trial, and as pure Gold is refined, rather then empaired by it. All
things shall work for their good, this is, shall make for the good of their
souls, for their eternal good; shall further their Sanctification, their
Salvation; shall make them more holy here, more happy hereafter, more gracious
on earth, more glorious in heaven.

A Paradox which soundes harsh, and must needs grate the ears of a carnal
Nichodemus, a conceit most absurd in the judgment of flesh and blood, contrary
to sense and experience; no marvel if a worldling will not subscribe to it.
Who more base, who more contemptible in the eye of the world, then the
Generation of the Just? No men more miserable, so berounded and environed with
euilles, that they cannot look beside their miseries: all things conspire to
mischief them. What a strange assertion, beyond all belief is this of our
Apostle, that all things work to their good. What all things (says the
Father?) what, all evil? what, sin? what, Affliction? Immo and peccata.
(He that puts the question, assoyles it) Yea, all things. A large word, of a
wide extent, yet not too large. General assertions avail little, the whole
weight of our comfort, lies in the induction of Particulars. Give me leave
therefore to run through all things, and to extract this Quintessence of
consolation from every thing.

For Method-sake, we will range them into two Heads; either they are Good, or
Evil. That al Good things turn to the good of them that are Good, will easily
be granted of all. Briefly then, all Good, whether supreme or subordinate.
Supreme God himself, whether we consider him in his Nature or Works. For his
attributes, His Wisdom is their Pilot, his Power their Bulwark, his
Faithfulness their Anchor, his Providence their Purueighor. His Justice keeps
them from Presumption, his Mercy from Despair. His Omniscience serves as a
Bridle, to curb them from doing evil. The Face of the Lord is against them
that do evil; Psalm. 34, 16.
as a Sparre to encourage them to all good Duties. Mat. 6.4.
He that sees in secret, will reward them openly. In a word, they love him for
his goodness, fear him for his greatness, and imitate his Holiness.

As for his Works, if toward them in particular, sometimes he speaks out
of the whirlwind; The Lion roares, Hosea 3, 8.
then all the Beasts of the field tremble. This rough Dealing, howeuer it
perplexe them for a time, yet makes them more careful to please him, more
fearful to offend him. Usually he speaks to his own in a gentle still voice,
1 King. 19.12 13.
and discourses with them in a familiar Language: then they walk with God as
Enoch, talk with him as Moses, converse with him as Abram, supplicate to him,
as David, Iosuah, Samuel, Danie. If toward Others, generally: Sometimes he
works by means; then his Glory shines sufficiently: they ascribe the praise
to him, who both appointed the means, and gave the blessing to that means he
had appointed.

Sometimes he works without means; and then his Glory gives a far greater
luster: This is the finger of God. Exodus 8.19.
they cry out Digitus Dei est. Sometimes he works above, against means, then
indeed his Glory shines out most brightly this fills them with wonder and
amazement, causing them to break out with the Apostle: O the deepenesse of the
wisdom and power of God, how unsearchable are his judgments and his ways
past finding out! Romans 11, 43. God the Father is their Creator, and Preserver;
God the Son, their Savior and Redeemer; God the holy Ghost, their Sanctifier
and Comforter.

As God the supreme Agent, so all Creatures in subordination to his will, work
for the good of his Chosen, Whether Men or Angels. Lower we may not descend,
least our discourse know no limits.

Angels: what is their office? are they not sent forth as Ministering Spirits for
the good of the elect? Heb. 11, 14 In our Insancie, these heavenly peers carry
us in their Arms as Nurses, least we should dash our feet against a stone.
Psa. 91, 11, 12
In our Nonage, they serve as Tutors or Governors, secretly instigating us to
good, dissuading from evil. Are we in prison? they can knock off our Fetters,
open the Brazen gates, Acts 12.7.
and set us at liberty to shift for our lives. Are we environed with an
innumerable Host of Armed Enemies? 2 King. 19.35
they can slay a Hundred and fourscore and five thousand in one night. At our
Death, they stand ready to receive our flitting souls, and to carry them into
Abraham's bosom. Luke 16.22.
At the Resurrection, they gather the Bodies of the Saints from the four
Corners of the world.

(Men.) All Ordinances among Men make for them, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical. Esaias 49.23.
Civil Magistrates are Nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers to the Church; as
the shadow of a great rock to shroud them from the rage of the wicked. Romans
4.44. He is the Minister of God to thee, for Good. What Good? That we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2, 2. As
Magistrates serve for their Temporal, so Ministers for their Eternal Good.
These are Pastors, Psalm. 23.2.
leading them to green Pastures, Esaias 52, 7.
whose very feet are Beautiful, because they bring the glad tidings of
Salvation. Guides, Luke. 1.79.
reducing those silly sheep, wandering in the by-pathes of Error, into the way
of peace. Watchmen, which standing on the Lords Watchtower, keep Sentinel;
Ezekiel. 3.17.
and when they they see a plague, give warning; that being (praemoniti)
forewarned, they might be (praemuniti) fore-armed.

The word of God, is to them that are saved, 2 Cor. 2.16.
the sweet savor of life unto life, the Arm of God to Salvation; Romans 1, 16.
Psa. 119.105.
A light unto their feet, a Lantern unto their steps; the two-edged sword of
the Spirit, piercing even to the dividing assunder of the Soul and Spirit, and
of the joints and marrow. Heb 4, 12. That heavenly Manna, Divine Nectar and
Ambrosia which nourishes them up to Immortality, as Oracles for Direction, as
apples of Paradise, and Flaggons of Wines for Consolation: a Corasiue to eat
out the proud flesh; a Cordial to strengthen them in their greatest
weakness. The Sacraments are the Broad Seals of the great King of Kings, to
ratify and confirm that Magna Charta, their Great Charter, whereby they lay
claim to that Immortal inheritance.

For Outward good things, whether Bona Animi, Bona Corporis, or Bona Fortunae,
even these become truly good. The gifts of the mind, acutenes of Wit, is to
them as that sword of Alexander, by whose keen edge they are made able to untie
or cut asunder the Gordian knots of all Sophistical Dilemmaes. Depth of
judgment so grounds them in the knowledge of the Truth, that like Trees which
have taken deep root, they cannot easily be tossed too and fro with every
blast of Doctrine; yea the gifts of Reprobates advance the good of the Elect.
Who may save others, but themselves they cannot save; like Noah's Shipwrights,
that builded an Arc for the securing of the Patriarchs, while themselves were
swallowed up of the Deluge.

The Ornaments of their Bodies. The beauty of Ester made the whole Church of the
Jews fare the better. Sampsons strength was Isreal's Bulwark, and the wrack
of Philistims. The Gifts of Fortune (as we commonly term them) are notably
emproued by them. If they become Favorites to Great men, Lot Joseph, David,
Nehemiah, Mordecai, Prou. 11.10.
rise and climb. When the righteous are exalted, the City shall flourish. If
their Cup ouerflow, their Breasts be full of Milk, and their Bones full of
Marrow; there wordly Wealth makes them rich in good Works, 1. Tim. 6.18.
to do good, and to distribute they forget not. Now they are Eyes to the
blind, Clothes to the naked, Job 31, 17, 18 19, 20. etc.
Feet to the lame: their Morsels are never eaten alone, the loins of the
poor shall bless them.

My promise was not to dwell on this branch, which requires not confirmation,
but only illustration. Why should I waste the time, in proving what none
denies? Here Is the maine Scruple, a Quaere not easily assoyl'd: What do all
evil things turn to their good? I, All evil too, by accident, whether of Sin
or Punishment of Sin; whether that of our first Parents, or what flows from
thence. That of our first Parents? Our Apostacy from God in the first Adam,
made way for the incarnation of the Second. Had we not fallen in Adam, we
could never have stood in Christ. Our Happiness at the first was put into our
own hands; but how easily were we beguiled by that wily Serpent (like little
Children, that will part with Gold for a Nut-shelle) to let go God, Heaven,
our Souls, and all for an Apple. Whereas now, this Jewel is kept under look
and key, in the Bosom of God, conueighed to us by our Head Christ Jesus; and
as soon may Satan pull Christ their Head out of Heaven, as snatch a rib, a
member, a limb from his body. Lo how we have gained by our lossel: our
Happiness is enlarged, confirmed, and we may triumphingly conclude with the
Philosopher: (...). We had perished, if we had not perished.

That which flows from our first Parents, whether Original Corruption, or
Actual Transgression. Original Corruption, howeuer it stick close to all the
sons of Adam, as an Hereditary Leprosy bred in the flesh, and will not our of
the bone. Well may it be subdued, rooted out it cannot be. If it do not
Regnare, it will Inhabitare. So has it fretted into our Nature, as the
Leprosy eat into the walls, that it cannot be scraped out till the house be
pulled down; like that poisoned Vestiment which the Poets feign was given to
Hercules, that would not off till it had torn the skin from the flesh, and
the flesh from the bone. This tainture sieges on the wholeman in the union of
the Soul to the Body, and therefore cannot be extirpated, eradicated, till the
final separation of the Body from the Soul.

This Fomes Malorum, works for their Good many ways. It serves to humble
them; it lets them see, that they carry in them the Spawne of all Sin, the
sourse of all Impiety lurkes in their vile Nature; that by Nature they are
Slaves to sin, Vassals to Satan, Daenen eti priusquam nati. Aug.
Firebrands of Hell, heirs of Condemnation; that they are naught, stark
naught, worse then naught. Now the first step to Christianity, is Self-denial
If any man will be my Disciple, he must deny himself, and follow me. If the
recognition of this poison and venom which lurketh in the Nature of Man, and
renders him more odious in the sight of God then a Toade, Snake, or Serpent can
be hateful to us, do not make him out of love with himself, I know not what
will. Certainly, Paul was not enamored with his own worth, when he cries out,
In me (that is) in my flesh, there dwells no good thing. Romans 7. ver. 18. It
drives them to Christ with lamentable sighs and groans; O miserable man that
I am who shall deliver me from this body of Death? Thanks be to God thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 7, 24, 25. verses.

These diseased creatures, sick as life can hold, how eagerly do they run
unto the Physician? accounting it a most singular Happiness, if they may with
the poor Woman in the Gospel) but steal a touch of the Hemme of our
Saviors Garment, Luke 8, 43, 44
that so this Issue of blood may be stanched, and this Spring of Corruption
dried up, which of it self like a seething pot, Ezech. 16, 16. Ezech. 24, 6,
7
is ever sending up a filthy Scumme, and like the raging Sea, is ever foaming
out mire and dirt. Esa. 57, 20, 21


Actual transgressions, the cursed fruit sprowting from that root of
Bitterness, whether Lesser or Greater, are made useful to the Elect. Smaller,
in the Understanding; Errors and doubting, occasions them to get a surer
resolution, a scrupulous mind; (I mean not of such as are more nice then wise,
which makes doubts where none is, and seek knots in a Bulrush.) Like those
trees which are shaken of the Northern winds take deeper root and stands
firmer. The doubting of some few, make for the satisfaction of many. The
Corinthians staggering in that high point of the Resurrection; 1. Cor. 15.
gave a hint to Paul, for the wiping out of all scruples both in themselves
and others. No truths more clear now then those which have been heretofore
most controuersall.

In the Affections. Their proanenesse to anger, wrath, dissension, Aemulation,
secret heart-burning, open distaste: These human frailties make them more
wary, more watchful. Acts. 15.39.
Paul and Barnabas fall at variance, their discord breaks into a rent or
separation; this separation tended much to the spreading of the Gospel.
Howsoever, these slips let them see their own weakness, now they know they
are but men; now they learn to curb their exorbitant passions, and will not
be not so foolish as to lay the reins on the necks of those unruly horses,
which if they once get head will endanger their own neck and their Masters
too. I but what shall we think of the greater evils?

Gross sins howsoever they seem to make Havoc of the graces of the
Spirit; like a Thief in the Candle wasting all, or like some blazing Comets
prodigiously portending ruin and desolation to that Soul which is so foully
ouer-taken: yet out of this Rank poison the Grand Physician fetches a
Sovereign Treacle, using the blood of the Scorpion to cure the sting of the
Scorpion. This turns to their own good, the good of their Brethren. To their
own Good many ways, making them more humble, more meek, more wise, more
cautelous, more wary, and more Zealous. These foul Enormities whereby they
become Public scandals to God and Man, are those stinging Coraziues which eat
down that Pride of heart, and selfe-conceitednesse, to too much ouerweening
their own worth. A sin which though it make little noise in the ears of the
world, yet appears far more odious and abominable in the sight of God, then
those Carnal fleshly sins which the world censures so deeply.

Secondly, as it make them more humble in themselves, Gal. 6.1.
so it renders them more gentle to their Brethren. If any man be fallen by
occasion into any fault, restore such a one with the Spirit of meekness is the
Iniunction of the Apostle. Those Physicians which never felt pain themselves,
handle their weak Patients more rigidly and more roughly. God suffers
sometimes even Famous and Eminent Men; (Stars of the first Magnitude) to fall
fearfully into gross sins, that they might put to their helping hand, to
raise up others more willingly, and instruct them more feelingly.

Thirdly, it makes them more wise and wary. The Burnt child will dread the
fire. No wit so good as that which is dear bought. (...), even fools by
suffering are made wife: he is a Fool and a Madman both, that will stumble
twice at the same stone. These Nocumenta are to them Documenta; If they learn
wisdom by other men's harms, much more by their Own. Such falls and shrewd
knockes, teach them to look before them, and ever after to take surer footing.
As these gross escapes tend to their own Good, so to the Good of their
Brethren, for their Comfort and Caution.

For Comfort: How many thousands had been plunged into the Gulf of Despair,
had they not been vpheld by the miscarriage of some few of the Saints? Have
thou been an Adulterer, a Murderer, violating the Bed first, and then embruing
thy hands in the blood of thy Brother? David comes to thee if thou can
Believe and Repent, despair not: I robbed my loyal subject of his wife, of
his life, and yet I was restored to the joy of my salvation. Psalm. 51, 12.
I confessed my sin, and the Lord forgave mine iniquity. Psalm 32.5.
Have thou bin a griping Extortioner, a proling Catch pole; grinding the faces
of the poor, and selling the needy for shoes? Zacheus comes to thee, Repent,
Believe, and despair not, for I was an Oppressing-Exactor, an Exacting
Oppresor, Luke 19.9.
yet Salvation came under my Roof, and I was made the Child of Abram. Have
thou bin a Bloody Persecutor, an horrible Blasphemer? Paul comes to thee,
Repent, Believe, despair not, I worried the tender Lambs of Christ (cruel
Woolfe and Tiger as I was) and made much havoc of the Flock: my foul mouth
belched out hideous Blasphemies against God and Heaven; yet I found mercy, and
became a Chosen vessel, of a Saul, a Paul; of a Persecutor, Acts 9.15.
a Preacher of the Name of Christ. Have thou been a spoiling Caterpillar, a
Robber by the Highway; whose whole Occupation was a Trade of vileness and
villainy; one that had sold thy self to work wickedness all the days of thy
life, and now art gasping out thy last breath, thy heart strings ready to
crack assunder, thy Soul almost torn from thy Body; the Thief on the Cross
cries to thee, Repent, Believe, and despair not; I knew no other Trade to live
by but stoile and rapine; this I practiced, til the hand of Justice fastened my
hands and feet to this wood; neither felt I any remorse for my lewd course,
till I came to the point of death, yet was I received into Paradise. Luke 23.43.
Romans 15, 4.
Wherefore are these things written but for our Instruction and Comfort? These
foul Crimes are recorded not in hatred to them, but in Love to us.

For Caution secondly. Who are we that we should presume of our own strength,
when we see the weakness of those Brave Worthies? 1 Cor. 10.12
Let him that stands take heed least he fall. If the tall Caedars of Lebanon
be thus tossed, and in a manner torn up by the roots; what shall become of
the shrubs? If the pillars be shaken, how shall the rafters hold out?

Thus you see, how the evil of sin, whether great or small; lesser or grosser,
works to the good of Gods chosen: no marvel then, if the evil of
punishment, the consequence of sin, have the same effects, whether Inward or
Outward. Inward, whether Spiritual desertion, or anguish of mind. These be
the unhappy twins of that cursed dam, Spiritual Desertion. A sad and doleful
condition it is, when the Father of lights shall withdraw the Light of his
countenance, Psalm. 4, 6.
which is better then life it self; when the Almighty shall become our enemy,
and shall set us as a Mark or But to shoot at: when this Arrows shall stick
fast in our ribs, Job. 6.4.
and the venom thereof shall drink up our blood. When the terrors of God fight
against us. When the Lion shall tear us in pieces, and there is none to
deliver us. When the Lord shall turn the deaf ear to our roarings, (...).
18.41.
sighs, and groans: We call and cry, but none hears; yea even to the Lord,
but he answers not. This forced those sad complaints from the man after Gods
own heart. Have thou forgotten to be merciful? Have thou shut up thy loving
kindness in everlasting forgetfulness? Psalm 13.1.
How long (Lord) how long, will thou absent thy self for ever? This made Job a
terror to himself. But, oh the unspeakable Good which redounds from this
unspeakable grief! First, this Hammer breaks our flinty hearts. A broken and
a contrite spririt (O God) thou will not despise. Psalm. 51.17.
None more comfortable, then such as have waded through these uncomfortable
storms.

Secondly. Therefore does he absent himself for a moment, to endeere his
presence, that we might greet him with a double welcome, and not too easily
forgo what cannot be obtained, without great difficulty. The Spouse in the
Canticles, suffers her Beloved to stand knocking without doors: though he
plead his lock were wet with the drops of the dew: Open my Love, my Dove, my
undefiled. The lazy fit was on her, loath she is to stir out of her warm
nest, there he must wait and cool his heels. Can. 5.2.3.4.
No sooner does the Bridegroom out of a just distaste draw back, but she comes
to her self, sees her folly, casts off her lithernes, starts up, forth of
Doors she gets her; seeking, enquiring him whom her soul loved, she pursues
him (as it were) with heu and cry, resolves never to give over seeking (though
beaten and buffeted black and blew) till she have found him; and then clasps
hands about his neck, and will be sure to hold him faster then her own life.
The other brat and abortiue conception of that ugly monster, is anguish of
mind. An insupportable evil. The spirit of a man, can bear all infirmities;
Prou. 18.14.
but a wounded spirit who can bear? When Conscience writes bitter things
against us, and causes us to possess the sins of our youth, Job. 13.26.
setting them in order before us: who is able to endure the gnawing of this
Chest-worme? Which is ever corroding our hearts like a greedy Vulture, and
eating through our bowels, like a cursed viper. Who can endure the heat of
this Aetna when it flashes the flames of hell fire in our faces? Who can endure
the strokes and stabbes of this hellish fiend, persecuting us (as it dogged
Brutus) with a drawn Sword, sheathing it to the very hilts in our heart? of
this Snaky Alecto stinging us with a perpetual Remorse. Every new sin is (as
it were) a new Snake, every renewed act of sin, gives a new stab; every stab
more mortal then the biting of a Serpent, or sting of an Adder, Prou. 23.32.
Yet even those tears, are the food of Angels; those sighs sweet music in
the ears of God; that grief, the joy of heaven. By this rough tract and
thorny path, their feet are guided into the way of Peace; those Agonies make
way for the Prince of Peace; who came not to Call the righteous, Mat. 2.17.
but sinners to Repentance. Sinners, Mar. 11.28.
that labor and are laden with the weight of their sins; to them he gives
that peace which passes all understanding. Philip. 4.7.
Both these put together, carry an Image of Hell. Spiritual disertion, is that
poena Damni, punishment of loss. Anguish of mind, is that poena sensus,
punishment of sense; an estate little differing from that of the Damned, save
only in Degree and Continuance. By these Gates of Hell, many times the dearest
Saints of God, sail to Heaven.

If these inward Evils which do pierce thorough our very souls, become thus
profitable; much more those outward miseries, which though great enough, in
themselves are but Flea-bitings in comparison of the other. May it please you
to see this fulfilled in the Generals, in the Particulars.

Generally, all outward affliction works to their good: whoeuer plowes not with
the Heifer of the Spirit, shall never unfold this Riddle; How meat comes out
of the Eater; Sweet out of the Sour; Judge. 14, 18.
Honey out of the Lion. Romans 5, 3, 4.
Tribulation brings forth Patience; Patience, Experience; Experience, 1 Cor. 4,
17.
Hope, that makes not ashamed. The light and momentarie affliction of this
life, cause to us a far more excellent, an eternal weight of Glory. This Lesson
the Holy ones learn in the School of Experience, that howeuer no affliction
but is grievous for the time, not joyous; Hebr. 12, 11.
yet after, it brings the quiet fruit of peace to them that are thereby
exercised. They find more solid joy in suffering for Christ, Hebr. 11, 25.
then in all the pleasures of sin, which last but for a season. Gods Sheep
thrive best in Salt marshes, his Corn is parest from Chafe when it is under
the Flaile: his Gold freest from dross when cast into the fiery furnace: these
stars shine brightest in the darkest night: their feet tread surest in the
roughest way.

The Prodigal spend-thrift thinks not of Home till he was pinched with
Famine, Luke 15, 17.
and brought to a morsel of bread. Hagar was proud and pierke in the house of
Abram, but gentle and tractable in the wilderness. Jonah lies snoring and
snorting in the ship; watching and praying in the Whales belly. Those noble
Vines planted with Gods own hand, would run wild, into Luxuriant branches,
and be ouergrowne with many noisome lusts, were they not ever and anon
pruned with some sanctified trouble. In their affliction they will seek me
early. Hosea 5.15.
While the Sunshine of Peace and Prosperity lasted, God sent his Prophets,
rising up early, and lying down late, stretching out their hands and throats
all the day long: but these deaf Adders stop their ears at the voice of the
Charmer, till the Aule of Afflictions come, then their ears are boared, then
they seek them as eagerly, as he sought him early. Let me then for the
General conclude with Jeremy, Lamen. 3, 27.
It is good for a man to bear the yoke from his youth: Psalm. 119.71.
with David, It is good for us that we are afflicted: with Paul, All things
work together for the good of them that love God.

For the Particulars: Private, Public Calamities, make all for the best too.
Private, whether in their Estate, or in their Name, or on their Persons. In
their Estate: Are they pinched with want and penury? Dan. 1, 12.
fed with pulse and water as Daniel, this lets them see, Prou. 15, 16.
a little with the fear of the Lord, is better to the righteous, then great
riches to the ungodly. Howeuer poor in this world, yet they are rich in God;
and this corporal poverty, fittes them for the Kingdom of God. They have a
Feast which the world knows not of. Besides, whether (I beseech you) has
better experience of the Love, Goodness, and Care of his Heavenly Father, he
that wallowes in his wealth, and sacrifices to his own Net, or he who is fed
from hand to mouth as it were from heaven. Who will not prefer the course
fare brought to Elijas by those strange Catorers the Ravens before all the
dainties which were served up to Ababs Table? 1 Kings 17.6.


In their Good Names. If their reputation be black with infamy; if some
stinking Fly be fallen into that sweet Ointment, which makes it putrify,
either this stain is drawn upon themselves deservedly, or some dirt is cast
in their faces by the hand of Malice or Envy. What comes through their own
default, they bear it patiently, and improve it profitably These are the
thoughts wherewith they entertain themselves. What? is it such a hell to be
in disgrace with Men, that a man had as good be half hanged, as have his
credit crack; oh what a hell is it to be out of favor with God, to be shamed,
discarded before Men and Angels at the General Assise of the whole World! What
Malice or Envy casts upon them if for a good cause, 1 Peter 4.14.
they glory in that shame, counting it the greatest grace in all the world, to
suffer disgrace for vvelldoing.

Evils on their persons, whether Diseases or Death. For Corporal deformities,
God often recompenses outward defects, with a supply of inward Grace. If Naaman
the Syrian had not been a Leaper in his body, the Leprosy of his soul (I
fear) had never been cured. How many flocking to Christ for the cure of their
bodies, obtained the salvation of their Souls; like Saul, who seeking for
Asses, stumbled on a Crown. 2 Cor. 4, 16.
As the outward man decays, so the inward is strengthened. Could we perform
in our health, what we promise on our sicke-bed; we should live more like
Angels then Men. Death it self, that King of Terrors to a natural man; Job.
14, 18.
as the Philosopher observes, of all fearful things, the most fearful to
them is but the Gate to Life. The Sting of this Serpent is pulled out, and they
dare lay it in their bosom. It was first threatened as a Curse, The soul that
sins shall Dye; Genesis 2.17.
it is now turned to a Blessing. If we had our hope in this life only, 1 Cor.
15, 19.
We were of all men the most miserable. Blessed are they that dye in the Lord,
Revel. 14.13.
for they rest from their labors, and their Works follow them. Their whole
life, is a continual Combat with the world, the flesh, and the devil: every
day they bring home new Spoils, new Trophies, but are never crowned til the
last.

These Sampsons, make foul havoc of their Enemies: many terrible slaughters
and massacres do the Philistms suffer from their hands, during their life; but
the dead which they slay at their death, Judge. 16.30.
are far more then those which were slain in their life. They bow down with
all their might, the pillars of the clay Cottages fall, and at once they are
avenged of all their Adversaries: Thus is the day of Death better to them,
Eccles. 7.3.
then the day of their Birth; being indeed, the Doomesday of their misery,
their Birthday of Glory. As for their Carcasses, which they leave behind
them, as the Snake his skin in the thicket, that they might renew their
strength as an Eagle; are they not committed as Good seed into the Granary of
the earth, there to die that they may be quickened? Shall not those leaves
which fall in this Autumn, at the spring of the General Resurrection sproute
forth again? 1 Cor. 15.42.
Sown they are in Corruption, but shall be raised in Incorruption; sown in
dishonor, but shall be raised in Glory. With theser very eyes shall I see my
Redeemer; said, Job. 17.26.27.
that Mirror of Patience.

As private and personal miseries; so public and National Calamities
advance their Good. Put the case, some strange judgment overtake a People
which threatens nothing but Ruin, Desolation, Deuastation; a judgment, the
very sound whereof, would make any Man's ears to tingle that hears it; a
sweeping storm, that bears all down before it; when the Lord (it should
seem) intends To cut root and branches, Isaiah. 9.14.
head and tail, and wipe out their name from under Heaven; this makes for them
many ways. Sometimes they are housed before the storm. Tender hearted Josiah,
2 King. 22.20. 1 King. 14.13. 2 King. 20.19.
good Abijah, upright Hezekiah; were they not all Gathered to their Father in
peace: and (as the Prophet speaks more generally of the Righteous) taken away
from the evil to come. Isaiah. 57.1.
Sometimes, they are shrouded from the storm. Noah rides safely in a
well-pitch'd Arc, when the whole world was covered with the waters of the
Deluge. Genesis 7.23.
Lot escapes with his wife, Genesis 19.21.22.
and finds a shelter in Zoar, when Sodom and Gommorah were turned into Ash
heaps. Sometimes, they have a Calm in the midst of the storm. Exodus 10.23.
There was light in Goshen when all Egypt was clouded with a thick and gross
darkness. Gideons fleece was dry, Judge. 6.39.
when all the earth was wet. The Mourners in Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 9.6.
were secured in that General massacre. When Israel was led into captivity,
then was Jeremy set at liberty. The Prophet finds more favor with the Princes
of Babel, Ier. 40.4.
then from the Peers of Israel? Sometimes, (as usually it falls out) they are
enwrapped in the Common Calamities; yet that is in mercy to them, which to
others becomes a judgment.

For first, God ever threatens before he strikes. The storm hanges and houers
a long time over their heads, ere it fall. The messengers of God summon them to
Repentance; lay open there sins, denounce judgment. As Jonah to Nineueh; yet
forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed. Jonah. 3.4.
These peales sounded in their ears; those visions presented to their eyes;
rouse them from the deep sleep of Security; and now how do they bestirre
themselves; considering their ways, ransacking their hearts, renouncing their
sins; Preparing to meet their God, with Ashes on their heads, Sackcloth on
their backs, Fears in their eyes, Sorrow in their hearts, Prayers in their
lips, and ropes in their hands.

Secondly, admit the Sentence be irreuocable, the Judge be inexorable, his
wrath unplacable: they have joined in the sins, and therefore must share in
the plagues of their Nation: even this is in favor: they are but corrected
here, that they might not be condemned heereafafter. These plagues may kill
them, but cannot hurt them; they may rent the garments of their bodies, but
their soul is invulnerable; they do but shorten their misery, and hasten their
Glory. Yea, even that Spiritual judgment, which of all others is most
fearful; makes to their advantage.

If the Golden Candlestick be removed from one Nation, is it not given to
another? The Gospel (like the Sea) it loses ground in one place, gets
footing elsewhere. If the Sun set to one Horizon, it arises to another. The
falling of the Jews, was the rising of the Gentiles: when they were cast off
with a Lo-ruhamah, and a Lo-anni; Hos. 1.8.9.
to us that were not the people of God, was it said, Yea are the Sons of the
living God. When the shadows of the Evening were stretched over Asia, the day
dawned to us in Europe. If our unworthiness should deprive us of this light,
(Quod omen Deus Auertat) it would doubtsly be given to a Nation that shall
bring forth better fruits, adorning the glorious Gospel of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, with their holy and Christian Conversation, which we
have soulely blemished with our horrible and heinous Abominations.

Thus you see, what a rich Mine of Consolation is here conueighed unto us; a
Mine that cannot be exhausted. The Well is deep, the deeper we go still the
sweeter it is: It is not the weak Backet of our shallow Capacity, though let
down never so often, that can dreine this Spring. Much water have we drawn up
already, and perhaps the Reader may think too much, yet nothing in comparison
of what is left behind. What is a drop to the Ocean? May I not safely and
boldly conclude now, All things, all Good, God, Angels, Men, the ordinances of
men; Civil, Ecclesiastical; gift of body, Ornaments of the mind, and estate.
All evil, of sin, Original, Actual; smaller, grosser; of punnishment,
inward, spiritual, disertion, horror of mind: outward, private miseries on
their goods, good name, or persons: public calamities: temporal, spiritual
judgments, all work for the best of those that love God. Ere I proceed to the
application of the point, I must clear the way by removing some scruples,
which otherwise will lie as so many rubs to block up our passage.

How does all evil work for the Good of Gods chosen, when even Good things
prove sometimes snares to the Righteous? Psa. 30, 6.7.
Was not the man after Gods own heart, puffed up with his prosperity: I said I
shall never be moved? Was not Hezekiah sick of the same disease, 1 Kings
10.15.17.
who took so deep a surfeit of plenty, that the Prophet was forced to minister
a sharp purgation? To this I answer. For, the most part, as the Lord
conferres his favors upon them; so he gives them Grace to make a right use of
them: as he wrings to them waters out of a full Cup, so he gives them a steady
hand to carry this Cup without spilling. Ioh. 1.10.
If they be hedged in with blessings as sometimes Job, this hedge serves as
awal of brass, whereby the suggestions of Satan are Baraccadoed out. If at any
time the tempter sollicites to any unlawful suites, they retort that of Joseph:
Genesis 39.9.
How shall I commit this great evil and sin against God, that God who has
laden me with his blessing, whose mercies are renewed upon me every morning,
and every moment If at any time they are left to themselves, it is but for
probation, for humiliation; to let them see their own weakness, the worlds
vanity, Gods goodness. Their own weakness, to lean with the whole weight
and stresse of their bodies, upon those broken reeds and hollow Canes of
Egypt. The worlds vanity; which (as the Wiseman speaks of riches) takes to
herself the wings of an Eagle: Prou. 15, 5.
If she stoop not to us, we cannot catch her, if she ierke from us, we
cannot hold her. No glass so brittle as the glassy Sea of this world. Gods
goodness; that held them up so long from falling, that kept them from
perishing in the fall.

But this is not my condition, will some weak soul pretend; I am no whit
bettered by my Crosses, Scruples of mind.
or Comforts; I find my heart too much elated in my prosperity; too much
dejected in adversity; I am never well full nor fasting. Let the Sun shine,
who more brisk? Let it be ecclipsed, my injurious diffidence and distrust of
Gods providence, secret murmurings, and open repinings, get ground upon me, and
like ill weeds grow so fast, that I fear me, the seed of Grace is (in a
manner) choked, stifled.

Alas, appearance while the fits lasts. The mist of temptations have now
clouded thy soul; A blind man is not fit to judge of colors. The water is now
trobled, the mud raised, it is impossible to see clearly. The Physic may
happily work churlishly, and for a Fit trouble the Patient more then the
disease it self. Tell me, do thou not bewail thy diffidence, impatience?
Do thou not strive and struggle against them with might and maine? Be of
good comfort; we are not to deal with a rigid Master, but with a tender
Father, that interprets the desire for the deed; and accepts of the will for
the work. Strive manfully, wait patiently, thou shall see and feel, that as
all other crosses; so this (which of all other thou esteemest to be the
greatest cross) shall work for thy Good.

Hitherto we have satisfied the Scruples of weak Christians: now we are to
grapple with a perverse generation. If all things, all evil; sin: if all
sin work for the best of them that Love God: What do I thwarting my Corrupt
Naiure? What do I striving against the stream? Why should I curb and check
my unbridled Appetite? Hereafter, I will let loose the reins to all
licentiousnes; hereafter I will Gratify the flesh, and humor it in all things:
now may I follow the swing of my licentious desires, now may I sin, that
Grace may abound; all will make for my Good.

The Apostle checkes this malepart misconstruction, What? Shall I do evil,
Romans 6.1.
that good may come thereof? God forbid. If any such hellish Suggestions be
raised in our hearts; snib them, O snib them, with a Get thee behind me Satan,
Math. 16.23.
for thou understand not the things of God. Will thou surfeit thy Body, Quae
Dei sunt non sapis.
that the Physician may purge it? Will thou quaffe off a cup of rank Poison,
because the Antidote is at hand? Will thou break thy head, that the Surgeon
may clap on a Plaster? Will thou sheath thy sword in thine own flesh,
Mountebanke-like, because there is a Balsome will heal up the wound? Some
broken legs and arms, by a stiff and hard Callus, are made stronger then
they were before; will thou wilfully thrust thy leg or shoulder out of joint,
expecting the like success? What is, if this be not, to Tempt the Lord, Jude 4.
and to turn his grace into wantonness? Nay rather, Remember (O man) how the
glorious Gospel of God will be stained, the Spirit of God grieved, the evil
Spirit solaced, the weak discouraged, the wicked emboldned, thy Religion
questioned, and thy Salvation hazarded. If this will not fright thee; Remember,
he that has promised mercy to the penitent, has not promised Repentance to
the obstinate. Repentance is not at thy beck or whistle; thou may as well
command the Wind to blow, the Sun to shine, as convert thine own heart.
Remember, that true and unfeigned repentance may secure us from eternal
torments, but cannot always secure us from Temporal Chastisements. In these
Cases, remissa culpa retinetur poena; howeuer God may forgive the sin, the
punishment he will not forgive. David's fault was remitted, yet he smarts
soundly for his folly; 2 Samuel 12.13 14.
his sweet meat had sour sauce. By that time thou have been as well scourged
as David, as well scorched as David, thou will take heed of committing the
like error, or thrusting thy finger into the same fire.

Now the Coast is cleared, all obstacles removed, Objections answered, what
should let us from descending to Application? This fountain branches it self
into three streams, and yeeldes matter of Instruction. Consolation.
Exhortation.


It ministers Instruction to the Godly; Instruction.
to the Wicked. Hearken unto me ye that fear the Lord. Behold here an
infallible ground, to euince the certainty of your Salvation. If all things
advance your Good, what can impeach it? What block can lie in your road to
Heaven? The greatest rub is Sin. Sin (indeed) is that Wall of partition,
that separats between us, and our God. It is Sin that hinders good things
from us. Esaias 55, 2. Ier. 5.25. Luke 16.26.
Sin, is that (...), that vaste gulf, which intercepts the free and familiar
intercourse of his favors, and our prayers; the reciprocal exchange or
commutation whereof, are the only Nerves and Sinews, that hold life and soul
together. But if sin it self, whither Great or Small, further their Good,
what can hinder it?

There is a Viperous generation lately sprung up; an Egg of that Cockatrice
Pelagius, (being as we supposed long since chilled) is newly hatched, new
warmth and life put into it, insomuch that it has broken forth into a flying
Serpent. It Is strange and admirable to consider; how many Learned Rabbis, (no
small Clerks, wise enough, if not too wise in their own conceits) bend their
wits, busy their brains to stagger the Saints, and to beat them from their
Hold; contending tanquam pro Aris and focis, that, As for a matter of life and
death.
Nothing is more sure, then that we cannot be sure of our Salvation. What else
mean those large Volumes, touching the Apostasy of the Saints (De Apostasia
Sanctorum.) As if a man might be this day an Heir of Heaven, the next a
firebrand of Hell: This hour a member of Christ, the next, a limb of Satan;
to Day, a Saint; to morrow, a Devil.

See how they are infatuated in the Forefront of their book, In ipso lamine
impingere.
thus to contradict themselves. The very Title overthrows the Tractate. What?
The Apostasy of Saints: If they be Saints, how can they then be Apostatates?
If they be Apostatates, how can they be Saints? What is, if this be not, Vno
ore frigidum and calidum spirare; To blow hot and cold at a breath. Surely,
surely, if once a true Saint, that man can never be a total Apostatate; if once
a total Apostatate, that man was never a true Saint. Incorruptible.
These are (...). They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they
had been of us, they would have continued with us. 1. John, 2.19. The beloved
Disciple sure was not infected with the Sour leaven, Arminanisme, his phrase
then must have been inuerted. They were sometimes ours, but now they are not;
for they are gone from us; They were never ours but in show only.
nay (faith John) they were not of us; intimating once their's, and ever
their's; once a Saint, and ever a Saint. Certainly these great Clerks err
not, knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God; Mat. 22.26.
or else they forget themselves exceedingly, while they swim against the
stream of Sacred writ; which speaks in another Dialect, That the gift and
calling of God are without Repentance. Whereupon, Romans 11.29.
the Apostle gives the Epithet: (...): That whom God loves once, he loves for
ever. That, Ier. 32.36.40. Mal. 3.6. James. 1.17.
in him there is no shadow of change. That, Christ has prayed (and was heard
in that he prayed for:) that their Faith fail not. Simon, Simon, John.
17.9.15.20.
Satan has desired to winnow thee, but I have prayed that thy faith fail not.
Their faith may faint, Luke. 22.31.32.
but fail it cannot. They may have their swooning fits, and terrible Agonies,
Acts. 10.20.
but still (as Paul of Eutichus) their life is in them. Whosoever is borne of
God sins not, for his seed remains in him: neither can he sin, because
he is borne of God. 1. John. 3.9. He cannot sin the sin unto death. I know
they may fall fearfully, as David, they may fall frequently, Prou, 24.10.
as Peter. The Righteous man falls seven times a day. (I see no ground why it
may not be intended as well of their falling into Sin, Mark the opposition.
as into Affliction:) but totally, finally, they cannot fall. Prou. 10.25.
The Righteous man is an everlasting foundation. Be not dismayed ye Select
vessels with these Bugge-beares; but go on boldly, courageously, and in spite
of all opposition, maugre the malice of Satan, and all his instruments, hang
out the Apostles flagge of defiance, presented in the cloze of this Chapter.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ: and verse 35. Be persuaded, that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature,
shall be able to separate us from the Love of God which is Christ Jesus our
Lord.

2. Instruction.
Secondly, as Iron sharpneth Iron; as the Sun is seen best by his own light;
so Scripture interprets Scripture, and this place gives light to many other
places. Many excellent promises are made to the Righteous, concerning
blessings, Temporal; that in times of famine they shall have enough; Job.
5.20. Psalm. 34.10.
that, though Thousands fall on their right hand, Ten thousands on their left,
Psa. 91.5.6.7
the plague shall not touch them: and yet Jobs penary is gone into a Proverb.
As poor as Job.
Lazarus was glad to beg crumbs, and yet was starued to death: It is said, Luke.
16.21.22.
they that fear the Lord shall want nothing, when as he that was Lord of all
had nothing: not so much as a house to harbor him, or a pillow to rest his head
on. Mat. 8.20.
We see by experience how they are plagued and die like other men. The
limitation is here expressed, which is only there intimated. The Sword shall
not raze their skin, nor poverty encroach upon their estates; the Pest shall
not poison their bodies if it be for their Good, as the Psalmist in pregnant
terms; Psalm. 34, 10.
They shall want nothing that is good for them. If it be good for them to be
kept low in their fortunes, to have their bodies pinched, and their minds
preplexed, they shall not want that neither. If good things may prove their
bane, they shall not have them; if evil things may do them good they shall not
want them.

Hitherto we have spoken to a people, whose ears are boared; now we must
charm the Deaf Adder. As this Doctrine serves to inform the Godly, so to
instruct, and withal to affright the Wicked, whose cursed Machinations are
laid as deep as hell to Ruin the Good Man. Vain, Men, why do you go about
to mischief those, whom the Almighty purposes to advance? Has the Lord of
Hoastes engaged his Honor, and plighted his Faith, that All things shall work
for their Good, and will ye seek their Hurt? 1 Cor. 10, 22 Acts 5.39.
Tell me, are ye stronger then God? Will ye be ever fighters against God? Shall
the potsheard contend with his Maker? Is there any possibility of crossing his
designs? Is there any Knowledge, Council, or Understanding against the LORD?
Prou. 21.30.
Will you ever be snatching at the Signet of his right hand? Will ye ever be
raking in the Apple of his eye? Be wise now therefore, Zechar. 2, 8.
O ye Kings and Learned, ye that are Princes of the earth: Psalm 2.10.
Touch not his Anointed, and do his Prophets no harm. Psalm.2, 10 He will
rebuke Kings, Psalm. 105.15.
and ouer-turne Kingdoms for their sakes. He will translate Crowns, from
Egypt to Ashur, from the Caldees to the Medes, from the Medes to the Persians;
for the good of his Church. Well may you vex his Chosen for a time, but hurt
them you cannot. Well may the Lord use you as Scullions, to scour these
Vessels of Honor when the rust is eaten in too far; or as Rods to scourge
his unruly Children. Ashur is the rod of mine Anger, and the staff of mine
Indignation: Esaias 10, 5.12
I will send him unto a dissembling Nation, Esaias 10, 5, 12. But when the rust
is scowred off, the Scullion shall have his payment. When the Child is
corrected, the Rod shall be cast into the fire. Psalm 14.4. Psalm 79.3.
O Remember this, ye that forget God; that devour his people as it were Bread,
and shed their blood as water in the streets: He that sits above will speak
to you in his wrath, Psalm 2.5.
and vex you in his displeasure.

You do but roll a great stone upon a steep Rock, which will tumble back
upon your own heads and grind all under it to powder. Woe to them that offend
any of these little ones, it were better that a Millstone were hanged about
their necks, and that they were cast into the Sea. Math. 18, 6. Would to God,
that Romish Strumpet, that has dyed her Garments in the red blood of the
Saints, Reu. 17, 4, 6.
would but take this to heart, and consider, whateuer Massacres, and Treacheries
she intends for evil, Genesis 50.20.
shall be turned (as Joseph to his Brethren, concerning their malicious
proiects against his person) to their Good; I persuade my self, out of very
malice, she would cease to be malicious, and out of very spite she would
cease to be spightfull: she would intend them no Evil, that she might do
them no Good.

The maine use of all is for Consolation. Is the best still working for us till
we get Heaven? What-euer changes or chances befall us; howeuer we be tumbled
and tossed too and fro as a Leaf shaken with the wind, or as the stubble
scattered before the Whirle-winde. Howeuer we may be counted the Offscouring
of the world, 1 Cor. 4, 13,
the scumme of the earth, here is our comfort, this hard measure lastes but
for a short season.

We are now laboring under the Bricke-killes in Egypt; Deuteronomy. 32.10.
we are now travailing through a vast and Roaring Wilderness: no marvel, if
we be stung with Fiery Serpents. Every day will be better then other; every
day we approach nearer Canaan then other. Our light may be ecclipsed for a
time, the Sun will break forth. Light is sown for the righteous, and joy
for the upright of heart, Psalm 97, 11. He that leads us into Temptation, will
not suffer us to be foiled in our Temptations. Our crosses are Sanctified, our
flesh mortified, sin subdued, Grace increased, our Glory shall be perfected.

Here is our Comfort, in all our crosses, losses; in all troubles and trials;
in all our dangers and distresses, we are sure to come off fair, and gain by
the Bargain. 2. Tim. 3.13.
But it shall not be so with the ungodly, they wax worse and worse;
deceyuing, and being deceived. It is a sure rule in the Schools, Contraria
iuxta se posita magis Elucescunt; Contraries mutually opposed, lend a luster
each to other: I hope therefore, it will not be altogether (...), nor much
beside our mark, to show you briefly and distinctly, that as all things turn
unto the good of the Good; so all things work the bane of the Bad. As all
things further the Salvation of the one; so all things help forward the
Condemnation of the other.

The one, like the Be, suck good out of evil, draw Honey out of the sowrest
Herb: The other, like the Spider, suck venom from the sweetest Flower, and
turn good into evil. (...) 1.15.
Nothing so Good which they corrupt not, nothing so Holy which they defile not.
God, he is the chief Good, yet his Mercy makes them presume; his Justice
drives them to despair; his Grace they turn into Wantonness, his Patience
increases their sin, and doubles their damnation, while they treasure up unto
themselves, Wrath against the day of Wrath, Romans 2. verse 5. They fear him
slauishly for his Greatness, and hate him unfeignedly for his Goodness. If
God the Father, offer himself as a Creator, they rebel against him: If God
the Son, offer himself as a Redeemer, they Crucify the Lord of Glory (to
themselves) daily. Heb. 6. verse 6. If God the holy Ghost, offer himself as a
Sanctifier, they resist despite the Spirit of Grace. Hebrew. 10. verse 29.

The Angels are vexed with beholding their abominations. Magistrates serve for
their Terror: If thou do ill, fear; Romans 14.4.
for he bears not the Sword for naught; it is either to curb thee, or to cut
thee off. Ministers are ever raking in their sores, and rubbing their galled
backs, which makes them kick and winche, storm and fume like Mad men. What
entertainment can they look for, but that Salutation with which Ahab
welcomed the Prophet, 1. Kings chap. 22. verse 8. 1 King 22.8.
I hate this man, because he never speaks good unto me, but evil. Or, as the
Devils greeted our Savior, Mark 1. verse 24. Art thou come to torment us
before our time? The Word of God, is unto them the Savor of Death unto Death:
1 Cor. 2.16.
this Light is as the shadow of death, their sore eyes cannot endure the
glaring of the Sun. The beating of those radiant beams on Ionahs head,
Jonah. 4.8.
never vexed him half so much, as those heavenly Rays which a edarted from
the Sun of Righteousness, torments their hearts. You cannot devise a greater
plague then to let them fry in that flame. So it fares with temporal good
things. Their Honor proves but like the Stool of Eli, 1 Samuel 4.18.
as a steep Pinnacle, from whence they break their necks.

Make Saul a King, he will prove a Tyrant: make Balaam a Prophet, he will prove
a Wizard, a Sorcerer: make Judas an Apostle, he will prove a Traitor, a Devil.
Their strength is perverted, and gives them an advantage beyond their
Neighbors, to power in strong drink, to follow after strange flesh, and to
show them selves the Devils Nazarites, strong to shed innocent blood. Their
Beauty is set forth as traps and snares to catch fools: By this Beagle they
hunt for the precious Soul of a man. Prou. 6.26.
Their favor with Great men, is as a Sword put into a mad man's hand, whereby
they wound themselves, him that gave it him, and all that comes near them. If
those Beggars get on Horseback, they take a pride to see their Masters
Lacquey it on foot.

Let Haman be promoted, Ester. 3.8.9.
the Jews must be crushed, Ester 3. verses 8, 9. Let Doeg insinuate into Saul,
Abimelech with his Brethren, shall soon be cut off, 1 Samuel 22, 9, 1 Samuel 22.9.
Their Wealth makes them as churlish as Nabal, as cruel as Dives, not a crumme
can be spared for Lazarus. As sottish as Ahashuerosh and Haman, Ester. 3.15.
who fate surfeiting and quaffing in the Palace of Sashan, when the Israel of
GOD were weeping and mourning in the City, Ester 3, verse 15. Their Wit makes
them geering Ishmaelites, and scoffing Iulianistes; They will rather loose
their Friend, nay their Soul, nay their God, then their Jest: and (if all
Trades fail) they can live by their Wits.

Thus all Good things become evil to them, much more all Evil. The sin of
their first Parents is set upon their score. Original Corruption, strippes
them of all Grace and Goodness; renders them Slaves to Sin, Vassalles to
Satan, binds them (as it were) in chains to condemnation.

Lesser sins, make way for Greater; Gross sins make them public Scandals,
odious to God and man, ten-fold more the Children of the Devil. Thereby their
hearts become hardened, crusted, 1 Timothy, 4, 2.
their Consciences seared as with hot Irons, and themselves stigmatized with
that Brand of Caine, and of Judas, being left Reprobate to every good Work.

As for evil of Punishment. Let God forsake them with Saul, 1 Samuel 28, 6, 7.8.
1 Samuel 28. verses 6, 7, 8. they will forsake God, and run from his
presence like Cain, turn Vagabonds. Genesis 4. verse 16. Genesis 4.16.
If the Evil of Sin pursue them, and their own Conscience have raised a Heu
and Cry against them, with Achitophell they fly to a Halter for Remedy, and
for fear of Hell, leap into Hell.

Outward Crosses do them no good. Esaias. 1.5.7.
Esaias 1. verses 5, 7. I have smitten them, yet they have not turned unto me, is
an old Complaint; nay, much hurt. Ahaz in his Affliction transgresses more
and more, 2 Chro. 28, 22. The wicked King cries out, This evil comes from the
Lord, shall I serve him any longer? 2 Kings. 9, 33.
2 Kings chap. 6. verse 33. Jobs Wife, will Curse God, Job. 2.6.
and Dye. Job 2. 9.

Is their Credit cracked? They grow as shameless now, as they were graceless
before; proclayming their sins (as Sodom) and fearing neither God, nor Man?
Is their state impouerished? The stick not to put forth their hands to
unlawful shifts, adding Sin to Affliction. In the Diseases of their Bodies,
with Asa, they seek not unto God, 2 Chro. 16.12.
but trust to the Physician. In extremity of pain, they soon loose
themselves and their patience; like the raging Sea, they vomit out their own
shame. In Death, they go away lumpishly as Nabal, or ridiculously, with a
Sardonicall Laughter, or desperately, like that Gallant, M. Perkins in
government of the tongue.
who spurring his Horse, till he sprang aside into the water, as he was
tumbling over the Bridge, cried out; Horse, Man, and all to the Devil.

All this; is but the beginning of Sorrow: Isaiah. 66.24.
Death gives them up to the Gnawing of that worm which never diet: the burning
of that Lake which shall never slake, and the scorching of those flames that
shall never cease. Death cuts off their Hope, which ends with their Life, and
gives life to those Torments which shall never end. Thus is their Life
Miserable, their Death Lamentable, their End Damnable.

The last Grape which I shall pluck from this Goodly Cluster, and press
forth, is, An Exhortation to Patience under the Cross. If all things shall
work for thy Good, why dooest thou murmr and mutine against God, because he
follows thee with a Succession of Crosses? Thy Afflictions are many and great,
tedious and grievous, say not thou with Caine, Genesis 4.13.
My punishment is Greater then I can bear, Genes. 4. verse 13. Whateuer evil
it be that lies so heavy, whether on thy Body, Name, or State, whether
inward Temptation, or outward Tribulations, is it not for thy Good? Will thou
be such an Enemy to thine own Soul as to repine at thine own Good? The Cup
is bitter; I but happily the less toothsome, the more wholesome. Thy teeth are
set an edge with eating sour Grapes, this bitter Aloes must set them right.
Thou can happily make a shift to turn over a draught of Worme-wood Beer
every morning next thy heart. Is it not bitter as Gall? Is it not distasteful
to the Palate? Why do thou drink it? Oh the Physician assures me it is for
my good. Thou suffer the Surgeon to lance thy raging ulcer, to lay a sharp
Corazine which may eat down the dead flesh. It stings cruelly, smarts
terribly, yet thou endurest it patiently: Why? The Surgeon tells thee, it is
good for thee. If the Grand Physician of thy Soul, prescribe a bitter draught
next thy heart, murmr not; if that skillful Soule-Surgeon clap on a Coraziue,
murmr not; he assures thee it is for thy Good. Stay not here neither; this
will teach thee, to undergo thy trouble not only patiently, but chearefully;
according to that of the Apostle, Rejoice in Tribulation: Why? Tribulation,
brings forth Patience; Patience, Experience; Romans 4.3.4, 5.
Experience, Hope, that makes not ashamed. Oh the sweet Fruit that grows
from this bitter root! S. James. 1.23.
James seconds Paul. My Brethren, count it great joy when you fall into diverse
tentations: knowing, that the trying of your faith brings forth Patience;
and let Patience have her perfect work. Set before your eyes, that Mirror of
patience: remember Job when crosses came thronging thick and threefold one upon
the neck of another, like a shower of haileshot; Luke. 21.19.
yet the Holy man possesses his soul by his patience. Set before you, that
Mirror of Mirrours, the Savior of the world; how willingly did he drink of
that bitter Potion. Mat. 26.39.
James. 1.13.
Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried, he shall
receive the Crown if life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.
Thou art now in the furnace, wait till the dross be consumed; thou art now
in the Scouring-house, stay till the soil be wiped off: then shall thou be
translated from this valley of tears, to that Region of joy; where all sin
shall be wiped from thy soul, all sorrow from thy heart, all tears from
thine eyes; that joy shall no man take from thee.

FINIS.
Gentle Reader, I thought good to fill up this vacant Page with this Table.
All things work for the best to the Godly, whether Good. Supreme God,
considered in his Nature; Atributes. Works Either of Mercy. Judgment.
Or By means without means. Against means.


Subordinate Persons. Angels. Men in their ordinances Civil Magistrates.
Ecclesiastical Ministers.

Things. Gifts of Mind. Ornaments of Body. Gifts of Fortune, so termed.


Evil. Sin, whether. That of our first Parents. That which flows thence
Original. Actual. Smaller in the Understanding. Errors. Will. Passions.
grosser


Punishment. Inward Spiritual Dissertion. Horror of Conscience. General --
All Affliction.
Outward. Private evil of State, Poverty, Name, Ignomy, Persons. Diseases Death.
National Plagues.
Public




A Postscript.
Gentle Reader, if I seem to break off abruptly, and to do my work by
halues; the truth is, my desire was to present this my first and imperfect
essay to the world for a taste only. If it may find favor and acceptance I
shall be encouraged to perfect what is left unfinished; if not, little said,
soon amended.

Errata.
For be, read is. Page 1. line 4. for his read this p 3. l. 6. read to p. 4.
l. 3. read the crown. p. 7. l. 10. read gastred. p. 27. line last. read make.
p. 44. l. 1. read locks. p. 51. l. 26. read him p. 56. l. 18. them l. 19. read
Lo-ammi. p. 64.13.


