FVNERALS OF THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE HENRY, Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornewaile and Rothsay, Count Palatine of Chester, Earl of Carick, and late
KNIGHT of the most Noble Order of the GARTER.

Vhich Noble Prince deceased at S. James, the sixth day of November, 1612. and
was most Princely interred the seventh day of December following, within the
Abbey of Westminster, in the Eighteenth year of his AGE.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shop at
the great south door of Paulles, and at Brittanes Bursse. 161^

THE FVNERALS OF THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE HENRY, Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornewaile and Rothsay, Count Palatine of Chester, Earl of Carick, and late
Knight of the most Noble Order of the GARTER.
Which Noble Prince deceased at Saint JAMES, the 6. day of November, 1612. and
was most Princely interred the 7. of December following, within the Abbey of
Westminster, in the Eighteenth year of his AGE.
THe body of the said PRINCE being bowelled, enbalmed and closed up in Lead,
there were four Chambers hung with blackes, viz. the Gaurd chamber and the
Presence with black Cloth, the Privy Chamber with finer Cloth, and that which
was his Highness Bedchamber, with black Velvet: in the midst whereof was set
up a Canopy of black Velvet, valanced, and fringed; under which upon Tressels
the Coffin with the body of the PRINCE was placed, covered with a large pall of
black Velvet, and adorned with Scuchions of his Arms. Upon the head of which
Cossin was laid a Cushion of black Velvet, and his Highness Cap and Coronet
set thereon, as also his Robes of estate, Sword and Rod of Gould; and so it
remained (being daily and nightly watched) until two or three days before his
Highness Funerals. In which time every day, both Morning and Evening Prayers
were said in his Presence or Privy Chamber, by his Chaplains, and his
Gentlemen and chief Officers attendant thereat.

Thursday before the Funerals his Princely body was brought forth of his
Bedchamber into his privy chamber.

Friday, it was brought into his Presence Chamber and set under his cloth of
estate.

Satterday, the fifth of December, about three of the clock in the afternoon
it was removed into the Guard-chamber, where all his chief servants and
Officers being assembled, and the Officers of Arms in their Coats, the corpse
was solempnly carried into the Chapel of that house, and placed under a
canopy in the midst of the Quire, the Bishop of Li^h-field red the Service,
and the Gentlemen of the Kings Chapel, with the children thereof, sung diverse
excellent Antheams, together with the Organs, and other wind instruments,
which likewise was performed the day following, being Sunday.

Monday, the 7. of December, (the Funeral day) the representation was laid
upon the Corpse, and both together put into an open Chariot, and so proceeded as
follows:

Pooremen, in gowns, to the number of 140.

About 300. Gentlemen's servants. Esquires servants. Knights servants. Baronets
servants. Barons sons servants. Viscount sons servants. E^rles sons
servants.

Two Drums and a Fife, their Drums covered with black cloth, and Scuchions
of the Prince his Arms thereupon.

Portesmou^h, Pursuiuant of Arms.

The great Standard of Prince HENRY, being a Lion crowned, standing on a
Chappeau, borne by Sir John Win, KNIGHT and Baronet, the Motto therein, Fax
meant is honestae gloria.

About 306. Prince HENRY his Household Servants, according to their several
Offices and Degrees: with Tradesmen and Artificers that belonged unto his
Highness.
Trumpets.

The Coronet of the Prince, being the three Feathers in a Crownet, with his
Motto; Iuuat ire per altum; borne by Sir Roger Dallison, Knight and Baronet.

About 360. Barons servants* Viscounts servants. Earls servants: as well
English as Strangers. The Duke of (...) his servants. The Lord Chauncellors
servants. Count Henry de Nassa^ his servants.

Trumpets.

A Banner of th'Earledome of Carick, borne by Sir David Fowls.

A Horse led by a Quirry of the Stable; the Horse was covered with black
cloth, and armed with Scuchions of that Earldom, having his Cheiffron and
Plumes.

About 80. Archbishops servants. Prince Palatine his servants. Prince Charles
his servants.

Blew-mantle (...) of ^^mes.

A Banner of the Earldom of Chester, borne by the Lord Howard of Effingham.

A Horse led by a Qui^ry of the Stable* covered with black cloth, and armed
with Scuchions of that Earldom, his Cheiffron and Plumes.

About 40. Faulconer and Huntsmen* Clearkes of the works. Clearkes of the
Poultry. Clearkes of the (...) Clearkes of the Larder. Clearkes of the Spicary.
Clearkes of the Kitchen. Clearkes of the (...) Clearkes of the (...) Clearkes
of the (...) Clearkes of the Wardrobe. Mr. of the Works. Pay Mr. And Cleark^
Comptroller.

About 60. Seriants of the Vestry. Children of the Chapel. Gentlemen of the
Chapel in rich Copes. Musicians. Apothecaries and Surgions.
6. Doctors of Physic. 24. The Princes Chapleyns.
Portcullis Pursuyuant of Arms.

A Banner of the Dukedom of Rothsay, borne by the Lord Bruise, Baron of
Kinlosse.

A Horse led by a Quirry of the Stable, covered with black cloth, armed with
Scuchions of that Dukedom, his Cheiffron and Plumes.

About 80. Pages of the Chamber. Gentlemen, the Princes servants extraordinary.
The Princes Solicitor, and Counsel at Law. Groom Porter. Gentlemen Vshers,
quarter Waiters. Grooms of the Priuy-Chamber extraordinary. Grooms of the
Priuy-Chamber in ordinary. Grooms of the Bedchamber. Pages of the
Bedchamber, and the Princes own Page.

Rouge-Dragon Pursuyuant.

A Banner of the Dukedom of Cornwall, borne by the Lord Clifford.

A Horse led by Mr. Henry Alexander, covered with black cloth, armed with
Scuchions of that Dukedom, his Cheiffron and Plumes.

About 146. Count Henrickes Gentlemen. Count Palatines Gentlemen, viz. viz.
Mounsieur Eltz. Mouns. Helmstadt. Mouns. Colbe. Mouns. Benefer. Mouns.
Adolshein. Mouns. Nenzkin. Mouns. Walbron. Mouns. Waldgraue. Mouns. Factes.
Mouns. Carden. Mouns. Berlinger. Mouns. Grorode. Mouns. Cawlt. Mouns. Stensels.
Mouns. Ridzell. Mouns. Helinger. Mouns. Henbell. Mouns. Auckensten. Mouns.
Gellu. Mouns. Wallyn^. Mouns. Pellinger. Mouns. Berlipps. Mouns. Shot. Mouns.
Weldensten. Mouns. Crotlesemere. Mouns. Leuinsten. Mouns. Dathenes. Mouns.
Colbe. Scultetez. Mouns. Rampf. Mouns. Dawnsier. Mouns. Maier. Mouns. Wanebach.



Prince Charles his Gentlemen.

Gentlemen of Prince Henry's Priuy-Chamber extraordinary.

Knights and Gentlemen of his Highness Priuy-Chamber in ordinary, and of his
Bedchamber, with (...), (...), and Cupbearers.

The Prince his Secretary.

The Prince his Thresorer of his Household. The Thresorer of his Revenues, and
the Comptroller of his Household together, bearing their white stan^^.

Rong-croix Pursuyuant of Arms.

A Banner of the Princes Principality of Scotland, with a Labell, borne by the
Viscount Fenton.

A Horse led by Sir Sigismond Alexander, covered with black cloth, armed with
Scuchions of that Kingdom, his Cheiffron and Plumes.

Baronets. Barons younger sons.
Sir Edward Phillips, Mr. of the Roles, being the Prince his Chaunceller, going
alone.

Knights Privy Counselors to the KING: viz.

Sir John Herbart, Secretary. Sir Julius Caesar Chaunceller of the Exchequer.
Sir Thomas Parry, Chaunceller of the Duchy of Lancaster.
Barons eldest sons.

Three Trumpets.

Lancaster Herald.

A Banner of England, France, and Ireland, quartered with Wales, borne by the
Viscount Lisle.

A Horse led by Sir William Webb, Knight, covered with black cloth, cloth,
his Cheiffron and Plumes.

Earls younger sons. Viscounts eldest sons.
Barons of Scotland.

Barons of England: viz.
Lord Kneuit. Lord Candish. Lord Arundell of VVardor. Lord Carewe. Lord
Stanhop. Lord Denny. Lord Spencer. Lord Garrard. Lord Danvers. Lord Harington.
Lord Peter's. Lord Russell. Lord Wotton. Lord Knowles. Lord Norris. Lord
Campton. Lord Hunsden. Lord Chandos. Lord North. Lord Darcy of Chich. Lord
Sheffeild. Lord Rich. Lord Wharton. Lord Evers. Lord Wentworth. Lord
VVindesor. Lord Mounteagle. Lord Dudley. Lord Stafford. Lord Dacres. Lord
Morley. Lord Laware.

Bishops 5. The Bishop of Rochester. The Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield. The
Bishop of Ely. The Bishop of Oxford. The Bishop of London.

The Earl of Excester.

The Prince his Chamberlayne, Sir Thomas Chaloner, alone, bearing his white
staff.

The Lord Chancellor, and Count Henricke.

The Archbishop of Canterbury: Preacher.

The great Embrodered Banner of the Union, borne by the Earls of Montgomery
and Argyle.

A Horse led, called Le Cheual de deul, covered with black Velvet, and led
by a chief Quirry. Monsieur Sant Antoin.

The Prince his Hachments of HONOR, carried by Officers of Arms, viz. The
Spurs, by Windsor. The Gauntlets, by Somerset. The Helm and Crest, by
Richmond. The Targe, by York. The Sword, by Norroy, King of Arms.
The Coat, by Clarencieux, King of Arms.

Three Gentlemen Vshers to the Prince, bearing their wands.

The Corpse of the Prince, lying in an open Chariot, with the Princes
representation thereon, invested with his Robes of estate of Purple Velvet,
furred with Ermines, his Highness Cap and Coronet on his head, and his Rod of
Gould in his hand, and at his feet, within the said Chariot, sat Sir David
Murrey, the Master of his Wardrobe.

The Chariot was covered with black Velvet, set with Plumes of black
feathers, and drawn by six Horses covered, and Armed with Scuchions, having
their Cheiffrons and Plumes.

A Canopy of black Velvet borne over the representation by six Baronets.

Ten Bannerols, borne about the body by ten Baronets.

Sir Moyle Finch. Sir Thomas Mounson. Sir John Wentworth. Sir Henry Sauile. Sir
Thomas Brewdnell. Sir Anthony Cope. Sir George Gresley. Sir Robert Cotton. Sir
Lewis Tresham. Sir Phillip Tiruit.
Four Assistants to the Corpse, that bore up the corners of the Pall. viz.

1 The Lord Zouch. 2 The Lord Abergaueny. 3 The Lord Burghley. 4 The Lord
Walden.
William Seger, Garter, Principal King of Arms, between the Gentleman-Viher
of Prince Charles, and the Gentleman-usher of the Prince Palatine.

Prince CHARLES chief Mourner, supported by the Lord Priuy-Seale, and the Duke
of Lenox.

His Highness Train was borne by the Lord Dawbney, Brother to the Duke of
Lenox.

Then followed the Prince Elector, FREDERICK, Count Palatine of the Rh^in.

His Highness Train was borne by Mounsieur Shamburgh.

Twelve Earls Assistants to the chief Mourner, viz.

Earl of Nottingham. Earl of Shrewsbury. Earl of Rutland. Earl of
Southampton. Earl of Hartford. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Suffolk. Earl of
Worcester. Earl of Sussex. Earl of Pembroke. Earl of Essex. Earl of (...).
Earls strangers, attendants on Count Palatine,

Count VVigensten. Count Lewis de Nassau. Count Leuingsten. Count Hodenlo.
Count Ringraue. Count Erback. Count Nassaw. Scarburg. Count Le Hanow, Junior.
Pages.
Count Is^bersh. Count ^olmes. Count Zerottin.

The Horse of Estate, led by Sir Robert Douglas, Master of the Princes Horse.

The Palzgreaues Priuy-Counsellors, viz.

The Count of Solmes. Mounsieur Shouburgh. Mounsieur de Pleshau. Mounsieur
Helmestedt. Mouns. Shouburgh, Junior. Mouns. Landshat.
Officers and Grooms of Prince Henry's stable. The Guard.

The Knight Marshall, and twenty servants that kept order in the proceeding.

Diverse Knights and Gentlemen, the Kings servants that came in voluntary in
blacks. So that the whole number amounted to 2000. or thereabout.

FINIS.
AN EPICEDE OR Funeral Song: On the most disastrous Death, of the High-borne
Prince of Men, HENRY Prince of WALES, etc.

With The Funerals, and Representation of the Hearse of the same High and
mighty Prince; Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornewaile and Rothsay, Count Palatine
of Chester, Earl of Carick, and late Knight of the most Noble Order of the
GARTER.

Which Noble Prince deceased at St. James, the sixth day of November, 1612. and
was most Princely interred the seventh day of December following, within the
Abbey of Westminster, in the Eighteenth year of his Age.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shop at
the great south door of Paul's, and at Brittanes Bursse. 161^

TO MY AFFECTIONATE, AND TRVE Friend, Mr. Henry Jones.
My truest Friend:
THE most invaluable and dismaifull hope of my most dear and Heroical
Patron, Prince HENRY, has so stricken all my spirits to the earth, that I
will never more dare, to look up to any greatness; but resolving the little
rest of my poor life to obscurity, and the shadow of his death; prepare ever
hereafter, for the light of heaven.

So absolute, constant, and noble, your love has been to me; that if I
should not as effectually, by all my best expressions, acknowledge it; I could
neither satisfy mine own affection, nor deserve yours.

Accept therefore, as freely as I acknowledge, this unprofitable sign of my
love; till God blessing my future labors, I may add a full end, to whatsoever
is begun in your assurance of my requital. A little, blessed, makes a great
feast (my best friend) and therefore despair not, but that, out of that
little, our loves always made even, may make you say, you (...) rather been
happy in your kindness, then in the least degree, hurt. There may favors
pass betwixt poor friends, which even the richest, and greatest may envy. And
GOD that yet never let me live, I know will never let me die an empaire to any
friend. If any good, more then requital succeed, it is all yours as freely,
as ever yours was mine; in which noble freedom and alacrity of doing; you
have thrice done, all I acknowledge. And thus knowing, I give you little
contentment, in this so far unexpected publication of my gratitude; I rest
satisfied with the ingenuous discharge of mine own office. Your extraordinary
and noble love and sorrow, borne to our most sweet PRINCE, entitles you
worthily to this Dedication: which (with my general Love, unfeignedly protested
to your whole Name and Family) I conclude you as desertfull of, at my hands, as
our Noblest Earl; and so ever remain

Your most true poor Friend, GEO: CHAPMAN.

AN EPICED, OR Funeral Song: On the most disastrous Death, of the High-borne
Prince of Men, HENRY Prince of WALES, etc.
IF ever adverse Influence enui'd
The glory of our Lands, or took a pride
To trample on our height; or in the Eye
Struck all the pomp of Principality,
Now it has done so; Oh, if ever Heaven
Made with the earth his angry reckening even,
Now it has done so. Ever, ever be
Admired, and feared, that Triple Majesty
Whose finger could so easily stick a Fate,
Twixt least Felicity, and greatest state;
Such, as should melt our shore into a Sea,
And dry our Ocean with Calamity.
Heaven opened, and but showed him to our eyes,
Then shut again, and showed our Miseries.
O God, to what end are thy Graces given? Expostulatio ^ perturbatione.

Only to show the world, Men fit for Heaven,
Then ravish them, as if too good for Earth?
We know, the most exempt in wealth, power, Birth,
Or any other blessing; should employ
(As to their chief end) all things they enjoy,
To make them fit for Heaven; and not pursue
With hearty appetite, the damned crew
Of merely sensual and earth ye pleasures?
But when one has done so; shall strait the tresures
Dug to, in those deeps, be consumed by death?
Shall not the rest, that error swalloweth,
Be, by the Pattern of that Masterpiece,
Helped to instruct their erring faculties?
When, without clear example; even the best
(That cannot put by knowledge to the Test
what they are taught) serve like the worst in field?
Is power to force, who will not freely yield,
(Being great assistant, to divine example)
As vain a Pillar to thy Manly Temple?
when (without perfect knowledge, which scarce one
Of many kingdoms reach) no other stone
Man has to build one corner of thy Phane,
Save one of these? But when the desperate wane Potentia expers sapi entiae quo
mayor est, eo perniciosior: sapientia procul a potentia manca videtur. Pla

Of power, and of example to all good,
So spent is, that one cannot turn the flood,
Of goodness, against her ebb; but both must plie,
And be at full to; or her stream will dry;
Where shall they meet again, now he is gone
Where both went foot by foot; and both were one?
One that in hope, took up to toplesse height
All his great Ancestors; his one sail, freight
With all, all Princes treasures; he like one
Of no importance; no way built upon,
Vanished without the end, for which he had
Such matchless virtues, and was God-like made?
Have thy best works no better cause to express
Themselves like men, and thy true Images?
To toil in virtues study, to sustain
(with comfort for her) want, and shame, and pain;
No nobler end in this life, then a death
Timeles, and wretched, wrought with less then breath?
And nothing solid, worthy of our souls?
Nothing that Reason, more then Sense extols!
Nothing that may in perfect judgment be
A fit foot for our Crown eternity?
All which, thou seem to tell us, in this one
Killing discomfort; apt to make our moan
Conclude against all things, serious and good;
our selves, not thy forms, but Chymaeras brood. Chymaera, a monster, having
his head and breast like a Lion; his belly like a Got^; and tail like ^ Dragon.

Now Princes, dare ye boast your vigorous states
That Fortunes breath thus builds and ruinates?
Exalt your spirits? trust in flowery youth?
Give reins to pleasure? all your humors sooth?
License in rapine? Powers exempt from laws?
Contempt of all things, but your own applause?
And think your swindge to any tyranny given,
Will stretch as broad, and last as long as heaven;
when he that curbed with virtues hand his power
his youth with continence; his sweet with sour
Boldness with pious fear; his pallats height
Applied to health, and not to appetite;
Felt timeles sickness charge; state, power to fly,
And glutted Death with all his cruelty.
Partial deuourer ever of the best, To Death.

With headlong rapture, sparing long the rest
Could not the precious tears his Father shed,
(That are with Kingdoms to be ransomed?)
His Bleeding prayer, upon his knees t'implore, The Prayer of the King in the
Princes sickne^

That if for any sin of his, Heaven tore
From his most Royal body that chief Limme,
It might be ransomed, for the rest of Him?
Could not the sacred eyes thou did profane
In his great Mothers tears? The spightful bane
Thou pour'dst upon the cheeks of all the Graces
In his more gracious Sisters? The defaces
(with all the Furies ouer-flowing Galls)
Cursedly fronting her near Nuptials?
Could not, O could not, the Almighty ruth
Of all these force thee to forbear the youth
Of our Incomparable Prince of Men?
whose Age had made thy Iron Forcke his Pen,
T'eternise what it now does murder merely;
And shall have from my soul, my curses yearly.
Tyrant, what knew'st thou, but the barbarous wound
Thou gave the son, the Father might confound?
Both lived so mixtly, and were jointly One,
Spirit to spirit cleft. The Humor bred
In one heart, straight was with the other fed;
The blood of one, the others heart did fire;
The heart and humor, were the Son and Sire;
The heart yet, void of humors slender'st part,
May easier live, then humor without heart;
The River needs the helpful fountain ever,
More then the Fountain, the supplied River.
As th Iron then, when it has once put on Sim l.

The Magnets quality, to the virtuous Stone
Is ever drawn, and not the stone to it:
So may the heavens, the sons Fate, not admit Apodesis.

To draw the Fathers, till a hundred years
Have drowned that Issue to him in our tears.
Blessed yet, and sacred shall thy memory be, Reditio ad Principem.

O-nothing-lesse-then-mortall Deity.
Thy Graces, like the Sun, to all men giving;
Fatal to thee in death, but kill me living.
Now, as inuerted, like th Antipodes,
The world (in all things of desert to please)
Is fallen on us, with thee: thy ruins lie
On our burst bosoms, as if from the sky
The Day Star, greater then the world were driven
Suncke to the Earth, and left a hole in Heaven;
through which, a second deluge now poures down
On our poor Earth; in which are ouer-flowne met
The seeds of all the sacred Virtues, set
In his Spring-Court; where all the prime spirits
Of all our Kingdoms; as if from the death, Those that came to the Princes
service seemed (compared with the places they leu'd in before) to the from
death to the fields of life, in tending the best part of young and noble
Gentlemen.

That in men living; baseness and rapine sheath,
Where they before lived, they unawares were come
Into a free, and fresh Elisitum;
Casting regenerate, and refined eyes
On him that raised them from their graves of vice,
Dug in their old grounds, to spring fresh on those
That his divine Ideas did propose,
First to himself; and then would form in them.
Who did not thirst to plant his son near him
as near the Thames their houses? what one worth
Was there in all our world, that set not forth
All his deserts, to Pilgrim to his favors,
With all devotion, offering all his labors?
And how the wild Bore, Barbarism, now
will root these Quick-sets up? what herb shall grow,
that is not sown in his inhumane tracts?
No thought of good shall spring, but many acts
Will crop, or blast, or blow it up: and see The parting of the Princes
Servants.

How left to this, the mournful Family,
Muffled in black clouds, full of tears are driven
With storms about the relickes of this Heaven;
Retiring from the world, like Corses, herst
Home to their graves, a hundred ways dispersed.
O that this court-schoole; this Olimpus merely, The Princes house an Olimpus,
where all contention of virtues were practiced.

Where twofold Man was practisde; should so early
Dissolve the celebration purposed there,
Of all Heroique parts, when far and near,
All were resolved t'admire, None to contend,
When, in the place of all, one wretched end
Will take up all endeauours; Harpye Gain,
Pandare to Got, Ambition; goulden Chain Non Homeri Aurea Restis

To true man's freedom; not from heaven let fall
To draw men up; But shot from Hell to hale
All men, as bondslaues, to his Turckish den,
For Toades, and Adders, far more fit then men.
His house had well his surname from a Saint, Saint James his house.

All things so sacred, did so lively paint
Their pious figures in it: And as well
His other house, did in his Name foretell Richmond.

what it should harbor; a rich world of parts
Bonfire-like kindling, the still-feasted Arts,
which now on bridles bite, and puffed Contempt
Spurs to Despair, from all fit food exempt.
O what a frame of Good, in all hopes raised
Came tumbling down with him! as when was seisde
By Grecian fury, famous Jlion,
Whose fall, still rings out his Confusion.
What Triumphs, scatterd at his feet, lie smoking!
Banquets that will not down; their cherers choking,
Fields fought, and hidden now, with future slaughter,
Furies sit frowning, where late fat sweet laughter,
The active lying maimed, the healthful crasde?
All round about his Hearse? And how amazed
The change of things stands! how astonishtioy
Wonders he ever was? yet every Toy
Quits this grave loss: Rainbowes no sooner taint
Thin dewye vapors, which opposed beams paint
Round in an instant, (at which children stare
And slight the Sun, that makes them circular
And so disparent) then mere gawds pierce men,
Slighting the grave, like fools, and children.
So courtly nere plagues, sooth and stupefie
And with such pain, men leave self flattery.
Of which, to see him free (who stood no less The Prince not to be wrought on
by flattery.

Then a full siege of such) who can express
His most direct infusion from above,
Far from the humorous seed of mortal love?
He knew, that Justice simply vsd, was best, His knowledge and wisdom.

Made princes most secure, most loved, most blessed
No Artezan; No Scholar; could pretend,
No Statesman; No Divine; for his own end
Anything to him, but he would descend
The depth of any right belonged to it,
Where they could merit, or himself should quit.
He would not trust, with what himself concerned,
Any in any kind; but ever learned
The grounds of what he built on: Nothing lies Any man is capable of his own
fit course and office in any thing.

In man's fit course, that his own knowledge flies
Either direct, or circumstantiall.
O what are Princes then, that never call
Their actions to account, but flatterers trust
To make their trial, if unjust or just?
Flatterers are household thieves, traitors by law, Apostrophe. Men grow so
ugly by trusting flattery with their informations, that when they see
themselves truly, by casting their eyes inward, they cast themselves away
with their own lothing.

that rob kings honors, and their soules-bloud draw;
Diseases, that keep nourishment from their food.
And as to know himself, is man's chief good,
So that which intercepts that supreme skill,
(which Flattery is) is the supreamest ill:
Whose looks will breed the Basilisk in kings eyes,
That by reflection of his sight, dies.
Simb^.
And as a Nurse laboring a vvayward Child,
Day, and night watching it, like an offspring wild;
Talks infinitely idly to it still;
Sings with a standing throat, to worse from ill;
Lord-blesses it; bears with his pewks and cries;
And to give it a long life's miseries,
Sweetens his food, rocks, kisses, sings again;
Plyes it with rattles, and all objects vain:
So Flatterers, with as servile childish things,
Observe, and sooth the waiward moods of kings;
So kings, that flatterers love, had need to have
as nurse-like counselors, and contemn the grave;
Themselves as wayward, and as noisome too;
Full as untuneable in all they do,
As poor sick Infants; ever breeding Teeth
In all their humors, that be worse then Death.
How wise then was our Prince that hated these,
and would with naught but truth his humor plese
Nor would he give a place, but where he saw
One that could use it; and become a Law
Both to his fortunes, and his Princes Honor.
Who would give fortune noght she took upon her,
Not give but to desert; nor take a chance,
That might not justly, his wished ends advance.
His Good he joined with Equity and Truth;
Wisdom in years, crowned his ripe head in youth;
His heart wore all the folds of Policy,
Yet went as naked as Simplicity.
Knew good and ill; but only good did love;
In him the Serpent did embrace the Dove.
He was not curious to sound all the stream
Of others acts, yet kept his own from them:
"He whose most dark deeds dare not stand the light,
"Begot was of imposture and the night.
"Who surer then a Man, does ends secure;
"Either a God is, or a Devil sure.
The President of men, whom (as men can)
All men should imitate, was God and Man.
In these eleere deepes our Prince fish't troubled streams
of blood and vantage challenge diadems.
In sum, (knot-like) he was together put,
That no man could dissolve, and so was cut,
But we shall see our foul-mouthed factions spite
(Marked, witch-like, with one black eye, the other
Open, and oppose against this spotless sun; (white)
Such, he auen strike blinder the^ th'eclipsed moon
Twixt whom and noblesse, or humanities truth,
As much dull earth lies, and as little ruth,
(Should all things sacred perish) as there lies
Twixt Phaebe, and the Light-fount of the skies,
In her most dark delinquence: vermin right,
That prey in darkness, and abhor the light;
Live by the spoil of virtue; are not well
But when they hear news, from their father hell
Of some black mischief; never do good deed,
But where it does much harm, or has no need.
What shall become of virtues far-short train,
when thou their head art reached, high Prince of men?
O that thy life could have dispersed deaths storms,
To give fair act to those Heroique forms,
with which al good rules had enricht thy mind,
Preparing for affairs of every kind;
Peace being but a pause to brearhe fierce war;
No warrant dormant, to neglect his Star;
The license sense has, is t'informe the soul;
Not to suppress her, and our lusts extol;
This life in all things, to enjoy the next;
Of which laws, thy youth, both contained the text
And the contents; ah, that thy grey-ripe years
Had made of all, Caesarean Commentares,
(More then can now be thought) in fact t'enroule;
And make black Faction blush away her soul.
That, as a Temple, built when Piety Simil.

Did to divine ends offer specially,
What men enjoyed; that wondrous state expressed,
Strange Art, strange cost; yet who had interest
In all the frame of it; and saw those days,
Admired but little; and as little praise
Gave to the goodly Fabric: but when men,
That live whole Ages after, view it, then,
They gaze, and wonder; and the longer time
It stands, the more it glorifies his prime;
Grows fresh in honor, and the age does shame
That in such Monuments neglect such fame;
So had thy sacred Frame been raised to height,
Form, fullness, ornament: the more the light
Had given it view, the more had Men admired;
And tho men now are scarce to warmness fired
With love of thee; but rather cold and dead
To all sense of the grace they forfeited
In thy neglect, and loss; yet after-ages
Would be inflamed, and put on holy rages
with thy inspiring virtues; cursing those
Whose breaths dare blast thus, in the bud, the Rose.
But thou (woe's me) art blown up before blown,
And as the ruins of some famous Town,
Show here a Temple stood; a Palace, here;
A Cytadell, an Amphitheater;
Of which (ahlas) some broken Arches, still
(Pillars, or Columnsrac't; which Art did fill
With all her riches and Divinity)
Retain their great, and worthy memory:
So of our Princes state, I naught rehearse
But show his ruins, bleeding in my verse.
What poisoned Ast'risme, may his death accuse?
Tell thy astonished Prophet (deathles Muse)
And make my stars therein, the more adverse,
The more advance, with sacred rage my Verse,
And so adorn my dearest Fautors Hearse.
That all the wits profane, of these bold times
May fear to spend the spawne of their rank rymes
On any touch of him, that should be sung
To ears divine, and ask an Angels tongue.
With this it thundered; and a lightning showed
Where she sat writing in a sable cloud;
A Pen so hard and sharp expressed her plight,
It bit through Flint; and did in Diamant write;
Her words, she sung, and laid out such a breast,
As melted Heaven, and vexed the very blessed.
In which she called all worlds to her complaints, Muse lachrim^

And how our loss grew, thus with tears she paints: The cause and man^^
(...)

Hear earth and heaven (and you that have no ears)
Hell, and the hearts of tyrants, hear my tears
Thus Britain Henry took his timelesse end;
When his great Father did so far transcend
All other Kings; and that he had a Son
In all his Fathers gifts, so far begun,
As added to Fames Pynions, double wings;
And (as brave rivers, broken from their springs,
The further off, grow greater, and disdain
To spread a narrower current then the Maine)
Had drawn in all deserts such ample Spheres,
As Hope yet never turned about his years.
All other Princes with his parts comparing;
Like all Heavens petty Luminaries faring,
To radiant Lucifer, the days first borne)
It hurld a fire red as a threatening Morn Rha^^sia (Goddess of revenge, and
taken for Fortune) in envy of our Prince, excited Fever against him.

On fiery Rhamnusias sere, and sulphurous spite,
who turned the stern orbs of her ghastly sight,
About each corner of her vaste Command,
And (in the turning of her bloody hand)
Sought how to ruin endlesly our Hope,
And set to all mishap all entries open. The Fever the Prince died on (by
Pros^pop^^a) d^scribed by her effects and circumstances.

And see how ready means to mischief are;
She saw, fast by, the bloud-affecting Fever,
(Even when th'Autumnal-starre began t'expire)
Gathering in vapors thin, Ethereall fire:
Of which, her venomde finger did jmpart
To our brave Princes fount of heat, the heart;
A praeternaturall heat; which through the veins
And Arteries, by the blood and spirits means
Diffused about the body, and jnflam'd,
Begat a Feuor to be never named.
And now this loather of the lovely Light,
(Begot of Erebus, and ugly Night)
Mounted in have, her new, and noysefull Carre,
Whose wheels had beam-spokes from th'Hungarian star;
And all the other frame, and freight; from thence The Fever the Prince dyed
off, is observed by our Modern Physicians to be begun in Hunga^e.

Derived their rude and ruthlesse jnfluence.
Up to her left side, lept jnfernall Death
His head hid in a cloud of sensual breath;
By ^er sat furious Anguish, Pale Despite;
Murmr, and Sorrow, and possessed Affright;
Yellow Corruption, Marow-eating Care;
Languor, chill Trembling, fits Irregulare;
Inconstant Collor, feeble voyc't Complaint;
Relentles Rigor, and Confusion faint;
Frantic Distemper; and Hare-eyd unrest; Out of the property of the Have that
never shuts her ^yes sleeping.

And short-breathed Thirst, with th'euer-burning breast
A wreath of Adders bound her trenched Brows;
Where Torment Ambusht lay with all her throws
Marmarian Lions, frindg'd with flaming Manes, Marmar^cae Leone., of Marmar^a a
Re^ion in (...) where the (...) Lions are bred; with which Fever is supposd to
be drawn, for their excess of he^t and violence, part of the effects of this
Fever. The properties of the Fever in these effects.

Drew this grym fury, and her brood of Banes,
Their hearts of glowing Coals, murmurd, and ror'd,
To bear her crook't yokes, and her Banes abhord,
To their dear Prince, that bore them in his Arms,
And should not suffer, for his Good, their Harms;
Then from Hels burning whirlepit up she hallde,
The horrid Monster fierce Echidna calde;
That from her Stigian Jaws, does vomit ever,
Quitture, and Venom, yet is empty never:
Then burnt her bloudshot eyes, her Temples yet
Were cold as Ice, her Neck all drowned in sw^t:
Palenes spread all her breast, her life's heat stung:
The Minds Interpreter, her scorched tongue,
Flowd with blew poison: from her yawning Mouth
Rhumes fell like spouts filled from the stormy South:
Which being corrupt, the hew of Saffron took,
A fervent Vapor, all her body shook:
From whence, her Vexed Spirits, a noisome smell,
Expyr'd in fumes that looked as black as Hell.
A ceaseles Torrent did her Nosthrils steep,
Her witherd Entrails took no rest, No sleep:
Her swollen throat ratl'd, warmd with life's last spark
And in her salt jaw^s, painful Cought did bark:
Herteeth were staind with Rust, her sluttish hand
She held out reeking like a New-quencht Brand:
Armed with crook'd Tallons like the horned Moon,
All Cheer, all Ease, all Hope with her was gone:
In her left hand a quenchles fire did glow,
And in her Right Palm freez'd Sithonian Snow:
The ancient Romans did a Temple build
To her, as whom a Deity they held:
So hyd, and far from cure of Man she flies,
In whose Life's Power she matter the Deities.
When fell Rhamnusia saw this Monster nere,
(Her steel Heart sharpning) thus she spoke to her: Rhamnus^^ excitat^o^ of
fe^e^

See thou this Prince (great Maid and seed of Night)
Whose ^rows cast beams about the^, like the Light:
Who joys securely in all present State,
Nor dreams what Fortune is, or future Fate:
At whom, with fingers, and with fixed eyes
All Kingdoms Point, and Look, and Sacrifice:
Could be content to give him: Templ^s raise
To his Expectance, and Unbounded Praise:
His Now-rip. S^irits, and Valor does de^pise,
Sickness, and Sword, that give our Godheads Prise:
His worth contracts the worlds, in his sole Hope,
Religion, Virtue, Conquest have no scope:
But his Indowments; At him, at him, fly;
More swift, and timelesse, more the Deity;
His Summer, Winter with the jellid flakes;
His pure Life, poison, sting out with thy Snakes;
This is a work will Fame thy Maidenhead: R^am: durst nolo^ger endure her,
being stirred into fury.

With this, her speech and she together fled;
Nor durst she more endure her dreadful eyes;
Who stung with goads her roaring Lions thyes;
And brandisht, round about, her Snak-curld head blew;
With her left hand, the Torch it managed. The starry Evening described by
V^lcans setting to work at that time. The Night being ever chie^esly
cou^ecrate to the Works of the Gods, and out of this Deities fires, the Stars
are supposd to fly; as sparkles of them.

And now Heavens Smith, kindled his Forge and
And through the round Pole, thick the sparkls flew
When great Prince Henry, the delight of fame;
Darkn'd the Palace, of his Fathers Name,
And hid his white lyms, in his downie Bed;
Then Heaven wept falling Stars that summoned
(With soft, and silent Motion) sleep to breath
On his bright Temples, th'Ominous form of death;
Which now the cruel Gods did permit,
That she might enter so, her Maiden fit;
When the good Angel, his kind Guardian,
Her withet'd foot, saw near this spring of Man;
He shrik't and said; what, what are thy rude ends; The good Angel of the
Pr^uce to the Fever, as she approach^.

Cannot, in him alone, all virtues friends,
(Melted into his all-vpholding Nerus;
For whose Assistance, every Deity serves)
Move thee to prove thy Godhead, bles^ing him
With long long life, whose light extinckt, will dim,
All heavenly graces? all this, moved her naught;
But on, and in his, all our rujnes wrought:
She touched the Thresholds, and the thresholds shook;
The dore-posts, Palenes pierst with her faint look:
The doors brake open, and the fatal Bed
Rudely sh'aproacht, and thus her fell mouth said;
Henry, why take thou thus thy rest secure? Fever to the prince; who is
thougght by ^ friend of mine to speak too mildly; not being satis compos m^tis
P^rtu^, in this. Her counsel or persuasion, showing only how the Prince was
persuaded and resolved in his deadlyest suffera^ce of her which she is made to
speak in spite of her self, since he at her worst was so sacredly resolu^e.

Naught doubting what Fortune and fates assure;
Thou never yet felt'st my red right hands maims,
That I co thee, and fate to me proclaims;
Thy fa^e stands jdle; spinns no more thy thread;
Die thou must (great Prince) sigh not; bear thy head
In all things free, even with necessity
If sweet it be to live; it is sweet to dye:
This said she shook at him her Torch, and cast
A fire in him, that all his breast embraced,
Then darting through his heart a deadly cold,
And as much venom as his veins could holdj
Death, Death, O Death, inserting, thrusting in,
Shut his fair eyes, and op't our ugly sin:
This seen resolved on, by her self and fate;
Was there a sight so pale, and desperate,
Ever before seen, in a thrust-through State?
The poor Verginian, miserable say^e, Description of the tempest ^^at cast Sir
^^b. Ca^es on the B^^muda* and the st^te of his Ship and Men, to this Kingdoms
Plight applied in the Princes death.

A long-long-Night-turnd-Day, that lived in Hell
Never so portrayed, where the Billows strove
(Blackt like so many Devils) which should prove
The damned Victor; all their furies heighting;
Their Drum, the thunder; and their Colors lightning,
Both soldiers in the battle; one conte^ding
To drown the waves in Noise; the other spe^ding
His Hel-hot sulphurous flames to drink the^ dry:
When heaven was lost, when not a tear wrackt eye,
Could tell in all that dead time, if they were,
Sincking or sailing; till a quickening clear
Gave light to save them by the ruth of Rocks
At the Bermudas; where the tearing shocks
And all the Miseries before, more felt
Then here half told; All, All this did not melt
Those desperate few, still dying more in tears,
Then this Death, all men, to the Marrow wears:
All that are Men; the rest, those drudging Beasts,
That only bear of Men, the Coats, and Crests;
And for their Slave, sick, that can earne the^ pence,
More mourn (O Monsters) the^ for such a Prince;
Whose souls do ebb and flow still with their gain,
Who^ nothing moves but pe^f, and their own pain;
Let such (great Heaven) be only borne to bear,
All that can follow this mere Massacre.
Lost is our poor Prince; all his sad jndure^s;
The busy Art of those that should be Curers;
The sacred vows made by the zealous King,
His God-like Sire; his often visiting;
Nor thy grave prayers and presence (holy Man) The Archbishop of C^^ (...)
passing pyous in care of the Princ^. S. E de P^^l. l^ps Master of the Rols and
the Princes Chancelo^, a chiese sorrower for him*

This Realm thrice Reverend Metropolitan,
That was the worthy Father to his soul:
Th'jnsulting Fever could one fit control.
Nor let me here forget on far, and near;
And in his life's love, Passing deep and dear;
That does his sacred Memory adore,
Virtues true favtor his grave Chancellor,
Whose worth in all works should a Place enioie,
Where his fit Fame ^er Trumpet shall jmploie,
Whose Cares, and Prayers, were ever used to ease
His feu^rous War, and send him health full peace,
Yet sick our Prince is still; who though the steps
Of bitter Death, he saw bring in by heaps
Clouds to his Luster, and poor rest of light;
And felt his last Day suffering lasting Night;
His true-bred-braue soul, shrunck yet at no part,
Down kept he all sighs, with his powers al-Hart; The prince heroical his
bearing his sickness at the Kings coming to see him, careful not to discomfort
him. The Twelfth day after (...) to ^ee ^^cke, his sickness was held (...).

Cler'd even his dying brows: and (in an Eye
Manly dissembling) hid his Misery.
And all to spare the Royal heat so spent
In his sad Father, fearful of the event.
And now did Phoebus with his Twelfth Lamp show
The world his haples light: and in his Brow
A Torch of Pitch stuck, lighting half t'half skies,
When life's last error pressed the broken eyes
Of this heartbreaking Prince; his forced look fled;
Fled was all Color from his cheeks; yet fed
His spirit, his sight: with dying now, he cast
On his kind King, and Father: on whom, fast
He fixed his fading beams: and with his view
A little did their empty Orbs renew:
His Mind saw him, come from the deeps of Death, The prince dying to ^he King.

To whom he said, O Author of my Breath:
Soul to my life, and essence to my Soul,
Why grieve you so, that should al grief co^troule?
Death's sweet to me, that you are still life's creature,
I now have finished the great work of Nature.
I see you pay a perfect Fathers debt
And in a feastfull Peace your Empire kept;
If your true Sons last words have any right
In your most righteous Bosom, do not fright
your harkening kingdoms to your carriage now;
All yours, in me, I here resign to you,
My youth (I pray to God with my last powers)
Substract from me may add to you and yours.
Thus vanished he, thus swift, thus instantly;
Ah now I see, even heavenly powers must dye. The sorrows and bemones of the
King Queen, Prince and his most Princely Sister, for the Princes death.

Now shift the King and Queen from court to court
but no way can shift off their cares resort,
That which we hate the more we fly, pursues,
that which we love, the more we seek, eschewes:
Now weeps his Princely Brother; Now alas
His Cynthian Sister, (our sole earthly Grace)
Like Hebes fount still ouerflowes her bounds,
And in her cold lips, stick astonished sounds,
Sh'oppresseth her sweet kind; In her soft breast
Care can no vent find, it is so comprest:
And see how the Promethean Liver grows The funeral described.

As vulture Grief deuoures it: see fresh shows
Revive woes sense, and multiply her soul;
And worthily; for who would tears control
On such a springing ground? It Is dearly fit,
To pay all tribute, Thought can pour on it:
For why were Funerals first used but for these,
Presaged and cast in their Natiuities?
The streams were checked a while: so Torrents staid
Enrage the more; but are (left free) allaid.
Now our grim waves march altogether; Now
Our black seas run so high, they ouerflow
the clouds they nourish; now the gloomy hearse
Puts out the Sun: Revive, revive (dead vierse)
death has slain death; there there the person lies
Whose death should buy out all mortalities.
But let the world be now a heap of death,
Life's joy lies dead in him, and challenges
No less a reason: If all motion stood
Benumbed and stupefied, with his frozen blood;
And like a Tombe-stone, fixed, lay all the seas
There were fit pillars for our Hercules
To bound the world with: Men had better dye
Then out-liue free times; slaves to Policy.
On on sad Train, as from a crannid rock
Bee-swarmes robbed of their honey, ceasles flock.
Mourn, mourn, dissected now his cold lims lie
Ah, knit so late with flame, and Majesty.
where is now his gracious smile, his sparkling eye
His Judgment, Valor, Magnanimity?
O God, what does not one short hour snatch up
Of all m^ns ^losse? still ouer-flowes the cup
Of his burst cares; put with no nerves together,
And lighter, then the shadow of a feather.
On: make earth pomp as frequent as ye c^^,
'Twill still leave black, the fairest ^^ower of man,
Ye well may lay all cost on misery,
It Is all can boast, the proud'st humanity.
If young Marcellus had to grace his fall,
Six hundred Herses at his Funeral;
Sylla six thousand; let Prince Henry have
Six Millions bring him to his greedy grave.
And now the States of earth, thus mourn below
Behold in Heaven, Love with his broken Bow;
his quiver downwards turned, his brands put out
Hanging his wings; with sighs all black about.
Nor less, our loss, his Mothers heart infests,
Her melting palms, beating her snowy breasts;
As much confused, as when the Calidon Bore
The thigh of her divine Adonis tore:
Her vows all vain, resol^'d to bless his years
With Issue Royal, and exempt from freres,
Who now dyed fruitless; and prevented then
The blessed of women, of the best of men.
Mourn all ye Arts, ye are not of the earth;
Fall, fall with him; rise with his second birth.
(...)

FINIS

