FOUR BOOKS OF Husbandry, collected by M. Conradus Heresbachius, Counselor
to the high and mighty Prince, the Duke of Cleue: Containing the whole art and
trade of Husbandry, with the antiquity, and commendation thereof. Nevvely
Englished, and increased, by Barnabe Googe, Esquire.

GENESIS. 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, till thou
be turned again into the ground, for out of it vvast thou taken: yea, dust
thou art, and to dust shall thou return.

AT LONDON, Printed by Richard Watkins. 1577.

POST. TRISTIA. LAETA


TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, his very good friend, Sir Wylliam Fitzwylliams,
Knight.
IF such a have paynefully and faithfully of long time served their Prince and
Country abroad, do most of all others deserve, beside their condign reward,
the benefit of a quiet and contented life at home, I know no man (good Sir
VVylliam Fitzwylliams) that of right may better challenge it, then your self:
who for the long time of your painful seruise, the trusty discharging of the
treasureship of Ireland, and your worthy government (while it pleased her most
excellent Majesty to appoint you for the said Realm her highnesses Deputy)
have so b^haued your self, as even your very enemies (whereof I know you had
goo^ store) have been forced to give you, will they nyll they, your just
deserved commendation. I leave to remember your sundry and troublesome
trauayles, your Gentelmanly mind, always vnweeried and vnmated with what so
ever peril or hazard happened: I pass over (because I know you delight not in
hearing your praises) that honorable, and worthy for ever to be Chronicled,
charge given upon the Oneale at Monham in the rescue of your miserably
distressed and slaughtred companions, and countrymen, of which there be sundry
yet remaining, that will attribute the having of their lives (next unto God) to
the prosperous success of your valeaunt enterprise: Neither has this your
loyal service to your Prince and Country at any time been unaccompanied,
without a fervent and zealous affection toward the Almighty, the cheifest and
only beauty of all man's actions. Since thus (as I said) you may justly challenge
for the good service you have done in your youth, a place and time of rest and
quietness in your greater years, and that there is, in my fancy, no life so
quiet, so acceptable to God, and pleasant to an honest mind, as is the life of
the Country, where a man, withdrawing him self from the miserable miseries,
vanities, and vexations of this foolish and now totoo much doting world, may
give him self to the sweet comtemplation of God, and his works, and the
profit and relief of his poor distressed neighbor, to which two things we
were chiefly created. I thought it good to send you here (as a token and
testimony of my thankful mind, for your sundry freendshippes and courtesies
showed unto me) a rude draught of the order and manner of the said Country
life, which you may use (if it please you) for your recreation: and afterward
(if so you think it meet) publish under your protection, to the commodity
and benefit of others. Fare you well in great haste, from Kingstone, the first
of February. 1577.

Your assured loving friend, Barnabe Googe.

THE EPISTLE TO the Reader.
I HAVE thought it me^te (good Reader) for thy further profit and pleasure, to
put into En^glishe, these four Books of husbandry, collected and set forth,
by M. CONRAD HERESBACH, a great and a learned Counselor of the DVKE of
Cleues: not thinking it reason, though I have altered and increased his work
with mine own readinges and obseru^tions, joined with the experience of
sundry my friends, to take from him (as diverse in the like case have done) the
honor and glory of his own travail: Neither is it my mind, that this
either his dooinges, or mine, should deface, or any vvayes darken the good
enterprise, or painful trauayles of such our Countrymen of England, as have
plentifully written of this matter: but alvvayes have, and do give them the
reverence and honor due to so virtuous and well disposed Gentlemen, namely,
Master Fitzherbert, and Master Tusser, whose works may, in my fancy,
without any presumption, compare with any their Varro, Columella, or
Palladius of Rome. You have here set down before you, not only the rules and
practices of the old ancient husbands, as well Greeks as Latins, whose
very orders (for the most part) at this day we observe, and from whom (if we
will confess the truth) we have borrowed the best knowledge and skill,
that our skilfullest husbands have: but also have joined herevvithall, the
experience and husbandry of our own husbands of England, as far as either
mine own observations, or the experience of sundry my friends vvoulde suffer
me. And though I have dealt with many, both Grains, Plants, and Trees, that
are yet strangers and unknown unto us, I do no whit doubt, but that with
good diligence and husbandry, they may in short time so be denisend and made
acquainted with ou^ soil, as they will prosper as well as the old
inhabitants. It is not many ages agone, since both the Peache, the Pistace,
the Pine, the Cypress, the VValnut, the Almond, the Chery, the Fig, the
Abricock, the Musk Rose, and a great sort of others, both Trees and Plants,
being some Perseans, some Scythians, some Armenians, some Italians, and some
French, all strangers and aleantes, were brought in as novelties amongst us,
that do now most of them as well, yea and some of them better, being
planted amongst us in England, then if they were at home. I have also been
careful about the planting and ordering of the Vine, though some of my
friends would have had it omitted, as altogether impertinent to our
country: because I am fully persuaded (if diligence, and good husbandry might
be used) we might have a reasonable good wine grovvyng in many places of this
Realm: as undoubtedly we had immediately after the Conquest, till partly by
slothfulness, not liking any thing long that is painful, partly by Civil
discord long continuing, it was left, and so with time lost, as appears by
a number of places in this Realm, that keeps still the names of Vineyardes:
and upon many ^liffes and Hills, are yet to be scene the roots and old
remaynes of Vines. There is besides Nottingham, an ancient house called
Chylvvel, in which house remains yet as an ancient monument in a great
vvyndovve of Gl^sse, the whole order of plantin^, proyning, stamping, and
pr^ssing of Vines. Beside, there is yet also growing an old Vine, that yeeldes
a Grape sufficient to make a right good wine, as was lately proved by a
Gentlevvoman in the said house. There has moreover good experience of late
years been made, by two noble and honorable Bar^ons of this Realm, the Lord
Cobham, and the Lord VVylliams of Tame, who both had grovvyng about their
houses as good vvines, as are in many places of France. And if they ansvvered
not in all points every man's expectation, the fault is rather to be imputed to
the malice and disdain peradventure of the Frenchemen that kept them, then to
any ill disposition, or fault of the soyle^ or where have you in any place
better, or pleasanter vvines, then about Backrach, Colin, Andernach, and diverse
other places of Germany, that have in a manner the self same latitute and
disposition of the Heavens that we have? Beside, that the nearenesse to the
South, is not altogether the causer of good vvines, appears in that you have
about Orleans, great store of good and excellent wine: whereas, if you go to
Burges, two days journey f^^ther to the South, you shall find a wine not
vvoorth the drinking. The like is (as I have heard reported by Master D. Dale,
Embassatour for her Majesty in these parts) of Paris, and Barleduke, the
Town being Southvvard, with nou^hty vvines the other, a great vvayes farther
to the North, with as good vvines as may be. But admit^e England would yield
none ^o strong and pleasant vvines as are desired (as I am fully persuaded it
would yet is it vvoorth the trial and the travail to have vvines of ou^
own, thou^h they be the smaller: and therefore I thought it not meet to leave
out of (...) book the ordring and trimming of Vines. It remains now (good
Reader) that thou take in good part my travail and ^ood will, which were
ch^efely employed to the pleasuring and benefiting of thee, and not to quarrel
with me, as is the manner of the most sort, for every fault and oversight that
has escaped my hands, nor to look for any cu^ious, or well m^^^ured style,
vvherevvith I am not able to satisfy thee, and though I were, yet were it
neither for the matter nor method necessary. And therefore I trust thou vvylt
accept it as it is, specially considering, that I neither had leisure, nor
quietness at the doing of it, neither after the doing had ever any time to
ouerlooke it, but was driven to deliver it to the Printer, as I first vvrote
it: neither was I privy to the printyng, till such time as it was finished.
And therefore (though there be faults, and great faults in it) I am not to be
charged with them, that if time, or opportunity had served, vvoulde not have
suffered them.

Farewell.
The names of such Aucthours, and Husbands, whose aucthorities, and
observations, are used in this Book.
The Bible, and Doctors of the Church. Homer. Hesiodus. Theocritus. Solon.
Xenophon. Plato. Aristotle. Theophrastus. ^^Socrates. Plutarche. Aelianus.
Diodorus Siculus. Herodotus. Thu^^dides. Polibius. Cato. Varro. Vi^gil. Ovid.
Horace. Martial. Colum^lla. Celius. Hippocra^e. Galen. Ae^^eta. Dioscondes.
Nicander. Aristophane. Alexander Aph^od. Macer. (...). Dio. Vegetius. Julius
Fumi^^^. Both the Plimes. Atheneus. Iuliu^ Pollu^. Lu^^an. Oppian. Constantyne.
Cassianus. Didymus. Horentine. Anatolius. Sotron. Democritus. Appuleus.
Heliodorus. Platina. Alexander Neap. Petrus de Cresc. Budaeus. Ruellius.
Fuccius. Mathiolus. Cardanus. Tragus. S. Nich. Malbee. M. Capt. Byngham. M.
John Somer. M. Nicas. Yetzvvert. M. Fitzherbert. M. VVylli. Lambert. M. Tusser.
M. Tho. VVhetenhall. M. Ri. Deeryng. M. Hen. Brockhull. M. Franklyn. ^. King.
Richard Andrews. Henry Denis. VVylliam Pratte. John H^tehe. Phillip Partrige.
Kenvvorth Datforth.
The first Book of husbandry, entreatyng of earable ground, tyllage, and
pasture.
Cono. Rigo. Metella. Hermes. CONO. ME thinks I hear a neighing and
trampling of Horses without, go HERMES, go know what strangers there are.


HERMES. Sir, yfmy sight fail me not, it is RIGO, the principal Secretary.


METELLA. A goodly matter, scarce have you been two days at home, and now you
must be sent for again to the Court, perhaps to be sent abroad in some
embassage.


CONO. God forbid, judge the best, it may be he comes to see me of courtesy and
friendship.


RIGO. Ah master CONO, I am glad I have found you in the mids of your
country joys and pleasures: Surely you are a happy man, that shifting your
self from the troubles and turmoyles of the Court, can pick out so quiet a
life, and geuyng over all, can secretly lie hid in the pleasant Country,
suffering us in the mean time to be cost and torn with the cares and
business of the common weal.


CONO. Surely I must confess I have taken a happy way, if these gods of the
Earth would suffer me to enjoy such happiness, that have bequeathed the
troublesome and ambitious life of the Court to the bottom of the Sea. But
what? do you intend to bring me again to my old troubles, being thus happily
discharged?


RIGO. Nothing less, though I would be very glad you should not so hastily
forsake the Court, nor rid your self from the affairs of the common wealth.
You know we are not borne to live to our selves, nor at our own pleasures: but
for our country, our common weal and state whereto we are called. There can
not be a worse thing, then for a man to suffer his country forsaken, to come
into the hands of villainous persons, and to rejoice with him self, that being
out of Gunshot, he has left the hurly burly of gonernment. And though Cato
had no need of Rome, yet Rome and Cato his friends had need of him.


CONO. I grant you, as long as years and strength will bear it, we are
bound to serve in our vocation: but as you your self are driven to confess,
there is sometime a reasonable cause of giving over. Lucullus is highly
commended, Lucullus.
that while his body was strong and lusty, he applied him self wholly to the
service of his Country, and that after his honorable service both abroad and
at home, in the end he got him self quietly again to his book. And Scipio,
Scipio.
who after he had conquered both Carthage and Numidia, was content rather to
leave of and rest him self, then to do as Marius did, who after so many
worthy victories and atchiued honors, could not content him self when he
was well, but puffed up with unmeasurable desire of glory and government, would
in his old age contend with young men, whereby he brought him self at the
length to most miserable misery. Surely Cicero took a better way by much,
Ci^ero.
when after the overthrow of Catelins conspiracy, he rather contented him
self to live quietly at home, then by ambitious intermedling with the
contentions of the common wealth, to bring him self in danger of his life. The
desire of bearing rule in a common weal, is to be moderated with a certain
bounded modesty, specially in this age of ours, when Courts are subject to
such enuies, hatreds, flatteries, slanders, covetous and ambitious desires,
and where no place is left for vertuousnesse and christian simplicity. These
are the things that drove Socrates and Plato from their commonweals, and do
likewise keep me, being now of good years and sickely, y^ Court forsaken, in
this my poor cottage at home.


RIGO. Yea, but age is no sufficient excuse for you to leave the gouernyng of
your country. You know (...), the labor of young men, and the counsel of
old men, and how those commonweals are safely alwayest guided, where old
men's heads, and young men's arms are stirryng. Father Nestor got great
commendation for his counsel at the siege of Troy, Nestor.
where as Peleus and Laertes were despised, and accounted for benchwhistlers at
home. (...)



CONO. Some are tickled with glory: some with gain, gifts, and rewards,
retain the Cockrowen Courtiers, yea such as have one of their feet already in
the grave. Now if we would content our selves with this life, and give our
selves to the true and perfect life, In Princes Courts we should not gape nor
gase,
Nor ill success in suits should vex our mind:
No vain nor fond devise our eyes should dase,
Nor lewd affection should our fancy blind.
All such things should be left and laid aside,
Now lives alas each out of order quite:
And to our shame the time away does slyde^
All seek to live, but none to live vpryght.
As the Poet excellently well writes in his Epigram, it were the part of a mad
man or a coxcome to run headlong without any profit into danger, when as he
may live godly and quietly at home without all trouble, as our old fathers
were wont to do.


RIGO. It is very true, the Poet accompteth him blessed to whom this life can
happen: But in the mean time you are alone, and lead your life with beasts,
lowtes of the Country, and trees, that have spent all your time before among
wise and honorable personages. Socrate^
Socrates affyrmeth wisdom to be learned in Cities, and not among beasts and
trees.


CONO. Socrates his judgment, though I will not gaynesay, yet it appears by
his disputations with Iscomachus in Xenophon, that he did not disalowe the
Country man's life. And as for my living alone, it almost happens here to me,
as Cicero reports Scipio to say, that he was never less alone, then when he
was alone: for being alone, I have continual conference with the grauest and
wysest men. For either I apply my self wholly to the sacred oracles of the
Prophets and the Apostles, who teach the true wisdom, by which both Kings
rule, and Princes govern, and by which our souls (which we cheefely ought to
regard) are fed, which also show unto us the perfect way to that
everlasting Court above: or when I list, I have the company of the greatest
Princes and Monarchies of the world, with whom I confer of the doubtful
state and government of commonweals, The use of a solita^^^ life.
in reading the Histories and Chronicles of the world, trauayling as it were
throughout all nations, or readyng the works of such as write in husbandry,
I occupy my mind in the beholding the wonderful woorkemanship of GOD in
Trees, Plants, and Beasts, whereby in the Creature, I acknowledge the
Creator. And besides these dumb companions, my friends come sometime to see
me, sometime Gentlemen, sometime Noblemen, sometime the Prince him self
vouchsafes to unite me: so that there is scarcely any day but that some come
unto me, some for their pleasure, some for good will, and some for their
business: For to my friends and my neighbors, I neither deny my counsel,
nor my travail. Therefore is it very expedient that good choice be made of
Lawyers, and discreet men for the Country, always provided, they give their
counsel free and without wages. Many times beside, you from the Court send me
hither process and arbitrementes to be tried before me. Thus have I in the
Country sweeter and pleasanter company then you have, either in the Court or
City.


RIGO. Tell me then I beseech you, how you bestow your time, and how you
are occupied all the day? for I doubt not but you do as much as in you lies
to spend the time as profitably as you may.


CONO. I will tell you thoroughly, and not dissemble with you, if ye will give
me the hearing, and to begin, I will use the words and verses of the
foresaid Poet, though in other his writings fearse honest, yet in this
speaking very grave and wise. First served on knees the Majesty divine,
My Servants next and ground I ouerlooke:
To every man his task I do assign,
When this is done I get me to my book.
I use commonly to rise first of all me self, specially in Summer, when we
loose the healthfullest and sweetest time with sluggishnesse. Aristotle
accompteth early rising to be best both for health, wealth, and study. In the
Winter if I be loath to rise, if either the vn^easonablenesse of the weather, or
sickness cause me to keep my bed, I commit all to my Steward, whose faith and
diligence I am sure of, whom I have so well instructed, that I may safely make
him my deputy, I have also Euriclia my maid, so skillful in huswyferie, that
she may well be my wives suffragan, these twain we appoint to supply our
places: but if the weather and time serve, I play the woorkemaister me self.
And though I have a Bailiffe as skillful as may be, yet remembering the old
sayeing, The best doung (...) groun^ is the ma^^ters foot.
that the best doung for the feelde is the masters foot, and the best
prouender for the horse the masters eye, I play the ouerseer me self. That
it is wholesome to rise betimes, I am persuaded both by the counsel of the most
grave Philosophers, and besides by mine own experience. When my Servants are
all set to work, and every man as busy as may be, I get me into my Closet to
serve GOD, and to read the holy Scriptures: (for this order I always keep,
to appoint me self every day my task, in reading some part either of the old
Testament or of the new): that done, I write or read such things as I
think most needful, or dispatche what business so ever I have in my house,
or with Sutars abroad. A little before dinner I walk abroad, if it be fair,
either in my Garden, or in the Feeldes, if it be foul, in my Galerie: when I
come in, I find an Egg, a Thick, a piece of Rid, or a piece of Ueale, Fish,
Butter, and such like, as my Foldes, my Yard, or my Dayrie and Fishpondes will
yield, sometime a Sallet, or such fruits as the Garden or Orchard does
bear: which victuals without any charges my wife provides me, wherewith I
content me self as well, as if I had the dayntiest dishe in Europe. I never
lightly sit above one hour at my meat: after dinner I pass the time with
talking with my wife, my servants, or if I have any, with my ghestes: I rise
and walk about my ground, where I view my woorkemen, my pastures, my meadows,
my corn, and my cattle. When I am in the Country, I go every day, if the
weather be good, and no other great business, about my ground: if not every
day, at the least once in two or three days: as often as I come to the City
from the Country, I do the like, to understand how my ground is husbanded,
and what is done, what undone: neither do I ever go about it, but some good
comes of my travail. In the mean while I behold the wonderful wisdom of
Nature, and the incomprehensible woorking of the most mighty GOD in his
Creatures, which as Cicero truly affirms, A^adem. ^u^st^o. lib. 1.
is the delicatest food of the Soul, and the thing that makes us come
nearest unto God. Here way I with me self, the benefits and wonderful
works of God, who brings forth Grass for the cattle, and green Herb
for the use of man, that he may bring food out of the Earth according to the
Psalm. Psalm. 104.
Here he preaches to me. The fruitful Earth that tyld in sundry wise,
Unto the eye her goodly fruits does yield:
The Violettes svveete that each where thick do rise,
And stayne with purple dye the pleasant feelde,
The feelde with herbs, the herbs with branches brave,
The glittring flovvres that shine like stars of light,
And springyng fast disclose the grace they have,
Each herb with sundry flovvre most svveete in sight.
What woorkeman is there in the world, that is able to frame or counterfeyte
such heavenly works? Who could of a sclender grass make Wheat or Bread,
and of a tender twigge bring forth so noble a licour as Wine? but only that
mighty Lord that has created all things visible and invisible. With these
sightes do I recreate my mind, and give thanks unto GOD, the creator and
conseruer of all things, for his great and exceeding goodness, I sing the
song, to thee O Lord belongs praises in Sion, or, praise thou the Lord O my
soul. etc. beseeching GOD to bless the gifts that he has given us through
his bounteous liberality, to enriche the Feeldes, and to prosper the Corn and
the Grass, and that he will crown the year with his plenteousnesse, that we
may enjoy the fruits of the Earth with thankesgeuing, to the honor of him,
and the profit of our neighbor. Then returning home, I go to writing or
reading, or such other business as I have: but with study, or invention, I
never meddle, in three hours after I have dyned. I suppe with a small pittans,
and after supper I either seeldome or never write or read, but rather pass
the time in seeing my Sheep come home from the Feelde, and my Oxen dragging
home the Plowe with weerie necks, in beholding the pleasant Pastures sweetly
smelling about my house, or my heardes of cattle lowing hard by me: sometime I
list to rest me under an old Holme, sometime upon the green grass, in the
mean time passes by me the pleasant River, the streams falling from the
springes with a comfortable noise, or else walking by the River side, or in my
Garden, or nearest pastures, I confer with my Wife or Servants of husbandry,
appointing what I will have done: if my Bailiffe have any thing to say, if any
thing be to be bought or sold: for a good husband, as Cato says, must rather
be a sellar then a byer. A good husband must r^ther be a sell^r th^n a byer.
Sometimes (specially in Winter) after s^pper, I make my Minister to tell
something out of the holy Scripture, or else some pleasant story, so that it be
honest and godly, and such as may edi^ie. Two or three hours after supper I
get me to bed, and commonly as I said before, the last in the house, except
my Chamberlayne and my Steward.


RIGO. In the mean time being far from the Church, neither can you hear
the sermons, nor be present with your wife and your household at service: for
your own part though ye may supply the matter with reading, yet your wife and
your servants can not so do.


CONO. For my part (without vaunt be it spoken,) I have service every day at
certain appointed hours, where preaches to me daily the Prophets, the
Apostles, Basil, Chrysostom, Nazianzen, Cyril, Ciprian, Ambrose, Austen, and
other excellent preachers, whom I am sure I hear with greater profit, then if
I should hear your sir John lacklatines and foolish fellows in your
Churches. My wife also being given to readyng, reads the Bible and certain
Psalms translated into our own tongue, if there be any thing to hard or dark
for her, I make her to understand it: besides, she has private prayers of her
own that she uses: in the mean time I have one, that upon the holy days
(if the weather or our business be such as we can not go to Church) reads
the Gospel, teaches the Catechism, and ministers the Sacraments when time
requires: but in the Summer time, if the weather be not unreasonable, we go
always upon the Sundays and Festival days to our Parish Church, where we
hear our Curate, and receive the blessed Communion: as for my household, I
bring them to this order, that they always serve God before their going to
work, and at their coming to meals. It is written of Anthony the Ermite,
that being demanded of a certain Philosopher, how he could in the solitary
wilderness without any books, occupy him self in the study of divinity:
The saying of saint Anthony.
He answered, that the whole world served him for books, as a well furnished
Library, in which he always read the wonderful woorkmanship of God, which
in every place stood before his eyes. In the like sort have I my household
servants well instructed in the chief grounds of true religion, who leauyng
to their vocation and innocence of their life, not carried away with the vain
entisementes and pleasures of Cities, do behold the Majesty of GOD in his
works, and honor the Creator in his Creatures, not only upon the Sundays,
but every day through the year, where they may also hear the little Birds,
and other creatures in their kinds, setting out the glory and Majesty of God.


RIGO. You seem to tell me of a School of divinity, and not of a husbandmans
Cottage, this was the very order of the Patriarchs, and the Monasteries in the
Primative Church.


CONO. Homely. 56 upon the. 16 of Matthew. and in other places.
In deed Chrysostom would have all Christians, married folks and unmarried, to
lead their lives according to the rule and order of Monks: but of such Monks
as lived in those days, not such good fellows as ours be now: for the
profession of a Monk in that age, was no other but the life of the purest and
perfectest Christians, which kind of life the old Patriarchs as the
Scriptures do witness did lead.


RIGO. I oftentimes woondred, that having so goodly a house and so well
furnished in the City as you have, what you meant to desire rather to dwell in
the Country: but now that I see the good order of your life, I leave to
wonder any longer.


CONO. It is natural to me, and left me by my parents, to delight in
husbandry: for my Father, my Graundfather, my great Graundfather, and as far
as I can fetch my petigree, all my Ancestors were occupiers of husbandry,
and were all borne and died in this house that you see.


RIGO. I remember not long since, being in business with the Chancellor
Hypsographus, a sober man, your neighbor, and one that delights in husbandry,
it was my chance to see your father, surely a man would have taken him for
old Laertes in Homer, or rather for Abram, or Isahac, and as the Chancellor
told me, he was four score and ten years old: but so fair he bare his
age, as I took him to be scarce fifty, his memory and judgment seemed to
serve him woonderous well, he would talk of the orders of the Country, of the
antiquities there abouts, of the stories of the Scripture, so sweetly and
eloquently, as I was woonderfully in love with him: he had the Prophets and
the Evangelists at his fingers ends, so that I saw the noble men had him in
estimation, not without great cause.


CONO. In deed he took such delight in the holy Scriptures, as no day passed
him without reading some part of them: he used to go commonly every day to the
next Parish Church, neither would he miss any Sermon that he could hear
of, he brought both Preacher and Priest into order, and caused them to frame
their lives according to the rule of the Gospel.


RIGO. You paynt me here the pattern of a Bishop, or an ouerseer: in deed
the most part of these Priests had need of such overseers to restrain their
covetousness, the spring of all their abuses.


CONO. To return to my quietness or my husbandry from whence I digressed, do
you yet marueyle how I can delight me self with this so honest and
profitable a quietness, then which in the judgment of the holiest and wysest
men, there is nothing more honest nor better, The commendation of husbandry.
neither is there beside any trade of life more meet for a Gentleman, nor
travail more acceptable to GOD, then is the tilling of the ground. The people
in the old time (as Cato a man of great wisdom, and a teacher of husbandry
does witness) as often as they would give a man the name of an honest man, they
would call him a good husband, comprehending in that name as much
commendation, as they could give him: besides, most mighty Kings and
Emperors were no whit ashamed to profess this trade, Emperour^ and kings
professou^s of husbandry.
as Xenophon reports of king Cyrus: the like writes Quintus Curtius of
Abdolominus. Numa the king of the Romans bare a singular affection to
husbandry, for that he thought there was no kind of life so sit to maintain
either peace or wars, or for the provision of a man's life, being rather a
geuer of good life, then richesse. Moreover, Hiero, Philometor, Attalus,
Archilaus, and a great number of Princes more, were delighted with ye
profession of husbandry: this knowledge is also hyghly commended by Homer, the
very fountain in his time of wisdom, whereas he describes Alcinous the king
of the Pheaces, whose delight in the planting and pleasures of his Orchardes
was wonderful. And Laertes the old man, that with his continual occupying
of husbandry, brought his mind better to bear the absence of his son.
Hesiodus in his work (...) gives great praise to Astrea, that being banished
the City, gave him self to the life of the Country: Yea the ground has
beforetime been tilled by the hands of Emperors, the Earth in the mean time
rejoicing to be torn with a Uictorers shaare, and to be plowed with the hands
of a tryumphant Conqueror, either because they dealt with the like regard in
their seed, as in their wars, or used such diligence in the Corn feeldes,
as they did in the Camp, or else because all things handled with honest and
virtuous fyngers prosper the better, being more ^arefully looked to. Serranus
when he was called to honor, Serranus.
was found sowing of seed. The Dictators office was brought by the Purceuant
to Cincinatus being all naked and besmeared with sweat and dust. Cincinatus.
The Purceuantes had first their name of calling Senato^rs and Governors, out
of the Country to the City. In like sort had this name at the first, the
Fabij, the Pisons, the Curij, the Lentuli, the Ciceroes, the Pilumni, and other
ancient houses. Horace tells, that of husbandmen have been bread the
valyauntest and woorthyest Soldiers, affyrming that the hand that has been
used to the Spade, proves often of greatest value in the Feelde. Homer
reports a great valiancie in Ulysses his Netheard in the slaughter of those
fellows that would have ravished his maistresse. Most certain it is, that a
great number of Emperors have sprung from the Plowe. And to let others go, it
is known that the Emperors Galerius and Maximinus, Husbandme^ come to be
Emperors.
came both of them from poor Herdmen to the imperial dignity. The like is
written of Iustine, Constancianus, Probus, and Aurelianus. The stories report,
that M. Curious the Emperor was found in his house boiling of a Rape root,
when he refused the great sums of gold brought by the Samnites Ambassadors.
What should I speak of the antiquity of it? The antiquity of husbandry.
the holy Scriptures declare husbandry to be the auncientest of al trades. And
to begin with the very beginning of man, and that neither Osyris, nor
Dionysius, were the first founders of this knowledge, as the Panims fable, but
that the most mighty Lord him self did first ordain it: for Adam and his
sons were all husbandmen, Noe was a planter of Uines, The first planter of
Vines.
Abraham, Isahac, and Jacob, were shepheardes, Saul from his Asses, and David
from his sheep were called to the crown, Eliseus and Amos of shepheardes were
made Prophets. Ozias as we read professed husbandry. Jesus the son of
Syrache commending husbandry above the rest, says, he customa^ily used him
self to hold the Plow, to drive the Cart, and to keep Cattle: but what need
we more? Our Savior CHRIST him self glories to be the son of a
husbandman, and frames his parables of planting of Uines, of Sheep and
Shepheardes: moreover, as it is in Luke, our Lord seems to be a teacher of
husbandry, where he shows, that ^rees are to be dug about and dunged, that
they may prosper the bette^. For si^h this knowledge is of al other most
innocent, and without which it ^s most plain we are not able to live: the best
and the godliest men have always embraced it, and the old fathers have ever
counted it the very Cousin Germane to wisdom. Husbandry the mother and nurse
of all other arts.
Cicero calls it the mistress of justice, diligens, and thriftinesse: some
others call it the Mother and Nurs of al other arts. For whereas we may live
without the other, without this we are not able to sustain our life: besides,
the gain that hereof aryseth, is most godly, and least subject to envy, for
it has to deal with the Earth, that restores with gain such things as is
committed unto her, specially y^ it be furthered with the blessing of GOD. The
only gentlemanly way of increasing the house, is the trade of husbandry: and
for this cause they were always accounted the perfectest Gentlemen, that, The
woorthynesse of husbandme^.
content with the living their ancestors left them, lived in the Country of
their lands, not meddling with figging, chopping, and changing, nor seeking
their living by handycraftes. M. Varro in his time says there was great
complaint made, that the Fathers forsaking the Plough and the Sicle, began to
creep into the Town, and busied them selves rather with Pageantes and
Midsommer games, then with the Uineyard or the Feeldi^, whereas the Governors
of Rome so divided the year, as they assigned only the nienth day for
business of the City, and the rest of the tune for the tyllage of the
Country, whereby being hardened with labor in peace, they might the better be
able to abide the travail of wars. Which Country people were always
preferred before the people of the City, and more Nobility thought to be in
them that tyld the ground abroad, then in those that living idely within the
walls, spent their time under the shadow of the Pen^house: except a man will,
with the common sort, think it more honest to get his living with the blood
and calamity of poor souls, or not daring to deal with the swoorde to make
his gain of merchandise, and being a creature of the land, contrary to his
kind, give him self to the rage of the Seas, and the pleasure of the Winds,
wandering like a Bird from shore to shore, and country to country, or to
follow this goodly profession of bawling at a bar, and for gain to open his
jaws at every benche. Surely as I said before, this only has been ever
counted the innocentest trade of life, of al men, and in all ages. By husbandry
were made rich the godly Fathers, Abram, Loath, Jacob, and Ioab: and most
certain it is, that this profession and this gain, is most acceptable to GOD,
when he commanded Adam to till the ground, Gene. 3.
and to get his living with the sweat of his brows. Thus is husbandry of such
authority, as GOD with his open witness has allowed it, Husbandry pleasyng
to God.
and afterward by his servant Moses has added his blessing unto it, saying,
I will give the ground my blessing in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth
the fruits of three years. And again, If you will keep my commandments,
Leuit. 26.
I will send you rain in due season, and the Earth shall yield her increase,
and your trees shall be laden with fruit, the threasshing time shall last till
the vintage, and the vintage shall endure till the sowing time, and you shall
eat your bread with plenteousnesse. What can there be now more pleasant to a
Christian man, then to get his living by such means as he knows does
please GOD, and to play the Philosopher in the most sweet contemplation of the
benefits of GOD, and to acknowledge and reverence the wisdom and power of
the divine Majesty, and his bounteousnesse to mankind, to give him thanks
and praise for his goodness, the very herbs and Creatures in the Feelde in
the mean time preaching unto us.


RIGO. You frame me here of a husbandman a divine, and almost bring me in mind
to become a husbandman, who always hitherto with the common sort, accounted
this husbandry to be a beastly and a beggarly occupation.


CONO. What divinity there is in it, and what a feeld of the acknowledged
benifites of God, you have heard. That the common sort do think it a beastly
and a beggarly kind of life, it is no maruelye, sith the common people do
never judge aryght. The common people do wonder at the pomp of the Court,
and judge them for the happiest men, that decked with gold and purple, are in
greatest favor with Princes, and Officers, and Councillors to them, little
knowing in the mean time what heaps of sorrows lies hyd under that brave and
glittering mi^erie. The common sort prefers shameful and beastly delicasie,
before honest and virtuous labor, joining to consume the night in
drunkenness, leacherie, and villainy, and the day in sleep and pastime,
thinking such happy, as neither behold the rising nor setting of ye Sun. But
those that are of sounder judgment, account the husbandmen most happy, if they
knew their own felicity, to whom the Earth in a far quieter manner does
minister a sufficient living. And thou with gorgeous gates the buyldynges hye,
With early greetinges alvvayes do not flow,
Nor seelyng garnisht gaye with Imagrye,
Nor ritche attire we see, nor costly show:
Yet steadfast state and life vnskild of guyle,
With wealth yenough and pastures vvyde at will,
And people strong trained up to pain and toil,
And youth with diet small contented still,
Where godly zeal and virtues all did dvvell,
When Justice last did bid the world farevvell.
As the Poet has most gravely written in the praise of the husband. Geor. ^.
Aglaus Sophidus was judged happy by the Oracle of Apollo, because he occupied
a small corner of Arcadia, but yet sufficient for his liuelode, where he spent
his life without ever coming abroad: whose order of life shows, that he was
neither vexed with greedy desire, neither with any other trouble of mind, as
Pliny witnesses. But I hold you to long with commendation of that which of
it self is sufficiently commended. Hawe, wife, I pray you let us go to dinner.


METELLA. You shall sir by and by. God morrow master RIGO, I thought
Xenoplutus had been here, who uses to fetch my husband away: he has by
chance been now at home a week or twain, which some mislikyng, prefer him
to most paineful and troublesome business, procuring him to be sent in
embassage beyond the pyllers of Hercules, and (which they would be loathe to
bear them selves) they cast all upon his back as a common packhorse, who
being now old, reason would he should be spared and suffered to be in quiet,
that being at the last free from the turmoyles of the world, he might give him
self to his prayers, and prepare him self for heaven.


RIGO. It were more for the benefit of his Country, that master CONO came
oftener to the Court, but he is the seeldome^ there, because he takes such
pleasure in his husbandry: howbeit, I came for no such purpose, but only to
visit him, being my old friend.


CONO. You must bear with a woman's bablyng.


RIGO. I pray you, sins it is not yet dinner time, let us walk about, that I
may view your house till dinner be ready.


CONO. If it please you, I will show you my house, where I have appointed my
kingdom.


RIGO. Now surely you have as happy and as pleasant a kingdom as may be.


CONO. Who is happy.
In deed I confess me self happy in this, that contentyng me self with my
poor estate, I desire no more: for as he says. The man that most does here
possess,
Horac^.
Thou can not justly happy name,
But he whom GOD with gifts does bless,
And well does know to use the same:
Him may thou rather rightly call,
A happy man above them all.
Surely I, in this my kingdom, or rather poor cottage, am more happy then a
great sort of Kings and Princes of the world, that are lords of so many and
so large dominions. Riches are not to be measured by their multitude, Who ^s
rich.
but by the mind of the possessor. And as David says, a little is better with
the godly, then the great richesse of the wicked. Cincinatus occupied only
four acres of ground. Socrates having but twenty marks in all the world,
was counted a rich man. So I with Virgil do commend great possessions, but
had rather occupy little. Therefore look not to see here the house of
Lucullus, or Hyrcius, which is reported to be sold for 4000000. HS. Such
stately dwellinges and marble floores, as Cicero says, I despise.


RIGO. Notwithstanding, here is all things fair, and as it appears
commodiously buylt.


CONO. For my part, I build my house, as they say, according to my purse,
agreeable to my calling, and to my living. I will show you in order how I have
cast it, following the advice of Iscomachus in Xenophon, whom Cicero does
greatly commend. And first, The order of building of a house for the Country.
the seat of my house has moved me to build it after this sort. Cato would
have a man long in determination to build, but to plant and sow out of hand.
Our fathers herebefore observed the same, and seemed to follow the counsel of
Cato and Columella, with whom agrees also Pliny, that the owner build his
house in good order, so as neither the house be to great for the land, nor the
land to much for the house. And herein it is written, that L. Lucullus, and
Qu. Scaeuola were both to blame: for one of them had a greater house then was
answearable to his living: the other, which was Scaeuola, built a smaller house
then his living required, where both are unprofitable to the master. For the
great ruinous house, not only is more chargeable in buildyng, but also asks
greater cost in the maintayning. Again, if the house be to little, it will be a
destruction and loss of your Corn and fruit: therefore is it greatly to
purpose, in what sort we build and ordeyne our house. Cato would have the house
so seated, as the air be good about it, The seat of a house.
and (if it may be) placed at the bottom of a hill, looking directly South,
and in a wholesome corner. Varros mind is, to have it placed toward the East,
that it may have the shadow in Summer, and the Sun in Winter: with whom
Columella agrees, saying, that if ability serve, the seat is to be wyshed
in a wholesome place (for Cato as shall hereafter be showed, would have healthy
standing cheefely regarded) with a fruitful moulde, some part of it champion,
some hilly, lying East or South, well watered and woodded, and standing not
far of from some haven, or nauigable river, to the end he may carry and
transport such things as him lists. Cornelius Tacitus writes, that the
Germans were wont to build their houses, as the Hill, the River, the Wood, or
the Lake, would best suffer them.


RIGO. Hereof I think sprang at the first so many surnames as are at this day
derived from Mountains, Rivers, Lakes, and Wooddes.


CONO. It may be, yet others do counsel, in no case to set your house near
a Marshe, or a great River: for the Fennes and Marshes in the heat of the
year, do send forth pestilent and deadly dampes, and a great number of
venomous Creatures: which dying, for lack of their old moystoure, infecteth
the air, and breeds sundry and strange diseases. Homer affyrmeth very
truly, that the air which in the morning comes from the River, is very
unwholesome and dangerous: and therefore if the house must needs be built near
a River, they would have such heed taken, as the River rather stand on the
backside of the house, then before it: and that the frunt of the house be
turned from the hurtful and unwholesome wyndes, and placed toward the
healthiest quarters. Sins all waters commonly with dampishe vapors in Summer,
and stinking cold mystes in Winter, except they be well purged with wholesome
Winds, do infect both man and beast with pestilence: best is it therefore in
good and healthy places, to set the house toward the East, or the South, and in
suspected airs to place them against the North. From the Sea it is good to be
as far as may be, because the winds that blow from the Sea, are unwholesome,
and the space lying betwixt you and it, yeeldes always a loathsome air. You
must beware besides, that you see not your house by any great hie way, least
you be molested with passingers, and troubled often times with more ghestes
then you would have.


RIGO. As far as I remember, the old fellows did measure the goodness of
their dwelling, Neighborhood.
by the qualities of their neighbors.


CONO. You say very well, in deed I had almost forgotten it, a froward knave
to a man's neighbor, is not one of the least mischiefs, as shall be said in the
end of this book. I have known sundry good men desirous of quietness, that
have forsaken good dwellinges, rather then they would abide the injuries and
troubles of such companions: wherefore Hesiodus had some reason in saying,
(...). As great a mischief is a froward knave,
As is the joy a neighbor good to have.
But you maruayle what I mean by such a long preamble, surely I am the longer
in this matter, because you should understand the reason of building of my
house. For whereas there are sundry purposes of building, and some build for
pleasure, some for wantonness, and some for necessity, I thought it good to
resyte the minds of the old writers, concerning the building of a house. And
when as every one will not suffer such curiosity as they require in ye
placing of a house, some building upon Rivers, some without or within the
Marshe walls, who can not shun the neighborhood of the River or the Sea,
some in Lakes, some in Wooddes, and some building upon mountains, are driven
to supply the defect of nature with art and industry, I me self sith I can
by no means avoid the neerenesse of the River, do seek as much as in me
lies, to turn away the discomodities: and because I feel the discomoditie of
the rising of the flooddes, I have set my house in this place without the
banks, and mounted it as hie as I could: and least the rage of the water, and
force of the ice should bear it away, I have planted round about it great
trees: and that I might shun the dampes of the ground, and the blastes of
unwholesome winds, I have turned my doors and my windows to the holsomest
quarters.


RIGO. Surely, either you, or your ancestors have both commodiously and
handsomely placed this house, for ye front is double, one part looking toward
ye East, the other toward the South, and so built with Galeries and Gables, as
it both receives the Sun in Winter, and the shadow in Summer: besides, you
have a fair Porche as you enter in, that keeps away the wind and the rain
from the door.


CONO. All the one side, if you mark it, where the front is, lies South,
receyuyng from the first corner, the rising of the Sun in Winter, declining
somewhat from the West, whereby it is warm in Winter, and not troubled with
over great heat in Summer: for this kind of building has an equal medlie of
the Winter winds and Summer winds, so that it receives the cool winds in
Summer, and is not subject to the bitter blastes in Winter, though there be
something in it that might be amended, and that does not well please me.


RIGO. Some part of the building, me thinks, is after the Italian manner.


CONO. Some part of it, being ruinous, I built after my fancy, and such as I
found sound, I thought yenough for me to keep the reparations.


RIGO. I pray you proceed with the describing of the rest. This base court
seems also to me to be after the Italian fashion with two gates.


CONO. This Court I thus devised me self. Here was a kind of Court before,
but not so commodious: therefore I made a square wall here with a great gate,
for the bringing in of my cariages, and a lesser for people to pass in and
out. In the void place here besides the porche, I have made a little walk,
covered with a Uine, with diverse seats in it for shadow, where I many times
walk and talk with such suitors as I have: I have in it a table of stone to
suppe upon when I am disposed. Oueragaynst the gate, as you see, at the South
side of the Court, there is a Backhouse, and a Cornemill, with Ouens for bread,
and other baked meats, there is also a Brewehouse with an Oast for drying of
Malt to make Beer with.


RIGO. Surely all very handsome, and in very good order.


CONO. These offices (for fear of fire) you see, are all severed from the
house: there is hereunto adjoining a very fair well, which besides the service
here, does also serve my Kitchen, and other houses of office: for within the
house, I have neither well nor fountain, which is a great discommoditie, such
as I would give a great deal of money to remedy, both for health and
coolness in Summer, and for watring my Gardens and my Orchardes. Water is one
of the principalest things to be cared for, as the greatest cause of health
both in man and beast: but this want is supplied partly by a good well without,
and partly by Sesternes receiving the rain water that falls in certain
Conduites and pipes, which water is most wholesome for the body: and beside, the
River is not far of.


RIGO. Come on I pray you, let us see this Backhouse, I hear that you have a
new and a strange fashioned Mill of your own deuise^


CONO. You shall see it. When as in a great house, there is great need of
Corn Mylles, and the common Milles, being fair of, the way foul, and I at
mine own liberty to grind at home, or where I list, thinking to make a mill
here at home, when neither place nor authority will serve me to build either
a water mill or a wind mill, and a querne, or a hand mill, does but a little
good: and to build a horse mill were more troublesome. When I saw the wheels
that they use to draw water with, turned with Asses or men, I thought in the
like sort the wheel of a mill might be turned, and after this sort devised I
this engine, which a couple of Asses, guided by a boy, do easilye turn, and
make very fine meal, sufficient for mine own house, and most times for my
neighbors, whom I suffer to grind toll free.


RIGO. Surely I like well your devise. What will not the diligence of man bring
to pass?


CONO. I find it profitable unto me, but because it is not the speediest way
of grinding, I have beside a horse mill, which if need require, is turned
about with a Jade or two.


RIGO. Lo here is a great lead placed handsomely in a Brick furnace in the
corner, which I think serves to brewe with all.


CONO. In deed to that end is it most occupied, but it serves other turns
beside.


RIGO. There is a Hopper (me thinks) over the top of the Oast, whereto
serves it?


CONO. It serves to convey down the Malt, after it is watered unto the hear
cloth, where it is dried.


RIGO. Wherefore serves that great Tonne?


CONO. To water the Barley in when need is, otherwise it serves for a
Mashfatte. Hereby is a Backhouse and a Pastrie with two Ouens, one serving for
householde bread, the other for manchet for mine own table, and for Tartes and
fine baake-meates. Here are also troughes to keep meal in, and troughes to
lay leaven in, and there is a fair table to mould upon.


RIGO. All is handsome: but what means this building about your Court?


CONO. These buildinges severed from the rest, do serve for gheste chambers,
with a chamber for my hot house: this side you see lies against the setting
of the sun in Summer, where the sun may lie from noone till night.


RIGO. But that little I Will moated about, and severed from the court with a
Bridge, seems to be more gorgeously and sumptuously built, I take it to be
your own lodging, where you, your wife, and your servants mean to lie safely.


CONO. It is even so, and therefore it is built upon a higher ground, both for
the safeguard of the fundation, and for the better air and fayrer prospect:
beside, my Garden and my Orchard are ad^oyning to it, which with the sweet
smell of the ^loures, and the fair beauty of the trees, brings both health
and pleasure. The wyndowes for the most part open al East, and some of them
North, very few West, except from such Chambers or Galleries Southward, where
I dyne and suppe, to receive the sun in Winter abundantly, and in Summer very
little: the Tower that you see serves for my Douehouse.


RIGO. The great flyghtes of this house must needs fill the masters purse,
and serve the Kitchen well.


CONO. In deed, if as that noble and passing well learned Varro affyrmeth,
they might be sold as in some ages they have been at eight pound a pair, or
that a man might meet with such fools, as Columella writes of, that have
given 40. pound for a pair, I grant I could make a good handsome gain of
them, but as they be, they hardly serve mine own table.


RIGO. What does not the mad desire of delicasie procure? even in our days
of late I have heard, there was threescore Florens given for a pair.


CONO I will keep you no longer here about mine own lodging, you have seen a
great number of better houses, and paraduenture had rather over look my
outhouses.


RIGO. I had so in deed, you have, I see, divided your house into three parts.


CONO. So I thought it best, one for me self, an other for my husbandmen, and
the third for grain and fruit^.


RIGO. What means this Cell here so handsomely built at the entrance?


CONO. This is sir, my Bayliffes lodging, I lay him by the Gate, that he may
see who goes in and out, and what is brought and goes forth, from thence he
may also look in^o the Kitchen, and see and hear what is there done: for
beside the meat that is dressed, there are other things done there in the
Winter morninges. Over my Gate I have laid my Steward, from whence he may
look into the Court, and to the Gate, and ouersee his neighbor the Bailey.


RIGO. Mary sir here is watch and ward in deed, this I think you learned of
Varro, for it is a part of his order.


CONO. Thus experience teaches. Hereby is my storehouse.


RIGO. Merciful God, what a sort of tools have you here?


CONO. Hesiodus would have a husband have all his furniture ready, and will not
have him borowe in any case. (...),
(...).
Of others borovve not, lest they refuse to lend,
So thou shall want, the time shall pass, and business never end.
Therefore I have so furnished my Bailiffe, as he has of every sort two.
Marcus Varro deuideth his husbandry necessaries into three parts: vowels,
where he puts his own servants, and such as he hyreth: half vowels, where
his woorking cattle be: and mutes, be these that you see, whereof the smaller
sort be these, Axes, Hatchettes, and Sithes, of all sorts, Corn Sithes,
Grass Sithes, Stubble Sithes, Handbils, Syckles, Knives, Peasehookes, Spades,
Shouels, Wedges, Draggehookes, great Sawes, ^e^^er Sawes, Handsawes,
Timbersawes, Pitch-forkes, Iron hooks, Iron forkes, Twybilles, Dung forkes,
Tongues, Sheares, Sysars, Mattockes, Fyles, Cleauers, Claspea, Lance^^,
Stringes, Cutting knives, Gelding tools, Clipping sheares, Leauers, Presses,
Rulers, Garden Rakes, Hammers, Ch^ppe (...), Winches, Pulleys, Wheels, Rakes,
single and double, Yokes, Collers, Bridse reins, Headst^lles, Halters,
^raaces, Cords, Ha^nes, Baskets, Fannes, ^^hippes, Fidels, Strikes, Spoakes,
Drawyng knives, S^cks, Walks, Bottels, Weed hooks, Brakes, Hemp be^elles,
Du^a^es, Spundelles, Wharles, Fyreshouels, Fyre-stones, G^ed^o^ns, Handbarowes,
Dung Carts, Wheelebarowes, Maundes, Hampers, Ropes, and Line, of all sorts.
The so^^es and parts of P^owes and Waynes, I will show you when we (...) into
the court next the Heybarne^ Hogsheds, Tonnes, and Uessels, for Wine, Beer,
and Water, Pipes, Tonne^s, and such like, shall likewise be showed you, when
you come to the Brewhouse, and Windsel^er. With Co^erakes, Siues, S^rc^rs,
Boul^ing rubbes, Bou^^ars, that you shall see in the Backhouse, and
instruments for all other purposes, laid up every one in his place, till they
be to be occupied: for it is very necessary to have of every sort two, as the
number of your servants and necessity requires: that if one be lost or
broken, you be not driven to go a borowyng, or to leave your work, whereby
your men shall be idle, while your tools be a seeking. For to run every day to
the Town to get new, is not for a husbands profile. Beside, in the mean time
your servants ^oyter, and lose more then the value of their tools.


RIGO. Truly they be all placed in good order.


CONO. I place first by them selves, such as are most in use, that they may be
the redier, and next to them, such as be occupied once in a month, or in a
year: I give the keeping of them al by ^ale, to my steward or my bayliffe,
that they may deliver them out as need is, and lay them up again, and charge
them in any case to look to them every month, that they may mend what is
amiss in them.


RIGO. Order is a jolly fellow, and no goodlier a thing in a man, then to do
every thing orderly, and to ^ay up every thing in such order, as it may redily
be found, of which a singular example does Iscomachus show (...) Xenophon, in
his Phenician bark, wherein a wonder it is to see what a deal of stuff he
has bestowed in so small a vessel: he carried with him all the furniture that
a man should need, and every thing in such order placed, as they were at hand
when need was, without any trouble.


CONO. I me self have an inventory of all my husbandry implementes, and so
has my Bailey and his Wife, my steward has the key of the storehouse, and
delivers out, and receaues as I told you, what every man needs: for I
wyllyngly neither borowe nor lend: I have a neighbor or twain, of whom
sometime I borowe, and send again: but except them, to none as Cato teaches
me.


RIGO. The same Cato also as I remember, teaches to know a man's husbandry by
his tools, and therefore by your great number of tools, a man may guess you
have a great deal of occupying.


CONO. The double number of them makes the muster the greater: otherwise, if
they were but to serve the turn, they would not seem so many.


RIGO. I pray you go forward with your description.


CONO. You see a void room before the Kitchen, which is an entry both to the
Kitchen, to the folks Chamber, and to the Oxhouses, which ought to be near
together, if any missefortune should happen to the cattle in the night, that
my men might speedely help them.


RIGO. The Kitching is very well handled, The Kitchen.
in that you have so well pargetted the rooffe.


CONO. It is because I have a great number of servants, which for lack of
other room, do dine and suppe here: beside, the pargetting or seeling, is a
good safety against fire.


RIGO. Here is a good handsome roosse by the Chimney, well stored with read
Hearing, Bacon, and Marulmas beef, there is also a handsome sincke by the
Kitchen.


CONO. This lettised wall that you see, joins to my Bayliffes chamber, so
that he may see what is done in the Kitchen, and about the house. Larder.
Hereunto is also joined my Larder, a vault with three rooms, one serving for
Butter and Milk, the other for Beer and Wine, the third for to keep ^leshe
in: here have I no wyndowes to the South, nor to the West, but all to the
North, and to the East, because these quarters are least subject to corruption,
Corneloft.
and will longest preserve any thing. Above in the loft yonder, do I lay my
corn upon a fair floor, closely fenced and seeled against Mise, receiving
the light by lattisse windows from the North. Hard by, is an other loft very
close, with like windows toward the North, Appleloft.
serving for my fruit: for that quarter is cold, and not moist, whereby it
preserues best, both Meat, Corn, and fruit. Now if you will go through
this door, you may behold the backside of my house: lo here a fair
threasshing floor, whereupon my Corn is sundry times threasshed, fan^ed, and
winnowed, and many other things done, cheefely in the Winter morninges,
though I have beside a threasshing place in my barn. On each side, are
lodginges for my servants, and other rooms and loftes for straw and fodder
for my cattle: and there by the stables, are also servants lodginges on every
side, and my maids chamber near the Kitchen, and the wasshing house. You see
this forestall closed round about, to the end that the cattle, when they be
watered and putforth, while their houses be made clean, may be in safety. And
here I keep also Geese, Duckes, Peacocks, Turkicockes, and other poultry. It
is as you see, so enclosed with stables, barnes, and other houses, that nothing
can get out. Varro will in any case have two courts, an inner court with a
little pond in it of standing w^ter, or running water, in manner of a Fishepond,
and there he would have Horse and Oxen, coming from the Feelde, or stable, to
be watered and washed, and to serve likewise for Sheep, Swyne, and Geese. In
the utter court would he have a Lake to cart in wheels, staves, and pieces of
timber, for instruments of husbandry, that they might there be seasoned. This
court he would have often strawed with straw, and Chafe, that being trampled
with cattle, it may serve to lay upon the ground. You see in this court a
double dounghil, one of them newely thrown out of the stables, an other old
one serving for the Feelde: for new doung is nothing so good as the old, for
manuring of the ground.


RIGO. What means these twigges, bows, and strawes, cast upon the doung?


CONO. This preserues the doung, that the juice that ye ground requires, be not
sucked out of the sun: and hither also runs the water from the Laundry to
moist it the better. Varro would have here also a lodging for servants. But
lest we tarry to long among the dounghilles, let us go see the other
buildinges about the Court. These great rooms that you see, Barnes.
be Barnes to la^^ Corn in. In some places they use houses, in others again,
stackes set upon proppes, which they call mowes: but the houses are a great
deal better. Next to the Barnes, are the stables, Stable^.
standing arowe round about the Court. And because Virgil would have the
stable stand toward the south, and Vitrunius, near the fire, I have followed
their order in building my stables. And first have I set here my stable for my
Cart horse. I have an other stable near mine own lodging, for my Horses of
service, and Hackneyes.


RIGO. That seems to be very handsomely built.


CONO. The next are houses for my sheep, and next them for Kine, Calves, and
Heyfers. There is a Hogstie with two rooms, one for my farrowyng sowes, the
other for Hogs and Bores. There is also a third stie, not far from the
washouse, for the fatting of my Porkes: every kind has their keepers lying
near them, that they may be at hand whatsoever chances. Last of all there
stands my Heybarne, which has in the upper rooms my Hey, and beneath, Waynes,
Carts, Carres, Wagons, Coaches, Harrowes, Sledes, Plowes, Rowlers, Wheels,
Naues, Cartshooes, Yokes, Rakes, Plowbeames, and such other like, which are
there safe from wet, and from pilferers.


RIGO. I pray you who does look to all this gear, and keeps every man to
his work?


CONO. My Bayliffe, as I told you before, ouerseeth both my work and my
woorkemen: besides, I have ^ Steward that looks to the receiving of my
revenues and commodities.


RIGO. Your Bayliffe had need to be a skillful and a trusty man.


CONO. You say true, for as Xenophon says, the choice of a Bayliffe and a
Physician ought to be one: you must choose such a one, The cho^se of a
^^^^iffe o^ ^u^bandry.
as being a very expert husbandman, may well be able to take the charge, and
not to be ignorant of those things him self, that he commands others to
do: for nothing is well taught or learned, without example. For as Cato says
of a husband of the old stamp, it goes ill with that master whom the
Bayliffe must teach. As Iscomachus being demanded of Socrates, whether he
would buy a Bailey, as he would hire a Smith, or rather teach him him self
at home? He answered, he would have him of his own teaching.


RIGO. But this is after the old world, wherein no man was unskillful: but it
is a wonder, how you that have always been brought up in Princes affairs,
could in these days (when very few, except Plowmen, and such as have no other
trade of life, have any skill in it) apply your mind so unto it, as a man would
think you had never minded any other profession.


CONO. Surely I think he shall never have a good Baylye, that is not able him
self to judge skilfully of him: nor let him ever think to have his work well
done, that knows not how nor which way things ought to be done, but must
be feign to learn of his man: for the^e is none can judge of a work but a
woorkeman. Therefore in the choice of a Bayliffe, What things ough^ ^o be in a
Bayliffe o^ husbandry.
I would have four things cheefely considered: that he be loving, diligent,
meet to rule, and trusty: and if you will add a fyft, I am well contented,
that is, that he be not given to drunkenness: for a drunkenman loses with
his memory the regard of his duty. I do not enquire whether he have been
brought up ciuilly or deyntely, but I would have him a hard fellow, brought
up from his childehood to labor, and one that were thoroughly well skilled, of
a mean age, that he be not vnwylling to work for youth, nor unable to
crauayle for age. I would have him have some skill in Carpentrie, that if there
happened to be any thing broken about his Stables, his Carts, or any other his
instruments, he might speedely mend them, and that he could mend Walls and
Hedges. I would have him also not unskillful in y^ diseases of cattle: such a
one as has been brought up with skilful husbands, will prove meetest to have
charge. For there be a great number, that though they be skillful yenough in
their profession, yet have they not government in them: but either using to
much sharpness, or to much gentleness toward such as be under them, do
hinder the profit of their master, and therefore I would have a Bayliffe
well tried before he be taken: neither is it only to be sought, whether he be
skillful in this craft, but whether he be trusty and loving to his master,
without which, he is not worth a rushe, though his skill be never so great.
And cheefely, he must be skillful in this, to know what work is meetest for
every man: for some works require strength more then skill, and others,
otherwise. And therefore in appointing of these, he ought to have great
judgment and good discretion, which he can not have, except he have good
skill. Therefore a Bayliffe is as well to be taught as a Smith, or a Carpenter:
and the knowledge of husbandry is greater and of more difficulty. Wherefore I
marueyle, that in this so necessary an occupation, there are found so few
masters and prentices.


RIGO. Perhaps the tediousness and hardness thereof drives them away.


CONO. Why have not Orators been likewise driven away, for hitherto as Cicero
says, there has been no perfect Orator found.


RIGO. Of whom would you have your Bayliffe to be taught?


CONO. Your question is good, I will show you, though very few have taught
what belongs to a husband in all things, neither shall you find many
skillful in every point. Therefore he that shall be a Baylie, must be taught by
degrees, he must first begin when he is a child, The traynyng of a Bayliffe.
with keeping of Sheep or Swyne, and when he is elder, with droues of cattle,
and keeping of horse: he must learn next to dig, to threashe, to set, to
sow, to hedge, to build, to mend such things as are broken, to play the
butcher, to give drinks and medicines to sick cattle, and such other like
things. And thus must he proceed from one to an other, till having passed
them all, he come to be a master, even as Gregory Nazianzen teaches of a
Bishop, and as Tully would have a general, after he has borne all other
offices of the feelde.


RIGO. You show me wonderful Philosophy.


CONO. As I said at the first, his best age is betwixt thirty and threescore:
for the flames of lusty youth beginning to abate, he will not be so hot in
his wooing: for while he folowes that game, he will have no mind but of his
minion, neither shall any reward be so welcome unto him, as the fruit of his
fancy, nor any grief so great to him, as the failing of his desire. If he
once pass threescore, he waxes slothful and unable to labor. For I had
rather have the work of a painful and diligent Bayliffe, then the service
of a great number of slouthful lubbers: as he that had rather have a Lion
captain over Hearts, then a Heart captain over Lions. This must cheefely be
looked unto (sins early going to work is a great matter) that the Bailiffe be
a good riser, and that, supplying his masters place, he may be the first up in
the morning, and the last that goes to bed, and that he see the doors fast
locked, and every man in bed, that the cattle have meat yenough, and be well
littured, that he set forward, according to the time of the year, such as do
loyter in their labor, that he him self go lustely before, that he suffer no
man after it is day to lagge behind, but that they follow the Bayliffe lustely
with a courage, as if he were their captain in a skirmishe: and that he use
sundry devises to cheer them up in their labor, sometime as it were to help
him that faints, to take his tool out of his hand, and labor lustely before
him. And as a careful shepherd early carrying out his sheep, and bringyng
them home late, looks that he leave none of his flock behind him: so
likewise ought a good Bailiffe to carry out his men, and to have good regard
over them. If any of them happen to be hurt or sick, let him look to the
dressing of them, and if they be very sick, to carry them to the sick folks
lodging, and to see that they be well ordered: and to that use have I built
yonder house that you see, removed from the other buildinges, that the sick
may be had thither and looked unto, specially if their diseases be contagious,
lest other should be infected. It is the masters duty to have such regard
of the health of his servants, and to have such care of them, that their
sickness may be prevented by good medicines and good looking to: as to see
that their meat and drink be wholesome and good, and given in due season:
beside, that the Bailiffe eat his meat with them, and not by him self,
whereby it shall be the better ordered. And because Physicians are not always at
hand in the Country, it behooves to use such remedies as experience has
taught, and such as have helped others of like diseases. Those that labor in
the Sun (because the Sun hurts the body and the veins) their diet must
be the thinner, that they make not to great meals, but eat little and often:
this order keeps them in health, and helps digestion. Some do use to give
Woormewood wine, or potage made of Woormewood. It is very necessary for them
sometimes to re^reate them selves, so that in the mean while they give not
them selves to noughtinesse. There must be heed taken, that they drink not
when they be hot, nor lie upon the cold ground: if their water be not good,
it must be well purified. It is very good also to let them drink Barley water.
We must remember that servants be men: besides, such good looking to, will
breed a greater good will and duty, and lightly they will serve the
faythfuller and better when they have their health, which have had good
cherishing in their sickness: and besides (which is not so well observed in
greater governors) the Bayliffe must beware that he deal not to cruelly, nor
to gently with them, that he always make much of those that be diligent and
painful, that he be not to hasty with the woorser sort, that they may rather
reverence him for his severity, then hate him for his cruelty, which he
shall easily bring to pass, if he rather beware that they offend not, then
after their offense to late to punish them. For there is none so good a bridle
for an evil disposed person, as to let him always be occupied. So that Catoes
saying herein is most true, that men in doing nothing, learn to do evil.
Let them have their allowance and their meat in due season, let them always
feed together in one place, and the Bayliffe with them, that he may be an
example to them of all thriftinesse. If he ^inde any of them to have labour^d
painefully and t^uely, let him give them a good countenance, and encourage them
with rewards, to make them the wyllinger to do their duties beside, let him
look that they be rather well clothed, then curio^^^^ apparelled, that their
garments may keep them from the cold and the rain: let their wages be well
paid them, that the what thereof be no excuse for them to lo^^er in their
labor. And as meat and apparel is necessary for them, so likewise is
correct^on. For the wise man says, Give a Horse the whip, an Ass the
sn^^^ell, and a Fool the rod. And again, He that deals to gently with his
servants, shall make them in the end stubborn and froward. Above all things
let him see that they fear God, let him in no wise suffer them to swear or to
blaspheme, nor to use filthy or ungodly speech: but let him provide that they
be instructed in the Catechism, that they use prayer, that they go to Sermons
upon the holy days, and receive the Sacraments at times appointed, that they
be not hunters of Alehouses or evil company. For as the Poet says, It is
lawful to be well occupied, even on the Festival days. When they have served
GOD, and dyned, let them walk abroad in the ground, let them look there be no
cattle in the Corn, and stop such Gappes as they find open, and look
that their cattle be in safety abroad. To be short, the Bayliffe must in all
these matters be as it were a Bishop, or a master of the works, so shall
every man the better do the work that belongs unto him. The Bailyffe must
never be from their heels, least in his absence they fall to loytering,
neither must he suffer them any time to be idel: he him self must not be given
to drinking or gaming, nor to huntyng or fysshing, except for his masters
profit: let him very seeldome enterteyne any ghestes, except they be of his
masters re^inewe: let him not bestow his masters money about his own
merchandise, for such kind of bargainyng makes him the slacker in his duty,
and makes his accomptes seeldome fall out just. Above all things this is to
be wisshed in the Bayliffe, that he do not think him self wyser then his
master, or suppose him self to have more skill then he has, and that he
always seek to learn such things as he is ignorant of. For as it is very
profitable to do any thing skilfully, so is it more hurtful to do it
untowardly. Columella had rather have a Bailiffe that could neither read nor
write, so that his memory be good: for such a Bailiffe (says he) will oftener
bring his master money, then a book: because (not able to write) he can not
so easily frame a false account. The Bailiffes wife must always be with him,
The Bayliffes wife.
that she may keep him from running at rouers, and may help him in his
labors: her age must be such also, as we required in the Bailiffe before, she
must be painful, healthy, careful, and honest. she must not be to
ylfauoured, lest she be loathsome unto him, nor to beautiful, least he doat to
much upon her, and keep home when he should be abroad. She must in the
mean time look to the ^itchin, and to other works at home, govern the
maids, and keep them at their work, look to their necessaries, and give
them their allowance.


RIGO. You seem to me here, to make the Bailiffe a master, and the master a
Bailiffe.


CONO. This age of ours, quite corrupted with delicacie and deyntinesse, little
regards the honest and profitable orders of our forefathers: for in those
days the masters them selves plaide the husbands, and thought it not to go
well with that master that must be taught by his Bailiffe, as Cato witnesses,
and Varro also complains, that the husbands in his days had forsaken the
Plowe and the Sith, and gotten them selves within the walls, and spent their
time rather in Maygames and Midsommer sightes, then with tylling the ground, or
planting of Uines. Therefore Cato and the old writers do attribute many
things to the master, that we assign to the Bailiffe. And I, though I seem
to put the charge of the household in the hands of my Bailiffe, yet will I me
self be ouerseer, and have every thing done as I appoint, entreating gently
(as I taught the Bailiffe before) both the Bailiffe and my laborers, regardyng
more their labor then my gaynes. But I carry you about to long, being
fasting, I pray you let us go to dinner: you shall not dyne at the Court to
day, neither meant I to show you, as you see, the palace of Lucullus, but the
poor cottage of Cincinatus, Abdolominus, or Laertes. Here you see the rooms
for my husbandmen, severed from mine own house, but yet so, as I may easily
see whatsoever they do. Here I and my wife with our householde servants do
lie.


RIGO. All very excellently well as may be, there is nothing wanting that is to
be wished for. Maistresse METELLA, you trouble your self to much, like
Martha, about the providing of your dinner.


METELLA. Not a whit sir, you must be contented with Country fare, you shall
neither have read Dear, Marchpane, nor Sturgian, nor any Courtiers fare: but
an Egg, and a Sallet, a Pullet, or a piece of Lamb.


RIGO. This diete contenteth me above all other.


CONO. Fall to it then, and tell me how you like our country wine.


RIGO. Surely it passes either wine of Orleans, or Aniow. I did not think to
have found so good a cup of wine in these quarters.


CONO. The husbandry, and good season of the year does yield the same.


RIGO. Well, we sit to long at dinner. The weather being so fair and so
pleasant abroad, it is ashame to sit any longer, but to walk out and look
upon your ground.


CONO. The weather being fair, you bring a Horse to the Feelde (as they say)
when you speak to me of going abroad: for I me self, if the weather or
business do not let me, am every day, according to Catoes counsel, abroad in
my ground: and if it please you, I will carry you abroad and show you my
ground. You must not look to see the great Countries of Metellus or Lucullus,
but the possessions of a poor Country man, that contented with his state,
would be as he is, and would not change lives with the Emperor.


RIGO. Of the tyllyng and husbanding of the ground.
I pray you let me here your opinion of the Feeld, and the tilture thereof: for
I see you are a perfect husband, and nothing unskillful. I have a great desire
to hear some rules, and such as serve our turn best.


CONO. If it be a shame for an apprentice at the law, and a pleadar of causes
to be ignorant of the law wherein he deals, a greater shame is it for a
professor of husbandry, to be unskillful in the ground whereon his whole trade
lies. How is he able to judge uprightly in husbandry, that knows not which
way to till his land? The professors of all other arts, do commonly keep to
them selves, such things as be the chief mysteries of their knowledge. The
good nature of the husbandman.
Contrariwy^e, the husband rejoices to have every body made prime to his
skill, and being demanded in what sort he does this and that, he gladly
declares his whole dealing in every point: such good natured men does this
knowledge make. I have ordered my ground here, according to the diligence of
the old fathers, rather then for the wantonness of these times. Therefore I
will first show you their opinions, and afterward mine own fancy. First,
Cato appoints niene degrees of the land in Italy. The degrees and sorts of
ground.
The first, the Uineyard, that yields much and good wine: the next, the well
watered Garden: the third the Wyllowe Grove: the fourth, for Olive trees: the
fifth, for Meddowe: the sixth, Corn ground: the seventh, for Coppie ground:
the eight, for Timber trees: the last, for Mast. But these degrees as Varro
says, are not generally allowed of, neither have we the use of them all in
these Countries: but make most account of such land, as serves for Garden or
Orchard ground, Corn, or Fishpondes. Of Corn ground I will first entreat,
and afterward of Pasture, Meddowe, Wood Land, and Wyllowe Groves.


RIGO. I pray you then take the pains to show the nature of it, Of Corn^
ground.
and which way the best ground may be known.


CONO. Cato counts that the best ground, that lies at the foot of a
mountain, being level and lying toward the Sun, as the whole Country of
Italy lies. In cold and Norther^ye Countries, it is good to have the land
lying East and South, least these two quarters, being bard of by any hill, the
land be frozen with cold: but in hot Countries it is better to have the
ground lie North, both for pleasure and health.


RIGO. They say it is needeful to know the conditions of every ground.


CONO. It is so, and sooner shall you do it, then the conditions of a man: for
being well tylled, it will not deceive you, but deal justly with you. To know
the nature of every ground, Iscomachus in Xenophon, does will you to mark
well the plants and the yield of the Country, How to know the goodnese of
the ground.
except you will loose your labor or fight with God. Varro counsels you to
look whether there be in the land either Stone, Marble, Sand, Gravel,
Raddell, Chalk, Claye, Preble, or Carbuncle, that is ground over heated and
parched with the Sun, which will burn the roots of what so ever comes in
it. Also if it be wette or weepyng ground, or subject unto other
inconveniences, and such ground also, according to the nature of the soil,
is good or evil. In some Countries stony ground is altogether barren,
specially for Corn and Fruit. In other places again, they use stones in the
manuring and bettring of their land, as in certain places of Arden is to be
seen. Theophrascus writes, that the Corynths did cast away all the stones out
of the Feeldes of Sarragosa, and thereby made the ground the worse, when, the
stones being away and the Country hot, there was no succor left to defend the
ground from the extreme heat of the Sun. In other places in stony and
hilly grounds Otes do prosper well. In like sort, in all Countries we must
regard the layre of the Country, and the nature of the seed that we sow:
for Gravel in some places is cast upon the ground in stead of doung, and
some things prosper best in gravely grounds. In Barbary (as Columella does
w^tnesse) the very rotten sands exceed any other ground in fruitefulnesse.
It is also something to the purpose, whether the gravel be white, read, or
yellowe: besides, some ground does deceive both with color and quality. In
some Countries the black mould is only esteemed: in others, the fat read
mould is thought best. In England, the chalkie ground bears good corn, and
pastures very well. In some places the thick and the clammie ground is most
fruitful. In all these it is to be learned, what is best for the hill ground,
what for the valley, what for the tylled, what for the leye ground, what the
moist seggie ground requires, and what the dry and barraine. Also in
planting, what ground is best for Uines, what for other trees, what delights
in dry ground, what in moist ground. Virgil commends a mellowe ground that
is fat, and will soon be resolved, for such ground is tylled with smalest
charge and labor: the next, is that which is fa^^e and stiff, which greatly
recompenceth the husband his travail and charges: the woorst, is that which
is dry, lean, and stiff: for both it is tylled with great labor, and beside,
neither answeareth in his croppe the husbands travail, neither serves it for
good meddowe or pasture any time after, and therefore such ground is not to be
meddled withal. Also, the goodness of the ground is easily perceived by
perfect tokens: for a clod sprinkled with a little water, Signs of the
goodness of the ground.
if in working with the hand it be clammie, and cleaving, and sticks to the
fyngers like Pitche, when it is handled as the Poet says, and breaks not in
falling to the ground, this shows a natural fatness and richenesse to be
in it: besides, you may know the mould that is good for Corn, if it bear
Bulrusshes, Thistels, Threeleaued grass, Danewoort, Brambles, Blackthorne, and
such like, as never grow but in good ground: as on the other side, loathsome
and illfauoured weeds, declare a lean and a bitter ground: Fern, and
withered plants, a cold ground: sad, and heavy colored, a moist and a
wette ground: a raddell and a stony ground, is discerned by the eye, a stiff
and tough clay, by the labor and toil of the Oxen. A good token is it also of
good ground, where the Crows and the Pyes follow in great number the Plowe,
scraping in the steps of the Plowman. The goodness is likewise known, if at
the Sun setting, after a Raynebowe, and in a shewre of rain following a great
drouthe, it yields a pleasant savor: also in taste it will appear, if
tasting a clodde that has been watered in an earthen vessel, you find it
sweet, it is a sign of rich ground, if bitter, a great token of barren
ground, if it be saltishe, it is to be shunned, and not to be used upon the
dounghill. You must remember also, that ground will some times change, and of
fruitful become barren, Ground will change.
which has been seen, as Pliny reports, in the old time in Thessali, and
in our time, in sundry places of our Country. Beside, one kind of ground,
though it be never so fertile, will not bear all things, as the Poet wisely
note^h, The disposition of the heavens to be obseru^d.
Ne serves one ground for every Croppe. Moreover, the disposition of the
Heavens is a great matter, all Countries have not the weather and air alike:
wherefore it is the part of a good husband to know the nature and property of
his ground, and to mark the disposition of it for every part of the year: he
must also consider what Croppe is best for every layer. Some ground serves for
Corn, some for Uines, some for Olives, some for Meddowe, some for Pasture,
neither may all things well be sown in rich ground, nor nothing in barren
ground. Such things as need not much moisture, are best sowed in light
ground, as the great Elauer, Sperie, Chich, and the other pulses that are
pulled and not cut. Those that require more sustenaunce, are sown in richer
ground, as Pot herbs, Wheat, Rye, Barley, Linseede. Some of them do good
to the ground the year following, as Lupines that are used to be sown for the
be^tering of the ground. There is difference also to be put betwixt fruits
for pleasure, and such as be for profit: as fruit trees and flowers, and
such things as yield both pleasure and sustenanc^, and are also profitable to
the ground. You must choose for Wyllowes, Osyres, and Reeds, a wette and a
marrish ground: and contrary where you will have Come and Pulse, that delights
in dry ground, Sperage and such like, must be sown in shaddowy places, and
other ground for Quicksets, Timber, Mast, and Fuel: yea such ground as is very
gravely and barren, has his use, where you may plant Birche and such like,
and waterie grounds where you may set Alders, Broom, and Bullrusshes.


RIGO. Surely the temperature of the air, does very much in the
fruitefulnesse of the ground, for I have oftentimes marked, that one kind of
ground is more fruiteful in one Country, then in an other.


CONO. In Venefri, the Gravel ground bears Olives best, where as about
Granado, they require the richest ground that may be. When in other places the
Uine does not prosper very well in stony grounds, about the Rhine the very
ragged rocks do yield as fruitful Uines as may be seen. Pliny does
witness, that in some places the Uines do grow even in the Fennes and Marshes,
such a secret force is there in Nature. About Ch^l^ia, an Island about the
Rodes, it is said there is a piece of ground so fruitful, that they mow
their Barley being sown in his season, and their Croppe, sow it again, and
geather it with their other grain. The Albanoyses receive the friuite of their
land (...) untilled and vnsowen, and being once sown, it yields his Croppe
three years together. Homer calls Phrigea (...), and Argos (...). Herodotus
writes, that Babylon is so fruitful, as the ground yields increase two
hundred and three hundred fold. Pliny affyrmeth, the increase in his time to
be fifty, and to good husbands an hundred fold. About Monte Gibello, it is
reported by credible persons, to be an hundred fold. Italy is so fruitful,
Italy, the garden of the world.
that Varro calls it the Garden of the world, because it is so fertile and
well planted in every place: Campania, being full of Corn: Apulia, plenteous
with Wine: and Venafri, aboundyng with oil.


RIGO. I have heard say, that Germany and France have not been in times past
very fertyll, and that they have been altogether without Uines, and now we
see no Country more fruitful, that yields greater abundance of all
things. Where can you find better wines, then about Bauaer and the Rhine? I
speak not of their great store of Grain, The fruitefulnesse of Germany.
Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, and Lead. In the Country of Thuryn in
Germany, it is said, that after Wheat once sown, the ground will yield Rye
of it self two years together.


CONO. Yea, and in our Country here, we have ground that will bear Wheat
every year. Rape seed being once sown with us, does often yield his Crop
two years together, without sowyng or laboring.


RIGO. Under the Northren Pole it is reported the ground is so fertyll, as
they sow in the Morning, and reap at Noone. In Barbarye, The fruitefulnesse
of Barbary.
where the ground is low, they plant under the Date tree the Olive, under the
Olive the Fig tree, under the Fig the Pomegranate, under it the Uine, under
the Uine they sow Wheat, and under Wheat Pulse, all prospering one under the
others shadow, and yielding their fruit the same year.


CONO. That made me to say, that the ground folowes the disposition of the
Heavens.


RIGO. But sith in all places the ground is not of like goodness, what if we
chance upon a lean and a barren ground, as Heathy, Brushy, and Grauelly
ground? may these be made fruitful, and mended by art?


CONO. Uery well, there is no Country that the most gracious Lord has left
without sufficient yield, if labor and travail be not refused.


RIGO. That skill I would gladly understand.


CONO. It is brought to pass diverse ways, principally by dounging and
diligent labor: Of dounging of ground
and to this end serve those heaps of doung that I lately showed you.


RIGO. I pray you let me know what doung does most enriche the ground.


CONO. Varro, and Columella his follower, appoint three sorts of dounges: The
sorts of doung.
the first of Poultrie, the next of Men, the third of Cattle. Of the first
sort, the best is that which is had out of Douehouses, the next is of
Pulleyne, and al other foul, except Geese and Duckes, which is hurtful. The
people in the old age had such store of Poultrie and Foul, as the doung of
them suffised for the manuring of their ground. The next to this, is man ^
ordure, if it be mixed with other rubbishe of the house: for of it self it is
to hot, Vryne
and bur^es the ground. Man's urine being six months kept, and powered upon
the roots of Apple trees and Uines, brings great fru^tefulnesse to the
trees, and gives a pleasant taste to the fruit. In the third place is the
doung of Cattle, whereof the best is the doung of Asses, because this beast
does chawe with most leisure, whereby his meat being well digested, is made
the profitabler doung. Next to this, is the doung of Sheep, next of Goats,
then of Oxen, and Horses: the woorst of all of Swyne, very hurtful to Corn,
but used in some places for Gardens, for lack of other doung, but is a great
breeder of noisome weeds: yet Pliny seems to allow it, as the fylth of a
filthy creature. The doung of Horses likewise, where the Horses are fed with
Barley, does breed great store of weeds. The Lupine before he bear his
Codde, is most commended, being turned up with the Plowe or Mattocke, and laid
in bundels about the roots of Trees or Uines. Where they have no store of
Cattle, they use to mend their ground with Straw and Fern, and with the
stalks of Lupines, and the branches laid together in some Ditch: hereunto
you may cast Ashes, the fylth of Synckes and Priuies, and straw, with dust
and other things raked together: but in the midst, you must lay some sound
matter against the breeding of Adders and Snakes: also Humlockes, Walwoort, and
the weeds growyng about Wyllowe trees and Fern, with other such rotten weeds
you may geather and lay under your Sheep. They that dwell in Gravely and
Heathie grounds, do take the Turues of the Earth and the Heath, and laying
them in heaps powdered with a little doung, suffer them to lie and rotte, and
after lay it upon barren ground, but specially where they keep great store of
Sheep, they cast into their Foldes such Turues pared from the ground.
Columella countes them but evil hu^bandes, that have of every one of the
lesser kind of cattle less then a cart lode of doung in 300. days, and of
each of the greater sort ten load, beside the fylth and dirt of the yard.
This is also to be noted, that the doung that has lain a year is best for
Corn, Old doung best for Corn, and nevve doung for Meddovve.
for it has is of sufficient strength, and breeds less weeds: but upon
Meddowe and Pasture, you must lay the newest, because it bringes most grass,
and this must be done in February, the Moon increasing, for this is the best
time to cause increase of grass. In the manuring of your ground, look that
you lay most doung upon the top of the Hill, for the rain will bear it to
the lower parts fast yenough. He that minds to have his ground bear Corn,
if he mean to sow in the end of Summer, must turn in his doung in
September: if in the spring, he may lay it on at any time all the Winter. The
observing of the VVinde and the Moon, in mending of the ground
What time so ever it be done, you must look that the wind be Westerly, and
the Moon in the wane. This observation helps greatly to the bettering of the
ground. Beside, you must not forget to let the doung be dry before it be laid
upon the ground. For though Columella do bid the contrary, our own
experience wylles us not to follow him: for doung while it is moist, Wet doung
hurtes the feelde.
does more harm to the ground then good, as daily experience teaches. Now
as your land will wax cold, if it be not dounged, so will it be dried or
burnt, if it be manured yearly, or to much. The watrie ground requires more
store of doung, and the dry ground the less.


RIGO. I remember I have yer this seen Earth taken out of the Feeldes near
adjoining, and laid upon the land, I therefore guess, the earth may be
mended with earth.


CONO. The Germans, besides sundry other sorts of enriching of their
grounds, do in stead of doung, cast upon it a kind of pith and fatness of
the earth: ( Pliny countes it to be first devised in England and France)
called Marga, Marle, a fat kind of earth used commonly at this day in diverse
parts of Sussex and ^en^, for the enriching of land.
as it were the fat of the Earth: but I rather think it to be the invention
of the Germans, with whom yet both the name and the use is retained: it is
gotten in deep pittes, but not alike in all soyles. That part of France that
lies upon the Maase, does show a sandy kind of Marle, differing from the
fat Marle of Germany, but of the same quality: which carried upon the Sea
in vessels, is sold as a great merchandise. In some places the skowring of
Pondes and Ditches is used, to the great enriching of the ground, in the
mountaynie and barren grounds. In some Countries they make their land very
fruitful with laying on of Chalk, Chalk used for mending of ground.
as Pliny testifyeth of the Burgundians, and the Gaskoynes. And in Germany in
our days, this manner of mendyng of ground is common. But long use of it, in
the end bringes the ground to be stark naught, whereby the common people
have a speech, that ground enriched with Chalk, makes a rich father, and a
beggarly son. A little lower, not far from the Maase, in the Country of
Lyege, they mende their land with a kind of s^ate stone, which cast upon the
ground does moulder away, and makes the ground fatter. Dounging with ashes.
In Lombardie they like so well the use of ashes, as they esteem it far
above any doung, thinking doung not meet to be used for the vnholsomenesse
thereof. Columella writes, that his Uncle was wont to mende sandy and gravely
grounds with Chalk, and chalkie and hard grounds with gravel and sand,
whereby he had always goodly Corn. So do I think, that River land by
ouerflowynges, and fast ground with mudde mingled with sand and gravel, will
be made much better.


RIGO. You have t^ught me sundry ways of mendyng of ground, I would gladly
now learn the right way of plowyng and sowyng.


CONO. The m^ner of plovving.
In plowyng and orderly preparing ground for seed, consistes the cheifest
point of husbandry. Cato affyrmeth the first point of husbandry, to be to
prepare the ground well, the second, to plowe it well, and the third, to
doung it well. Of plowing and turnyng up the ground, the fashion is diverse,
according to the nature of every soil and country. All great feeldes are
tylled with the Plowe and the Share, the lesser with the Spade. The Plowes are
of sundry fashions, according to the diversity of Countries, some single, some
double, some with wheels, some without. The parts of the Plowe, The parts of
the plow.
are the Tail, the Shelfe, the Beam, the Foot, the Coulter, the Share, the
Wheels, and the Staff. The Share, is that which first cuttes the way for the
Coulter, that afterward turns up the Forowe. Where the ground is light, they
use only a small Share. In Lifflande they have for their Plowe nothing but a
Forke. In Syria, where they can not go very deep, they use (as Theophrastus
writes) very little Plowes. Pliny writes, that wheels for Plowes were
devised by the Frenchemen, and called Plugrat, a German name, which corruptly
is printed Planarati. In diverse places where the ground is stiff, they have a
little wyng on the right side of the Coulter, which wyng is to be removed to
which side you list: with the Rod or Staff well poynted, the plowman makes
clean his Coulter. When you work, your Oxen must be yoked even together,
that they may draw more handsomely with heads at liberty, and less hurt to
their necks. This kind of yoking is better liked of many, then to be yoked by
the horns: This dravving with the head, is used in the upper parts of
France and Spain.
for the Cattle shall be able to draw better with the neck and the breast, then
they shall with their heads: and this way they put to the force of their whole
bodies, whereas the other way (being restrained by the yoke on their heads)
they are so grieved, as they scarsely race the upper part of the earth. Where
Horses may be used, their use is more commodious for the Plowe, and the fewer
of them the better: for many Horses draw too hastyly, and make too large
Furrows, which is not good: whereby we see the ground to be excellently well
plowed in Gelderland, The like is used with us in Norfolk, and I inconshy^d.
and about Coleyne, where they plowe always with two Horses, going very
softly. In France and other places, where they plowe with Oxen, they make
their Furrows rather deep then broad. Where the ground is stiff, the Coulter
must be the greater and the stronger, that it may go the deeper: for if the
crust of the earth be turned up very broad, it remains still hole, whereby
neither the weeds are killed, nor the ground can be well harrowed. The Furrowe
ought not to exceed one hundred and twenty foot in length, for if it do, as
Columella says, it is hurtful to the beasts, because they are to much
weeried withal: but this rule, where the feeldes are large, is not in many
places regarded, as in the Country of Gulicke, where the feeldes are great,
their Furrows are drawn very long. You must not plowe in wette weather, nor
wette ground, nor when after a long drouthe a little rain falling, has but
wette the utter part, and not gone deep. If it be too wette when it is plowed,
it does no good that year. You must therefore have a regard to the
temperature of your season, that it be neither to dry, nor to wette: for, too
much moisture makes it to durtie, and too great dryness makes that it will
never work well: for either the hardness of the Earth resists the Plowe,
or if it do enter, it breaks it not small yenough, but turns up great
flakes, hurtful to the next plowing. For though the land be as rich as may be,
yet if you go any deapth, Dead mould
you shall have it barren, which is turned up in these great cloddes, whereby
it happens that the bad moulde, mixed with the good, yields the woorser
Croppe. Where you have plowed in a dry season, it is good to have some
moisture in your second stirring, which moistning the ground, shall make your
labor the lighter. Where the ground is rich, and has long borne water, it
is to be stirred again when the weather waxes warm, and when the weeds are
full grown, and have their seeds in their top, which being plowed so
thick, as you can scarce see where the Coulter has gone, utterly kills and
destroys the weeds: besides, through many stirringes, your Fallowe is
brought to so fine a moulde, as it shall need very little or no harrowing at
all when you sow it: for the old Roman^s, as Columella witnesses, would ^ay
that the ground was ill husbanded, that after sowing had need of the Harrowe.
Moreover, the good husband must try whether it be well plowed or no, and not
only trust your eyes, which (the Balkes being covered with mould) may easily
be deceived, but try it with your hand (which is a certainer proof) by
thrusting down a rod into the Furrowe, which if it pearce a like in every
place, it shows that the ground is well plowed. Trial of good plovving.
If it be shallowe in one place, and deep in an other, it declares the ground
to be evil handled in the plowing. If you are to plowe upon a Hill, you must
plowe overthwart, The plovving of a hill
and not up and down: for thereby the inconvenience of the steepness is met
with, and the labor of both Man and Cattle is lightened: but herein you must
beware, that you plow not always one way, but sometime higher, sometime lower,
woorking a slope, as you shall see cause. Touching the season of your plowing,
The best time of plovving.
it must be cheefely in the spring, as the Poet well teaches. When as the
pleasant spryng. etc. For in Summer the ground is to hard and churlishe, and
in Winter to foul and durtie: but in the Spring the ground being mellowe, is
easily to be wrought, and the weeds are then best turned in, which both do
good for the enriching of the ground, and plucked up by the roots before they
have seeded, will never spring again. And therefore with us, we use to begin
to plowe about the midst of March: but in sandy and light ground, they use
to plowe in the midst of Winter, if the season will suffer, Pliny is of
opinion, that stiff ground also should then be stirred. A slendar and level
ground, subject to the water, would be first plowed in the end of August, and
stirred again in September, and prepared for sowyng about the twelfth of
March. The light hilly ground, is not to be broken up in Summer, but about the
Ralendes of September: for if it be broken up before, being barren and without
juice, it is burnt up with the Sun, and has no goodness remaining in it.
Wette ground, some would have broken up after the Ides of April, which being
plowed at that time, should be stirred again about the tenth of June, and
after again, about the Ralendes of September, according to Columellaes mind.
But those that are skillful in husbandry agree, that after the tenth of June,
without great store of rain, you shall not plowe: for if the year be wette,
there is nothing to the contrary but you may plowe in July. In the mean time,
beware that you deal not with ground ouerwette, as I gave you warnyng before.


RIGO. May I plowe in the night, if I list?


CONO. Plowyng in the night.
Yea very well, in Summer time and in hot Countries you may begin in the
Evening, and continue til the Sun rise, that the moisture and fatness of the
ground, may remain shadowed under the Clodde: and that the Cattle through
overmuch heat of the Sun, be not diseased nor hurt. How often you shall plowe
the ground that you mean to sow, partly the nature of the soil, and partly
ye condition of the seed will teach you, as when we come to it, I will tell you:
for it is not needeful to stir a grauelly and a light ground, so often as the
stiff ground: yet we find that land, the oftener it is stirred, the better it
bears. So that for some seed, you must not only twyfallowe and threefallowe
your ground, but also fourefallow it, as they use in the fruitefullest places
of Italy and Germany. In Misnia and Austria, they plowe but twyse. Stiff
ground, as they commonly do in Italy, is best to be sowed upon the fifth
stirring, in Tuscan, upon the nienth. Thus has every Country both in this,
and other matters, his fashion, according to the nature of the ground.


RIGO. But may I not sow one piece of ground every year without resting?


CONO. There are some grounds you may sow yearly, as in Italy and Austria,
and likewise in some parts here about the River, that are fruiteful either by
nature, or by ouerflowyng. In other places you must observe the old saying of
the husband, Take not too much of your ground. Virgil would have ground
rest every other year: which, if you have store of ground, out of al doubt is
best. Hereof had the ground, that is sowed every year, his name in the old
time: but commonly even the best ground requires rest the third, the fourth,
or (at ye farthest) the fifth year. Varro writes, that in Olynthia the land
bears every year, and every third year most plentifully. But if you will
do well, you must let it lie every other year, according to the nature of the
soil, or else sow it with lighter seed, that soketh out less the substance
of the ground, as Lupines and others, that we will shortly entreat of. It is
also much to be considered, whether the ground that you plowe be lay ground
yearly sown, or fallowe. If you break up new ground, if it be rich,
heavy, and prepared for seed, it suffiseth to plowe it once, and to sow it
immediately, and harrowe it. If it be ligh^ and grauelly ground, you mu^^
thryfallowe it, specially at the first breaking up.


RIGO. Here you speak of diverse terms belonging to this trade, Diverse Latin
words belong to husbandry, interpreted.
I pray you make me to understand them, before you proceed any farther.


CONO. This art (as likewise al other) has certain words peculiar and
belonging to it self: and because sundry men of good learning have herein been
deceived, least my matter should be marred with dark and strange terms, I
will declare the words as plain as I can, digressing a while from my farther
^peache.


RIGO. I beseech you heartily.


CONO. We take Agrum, a Feelde in out speech, not for a jurisdiction, a
Diocese, Agri Vo^a.
or a Shire, as the old Lawiers take it: but with Iabolenus and Florentinus,
we count it a parcel of ground, either earable or pasture. Ager, Aruus, or
Aruum, we call earable ground that is to be plowed and sown. Varro would
rather have it called Aratum and not Satum. The Feelde that is called
Restibilis, is that which is renewed and every year sown, called of the Greek
(...) because his fruietfulnesse continues to the next yeere^ and yields his
Crop every year. Ager Noualis, is called of Varro, the ground that has been
sowed and fallowed: of Pliny counted to be sown every other year: with the
Lawiers it is counted ground new plowed, that has lain a year: we, according
to the vulgar speech (for we must speak with the most, and judge with the
fewest) do call Nouale Agrum, that which is new broken up, and has not before
been plowed, whereof comes Noualium Decimae, the cythes of new broken up
land, yet I know there are some learned that count it that; which after his
Crop lies lay. Veruactum is of Varro taken for ye ground, that in the Spring
time is turned up, and has been for a while spared. Oftentimes is this also
called Nouale, both the feelde that has lain a year, and that which is
broken up the first Spring: for thus faith Varro, There is great difference
whether you sow in untilled ground, or in that which is yearly sown, and is
called Restibilis, or in that which has lain a while, and is broken up in the
Spring. Moreover, both Co^imella, and Pliny, do use not seeldome Veruact^^
for ground new broken up in the Spring, taking their reason of the time,
whereby (...), may be interpreted by the name of Veruactum, or Nouale. The
Feelde is said to be plowed, to be stirred with the Plowe when it is turned
up: (...) as Hesiodus says, (...), it is broken up when it is first plowed
lying in great Cloddes: the second plowing is called Offringere Agrum, or
Iterare, to plowe again, (...) Tertiare to thry allow it^ Ageriteratus, and
tertiatus, be usual words with Columella and Pliny, Nouare, is to change
the ground w^ll husbanded before, and to plowe it and prepare it for the
sowing season. Occare, to harrowe it, as Varro says, is so to break it, as
there remain no Clodde. The Harrowe, is an instrument cross lettused, to
break the Cloddes withal, and to cover the seeds. Cr^tire, is likewise used
in the same signification. A^rare, is when that which is sown and come to some
grouth, is turned in with the Plowe Pliny calls Ararare, as it were
Aratrare, to plow often that which is sown. Sarrire, is to purge with the
Rake. Runcare, is to weed out of the ground noisome weeds, for which is
also used Auerruncare and deruncare, and of Columella, Exherbare^ Pas^^nare,
and Rep^stinare, is to dig about the Uines. Pastinum, is a forked instrument
used in planting of Uines. Lirare, and Occare, are almost one, where we plowe,
so as we leave betwixt two Furrows a Ridge, for the dry keeping of the grain
like a Garden bed. And hereof is that space called Lira a Ridge, which the
husbandmen call ^orcas, because the place being raised hye, defends the Corn
from the water, and Lira Hortensis, a bed in a Garden. Scamm^n, a Balke, is the
gross earth that has escaped the Plow^. Pliny wylleth, that there be no
Balkes made, nor great Cloddes remaining, meaning the great Turffe that is
turned up at the first plowing. Scamnatus Ager, is called of Vibius Vrbicus,
that land which runs all in length from West to East, which if it be more
of length then breadth, and lies upon the North, is called Strigatus The land
it self is also called gross and raw, that is not well mellowed, which has
need to be seasoned with the heat of the Summer, and the cold of Winter, and
to be plowed in the Spring. It is also called rich, fruitful, fertyll: and
that which is naught and yeeldes not his fruit, is called lean, barren,
hungry, or brynishe, (...). Also salt, bitter: sennishe, where the water still
continues: wette, that some time lies dry: Carbunckled, that is burnt with the
son, rotten and mossie. It is also called pleasant ground, sweet, black,
rotten, and mellowed, which are the signs of good ground: but hereof I think
I have now spoken sufficiently.


RIGO. That you may continue your speech, I pray you go to your former matter
again.


CONO. When you have broken up your ground, if it be Noualis as I said, and
not tylled before, you may sow it presently, and harrowe it, and if need be,
rake it. The ground that is yearly sown, and that has line spare, is to be
plowed thryse, according to the nature of the soil, and the seed that you
mean to sow.


RIGO. Now you have told me how to order my land for seed, I pray you let
me understand the sorts of seed, and in what sort they must be sowed.


CONO. That must I do. The seed that comes of that which the Latins call
Fruges, Of seed, and their diversity.
as Pulse and Corn, we here do call Fruges, all sorts of harvest grain,
which the Germans call (...) and (...), because they are geathered in their
beauty and their ripeness. Julian the Lawyer, calls Fruges all things
wherewith a man is fed. The ancient writers do understand it more largely,
for all the fruits of the earth. Pliny deuides it into two kinds, into Corn
that grows on Ear, as Gallus the Lawyer defines it: the other that bears
Coddes, as all kind of Pulse, or pedware. Of the first kind, is Wheat, Rye,
Barley, Big, Otes, Beechewheate, or Bucke, or if you will in Greek (...),
Rise, and Lenten Wheat, though all kinds grow not in all places, nor have in
every place all one name. In some places you have not Lenten Wheat, cheefely
where there is plenty of Big. In other places they use neither Otes nor
Bucke. Of the kinds of Pulse are these^ Beans, Peason, Lentiles, Chiches,
Tares, Lintels, Lupines, and such like. And though there be sundry sorts of
seed, and every Countr^y has his kind, Old seed not to be sown.
and sowes such as best agrees with their nature: yet generally this is to be
regarded, that you sow none that are old and dried, but the newest: for old
seed does oftentimes as they write, change their nature: as the seed of
Colwoortes, that being sown, turns to Rapes, and Rape seed likewise into
Colwoortes. The seed of the first year is best, of two year old worse, and
of three, woorst of all, the rest is barren and naught. The best seed also is
that which is waightiest, and lies in the bottom, and such as is full, and
being broken has a good color: such as is wrinckled, and thin in the ^are,
is to be thrown away. There is also another necessary note, to have the seed
from strange ground, and from the worse to the better, and not the contrary,
nor from cold Countries into hot, nor from the forward to the slow, and to
beware that it be not bitten with Birds, Mise, or Antes: and to prosper the
better, sprinckle them before they be sown, with the yuice of Houseleeke. If
you mingle with your grain the seed of Bearfoote, and sow it about your
ground, you shall save it from the anoyance of Birds. You must sow your
Ridges with an equal hand, The order of sovvyng.
(...), and all alike in every place, letting your foot (specially the right
foot) and your hand go together: Wheat, Rye, Barley, Otes, and other,
cheefely such as bear Coddes, as Milium, and Panicum, must be sown with a full
hand, but Rape seed only with three fingers.


RIGO. A man must use his hand I perceive, as the Harper does, to make it
perfect.


CONO. He must in deed. And as we put more water to stronger wine then we do
to small, and lay the greater burden upon the stronger man, and some stomach
requires the stronger food, so some ground may bear much seed, and some
away with less: neither can it be certaynely appointed, how much seed is
generally to be cast upon an acre: though I know the old writers appointed
certain quantity to every acre, which perhaps might serve with them: but we
should foulie deceive our selues^ if we should observe the like in every
place. First, because some ground requires more seed then other, as the
ground is of stiffenesse or lightness: for the stiffer ground (as in Hollande
near the Rhyne) requires much seede^ where lighter ground requires less.
The timely sowing, the thinner: and the later, as Columella says, the thicker.
Secondly, their measures and acres differ, as the thing that at this day is not
thoroughly agreed upon. But now you shall hear what seed every ground
requires.


RIGO. That I long to hear.


CONO. After long rest, or the first dounging, either Barley or Wheat is to be
sown: but Wheat, though it require good ground, yet if the ground be to rich
where it is sown, it will grow to rank, and lie leadge upon the ground. And
therefore upon such ground, it is best to sow your Wheat after a crop of
Barley, Pease, or Buck, and after your Wheat crop, to sow it with Rye: and
then again (if the ground wax not poor) with Barley. In very rich ground,
immediately after the geathering of Rape seed, plowe it presently for Bucke,
whereby you may have two Croppes in one year. In like manner the Cabegged Rape
sown after Rye, makes two haruestes in one year. Pease, Beans, Tares, and
Fitches, and almost al Pulse else, requires rich ground, which afterward may
yearly serve for Wheat, Milium, and Rape. Pliny would not have Rapes sown,
but in very well dunged ground: but we find by experience, that after a croppe
of Rye in mean ground, you shall have the same year great Rapes. Sandy and
Grauesly ground, must rest every third year, for two or three years, that
being then well dounged, you may sow Rye, or Buck, and after Oats. In good
pasture ground new broken up, you may sow Oats after the first plowing,
after that, Rape seed, then Barley, after that Wheat, or Rye, and at last
Oats, or Rye, if the nature of the country be for it. When this is done, you
must either doung it, or let it lie lay. If the ground be mellowe, after
Barley in some places they sow Millet, then Rad^she, after that Barley, and
Wheat, as in Campania: and such ground is sufficiently plowed, when it is
sown in some place where Lenten Wheat is sown, it restes three months, and
after is sown with Beans in the Spring, in no other wise may you charge
indifferent ground. If after two seasons of Corn, you sow Pulse or Pedwaxe,
the barrenner ground must rest three years. Some will in no case have you sow
Wheat, or Barley, in ground that lies f^llowe. After that ye have thus sown
your seed in ground thryse plowed and well prepared, Harrowing.
then must you straight w^yes harrowe it, which is done with a lettused
instrument full of teeth drawn upon the ground, whereby the Cloddes are
broken, and the seed covered: in some places it is done with a boorde tied to
the Plowe, Rakyng.
which they call in Latin Lirare. Sometime Rakyng is needful, which in the
Spring, loses the earth made clunged with the cold of Winter, and lets in
the fresh warmth. It is best to rake Wheat, Barley, and Beans, twyse.
Moreover, they break a sunder with the Rouler the greater and stiffer Clods.
Rovvlyng.
Weeding is when the Corn is knotted, the noughtie weeds being plucked up,
delivers the roots of the Corn, and seuereth it. To speak of the season of
Sowyng, The time for sovvyng.
it is agreed upon of all men, that there ought to be no sowing in Winter, for
the Winter Corn when it is sowed before Winter, appears above the ground
sometimes within a seven night after, which if it be sowed after Winter is
begun, it scarsely appears in forty days after. Some very fondly think
it better to sow in the Spring, then in Autumn. Pliny writes, that in
Treuers the Harvest being in, they have sowed in the coldest of Winter, and
rakyng their ground in the spring, have had an excellent good Croppe after.
Amongst our harvest seeds, there are some harder yt are able to abide the
Winter, which are sown in hot Countries, as Virgil says, about the setting
of the seven stars, which Columella understands to be about one and thirty
days after the Autumn Aequinoctial, that is, the nienth Kalendes of November,
and in France and Germanse in September, and the beginning of October, as Rape
seed, Wheat, Rye, Winter Barley, that are nourished in the blade all Winter,
and grow up toward earing in the Spring. Some there be that will you to sow
before, only in dry ground and hot Countries. Some again would have you
sow in cold Countries after the Autumn Aequinoctial, in hot Countries
later, least they should florishe before the Winter, and be destroyed of
woormes, or blasted. Some on the other side make haste, Late sovveing alvvayes
^ayleth.
saying, That soon sowing sometimes deceaues, but late sowing, ever. It is
good reason to sow timely in wette grounds, that the seed rotte not with
over much moisture, and later in dry grounds, least lying long and not
sprowting, it come to naught. Also, in timely sowyng, to ^owe thicker, because
it is slow in rooting, and in later sowyng, thinner, least with the thickness
it be choked. Summer seeds, which are sowed before the risyng of the seven
stars, Summer grain.
and in the Spring, as Beans, Pease, and such, Pulse, Millet, Panicum,
Sesamum, Summer Barley, Flax, Hemp, Oats, Buck, Sporia, and such other, are
sowed in the Spring time. In Asia and Greece they sow all as they say, at the
setting of the seven stars. Now, although there be certain precepts of the
time of sowing, and how much seed is meet for every quantity of ground:
surely, they might as I have said before, for their own Country and nature
of their ground, give a kind of guess: but to determine any thing herein
certainly, there is no man that can do it, but the ground and every man's own
practice is herein the best master. A general rule.
One ancient general rule of husbandry there is, wherein we are warned in
cold Countries to sow late, in temperate Countries sooner, and in hot regions
soonest of al. Eratosthenes says, that India is subject to much raynes in
Summer, and that then they sow Flax, Sesamum, Rise, and Millet: and in
Winter, Wheat, Barley, Pedware, and other fruits that we have not. Hesiodus,
the Prince in his time of husbandry, wyls us to sow according to the custom
of Greece, his natural country. Virgil, Cato, Varro, Columella, and Pliny,
appoint their rules for Italy, whose minds if you will have followed in all
other places, you shall but seek to cover every pot with one cover. But to
come to the matter, sithe the seeds of sundry natures, require sundry times of
sowyng, and diverse sorts of ordering, and that herein every Country has his
guise, I will here (observing such customs as are most general to them all)
severally show you of every seed by him self, and so declare unto you the
order of their sowyng. And first, amongst all the fruits and grain that the
Earth does yield for our sustenance, Wheat.
the cheifest place is rightly given unto Wheat, called in Greek (...), in
Italian Grano, in Spanishe Trigo, in Dutch VVeyss, in French Fourment, as a
grain most needful for man, and therefore most fruitful, because God has
ordained it to nourishe man withal. It is wonderful what yield it has been
of in some Countries. Augustus his deputy sent him from Bisaice in Africa, of
one grain of Wheat four hundred branches. And Pliny witnesses, that in the
same place, one bushel has yielded a hundred and fyftie bushels.


RIGO. There are that hold opinion, that this which the common people call
Wheat, the Germans VVeyss, and the Hollanders Terue, is not the true Wheat,
but a kind of Rye, and that the true Wheat which the Italians call Grano,
grows only in Italy and in Spain.


CONO. That which grows in Italy and Cicil at this day, differs not from
ours in fashion, color, nor flower, though the grain there be somewhat great,
and the flower more clammey, which makes it that it can not be long kept,
specially about Rome. And whereas our Wheat is either bearded or pollarde,
theirs is altogether pold: we call it pold or pollard, that has no Aanes upon
the ears. And that we call ye Aane, which grows out of the ear like a long
prick or a darte, whereby the ear is defended from the danger of Birds.
With Virgil the Aane is used for the Corn, as the park for ye Wheat. Gluma
is the husks of the Corn whose top is the Aane. F^it is the small grain
lesser then the corn that grows in the top of the ripe ear. To return to
the Wheat, I grant there are some that doubt of this Wheat of ours, such
has been the injury of the time (as all things almost forgotten) we scarsely
know how to name the food that we dayl^ feed of. For my part, I will follow
common use as a maistresse in speech. The old writers have written of sundry
sorts of Wheat, whereof they have thought that most needful to be sown,
which they called Robus, as the fairest and wayghtiest. The second called
Siligo, they used in their fynest Cheat. The third, they called Trimestre,
because it would be ripe in three months after the sowing. Though Columella
allow no such kind, yet was it most ancient with the Greeks, and called
Trim^non, growyng only in the cold countries. In Th^^cia they have a kind
that is ripe in two months, and is covered with a number of husks, against
the extreme cold of the Country. In our Countries also we have Wheat and
Rye, that we sow with our Summer grain, as we likewise do Rape seed, but to
no great commodititie: for the Winter seeds too far exceed them, and being
nourished in the earth al Winter, they prove, as Theophrastus says, of more
substance and profit. Amongst all these sorts Pliny recounteth the Wheat
of Italy to be the best, both for beauty and weight. We use with us only two
sorts, differing in this, that the one has smoothe ears without any beardes,
the other with long beardes or Aanes, very ruff and sharp, not much unlike to
Winter Bailey: in all other properties they are both alike. It is sown in
September, the season being fair, The time for Wheat sovvyng.
the ground thryse plowed and well raked or harrowed, although you may sow it
very well after once plowing upon ground where Pease, Tares, or Buck has been
newly had of, in a good soil. Pliny and Columella would have you sow of
Wheat and Rye, five busshels upon an acre: but as I have said before, this
mea^ure is to be measured by reason. We at this day sow not so much Wheat
upon an acre as Rye, nor so much Rye as Barley. It is best, if the Winter be
like to be cold, to sow the sooner: if warm, the later. Wheat delights in
a level, rich, warm, and a dry ground: a shaddowy, weedy, and a hilly
ground, it loves not, though Pliny say the hill yields harder Wheat, but no
great store. After it is sown, it puts out a great company of small roots,
and appears at the first wy or blade: it has sundry stalks, but such as
can not branche all the Winter, as other Winter Corn is, it is nourished in
blade: when the Spring draws on, it begins to spindle: upon the third or
fourth joint thereof, comes out the ear, which first appears enclosed in
the blade, it flowreth the fourth or fyfth day after: if it grow to rank at
the first, it is eaten down with cattle, or in some place mowed: it is after
weeded, it flowers about ye tenth of June, sooner or later, as the year falls
out, even at one time almost with ye Uine, two noble flowers with comfortable
savor flourishing at once. Varro affyrmeth, that the Wh^ate lies fyfteene
days in the blade, flourishes fyfteene, and ripeth fyfteene: after it has
flowred it waxes greater, and as Theophrastus says, is within forty days
after full ripe, where with the latest they reap in the eight month. Other say
in six and thirty days, and reaped in the nienth month. It never ears,
till al his joints or knottes he grown. There are four iointes in Wheat, as
Pliny says, and eight in Barley: but in our country and our days, both
Wheat, Rye, Barley, and Oats, have but four, and that not always. Before
the full number of the joints, there is no appearing of the ear: which when
it comes, begins to flower within four or five days, and so many, or
little more, it fades. When the flower is gone, the grain begins to swel, and
in four or five days after to ripe. The blade of the Wheat is something like
a Sedge, but narrower then the Barley: the Spindel, Stalk, or Straw thereof,
is smoother and gentler, and not so brittle as of Barley. It is closed in many
coats. The stalk that bears the ear is higher then that of Barley, the
ear grows more vpryghe and farther from the blade, the chafe is softer,
sweeter, and more full of juice, the ear of Wheat is out of order and uneven,
as well of the Pollard as of the hearded, where as Barley has his ear of just
number and in perfect order. In Bact^i^, it is said a grain of Wheat is
equal in quantity to an ear of our Wheat. In Babylon, the blades both of
Wheat and Barley, as Herodotus reports, are four inches broad. Wheat, as
Columella writes, after the third sowing changes to Rye, which has been
known in Germany, as I said before, in many places. Of Wheat is made Amyl,
the making whereof Cato and Dioscorides teaches. After Wheat we sow with us
Rye. There are that think it to be that which the Greeks call (...), though
Homer take (...) for a kind of food for Horses: some others take it for a
kind of Wheat. Herodotus says, Bread was made of it. Of Laurentius, it is
called Far, of Gasa, Siligo. Diverse learned men call it Secale, and take it for
Plinies farrago^ the Frenchemen call it Segle, the Dutchemen Rock, the Italians
almost as the Latins Saegala: the grain is something black, and makes
blackishe bread. But to pass over all controversies, I follow the Country
speech, and take Siligo for our common Rye which is sowed immediately after
Wheat, about the end of September, or in the beginning of October, in good
ground: in sandy and grauelly ground, it is sowed in February, and called
Summer Wheat: it requires the best ground, warm, and fast, and refuses not
light ground and grauelly, so it be helped with doung: it loves wette ground
as ill as Wheat, they both require to be sown in a deep moulde and a plain
soil: but Rye is sowed a little after Wheat, in the sowyng whereof, you must
occupy a third part more then of Wheat: it prospers lightly in any
ground, and many times with the yield of a hundred for one. It must be sowed
after the third plowing as Wheat and harrowed much after the same sort, the
stalk or steal thereof, is smaller then the Wheat stalk, taller, and
stronger, his care hanging downewardes, and therefore more subject to blasting,
because it receives and keeps the water that falls while it flowreth, and
suffers the violence of mystes and frostes: the straw thereof is gentle and
flaxible, serving for Uines and coueringes of houses. Now follows Bar^ley,
Barley.
accounted in the old generations among the woorthyest sort of grain, and not
of small estimation at this day. The Italians call it Beade or Beaue, or Orze:
the Spaniards Ceuada: the Dutch men Gerst: the Frenchemen Orge: the Grecians
(...): and though it be used in Greece and Italy, and such warm and
fruitful Countries for cattelles food, as Homer also witnesses, yet in the
Northern Countries it supplies the place both of Bread and Wine. There are of
it two sorts Hex^stichon and Polystichum, whose ears are three, four, and
sometimes six square, and diverse ears springing from one grain, every ear
conteynyng above fourscore graynes, so wonderful are the gifts and
blessings of GOD. The other sort is called Distichon, having in the ear but
two ranks or orders only. Again, there is one kind of it to be sowed in
Winter, an other for Summer. The Winter Barley is of better yield, but it is
soon hurt, specially with much wette and frostes following. There is nothing
more hurtful to Winter Corn, specially Barley, Rape seed, and Rye, then the
wette of Winter, nipped with often frostes, and after a warm thawe to be
presently frozen again: both the sorts of Barley require ground that is very
rich. Winter Barley after two or three plowinges, is to be sowed in September:
Summer Barley in March, or April, after twyse plowing: and many times,
necessity forcing, after once plowing: in the sowing, you must occupy more
seed by half, then in sowyng of Wheat: it requires a mellowe and a fat
ground, and therefore is best sowed, where the ground is most manured. The
Winter seed flowreth in May, and is ripe in June at the furthest. This kind
was not wont to be sowed in these parts, but great numbers now, moved by my
example, do use and receive great gaynes by it. The Summer Barley in many
Countries is ripe and ready in three months after the sowyng. In Aragon as
Pliny writes, it makes double haruestes every year. The seventh day after
it is sown, it comes up, and one end of the seed runs down in root,
the other, that ^ooner springs, comes up in blade: the greater end of the
grain makes the root, and the slenderer the flower. In other grain the
root and the blade spring both from one part, the blades of both kinds are
ruff. It must be geathered with more speed then other graynes, for the straw
of it is very brittell. Of Barley is made, as Dioscorides writes, both Beer
and Ale.


RIGO. I like your Beer you have excellently well, I pray you tell me in what
sor^ you make it?


CONO. I will not hyde my cunnyng in this matter. My Barley is first steeped in
a Sestorne of water a day or two, if it be Winter seed it is harder hulled,
and requires the longer watering. The Summer grain is thinner, and requires
a lesser time. When it is watered, I dry it upon a floor or a keel, till it
swel and break, putting out as it were little beardes or threads: if it be laid
thin, it will in Summer, specially in March, dry and break of it self
without any fire. You must take good heed that in sprowting it open not to
much, and loose his flower. This being done I grind it, and put the meal
into a Mash Fat, whereunto I put my licour sodden, and after let it seethe
three or four times, adding unto it, both for holsomenesse and taste, the
flower of the Hoppe: after this, I put on Yeest, and set it a woorkyng, and
then cleanse it. The more it is cleansed, the holsomer and cleerer it is: that
which comes of the spurging, is kept both for brewing and baking: the drink
will be the better, if you put to it a fourth part or sixth part of Wheat: the
more Corn you la^ on, the pleasaunter and better colored will your Beer be.
Your greatest care must be to see it well sodden, well cleanse^, and well
hopped, otherwise Malt of it self will soon corrupt. Observing this order,
your drink shall be both wholesome and pleasant: that endures best and longest,
that is brewed in March. There is made of Barley Alica, a reasonable good
meat, and Ptisan. How they must be made, you may read in Pliny. Next to
Wheat and Barley, follows Zea, which the common people both in Italy, Zea.
Spain, and Flaunders, call Spelta: the French call it Espeltra, with Homer
is greatly commended (...), the feel des that bears the Zeam, being as Galen
says, the mean betwixt Wheat and Barley, for he has the qualities of each
of them, and is of two sorts, the one in stalk, joint, and care, like to
Wheat, and carries in every husk two seeds, and therefore is called (...),
the other having both stalk and ear shorter, and but one grain in every
husk, growing in two ranks, and in the top resembling Barley with his
sharp Aa^es. In Italy, specially about Mirandula and Concordia, it is used in
prouender for Horses, it is not in these Countries in use. I would sow it
here, sith the ground will well serve for it, and that both bread and drink
might be made of it very well, but that it is something troublesome to grind,
because of the double husks. It desires a moist ground, rich and good, it is
sowed, after the same manner that Wheat is sowed, in September or October: it
flowreth in June, and is ripe in July, very meet for cold Countries, because
it can abide frost and storms.


RIGO. There is (as I remember) a kind of Wheat called Far, Far. Ad^^reum.
the ancient people called it Adoreum, that grows in many Countries.


CONO. You say true, for with the old sort Far was a general name to all
Corn, as Wheat Far, Barley Far, and Rye Far, and when Mylles were not yet
devised, they did beat their Corn in Morters, whereof came, that the Meal
was called Farina: yet after, was the name of Far only given to Adoreum,
though Columella called it always Far Adoreum, making four sundry sorts of
it. The Frenchemen call it Brance, the Italians Sandala, the Spaniardes
Escand^a, the common people of our Country call it Farro, the Dutche Keskome,
whose grain is very like Wheat, but that it is shorter and thicker, and where
Wheat has a clift, there has it a risyng: it is heavier then Barley, and
lighter then Wheat, it yields more Meal then any other Corn. The people of
Rome as Pliny says, lived with this Corn at the ^yrst three hundred years,
it grows in Egypt without Aane, with a greater ^are and a waightier, it has
in the stalk seven joints, and can not be cleansed, except it be parched.
France has two sorts thereof, one of a reddishe color, which the people call
red Wheat, the other whiter, which they call white Wheat, the ear is
threesquare, not unlike to spelt. In Italy they make pottage of it for their
laborers. Far or Adoreum, Virgil would have sown before the setting of the
seven stars, after the Aequinoctiall of Autum: but in wette and cold barren
grounds, it is best to sow it about the Kalendes of October, that it may take
deep root before the s^eezing and cold in Winter. It is sowed in low
ground, watrishe, and chalkie: after it is sowed, it must be harrawed, raked,
and weeded: the raking loses in the Spring, the heavy sha^tes of Winter. In
raking or harrawyng, you must take heed, as I have said before, that you hurt
not the roots: weeding when it is knotted, seuereth the Corn from all
anoyances. The Frencheman sow it in hollow Furrows, because it is very
subject to blasting, thinking thereby to preserve it both from blast and
mildewe. To sow it in hie ground is discommended, though it prospers t^e^e
well yenough, because cattle can not away with it, for the sharpness and
ruffenesse of the ears, and because it requires great labor in getting of
the husks, which if it be not cleared of, is neither good for man nor beast:
the unclean Chasfe does hurt with the Cough the Cattelles lunges. Amongst
the Winter seeds, Rape seed does challenge his place, Rape.
which I take to be the seed of the Rape which Pliny makes for his third
kind, and wild, whose root, like the Raddishe, runs in length, the leaves
being ruff like the other kinds, and the stalk busshy and full of branches:
the root of it is good for nothing, but is only sowed for the seed, whereof
they make oil serving for poor men's kitchins, fastes, and lights, specially
in Germany where they want the oil of Olives, whereby aryseth great gaynes to
the husbandman. In the hot Countries where they have other oil yenough,
this seed is of no use but in feeding of Birds: it is sowed in the end of
August, or the beginning of September: how be it, sometime it is sown in
March among the Summer seeds, but to nothing so great a profit: it is cast
into very rich ground or well manured, thryse plowed and well tylled, it must
be sowed very thin: for being a very small seed, it must not be sowed with
the full hand as Wheat is, but only with three fyngers: it flowreth in March
or there abouts, as the year is forward, and contineweth his flowring a long
time: the flower is yellowe and very sweet, wherein Bees do much delight: as
soon as it has left flowring, it is presently ripe, it grows two cubits in
height bearing a plentiful seed in little small Coddes, it renders for one
b^sshell, a hundred busshels of seed. Hitherto have I spoken of Winter seeds,
now must I tell you of such as are sown toward Summer.


RIGO. Will you speak nothing of the Rape root which is greatly occupied of
the husbandman, and not to be despised as a thing that grows in great
quantity, and is meetely good meat both for man and beast.


CONO. The Rape is named of the Greeks (...), in Italian Rapo, in Spanishe
Nabo, in French Raven. The ordering of which, though I took it to belong to
the garden, wherein you are able to say more then I, yet because you require
it, and that sometime the husbandmen do plant them in their Feeldes, I will
tell you as much as I know therein. There are two kinds of them, the first
does root all in length like the Radishe, which in many places of Germany
is used for a dayntie meat, the other either grows in great roundnesse, or
else very flat: they are nourished with mystes, frostes, and cold, three
months together, and grow to an exceedyng greatness. Pliny writes, that
he has seen Roots of them that have weighed forty pound. Some say, they
have seen of them that have weighed an hundred pound. It is wonderful, that
of so little a seed should come so great a root The Greeks make two kinds
of them, the male and the female, both coming of one seed, the male when it
is sowed thick, and the female when it is sowed thin. There are two seasons
for the sowing of it, either in March, which will be ripe about the tenth of
June, or in July or August, after the first plowyng, commonly upon the ground
where Rye and Winter Barley have been newely had of. It is thought they are the
sweeter by lying in the ground all Winter, when as the increase is not in the
leaf, but in the root. They are also sowed (as Pliny writes) in hot and
moist Countries in the spring, and w^ll the better increase if they be sowed
with Chafe, who would also have the sower naked, and in castyng the seed, to
wyshe good luck to him self, and to his neighbors. They are preserved from
the Caterpiller, which commonly consumes the young leaves, by mingling the
seed with Soote, or steepyng them all a night in the juice of Houseleeke:
Columella affyrmeth, that he him self has seen it proved.


RIGO. Now proceed (I pray you) with your Summer seeds.


CONO. The Summer seeds are almost all such as are ripe within three
months, or four at the uttermost after they are sown, and some of them
sooner, if the ground and the weather be good. Oate^.
Among the summer seeds we will first talk of grain, and after of pulse. Of
the grain, Oats are the first that are sowed, though Virgil count them
barren, and Pliny counts them rather weeds then Corn, affyrmyng that
Barley when it prospers not, will many times turn to Oats: yet the French
men and the Germans count it (at this day) the best prouender for Horses, and
food for Cattle. Pliny also witnesses, that the Germans used to make
pottage of Oats. And Dioscorides makes mention of Oaten po^tage. (...),
pottage or gruell is made of Oats, it is called of the Greeks (...), in
Italian Vena, in Spanishe Auena, in French Auoyne, in Dutche Hauer, which
though it grow not commonly in Italy, yet upon monte Fic^l^o, and in the
kingdom of Naples about Siponto it is found. We have amongst us two kinds of
them, one full and weyghty, serving in dear years to make bread and drink
of, specially if it be meddled wi^h a little Barley, and this kind prospers in
rich and new broken up ground exceedingly. The other kind is lyghter, which
the common people call Gwen and Brumhauer, it is very light, and yields but
little flower nor food, it grows upon sandy and barrayne grounds, and
serves well for Cattle and for Horse, both the kinds have busshy tops,
from whence hangs the seed in likewise, resemblyng the Grassehopper: the
flower of it is white, and from one grain, there springs diverse stalks.
With Dioscorides, Bromos is a kind of Oats that resembles Wheat in the
stalk and the blade, and grows like wild Wheat. Theophrastus calls it
(...) The Oate is not dangerous in the choice of his ground, but grows like
a good fellow in every place^, where no seed else will grow. Of the like
disposition almost is Buck or Beechewheate, Buck.
unknown to our old fathers. It is called (...), Beechewheate or (...)
Blackwheate, though (...) signifies an other grain. I had rather call it
Beechwheate, because the grain thereof is threecorned, not unlike the
Beechemast both in color and form, differing only in the smalenesse. The
stalk is very great, and straked like to the greater Fearne: It has many
branches with a bushy top, a great sort of white flowers in a knop, like the
flowers of Elder: it flowreth long together, and after appears the grain,
first white and greenishe, in shape threecornerd: after they be ripe the color
changes to black or brownishe like a Chestnutte. This grain has not long
since ben brought from Russia and the Northern parts into Germany: now is
it become common, and used for fatting of Hogs, and serves the common people
in dear seasons to make bread and dr^nke withal, it may be sowed in any ground
how ^adde so ever it be: howebeit, it does best in good ground, and is sown
in April and May, and in June, after the reaping of Rape seed. You must sow
less of it upon an acre by a fourth part then of Wheat or Rye: it is much
used to be sowed upon the ground where Rapes grow, whereby the ground does
yield a double Croppe in one year. When it is sown, it comes un, if it be
moist weather, within four or five days after, having two leaves at ^ first
appearing, not much unlike to Purcelaine. Amongst the Summer seeds is also
received Summer Barley, Summer Barley.
which from the Sons entering into the Aequinoctiall, till the end of March
and April, is sown, and is reaped again for the most part in three months,
or at the uttermost four. It requires (as Winter Barley does) a rich and a
mellowe ground, and to be sowed after twyse plowing, though sometime for
necessity it is sowed after the first plowyng. And though it yield no^ so
good nor so perfect a grain as the Winter Corn does, whose grain as
Theophrastus writes, is far more perfect and of stronger substance,
bringing greater straw and weightier Ears, yet because it is harder husked,
and the Summer seed more fine and gentle, is therefore of most men desired,
and counted to yield more flower then the Winter grain: some again prefer
the other Millet, Myllet.
called in Latin Millium, in Greek (...), in Italian Milio, or Miglio, having
as it were a thousand graynes in a Ear, as Festus seems to auowe, in
Spanishe Mijo, in French Millet, and in Dutche Hyers, where they make pottage
of it and bread. The Russians and Moscouians are chiefly nourished with this
kind of pottage, which they make with the flower mingled with milk, and the
blood that they let from their Horses. The men of Ind, as Pliny says, know
no other grain bu^ Barley and Millet, which grew in his time plentifullest in
Campania, it is the best leaven that may be made, neither is there any grain
comparable to it for weight, that more increases in bakyng: for of one
busshell has been drawn threescore pound of bread, and a busshell of sodden
meat, made of three quarters wet and vnsodde. It is sowed at this day in every
place, though very little in ye low Country, it grows with a stalk full of
joints a cubite high, a leaf like a Reed, a round and a small seed hanging
down in long ruinnes with many tops, it grows sometime seven foot hie, it
delights in a watrishe moorie ground, and in grauel, so it be now and then
overflowed, it hates dry and chalkie grounds. Some give counsel to sow it
first in a cold and a wette ground, and then in a hot ground: before the
Spring you must not sow it, for it delights much in warmth. A little seed
of it, is sufficient for a great deal of ground: if it be sowed thick, it
comes to naught: a great handful will serve a whole acre, wherefore in raking,
you must rake out what is more then needful: an acre bears forty
busshels, if it be well sowed, every seed yields about a pottell. It is
forbidden to be sown among Uines or fruit trees, and must continually be
weeded and raked. When the ear is full grown, it must be geathered with the
hand, and dried in the Sun, least the wh^t weather shatter the seeds. This
grain may very long be preserved, for being well laid up where the wind can
not come, it will well last an hundred year. There is an other like grain
that they call Indian Millet, with a great grain, and a black and big reedy
stalk, which was first brought into Italy in the reign of Nero, which (as
Pliny says) was called Loba, where as Lobae are rather the Coddes of all
Pulse, and Phobae the manes and ^oppes of Millet, as it appears by
Theophrastus. Panicle.
Panicum is called of the Greeks (...), of the Dutch Psennich, or
Heidengre^ss, of the Italians^ Pannacho, the Spaniardes Panizo, the Frenchemen
Pani^, so called of the little Pannicles wherein the seed lies. It comes up
like Millet, with many leaves and slippes, glittering with a reddishe busshy
top, full of seeds like Mustard seed, some yellowe, purple, black, and
white: it must be ordered in all things almost as Millet: being sowed in
Summer, it is ripe in forty days after: in other places sowed in May in
wette ground, it is to be geathered in September. The harvest, and the use of
it, is almost all one with Millet, neither can it as Millet be fined without
parching, when it begins to spindel, it must be well weeded, least the weeds
ouergrowe it: being well dr^st with Cheesyl and Milk, it makes indifferent
good meat, in bread it is not so much used as Millet: for the bread is very
dry, and croombleth like S^^d or Ashes, being altogether without moisture or
cleaving: but the common people remediyng that with Larde or Oil, do make a
shift with it as well as they can. They that dwell about Pontus, are said to
esteem it above all other food, as the people of Nauare do at this day. In
many Countries it is used only to feed Pigeons withal. Of the number of
outlandishe grain, is Rise, Rise.
in share as Theophrastus says, like Darnell, having a busshy top like
Millet or Pannicle, but no Ear: his grain is like the kind of Barley called
Zea, the leaves are thick like leaves of Leekes, but broader, the stalk a
cubite hie, the flower purple. This grain is but geason in France and
Germany, but in Italy and Lumbardy common, where it is called Elriso, and
Men^stro Del riso, the Frenchmen leauyng the first letter, do call it Rison,
the Greeks (...), the Spaniardes call it Arross, Pliny supposes it to be
engendered of the water Sedge. There is made of it Furmentie, as Horace calls
it Rise Furmentie. It is sowed in March as Millet and Pannicle is. The Indians
(they say) do bruise it before they sow it, to make it the lighter of
digestion. And as Strabo reports, they make drink of it?


RIGO. Sesamum.
What say you to Sesamum, that was greatly in use in the old time.


CONO. Sesamum is named with the Greeks (...), the Italians Se^amo, the
Spaniard A^onioli^ the Frenchemen Iugiolin. In times part, it has been more
used and greatly commended, both of Columella and Pliny. At t^is day it is
known to a very few, as a great sort ^f seeds else are, in so much as the
very Corn that we daily seed of, we scarsely know what it is. Some reckon it
in the number of Grain, and some of Pulse: the stalk thereof is not like
Millet or Pannicle, full of joints, but plain and smoothe like a reed, the
leaves thereof ruddy, the seed white, not so big as Lineseede, and is
contained in little knoppes like Poppie: it is sown before the rising of the
Seven Stars, after the manner of Italy. Columella says, that he has seen it
in Cilicia and Sy^ia sowed in June and July, and reaped in Autumn. It requires
a mellowe black moulde, though it will grow upon good sandy ground, and
forced ground, rain is hurtful unto it after it is sowed, where as it ^oth
good to all other grain, no great Cattle nor Uermine will meddle with it, it
hurts ground very much, because of the great quantity and thickness of the
stalk, and the number of the roots. Pliny writes, that it was brought out
of India, and used both for meat and oil. But to return to such grain as we
are acquainted with. Amongst the Summer seeds is Myscelyn to be reckoned. The
husbandmen do sometime make a medley of sundry sorts of seeds, and (...)
them partly for Cattle, and partly for hope, that though some of them fail,
yet some will gro^e. But here must you beware, lest you mingle not Winter Corn
and Summer Corn together, for that were a great oversight, and one of them
must needs perish. Some Barley may well be mingled with Oats or Buck, as
well for brewing, as for feeding of cattle: and Tares or other like Pulse may
be myngled with Oats, as very good food for beasts. They are to be fowed in
time and place as I have cold before, in my several entreatyng of them.


RIGO. You have well satisfied me for Grain and Corn, you may now (if it
please you) do as much in Pulse.


CONO. Pulse or Pedware, Of Pulse
is called of the Greeks (...), the other parts of the fruits of the
ground: of these, there are sundry sorts as you have seen of Corn: some put
Millet, Pannicle, and Sesanum, to this kind, because Columo^ll^ sometimes puts
them in the number of Grain, and sometime of Pulse: but I following Pliny
herein, do put them amongst the kinds of Grain, accountyng those to be
Pulse, whose seeds are contained in coddes, as Beans, Pease, Len^^es, Tares,
Chy^hes, Fytches, and such like, which all are to be sown in the Spring. Of
all kind of Pulse, the greatest honor is due to the Bean as Pliny
witnesses, as to a Pulse that is most commodious for man and beast. Beanes^
In Greek it is called (...), in Italian and Latin Faba, in Spanishe Haua, in
French Feue, in Dutche Bonen. This amongst all other Pulse grows in height
without any stay, it has a thick leaf, a creasted flower of diverse colors,
spotted white and black, which Varro calls the lamentable letters, it has a
long Codde, his fruit within broad, like the nail of a man, of diverse
colors, it appears at the first with many leaves like a Pease, and not with
one alone like Wheat. It is sowed first of all other Pulse in the Spring time
as Virgil will have it, and timely, because of Fabalia, which is the offall of
the Beans, for both the Coddes and the stalk, is a food that cattle much
delights in. Columella reports how he heard a skillful husband say, that he
had rather have the offall of Beans timely sowed, then the Croppe of that
which is ripe in three months, you must sow them in the increase of the
Moon, and after once plowing. It is said, that if they be enclosed in Goats
doung and sowed, they will yield great increase, and that the parts that are
eaten or gnawne, in the increase of the Moon will fill up again. If they be
sowed near to the roots of Trees, they will kill them. Some hold opinion,
that if they be steeped in Capons blood, they will be safe from all hurtful
weeds, and that laid in water a day or two before they be sown, they will
grow the sooner. The Bean delights in rich and well dounged ground, as all
other Pulse does: wette and low ground it does not refuse, though all the
rest desire dry ground, it wayeth not weedyng, being able to ouergrowe them.
Of all other Pulse it only springs with an vpryght stalk full of knottes,
and hollow. And where as all other Pulse are long in flower, this flowreth
longest, flowring forty days together, one stalk beginning when others end,
and not all at one time as Wheat, they codde in sundry days, the lowest part
of the stalk flowring first, and so upward still in order. So fruitful are
they in some places, as you shall find one stalk to bear a hundred Beans.
The Beans stick close to their Coddes, the black in their ^oppes, the
Latins call Hilum, the Coddes Valuuli, the woormes that breed in them, Midae.
Lomentum is the Meal which the people in old time did use for the smoothing
of their skins. Fresa Faba was the Bean that was but finally broken, and
hulled^in the Myll. Refrina was that which they used to offer in sacrifyce for
good luck with their Corn. It is good to steep your Beans in the water of
Saltpeeter, a day before you sow them, you shall keep them from Wyuels as (
Palladius says) if you geather them in the wane of the Moon, and cherishe
them, and lay them up before the increase. Beans, and all other Pulse do mend
the ground that they are sown in. The next to Beans in woorthynesse and
sowyng is Pease, Pease.
called in Greek (...), in Italian Pise, and Piselle, in Spanishe Aruera, in
French Pese, in Dutch Errettem, a Pulse that grows with hollow stalks and
full of branches lying upon the ground, many leaves and long, the Coddes
round, containing in them round seeds and white: though Pliny write, that
they be cornerd as Chych, of which sort we have some at this day blewishe, with
flowers in shape like the Butter^lye, purple colored toward the midst. There
are two sorts of Pease, the one sort coueteth to climb aloft, and runs up
upon sticks, to which with little wynders he binds him self, and is for
the most part only sown in Gardens, the other sort grows low, and creeps
upon the ground: both kinds are very good to be eaten, specially when they be
young and tender, they must be sown in warm grounds, for they can in no wise
away with cold: they are sowed either upon fallowes, or rather in rich and
yearly bearing ground once plowed, and as all other Pulse, in a gentle and a
mellowe moulde, the season being warm and moist. Columella says, that ground
is made very rich with them, if they be presently plowed, and the Culter turn
in and cover that which the Hook has newely left. They are sowed among
Summer Corn, commonly with the first. First Beans, Pease, and Lentiles, then
Tares, and Oats, as is said before. Pease and Tares must be sown in March
and April, and in the wane of the Moon, le^t they grow to rank, and flower
out of order: where as the best sowing for all other Pulse and grain, is in ye
increase of the Moon. There are that count Pease to be the Pulse that the
Greeks call (...), the Latins Eruum, the Italians Eruo, the Spaniardes Yeruo,
the Dutchmen Eruen, of which there are two kinds, the one white, the other
red. The later is wild, and grows in Hedges and Corn feeldes: it is a small
plant, having his leaves narrow and s^lender, his flower either white, or
meddled with purple, growyng near together like Pease, there is no great
business about it, it delights in a lean barren ground, not moist, for it
will be spilt with too much rancknesse: it must be sowed before March, with
which month it agrees not, because it is then hurtful unto cattle. Eruilia
is a Pulse like small Beans, some white, some black, and others speckled: it
has a stalk like Pease, and climeth like a Hoppe, the Coddes are smoothe like
Pescoddes: The leaves longer then the leaves of Beans: the flower is a
pleasant food to Bees. In France and Lumbardie it is called Dora, or Dorella,
Phaseolus in Latin, French Beans.
in Greek (...) garden Smalax, some call it Fasiolum, and Dolichium, among the
Italians some call it Fagiuoli, some Smilace, de gli Horti, others Fagiuolo,
Turcheses, others Lasanie, the Spaniardes call it Frisoles, the Frenchemen
Fasioles, and Fales Pinceos, the Dutchmen Fas^len, or wyld Bonen. It is a kind
of Pulse, whereof there are white, read, and yellowe, and some specked with
black spots: the leaves are like Iuie leaves, but something tenderer, the
stalk is s^lender, wyndyng, with claspes about such-plantes as are next him,
runnyng up so hie, as you may make Herbers under him, the coddes are longer
then Fennigrecke, the Graynes within diverse colored and fashioned like
Kydneys: it prospers in a fat and a yearly bearyng ground, in Gardens, or
where you will: and because it climeth aloft, there must be set by them poales
or staves, from the which runnyng to the tops, it climeth upon Trees,
seruyng well for the shadowyng of Herbers and Summer houses. It is sown of
diverse from the Ides of October to the Ralendes of November in some places, and
with us in March. It flowreth in Summer, the meat of them is but indifferent,
the juice not very good, the Coddes and the Graynes are eaten together, or
like Sperage. The Jews sell them at Rome preserved, to be eaten raw. Lens and
Lenticula, in Greek (...) and (...), Lyntels.
in Italian Lendi iae bon maenastre, in Spanishe Lenteza, in French Lentilla,
in Duch Linsen, is a Pulse very thick and busshy, with leaves like the Tare,
with three or four very small Graynes in every Codde, of all Pulses the least,
they are soft and flat. The white ones for their pleasantness are the best,
and such as are aptest to seethe and consume most water in their boylyng. It is
sown with us in Germany in March and in April, the Moon encreasyng, in
mellowe ground, being rich and dry: yet Pliny would rather have the ground
lean then rich, and the season dry: it flowreth in July, at which time by
over much rancknesse and moisture, it soon corrupts. Therefore to cause it
quickly to spring and well to prosper, it must be mingled with dry doung
before it be sown: and when it has lain so mingled four or five days, it
must be cast into the ground. It grows hy^ (as they say) when it is wette in
warm water and Saltpeter before it be sown, and will never corrupt being
sprinkled with Bengwin and Uineger. Varro wylleth, that you sow it from the
five and twentieth day of the Moon to the thirtieth, so shall it be safe from
Snayles. And Columella affyrmeth, that if it be mingled with Ashes, it w^ll be
safe from all annoyance. Cicer in Latin, ^hyche.
in Greek (...), in Italian Ceci, Cicere Rosso, and Cicere b^ance, in Spanishe
Ganrangos, in French Chiche, and in Dutch Cicererbs, is a busshy kind of
Pulse, having a round Codde, and therein a couple of three cornered seeds,
whereof there are that make three kinds, white, read, and black, differin^
only in the color of their flower: the best kind has a sti^^e stalk,
crooked, little leaves indented, a white, a purple, or a black flower. And
whereas other Pulse have their coddes long and broad, according to their seed,
this bears them round: it delights in a black and a rich moulde, is a
great spoyler of land, and therefore not good for new broken up ground: it may
be sown at any time, in March, in rayny weather, and in very rich ground: the
seed must be steeped in water a day before it be sown, to the end it may
spring the sooner: it flowreth in June and July, and then falls to seed: it
flowreth a very long while, and is geathered the fourth day, being ripe in a
very short time: when it is in flower, of all other Pulse it receives harm by
rain: when it is ripe it must be geathered out of hand, for it scatters
very soon, and lies hid when it is fallen. In the chych there never breeds
any worm, contrary to all Pulse else: and because it dryueth away
Caterpillars, it is counted good to be set in Gardens. Cicercula in Latin,
Cic^rcula.
in Greek (...), in Italian Cicerse, in Spanish Cizerche, it differs from
the Chych, only in that it is somewhat blacker, which Pliny accounts to have
vneauen corners as Pease has: and in many places about us, they use them in
steed of Pease, esteeming them far above Peason: for they both yield more
flower then Pease, and is lighter of digestion, and not so subject to worms.
Columella countes it rather in the ^umber of Fodder for cattle, then of Pass
for man: in which number are these that follow. And ^ir^t Vici^ in Latin,
Tares and fodder for Cattle.
in Greek (...), in Dutch VVycken, in French Vessae, so called as Varro
thinks of wynding, because it has (...) or claspes as the Uine has, whereby
it clymeth upon such st^lkes as grow next it: it grows half a y^rde hie,
le^^^ed like Tyutare, s^u^ng that they be something narrower, the (...) like
the ^lowre of Pease, having little bl^cke seeds in (...), nor altogether:
ounde, but bro^e like the L^ntell: it re^uired above ground, though it w^l also
grow well yenough in shadowye places, or ^any ground with small labor, being
not trou^le come to the (...) it requires but once plowing, and s^^keth for
(...) ^or doung^ng, but ^nricheth the land of it se^^e, specially if ^he
ground be plowed when the crop is of, so that the Stalks may be turned in:
for otherwise the Roots and Stalks remaining, do suck out the goodness of
the ground: yet Cato would have it sown in grassie ground, not watrishe, and
in new broken up ground after the d^awe be gone, and the moisture dried up
with the Sun and the Wind. You must beware that you sow no more, then you
may well cover the same day: for the ^east deawe in the world does spoil it.
Neither must you sow them before the Moon be 24. days old, otherwise the
Snayle will devour it: his time of sowing is, as Pliny writes, at the
setting of the Star called the Berward, that it may serve to feed in
December: the second sowing is in January: the last, in March. In Germany
they use to sow them in March or April, chiefly for fodder for the^r cattle.
To sow Tares, and as Pliny says Beans, in not broken up ground without
l^sse, is a great piece of husbandry: they flower in June, at which time they
are very good of skowre horses: it is good to ^aye them up in the codde, and to
keep them to serve Cattle withal. Tares and Oats make a good meslyne sowed
together. Lupinus in Latin, Lupines.
in Greek (...), in Italian and French almost as in Latin, in Spanish
Altramuz, in Dutch Roomsche Boouen, is a Pulse having one only stalk, the
leaf tagged in five divisions like a star, the flower white, the coddes
tagged, and indented about, having within them ^iue or six seeds hard, broad,
and red, the leaves thereof do fall. This pulse requires least trouble, and is
of small p^ice, and yet most helps the ground of any thing that is sown: for
there can be no better manuring for barrayne Uineyardes and Corn ^eeldes then
this, which either upon barrayne ground prospers, or kept in the Garner,
endures a wonderful w^yle: being sodden and laid in water, it feeds Oxen in
Winter very well, and in time of dearth (as Columella says) serves men to
assuage their hunger: it prospers in sandy and grauelly gro^ndes, in the
worst land that may be: neither loves i^ to have any labor bestowed upon it,
nor weyeth the goodness of the ground. So fruitful it is, as if it be cast
among Bushes and Br^er, yet will it root and prosper: it refuses both
Harrowing and Raking, and is not anoyed with Weeds, but kills the weeds
about it. If doung be wantyng to mende the ground withal, this serves the
turn above all other: for being sowed and turned in with the Plowe, it serves
the turn in steed of dounging: it is sowed timeliest of all other, and reaped
last: it is sowed before all other Pulse, a little after Harvest: cover it how
sclenderly you will, it cares not, an excellent good seed for an evil
husband: yet desires it the warmth of Aut^me, that it may be well rooted
before Winter come, for otherwise the cold is hurtful unto it. It flowreth
thryse, first in May, then again in June, and last in July: after every
flowryng it bears his codde. Before it flowreth, they v^e to put in Cattle:
for where as they will feed upon all other grass or weeds, only this for
the bitterness thereof while it is green, they leave untouched. Being dried,
it serves for sustenaunce both of man and beast: to cattle it is given meddled
with Chafe, and for bread for man's use: it is mingled with Wheat flower, or
Barley flower: it is good to keep it in a smokie loaft, for if it lie moist,
it is eaten of l^ttle woormes and spoiled. The leaf keeps course and turns
with the Sun, whereby it shows to the husband, even in cloudie weather,
what time of the day it is. Fenu grecum in Latin, Fenugreeke.
in Greek with Theophrastus and others (...), with Dioscorides (...) and
(...), of others (...), in French Fenegres, and Fenigrent in Italian,
Faenigraeco in Spanishe, Al^oluas in Dutche, sometime by the Latin name, and
commonly Roherne and Lockshorne, comes up with a small stalk, the leefe like
a Threeleaued grass, it is sowed well in a sclender barrayne ground, you must
take heed you plowe it thick, and not very deep: for if the seed be covered
above four fyngers thick, it will very hardly grow. Therefore the ground
must be tyld with small Plowes, and the seed presently covered with Rakes.
There are two sorts of it, the one called of the common people Siliqua or
code, which they sow for fodder in Sep^ember, the other in January, or the
beginning of February: when they sow it for seed, it flowreth in June and
July, when also it bears his codde, but the seed is not ripe t^ll August: it
is dressed to be eaten after the order of Lupines, with vinegar, water and
salt, some put to a little oil: it is used both for fodder, and diverse other
uses. Furthermore, of Pulse called of Gelliu^ Le^ament^ we have these general
rules, that they al bear coddes, and have single roots every one, except the
Bean, the Chich growyng deepest. The stalk of the Bean^ and the Lupine is
also single, the others are all fall o^ branches and selender slippes, and all
hollow. All Pulse for the most part are to be sowed in the Spring and req^ire
very r^che ground^, except the Lupine, that c^res not where he lies: they are
all sown in the increase of the Moon, except Pease: if they be watered before
their sowing, they prosper the better: they are speedily to be geathered when
they be ripe, for they suddaynely shatter: they will endure longest, being
ge^thered in the change of the Moon. It is much to be regarded whether you will
keep or sell them, for the seeds in the increase of the Moon do wax
greater, the^e are that preserve them in earth^n vesse^es, str^wyng ashes
under them, and sprinckling them with Uineger: some use ashes alone, other
so^e (...) sprinckle them with Bergewine vinegar, as I have said of the
Lin^yll. Moreover, the Greeks have wylled to mingle with the doung a little
Saltp^ter when you sow them, wher^by they shall the better seethe and be the
tenderer: and if they be not presently ^ender, they will to cast into the pot a
little Mustard see^e, which will make them straightway well. Theophrastus
adds diverse things beside, which were to long to tell.


RIGO. Is ^t needful or every husbandman to sow all these Gra^ne and Pul^e
in h^s ground?


CONO. No, but as I ^aide before, in speaking of ground and seed, you must
cheefely sow such as best agree with the nature of your ground: how be it,
there are some of them that refuse no ground. There are certain of them as
Varro says, that are not sown for present necessity, but for other
afterturnes. And others again that are of necessity to be sown, as Corn for
man, and Fodder for cattle: of which must special care he had, that there be
no (...) of them, without which we can not ^iue: as Rye, Otes, and Buck,
Lupines and certain Pulse else for fodder, refuse no ground, though it be
never so barren. Besides, Fodder for C^ttell.
when as the husband must not only have a care of providing such as serve for
the sustenaunce of man, but also for such as serve for the feeding of poor
cattle, without which the ground can not be husbanded: therefore must he
sow P^lse for the use of man and beast, and fodder in more abundance for the
sustenaunce of bea^tes. Amongst all sorts of fodder, that is counted for the
chief and the best, which the people of old time^ and the Italians at this
day call Medica, Medica.
some call it Treefoyle, the French men call it Grand ^rest^, the Spaniardes
^lfals^, others call it Burgandie grass, because it was brought in by the
Burgundians, it is now also come into Germany, and there called Welsholken,
in Greek (...). Pliny writes, that it was brought by the Romans out of
Media into Italy, differing almost nothing from Tryfolly or Threeleaued grass:
but that it is gr^^ter, higher, and rancker, for in stalk, leaf, and flower,
it is all one, it grows altogether busshing in leaves. In the top of the
st^lke it puts forth short coddes, writhen like horns indented about, and
having as it were little prickles, wherein is the seed shaped like a Moon,
and growyng to the codde in bigness as the Lentyl: which being chawed, tastes
like Pe^se: every codde has his seed, it requires a fat ground without
stones, full of juice and rich: in many places it comes not up, in others it
springs very thick. Varro gives charge, that it be not sowed in too dry a
ground or tyckle, but in good and well seasoned. Pliny would have the ground
be dry and very rich, Columella bids, that the feelde where this Medica
shall be sowed, should be broken up about October, and so to lie mellowyng all the
Winter, and then to stir it in February, and the stones cast out, to harrowe
it well, and after in March to order it garden wise, castyng it into beds,
every bed ten foot broad, and fyftie in length, so that they may be easily
w^tred, and of every side well weeded: then laying on good old doung, let it
lie till Apryl, and at the end of April sow it in such proportion, as every
handful of seed may occupy five foot in breadth, and ten in length: and
cover the seed out of hand, raking them with wooden Rakes, for the Sun will
soon burn them. After it is sown, that it come up an inche in heyght, you
must beware you touch not the ground with any iron instrument, but either
with your yngers, or with Rakes of wood, weed it well from all other noisome
things, otherwise it will grow wild and turn to pasture. Let the first
harvest be long deferred, to the end he may somewhat shed his seeds: at other
times you may mow it as soon as you w^l, and give it to your cattle. Such
as are skillful in husbandry, do say, that if you mingle Otes with the seed
of Medica, and sow them, they will cause them to stock very well: it is sowed
in April or later, in May, to escape the frostes, and the seed is cast in like
sort as Wheat is. When it begins to branche, al other weeds must be weeded
away: and being this ordered, you may mow it six times a year. It flowreth
six times, or at the least five times, so it be not cut. When you have mowed
it, water it well, and as it springs, weed it again. And thus as I said,
you may mow it six times a year, and it shall thus continue ten years
together: it enricheth the ground, all poor and feeble cattle, are soon
brought up with it: it likewise heals cattle that are diseased: but when it
first springs, till cattle be acquainted with it, you must give them but
little at once, lest the strangeness of the food hurt them: for it makes
them to swell, and breeds great abundance of blood. Columella writes, that
one acre of it will well find three Horses a year. In some Countries this
herb does grow in great plenty in every Meddowe, either of the nature of
the ground, or through the disposition of the heavens, and sometime the
relikes of that which ^ath been long ago sown, does yearly spring of the
seed that falls, and ouergrowen with grass and weeds, does change into
meddowe. I see no cause but that it may grow of it self, but that perhaps
such plants as are brought out of strange Countries require sowyng and
dressing: it is best to be mowed when it begins to flower, for it must not
be suffered to seed, whereby the fodder shall be the better: which being well
laid up, will continue in goodness three years, to the great profit of the
Grasier, for as I have said before, there can be no better fodder devised for
cattle, wherewith they will better feed, and sooner rise. The next in
goodness in this Medica is Cytisus, Cytisus.
woonderfully as Pliny writes commended of Aristomachus, and as Vergil says,
a good fodder for Sheep, and being dry, a delightful food to Swyne: it may
be moved sundry times in the year, to the great commodity of the husband: a
little whereof does soon fat up cattle, neither is there any other grass
that yields either more abundance or better milk, the most sovereign
medicine for the sicknes^e o^ cattle that may be: b^side, the Philosophers
promise, that Bees will never fail that have this grass growyng near them:
therefore it is necessary to have your ground stored with it, as the thing
that best serves for Poultrie and Cattle: the leaves and seeds are to be
given to lean and drouping Pullen: some call it Telinen, some Trefoyle, some
great Melilot, the Romans call it Trifolu maius, great Tras^e, it is a plant
al hearie and whytishe, as Rhamnus is, having branches half a yard long and
more, whereupon grows leaves like unto Fenygreeke or Clauer, but something
less, having a ry^yng crest in the midst of them. This plant was first
found in the Island Cythno, and from thence spread throughout the Cyclads, and
so to Greece, whereby the store of Cheese came to be great: neither is there any
Country at this day, where they may not have great plenty (as Columella
says) of this shrubbe. In Italy it grows about the encl^syars of Uineyardes,
it shr^nketh neither for heat, cold, frost, nor snow: it requires good
groude, if the weather be very dry, it must be watered, and when it first
springes well harrowed after three years, you may cut it down and give it
your cattle. Va^ro would have it sown in well ordered ground, as the seed of
Colwoortes should be, and after removed and set a foot and a half a sunder,
or else to be set of the slippes. The time of sowyng of Cytisus is either in
Autumn, or in the spryng, in ground well plowed and laid out in be^des: if you
want the seed, you may take the slip, so that you set them four foot a
sunder, and a bancke cast about them with earth well dounged: you may also set
them before September, when they will very well grow and abide the cold in
Winter: it lasts but three year. Columella has two kinds of Cytisus, one
wild, the other of the Garden. The wild does with his claspers feed very
well: it wyndeth about, and killes his neighbors as the Iuie does: it is
found in Cornefeeldes, specially amongst Barley, the flower thereof is like
the flower of Pease, the leaf if it be bruysed, smells like Rocke^, and
being champ^d in the mouth, it tastes like Chyche, or Pease. There is an other
kind of fodder among the plants, unknown to ye old writers, very good to
feed both cattle and Poultrye. I know not whether it be known in other
Countries beside Germany, the common people call it Spury, or Sperie: Sperie.
it h^th a stalk a foot in height or more, busshed forth in man's branches,
it has a white flower without any leaf: the flower ends in little knoppes
as Flax has, conteynyng in them a very little seed like Rape seed. They are
much deceived that take it for Cytisus, when that (as Dioscorides says) has
leaves like Fenugreeke, and this is altogether without leaves: neither is the
seed any thing like, though the use be almost one. The best Milk and Butter
in Germany, comes of this feeding: wherefore it is esteemed almost as good
as Barley, or other grain: the straw is better then any Heye: the Chafe
feeds as well as any Graynes: the seed feeds Pigeons and Poultrie in
Winter passing well: it is sowed in sandy and light grounds all the Summer
long, and some sow it in Spring time with Oats for the seed sake: in Autumn
and Harvest time it is sowed to feed Cattle: it is profitable for husbands
that dwell in sandy and grauelly Countries, wherefore they should never be
without good store of it, for Hens, Bees, Goats, Sheep, Oxen, and all kind
of Cattle delight very much in it: now remains the sowyng of Flax and
Hemp.


RIGO. I look for it.


CONO. These, although they be not to be received in the number of Corn nor
Pulse, Fodder nor Herbs, yet is there great account to be made of them with
ye husbandmans things, without which no house can be furnished, nor man well
apparelled: which being beaten to a sof^nesse, serves for webbes of Linen,
and twysting of Cords: and more, of t^is so little a seed does spring that,
which (as Pliny says) carries the whole world hither and thither, that
brings Egypt to Italy, and carries us from Cales of Ostia in seven days.
Flax.
Linum in Latin, in Greek, (...), in Italian and S^^nishe Lino, in French
Dulin, in Dutch almost like, ^auing that they call the seed Lyn and the plant
Flax, is a very common herb, wherewith women are set a work: it has a
sclender stalk, not much unlike to Sperie, but that it grows higher a
little, and bigger, with narrow leaves, and long blewe flowers in the top, which
falling away, leaves behind them little round knoppes as big as a Pease,
wherein are enclosed yellowe seeds: it delights in rich ground and somewhat
moist, some sow it in barrayne ground: after once plowyng, it is sowed in the
Spring, and geathered in summer. In Gelderland and Gulicke, where there is
great store of it, they sow it about the beginning of May: there are again
that observe three seasons for the sowyng of it, as the weather shall fall out,
for it requires rain and moisture: the ripeness of it, is perceived by the
waxing yellowe, and swelling of the knoppes that hold the seed, being then
plucked up and made in little bundels, it is dried in the Sun, the roots
standing upward that the seed may fall out. Some use again to card of the
knoppes with an iron Comb, and drying them in the Sun to geather the seed.
The bundels afterward are laid in water heated with the Sun, with some
wayght upon them to keep them down: the rynde waxing loose, shows when
they have been steeped yenough. Then the bundels unloosed and dried in the
Sun, are beaten with beetelles, when as the utter rynde is pilled of, and
combed and hacked upon an iron comb: the more wrong it suffers, the better
does it prove: the Towe is severed from the Flax, and appointed for his use,
so are they severally spon upon the Distaffe, made up in bottomes, and sent to
the Weauers, whereof are wouen webbes, to the great commodity of al men. Last
of all, the web is laid out in the hot Sun, and sprinkled with water,
whereby it is brought to a passing whiteness. It may be remembered, that not
long since the women of Germany knew no costlyer attire. The best Flax that
is at this day, is brought from Moscouia, Liuonia, and those Countries, far
excelling ours in heyght and goodness. Except there be great increase of it,
and price in the Country where you dwell, Columella would not have you meddle
with the sowing of it, for it is most hurtful to the ground, as Virgil has
noted. Flax, where he grows does burn the feelde,
The like does Oats and Poppey yield.
And therefore (but that women must have something to occupy their hands
withal) it were more profit to sow the ground with corn, and to bye linen
abroad, especially if you way the heart of your ground, and the charges of the
making. Hemp, in Latin Canubis, Hemp.
in Greek (...), in Italian Canabe, in Spanishe Cannamo, in French Chamura,
and in Dutch Haueph, is a plant of the Reedishe kind, having a very strong
savor: it grows with a single stalk, and many times to such a heyght, that
it matcheth with indifferent Trees: it is of great necessity for the use of
man, and serves both for making of Canuisse, and framing of Ropes: the stalk
has many knottes, out of which proceeds branches with narrow leaves
indented and sharp. Dioscorides describes both the wild Hemp, and the
Garden Hemp to have leaves like the Ash, hollow stalks, a stinkyng savor,
and round seed. There are two kinds of it, the Male, that is without flower,
and bears a seed of sundry colors: and the Female, that, to recompense her
barrenness, does yield a white flower: it is sowed in Gardens, Orchardes, or
other goo^ ground (as Pliny would have it) after a Southwest wind: with us it
is sown in the end of April, for it can not away with cold: some sow it at
the rising of the star called the Berward, which is at the end of February,
or the beginning of March: it loves ri^che ground well dounged and watered,
and deep plowed: it is noughty sowing of it in raynie weather, the thicker you
sow it, the tenderer it will be, and therefore many times it is sown thryse,
though some there be that appoint to every foot square six seeds. The Female
or fyrble Hemp is first pulled up, afterward the Male, or the Carle, when his
seed is ripe, is plucked up, and made up in bundels, laid in the Sun for
three or four days, and after is cast into the water, with weight laid upon
him for eight or ten days, till he be sufficiently watered, and as Flax,
till the Rynde wax loose: then taken out, it is dried with the Sun, and
after broken in the Brake, and then combed and hacked for Yarne and Ropes. Of
Hemp, are made Cables, Cords, Nets, and Sails for Ships, garments for
Laborers, Shertes, and Sheets: the Shales or Stalks serve for the heating of
Ouens, or kyndeling of Fyres.


RIGO. In the Country of Gulicke, and some parts of France, I remember I
have seen an herb planted of the common people with great diligence, that
serves as they said for Dyars.


CONO. You say true, that herb Caesar in his Comentaries of the wars of
France, VVoade.
calls Glastum, in Greek (...), in Italian Gnado, in Spanishe Pastel, in
French with the common sort Guadum, and Guesde, in Dutch VVeyt, the Dyars do
use it, and with them it is greatly esteemed, and great gain aryseth thereof
unto the people of Gelderland, Iulyes, and Turyn, and diverse Countries else: the
leaves as Pliny writes, are like unto Dock leaves. Dioscorides writes of two
kinds, the wyld, and the Garden Woade, saying, that the Garden Woade which
Dyars use, has leaves like Plantayne, but something thicker, and the wild,
leaves like Lentyll, with yellowe flowers: with this herb Caesar says the
people of England were wont to paynt their faces and bodies, to seem more
terrible to their enemies: it requires like sowyng and soil as Wheat does:
but it is a great soker of the ground, and much hurts it: it would have a
very rich and a fat ground, and well dygged: for the ground were better to
be turned up with Spades then with Plowes for the sowyng of this Plant, and it
must be very well weeded. It is sowed in Gelderland in April, and after the
common peoples rule, in Easter wecke: at the first f^llowing they marle the
ground, after sow it: you must be very heedefull in the weedyng of it. When
it is grown a handful hye and more, they suffer it not to flower, but with an
instrument for the purpose, they cut it close by the root, wash it, and carry
it to the Myll, and suffering it to grow again, they cut it three or four
times, and so leave it to seed. The green herb they grind in Milles like
Apple Milles, pressing it, til they get out all the juice thereof, then roll
they it up with their hands in round balls, and so lay it upon boorded
floores to be dried.


RIGO. You have greatly delighted me, in describing unto me the order of sowyng
of seeds, without which, not only the people of the Country, but also the
Courtiar and Citizen are not able to live: my desire is now to understand the
order of Harvest, the Country man's long looked for time, and the reward of all
his toil.


CONO. Harvest.
I will proceed in the accomplishing of your request. When the Corn is ripe,
before it be scorched with the great heat of the Sun (which is most
extreme at the rysyng of the lesser Dog) it is to be cut down out of hand:
for delay herein is dangerous. First, because that birds, and other vermin
will devour it: and again, both the Grain and the Ear, the top and the
straw being brittell and over dry, will soon fall to the ground: if storm or
tempest chance to arise, the greatest part thereof will to the ground, and
therefore it must not be lingered, but when it does look yellowe in every
place, and before that the Grain be through hard, when they come to look
reddishe, you must then have it in, that it may rather wax in the Barn then
in the Feelde. Experience teaches, that if it be cut down in due time, the
seed will grow in fullness as it lies in the Barn: for the Moon
encreasyng, the Corn grows greater: at the change, you must geather such
seed, as you would should be least fautie. Varro says, that the best time
for Harvest, is betwixt the Sunnestay, and the Dog days: for the Corn they
say, does lie in the blade.xv. days, flowreth.xv. days, and ripeth in.xv.
days. Amongst Grain and Pulse, the first that is to be geathered, is Rape
seed. Rape har^est.
And because the seed, when the cod begins to wax yellowe, declares
ripeness, it must be geathered out of hand: and sithe the seed will easyly
skatter, it must be laid either in plain smoothe places in the Feelde, or
upon Canuasse: and if it be presently to be carried, the Wayne or Cart must be
lyned with sheets, lest with iogging and tottring of the carryage, the seed
fall through. You must take good heed as well here, as in all other Pulse,
that you prevent the rain, for the rain falling, the coddes do open. As
soon as your Rape seed is of, if the ground be plowed, you may sow Bucke,
or Branke as they call it: so that of one piece of ground in one year, you may
make two haruestes. Next unto Rape harvest in these Countries, follows the
harvest of Winter Barley, Harvest for VVinter Barley.
which is to be dispatched before the seed (the Ear being over dried) do
fall, for they have not husks to conteyne them as Wheat has, and the Ears
being brittel, will soon fall: yet some think it best to let the Barley lie a
while in the Feelde, whereby they think the Grain will wax the greater. Then
follows the Hemp harvest. But first (as I said before) the Fymble or the
Female, H^mpe h^ru^^t.
is pulled, and is dried a while in the Sun, then (bound up in bundels) it
is thrown into the water, and kept down with some weight, that it swim not
above. After likewise the Male, the ^eede declaryng his ripeness is pulde up,
and the seed being threasshed out, it is cast into the water, till the stalk
be soft: after, being dried in the Sun, it is made up in bundels to be
knocked and shaled in Winter evenings. Rye is to be mowed in June or July, and
after that, Wheat. Rye and Wheat harvest.
No better rule, then before the Grain be hard, and when it has changed
color. An old Proverb (as Pliny says) it is better to have in harvest two
days to soon, the^ three days to late. In Rye there is not such sear in
scattering as in Wheat, which as soon as it is ripe, will shed with every
wind. Wherefore good heed must be taken, that you linger not with Wheat
after it is ripe: although Pliny affyrmeth, that Wheat will have greater
yield when it stands long: but surely deferring of it is dangerous, as well
for the deuouryng of Birds and Uermine, as for shattring and falling of the
seed through storm and weather: as the proof was seen in the great wyndes
that were in the year of our redemption.1567. Then follows the harvest of
Pease, Beans, The harvest of all other Corn and Pul^e.
Tares, and Lentyles, according as they are tymely sowed, wherein you must take
heed, as I warned you before in Rape seed, that they lie not abroad in the
rain: for if they do, they will open and loose their seed. Last of all,
comes the harvest of the other summer seeds, as of Barley, Pannicle, Myllet,
and Oats. It is found by experience, that rain is good for Oats after they
be down: for it causes them to swell and to be fuller, and to that end they
are left in the Feelde many times two or three weeks after they be down.


RIGO. What order have you in your reaping?


CONO. There are diverse sorts of reaping, Diverse sorts of reapyng.
according to the manner of every Country. Some with Sy^hes, which differ also
as the work requires. In this Country we use three sorts of Corn Sythes,
for either we have a Sithe like a Syckle, which holden in the right hand, they
cut the straw close by the ground, and have in the leaft hand a long
hook, wherewith they pull together that, that they have cut, and lay it in
heaps: and in this sort Wheat and Rye, and such Grain as has the sturdiest
straw, is reaped. In other places, as in Iulis, where the ground being very
ritche, the Corn grows higher and rancker, there they hold their leaft
hand full of Corn, and with the right hand with t^othed Syckles they cut it,
leaving the straw under their hands long, to help the ground withal. In
other places they use a greater Sithe with a long Suath, and fence^ with a
crooked frame of sticks, wherewith with both their hands they cut down the
Corn, and lay it in Swathes as they do Grass when they mow it, and with
that they mow the higher sorts of Cor^e. Varro, and Columella, and other, do
tell of sundry other sorts of reaping. Palladius teaches, beside the labor
of men, a shorter way to be done with an Ox, that shall in short time cut
down all that grows, which was wont to be used in France. The devise was,
a low kind of Carre with a couple of wheels, and the Frunt armed with sharp
Syckles, which forced by the beast through the Corn, did cut down al before
it. This trick might be used in level and champion Countries: but with us it
would make but ill-favored work. In reapyng, you must regard to go with the
wind: for if you work against the wind, it wylbe hurtful as ( Xenophon
says) both to your eyes and your hands. If the straw be but short, you must
go nearer the ground: if it be long, you may put your Syckles to the midst
to dispatche it the sooner, and to make it thresshe the better: and the stabble
upon the ground must either, according to Virgils rule be burnt, or rotte
upon the ground for the bettryng of the land. Some preserve that which is
longest, to ^hatche Barnes, Stables, and Country Cottages withal. And where
Hay is scant, it serves for foddring of Cattle: for Barley straw is a food
that Bullockes love well, and beside, al kind of straw, is good to litter
withal. When the Corn is down, it is presently to be bound in sheaues:
although Barley, Oats, and other Corn and Pulse is made up in Coppes and
Ryckes, but not without hurt and hazard. The Corn being cut, is not to be had
into the Barn presently, but to be let dry, according to the nature of every
Grain and Pulse: for if it be carried in before it be through dry, it
corrupts and rotteth. Oats and Buck, are longest left abroad, as also
Lentyles, Pease, and Pulse: because they are longest in drying. Wheat may
soonest be carried, if it be not mingled with too many weeds, that hinder the
drying of it. When harvest is in, the ground must out of hand be plowed, both
to kill the weeds, and to make it the meeter for the next sowyng. The Corn
cut down and dry, Plovving after Harvest.
is to be laid either in Barnes, Houels, or Stacks, and after in Winter to be
trod out with beasts, or thresshed out with Flayles, and to be cleansed with
Fannes.


RIGO. In Italy they use to tread out their Corn with Cattle, the like
reports Xenophon of the Greeks.


CONO. I have seen it me self, where they rather take Horse then Oxen, and
that time they also wynnowe their Corn, thinking the Southwest wind to be
best for that purpose: but to stay for that, Columella thinks but the part of
a small husband.


RIGO. I see you have very large Barnes, what order observe you in the building
of them?


CONO. You must so set your Barn, The Barn.
that the Corn may be well brought into it, and see it be very close on every
side, leaving open a space for two doors, a fore door and a back door, but
so, as neither of them open to the West, but rather North and East, and at both
sides of the floor bestow your Corn in several tasses and moowes, so that
you may easyly come to every one at your pleasure. And though the Corn be
laid upon Battes in the floores, yet let there be a space left in the midst,
that may be open to the very top, that you may fetch what sort you list to
be thresshed. In some places they have a Pully in the midst, wherewith they
hoyse up the Corn to the very Rafters of the house. In Holland they have few
close Barnes, but all houels and stackes, so placed with hanging rooffes upon
posts, that with pinnes and wynches, they may heyghten it, or let it down as
they list.


RIGO. Those kind of Barnes they say, are not so subject to Myse and Rattes,
nor so chargeable as the other.


CONO. How so ever the Barn be, you must place it as hie as you may, least ye
Corn be spoiled with moisture or dampes. Some think it better for them to be
thatched then tiled: the largeness must be according to ye greatness of your
occupying. Some to the end Cattes and Weesels may the better come by, they do
vaute the floor with Bryckes, and laying rafters thereon, do lay on their
Corn. The floor must be fair and smoothe made, so as the Corn may be well
threasshed or trodden out. Columella would have the floor fair paued with
Flint or Stone, whereby the Corn will the sooner be threasshed, and the floor
not hu^t with beatyng and trampling of Oxen: and when it is fande or wynnowed,
it will not be full of gravel and dirt, as the earthen floores yield. But we
content our selves with our earthen floores, well made and of good earth, mixed
with a little Chafe, and the grounds of oil: for this preserves the Corn
from Myse and Emets. You must make it very eeuen and leauel, and after it is
mingled with Chafe, let it be well trodden, and so suffered to dry. You must
keep also from it Beasts and Poultry, which with tramplyng and skraping will
make it rugged and uneven. When the floor is dry, the Corn laid on it, is
beaten out with Flayles and cleaned with Fannes, though in some place they
rather like to tread it out with Oxen, and to wynnowe it after the old fashion
with the wind.


RIGO. Well sir, when you have thus threasshed your Corn, what ways have you
to keep it from Wyuels?


CONO. The Garners, or Corn loftes, wherein your Corn thus threasshed and
cleansed shall be laid, Garners.
must stand hye, that they may be blown through with the Eastern and
Northern winds, to which no moisture from the places adioynyng must be
suffered to come: for ye quarters of the Heaven that are coldest and dryest,
do both preserve Corn the longest. In Spain and Apulia being hot
Countries, the wind is not only let in on the sides by wyndowes, but also at
the bottom by grates. Some again preserues it in vautes under the graunde,
where the dry earth does cherishe such fruits as she has brought forth,
used as Varro says, in Spain and Garthage: and in our days we use to keep
both Wine and Grain in such vaultes. In Countries that are very wette and
watrishe, it is better to make them in Garrettes as hie as may be, having good
regard that it be well walled and floored. Moreover, where as Corn is subject
to Wyuels and Uermine, except it be very safely laid up, it will soon be
consumed: Against breedyng of VVyuels.
therefore you must make with Clay mingled in stead of straw with hear, then
ouercast it within and without with white Potters Claye, last of all, steep
the roots and leaves of wild Cucumbers in water two days, and with that
water, and Lime, and Sand, make plaster, and wash therewithal the walls
within: albeit Pliny countes Lyme as hurtful a thing as may be for Corn.
Some mingle with Lyme the vryne of Cattle, as a thing that will destroy
Wyuels, or the leaves of Houseleeke, of Wormwood, or Hoppes: but specially if
you have it, there is nothing so good to destroy all such Uermine, as the
dregs and bottom of Oil: some use in the stead thereof, the pickle of
Herringes. Having in this sort ordered their feelinges, and their floores being
dry, they suppose that no hurtful woorme shall annoy what so ever Corn they lay
in them. Some lay under their Corn, Fleewoort: others think it an assured
remedy, if they be often fanned and wynnowed, and thereby cooled: but
Columella thinks it untrue, and that by this means the vermin shall not
only be not driven out, but they shall be dispearsed throughout all the Corn,
which if they otherwise be left alone, will meddle with no more then the
outward parts, for a handbredth depth within, there never breeds any Wyuels:
and therefore he thinks it better to let that alone that is already corrupted,
and will go no further, then with farther meddling to mar all: for it is an
easy matter when so ever ye need to occupy it, to take away that is taynted,
and to use the rest. But for all this, experience teaches us, that there is no
so good a remedy to destroy the Wyuel, as is the often fannyng and wynnowing
in Summer. After the first two years, they hold opinion they will not meddle
with Corn: but I weerie you with carrying you to much about, and if it please
you, we will return home.


RIGO. If it be for your ease so to do: otherwise there can be no greater
pleasure to me, then walking abroad to hear you talk of husbandry. Of pasture
and medovve
Are these that I see your Pastures, where your fat Oxen, and your Mares, and
your Caltes go leaping?


CONO. They are so. I lay all my Pastures several, for every kind of Cattle
to be by him self: in the hythermost that you see, are my Cattle that I
fat: in the next are my Horses, my Mares, and my Coltes: in the next are my
young breed, Yeerelinges, and Twayeerelinges. The Meddowes that you see in
yonder Ualley, lie all to be mowed. Here next to my house, are my Sucklings,
that are brought to their dammes to suck thrice a day, and therefore ought to
be near: how be it, such as feed far of, must diligently and daily be
looked to, for fear of diseases.


RIGO. Since I have troubled you this far, I can not leave till I understand
all your orders.


CONO. No trouble at all to me, but rather as I said before, the recording
hereof, is my great joy: for in talking of these matters you bring me abedde.


RIGO. I pray you then take the pains to describe me the ordering of Pastures
and Meddowes, when as there seems to be a great affinity betwixt them and
Corn ground, and because they are sometimes also to be plowed, me thinks
this part remains to be spoken of.


CONO. With all my heart, I will satisfy your desire in as much as I am able:
and in deed since I have all this while spoken of Corn ground, it is not out
of order to tell you my mind of Pasture: and although Cato in some places
does give the preeminence to the Uineyarde, yet other old writers do most of
all prefer Pastures, as the ground that requires least a do about it: and
therefore they were called as Varro says, Prata, because they were parata,
always in readiness, and needed neither great charge nor labor, nor are in
danger of storm or tempests, as other kind of ground is, except such
parcels as lie near Rivers and Islands, which are sometimes ouerflowed: and
that discommoditie is sufficiently recompensed with the fatness that the water
leaves behind it, which enricheth the ground, and makes it the better
yearly to yield his gain either in Pasture or Meddowe. The Pastures wi^h us
do commonly serve both for Pasture or Meddowe when we list, specially in such
places where the ground is ritche and dry, which they had ratired to employ
to Pasture, because with dounging of Cattle, it waxes ^^wayes the better,
whereas with continual bearing of He^, in has grown to be mossie and naught:
but where the ground is always wette and watrishe, there it is better to let
it lie for Meddowe. Columella makes two kinds of Pasture ground, whereof one
is always dry, the other overflowed. The good and the rich ground has no
need of ouerflowyng, the Hay being much better that grows of the self
goodness of the ground, then that which is forced by waters: which sometime
notwithstanding is needful, if the barrenness of the ground requires it:
for in badde and noughtie ground, good Meddowe may be made, if it lie to be
overflowed: but then must the ground neither lie hollow, nor in hills, lest
the one of them keep the waters upon it to long, and the other presently let
it soorth again. Therefyre lies the ground best, that lies leuelest, which
suffers not the water to remain very long, nor auoydeth it too soon. If in
such ground it chance to stand ouerlong, it may be auorded with water
stream at your pleasure: for both overplus, and the want of water are alike
hurtful unto Meddowes. It is very handsome, where dry and barrayne ground
lies so by the River, as the water may be let in by Trenches when you list: in
fine, the occupying of Pasture grounds require more care then travail. First,
that we suffer not Busshes, Thorns, nor great Weeds, to ouergrowe them, but
to destroy some of them, as Brembles, Briars, Bulrusshes, and Sedges in the
end of Summer, and the other that be Summer Weeds, as Sowthystell, and all
other Thystels, in the Spring. You must take heed of Swyne, that spoil and
turn up the ground ilfauouredly, and all other Cattle: except it be in hard
and dry weather, for otherwise they gult and ma^re the ground with the deep
sincking of their feet treading in the Grass, and breaking the Roots. The
badde and barrayne grounds are to be helped with doung in Winter, specially in
February, the Moon increasing, and the stones, sticks, and such baggage as
lie scattered abroad, are to be thrown out sooner or later, as the ground is.
There are some Meddowes that with long lying, are over grown with Moss,
which the old husbands were woout to remedy with casting of certain seeds
abroad, or with laying on of doung, specially Pigeons doung: but nothing is so
good for this purpose, as often to cast ashes upon it, for that destroys
Moss out of hand. Notwithstanding, these are but troublesome remedies. The
best and certainest is to plowe it: for the ground after his long rest, will
bear goodly Corn. But after you have plowed it, it will scarce recover his
old estate again for Pasture or Meddowe in three or four years. When you
mean to let your ground lie again for Meddowe or Pasture, your best is to
sow it with Oats, and to harrowe the ground even and level, and to hurl
out all the stones and such things as may hurt the Sithe: for Oats is a
great breeder of Grass. Some do cast Hey seed, geathered from the Heyloaft
or the racks, over the ground before they harrowe it. Others again, when
their Meddowes have lain long, sow Beans upon them, or Rape seed, or Millet,
and the year after, Wheat: and the third year they let them lie again for
Meddowe or Pasture. You must beware, that while the ground is loose and soft,
you let not in the water, for the force of the water will wash away the earth
from the roots of the Grass, and will not suffer them to grow together:
neither must you (for the like danger) suffer Cattle to come upon it, except
in the second year Goats, or Sheep, or such like, after you have mowed it,
and that if the season be very dry. The third year you may put on your
greater sort of Cattle again, and if the ground be hilly and barrayne, you
may doung the highest part of it in February, as I said before, casting on it
some Hey seed: for the higher part being mended, the rain or water that comes
to it, will carry down some part of the richenesse to the hottome. as I said
before, when I spoke of the manuring of earable ground. But if you will lay in
new ground for Meddowe, and that you may have your choice, take such as is
ritche, dewye, level, or a little hanging, or choose such as valley, where
the water can neither lie long, nor run away to fast: neither is the rank
Grass always a sign of good ground: for what goodlyer Grass is there says
Pliny, then is in Germany, and yet you shall there have sand within a little
of the upper part. Neither is it always a watrie ground where the Grass grows
hie, for the very Mountains in Sycherland yield great and hie Grass for
Cattle. The Pastures that lies by the Lakes of Dumone in Austri and Hungry are
but selender, nor about the Rhine, specially at his falling into the Sea about
Holland, as likewise in Frislande and Flaunders. Caesar Vopiscus, the Feeldes
of Roscius were the principal of Italy, where the Grass would so soon grow,
as it would hide a staff in a day. You may make good Meddowe of any ground,
so it may be watered. Your Meddowes are to be purged in September and October,
and to be rid of all Busshes, Brambles, and great foul Weeds, and al
things else that annoy them: then after that it has often been stirred, and
with many times plowing made fine, the stones cast away, and the cloddes in
every place broken, you must doung it well with fresh doung, the Moon
increasing. Let them be kept from gulling and trampling of Cattle. The
Mouldhilles and dounging of Horse and Bullockes, must with your Spade be cast
abroad, which if they remain, would either be harberours of Antes and such
like Uermine, or else breeders of hurtful and unprofitable weeds: your Meddowes
must be laid in toward March, and kept from Cattle, and made very clean:
if they be not ritche, they must be mended with doung, which must be laid on,
the Moon increasing, and the newer the doung be, the better it is, and the
more Grass it makes: which must be laid upon the top of the highest of the
ground, that the goodness may run to the bottom. The best herb for
Pasture or Meddowe, is the Trefoyle or Clauer: the next is sweet Grass: the
woorst as Pliny says, is Russhes, Fearne, and Horsetayle.


RIGO. How shall I know when the Grass is ripe, and ready to be cut?


CONO. The time of cutting of it, is when the Bent begins to fade and to
wax stiff, and before it wyther. Cato biddes not to mow your Grass with the
latest, but before the seed be ripe. It is best cut down before it wyther,
whereby you shall have bot^ more, and better Hey of it. Some, where they may
ouerflowe it, do water it a day before they cut it, it cutteth better after a
dewye Evening.


RIGO. Do you cut Grass in the like sort as you do Corn?


CONO. Almost in the like same sort, some do use short Sythes, mowing it with
one hand: but we here do use the common great Sithe, mowing with both our
hands, as I said before, that Oats, and Barley, and such other like Corn
was mowed: which Sythes we use to sharp with Whetstones, or instruments of
Wood dressed with Sand. The Grass being cut, must be well tedded and turned
in the Summer, and not cocked till it be dry: and if it chance to be wette
with rain, it must not be turned, till the upper part be dried. There is a
measure to be used in making of it, that it be not had in too dry, nor to
green. The one sort, if the juice be dried up, serves only for litter: the
other (too green and moist) if it be carried into the Loft, rotteth, and the
vapor being ouerheated, falls on fire and burns. And if so be the rain
chance to fall upon the Grass that is new cut down, if it be not stirred,
it takes not so much harm: but if it be once turned, you must still be
stirring of it, otherwise it will rotte. Therefore the uppermost part before it
be turned, must be well dried with the Sun and the Wind: when it is dried,
we lay it in windrowes, and then make it up in Cocks, and after that in
Moowes, which must be sharp and piked in the top, the better to defend it
from the rain: which if it do not fall, yet is it good so to do, that they
may sweat in the said Moowes, and digest what so ever moisture is in it. And
therefore good husbands do not lay it up in their Loftes, till such time as
it has sweat in the Feelde. Grass is commonly mowed twyse a year, in May or
June, and again after Harvest: the first mowing is counted the best. As soon
as the Hey is of after the first mowing, it would be ouerflowed (if you may
conveniently) to the end the after swath may be mowed in Autumn, which they
call in Latin Cordum. In the Dukedom of Spol^to, it is said they mow four
times a year, being dry ground, and diverse other places thryse a year.
Medica may be rutte six times a year, if it be ordered as it ought to be. It
is best mowed when it begins to flower, for it must not grow to seed:
being dried, it is made up in bundels, and kept good three years, to the great
comfort of poor Cattle: but because I have told you of Medica before, it is
but vain to rehearse it again.


RIGO. You have spoken of a very large and great knowledge of husbandry, which
out of doubt requires in a man great travail and diligence.


CONO. It requires in deed great diligence and travail, howebeit, it
recompenceth the pains and the charges not without great gaynes, whereof
Pliny brings for example Caius Cresinus, who when upon a little piece of
ground he reaped more fruit and graynes a great deal, then his neighbors
did upon their great occupiers, gr^we into great hatred amongst them, as
though they had bewitched their feeldes: whereof being accused by Spurius
Albinus, and fearing to be condemned, when the Quest should pass upon him, he
bringes all his instruments of husbandry into the common place, and brought in
there with all his daughter, a jolly great royle, his iron tools perfectly well
made, great Spades, The diligence of Caius Cresinus.
mighty Coulters, and lusty Cattle: lo here (quoth he) mine echauntments,
neither can I bring before you my great and painful labors, watchinges, and
sweat: whereupon he was presently quitte by the voices of them all. But I
keep you to long about my husbandry, it is good time we leave and go home.


RIGO. With a good will. If I may obtain one thing at your hands, which when
you have made an end with, I will trouble you no longer.


CONO. What is that?


RIGO. If a man would bye a Farm or a Manor, in what sort shall he best do
it? for I dout not but you have good skill in such matters.


CONO. Iscomachus in Xenophon tells, that his father taught him that he
should never buy a piece of ground, that had been skilfully or curiously
husbanded before, but rather such ground as by the slothfulness and poverty
of the master, had lain untilled and neglected, and yet seem to be very good
ground: as it is better to bye a lean Horse, so that he be not old, and that
he have the tokens of a good Horse, then a fat Horse, and one that is
curiously kept. A well ordered peeece of land is held dear, and yeeldes no
great increase, and therefore is neither so pleasant nor so profitable, as that
which by good husbandry may be made better. Cato would have two things to be
observed in bying of land, the goodness of the ground, and the holsomenesse
of the air: of which two, if either be lacking, whosoever does bye it, he
judges him mad, and meet to be sent to Bedlem: for none that is well in his
wits, will bestow cost upon barraine ground, nor hazard him self for a
little rich ground, to be always subject to pestilentiall diseases: for
where a man must deal with the Devil, there is not only his commodity, but
his life doubtful, and rather his death then his gain certain. After these
two principal notes, as Columella says, Cato added of like weight these three
that follow to be regarded: the Way, the Water, and the Neighbor. The
goodness of the way is a great matter, for it both makes the master have a
delight to go about it, and it is commodious for carriage, which brings
great gain, and litleth charges. Of the commodity of water who doubts,
without whose use no man is able to live. Of a man's neighbor, he would have a
man have special regard. Hesiodus says, (...), an evil neighbor is a great
mischief. I have known diverse, that for the troublesomenesse of their
neighbor, have forsaken good dwellings, and changed gold for copper, because
they have had false knaves to their neighbors, and quarellers, that suffering
their cattle to run at large in every man's ground to spoil their Corn and
their Uines, would also cut down wood, and take what so ever they find,
always brabling about the bounds of their ground, that a man could never be
in quiet for them: or else have dwelt by some Caterpiller Ruffian or
Swashbuckler, that would leave no kind of mischief undone. Amongst all which
commonly there is not so ill a neighbor, as the new vpstart, that takes upon
him the name of a gentleman, who though you use him never so well, will at one
time or other give you to understand from whence he comes, and make you sing
with Claudian. ASPERIVS NIHIL EST HV MILI CVM SVRGIT IN ALTVM.
A leudar vvretche there lives not under sky,
Then Clovvne that climes from base estate to hye.
As the Proverb in England is, Set a Knave on horseback, and you shall see
him shoulder a Knight: for an Ape will be an Ape, though you clothe him in
Purple. Surely M. Portius would have a man shun the neighborhood of such as
the pestilence. I for my part am happy in this point, that I have no neighbor
that I need to fear.


RIGO. Perhaps they dare not for your authority do, as otherwise they would.


CONO. But since death and other casualties riddes a man of them, the dwelling
is not to be left, if it have other good commodities, except it be placed in
the borders of sundry Countries that be subject to great sicknesses. Some
commend the dwelling that has fair ways about it, is near some River or
good market, whereby a man may carry his marcha^dize with less charges. The
old fellows would never have a man place him self near the hie way, for
pilffering of such as pass by, and troublesomenesse of ghestes, as I said
before in speaking of the placing of an house. In the letting of a Farm, The
lettyng of a Farm
those things are to be observed that I spoke of before, in describing of a
Bayliffe of husbandry and his labor: that you let it to such, whose travail
and good behavior you may be assured of, and that you regard more their good
ordering of the land then the rent, which is least hurtful, and most
gaynefull. For where as the ground is well husbanded, you shall commonly have
gain, and never loss, except by unreasonableness of the weather, which the
Civil Lawyer says should not be any damage to the Tenant, or the invasion of
the enemy, where the Tenant can not help it. Besides, the Lord must not
deal with his Tenant so straightly in every point, as by law he might, for
his rent days, bargaynes of wood, quit rentes, or such, the rigor wherein is
more troublesome then beneficial: neither ought we to take every advantage, for
law many times is right plain wrong: neither must ye be to slack on the
other side, for too much gentelnesse many times makes a man the woorst. And
therefore it is good if the Farmer be slack in his paimentes, to make him to
know it: but in no wise to be a rayser or enhaunser of rentes, for that
discomfortes, and many times vndooeth the Tenant. Moreover, you must not
lightly change the old Farmer, both because of his deserts, and that he is
better acquainted with the ground then a new. L. Volusius would always say,
that he was in best case for his lands, that had always his Tenauntes borne
and bread up in them, whereby the long familiarity should make them more
lovingly to use them selves: for sure it is an evil use often to change
Tenauntes, and therefore I do like well that order, where the land is let for
the lives of the Tenant, his Wife, and his Child, paying a yearly rent, so
that as long as he pays his rent, and keeps the reparations, it shall not be
lawful to deceive him: for hereby the Tenant shall be provoked to order the
ground with more diligen^e, to repair the house, and to look to it in all
points as to his own, bestowyng many times as much as he has upon it. This
way of letting land me see^es is best, where the ground is subject to the Sea
or the River, or other danger, that the Tenant be charged with the
maintenance of it. And here be sure that you let it rather to one of
ability, then to a an unthrifty man that is not able to bear it, whereby
you may loose both your land and your rent. In such place as lies near the
lord, he may occupy it by his Bayliffe, or to hawues: but where it is far
of, it is better to let it out for a yearly rent upon ye foresaid couenantes.
For if you occupy it with your servants, they will either look ill to your
cattle, or your ground, or suffer things to be stolen, or steal them selves,
or make you be at more charges then needs, and be careless in every thing.
In letting of ground commonly it is couenaunted, that the Tenant shall not let
nor sell without leave of the lord, and that he shall not break any Pasture
or Medowe land, and what, and how much he shall sow of eue^y kind of
grain, how much he shall have for Pasture, how much he shall let lie, and
how much he shall mend. Here have you almost as much as I am able to say in
husbandyng of the ground.


RIGO. I thank you, you have greatly delighted me with the describing of your
Pasture ground and Earable.


The end of the first Book.
The second Book, of Gardens, Orchardes, and Wooddes.
Thrasybulus. Marius. Iulia. BEcause of the Aliance betwixt Herbs, Trees, and
Corn, and because their husbandry is almost one, it is reason that next to the
first book, written of earable ground and tyllage, should follow the
description of Orchardes, Gardens, and their fruits. Virgil in writing of
husbandry, left this part unwritten of: how be it, diverse others both old and
new writers have not without some diligence written of this part, but yet by
snatches (as it were) and not thoroughly: whose opinions, joined with mine own
experience, it seems good to me in this book to declare. And since the use
of Orchardes and Gardens is great and ancient, The use of Gardens of great
antiquity.
and that Homer writes, how Laertes the old man, was wont with his travail
in his Orchardes, to drive from his mind the sorrow he took for the absence
of his son. And Xenophon reports, that king Cyrus, as great a prince as he
was, would plant with his own hands, and set Trees in his Orchardes, in
such order, as it seemed an earthly paradise. Qu. Curtius writes of
Abdolominus, that for his great virtue, of a poor Gardner, came to be king of
the Sidonians. And surely, not vnwoorthyly is this part of husbandry esteemed,
seeing it does not alonely bring great pleasure, but also is greatly profitable
for the maintenance of household, and the sparing of charges, ministering to
the husband daily food and sufficient sustenaunce without cost. For when (as
Columella says) in the old time the people lived more temperately, and the
poor at more liberty fed of flesh and milk, and such things as the
ground and foldes yielded: but in the latter age when ryotte and daintiness
began to come in, and the wealthyer sort to esteem no fare but costly, and
far fetched, not content with mean diet, but coveting such things as were
of greatest price, the poor people as not able to bear the charges, were
banished from the costlier eats, and driven to content them selves with the
basest food. And hereof sprang at the first the planting of Orchardes, and
making of Gardens, wherewith the poorest creature that was, might store his
Kitchen, and have his victuals always at hand, the Orchard and Garden serving
for his Shambles, with a great deal more commendable and hurtlesse diet.
Herein were the old husbands very careful, An evil Garden, token of an ill
husvvyfe.
and used always to judge, that where they found the Garden out of order, the
wife of the house (for unto her belonged the charge thereof) was no good
huswyfe, for they should be forced to have their victuals from the Shambles or
the Market, not making so great account of Colwoortes then, as they do now,
condemning them for the charges that were about them. As for flesh, it was
rather lothed then used amongst them. Only Orchardes and Gardens did chiefly
please them, because the fruits that they yield, needed no fire for the
dressing of them, but spared wood, being always of them selves ready dressed,
easy of digestion, and nothing burdensome to the stomach: and some of them
serving also to powder or preserve withal, as good merchandise at home, as
Pliny says, not driving men to seek Pepper as far as Indie. Of Lucrin, I
the Oysters not regard, as the Poet says. And therefore to make them of more
woorthynesse, and that for their common profit they should not be the less
regarded, there were diverse noble men of the house of Valerius, that took
their surnames of Lettuse, and were not ashamed to be named Lettismen. O^
Lettusyns.
The old people had in great estimation the Gardens of the daughters of Altas,
and of the kings Adonis, and Alcinoi, of whom Homer so much speaks, as also
the great vaulted Gardens, either built by Semiramis, or by Cyrus the king of
Assyria. Epicure is reported to be the first that ever devised Garden in
Athens, before his time it was not seen that the pleasures of the Country
were had in the City. Now when Thrasybulus trauayling in the affairs of his
Prince, chanced to come to the house of Marius, and carried by him into a
Garden that he had, which was very beautiful, being led about among the
sweet smelling flowers, and under the pleasant Hearbers, what a goodly sight
(quoth) Thrasybulus is here? how excellently have you garnished this paradise
of yours with all kind of pleasures? Your Parlers, and your banketting houses
both within and without, as all bedecked with pictures of beautiful Flowers
and Trees, that you may not only feed your eyes with the beh^lding of the
true and lively flower, but also delight your self with the counterfaite in
the midst of Winter, seeing in the one, the painted flower to contend in
beauty with the very flower: in the other, the wonderful work of nature,
and in both, the passing goodness of GOD. Moreover, your pleasant Herbers to
walk in, whose shadows keep of the heat of the Sun, and if it fortune to
rain, the Cloisters are hard by. But specially this little River with most
clear water, encompassing the Garden, does woonderfully set it forth, and
here withal the green and goodly quickset Hedges, in chargeble kind of
enclosures, differs it both from Man and Beast. I speak nothing of the well
ordered quarters, whereas the Herbs and Trees are severed every sort in their
due place, the Pot herbs by them selves, the Flowers in an other place, the
Trees and the Impes in an other quarter, all in just square and proportion,
with Alleys and Walks amongst them. Among these goodly sightes, I pray you
remember according to your promise (for so the time requires) to show me some
part of your great knowledge in Garden matters, sith you have upon this
condition heard me heretofore garbring, or rather weerying you with the
declaiming of my poor skill in the tilling of the Feeld.

MARIUS. Your memory is herein a littel to quick, but what shall I do?
promise must be kept, and since you will needs force me, you shall hear me
babble as well as I can, of my knowledge in gardning: but not with the like
pleasure that I heard you talking, of your grasyng and your ground.


THRA. Yes truly, with as great pleasure and desire as may be.


MARIUS. Come on then, let us here sit down in this Herber, and we will now
and then rise and walk, resting us as often as you will: in the mean time IVLIA
shall make ready our supper. And first, even as you began with the choosing of a
place meet to set your house upon, so must I with the choice of a Plot meet
for a Garden. The ordring of Gardens is diverse, for some are made by the Manor
houses, some in the Suburbs, some in the City, where so ever they be, if the
place will suffer, they must be made as near to the house as may be: but so,
as they be as far from the Barnes as you can, for the chafe or dust blowing
into them, and either subject to the Doung heap, whereby it may be made rich,
or else in some very good ground that has some small Brook runnyng by it, or
if it have none such, some Well or Condite, whereby it may be watered. An
excellent plotte for the purpose is that which declineth a little, and has
certain gutters of water running through diverse parts thereof: for Gardens
must always be to be easily watered, if not, with some runnyng stream, some
Pomp is to be made, or Kettell, Myll, or such like, The time of s^^rchyng for
water.
as may serve the turn of a natural stream. Columella would have you make
your search for water, when the Sun is in the latter part of Virgo, which is
in September before his entrance into the Winter Aequinoctial, for then may you
best understand the strength or goodness of the springes, when after the great
burning heat of the Summer, the ground has a long while continued without
rain. If you can not thus have water, you must make some standing Pond at the
upper part of the ground, that may receive and conteyne such water as falls
from above, wherewith ye may water your Garden in the extreme heat of the
Summer: but where neither the nature of the soil, nor conueiance by Conduite,
or Pomp, or running stream is to be had, you have no other help but the
rain water of Winter, which if you also have not, then must you delue and lay
your Garden three or four foot deep: which being so ordered, will well be
able to abide what so ever droughth do happen. This is also to be regarded,
that in Gardens that are destitute of water, you so order them into several
parts, that what part you will occupy in Winter, may lie toward the South,
and that which shall serve you for Summer, may lie toward the North. In a
Garden, as in the choice of Corn ground, you must look whether the goodness
of the ground be not hindered by the unskillfulness of him that has occupied
it. You must also make choice of your water, of which the best as Pliny
says) are the coldest, and such as be sweet to drink: the woorst, that comes
from Ponds, or is brought in by trenches, because they bring with them the
seeds of Grass and Weeds: but the ground does most delight in rain water,
which kills Woormes and baggage that breeds in it: but for some Herbs, salt
water is needful, as the Raddishe, Beete, Rue, Sa^rile, to which, al salt
water they say, is a special helper, making them both pleasant and
fruitful: to all others, The (...) of (...) of Gardens.
sweet water is only to be used. And because I have begun to entreat of
watring, I must give this note, that the times of watring is not in the heat
of the day, but early in the morning, and at night, least the water be heated
with the sun: only Basyl you must water at Noone, the seed something will
come the sooner up, if they be sprinkled at the first with hot water. You
have here heard, that the first needful thing for a Garden, Enclosyng of
Gardens.
is water. The next to that is enclosure, that it be well enclosed both from
unruly folks and thieves, and likewise from Beasts: least lying in wait for
your Herbs and your Fruits, they may both bere^ue you of your pains and your
pleasure: for if either they be bitten with Beasts, or to often handeled with
Men, it hinders them both of their growth and seeding: and therefore it is of
necessity to have the Garden well enclosed. Now for enclosures, there are
sundry kinds, some making earth in mould do counterfeite Brickwalles: others
make them of lime and stones, some others of stones laid one upon an other in
heaps, casting a ditche for water round about them, which kind Palladius
forbiddes to follow, because it will draw out the moisture from the Garden,
except it be in marrishe ground. Other make their fence with the seeds and
settes of Thorn: some make them of mudde walls covered with straw or heath,
Varro makes mention of four kinds of enclosure, the first natural, the
second wild, the third souldierly, the fourth, of Carpenters work. The
first and natural is the quickset Hedge, being set of young Thorns, which
once well grown, regards neither fire nor other hurt. The second is the
common Hedge made of dead wood, well staked and thick plasshed, or raylde. The
third the Soldiers fortefying, is a deep Ditch with a rampire: but the Ditche
must be so made, as it may receive all the water that comes from above, or
falls into it, wherein the vaumure must be so steep, that it may not easily be
climed. This kind of fence is to be made, where the ground lies near the hie
way, or buts upon the River, of which sort I shall have occasion to speak more
hereafter. The fourth fence made by the Carpenter or by the Mason, is commonly
known: whereof there is four sorts, either of Stones, or of Brickes, of Turfe
and Earth, and little stones framed in moulde. Columella following the
auncientest aucthours, prefers the quickset Hedge before the dead, both
because it is less chargeable, and also endures the longer, continuing a long
time: which Hedge of young thorns, he teaches to make in this sort. The place
that you determine to enclose, The making of a quickset h^dge.
must after ye beginning of September, when ye ground has been well soked with
rain, be trenched about with two Furrows, a yard distant one from the other,
the deapth and breadth of every one of them must be two foot, which you must
suffer to lie empty al Winter, providing in ye mean time the seeds that you
mean to sow in them, which must be the Berries of sharp Thorns, Briars,
Holly, and wild Eglanttine, which ye Greeks call (...)^ Dog Bryer. The
Beries of these you must geather as ripe as you may, and mingle them with the
flower or meal of Tares, which when it is sprinkled with water, must be put
upon old ropes of Ships, or any other ropes, the ropes being thus handled and
dried, must be laid up in some boorded ^^oore. Afterward when Winter is done,
within forty days after, about the coming of the swallowe, if there be any
water remaining in the F^rrowes, it must be ^et out, and the mellowed earth,
which was cast out of the Furrows in the end of Summer, must now be cast in
again, till you have filled them up to the midde^t: then must you handsomely
vnf^lde the rope, and lay them in length through both the Furrows, and so
cover them, taking good heed that you throw not to much earth upon them for
hindering the spring: which commonly uses to appear within thirty days
after, and when they be grown to be of some heyght, they must be made to
incline to the space betwixt the two Furrows: in which space you must have a
little walled Hedge, to teach the springes of other Furrows to clime by,
which will be a (...) and a comfort to them. But I have an other and a more
redyer way of making of them, which you first practisyng in this Country, An
other nevver and bette^ (...) hedge.
diverse others have followed. I also do make a certain Ditche, and geathering
in the wood the young springes of Thorns, cutting of their tops, I set them
on the bancke of the Ditche, so that they stand half a foot out of the
ground, plucking up all the weeds (specially the first summer) that grow
about them, and suck away the juice that comfortes the set. The roots being
thus rid, I cover all the earth about them with straw, whereby both the dew
of the night is let into the roots, and the poor plant is defended from the
burning of the Sun. The year after, I make a little s^lender rail of
powles, whereunto I leye up the springes, weauing them in such sort as I will
have them to grow, which I yearly make higher, according to the height that I
would have the Hedge to spring. Eight, or at the uttermost niene foot, is a
sufficient heyght, and what so ever spring above, must be plasshed of one side
or the other, to make the fence the stronger. When I have thus done, I matte it
thicker and thicker every year, filling up the places where I see it thin,
with such bows as I see grow out of order: and thus is it wouen so thick
with yearly bindinges, that not so much as a small bird is able to pass
through it, nor any man to look through it. When it is thick yenough and
big yenough, the superfluous springes must every yeerer be cut. This Hedge
can never be destroyed, except it be plucked up by ye roots: neither fears
it the hurt of fire, but will grow the better for it. And this is my way of
enclosing a Garden, as the pleasantest, most profitable, and of least charges.


THRA. There is an other way of making of a quicksette Hedge, An other sort of
hedging.
which our Hedgers in the Country do use, which is something the stronger.
For setting the young settes, as you have said before, when they be grown to
some greatness, they cut the Thorn near to the ground, and being half cut
and broken a sunder, they bow it along the Hedge, and plashe it. From these
cuttes spring up new plants, which still as they grow to any highness, they
cut them, and plashe them again: so doing continually, till the Hedge be come
to his full height. This way the Hedge is made wonderful strong, that neither
Hog nor other Beast, is able to break through it: but the other is a great
deal more pleasant to the eye. But if I have not settes yenowe to serve, may I
make an Impe Garden of their seed?


MARIUS. Yea very well. Make your Thorn Garden or store plotte in this sort.
Take your Berries or Stones, and mingle them with earth, lay them up for the
first year in some place meet for them, the next year sow them as thick as
you can, and ye shall within a little time have a whole wood of Thorns.


THRA. You have now spoken of water and enclosure, two principal points in a
Garden: it now remains for you to speak of the ground meet for a Garden,
and of the order of dressyng of it.


MARIUS. Of the sundry sorts of ground, and of the discerning of them, because
you in your describing of Corn ground before have sufficiently spoken, I do
not think it needful for me to repeat it. Again, it is yenough to me to
add only this, that the ground ought not to be too rich nor too lean, but
fat and mellowe, which brings forth a small kind of Grass like hears:
such ground requires least labor, the stiff and the rich ground asks
greater pains about it, but does recompense it again with his
fruitefulnesse. The stiff, lean, and cold ground, is not to be meddled with,
as Columella writes in appoynting good ground for Gardens. The ground that
geues the ripe and mellowed moulde,
And does in woorking croomble like the sands,
That of his own good nature yields manifold,
Where Walwoort with his purple berrie stands:
For neither does the ground that still is dry,
Content my mind, nor yet the watery soil,
Whereas the Frogge continually does cry,
While in the stinking Lakes he still does moyle.
I like the land that of it self does yield,
The mighty Elm that branches broad does bear,
And round about with trees bedeckes the feelde,
With trees, that wild bears Apple Plome and Pear.
But will no Ber^oote breed nor stinking Gum,
Nor Yewe nor Plants, whence deadly poisons come.
And this much of the Garden ground, which as I said, is watered, or may be
watered, and is enclosed either with a Wall, a Hedge, What to be considered in
the cho^se of Garden ground.
or some other safe enclosure. After this, it is needful it lie well to the
Sun, and warm: for in ground that is very cold, the warmth of the Sun
will not much avail it. And contrary, if it be a hette burning Sand, the
benefit of the heavens can little help it. Air.
You must yet look, that it lie not subject to ill winds that are dry and
^^^^ching, VVindes.
and bring frostes and mystes. But now to the orde^ing of your Garden. The
ord^ring of Gardens.
First, you must be sure that the ground which you mean to sow in the
Spring, be well dug in the fall of the leaf, about the kalendes of October:
and that which you garden in the fall of the leaf, must be dug in May,
that either by the cold of Winter, or the heat of Summer, both the clodde may
be mellowed, and the roots of the weeds destroyed, nor much before this time
must you doung it. And when the time of sowing is at hand a five days before,
the weeds must be got out, and the doung laid on, and so often and diligently
must it be dug, as the ground may be thoroughly meddled with the mould.
Therefore the parts of the Gardens must be so ordered, as that which you mean
to sow in the end of Summer, may be dug in the spring: and the part that
you will sow in the spring, must be dug in ye end of Summer: so shall both
your f^llowes be seasoned by the benefit of the cold and the Sun. Bedde^.
The beds are to be made narrow and long, as twelve foot in length, and
six in breadth, that they may be the easyer weeded: they must lie in wette and
watrye ground two foot hie, in dry ground a foot is sufficient. If your
beds lie so dry, as they will suffer no water to tarry upon them, you must
make the spaces betwixt hyer, that the water may be forced to lie and avoid
when you will. Of the kinds and sorts of dounging, Of digging and dounging of
Gardens.
being sufficiently entreated of by you, I will say nothing: only adding this,
that the doung of Asses is the best, because it breeds fewest weeds: the
next is Cattels doung, and Sheep doung, if it have lain a year. The ground
as I said which we mean to sow in the Spring, we must after the end of
Summer let lie fallowe, to be seasoned with the frost and the cold: for as the
heat of Summer, so does the cold of the Winter bake and season the ground.
When Winter is done, then must we begin to doung it, and about the fourteenth
or fifteenth of January, we must dig it again, dividing it into quarters
and beds. First must the weeds be plucked up, and turffes of barrayne
ground must be laid in the Alleyes, which being well beaten with Beetles, and
so trod upon, that the Grass be worn away, so that it scarce appear, it
will after spring up as fine as littleheare, and yield a pleasant sight to
the eye, which will be very beautiful. When you have severed your flowers by
them selves, your Physic herbs by them selves, and your pot herbs and
sallettes in an other place, the beds and the borders must be so cast, as the
weeders hands may reach to the midst of them, so shall they not need in
their labor to tread upon the beds, nor to hurt the herbs. And this I
think sufficient for the preparing of your ground before the sowing. Now will
I speak of sowing, and what shall be sowed in every season. Of sovving.
To speak of all sorts of herbs and flowers, were an endless labor, only
of those that are most needeful, I mean to entreat. And first of herbs,
some are for the pot, some for the sight, some for pleasure and sweet
savor, and some for physic. And again, some are for Winter, some for
Summer, and some betwixt both. The first time of sowing after Winter, is the
month of March, April, and May, Three seasons to sovv in.
wherein we use to sow Colwoortes, Radishe, Rape, and after Beetes, Lettuse,
Sorel, Mustardseede, Corr^ander, Dyll, and Garden Cresses. The second season
for sowing, is in the beginning of October, wherein they set Beetes, and sow
Smallage in Gellaci and Arreche. The third season, which they call the Summer
season, in some places the Gardners begin in January, wherein they set
Cucumbers, Gourdes, Spinnache, Basyl, Pursline, and Sauery. Many things may be
sowed betwixt these seasons, and yet do very well. All Garden herbs are
commonly sown before the tenth of June, such things as you would not have
seed, you may sow after this time. Some things are sowed only two times a
year, in the spring, and in the end of Summer. Others again at sundry times,
as Lettuse, Colwoortes, Rocket, Radishe, Cresses, Corriander, Cheruil, and
Dyll. These are sowed about March, or about September, and as Columella says,
do come either of the seed, or of the slip: some of the Root, some of the
Stalk, some of the Leaf, some of the Clot, some of the Head, some of both:
others of the Bark, others of the Pith: some, both of the seed and the
slip, as Rue, wild Marierum, and Basyl, this they cut of, when it comes to
be a handful hye: others grow both of the Seed and the Root, as Onyons,
Garlyke, and such like. And although al thing will grow of their seeds, yet
this they say, Rue will not do: for it very seeldome springes, therefore they
rather set the slippes. These that are set of the Root, do commonly last
longer, and branche better, putting forth young slippes from his sides, as the
Onyon and Gith. The stalk being cut, they all do spring again for the most
part, except such as have special stalks, called of Theophrastus (...), that
is, such as when the stalk is cut, grow no more: Gasa interprets it
Secaulia. The Rape and the Radysh, their leaves being pulled away and covered
with earth, do grow and continue till Summer. The fruits of some is in the
earth, some without, and some both within and without, some lie and grow, as
the Cucumber and the Gourd, and sometimes hang, though of greater weight by
much then the fruits of Trees: some require stays and helps to clime by, as
Hoppes, Lupines, and Pease: some seed grows better. The newer they be, Of
seeds.
as Leekes, Nigella Romana, Cucumbers, and Gourdes, and therefore some use to
steep their Cucumber-seede in Milk or Water, to cause them to grow the
speedelyer. On the other side, of old seed better grows the Beete, Garden
Cresses, Peniryal, great Marierum, and Corriander. In the Beete this is only
observed, that the seed comes not al up in one year, but part the second
year, and some the third: and therefore of a great deal of seed, springs
but a little. Touching seed, this is to be well seen to, that they be not to
old and dry, that they be not mingled, or taken one for an other: old seed
in some is of such force, as it changes the nature: for of old Colwoort
seed springs the Rape, and likewise of Rape seed Colwoortes. Also, that ye
geather not your seeds to soon nor to late. The very time as Theophrastus
writes, is at the spring, the fall of the leaf, and the rysyng of the Dog:
but not in all places and kinds alike. What seed spring soon and which
slovvly.
Of Seeds, the soonest that spring are these, Basyl, Arach, Nauen, Rocket,
that comes up the third day after the sowing, Lettuse the fourth day, the
Cucumber and the Gourde, the fyfth day, Parslin longer ear it come, Dyl the
fourth day, Cresses, and M^stardseede the fifth day, Beetes in Summer, the
^ixth day, in Winter, the tenth or the twelfth, Leekes the nienetienth day,
sometime ye twentieth, Corryander later: which if it be new (except it be
thrust together) it grows not at all. Peneryall, and great Marierom, come up
after thyrtie days. Parsley, of all other the longest before it come up,
appearing the fourtieth day after, The vveather for sovvyng.
or many times the fiftieth. You must also consider, that the weather in sowyng
is of great force: for the season being fair and warm, they come up the
sooner. Some sorts seed one year, and never after come up: some again
continue, as Persley, Smalledge, Leekes, Nigella, that being once sowed, come
up every year. Such as continue but a year, presently upon their seeding
dye: other spring again after the loss of their stalk, as Leekes, Nigella,
Onyons, and Garlyke: and commonly all such as put out from the side: and all
these require dounging and watring. The Moon
In sowyng beside, some think you must have regard to the Moon, and to sow
and set in the increase, and not in the wane. Some again think it best from
that she is four days old, till she be eyghteene: some after the third,
others from the tenth, till the twentieth: and best (as they all suppose) the
Moon being aloft, and not set.


THRA. But now I pray you tell us something of the ordering of the best Garden
herbs you have.


MARIUS. Some divide their gardnyng time by the months, as they do their
other husbandry.


THRA. I care not whether by months, or other ways, but I would feign know
the orderyng of your Garden here: for I know in hot Countries they garden
all the Winter long, but I am altogether for our Country, whose order we must
here follow.


MARIUS. The time for gardning
In these parts they commonly begin their gardnyng (if the weather be fair and
seasonable) in the end of February. At this time therefore the Garden being
dounged, dug, raked, and cleansed, they use to plant Sperage, and Rue.


THRA. I pray you begin with Asparagus, Of pot herb.
or Sperage^ and the other pot herbs, every one in his order, and afterward
with flowers, and Physic herbs.


MARIUS. Asparagus was wont to grow wild, but now is brought into the
Garden, Asparagus.
it is called in Greek (...) in Italian, Spanishe, and French, it is almost
all one, the one calling it Asparago, the other Asperge, the Dutche men call it
Sparages and Spiritus, because it comes up of it self: for the Garden Sperage
they were not acquainted with. It is planted in two sorts, either of the
Seed, or the Root. They take of the Seed as much as you may take up with
three fyngers, and bestowing it in little ho^ls, every two or three seeds
half a foot a sunder: they set them in ritche ground in February, and cover
the ground with doung. The weeds that grow, must be well plucked away, after
the fourtieth day they come up as it were to one root, and tangled together,
the roots have sundry long threedes, which they call the Sponge. In ground
that is dry, the seeds are to be set deep, and well tempered with doung. In
wette grounds on the other side, they are to be set shallowe in top of the
borders, lest the moisture destroy them. The first year you must break of the
stalks that grow, for if you pluck them up by the roots, the whole settes
will follow, which are to be preserved for two year with dounging and weeding.
All the years after, you must not geather them in the stalk, but pull them
from the root, that the roots being opened may the better spring, which
except you do, you hurt the spring. Him that you mean to keep for feed, you
must in no wise meddle withal, after, burn up the busshes, and in Winter
doung well the roots with doung and ashes, they are planted also of the
roots, which after two years you must remove into a warm and well dounged
ground. The trenches where you mean to set them, must stand a foot a sunder,
and a shaftman in depthe, wherein you must so lay your Sponges (as being
covered) they may best grow: bnt in the spring before they come up, you must
loose the earth with a little Forke, to cause them the better to spring, and to
make the roots the greater. Cato would have you to take them, but so, as you
hurt not the roots, and after to pull the plant from the root: for if you
otherwise break it, the root will dye, and come to nothing. But you may so
long croppe it, till you see it begin to grow to seed: in which year for the
Winter time, you must according to Catoes mind, cover it with straw, or such
like, least the cold do kill them, and in the spring open it again, and doung
it well. Some think, that the first year it is needelesse to do any thing to
the plant, but only to weed it. From the roots, which they call the sponges,
there springs first certain buddes with crompled knoppes, very good and
pleasant for sallettes: which if you suffer to grow, it straight bussheth
forth with branches like Fennel, and at length grow to be prickely: after
it has flowred, it bears a Berrie, first green, and when it is ripe, read.
If you would have Sallettes of Asparagus all the year through: when you have
geathered the Berries, open the roots that run aloft by the ground with
dyggyng, and you shall have the roots send forth new buddes out of hand. It
is thought, that if you break to poulder the horn of a Ram, and sow it,
watring it well, it will come to be good Sperage. In the Spring time they make
a very good sallet, being sodde in water, or fat broth, till they be tender:
for if you seethe them too much, they will waste away. When they be sod, they
dress them with Uineger, Oil, Pepper, and Salt, and so eat them: or as my
friend Wylliam Prat, very skilful in these matters tells me, they cut them
in small pieces like Dyse, and after they have parboyled them, butter them with
sweet butter, a little Uineger and Pepper.


THRA. You have very well showed me the orderyng of Asparagus, I pray you go
forward to Rue.


MARIUS. Rue, which the Greeks call (...), the Latins Rutam. Rue.
the Italians Rutache, the Spaniardes Ruda, the Frenchemen Rue de gardin, is
planted at the end of February or in March, prospering best in dry and sunny
grounds, it abhors both water and doung, which all other herbs most
delight in, it most delights in ashes: and where all other plants will
spring of the seed, this they say will never do it. The branches being
slipped of and set in the spring, will very well grow, but if you remove the
old root, it dies: it delights in the shadow of the Fig tree, and being
stolen (as they say) it prospers the better: it is sowed with cursyng, as
Cummin, and diverse other, and can not abide the presence of an unclean woman.


THRA. I see goodly Lettuse here, I pray you how do you order it?


MARIUS. Lettuse is called in Dutche Lattich, Lettuse.
in French Laictue, in Greek (...), in Italian Lactuca, and so in Latin, in
Spanishe Lechugas, whereof besides the wild, there are three kinds, one
croompled, which Columella calls Caecilia, and Spanishe Lettuse, of the
Countries where it most grows, and is greatest esteemed, in Dutch called
Krauser Lattich, in French Crespue, the other Cabbedge Lettuse, in Dutch Knopf
Lattich, in French Laictue testue, of Pliny called Laconica, and Sessilis,
because it grows round like an head, or a apple. The third sort is called
Rotunda, because it grows in compass upon the ground.


THRA. But how come you to have so good Lettuse, and how do you order them?


MARIUS. At the end of February, or in the beginning of March, we use to sow
it, that it may be removed about April or May. In hot Countries as Palladius
tells, they sow it in January or in December, with intent to remove it in
February: but you may sow it at any time of the year, so the ground be good,
well dounged, and watered. When you remove them, the roots must be pared and
rubbed over with doung, and such as be already planted, their roots must be
bared and dounged: they love a good ground, moist and well dounged, they spread
the better (if you set by them the Rape) or when they begin to stalk, the
stalk being tenderly cloven, you lay upon it a clod or a tyleshard: they will
be white, if you sprinckle them often with sand, or tie sand within the
leaves, and both tender and white you shall have them. If two days before they
be geathered their tops be tied up, they will be round and Cabbeged: if the
root, being removed when it is growena hand broad in heyght, be pared and
smered with fresh Cow doung, and earth cast about it, be well watered, and
when it grow^th hye, the top be cut, a po^shard laid upon it, the sweeter
also they will be, the more you restrain the stalk from shooting up, which
must, as I said, be kept down with some stone or weight, that they may spread
the better. If the Lettuse chance by reason of the badnesse of the soil, the
seed, or the season, to wax hard, the remoouing of it will bring it again to
his tenderness: it will have sundry and diverse tastes, if taking a Treddle of
Sheep or Goats doung, and hollowyng it cunnyngly with an All or a Bodkyn,
you thrust into it the seed of Lettuse, Cresses, Basyl, Rocket, Smallage,
Parsley, and Radyshe, and after wrapping it in doung, you put it into very good
ground, and water it well. The Parsley, or Smallage goes to root, the others
grow in heygth, keeping still the taste of every one. Constantine affyrmeth
Lettuse to be a moist and a cold herb, a quencher of thyrst, and causer of
sleep, and that being boyld, it nourishes most, and abateth lechery, for
which the Pithagoreans do call it Eunuchion. Galen himself, the prince of
Physicians does greatly commend it, who in his youth did always use to eat
it raw, and after in his elder years boiled, whereby he kept his body in good
temperature. Endive, Endive.
in Latin Intabum, or Intubus, not unlike to Lettuse, some call it Garden
Succory, the Dutchmen and common sort Endiuiam, the Italians and the French
Cicoriam, the Spaniardes Endibia, it is sown as other Garden herbs in March,
it loves moisture and good earth, but you must make your beds when you sow
it the flatter, least the earth falling away, the roots be bared: when it has
put forth four leaves, you must remove it unto well dounged ground, that
which is sown before the kalendes of July, does come to seed, but that
which is sown after^ seedeth not. You must sow that which you would have to
serve you in Winter in October, in warm stony places for sallets in Winter,
they use at this day when his leaves be out, to fold them up together and tie
them round in the top with some small thing, covering them with some little
earthen vessel, the roots still remaining to nourishe them withal: thus
doing, they will grow to be white and tender, and to loose a great part of
their bitterness. It is said, that they will be white, if they be sprinkled a
few days abroad, and lying upon sand, be washed with the rain: and thus is
Endive with his increase preserved all Winter. Some there be, that contentyng
them selves with less charges and labor, do only cover them with earth,
others again with straw: this order of wintering of it, is now in every
place grown to be common.


THRA. I see also in this pleasant Garden Colwoortes, Colvvoorts.
that we Country folks be so well acquainted with.


MARIUS. Is it meet my Garden should want that, which as you know Cato
prefers before all other herbs, in describing the woonderful properties
and uses thereof? and this place I only appoint for such common pot
herbs, as Colwoortes, Bee^es, Endive, Onyans, Rapes, Nauenes, Leekes,
Carrettes, Raddishe, Garleeke, and Parsneppes: the woorthyer sort I place by
them selves, and as the nature of every one requires. Colwoortes is commonly
called in Latin Brassica, or Caulis, in Greek (...), in French Choux, in
Italian Caul, in Spanishe l'erza, in Dutche Koil. The old writers made diverse
sorts of it, as at this day there be. One sort with great and broad leaves, a
big stalk, and very fruitful. This sort is commonly known, which being
the pleasaunter in Winter, when it is bitten with the frostes, is sodde with
Baken, and used in porredge. The tender part of the top being a little
boiled, is served for sallettes, dressed with oil and salt. The second sort
with the croombled leaf, of yt resemblance that it has to Smallage, is called
Selinocis or Apiaria, of the common people crompled Col, or wrinckled Col. The
third sort which is properly called Crambe, has a smaller stalk and leaf,
smoothe, tender, and not very full of juice. The fourth sort is the great
Cabbedge, with broad leaves and a great head, called in Dutche Kappes, in
French Cheux Cabuz, of the old writers Tritiana Brassica, and this kind is
only most set by. In Germany there is one kind of them that they call Lumbardy
Colwoort, or Sauoy Colwoort, sweeter then the other, and not able to endure the
Winter: and an other with very broad leaves croompled and full of wrinckles,
but a great de^le blacker, which the Italians call Ne^^^caules, and the
Latins Nigra Brassica, of the number of th^se that they call commonly read
Col, of the old writers Marucina Brassica. There are besides other sorts,
taking their names of they Country where they grow, as Aricina and Cumana.
The best time for setting and sowyng of Colwoortes, is after the Ides of April.
In cold and raynie Countries, the oftener it is dounged and raked, the better a
great deal will the Colwoortes be: some use to sow them about the Kalends of
March, but then the cheifest of it goes out in leaf, and when it is once cut,
makes no good stalk for the Winter after: yet may you twyse remove your
greatest Col, and if you so do, you shall have both more seede^ and greater
yield: for it so abounds with seed, as it is sowed with no less advantage
then Rape seed. For the making of oil, Colwoortes may be sown all the year
long, but chiefly in March after it is sowed, it appears within ten days,
except your seeds be old and dry, for old seed will grow to Rapes, as old
Rape seed will to Colwoortes. Some say it prospers best in salt ground, and
therefore they use to cast upon the ground Saltpeter or Ashes, which also
destroys the Caterpiller: it is removed in June, chiefly when it has put
forth sire leaves, and that when the weather is rayny, so that you cover the
root before with a little fresh doung, and wrappe it in seaweede, and so set
it. More diligence is to be used about the Cabbedge: it must be sown in March
in the full of the Moon, that it may remain in the ground two Moons, and in
May you must take them up, and set them again two foot asunder. The ground
must be well dug where you set them, and as fast as they grow, the earth
must be raised about them, so that there appear no more then the very tops
of them: for to cause them to grow sayre and great: you must as often as you
remove them, bank them up with earth about them, that nothing but ye leaves
appear. And this you must often do to all the kinds of them, the hoare
frostes make them have the greater sweetness. The Uineyardes (they say) where
Colwoortes grow, do yield the wo^^ser Uines, and the Col corrupts the wine.


THRA. I pray you proceed with ye rest of these pot herbs.


MARIUS. You see hereby Spinach, Spinach.
so termed (as you know) of the prickly seeds, called in Latin Spinacia,
and even so in Italian, Spanishe, French, and Datche: it is sown as those
before, in March, Apryll, and so till September: if it may be well watered, it
comes up in seven days after the sowing, you shall not need to remove it.
The seed must presently after the sowing be covered, and afterward well
weeded: it refuses no kind of ground, but prospers in every place, you
must often cut it, for it continually grows, it is to be boiled without any
water, where in the boiling it does yield great store of juice, and contenting
it self with his own licquour, it requires none other. Afterward, being
beaten and stirred with the ladell, till the clamminesse be gone, it is made up
in little balls, the juice strayned out and boiled upon a Chafyndishe with
Ole or Butter, some add thereunto Uergius, or the juice of sour Grapes, to
make the taste more tarte. I show you in order as you see, all my Kitchen
herbs, now follows Sorel, Sorell.
called in Latin Acetosa, in Italian likewise, in Spanishe Romaza, in French
Oxella, in Dutch Surick, of the sowrer thereof. There are sundry sorts of it,
we have at this day two kind, the Garden Sorel and the wild, which are
pleasant both in broth and sallettes, and of this herb the wyld sorts are
both sowrer in taste, and smaller in leaf: it is sowed as all other pot
herbs are, and it grows of it self in Meddowes and Gardens. Cummin, and
Co^ri^nder.
Cummin and Corriander require well ordered ground, they are sowed in the
Spring, and must be well weeded. Cummin is called in Greek (...), in Latin
Cuminum, and almost like in all other languages: it is sowed best (as they
think) with curfyng and execration, that it may prosper the better. Corriander
called in Greek (...), in Latin Coriandrum, and in almost by the same name in all other tongues, does best prosper when it is sowed of seed that is oldest.
Smalledge and Parsley called in Greek (...), Smalledge, or Parsley.
and also Petro^elinon, in Latin Apium, Petroselinum, and Apium hortense, in
Italian Apio domestico, and Petrosello, in Spanishe Petersillie or Peterlin, it
is sowed at the Aequinoctiall in the Spring time, the seed beaten a little,
and made up in round pellettes: we call it Aequinoctial, when the night and the
days are of equal length over all the world: that is, when the sun, the
captain and aucthour of the other lights, the very soul of the world, does
enter into the signs of Aries and Libra. It is thought to prosper the better
the older the seed is, and to spring the sooner: it comes up the fiftieth
day, or at the soonest the fourtieth day after it is sown: when it is once
sown, it abides a long time, it rejoices in water or wette. Fenel.
Fenel in Greek (...), in Italian E^nochio, in Spanish Hinozo, in French
Fenoil, in Dutche Fenchel, is sowed in the beginning of the Spring in hot
sunny places, stony ground, or any ground: being once sown, it springs
every year. Annise in Greek (...), in Latin Anisum, so known in most
tongues, as Cummin, and Corriander, requires a ground well ordered and
dressed. Dyll in Greek (...), D^ll.
in Latin Anethum, in French and Italian almost so, in Spanishe Eneldo, in
Dutch Dyll, endures and abides all kind of weathers, but delights most in
warm ground: if it be not well watered, it must be sowed thinner. Some never
cover the seeds when they sow them, supposing that no Bird will meddle with
it, it comes up also of it self as Fenel does. Cheruyl in Greek (...),
Cheruile.
in Latin C^r^foli^om, in Dutche Kerbel, in Italian Gingidia, in French
Cerfu^il, desires a good ground, moist, and well dounged: it is sowed with the
rest in cold places. In this same month they also sow Beetes, Beetes.
though you may sow them when you will at any other time of the year as
Spinach, it is a common Country herb, they call it in Greek (...), in
Italian Bietola, in Spanishe A^elga, in Dutch Beett, or Mangelt. No Garden
herb has greater leaves, so that with due orderyng, it grows like a young
tree. It is called Beta, because when it seedeth, it is (as Columella
affyrmeth) to the likeness of the Greek letter b. There be two sorts of
them, the white and the black, the orderyng of them is after one sort: it is
sowed as Colwoortes, Sozel, and Radyshe are, in March, April, or May. Some
think the best time for sowing it, is while the Pomegranate does flower, it
may be sowed nevertheless as Lettuse, Cols, and diverse others, at any time of
the Summer. The seed, the older it is, the better it is to be sown, as are
the seeds of Smallage, Parsley, Garden Cresses, Sauery, wyld Marierum, and
Corriander, though in all other the newest be best. It comes up in Summer the
sixth day, in Winter the tenth after the sowyng, it loves a moist, a ritche,
and a mellow ground, you may remove it when it has put forth five leaves, if
your ground like well to be watered: if it be dry ground, it must be set in the
end of the Summer, as I have said of Colwoortes, though it make no great
matter at what other time you do it. When you remove it, you must rub over
the root with new doung. This is proper to the Beete, that his seed come not
all up together, but some the year after, some the third year: and
therefore of a great deal of seed, there is at the first but a little show,
it grows the broader and the whyter, if when it is something grown, you lay
upon it Tyle stones, or such like, to cause it to spread, as I spoke before
of Lettuse. Garden Cresses in Greek (...), Ga^den Cres^es.
in Italian Nasturtio, and Agretto, in Spanishe Mastuerzo, in French Cresson,
de gardin, in Dutch Kerss, are sowed bath in ye spring, and at the fall of the
leaf, it comes up the first day after it is sown, and drinks away the
moisture from such herbs as grow near him, mingled with other herbs, he
cares not what weather come, and therefore prospers both as well in winter
as in summer: if it be sowed with Lettuse, it comes v^ exceedingly, it
delights in moisture, which if it want, it will do well yenough in watrie
places it grows of his own accord, as about Padelbor, a Town in
Westphalia, it grows in great abundance in the River, and therefore is called
of some Water Cresses: it was called in the old time Sisimbrium. The bran^hes
when they wa^e old, are netted together with white heary rings. Garden
Poppy, called in Greek (...), Garden Poppy.
in Latin Papauer satiuum, is thought best to grow, where old stalks have been burnt, it is sowed in warm places with other pot herbs. Mustardseede,
Must^^dseede.
in Greek (...), in Latin Sinapi, in Dutch Seneff, in Italian Senape, in
Spanish Mostaz^, in French Seneue, there are two kinds, white and black, it
is best to be sown in the end of summer, and again in March. Where it is once
sown, it is hard to rid the ground of it again, because the seed does
still grow as it falls. It loves to grow upon dounghils, and cast banks.


THRA. I see you have very fair Radishes here.


MARIUS. Nothing so fair as I have had them, for where as they delight in the
Sun, Radishe.
and in warm ground, my Gardners have here set them in the shadow. The order
of them is to be set in very good ground, and lying upon the Sun: some
says, it does not greatly care for doung, so it may have Chafe strawed upon
it. When it is come to some growth, they must be covered with earth, for if it
florishe once above the ground, the roots will never be good, but hard and
full of pithe. It is called Radishe, because it exceeds all other roots in
greatness. Pliny writes, that he saw at Erford in Germany, Radishe as
big as the body of an Infant. It is sowed twyse in the year, in February or
March, the Moon being in the wane, lest it grow too much in leaves, four
fingers distant one from the other, and again in August, which is the best
season for them. Those that you set after the tenth of June, will never seed,
the like is to be observed in all other seeds, it comes up commonly the
third day after it be sown: in hot and Southerly Countries, the weather being
fair, it grows soon to stalk, and quickly seeds. The leaves as they
grow, must still be trampled down and trodden upon, whereby the root shall
grow the greater, otherwise it florisheth with leaves, and gives increase to
the leaf, and not to the root: the less and the smoother the leaf is, the
mileder and the sweeter is the root: cold as some say, does further the
goodness of them. They say they will be very pleasant, if the seed be steeped
in meedth, or in the juice of reyzyus: they wax sweet with cold as the Rape
does, and their bitterness is taken away with brine, and therefore some
would have Radishes watered and nourished with salt waters: being sodden, they
come to be very sweet, and serve the turn of Rapes, ge^ing fasting, they
provoke vomit, they are hurtful to the Uines and to the Teethe. Radishe eaten
at first, is a good preservative against poison: eaten before meat, it
breaks wind, and provoke vryne: and after meat, it loses the belly, it
is called in Greek (...), in Latin Raphanus, in Italian Rapha^, in Spanishe
Rauano, in French Rave, in Dutch Retich.


THRA. There is an other kind of them, that the Dutch men call Merrettich, I
take it to be that which the Romans called Armaracia, called commonly in
Italy Ramaracta, the first letter misplaced.


MARIUS. You say well, but this is more full of branches, greater in leaves,
thin in body: the leaves are not unlike to the former Radishe, but that they
are a little sharper and longer, and the root s^lenderer, and therefore there
are some that deny it to be Armaracia: but here let the Physicians contend.
Theophrastus makes mention of sundry sorts of Radish. This kind of Radishe
has a wonderful bityng taste, a great deal more then Mustard seed, and
fetches tears from the eyes of them that eat it: it is set and planted in
this sort. The root is cut in a great number of pieces, whereof every piece
prospers: for if you pluck up this kind of Radishe by the roots, you may
cut of a good quantity of the root, and dividing them into small pieces set
them, setting the old root again by him self, and they will all grow and
prosper very well.


THRA. Yea, have you gotten the Rape? hitherto I thought he had only
belonged unto us, for we use to sow them after the Sun has been at the
highest, and immediatlye after over other Corn, for the sustenaunce both of
man and beast.


MARIUS. You do well, Rapes.
and we sow it now in May, and in watery ground sooner, and in some places in
July. There are diverse sorts of them, some of them round, some grow all in
length, and are most pleasant in taste, as at Binge, and in the Country of
Bauar. Some again of the quantity of a man's head, and of a hundred pound
weight: but the smallest sort is the sweetest. There is an other kind of Rape
that they use to sow, which carries his seed in little coddes, and is
cheefely planted in Germany for to make Oil of, the which you the other day
spoke of, it is called in Greek Goloules, in French Rave, in Italian Rapo, in
Spanishe Nabo, in Dutche Ruben. There is also an other wyld kind called
Rapunculus, The little Rape.
that grows half a yard hie full of seed, and tender topped. This they
geather in the spring time, before the stalk be sprung up, and pulling it up
by the roots, do use it in sallettes, supposyng it to be a wild kind of
Rape. The Nauens also called in Greek (...), Nauens.
in Latin Napus, in French Nauet, in Italian Napo, in Spanishe Nabicas, in
Dutch Stockruben, may be counted in the number of Rapes, for Rapes in some
ground change into Nauens, and in some ground, Nauens into Rapes. These also
love to grow in a well watered, mellowe, and a ritche ground: though such as
grow in sandy and barraine ground, prove often the sweetest in eating. They
use to sow them in March, and in some places before, as also in August.
Parsneppe in Greek (...), Parsn^p.
in Latin Pastinaca, in other tongues almost as in Latin, is very pleasant to
be eaten^ and requires a fat and a ritche ground, and deep dygged, whereby
the root may have room yenough to grow in: it is sowed and set in the
spring, and in the end of summer.


THRA. You have here also in this Garden red Carrets.


MARIUS. R^dde and yellovve Carrettes.
I have so. Yellowe Carrettes is called in Greek (...), in Latin Siser, in
French Cheruille, in Italian Sisero, in Spanishe Chiriuias, in Dutche Querlin,
I think you know it. Pliny writes, that Tiberius was so in love with this
root, that he caused Carrettes to be yearly brought him out of Germany, from
the Castle of Gel^uba standing upon the Rhine. It delights in cold places,
and is sowed before the kalendes of March, and of some in September: but the
third and the best kind of sowing as some think, is in August. There is also
wild Carret, a kind of Parsnep, in Greek (...)^ in Latin Daueus, in Italian
Dauco, in French Carote savage, in Dutche Woortzel, there are that suppose it
to be the yellowe ro^te, that is so common in Germany, they are to be sowed in
March. It is general to Rapes, Radishe^, Parsneps, Carrets, Onyons, and Leekes,
that they be well trodden upon, or kept cut, to the end the roots may grow
the greater. Of Leekes there are two sorts, Leekes.
the one called Capi^atum, (...), and the other Sectiuum, which they use
always to cut close by the ground. The headded, or set Leeke, in Greek
(...), in Latin Capitatum, in Italian Porro capitato, in Span^she Puerro con
Cabeza, in Dutch Lauch, in French Porreau, the other Leeke in Latin Sectile,
in Greek (...), in Dutche Schnitlauch, beside the often raking and dounging,
must be watered as often as you cut it down. The seeds in cold hot Countries,
is sowed in January or February, and in colder places in March, to cause it
to grow the fayrer and the better. They use to knitte up a good deal of seed
together in thin lynnen clothes, and so to lay them in the ground: but to
make them greater headed, when it has well taken root, they use to pluck it
up by the blades, and raise it so, that as it were hangyng and borne up by the
earth, it is forced to fill the empty place that lies under it: the blades and
the roots cut of, they use to set the heads, vnderlaying them with a
Tyleshard, that when as they are not able to run down in length, they should
be driven to grow in bigness and breadth. The Leeke delyghteth in good
ground, and hates watery ground: sowed in the spryng, it must be removed or
set again after harvest, that they may be the greater, the earth must be
continually loosed about it, and they must be pulted and rayled up, as I said
before: if when you remove them, you make in the heads of every one a little
hole with a piece of a Reed, or any thing except Iron, and thruste therein a
Cucumber seed, they will grow to a wonderful greatness: some use in stead
of Cucumber seed, to put in Rape seed. To have very large and great Leekes,
you must hollow a Treatle of Goats doung, and f^ll it full of Leeke seed,
for the little sproute at the first restrained, will run altogether in one,
and so come forth of the ground: and this as Hieronimus Cardanus writes,
has been often tried to be true. They shall not savor of Leekes or Onyons,
that have eaten Cummin after. It comes up the tenth day after the sowyng, and
lasts two year: the first year it contenteth it self only with bearyng of
leaves, the next year it ryseth in a long stalk hollow within, the top
garnished with round knoppes of flowers. The Onyon, Onyon^.
in Greek (...), in Latin Cepa, or Cepe, in Italian Cipella, in Spanishe
Cebolla, in French Oignon, the next neighbor to the Leeke, is also of tw^
kinds, ye one kind called Capitatum, that grows to head, the other Fissile,
that without any head only flowrisheth in blades, and is often geathered as
Leekes are, and therefore only is sown and not set in February or March in
fair weather, and in the wane of the Moon: it delights in ritche ground,
well dug and dounged, and therefore Columella would have the ground well
f^llowed, that it may be mellowed with the Winter frostes, and after dounged,
after well dug again, and the roots and weeds cast out, laid out in
beds and sowed: it is called Fissile, Fissile.
because it is parted and divided below, for in the Winter it is least with
his top naked: in the spring time the blades are pulled of, and other come up
in their places. The heads are set, and if you pluck away the tails and the
outgrowinges when you set them, they will grow to be very great. Twenty days
before you set them, dig the ground well, and lay it dry, and so shall
they prosper the better. The heads are set in Autumn, and grow to seed as
other plants do: if you mean to geather the seeds, when the stalk is
grown, you must prop it up with little sticks, that the winds shaking of the
stalk, shatter not the seeds, nor break the stalk: which seed you must
geather before it be all black, for the blackness is a sure sign of the full
ripeness: if you will not have it seed but head, pluck of the blade still
close by the ground, so shall all the maintenance go to the root. Among all
other herbs, only the Onyon is not subject to the force of the Moon, Onyons.
but has a contrary power, for it waxes in the wane of the Moon, and
decreaseth in the increase of it: yet there are that hold opinion, that if you
sow them in the wane, they will be the smaller, and sourer, and in the
increase, they will be the greater, and the milder. The red Onyon is more
sharp then the white, they are best preserved in Barley Chafe, if first you
dippe them in hot water, and after dry them in the sun, till they be
through dry. They are of the common people thought to last longest being
hanged up in the smoke, for the kynred it has with the Onyon. I proceed to
speak next of Garlic, Garlic.
called in Greek (...), in Latin Allium^ in Italian Aglio, in Spanishe Aio,
in Dutch Knobloich, in French Aux, it grows with a blade like the Onyon, but
not hollow, the stalk round, and the flowers in the top in a round tufte
where the seed lies. Garlic grows both of the head and the seed, as the
Onyon and other of this kind does. It is commonly sowed in February or
March, according to the disposition of the weather, as the Onyon is. It would
be set in the uppermost part of little narrow Ridges, the cloves being distant
four or five inches one from the other, and not very deep. After, when the
cloves have put forth the little stringes, or when their blades are come up,
they must be well racked, for the oftener ye do so, the greater they will be:
but if you will have the heads the greater, before it grow to stalk, you
shall wind and wreathe the green blades together, and tread them to the
ground, for that continual treading upon them will make them the greater. In
October the cloves must be plucked a sunder, and set in row upon hie borders,
that they may skape ye danger of the winter storms. They say the seant of
them will sease, if you eat after them the root of Beetes tosted at the fire:
thus says Pliny out of Menander.


THRA. What herb is that yonder that comes up so hie as a man may make a
staff of the stalk, the leaves large and round, the flower in shape seeming
to compare with the Rose?


MARIUS. It is Hollioke, or garden Mallowe, in Greek (...), Malovve^^
in Latin Malua hortensis, in Dutche Peppel, in Italian and French, ^lmost as
in Latin.


THRA. What, the same that Horace takes to so wholesome for the body? and
which of Hesiodus and Martial is so highly commended?


MARIUS. The very same, and also which is more wonderful, in it the leaves
turn about with the sun, so that it may serve in stead of a Dyall,
declaryng by the turnyng of his leaves, what time of the day it is, though the
sun do not shine, which the Philosophers think to be done, by the drawing
of his moisture. In Africa as Pliny writes, it comes in seven months to
be like a young tree, and serve well for a walkyng staff. It is sowed in
October, or in the end of the summer, as also at other times, that by the
coming on of Winter, it may be restrained of his high growth: it rejoices it
ritche and moist ground, and must be removed when it comes to have four or
five leaves, it grows best when it is young: when it comes to greater, it
dies in the remoouing. We use it both for the pot and for sallettes, the
taste is better when it is not removed: you must sow it but thin for
growyng to rank, and in the midst of them you must lay little cloddes or
stones, it requires continual rakyng, and makes better the ground where it
grows.


THRA. I marueyle whether you sow Purcelayne, sith it grows wild abroad.


MARIUS. Purcelaine.
The Greeks call it (...), the Latins Portulacan, with the Italians it has
the same name, in Spanishe Verd^laga, in French and Dutch Porchelle, it is
sowed in Gardens, and well ordered does grow the better and spreads the
farther, it has a black seed growing in little green cups.


THRA. Buglose that the Greeks call (...), the Latins Bugglossum, the Dutchmen
Ochsenzung or Burretsth, the Frenchmen Borague, the Italians Borache, the
Spaniardes Boraje, Is not this it that I see here with y^ fair blewe flower,
and a stalk a foot long, and full of branches?


MARIUS. Buglose is at this day with the Potecaries called Borage, though they
differ somethyng in the flower, and in very deed they are two sundry herbs,
for some call the common Borage, the lesser Buglose, and the greater Buglose,
is thought to be that which Dioscorides calls Circium, the true Buglose, the
flowers of both sorts are used in sallettes, and in wine, because it makes
the heart meery, and therefore is called in Greek (...), that is to say,
gladness, the leaves are also used in dressyng of meats, it is sown about
March, and once sown, it will never away, there is also a wild kind of it.


THRA. I pray you go forward, and tell us some thing of Straberries, which
here grow with great plenty and beauty, helped as it seems with good
orderyng.


MARIUS. They are so, for we use to bring roots out of the wooddes,
Straberrie^.
which being set and planted in the Garden, prosper exceedyngly two or three
years together: and after, we either remove them again, because they wax
wild, or set the wild in their places: and so have we them to yield their
fruit twyse in the year, in the spring, and in the end of summer. And
although it grows of it self in shadowy woods in great plenty, as if it
delighted in shadow of Trees, yet being brought into the Garden, it delights
in sonny places, and good orderyng, yielding a great deal more and better
fruit: it creeps upon the ground without a stalk, with small stringes
coming from the root, with a white flower, and a leaf like a Trefoyle,
indented about. The berries, which is the fruit, are read, and taste very
pleasauntly, the Dutchmen call them Erdbern, the Frenchemen Freses. There is an
other fruit that grows somethyng higher, whose berrie is also like the
Straberie. Raspi^^
Dioscorides seems to call it Rubus Idaeus, the Bryer of Ida, because it
grows in great abundance upon the mountain Ida. It is not full of prickles,
as the other brambles are, but soft and tender, full of branches and whytish
leaves, it bears read berries, somethyng paler then the Straberie, and very
pleasant in taste. The Grecians call it (...) and (...), the Dutchmen Imberen,
the Frenchmen Fram^osas.


THRA. What is that grows yonder, a yard in height?


MARIUS. It is commonly called Liquerise, Liqueris^.
in Greek (...), in Latin Dulcis Radix, in Italian Regolitia, in Spanishe
Regaliza, in French Reclisse, in Dutche Clarits, or Sussholts.


THRA. I did not think to have found it here. I hear it grows very
plentifully about the Meyne, I would be glad to hear how you do order it,
for it has a root for the sweetness thereof (whence it takes his name)
very commendable.


MARIUS. It is set of young springes of the root, as the Hoppe is, in dry
light ground, and sonny.


THRA. What say you to small Reazyns, Small Reazins.
called in Latin Ribes? do you think the old writers knew this bushe?


MARIUS. That which we call at this day Ribis, and the Dutchmen Saint John's
pearl, because about Midsommer it is garnished with read and rich berries,
having a tarte taste, quenchyng thyrst, cheefely, the ragyng and extreme
thryst of fevers, and coolyng the stomach, which the Appothecaries in Sugar
or Honey keep all the year, is thought was unknown to the old writers: but
now a com^on bushe used for enclosyng of Gardens, and making of Borders and
Herbers: it will easyly grow, but that it is somethyng troublesome, by reason
of his sharp prickles to be bent about summer houses.


THRA. You spoke even now of Hoppes, do you set in these your princely
paradises, Hoppes.
that plant that is so common with the Country man? for about us they make
great gain of it. Read the perfect orde^ing h^^^of, in m^^ster Reynolde Scots
book of Hoppe Ga^dens.



MARIUS. Tell you therefore, I pray you, how they do use it.


THRA. It is set of the young shootes, as you told a little before of
Liquerise, and that in the end of summer: or if they fear a hard winter, in
M^rch. The se^tes or shootes are cut from the old roots, and are set in
ground well covered with doung and good mould, and afterward hilled, and so
suffered to remain all Winter. In the spring, the earth is stirred with Rakes,
and not with Spades, and the hills raised, and the ground rid of all
hurtful weeds. About May, certain powles are set up, upon which the Hoppe
clymeth: all the spraye that springs above the flower, is commonly cut of.
About September, or in the end of August, the flowers or bells are geathered
and kept to make Beer with: when the Hoppes are geathered, the remaynes are
cut down close to the ground, and the hills being again raised, are covered
with doung. The tops, and the young buddes that come first out in April, are
used to be geathered for sallettes, and keeps them from growyng to rank. But
now, I pray you go on, and return to the description of your Garden. O what
excellent Mellons, Pompens, Cowcumbers, and Gourdes have you here, I pray you
tell in what sort you order them.


MARIUS. Melons (which some, because they are fashioned like Apples call
Pomes) are of the kind of Coucumbers, and so are the Pepones which the
Frenchemen call Pompeons. The Coucombers in Greek (...), Coucumbers.
in Latin Cucumer, in Italian Cucumero or Cedruolo, in French and Dutch
Cocumbre. They change to Pompeons, and Muskemillions, from which they only
differ in shape and greatness: when they exceed in greatness, they become
Pompeons, and when they grow round, they are Mellonpompeons: al these kinds
are called of some writers Melons. The Grecians call all the sorts, as well
Coucumbers as Mellonpompeons, by the name of Pompeons and Mellons: though there
are some that make a difference between Pompeons and Mellons, neither do the
learned yet thoroughly agree upon these means, nor can it be certaynely said
what kind the old writers meant by Pompeons, and Melonpompeons. Pompeons do
creep along upon the ground with ruff leaves and a yellowe flower, and are
pleasant to be heaten when they be ripe. The sweetest sort of them they call
Succrino, or Muskmillions. The Mellonpompeons are supposed to spring first in
Campania, being fashioned like a Quince. This kind hangs not, but grows
round lying upon the ground, and being ripe, do leave the stalk. Some
Coucombers are called Citrini, of their yellowness when they be ripe, and also
Citruli or Citreoli, they grow all in length, and are spotted as the Citrons
are: some be called Ma^in, and be called in Italian Cucussae Marinae, the seed
whereof is to be eaten before they be ripe: they are cut in pieces, and
porredge made of them, not much unlike in fashion to the Mellon. There is also
an other kind of Coucumber of a houge compass, almost as big as a busshel:
the Mowers and Harvest folks in Italy, use to carry great pieces of them to
the Feelde with them, to quench their thyrst. You must set al these kinds in
March, the seeds must be set thin, two foot one from an other, in watrie
ground well dounged and dug, specially sandy ground: you must lay them in
milk, or water and honey three days, and after dry them and sow them, so
shall you have them very pleasant. They will have a very sweet savor, if
their seeds be kept many days among Rose leaves. Your Coucumbers shall be long
and tender, if you see under them water in a broad vessel, two handfulles under
them. They delight in water so much, as if they be cut of, they will yet bend
toward it, and if they hang or have any stay, they will grow crooked, as also
if you set oil by them, which they greatly abhor. The flowers being suffered
to grow in Pipes, do grow to a wonderful length. They love not the Winter
no more then does the Gourde, whereunto they are almost like in nature, for
the flowers, the leaves, and the claspers, are like of them both: but the
Gourde is more busy in climing, Gourdes.
so that with hasty growth, it spreads quickly over the Herbers and summer
houses, runnyng up by the walls, and mountyng up to the very Tyles of the
houses, having a great fruit of a monstrous bigness, hangyng by a small
stalk, in fashion like a Pear, and green in color, although when it has
flowred, it will grow in what fashion you will have it: they say, there has
been some of them mean foot in length. The round ones also grow to be used
for great vessels: the rynde of the new ones, is soft and tender, but of the
old ones hard, whereof when the meat is out, trauaylers make great bottles to
carry drink in. The Gourdes that are used to be eaten in summer, are sundry
in shape, for some are round, some long, some broad: and though the fashion
be diverse, yet the nature is all one: for it is made by art to grow in what
shape you will, as in the form of a creeping Dragon, or what yelist, they are
called in Greek (...), in Italian Zuma, in Spanishe Calabaz in Dutche
Kuirbisch, the French Vne courge. The seeds that the Gourde ^eareth next to
the stalk (as Paladius says) are longest, they in the midst round, and
those that lie on the side, short, broad, and flat: if you set the sharp
end of the seed downward, as Columella says, you shall have them both
greater Gourdes and Coucumbers. It delights in a moist, rich, well dounged,
and well watered ground. That which grows without water, bringes the
pleasanter fruit, and that which has water yenough, needs the less looking
to. The flowers where they be set, must be dug a foot and a half deep,
the third part whereof must be filled with straw, and then with good ritche
mould: it m^st be filled to the midst, then the seeds being set, must be
watered till they be sprung, and after, earth laid to them still as they grow,
till the Furrowe be filled. They must be set thin, two foot a sunder, it
comes up in six or seven days after the setting. Those that are set in dry
ground, must be very well watered, therefore they use to set by them earthen
pottes full of water, with rags or cloutes in them to water them. When they
be a little grown, they must have helps set by them to climb upon, the
longer they be, the better the meat is. You must beware there come no women
near where you set them, for their presence does greatly hurt them. Those
that you keep for seed, you must suffer to remain upon the stalk till
Winter, and then geathering them, and dry them, either in the sun, or in the
smoke, for otherwise the seed will rotte and perish. They will long be
preserved and continue fresh, if after they be geathered they be put into a
close vessel with the le^ues of white wine, or hanged in a vessel of vinegar,
so that they touch not the vinegar.


THRA. What means that great Thistell that springs there?


MARIUS. Did you never read in your Columella of the Hartichoch, Artichoch
specially in his verses that he wrote of Gardnyng, where he says. Go set the
brystled Hartichoch,
That well with wine agrees. etc.
Athenaeus in his second book Dipnosophus out of Sophoclus, (...).
A Thistell is the Hartichoch, that every where does grow. It is a kind of
Thistel, by the diligence of ye Gardner, brought to be a good Garden herb,
and in great estimation at noble men's tables: it is as you see framed with a
round prickly head, having a great sort of flakes set in order steeple wise.
The Greeks call it (...) and (...), the Latins Strobilum, because the fruit
of it something resembles the Pineapple. The Frenchemen call it Alticocalum,
of the Arabic article Al, and Cocalos a Pineapple, whereof it is corruptly
called Artichault, in Italian and Spanishe Cardo, in Dutche, sometime by the
French name, sometime Strobirn. It is called of Columella Cinara, because in
his growing, he cheefely delights in ashes. The seed is best sown in
March, and the settes in November: if you will have it yield fruit in the
Spring, you must bestow much ashes upon it, it will hardly bear the first
year that it is sown. Beware that you set not the seed with the rong end
upward, for so shall your Artichoch prove very little and evil favored. It
loves good ground and well dounged, and prospers best in fat ground.
Palladius would have you moreover, to set the seeds in well ordered beds,
in the increase of the Moon, half a foot a sunder, and not deep, but taking
them in three of your fingers, thrust them down, till the earth come to the
first joints of your fyngers, then cover them tenderly, and water them often,
specially toward Summer, so shall you have the bigger fruit. When they grow
up, they must be continually weeded and dounged, as I said with ashes. They
say, they will loose their prickles, if the tops of the seed be made blunt
upon a stone before they be set: and sweet they will be, if the seed be
laid in Milk. You must keep them from Mowles and Myse, with Cattes or tame
Weesels, as Ruellius teaches you. Athenaeus calls the stalk of the
Artichoch (...), that lies upon the ground, and that which stands vpryght
(...).


THRA. Well, what herb is yonder same that comes up as it were hears, with
a blewishe flower and pale, having in the midst of the belles, as it were,
fiery yellowe tongues?


MARIUS. Saffron.
It is Saffron, in Greek (...), in Latin Crocus, in Italian and French so, in
Spanishe Aczafran.


THRA. What need we care any more for either Corycum, Sicil, or Cyren, from
whence we fetch it with so great charges?


MARIUS. Yea, there grows great plenty of it in Germany about Spirs, and
diverse other places, which may compare in goodness with any other place. It
is set in March of the head that it has round, and in cloves as the Lyllie,
the Leeke, and the Sea Onyon. Constantine affyrmeth, that it may be set of the
root, as soon as the flower is of. The roots or the heads do so increase
under the ground, that of one of them some year springs eight or niene
others. In many places they are removed every seventh or eight year into
better ground, whereby they come again to be as good, as at the first. In the
Countries lying upon the Rhine, they pluck them up every third year, and lay
them a drying in the sun till August, and then pulling of the outer skin,
they set them again half a foot one from the other: the best heads are
those that are fattest, and have little hears, the woorst look rottenly and
^^fauouredly, and have an ill savor: It delights to grow by hie ways and
near springes, and to be trodde and trampled on, prospering as it were by
oppression: it grows green all the Winter, it is geathered in Autumn, when
it is come to his color, by plucking out the little yellowe tongues from the
bell, which are afterward dried three or four days together, and well
picked and purged, and so made up in boxes: some think it best to dry it in
the shadow. It is craftily counterfeited by the Apothecaries, braying it in
sodde wine, which they besmeare adding thereto the skumme of silver or lead to
increase the weight, the craft is perceived by the dustinesse thereof, and by
the savor of the sodde wine. The proof of the good is, if it crackle between
the hands as a brittle thing, which the counterfeite does not, or if in
putting it to your mouth, it cause your eyes to water. Wherefore, the best is
that which is new, and has a pleasant smell, in color like to gold, and
dies the fyngers in touching it. In March you must purge the ground where it
grows, and whether ye pluck it up or not, notwithstanding, other herbs may
very well grow there until August: Pursleyne, Parsley, or such like herbs
do best grow there. And when the Saffron begins to flower, you must rid
away the other herbs: for in harvest time about September or October it
flowreth.


THRA. Here is great store of Rosemarie, Rosemary.
the cheifest beauty of Gardens, and not to be wanted in the Kitchen.


MARIUS. Of the orderyng of Rosemarie, since you will have me, I will speak a
little. There are which suppose it to be the same which the Greeks call
(...), because it sauoureth like Frankencense, in Latin it is called
Rosmarinus, and in all other tongues it keeps the name, it serves both for
pleasure and profit. Theophrastus makes two kinds of it, a barrayne, and a
fruitful, and is set of small slippes in April: it is set by women for
their pleasure, to grow in sundry proportions, as in the fashion of a Cart, a
Pecock, or such like thing as they fancy. It delights in stony or rough
ground, and in the tops is the seed enclosed in little husks white and
round. It flowreth twyse a year, in the spring, and in the end of summer: it
is geathered from May till September, and it is good to pluck of the flow^e
often, that it may not flower too much. In the higher parts of France it
grows wild in such plenty, that they use almost no other fuel: it is in
cold Countries in Winter set in Sellars and hot houses, and is brought
again in the spring into the Garden. But here you must beware, that when you
first bring it out, you keep it from the March sun, setting it in the
shadow, acquaintyng it by little and little with the air: some use to house
it with straw and horse doung, and so leave it in the Garden. Sauge, in Greek
(...), Sauge,
in Latin Saluia, and like in other languages, is an herb common in every
Garden: it is planted both of the seed and the slip in March, in any kind of
ground, it makes no matter where: the Gardners use to lay bucking ashes about
it, whereby it prospers the better. Next to Sauge is Mynt, in Greek (...),
M^ntes.
in Latin Menta, in Dutch Myntz, in Italian and French, after the Latin, in
Spanishe Yerua buena: it is planted and ordered in all thing as Sauge is, it
prospers both in dry, and wette grounds, and grows well by waters. If you
lack seeds, you may take the seed of the wild Mint, and set them with the
tops downward, whereby they shall leave their rankness, and being once
sown or set, grows every year. Pimpe^n^l.
Pimpernell, in Greek (...), in Latin Pimpinella, is used both in the
Kitchen, and in Physic, and being once sown, grows every year both in
sonny places, and in shaddowy: it grows in most pla^es wild. Hysope, in
Greek (...), Hysope.
in Latin Hyssopus, and so called in mo^^ tongues in Europe, a common herb
known to every Gardner: it desires, though no sonny ground, yet good and
ritche ground, it is planted both of the seed and the slip: when it has
once taken root, it cares not for the sharpness of Winter. Sauorie.
Sauery in Greek (...), in Latin Satureia, or as Columella says, Cunila, in
Italian Coniella, Sauoreggia, Thymbre, in French Sauoreje, in Dutche Kuuel
Zwibel hisop, grows in barrayne places, and is set and sowed as the plants
before. The next is that which commonly is called Basyl, in Greek (...), in
Latin Ocymum, in French, Italian, and Dutche, Basilica: Basyl.
an herb that is used to be set in the midst of knottes, and in windows,
for the excellent sauoure that it has: it is also good for the pot, it is
sowed in March and April, and delights in sonny ground, you must put two
seeds still together. Basyl is best watered at noone, whereas all other
herbs are to be watered in the morning and in the euenyng, it may be removed
in May. Theophrastus says, that it prospers best, when it is sowed with
curses. Marierum, Marierum.
in Latin Amaracus, and Maiorana, is also in like sort used, the Dutche and
the Italians call it after the Latin, the Spaniardes Amoredeux, the French
Mariolaine and Thyn, in Greek of Dioscorides and Paulus Aegineta (...), this
also for the pleasant savor it has, is set in pottes and in Gardens: it is
sowed in March three or four seeds together, and half a foot a sunder, in
May when it grows to some heyght as Basyl, it is removed. Time near of
kinrede to these, Time.
in Greek (...), in French, Italian, and Dutche, like the Latin, in Spanishe
Tomillo, delights in stony, light, and sonny ground: it springs both of the
seed and of the slip, and also of the flower as Theophrastus says. These
three tender and delicate herbs, are to be sowed with great heed, either in
earthen pottes, or in garden beds. Hitherto have I described unto you, such
herbs as serve for the Kitchen, and because the latter sorts are also
esteemed for the savors, I will go forward with the description of the rest
that are set in Gardens for the pleasure of them, and for the savor, do
garnishe the said Gardens, and serve also for other purposes. Of Rosemarie, I
spoke before, I will now proceed with these that grow before my feet.
Lauender, called in Latin Lauanda, Lauender.
or Lauendula, that grows in border^ about the beds, in Greek (...). and
keeps the Latin name in other tongues, does grow in wild places and
stony: it is set of the slippes, and removed, it grows to Spike in June,
and in July is geathered and tied in bundels for the savor, the flower is
distilled for sweet waters. Flowregentle, in Latin Amaranthus, ^lovvregen^le.
in Greek (...), though it have no savor at all, yet has it a delightful
beauty to the eye, the Frenchemen for the fayrenesse of the color, excelling
both crimson and purple in grain, do call it Passeuelleurs, the Italians
Fioruelu^o, because it contendeth in color with crimson in grain, it loves
to be often geathered and plucked, whereby it springs the better, the flowers
after they be dead, with a little water come again to their color: it is
called Amaranthus, because it dies not.


THRA. Lauendercott^n.
Here follows Lauendercotten.


MARIUS. This Lauendercotten, in Greek is called as Pliny supposes (...), as
it were the little Cypres, some call it Santonia, and female Sothernewood, in
Dutch it is called Cypressen, in French Cyprez, it grows commonly in
Gardens, springing every year. Myrtel, in Greek (...), in Latin Myrtus, in
Italian Myrto, in Spanishe Araihan, in French M^inte, My^t^l.
in Dutch Welsch^heidelberr, the leaves are not much unlike to the leaves of
the Olive tree, something smaller, with sclender branches, and leaves growing
in order one by another as you see, with black berries, and leaued like the
Pomegranate. It grows always green, it is set and sowed both of the seed,
the slip, and the stock: but you must still raise up y^ earth about it, til
it be thoroughly rooted. Some sow the berries being a little beaten, and
covered in Furrows of ^arth: it delights in continual weeding, so grows
it to a handsome heygth, meet to shaddowe Herbers: it loves to be watered with
the urine of men, or of sheep. This only is to be woondred at, that of the
li^our thereof alone, may be made all sorts of wine and oil. Cato teaches to
make wine of the berries, being dried, and put in water and honnie sodden
together: if they be not dried, they come to oil, how the wine of them is
made, Dioscorides sufficiently declares. Pliny reports, that Cato made
three sorts of Myrtels, white, black, and a third kind that he calls
coni^gale: it delights to grow by the Sea banks, as Seruius says, it
grows at this day commonly in Italy, along by the Sea coasts.


THRA. Oh what sweet and goodly Gelyflowres are here:? Gilyfloures.
You may truly say, that Solomon in all his princely pomp, was never able to
attain to this beauty: some of them glitter with a perfect crimson dye, some
with a deep purple, and some with a passing beautiful carnation: I marueyle
the old writers knew nothing of these in their time.


MARIUS. There are some that suppose to be a kind of Garden Betony, which the
Gardner feiching out of the feelde, and thrusting Cloves into the roots of
them, with diligent planting have brought to this excellency: others think it
to be called Vetonica of the Spaniardes, who first found it. Some think it to
be O^nanthe, because it flowreth with the Uine: it delights in warm sonny
ground, it is sowed seeldome of seed, but commonly set of the slippes, as I
said of Rosemarie. The Gardners in the end of Summer, do take the roots, and
set them in pannes, pottes, or payles, and when the frostes come, they carry
them into their sellers, and in fair warm days bring them abroad again,
and suffer them to be now or then watered with the rain. It has been often
seen, that in such vaultes or sellers, they have flowred all the Winter long,
through warmenesse of the place: some set bows about them, and cover them with
straw and horse doung, to preserve them against ye cold: it often happens,
that one root bears one year white flower and read, and the third speckled
or Carnation.


THRA. Lo, yonder are Roses growyng in borders, and made in a maze: do they
grow of the seed, or of the set?


MARIUS. Roses, Roses.
called in Greek (...), in Latin Ros^, and in all other languages as in
Latin, are diversely planted, sometime of the roots, sometime of the branches,
being cut in small settes, and planted a foot a sunder. Some wrethe them in
Garlandes, and so set them to have them smell the pleasanter. The use of
sowing of them is best: how be it, they will very well grow of the seed,
though it be long ear they spring, and therefore they set them of settes a
foot in length: i^ n^yther delights in rich or moist ground, b^t is well
contented to grow amongst rubbishe, and under walls. The places where they
must grow^, must be dygged deeper then come ground, and not so deep as the
Uineyard: the Rose is rather a thorn then a plant, and grows upon the very
brambles: it comes first out in a little budde and long sharp beard, w^iche
after they be opened, it discloseth it self and spreads abroad, with a
yellowe heary tuske in the midst. Pliny makes mention of sundry sorts of
them: one sort he calls Milesia, having an oryent and fyerie color, an other
Alabandica, with white leaves, and S^erm^nia, the base^t sort of all: the
dam^s^e and the white, are used for sweet waters: they differ in roufnesse,
pricles, color, and smell. There are that have but only five leaves, and
others with an hundred leaves, neither good in beauty, nor in smell: the
roufnesse of the rynde (as Pliny says) is a sign of the savor. There are
some little pale ones called Carnation and Prouincers, Musk^^ses.
these do woonderfully grow where they once are planted, and have a most
excellent savor. R^ses are used to be set in February, which is either done
with the seed, or the set planted in little furrows. The seeds (as
^a^adius says) are not the little yellowe things in the ^^ddest of the Rose,
but the graynes that grow within the red riped berrie: the ripeness whereof
is deemed by the sworthinesse and the softness of the berrie: where they once
are planted, they continue long, and after they dye, they send ou^ new buddes
and springes. If you lack settes, and would of a few have a great number,
take the branches that begin as it were to show their buddes, and cuttyng them
in sundry sets, four or five syngers in length, set them in good ground well
dounged and watered: and when they be of a years growth, take them up, and set
them a fo^te a sunder, proyne them and trim them with often digging about
them. Roses must still be cut, for the more you cut them, the thicker and
the doubbler they grow, otherwise they will ware syngle and wild, it will
also do them good sometime to burn them: being removed, it springs very
soon and well, being set of settes four fyngers long or more, after the
setting of ^ seven stars, and after removed in a westerly wind, and set a
foot a sunder, and often dygged. The old Rosyars must have the earth loosed
about them in February, and the dead twigges cut of, and where they wax
thin, they must be repa^red with the young springes. To have Roses of five
sundry colors upon one root, make when they begin to burgen, a fine hole
beneath in the stock under the joint, and fill it with read color made of
Brasell sodde in water, and thrust it in with a cl^ute, and in the like sort
put into an other part of the stock green color, and in an other yellowe,
and what other colors you will, and cover the holes well with Ox doung and
Lome, or very good earth. If you will have your Roses bear betimes, make a
little trenche two hand breadthes of round about it, and power in hot water
twyse aday, and thus doing (as Democri^us promises) you shall have Roses in
January. You may preserve Roses before they open, if making a slitte in a
Reed, you enclose the blossom, and when you would have fresh Roses, take
them out of the Reeds: others put them in earthen pottes close covered, and
set them abroad: the Roses continue always fresh that are dipped in the dregs
of Oil. If you will have them at all times, you must set them every month,
and doung them, and so (as Didymus says) you shall have them continually. To
cause them, or any other flowers to grow double, put two or three of the
seeds in a Wheat straw, and so lay them in the ground. If you set Garlic
by your Roses, they wylbe the sweeter: the dryer the ground is where they
grow, the sweeter they will be, as it appears by the season of the year,
for some years they are sweeter then others: the Rose wylbe white, that is
smokte in with brimstone, when it begins to even: amongst all Roses, those
are most to be commended, that they call Carnations and Prouincials. The oil
of Roses was greatly had in estimation even in Homer his time, and at this day
the vinegre of Roses is greatly used. Next unto the Rose in woorthynesse, for
his savor and beautiful whiteness is the Lillye, Lillyes.
called iu Gre^ke (...) and (...), in Italian Giglio, in Spanishe Tirio, in
French Fleur de Lis, in Dutch Lilien. The Gre^kes hold opinion, that it
sprang first of Iunos milk sprinkled upon the ground. In February we begin
to set Lillyes, or if they grew before, to loose the earth about them with a
rake, taking good heed that the young tender shootes about the root be not
hurt, nor the little head: which taken from the old root, we set for new
Lillyes. As the Roses are, so are the Lillyes, the sweeter, the dryer the
ground is where they grow: Lillyes and Roses being once set, continue both
very long. There are read Lillyes made so by art, for they take the stalks
and roots of the Lillye, and hang them in the smoke till they wyther, and when
the knottes begin to uncover, they are laid in March in the lees of red wine, till they be colored, and then set in the ground with the lees powered
about them, so will they come to be purple. Uiolet in Greek is (...), in
Latin Viola. Violets.
Uiolet black, and Uiolet purple, (...), in Italian it is called Viola
porporta, in Spanishe Violetta, in French Violets de Marts and Caresme, in
Dutche Fiolen: these although they grow wild about every Hedge and Wall, yet
are they set in Gardens with other flowers. There are sundry sorts of
Uiolettes, both of kind and color, but the orderyng of them is in a manner all
one.


THRA. I have now heard yenough of Kitchen herbs and flowers, therefore
now, I pray you, let me hear you say something of the third sort, that is
Physic herbs, for me seems I see a great sort of healyng herbs here in
your Garden.


MARIUS. Nature has appointed remedies in a redynesse for all diseases, It is
but the opinion of a Gardne.
but the craft and subteltie of man for gain, has devised Apothecaries
shoppes, in which a man's life is to be sold and bought, where for a little
byle, they fetch their medicines from Jerusalem, and out of Turkey, while in
ye mean time every poor man has the right remedies growing in his Garden:
for if men would make their Gardens their Physicians, the Physicians craft
would soon decay. You know what your old freende Cato says, and what a
deal of Physic he fetches out of a poor Colwoort.


THRA. I do remember it, and that he says he was wont both to help him
self, and his whole family, with the herbs of his Garden. But what herb
is younder with ye long stalk, and the long black indented leaves on the
top? if I be not deceived it is Bearfoote, with whose root we use to heal
our cattle when they be sick.


MARIUS. It is so in deed, and is called in Greek (...), Berfoote, or
Settervvort.
in Latin Veratrum, there are two kinds of it, the black and the white: the
white, is that which the Dutchmen call Nyswurts wranckrau^, the black they
call Kristwurts, because it flowreth about Christmas, the Italians, the
Spaniards, and the Frenchmen keep the Greek name. The root of this Bearfoote
they thrust through the ear, or into the breast of the beast, that is either
diseased in his loonges, or has the murren. Columella seems to call it
Consiligo, it grows not in Gardens, except it be sowed: it continues long,
and loves cold and woody ground. There stands not far from that, an other
very noble herb in Physic called Angelica, Angellic^
it is supposed to be called in Greek (...), and whether it be Myrrhis with
the Latins or no. I leave that to the Physicians to discuss: it is called
with the Italians, Spaniards, Frenchmen, and Germans Angelica. His root,
because it is a sovereign remedy against the plague, and has diverse other
good operations, it is cherished in our Gardens, and being once sowed, it
comes up every year, it grows also wild in the mountain country, and
flowreth in July and August. Here is also Helicampane, in Greek (...), in
Latin Enula, in Italian Enela, in Spanishe Enula campana, Helecompany.
in French Aulne, in Dutch Alan^, this also is set in our Gardens for
medicines sake, and we make much of it for the root: it grows wild in
hilly Countries, and dry shaddowy places. In Summer the root is taken out of
the ground, and cut in small pieces, is dried: at this day it is called Enula
campana, it has a yellowe flower, a leaf like Mullin, but white and hoarie at
the one side. Woormewood, though it grow in every place, VVormevvoode.
yet this that you see here is Roman or Pontike Woormewood, the Latins call
it Cerephium, or A^sinthium Romanum, the Dutchmen Romische wermut, the Italians
Assenso, ye Spaniardes Encensos, the Frenchmen Aluine and Absince, this kind
is set in our Gardens, and thought to be the best. Sauine which we have here
also in our Gardens, for diverse diseases of cattle, is called in Greek (...),
in Latin Sabina, Sauine.
in Dutche Seuenboun, in Italian as in Latin, in Spanish likew^se, in French
Sauinier, it has leaves like Juniper or Cypres, always green, there are two
kinds of it, one like the Tamariske, the other like Cypres: it is a bushe
rather spreadyng in breadth, then growyng in heyght: the berries which he
bears, may be geathered in the end of Summer, or any other time.


THRA. But many times we see Gardens to be destroyed with woormes and vermin,
what remedy have you for this?


MARIUS. Of the faults of the ground, and the remedy thereof, as the amendyng
of either too much moisture or dryness, I spoke in the beginning, touching
Woormes, Flies, and other vermin that annoy the Gardens, which for the most
part are these, Caterpillars, Snayles, Moles, Myse, Gnats, and Antes. Against
Caterpillars.
There are that say, that if you mingle with your seeds Soote, or the ^yce of
Housele^ke, or Singreene, the Caterpillars will not meddle with the herb that
springs of such seed, and that they will do no harm to your trees, if you
sprinckle them with the water wherein the ashes of Uines has been laid:
moreover, the stalks of Garlic made in bundels, and burnt in Orchardes or
Gardens, destroys the Caterpillars. They will not breed (as they say) if you
burn about the roots of your herbs or trees, quick brimstone and lyme: the
same they report of lie made of the Fig tree. Antes will not annoy your corn
or herbs, if you encompasse it round with chalk, or put into their hills,
ye ashes of burnt Snailes, and if some of them be taken and burnt, the rest
will not come near the savor: if Assa foetida be laid in oil, and powered
upon their hills, it utterly destroys them: they will not touch the trees nor
the herbs, if you annoint the stalks with bitter Lupines, or lyme laid with
oil. You must shake of the Caterpillars in the morning, or late in the euenyng
when they he nummed: also water wherein Dyl has been sodden, cast about in the
Orchard when it is cold, destroys them. It is written, that if you set
Chiches about your Garden, Caterpillars will not breed, and if they be already
bredde, you must seethe the juice of Woormewood, and cast among them. The doung
of Bullockes burnt upon the coals, destroys Gnattes, Gnattes.
the like also does brimstone: a Sponge wette with vinegar and hanged up,
draws also swarms of Gnattes unto it: also y^ mawe of a Sheep new killed,
not washed nor made clean, if it be laid in the place where Mot^^as, or other
such vermin do use, and covered a little the upper part, you shall after two
days, find all the noisome vermin crept into it: thus must you do twyse or
thryse, Moles.
till you think you have destroyed them all. Of killyng and driving away
Moles, Sotion the Greek writes, that you must take a Nut, or any like fruit,
and making it hollow within, syll it up with Chafe, Rosen, and Brimstone,
afterward stop the vent holes that ye Mole has in every place, that the
smoke break not out, only leaving one open, where you shall lay the Nut, in
such sort as it may receive the wind on the back part, that may drive the
smoke into the Mines. There are also trappes to be made, for ye destroying of
Moles: a frame is to be set up upon the new hills, with a piece of wood so
hollow and framed, that it may receive (as it were in a sheathe) an other
piece of wood made in fashion like a knife, to this is joined an other little
stick that lies in the hole, and is fastened to a catch without, that as
soon as the Mole touches the stick within, she is taken presently, as it
were with a pair of sheares. Myse are taken, Myse.
if ye power into a platter, the thickest mother of oil, and set in the house
a night, as many as come at it, are taken: also the root of Bearfoote mingled
with cheese, bread, flower, or grease, kills them. Tarte and very sharp
vinegre mingled with the juice of Henbane, and sprinkled upon the herbs,
kylleth the Fleaes, Garden Fleas.
or little black woormes that be in them. No kind of vermin will annoy your
herbs, if you take a good sort of Crefyshes, and cast them in an earthen
vessel with water, sufferyng them to work abroad in the Sun for the space
of ten days, and after with their lycour, sprinckle your herbs. But I keep
yo^ to long in this ill-favored Garden, if it please you we will walk into the
Orchard adjoining.


THRA. Of Orchardes.
With a very good will, although the goodly fair color and sweet savor of
these herbs and flowers, beside the fair headges enclosyng it as it were
with a gorgeous green tapestry, make me that I could abide here ever.


MARIUS. Both the Garden and the Orchard are enclosed with several hedges and
ditches, whereby they are defended from hurtful beasts and unruly folks (as
I told you at the first) when I began to speak of the enclosyng of Gardens
and Orchardes.


THRA. Every thing likes me passing well: Good Lord what a pleasant ground,
what a Paradise is this? me thinks I see the Orchardes of Alcinous, the trees
are set checkerwise, and so catred, as look which way ye will, they lie leuel:
King Cyrus him self never had better. If Lysander had ever seen this Orchard,
he would have wondered a great deal more, then he did at Cyrus his Orchard.


MARIUS. Such gorgeous Gardens and Orchardes as Princes have, I neither desire,
nor mean to counterfeyte: but vsyng the diligence of a poor Country Gardner,
I build (as they say) my walls according to my wealth. I framed the order,
and set the most part of these trees with mine own hands, following herein,
the Fathers of the old time, who delighted them selves cheefely with this
kind of Philosophy. So then (as I think) the Trees and Wooddes to be the
greatest commodity given to men: for besides the house pleasure that they
minister unto us, the gracious Lord, that is the geuer of all good things,
has also given us a number of other goodly commodities by them, which at the
first served men for food, coueryng, and clothyng: which commodities, the very
Ethnickes had in estimation. But unto us that know God, by whom we have
received our preeminence above all other creatures, which benefyte we ought
with thanks to acknowledge, the holy Scripture does teach a more higher and
mystical consyderation: for before that gracious Lord had framed man, wylling
to provide him of food and apparel* he caused all kind of pleasant trees
bearing fruit to spring out of the earth, that they might serve for the
sustenaunce of man: and in the midst lie planted the Tree of life, and there
bye, the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, to the end that Adam might have
an assured sign of his duty and reverence toward GOD, out of which the
Lord (as in a Temple did speak unto Adam) and Adam him self, if the continued
in his innocence after his refection of the Tree of life, had with his
posterity preached God, and always been thankful unto him, for his
authority given unto him over all other Creatures, as the Prophetical
Pslamist sings. This that through the bountiful liberality of GOD, was
given us to so good an end, the ungodly and wicked posterity turned to
idolatry, consecratyng both Trees and Groves, to the idols of the Heathen.


THRA. What? me thinks you begin to play the Preacher with me.


MARIUS. Surely, there is no better a place to preach in then here, to
acknowledge the Creator in his Creatures, and by these visible works, to
behold the Almighty and everlasting power, blessedness, bountifulness, and
Godhead, of the incomprehensible woorkeman, and always to speak and preach
of them: but I will say more hereafter. The plantyng of trees does out of all
doubt (as I said) bring unto us both profit and pleasure: and therefore this
part of husbandry, must not be neglected, for Columella accountes it one of the
cheifest points of husbandry, which the Poet seems to agree unto. Of
tyllage all this while, and of the stars
We here have talked.
And Bacchus now of thee I mean to sing etc.



THRA. I pray you then declare unto me, the order of plantyng and preseruyng of
Trees.


MARIUS. Let us first sit down under the shadow of this fair Uine, that
yields both pleasant wine, and comfortable shadow.


THRA. Agreed.


MARIUS. The sorts of trees are diverse and manifold: some grow wild, some
come of the seed, some of the root, as the self same Poet says, Some sorts
there are, that of the seed are sown,
And some that set of roots, to seeds are grown.
Some do grow and spring of them selves: a number of others again are to be
sown. Those that grow wild without the labor of man, do bear their seeds
each one according to his kind: but those that are set and dressed, do
yield greater increase. There are diverse again that are always green, and
do never loose their leaf, which are (as Constantine rpeorteth) these, the
Date, the Orange, the Lemon, the Cytron, the Bay, the Olyue, the Cypress, the
Pine, the Hollie, the Box, Myrtel, Cedar, and Juniper. As for strange trees,
and those that will grow no where but at home, we will not meddel withal: we
will therefore begin first with those that yield us sustenance, and bear
fruit, and those are divided into three sorts: for either of the settes they
come to be trees as the Olyue is, or else shrubbes as the wild Date, or neither
tree nor shrubbe as the Uine.


THRA. I desire to here your opinion of every sort, for I think it no small
skill to plant such fair Gardens, Orchards, and Uineyards. Me thinks you
have used a wonderful good order, that amongst your Uines, you have
entermedled Olyue trees, Fig trees, Almondes, and Abrecocts, and that you
have severed your Orchard from your Garden, and your Uineyard from them both,
with fair hedges and dytches.


MARIUS. It was needful so to do, least my folks labouryng in some of them,
should come into the rest, contrary to my pleasure. First if you will, I will
speak of those that bring us fruit, and then of the ^^l^e, and the order of
setting and planting of Wooddes. First (as your Columella says) that ground
that serves for an Orchard, will serve for a Uineyard, as you see it does
here: and if the ground be h^^ly, rugged, and uneven, it is more meet for a
Uineyard then for an Orchard. If therefore you will make an Orchard, How to
(...).
you must choose such a ground as is meet for it: a rich ground, level,
and lying upon the Sun, which when you have found, you must well enclose it,
as I taught you before in the enclosure of Gardens, that it may lie out of
danger of cattle and knaves: for although that y^ trampling, and dounging of
cattle, is not unprofitable to the trees, yet if they be either bruised, or
broken whiles they be young, they will soon come to naught. When you mean to
dress your Orchard place thus fenced, you shall make your furrows a year
before you plant them, so shall they be well seasoned with the sun and the
rain: and what so ever you plant, shall the sooner take. But if you will
needs plant the same year, that you make your furrows, let y^ furrows be
made at least two months before: after, fyl them full of straw, and set it on
fire. The broader and the wyder that you make your furrows, the fayrer and
more fruitful will your trees be, and the fruit the better. Your furrowe must
be made like an Oven, or Furnace, wyder at the bottom then above, that the
root may spread the better, and the cold in Winter, and the heat in Summer,
may the better be kept from it, and also in steep grounds, the earth shall
not so easily be washed away. In setting of your fruit trees and Uines, you
must place them in order, either Checkerwyse, or Netwyse: which needful order
of setting, is not only profitable by receiving the air, but also very
beautiful to the eye: when as, which way so ever you look, you shall see them
stand in rank, and which also is to good purpose, the trees shall equally
receive their moisture from the ground.


THRA. I see the Gardners in every place observe this order, setting their
trees in such proportion, as which way so ever you look, your eye shall not
be let, but shall see the trees stand straight in order.


MARIUS. I have used two sorts of this catred order, one wherein my trees
stand four square like the Chequer or Chesseboorde: the other not in square
as the first, but losing-wyse or Diamond wise like the Glass windows or
Nets. You must frame it according to the nature of the trees, lest the lower
sort be drowned of ye higher. You must also set the^ a good distance a sunder,
that their branches may spread at pleasure, for if you set them to thick, you
shall be able to sow nothing betwixt them, and they will be the less
fruitful. Therefore Paladius would have the space betwixt them, thirty
foot at the least: there is more pro^yte in the general disposyng of them,
entermedlyng the greater with the lesser, so as the great ones do not annoy
their underlings, Dropping of tr^^^.
either with their shaddowe or dropping, for that they grow not equal to them
in strength or bigness. Pomegranates and Myrtels must be sowed nearer
together, as mean foot a sunder, Apples nearer then they, and Pears nearer
then them both, but of them there are sundry sorts, Almonds and Fig trees,
must also be set nearer. And because there is a natural freendshippe and jove
betwixt certain trees, Freendship amongst ^^ees.
you must set them the nearer together, as the Uine and the Olyue, the
Pomegranate and the Myrtel. On the other side, you must set far a sunder,
such as have mutual hatred among them, as the Uine with the Filberde and the
Bay. There are some of them, that desire to stand two and two together as the
Chestnut: the droppinges also do great hurt of all sorts, but specially the
droppinges of Oaks, Pinetrees, and Mastholmes. Shaddovves of trees.
Moreover, the shadows of diverse of them are hurtful, as of the Walnut tree,
whose shaddowe is unwholesome for men, and Pine tree that kylleth young springes:
yet they both resist the wind, and therefor are best to be set in the outer
sides of the Orchardes, as hereafter shall be said. Of the place, and the order,
perhaps you think I have said yenough, and look that I should proceed to
the order of plantyng and setting.


THRA. Time of plantyng.
What t^m^ is the best for plantyng and setting of trees.


MARIUS. The ^heefest time of plantyng (as Florentine says) is the end of
Summer, for the^ is nature most occupied about the root, is in the spring
about the upper parts: and therefore graf^yng is meeres^ in the Spring, and
setting in the end of Summer: Time for gr^f^ing.
for the plants are watered all the Winter, and therefore it is bent sortyng or
plantyng, from the setting of the seven stars, (...) the twelft of December.
In the spring time, you may set those things that you forgatte before, at
what season so ever it b^: look that you set them in the afternoon, in a
fair westerly wind, westerly wind, and in the wane of the Moon. Pliny
says, The observation of the Moon.
that this note is of great importance for the increase of the tree, and
goodnessee of the fruit: if the tree be planted in the increase of the Moon,
it grows to be very great: but if it be in the wane, it will be smaler, yet a
great deal more lastyng.


THRA. But are there more ways then one of plantyng and setting?


MARIUS. A great sort: The kinds of planting and graffing of tree^.
we plant either by graffing, setting of the kernel, or the stone, setting the
roots, stocks, or slippes, grafting betwixt the bark and the tree: some are
planted in some of these sorts, others in all. In Babylon (as they say) only
the leaf set, comes to be a tree, first I will speak of graffing, Three
kinds of g^affing.
and then of the rest. There are that appoint but three kinds of graffing,
betwixt the bark and the wood, in the stock, and emplastring, or inoculation.
The first for they call grafting, the second imbranching, the third
inoculation, or imbudding. Such trees as have thickest barks, What trees are
best to be graffed betwixt the bark and the vvood.
and draw most sap from the ground, are best graffed betwixt the bark and
the wood, as the Fig, the Chery, and the Olyue: those that have thin
ryndes, and content them selves with less moisture, as if the sap leaving
the bark, should geather it self to the heart, as the Orange tree, the Apple
tree, the Uine, and diverse others, in these it is best to open the stock, and
graffe in the wood. What tre^^ agree best together.
Some trees are also best graffed upon other some, the Fig that prospers
best upon the Mulbery stock, and the Plane tree: the Mulbery upon the
Chestnut, and the Beech, the Apple, the Pear, the Eline, and the white Poplar,
wherein if you graffe, you shall have your Mulberies white: upon the same stock
are graffed the Pear, the Quince, the Medlar, and the Seruisse: the Pear upon
the Pomegranate, the Apple, the Quince, To have read Pears and Apples.
the Mulberie, and the Almon. If you gra^^e your Pear upon a Mulbery, you
shall have read Pears: the Apple is graffed upon all Pear stocks, and
Crabbe settes, Wyllowe, and Poplar: being graffed upon the Q^ince, it brings
forth the fruit which the Greeks call Melimela: it is also graffed upon
the Plomtree, but being graffed upon the Plane tree, it brings forth read
Apples. The Medlar being graffed upon the Thorn, the graft grows to great
bigness, but the stock continues small: upon the Pine tree, it brings a
sweet fruit, but not lastyng. The Peache graffed in the Thorn, A Peache ^ith
an Almond in it.
or the Beeche, grows to be very fair, and great: the Almond and the Peache
being joined together, and graffed in the Plumtree, will bear a Peache with
an Almond in the stone. The Fylbert will only be graffed in the Wylding, not
agreeing with any other. The Pomegranate delights in diverse stocks, as in
the Wyllowe, the Bay, the Ash, the Damson, the Plome, and the Almond, upon all
which he prospers well. The Damson grows very well upon any kind of wild
Pear, Quince, and Apple: The Chestnut lyketh well the Wallnut and the Beeche.
The Chery refuses not the company of the Peache, nor the Turpentine, nor they
his: the Quince will well be graffed upon the Barbery: the Myrtel upon the
Sallow: the Plome upon the Damson: the Almond upon the Fylbert: the Cytron,
because of his tender tree, and thin rynde, will scarsely bear any other
graffe, and therefore contents him self with his own branche. The Uine that
is graffed upon the Chery tree (as Florentinus promises) will bear Grapes,
and graffed upon the Olyue, will bring forth a fruit, that bearyng the name
of both his parents, is called El^o^laphylos. Olyue grape
In fine, all young trees that have sap in the bark may be graffed: if it be
greater, it is best graffing near the root, where both the bark and the
wood, by the reason of the nearenesse of the ground are full of sap. He then
that will graft either in the stock, or betwixt the stock and the rynde, let
him geather his graffes from a fruiteful tender tree, and full of joints, The
choice o^ gra^^ing.
and out of the new spring, except he mean to graffe an old tree, when as the
sturoyer the graffes be, the better they are, otherwise the last shootes of
such trees as have lately borne will be the best. You must geather them on that
side the tree that lies upon the North, others like better the East side then
the shaddowy. Virgil forb^ddeth those that grow upon the top, thinking them
better that grows out of the side. To be short, your graffes must be full of
buddes lately grown out, smoothe, the rynde smoothe, good, and ready to grow:
they must be of the last years growth, The knottes
which is known by the knottes or joints, that declare every years growth:
beside, graffes of all trees are not to be geathered alike: for Uines and Fig
trees are dryest in the middle parts, and take best of the top, and
therefore from thence you must geather your graffes: Olyues are fullest of
sap i^ the midst, and the outer parts dryest. Those best agree together,
whose ryndes are nearest of nature, and do blossom, and bear both about a
time. You must geather your graffes in the wane of the Moon, ten days
before you graffe them. Constantine adds this reason, that it is need the
graffe do a little wyther, that he may the better be received of the stock.
The time for graffing.
You must appoint your graffing time in the spring, from March, when as the
buddes do begin to burgen, but not come out (although you may graffe the Pear
when his leaves be out) until May: for g^affing in rain is pro^itable, but not
for imbranching. The Olyue, whose springes do longest budde, and have much
sap under the bark, the abundance whereof does hurt the graffe, must be
graffed (as Florentine says) from May, till June. Columella would have the
Olyue graffed from the twelfth of March, till the first, or sixth of April, and
the time of graffing, to be the Moon increasing, in the after noone, when
there blows no South wind. When ye have found a good graffe, take your
knife (being very sharp) and pare it about a three fingers from the joint
downward, The manner of gra^fi^g.
so much as shall be meet to be set in the stock: that part that is under
the joint (not perishing the pith) you must cut with your knife, as if you
should make a pen, so as the wood with the wood, and the bark with the
bark, may join together, as just as may be. Which being done, if you mean
to graffe in the stock, you must first saw it smoothe, and then cleave it in
the midst with a sharp knife, about three fyngers: and to the end you may
handsomely put in your graffe, you must have a little wedge of wood or iron, (
Pliny thinks it better of bone) which wedg^ (when you will graffe between
the rynde and the stock) must be made flat on the one side, and round on
the other, and the graffe must be pared also flat on that side that must
stand next the wood, taking always good heed that the pith be not perished:
the other part must only have the rynde pulled of, which after you must set in
the cleft, or betwixt the bark, till you see all parts agree together. Some
do cut the point of their graffe three square, so as two sides are bare, and
the other covered with his bark: and in that sort they use to graffe in a
stock one against another, but it is thought best to graffe no more but one.
When you have thus set in your graffe in the stock, pluck out the wedge: but
here is a great carfulness, and heed to be used. And therefore, good
grafters think it best to hold the graffe even with both hands, least in the
binding and pulling out of the wedge, the graffe be hurt, or stand uneven. For
auoydyng of which, some use for to bind the stock about, and after to put in
the wedge, the bands keeping it from openyng to wide. The harder they be set
in, the longer will they be ear they bear, but will endure the better: you
must take heed therefore, that the cleft be not to slack nor to strayt. When
you have thus graffed, bind the stock with a twigge, and cover it with Loame,
well tempered with Chafe, two fyngers thickness, and (putting Moss round
about it) tie it up so, that there come no rain at it, nor be hurt with the
Sun or the Wind. This is the order both in the old time, and at this day
used: though in Columellas time (as it appears) they were not wont to
graffe, but only betwixt the bark and the wood, for the old people (as
Pliny writes) durst not as yet meddle with clea^yng of the stock: at length
they presumed to make holes, and graffe in the pith, and so at last waxed bold
to cleave the stock. Cato would have the stock covered with Clay and Chalk,
mingled with Sand, and Oxedoung, and so made in mortar. Somet^me they graffe
with the top of the graft downewarde, and they do it to make a little tree
spread in breadth. It is best graffing next the ground, if the knottes and the
stock will suffer: and ^linie would have the graffe grow forth not above
six fyngers. If you will graffe a little tree, cut it near the ground, so
as it be a foot and a half hye. If you would carry your graftes far, To
keep your graffes.
they will longest keep their sap, if they be thrust into the root of a
Rape: and that they will be preserved if they lie betwixt two little guts
runnyng out of some River, or Fishpond, and be well covered with earth.


THRA. I do now greatly desire to hear you say something of emplast^ing or
inocula^ion, Of empl^st^^ng and inocu^ation.
that is, in graffing with the budde or the leaf, which you call in Greek
(...)^ which kind of graffing, I see those that are given to new fashions
delight much in.


MARIUS. This is no new manner of graffing, but we find that it was used both
of the Latins, and of the Greeks, when taking of a leaf or little budde,
with some part of y^ rynde with him, we graffe it into an other branche, from
which we have taken as much bark. This order ( Columella says) the husbands
in his days were wont to call emplastring, or moculation: and before
Columellas days, Theophrastus in his book de causes plantarum, does show
the reason of inoculation. Pliny does say, it was first learned of Dawes,
hydyng of seeds in caves and holes of trees. This kind of graffing as
Columella does write, and our Gardners them selves confess, is best to be
used in summer, about the twelft of June: yet Didymus says, he has graffed in
this manner, and has had good increase with it in the spring time. And since
it is the dayntiest kind of graffing, it is not to be used in all trees, but
alonely in such as have a strong, a moist, and a sappy rin^e, as the Olyue, the
Peache, and the Fig, which are full of Milk, and have a big bark. Of that
tree that you mean to graffe, chouse the youngest and the fairest branches you
can, and in them take the budde that is likeliest to grow, and mark it round
about two inches square, so as the budde stand even in the midst, and then
with a sharp knife cut it round about, and flawe of the rynde, taking good
heed you hurt not the budde, and take out the piece. Afterward, go to the
tree that you mean to graffe on, and choose likewise the fairest branche, and
pare away the rynde a little space, and join in your budde so just, as the
ryndes may agree together so close, as neither water nor wind may enter in.
You must look that you hurt not the wood, and that the ryndes be of one
thickness. When you have this done, bind it up, so as you hurt not the
budde: then claye it over all, leauyng liberty yenough for the budde. Cut of
all the spring that grows about it, that there be nothing left to draw away
the sap, but that it may only serve the graffe: after one and twenty days
unloose it, and take of your coueryng, and you shall see your budde incorporated
in the branche of a strange tree. Columella speaks of an other sort of
graffing, to bore a hole in a tree with an Augur, VV^^rble graffing.
either to the pith, or the uttermost rynde, going something sloapewyse
downward, and getting out all the chippes clean, take a Uine, or an arm of
the best U^ne, not cut from his old mother, and paryng away the outer rynde,
thrust it fast into the hole being all moist and full of sap, leauyng a budde
or two only upon it: afterward, stop the hole well with Moss and Clay, and
commit it to the earth. In this sort may you graffe Uines upon Elmes, so shall
the branch live being both nourished by his old mother, and his new father.
Two year after, you shall cut of the new graffed branche, and the stock
wherein you graffed, you shall saw of a little above the bory^g, so shall the
graffe become the cheifest part of the plant. The like do our country men,
taking a branche of a Beeche a foot thick: and when they have cut it and
bored it, they set in it the branches of the best Pear or Apple that they can
geat, setting the same in a very wet ground in March, and in the same month
the year after taking up the Beeche, they cut it a sunder with a Saw betwixt
the holes and the branches: and every piece of stock with his branche, they
set in very rich and fruitful ground. There are some that brag of ^n
other kind of graffing, not much unlike to the former, whereof
notwithstanding. A^rican in Constantine makes mention, as tried in a Peache.
They will a man to take the branch of a Wyllowe as big as your arm, ^
and two cubits in length or more: this they would have you to bore through
the mids, and after sl^pping of the branches of a Peache as he stands,
l^^^ing only the top untouched, they would have you to make the Pe^c^e pass
through the Wyllowe batte, and that done, to bow the wyllowe like a bow,
se^ting both his ends into the earth, and so to bind up the hole with moss,
mortar, and bands. The year after when as the head of the Peache, has joined
him self with the pith of the Wyllowe, that both the bodies are become one.
You shall cut the tree beneath, and remove it, and raise up the earth, so as
you cover the Wyllow bow with the top of the Peache: and this shall bring you
Peaches without stones. This kind of graffing must be done in moist places,
and the Wyllowes must be hol^en with often watringes, that the nature of the
tree may be of force. The kinds and manners of propagation, are declared by
Pliny, Propagatio^, and his kinds.
who tells of two kinds: the first, wherein a branche of the tree being
bowed down, and buried in a little furrowe, and after two years cut of, and
the plant in the third year removed: which if you entende to carry any far
distance of, it is best for you to bury your branches in baskettes, or earthen
vessels, in which you may appliest carry them. And an other more delicater way
he speaks of, which is to get the root out of the very tree, laying the
branches in baskettes of earth, and by that means obtaynyng roots betwixt the
very fruit and the tops (for by this means the root is fetched from the
very top, so far they presume) and from thence fetch them, using it as
before: in which sort you may also deal with Rosemary and Sauyne. Columella
shows a way, how slippes of all manner of trees may be graffed in what trees
you list.


THRA. And some are also set of the slippes, or slyuynges: I me self have
plucked a branche from a Mulbery tree, and broosing the end a little with a
Mallet, have set it in the ground, and it has grown to be a fair tree: the
like has been tried (as they say) in Apples and Pears.


MARIUS. You say well, for nature has showed us, that the young scyences
plucked from the roots of the trees will grow: the youngest are best to be
planted, and so to be pulled up, as they may bring with them some part of their
mothers body. In this sort you may plant Pomegranates, Fylbertes, Apples,
Seruysses, Medlars, Plomes, Fygges, but specially Uines, and sometimes Cheryes,
and Myrtels. Of the stock and the branches are also planted the Almond, the
Pear, the Mulbery, the Orange, the Olyue, the Q^^^ce, the Iuye, and the
turkishe Plome: which the oftener you remove them, the better they prove.
Pliny says, that branches cut from the tree, were at the first only used for
hedges, Elder, Quinces, and Briars meddled together, afterward for use, as
the Poplar, the Alder, and the Wyllowe, at this day we set them where we best
like. Heed must be taken, that the stocks, or the settes be of a good kind,
not crooked, knotty, nor forked, nor sclenderer, then that a man may well gripe
with his hand, nor less then a foot in length.


THRA. It remains now, that you speak of the setting of the fruit or
kernel.


MARIUS, Nature (as Pliny says) has taught us to set the kernel, by the
seeds devoured of birds, and moystned with the warmth of their entrayles, and
after voyded in the boughs and ryses of trees: whereby we find many times a
Plane tree growyng out of a Bay, a Bay out of a Chery, and a Chery out of a
Wyllowe. Many trees are set of the fruit, kernel, or stone, which grow
yearly of them selves, by reason of the falling of the fruit: as Chestnuts,
Haselnuts, and Wallnuts. Columella says, they are the fruitefuller trees that
spring of their fruit, then those that are set of the stock, or the
branche. Some delight to be set in trees, and not in the ground: and when they
have no soil of their own, they live in a stranger. Of ye fruit or kernel,
are planted Nuttes, Almondes, Pystaces, Chestnuts, Damsons, Plomes, Pineapples,
Dates, Cypress, Bays, Apples, Pears, Maples, Fyrtrees, Cheryes, Peaches, and
Alm co^tes: but set or planted, they prove to be the kyndlyer. Some of these
do grow in graffing, and other ways: for experience teaches, that the Nutte
and the Tere^^ith are graffed, and Demageron witnesses as much: neither are
all fruits, kernels, and stones set in like sort, as hereafter shall be seen.
Some are laid in water before, others not: some lie three days in honey and
water, and at the fall of the leaf, are buried in the ground till March: ^
and then set Nuttes are only laid in moist doung a day before, and of some
in water and honey only a night, lest the sharpness of the honey destroy the
sproote. Some are (...) with their tops standing upward, as the Chestnut:
others downward, as the Almond, though this is not greatly to be regarded,
since we see the fruit that falls from the tree, or is let fall by Birds,
does prosper best of any other.


THRA. I have a wonderful delyght in the Impe Gardens of these Countries, I
pray you tell me how they be ordered.


MARIUS. The orderyng of an Impe Garden may not be passed over, Of impe Garden.
wherein as in a Park, the young plants are nourished. And because the Nurse
sometimes ought to be kineder and tenderer then the Mother, a meet ground must
be chosen for the purpose: that is, a ground dry, fat, and well labored
with the Mattocke, wherein the stranger may be well cherished, and very like
unto the soil, into which you mean to remove them. The kernels, or stones,
must not be altogether naked, but a little covered with some part of the
fruit, so shall they afterward endure the longer. They must be set a foot,
or there aboutes a sunder: after two years they must be removed. And because
their roots do run very deep into the ground, they must be somewhat bent,
or turned in, to the end they may spread abroad, and not run downward.
Above all things, you must see it be free from stones and rubbishe, well
fenced against Poultry, and not full of chinckes or cleftes, that the sun
burn not the tender roots: they must be set a foot and a half a sunder,
that they hurt not one y^ other with their near growing. Among other evils,
they will be full of worms, and therefore must be well raked and weeded: beside,
growyng rank, they must be trymmed and proyned. Cato would have them covered
over with Lattuses upon forkes, to let in the sun, and to keep out the
cold: Thus are the kernelles of Pears, Pineapples, Nuttes, Cypress, and such
others cherished. They must be gently watered for the first three days, at the
going down of the sun, that they equally receyuyng the water, may open ye
sooner. Zizipha, or Turkey Plomes, Nuts, Wallnuttes, and Chestnuttes, Bays,
Cheryes, Pistaces, Apples, Dates, Pears, Maples, Fyrres, Plomes, and diverse
others, are set of the stone, or kernels. In remouyng of them, have special
regard, that they be set in the like soil, or in better, not from hot and
forward grounds, into cold and backward, nor contrary from these to the
other. You must make your furrows so long before, if you can, that they be
ouergrowen with good mould. Mago would have them made a year before, that they
may be well seasoned with the Sun, and the weather: or if you can not so, you
must kindle fyres in the midst of them two months before, and not to set
them, but after a shewre. The deapth of their setting must be in stiff claye,
or hard ground, three cubits: and for Plome trees, a handful more. The
furrowe must be made Furnase like, straight above, and broad in the bottom:
and in black moulde, two cubits and a hand broad, being square cornered,
never deeper then two foot and a half, nor broader then two foot broad, and
never of less deapth, then a foot and a half, which in a wette ground will
draw near the water. Such as delight in the deapth of the ground, are to be
set the deeper, as the Ash, and the Olyue: these and such like, must be set
four foot deep, the others it suffiseth if they stand three foot deep.
Some use to set under their roots round little stones, both to conteyne, and
convey away the water: others lay gravel underneath them. The greater trees
are to be set toward the North and the West, the smaller toward the South and
the East. Some will have no tree removed, under two year old, or above three:
and others when they be of a years growth. Cato resists Virgils authority,
that it is to great purpose to mark the standing of the tree, as it grew at
the first, and to place it toward the lame quarters of the heaven again.
Others observe the contrary in the Uine, and the Fig tree, being of opinion,
that the leaves shall thereby be the thicker, and better defend the fruit, and
not so soon fall: beside, the Fig tree will be the better to be climbed
upon. Moreover, you must beware that by long tarying, the roots be not
wythered, nor the wind in the North when ye remove them, whereby many times
they dye, the husband not knowing the cause. Cato condemns utterly all manner
of winds and storms in the removing of trees, and therefore it is to great
good purpose, to take them up with the earth about them, and to cover the
roots with a (...), and for this cause Cato would have them to be carried in
basaet^ filled with earth up to the top: the tree must so be set, as it may
stand in the midst of the trenche, and so great heed must be taken of the
roots, that they may not be broken, nor mangled.


THRA. Let us now go forward with every tree in his order.


MARIUS. Among all trees and plants, the Uine by good right chalengeth the
soueraignetie, seeing there is no plant used in husbandry more fruitful, and
more commodious then it, The Vine.
not alonely for the beautifulness, and goodlynesse of the fruit, but also
for the easiness he has in growyng, whereby he refuses not almost any kind
of Country in the whole world, except such as are too extremely skorched
with the burning heat of the Sun, or else to extremely frozen with the
vehement cold, prosperyng also as well in the plain and champion country, as
it does upon the hilly and mountain Country: likewise as well in the stiff
and fast, ground, as in the soft and meilowe ground: and oftentimes in the
loamie and lean ground, as in the fat and foggie, and in the dry, as in
the moist and myrie, yea and in many places, in the very rocks it grows most
abundantly and most fruitefully, as is to be seen and proved at this day
about the river of Rhyne in Germany, and the river of Mosel in France: and
above all this, it best abides and bears the contrary disposition of the
heavens.


THRA. No doubt it is the most excellent plant: but whom do you suppose to be
the first aucthour of the plantyng of it? the common sort do attribute the
first invention of it to Bachus.


MARIUS. We that are taught by Gods holy word, do know that it was first
found out by the Patryarke Noe, immediately after the drownyng of the world:
it may be, the Uine was before that time, The invention of the Vine.
though the plantyng and the use thereof, was not then known. The Heathen both
most falsely, and very fondly, as in many other things, do give the invention
of the same unto the god Bachus. But Noah lived many years before either
Bacchus, Saturnus, or Vranius were borne.


THRA. It is most likely so: but I would feign know, whether the planting of
Uines does more enriche the husband, then other husbandries do.


MARIUS. About this question there is no little adoo among the writers of old,
where there are some that prefer grasing, tyllyng, and woodsales far above
the Uines: and yet again there wantes not great and learned men, that affirm
the Uine to be most gainefull: as declares that old fruitefulnesse of the
Uines, The Vineyard most gayneful.
mentioned by Cato, Varro, and Columella, which upon every acre yielded.700.
gallondes of Wine, and the Uineyardes of Seneca, wherein he had yearly upon
one acre.1000. gallondes: when as in Corn ground, Pasture, or Woodland, if a
man do geat upon one acre.xx. s. a year, it is thought a great matter.


THRA. But the Uine asks great charges, and great travail about it, Corn
feeld and Vineyardes compared.
and it is subject to many mishaps, as the cold frostes of Winter, the blastes
and burning of Summer, and from the first appearing, til the third of May
(which is the last decretorie day of the Uine) the hurt of the cold and frost
is feared. When it has escaped this danger, then comes a greater mischief,
which lightly every year does great harm: for either with blastes in the
Dog days, or for lack of rain, the Grapes are wythered and spoiled, or else
with overmuch rain they wax sour, and not ripe. Sundry other mishappes there
happen, that the Uine is subject to.


MARIUS. I grant: so is your Corn likewise, for both it asks great charges,
and such casualties often times vndooeth the poor husband. For in all kind of
husbandry, if there be not great diligence, and good skill employed, there will
be but small commodity reaped. And especially the Uine requires great
husbandry about it, for it is tender, and soon harmed, and therefore in choice
of the Uineyard, there must be good heed, and both the nature of the country,
and the disposition of the Heavens to be well considered. Most men plant their
Uines without any great care, or heed of them: and when they grow up use
little diligence in the trimming of them, by which negligence, many times they
wyther before they be ripe. Others again think it makes no great matter, what
ground they bestow about it, and most times lay out for this purpose the
worst ground they have, as though it would serve for this plant, that will
serve for no other thing. Some again reap all the commodity they can ye
first years, not prouidyng for farther time, and so complain, that their
gaynes does neither answer their travail, nor their charges, whereas in
deed their own folly and negligence is the cause: for if there be diligence
and pains bestowed upon it, as Columella proves by many reasons, there is no
husbandry so profitable, as the plantyng of Uines.


THRA. I do not deny but that there is great profit in it, where the ground
is meet for Uines, and not so fit for Corn: otherwise I think the sowing
of Corn to be an easier matter, and speedyer way to enriche the husband.


MARIUS. Surely as touching the easiness of the husbandry, and the greatness
of the gain, the old writers have ever preferred the Uineyard before the Corn
feelde: for as Columella reports Siserna writes, that the labor of one man
is sufficient for eight acres of Uines, or at the least for seven: of the
increase I have spoken before.


THRA. Mary sir at this day one man thinks three acres too much for him: but
not to trouble your talk, I pray you go forward with the husbandry of your
Uines.


MARIUS. The ordering of the wine bearyng Uines, as the sorts of Uines are
sundry, neither can they be contained in certain numbers, for there is as many
sorts, as there is of ground. Homer gives the cheifest praise to the wine of
Maronia, and Pramnium, Virgil most commends Rhenishe wine: others the wine of
Aminea, Lamentana, Candy, and Corsega, but I mean to speak of those that are
common in our days. In Italy at this day they make most account of wine of
Corsega, Romani, and Mesina. In Spain they cheifest esteem wine of S. Martin,
of Ribodaui, and Giberaltar. In France the greatest praise is given to the
wine of Orleans, Anjou, and Greues. Germany began but of late to meddle with
planting of Uines, for Varro writes, that the Frenchemen, and the Germans had
in his time both Uines, and Olyues: but at this day the Rhine, the Necker, the
Mean, Mosel, and Danow, may compare with any Countries, for goodness of their
Uines.


THRA. I see that the Uines are diversely dressed otherwise in Italy, then in
France, and otherwise in France, then in Germany, every Country vsyng his
several fasshion.


MARIUS. True: for as Pliny, after Columella, teaches, the Uine may be
planted five sundry ways: for either his branches are suffered to run in
safety upon the ground, or else without any stay grow vpryght, or having a
stay or a proppe set for them, they climb up by it, or else run up by a
couple of such proppes, called of Liuy a yoke, or else sustained with four of
those yokes, which of the resemblance that they have with the hollow gutters
of a house, are said to be guttered: others again suffered to run upon
frames like Arbers, seruyng to sit under, and are called Arber vines: others
run up by the walls of houses. Moreover, the yoked Uines, called in Greek
(...), are tied together, and joined with three or four proppes, as if they
were yoked: some do let them run upon trees, as commonly in Lumbardy they
are suffered to climb upon Elmes, Trees which be friends or foes to the Vine.
Wyllowes, and Ashes, where they greatly prosper: neither do they like all
manner of trees, for they hate the Nuttree, the Bay, the Radishe, and the Coll:
as again they love the Poplar, the Elm, the Wyllowe, the Fig, and the Olyue
tree. The Uines that are yoked, or stayed up with proppes, receive more air,
and bear their fruit the higher, and ryp^ the better, but ask more trouble
in the lookyng to: and these are so ordered, that they may be plowed, whereby
they are the more fruitful, because they may the oftener, and with the less
charge be tylled. The Uines that creep upon the ground, make much wine, but
not (as Columella says) so good.


THRA. Now to your orderyng of them.


MARIUS. First I will speak of the ground, and of the diggyng of it, The
ordring of Vines.
and after of the plantyng, and cuttyng of them. And first you must take for a
special note, that every Uine will not agree with every place, nor yield his
wine in like goodness, of such force is the quality of the air, neither
will all kind of ground serve: What ground is best for the Vine.
for Columella does counsel to set the Uine in a wild ground, rather then
where Corn or Busshes have grown: for as for old Uineyardes, it is most
certain they are the woorst places of all other to set new in, because the
ground is matted, and as it were netted with the remaynes of the old roots:
neither has it lost the poison of the rotten and old stinkyng roots,
wherewith the soil (glutted as it were with venime) is benommed. And therefore
the wild and vntyld ground is cheefely to be chosen, which though it be over
grown with shrubbes and trees, may yet easily be rid. If such wild ground
be not to be had, the best is the plain champion land without trees: if
neither such a ground, then the light and thin busshie ground, or Olyue
ground. The last and woorst (as I said) is the old rotten Uineyard, which if
necessity compel you to take, you must first rid the ground of all the
old rotten roots, and then cover it either with old doung, or with the
newest of any other kind of manuryng: the roots being thus dug up, must be
laid up together, and burned. After must the ground be considered, whether it
be mellowe and gentle: it is thought to be good, that is somethyng greety and
grauelly, and full of small peebles, so that it be mingled with fat mould
withal, which if it be not, is utterly disalowed. Dame Ceres joys in heavy
ground, and Bacchus in the light.
You shall perceive it to be massy and thick, if being dug and cast into
the hole again, it ryseth over: if it scarsely fill the hole, it is a sign
that it is light and thin. The Flynt by the general consent of husbandmen,
is counted a friend to the Uine, specially where it is well covered with good
mould: for being cold and a keeper of moisture, it suffers not the roots to
be skalded with the heat of Summer: so much, that Columella does will men to
lay certain stones about the sides of the Uinetrees, so that they exceed not
the weight of five pound a piece: which as Virgil has noted, keeps away the
water in Winter, and the heat in Summer. Hurl in the thyrstie stone, or
therein throw the nasty shelles.
So do we see the banks of the Rhine being full of these stones, to yield
an excellent good wine: but the stones that lie above ground, are to be cast
away: for in the Summer being heated with the sun, they burn the Uine, and
in the Winter they hurt them with their coldness, contrary to those that lie
in the bottom. But the best of all is the foot of an hill, which receives
the falling moulde from the top: or the valley, that with ouerflowyng of
Ryuers has been made rich. Neither is chalkie ground to be re^used, though
the chalk of it self that Potters use, is hurtful to the Uine. The hungry
sandy ground, the salt, bitter, and thyrstie ground, is not meet for the
Uine: yet the black and the reddishe sand, meddled with some moist earth, is
of some allowed well yenough. Moreover, neither ground too hot or too cold,
too dry nor too moist, too sclender nor too stiff, that will not suffer the
rain to sincke, is meet to be used for Uines, for it will easily gape and
open, whereby the sun coming in at the crayuesses, does burn the roots:
that again which is over thin, lettyng in as it were by ventes the rain,
the sun, and the wind, does dry up the moisture of the roots: the thick
and stiff ground is hardly to be labored, the fat ground subject to too
much rancknesse, the lean ground to barrenness: wherefore there must be an
even temperature amongst these extreamities, as is required in our bodies,
whose health is preserved by the equal medley of heat and cold, dryth and
moisture, fullness and emptiness, or thickness and thinness: neither yet is
this temperature in ground for Uines so justly to be euened, but that there is
required a more enclining to the one part, as that the earth be more hot then
cold, more dry then moist, more s^^htyll then gross, specially if the state
of the heavens agree^ again, what quarter whereof the Uineyard ought to lie,
What quarter of the heaven the Vine must lie against.
it is an old controversy, some like best the rising of the sun, some the
West, some the North, Virgil misliketh the West: others again think the best
lying to be upon the South. But in general it is thought best in cold
countries, to have it lie toward the South, in warm countries upon the East,
in hot burning Countries, as Egypt, and Barbary, upon the North. Pliny would
have the Uine him self stand toward the North, and his spring, or shoutes,
toward the South. A fytte ground and w^ll lying, being found out, must be
diligently dug, dounged, and weeded: all unprofitable weeds must be pulled
up, and thrown away, lest they should spring again, and either corrupt the
young plants, or hinder the labourer.


THRA. Before you come to trenchyng, I would gladly hear, in what sort you
plant your Uine, and what season is fittest for it.


MARIUS. I will first speak of the season, and afterward of the plantyng.
The Uine is planted according to Virgils rule, The time for planting of Vines.
in the fall of the leaf, but better in the spring, if the weather be rayny,
or cold, or the ground be fat, champion, or a watrishe valley: and best in
the fall of the leaf, if the weather be dry and warm, the ground dry and
light, a barrayne, or a rugged hill. The time of plantyng, in the spring (as
Columella says) endures forty days, from the Ides of February, until the
Aequinoclial: and in the fall of the leaf, from the Ides of October, to the
Kalendes of December. Cassian in Constantine being taught by experience, wyls
in watrye grounds you should rather plant in Autumn, when the leaves are
fallen, and the plants after the vintage, delivered of the burden of their
clusters, sound and strong, before they be nipped with the frostes, for then
they best agree with the ground, nature applying her self wholly to the
nourishing of the root. The time of graffing Columella says, is of some
extended from the first of November, to the first of June, Graffing of Vines.
till which time the shoot or graffe may be preserved: but it is not well liked
of him, who rather would have it to be done in warmer weather, when Winter is
past, when both budde and rynde is naturally moved, and safe from cold, that
might annoy either the graffe, or the stock: yet he grants (when have
requires) it may be done in the fall of the leaf, when as the temperature of
the air, is not much unlike to the spring: for which purpose, you must choose
a warm day, and no wind stirryng. The graffe must be round and sound, What
graffes to be chosen.
not full of pith, but full of buddes, and thick of joints, the tenant
whereof must not exceed three inches, and smoothe, and even cut: the stock
and the cleft must be well closed with clay and moss. Those that grow toward
the South, must be marked, which Virgil obseruyng says. But on the bark,
they also note the quarter of the skie^
The order how it stood, and grew, and where the South did lie.
The like is to be done with all other trees. Of plantyng of Uines, there is
two ways, the one of the root, the other of the branche, or spray: the root
is counted a great deal better then the branche or set, by reason of the
forwardness, and vauntage that it has, in that it has already taken root.
The root is set in stiff ground, well dug and labored, in a trenche of
three foot, the set or spray, in a gentle and mellowe ground: in dry ground,
it is neither good to set the root, nor the branche, in a dry season: it is
best to plant in the fall of the leaf in a hot season, and in a cold and
moist, in the spring: in much wet, you must set them thinner, in great dries,
thicker: in what sort you shall make a store Garden for Uines, Palla^tius
teaches you. The set requires a time to root, and being removed, will bear
the better fruit. The roots do bear fruit the second year, or sooner: the
settes, or branches, skarse in the third or fourth year, though in some
places sooner. Didymus in Constantine, teaches an easy and a ready way of
plantyng the quicksette: which is, to take of a strong and ten year Uine, the
longest and fairest branch, that grows lowest, a foot from ye ground, and
laying it along in a trenche of a foot deapth, to cover it with earth the
space of four joints, so that the remain in the top, exceed^ not two or
three joints: and if the branche be so long, as it will serve for two
buryinges, you may make thereof two roots. You must not suffer two roots to
run up upon one stay, but allow every root his supporter. The branches or
settes that you mean to plant, you must cut from a ^^ry fruiteful and
flourishing Uine, that has borne ripe and per^^^^ good fruit, full of joints,
and not any ways taynted, but whole and sound. Of such you must choose your
settes, and not of young Uines, that are weak and feeble, but such as are in
there chief state. Moreover, you must geather your set, not of the highest,
nor the lowest, but from the midst of the Uine: the set must be round
smooth, full of knottes and joints, and many littel burgeons. As soon as you
have cut it of, look that you set it: for better does it agree with the
ground, and sooner grow. If you are driven to keep them, bury them in the
ground either loose, or loosely bound: and if the time be long that you mean
to keep them, you must lay them in empty barelles, strawing earth under them,
and upon them, that the earth may lie round about them: and the barrel you must
stop closely with clay, that there enter neither wind nor air, so shall you
preserve them two months in their goodness. Such as are over dry, you must
lay them in water.xxiiii. hours before you set them, and you must set two
settes together, that though the one fail, the other may take: and if they
both grow, you may take up the lesser of them: you must not make a medley of
sundry sorts, specially white and black together: but as Columella says,
must sort them severally. You must beware, that the settes have not put out
their springes, and that you set not a wythered set. Constantine would have
the set something crooked, affirming that it will the sooner take root. You
must lay about them three or four stones, and then raise the earth, that it
may equally with the doung be trodden down: for the stones keeps the earth
fyrme, and as I said before, cools the root. Both the ends of the set
you must annoint with Ox doung, for the killyng of the woormes: as for the
length, if it be full of joints, it may be the shorter, if it have few
joints, you must make it the longer, and yet not exceedyng a foot in length,
The length of the setter.
nor a shaftman in shortness, the one for being burnt with over dryness in
Summer, the other least being set to deep, it be with great hardness taken
up, but this is for the level ground: for upon hills, where the earth still
falls, you may have them a foot and a hand breadth in length. Florentine
would not have the trenche less then four foot in deapth: for being set
shallowe, they sooner decay, both for the want of sustenance, and great heat
of the Sun, which is thought to pearse four foot into the ground: though
some there be that think three foot sufficient for the plant. The trenches
for Uines, Virgil would not have very deep: but deeper a great deal for
trees. Such Uines as you mean shall run upon trees, you must plant three
cubits distant from the tree: afterward, when they be well grown, and need
to be joined with the tree (which you shall perceive by his thickness) you
shall lay it down in length, and bury it, till it come within a foot of the
tree, suffering the remain to go at liberty, nipping of all the buddes with
your nail, except one or two, that it may the better prosper, which when it
is grown up, you must join by little and little to the tree, that it may rest
upon it: which part of the tree must be diligently proyned, and the springes
and scyenses, that grow out of the root, must according to Florentinus, be
cut clean away. The trees, as much as may be, must be forced to the East and
the West, and both the Tree and the Uine, must have the earth well dug, and
dounged about them. In rich ground, you may suffer the trees to grow in
heygth, but in barrayne ground, they must be polled at seven or eight foot,
least all the substance of the earth, be soked up of the tree. After your
planting, you must dig the ground every month, and weed it, specially from
the first of March, The (...)
till the first of October: every thyrtie day you must dig about the young
plants, and pluck up the weeds, specially the grass, which except it be
clean plucked up and cast away, though it be never so well covered, will
spring again, and so burn the plants, ^
as they will make them both foul, and wythered: the oftener you dig them, the
more good you do them. When the Grape begins to alter, you must in hand
with your third digging, and when it is ripe, before noone when it waxes
hot, and after noone when the heat decreaseth, you must dig it, and raise
the dust, which doing, defends the Grape both from the sun and the mist.
According to Virgils mind, the Uine must be dug and weeded every month:
some would have them dug all the Summer long, after every deawe: others
again will not have them dug, as long as they ^udde, or burgen, for hurtyng
the springes, saying, that it is yenough to dig them thryse in the year,
from the entering of the sun into Aries, till the rising of the seven stars,
and the Dog. Some again would have it done from the vintage before Winter,
and from the Ides of April before it take, and then again before it flower,
and likewise before the burning hours of the day: in some places when they
have dug them, they do not straightwayes cover them, but suffer the
trenches to lie open all the Winter, in wette and rayny places they cover them
sooner, closyng up the roots with earth, and stopping all the passages of the
water. What doung is best for Vines.
Some make the trenches very deep, and some not passing a foot deep: and
when they have done, they cover them aloft with Ox doung, Sheep doung, or
Hogs doung, or of other cattle: Pigeons doung is the hottest, and such as
causes the Uine fastest to grow, but makes the woorser wine. The doung must
not be laid close to the Uine, but a little distant from it, whereby the roots
that spread abroad, Where the doung must be laid.
may have some help of it, and the doung must not touch the roots, for
breaking of them: if there be no doung at hand, the stalks of Beans, and
other Pulse, will well serve the turn, which both defends the Uine from
frost and cold, and keeps them likewise from noisome worms: the kernelles,
and the stalks of the Grapes, do likewise supply the want of doung, Piss the
best doung.
but the best of all, is old stale urine. The plants of a year, or two year
old, and so forth til five years, must be discreetely dug and dounged,
according to their state: in sandy ground, the best doung is of Sheep and
Goats, and in such sort you must dig the ground, that the earth that lies
highest, be cast to the bottom, and that which was at the bottom, The order
of digging or stirring the ground.
be laid aloft: so shall that that was dry by the moisture within, be helped,
and that which was moist and stiff by the heat above, be loosened. You must
also see that there be no holes nor pittes in ye Uineyard, but that it lie
even. When you have thus dug it, and that the Uines have taken root the
first year, the roots that grow above, must be cut away with a sharp knife:
for the Uine, if it be suffered to root every way, it hinders the deep
down growing of the root. The Uines that are now of two years growth, we
must dig and trenche about two foot deep, and three foot broad, according
to the rule of Socion. Of those Uines that climb upon trees, you must
likewise cut of the sprigs that run among the roots of the tree, least the
small root tangled with the greater, be strangled: and therefore you must
leave some little space betwixt the Uine and the Tree. Often digging causes
great fruitfulness: good heed must be taken, that the plants be not hurt in
the digging: also it must be dug before his flourishing, or shooting out of
his leaves, for as immediately therewithal he begins to thrust out his
fruit. So he that diggeth after the romming forth thereof, loses much
fruit with the violen^ shaking, and therefore must dig the timelyer. Cutting
and dressing of the roots, you must begin in hand with at y^ Ides of October:
D^^ssing of Vines.
so that they may be trimmed and dispatched before Winter. After Winter, dig
about the roots that you have dressed: and before the son enter the
Aequinoctium, level the roots that you have trimmed. After the Ides of April,
raise up the earth about your Uine: in Summer let the ground be oftentimes
harrowed. After the Ides of October (as I have said) before the cold come in,
you must dress the roots of your Uines, which labor lays open the Summer
springes, which the good husband cutteth away with his knife^ for if you suffer
them to grow, the roots that grow down will perish, and it happens that
the roots spread all above, which will be subject both to cold and heat:
and therefore what so ever is w^thin a foot and a half, is to be cut of,
but so, as you hurt not the principal. You must make this ryddance of the
roots at every fall of the leaf, for the first five years, till the Uine be
full grown, after, you must dress them every fourth year: such Uines as are
joined with trees for the vnhandsomenesse, can not be thus handled. Uines and
Trees, the sooner their roots be thus dressed, the stronger and weyghtier they
will be: b^t such as grow upon the sides of hills, must so be dressed, as the
upper roots near to the stock may spread largely, and underneath toward
the foot of the hill, the earth must be bancked, to keep the water and the
mould the better. The old U^ne must not have his root meddled withal for
wytheryng, nor be plowed, for breaking of them, but the earth a little loosed
with a Mattocke, and when you have thus dressed the root, lay doung about it.
After this ridding of the roots, then follows proyning, or cuttyng, whereby
the whole Uine is brought to one twigge, and that also cut within two joints
of the ear^th: which cuttyng must not be in the joint, but betwixt the joints
with a slope cut, for avoiding the water: neither must the cut be on that
side that the budde comes out of, but on the contrary, least with his bleeding
he kill the budde. Columella appoynteth two seasons for the cuttyng of Uines,
the spring, and the fall of the leaf, judging in cold countries, the cutting
in the spring to be the best, and in hot countries where the Winters be
mild, the fall of the leaf: at which time both trees and plants, by the
divine and everlasting appointment of GOD, yeel^ up their fruit, and their
leaf. Yet must not your settes be too nearely cut, except they be very feeble:
but the first year they be set, they must be helped with often digging, and
pullyng of the leaves moonthly while they bear, that they may grow the better.
Pamphilus in Constantine declares the time of cuttyng, or proynyng, to begin
in February, or March, from ye fiftienth of February, till the twentieth of
March: some (he says) thought good to cut them immediately after the
geathering of the Grapes, least by bleedyng in the spring, they loose their
sustenance: though being cut in the fall of the leaf, it springs the sooner
in the spring, and if the cold of frost happen to come, it is spoiled.
Therefore in cold countries, it were better to proyne it a little, then to cut
it thoroughly, that is, to suffer the principal springes, and branches to
grow. Again, it is very necessary to cut them in the spring: the cuttes must
be made with a very sharp knife, that they may be smoothe, and that the water
may not stand in them, to the engendring of worms, and corruptyng of the Uine:
you must cut them round, so will the cut be sooner grown out again: but
Pliny would have them slope wise, for the better auoydyng of the water. The
branches that be broad, old, crooked, or wrythen, cut away, and set young
and better in their place. You must make an end of your cutting with as much
speed as you may, from ye Ides of December, till the Ides of January: you
must not touch your Uines with a knife, for Columella witnesses, that Uines
in Winter may not be cut. In cuttyng, remember well to cut it betwixt two
ioynes, for if you cut it in the joint, you spill it: let the cut be always
downward, so shall it be safe both from sun, and weather. You must not cut
them very early, but when the sun has drunk up the frost, or the deawe, and
warmed the branche: the springes of the settes the first year, must be cut
with good discretion, nor suffered to grow to rank, nor cut too near, but
making the old set to suffer a spring or two to grow out. Next unto cuttyng,
follows the proppyng, or supportyng of the Uine: and it is best for the young
and tender Uine, not to be stayed up with any strong stay, but with some small
thing at the first, Propping of Vines.
and while it is young, it must be deyntely tied to the stay, with small twigges
of Wyllowe, Elm, Broom, Russhes, or Straw: this latter binding, is thought
to be best, for the twigges when they wax dry, do pearce and hurt the rynde.
There is an herb, which because of his aptness for tying of Uines, the
Sicyllians call (...). The best stays for Uines as Pliny says, are made of
Wyllowe, Oak, Reed, Juniper, Cypress, and Eldar. And in an other place, he
prefers the Chestnut for this purpose, above all the rest. The best for the
Uine, is the Reed, which well endures five years: geldyng of the leaves,
and cuttyng the Uine, is almost in one manner. The geldyng of the leaves, or
branches, must be done twyse a year, to the end that the superfluous springes
and leaves may be plucked of. G^ldyng, or plucking of of leaves.
The first (as Pliny writes) must be done within ten days after the Ides of
May, before the Uines begin to flower: for about the tenth of June, both the
Uine, and Wheat, the two noble fruits, do flower. Of the second time, the
opinions are sundry, for some suppose it best to pluck of the leaves and
branches, as soon as it has left flowring: others, when the fruit is full
ripe. The superfluous springes being young and tender, are to be taken away,
that the Uine may be more at liberty, and through blown with the wind. This
geldyng, or cuttyng away the superfluous branches and leaves, is as needful
as the propping: for both the fruit does prosper the better, and the propping
the next year will be the handsomer, and the Uine will be the less full of
galls: for that which is cut being green and tender, does the sooner and the
soundlyer recover him self, and the Grape ripeth the better. Ten days
before the Uine begins to flower, see that you gelde it in this sort: cut of
all the superfluous branches, both on the top, and on the sides, but meddle
not where the clusters grow, strike of the tops of the branches for growing
to rank: such Grapes as grow toward the South, or the West, leave them
their branches to defend them from the heat of the Sun: cut away most from
the young Uine, for ouerburdning him. After the heat of the Sun begins to
fade, away with the leaves, for hindering the Grapes of there ryping: and while
the Grape is a flowring, busy your self with digging about it. Such Uines as
with thickness of their leaves corrupts their fruit, are to be rydde of
their superfluous branches and leaves, a month before the geatheryng of your
Grapes, that the wind may blow the better through them: but the leaves that
grow aloft in the very top, must not be meddled with, but left as a defense,
and shadow against the heat of the Sun: but if so be the end of Summer be
given to much rain, and that the Grapes swell in greatness, then hardly
pluck of ye leaves from the top also.


THRA. You have told us of a great deal of labor about Uines.


MARIUS. The Uine keeper must often go about his Uines, and set up his
proppes, and make even his yokes.


THRA. One thing, I pray you, let me hear more, the signs and tokens of the
ripeness: for as I understand, we may not be to busy in geathering them to
soon, nor use any lingering after they be ripe, without great harm.


MARIUS. You say true: for being geathered before they be ripe, they will make
but small wine, and not durable. And again, if you suffer them to long, you
shall not only hurt the Uine with the ouerlong bearing of her burden, but also
if hayle or frost happen to come, you put your Uine in great danger. Democritus
writes, that y^ Grape endures in his ripeness not above six days, and
therefore the judgment of his ripeness, is not alonely to be given upon the
sight, but upon his ta^te, though Columella thinks there can be no certain
iudgemen^ given of the ta^te. But if the stones do change their color, and be
no longer green, but be almost black, it is a sign the Grape is ripe. Some
again do press the Grape betwixt their fynge^s, and if they see the stone to
slip out smoothe, without any thing cleauyng to it, they think them meet to
be geathered, but if they come out with some part of the Grape cleauyng to
them, they count them not to be ripe. Others prove them in this sort: out of a
very thick cluster, they take a grape, and as they behold the cluster well,
wherein they see no change, they take it for a token of ripeness. You must
geather your Grapes, the Moon being in Cancer, Leo, Libra, Scorpius,
Capricorn, or Aquari, and underneath the earth.


THRA. Is there no way to make y^ Grape ripe speedely?


MARIUS. Pliny teaches, to rub over the roots with ta^te Uineger, and very
old vryne, and thus to be often dug, and covered.


THRA. What order have you for preserving of your Grapes, when they be
geathered?


MARIUS. Some keep them hanged up in the roof of Chambers, and some in
earthen pottes close covered with wooden vessels. Pallalius shows away how
to keep them upon the Uine, till the Spring.


THRA. I pray you proceed with the other fruit trees of your Orchardes.


MARIUS. Among other fruit trees next unto the Uine (as Columella says) the
chief place is given to the Olyue, The Olyue.
in Latin Olea, in Greek (...). Of all other plants, it requires least
travail and charges, where as the Uine requires most: and though it bear not
every year, but every other year, yet is he to be borne withal, because he
asks neither co^t, nor labor: and if you bestow any upon him, he
recompenseth it throwly, with the abundance of his fruit. And since there is
so great profit and commodity in this tree, and that the uses of it are so
many, and so needful, it is good reason to be diligent and careful about it:
he loves a ground neither to hye, nor to low, but rather the side of a hill,
such as is the most part of Italy and Spain: for in such ground, the extreme
heat of the sun, is something mollifyed with the cold blastes of the wind:
for in Olyue trees (as Pliny says) the soil, and the clime, is of great
importance: it delights in a warm, and a dry air, and therefore in
Barbary, Sicil, Andalusia, sundry parts of Italy, specially Campania, it
prospers woonderfully: it likes not too great heat, nor too much cold. And
therefore in hot countries, it joins upon the North side of the hills,
and in cold, upon the South side. It is thought, that if it stand above
threescore miles from the sea, that it either dies, or proves not
fruitful. The best ground is the grauel^y ground, having aloft a little
chalk mingled with land: it is also good gro^nd where the sand, or grauel, is
meddled with rich moulde: yea the sliffe ground, if it be rich and lively,
does very well agree with this tree. Chalkie ground is utterly to be refused,
and watery and maryshe ground, woorst of all. The ^yke is a barrayne sand, and a
hungry sand: but you may see it well in corn ground, where either the Wylding,
or the ^asthelme has grown: but betwixt the Oak and it, there ^^ great
hatred, for if the Oak grows near, it flies away, and ^^^in^eth toward
the earth: and though you cut down the Oak, yet the very roots poysoneth and
kylleth the poor Olyue. The like some affirm of the trees called Cerrus, and
Esculus: for where they be pulled up, if you set the Olyue, he dies: so does
it (as Pliny says) if it chance to be bruised of the Goat. On the other
side, betwixt the Olyue and the Uine, there is great freendship and love: and
it is said, that if you graffe the Olyue upon the Uine, it will bear a fruit
that shall be half Grape, and half Olyue, called Vuolea, in Greek (...), an
Olyue grape. There are sundry ways of plantyng of Olyues: some take the
biggest branches from the trees, and saweing of the youngest plants of two
^ubites in length, they set them orderly in the ground: some set the whole tree
together. Some again cuttyng of the tops, and all the branches, set the
stock, about the rising of the star Arcturus. Many make them Impe Gardens in
good ground and mellowe, such as is commonly the black mould: herein they
set the young branches, the lowest, and the fairest, two or three inches in
thickness, and very fertile, which they geather no^ from the body of the
tree, but from the newest and latest bows. These they cut into pretty settes of
a foot and a half in length, taking good heed that they hurt not the rynde,
and paring the ends very smoothe with a sharp knife, and markyng them with
read O^re, that they may know which way they stood before, and so setting
the lowest part into the ground, and the highest toward the Heaven, they put
them in the ground, and so they grow the faster, and bear the better: for if
you should set them with the lower end upward, they would either hardly grow,
and prove unfruitful: and therefore they have a regard of the setting of
them. You must beside, before you set them, rub over both the top and the
foot, with doung mingled with ashes, and so set them deep in the ground,
coueryng them four fyngers thick with rotten mould. You may choose whether
you will set them all under the ground, or set some part within the ground,
and suffer the rest to appear above the ground: those that be set all within
the ground, need not to be marked, but such as shall stand with one part
above the ground. Didymus would have them so set, as they may appear four
fingers above the ground, and then to make a little trench for the receiving of
the water: and this manner of planting with the bows, is of Didymus best liked.
Where you mean to plant, you must purge the ground of all other plants,
busshes, and weeds: and the trenches must so be made, as with the wind, the
sun, and rain, it may be mellowed and made crombling, that the plants may
the sooner take root. If your business require haste, you must a month or
two before, burn in ye trenches either sticks, or reed, or such things as
will easily take fire: and this you must do diverse days together. Your
trenches must be three cubits, or there about in deapth, and forty cubits a
sunder, whereby ye trees may have air yenough: the first year, second, and the
third, ye earth must be trimmed with often ^aking: the first two years you must
not meddle with propping^ the third year, you must leave upon every one a
couple of branches, and often rake your Impe Garden: the fourth year, you
shall of the two branches, cut away the weaker: being thus ordered, in the
fyfth year they will be meet to be removed: the stock that is as big as a
man's arm, is best to be removed: let it stand but a little above the ground,
so shall it prosper the better. Before you remove it, mark the part that stood
South with a piece of Oker, that you may set it in like manner again. You must
first dig the trenched ground with Mattockes, and after turn in stone
plowed earth, and sow it with Barley: if there be any water standing in them,
you must let it out, and cast in a few small stones, and so setting your
settes, cast in a little doung. After the tenth of June, when the ground gapes
with the heat of the Sun, you must take heed, that the sun pearce not
through the cleftes to the root. From the entryng of the Sun into Libra, you
must rid the roots of all superfluous springes: and if the tree grow upon
the edge of a hill, you must with little gutters draw away ye muddy water. The
doung must be cast on at the fall of the leaf, that being mingled in Winter
with the mould, it may keep the roots of the trees warm. The mother of oil
must be powered upon ye great ones, and the moss must be cut of with an iron
instrument, or else it will yield you no fruit. Also after certain years, you
must cut and loppe your Olyue trees, for it is an old proverb: that who so
ploweth his Olyue Garden, craves fruit: who doungeth it, moweth fruit: who
cutteth the trees, forces fruit. In the Olyue tree, you shall sometime have
one branche more gallant then his fellows, which if you cut not away, you
discourage all the rest. The Olyue is also graffed in the wyld Olyue, specially
betwixt the rynde and the wood, and by emplastring: others graffe it in the
root, and when it has taken, they pull up a parcel of the root withal, and
remove it as they do other plants. Those Olyues that have the thickest
barks, are graffed in the bark. The time of graffing them, is from the
entryng of the Sun into Aries, and with some from the.xxii. of May, till the
first of June. The time of geathering of Olyues, is when the greater part of
half the fruit waxes black, and in fair weather: the riper the Olyue is,
the fatter will be the oil. In geathering of Olyues, there is more cunnyng in
making oil, then in making wine: the lesser Olyues serve for oil, the greater
for meat. There is sundry sorts of oil made of an Olyue, the first of all is
raw, and pleasantest in taste: the first stream that comes from the press is
best, and so in order. The best oil is about Venafri in Italy, and Licinia in
Spain. The next in goodness is in Prouence, except in the fruitful parts of
(...). The Olyues that you may come by with your hands, you must either upon
the ground, or with ladders geather, and not beat them down: for those that
are beaten down do wyther, and yeel^e not so much oil as the other: and
better is the Olyue that is geathered with the bare hand, then with gloves:
there is an old law for Olyues, bruise not the Olyue, nor beat him. Those
that pass the reach of the hand, must be rather beaten down with Reeds then
Powses: the oil is increased from the rising of ye Bearward, to the sixeteenth
of the Kalendes of October: after, the stone and the meat do grow. Of oil,
some part serves for meat, and other for the sowpling of the body: and
therefore as Varro says, it accompanies his master, not only to the Bath,
but also to the Feelde, or where so ever he goes. The Olyue whereof you make
your oil, must be taken from ye ground: and if it be foul, must be washed:
for the drying, three days is sufficient: if it be frosty weather, they must
be pressed the fourth day: every first heap must be put in earthen pottes, and
oil vessels, where with hard and rough stones they are grinded. The geathered
Olyue, if it lie to long in heaps, putrifieth by reason of heat, and makes
unsavory oil. Mylles are more handsome for the making of oil, then the Trough
and the Foot: for the Mylles may be handled with great discretion: the whole
store may be raised or let down, according to the quantity of the Berry, lest
the stone which would mar the taste of the oil, should be broken. The
presses cheefely, and the oil houses ought to be warm, for the speedyer
runnyng of the oil: which with cold would make the longer stay. And since
heat and warmth is so needful, you must provide that your house lie toward
the Sun: so shall you need neither flame nor fire, which with knoke or
soote, may corrupt the taste of your oil. The laws and order of geathering,
and bestowing of Olyues, has Cato described: the manner of preserving them, is
declared by Columella, which were too much for me to speak at this time.


THRA. Go on then, and let us hear what you can say of Apple trees: whose use
is more commonly known unto us.


MARIUS. The Apple, called in Latin Pomum, in Greek (...). Apples.
There are that put this difference betwixt the Apple and the Nut, that what so
ever fruit is to be eaten soft without, and hard within, is an Apple, and the
contrary a Nut. Pomum generally spoken, is to be understood of all that the
Greeks comprehend in the word (...), as Beaches, Quinces, and Pears,
whereunto the Lawyer agreeeth: but in this place I speak of Apples, according
to the common phrase: as for Quinces, Pomegran^tes, and Turkey Plomes, I will
speak of in their due places. There are such sundry sorts of Apples,
differing both in shape and savor, as are skarcely to be numbered. In the old
time the cheifest Apples were Septians, very great and round, Martians,
Claudians, Ma^^ans, and Appians, so called of their first founders: some again
took their names of their countries, as Camerians, and Grecians: so others of
their colors, as re^de, sanguine, silken, and golden. We have at this day that
are chief in price the Pippin, the Romet, the Pomeroyal, the Mar^^gold, with a
great number of others, that were too long to speak of. There is but one manner
of plantyng and graffing of them all, saving that the Peache, the Lemon, the
Ahrecoct, the Quince, and the Cytron, which are all of Dioscorides accounted in
the number of Apples, require a little more diligent care, as shall be said
hereafter, then the others, for they are al both planted and graffed: the manner
of an Impe Garden Cato describes. Apple trees are set either in February, or
in March: or if the country be hot and dry, in October and November. But al
kinds of Apples do better prosper by graffing, and inoculation, or imbudding,
as I said before, about March or April, or at what time so ever the sap be in
ye rind. They are also graffed by implast^yng, about the tenth of June: though
some (as they say) have had good success in doing it, after the entrance of
the Sun into Aries, as I have said before, where I spoke of implastring, and
graffing. The Apple is commonly graffed upon the Crabbe stock, or upon the
Bramble, being first planted, and the year after cut of w^thin a foot of
the earth: upon this stock you may graffe (as I said) the tender young graffes
of any Apples. Palladius says, you may graffe the Apple upon the Perry, the
Hawthorne, Plome tree, Seruisse tree, Peache, Plane tree, Poplar, Wyllow, and
Pear: but in such difference of countries, we can set down no certain order
for them all: and therefore as far as mine own experience, and the knowledge
that I have learned of others will stretche, I will gladly show you. There are
that according to the old order, do graffe the Apple either upon a wild
Perry, or upon a Quince, whereof they have a most excellent fruit, called of
the old writers Melimela. If you graffe upon the Plane tree, you shall have a red fruit: you may also w^ll graffe your Apple upon the Damson tree, and if
you graffe upon the Cytron, you shall have them bear, as Diophanes says,
fruit almost all the year long. The Apple loves a fat, and a good ground,
well watered rather by nature, then by industry. In mountain countries, they
must always be set toward the South: it prospers well yenough, so it be
something helped with the Sun, neither do they refuse either rough, or
marrishe grounds. A lean and a barrayne soil brings out woorme eaten, and
falling fruit: the noisome woormes are destroyed with Hogs doung, mingled
with man's urine, and powered upon the roots. And if the tree be very full of
woormes, Against hurtful vvoormes.
being scraped down with a brazen scraper, they never come again, if the
place whence you scraped them, be rubbed over with Bullockes doung: some add
unto vryne Goats doung, and power upon the roots the lees of old wine. The
tree that is sick, or prospers not, is helped being watered with Ass doung,
and water six days: they must be often watered at the set^yng of the Sun,
till the spring be come out. Pliny writes, that the water wherein Lupines has
been sodde powered upon the tree, does the fruit good. They say, if the tree
be much watered with urine, the fruit wylbe read. Others again set under
their trees Roses, thinking thereby to have their Apples read. Apple trees (as
I said before) must be set every sort by them selves, as Columella bids,
lest the small trees be hurt of the great, because they be not all of one
growth, nor strength. Beside, you must set them very thin, that they may have
room to shoot out their branches: for if you set them thick, they will
never bear well, and therefore you must set them forty, or at the least
thyrtie foot a sunder: the Apple declares his ripeness, by the blackness of
his kernelles. They are geathered after the fourteenth of September, or there
about, according to their kind, and not before the Moon be seventeen days
old, in fair weather, and in the after noone: those that fall from the tree,
must be laid by them selves: it is better to pull them, then to shake them,
lest they be bruised in their falling. To keep Apples.
They are kept in fair loftes, vaultes, or cold places, with windows openyng
toward the North, which in fair weather must be set wide open: and therefore
Varro would have all Apple loftes have their windows North, that they may
receive the North air: the South winds must be shut out: the blastes of the
North wind, does make them wrinckled and rugled: they must be laid thin
upon straw, chafe, or mattes. I had an Apple brought me ont of H^lland, that
endured three years: I have a tree of them here in this Orchard of his color,
called a Greening. You must lay every sort by them selves, lest sundry sorts
lying together, they sooner rotte. Some use to lay them in Nut leaves, whic^e
both gives them good color, and good smell. They are also kept from rotting,
if they be laid in Barley, or Wheat. Palladius would have them kept in earthen
vessels close stopped, in Sesternes, or in Caves. Apuleus in Conctantine,
would have every Apple wrapped in Nut leaves, and so laid up: a great sort of
ways beside of keeping them, you shall read in diverse aucthours. Some to
avoid the hurt of the frost, use to cover them with wette linen cloth, which
being frozen, the fruit that lies under it, is preserved. Your Apples must be
so laid up, as the stalks stand downward: neither must you touch any, but
such as you need. Apples are hurtful to bearing cattle, so as the savor
causes them to tire, as Lucian in his ass witnesses: the like is written of
Pears, the remedy they say, is to let them eat some of the fruit before. Of
Apples, with certain mylles for the purpose, they make a drink called Cider,
and a smaly drink beside with water, and the refuse of the Apples strayned: a
good drink to cool the thyrst of the poor labourer. A kind of vinegre also
they make of Crabbes, and sour Apples, which lying in heap togeathe three or
four days, they afterward put into a Pipe, or Tun, wherewith they mingle
spring water, or rain water, and so is it suffered to stand close covered
thyrtie days, and after taking out what vinegar they need, they put in again
as much water. The Pear, The Pear.
in Latin Pi(...), in Greek (...) and (...), chalengeth the next place, and
is one of the cheifest beauties of the Orcharde. The Apple tree spreads in
broad branches, the Pear tree ryseth in heygth, and delights in a rich and
a moist ground: it does grow of the kernel, and of the Pippin, but is a
great while before it come to good: and when it is grown, it degenerateth from
them his old good nature, and therefore it is bett^r to take the wild
plants, and to set them in their ground in November, and when they be well
rooted, you may gra^^e upon them. It is sa^de, that i^ so spr^sp^reth with
often digging, and much moisture as it never loses his flow^e. You shall do
great good unto it, if every other year you bestow some doung upon it. Ore
do^ng is thought to make great and massy Pears: some put to a^ the ashes to
make their taste the pleasanter. They (...) not ^lonely planted of the roots,
but also the very little twigges being plucked from the root, wy^l grew. If
you will (...), let them be three year old, or at the least two (...). Seem
ag^yne take the fairest (...), and set them as they do the (...), is March
and April. (...), when the blossom is on it, (...). It i^ graff^d upon the
(...), the Apple, and (...) upon the Mulbery, your Pear shall be read. Virgil
teaches to graffe it upon an Ash, whereas in deed it will agree with any
stock: the grass must be the growth of a year, and before it be graffed,
cleared of all the leaves and tender parts. And if you would have the fruit
pleasant, and the tree fruitful, you shall bore a hole through the stock
close by the ground, and driving in an Oken, or a Beechen pin, cover it up with
earth: if the tree prosper not, wash the roots, and water them with ^ees of
old wine fifteen days, so shall it bear the better and pleasanter fruit.
It shall never be hurt with woormes, if when you ylant it, you do annoint it
with the gall of an Ox: if the tree (whose roots have been cut) seem not
to prosper, Palladius his remedy, is to pearce ye root through, and to drive
in a pin made either of Oak, or Plome tree. If your Pears be stony, and
choke Pears, dig up the earth from the roots, cleanse them of stones, and
sift in good new mould again in the place: let your Pear trees stand thyrtie
foot a sunder, or little less: your Apple tree farther, as I have said. They
are kept preserved sundry ways, some dipping the stalks in boiling Pitch, do
afterward hang them up, and so keep them: To keep Pears.
others keep them in new boiled wine, or in a close vessel: others in sand,
some in slockes, and some again covered with Wheat, or Chafe: some are of
opinion, there is no kind of fruit, but may be preserved in honey. Of Pears,
Palladius teaches as of Apples, to make both drink and sause, the juice being
pressed out with ye press: women have a pretty dyshe made of Pears for their
religious fastes, called Castimoniale. Next in order after Apples and Pears,
comes the Quince, The Quince
which was first by Cato called Co^oncum, the Greeks call it (...), of the
city ^ydon, from whence it was first brought, the Italians Meie cotogne, the
Spaniardes Memb^^^llo, the Frenchemen Un coignier: both the Greeks and Virgil,
call them of the color (...), golden Apples, and Struthia, which kind (though
they differ a little) are of this sort: for Colume^a speaks of three sorts
of Quinces, S^^uthia, Chrysomela, and Mustea, which all serve both for health
and pleasure. They are planted after the same manner that Pears and Cherys are:
some affirm, that the set that have been set in March, or in February, have
taken such root, as they have borne fruit the year after. They grow well in
cold and moist countries, in plain and hilly grounds: in hot dry
countries, you must set them in October. Many set them with the tops and
the set, but neither of them both is very good: and being set of scyens, they
soon degenerate. They are better graffed in the stock, then in the bark, and
that in February, or March: they receive into their stocks, the graffes (in a
manner) of all manner of trees, the Pomegranate, the Seruisse, all the sorts of
Apples, and make the fruit the better. The Quince tree must be set in that
order, that in the shaking of the wind, they drop not one upon the other.
When it is young, or newely planted, it is helped with doung, or better with
ashes: they must be watered as often as the season is very dry, and dug
about continually: in hot countries in October, or November, in cold
countries in February, or March: for if you do not often dig about them,
they will either be barrayne, or bear noughty fruit: they must be proyned,
cut, and rid of a^l encombrances. If the tree be sick, or prosper not
well, the root must be watered with ye mother of oil, mingled with the like
quantity of water, as Didymus in Constantine says, or vnsleckt Lyme meddled
with Chalk, or Rozen and Tar must be powered upon the roots: you shall
geather them in a very fair day, being ^ounde and unspotted, and very ripe,
and in the w^ne of the Moon. They are best kept coffened betwixt two hollow
Tyles, To keep Quinees.
well closed on every side with clay: some ^y them only in dry places, where
no wind comes: others keep them in Chafe and Wheat: many in Honey, some in
Wine, and makes the Wine more pleasant. Democritus bids you beware, that
you lay them not near other fruit, because with their air they will corrupt
them. There is also made a kind of wine of Quinces (being beaten and pressed)
and ^ little Honey and Oil put unto it: our country men make of them a
precious Conserve, and Marmelad, being congealed with long seething, and b^yled
with Sugar, Wine, and Spices I will now show you of the M^^lar, which the
Greeks call M. (...), the Latins Mespilus, ^
the Italians Nespilo, the Spaniard Mespero, the Frenchmen Mesplier, or
Nes^^ier, the Dutchmen Mespelen: this tree is also of the number of Apple
trees, and Pear trees: it is planted in like manner as the Quince is: it
delights in hot places, but well watered, though it do well yenough in cold.
We have seen it prosper very well among Oaks and Wooddes: for we have seen
great Woods of them growing among Ok^s, that have yearly yielded a great deal
of money. Some say it is planted of the scyens, in March or November, in a well
dounged ground and mellowe, so that both the ends be rubbed over with doung.
It is also set of the stone, but then it is very long before it come to any
thing: it is excellently well graffed in the Bramble, the Pyrry, or the Apple.
The M^dlar that you mean to keep, must be geathered before they be ripe: and
being suffered to grow upon the tree, they last a great part of the Winter:
they are also preserved in sodden Wine, and Uinegre and Water: in Catos time
they were not known in Italy. Pliny and others have spoken of them: neither
is it certain, whether the old writers took them for Seruisses. Pliny
speaks of three kinds of them: the first kind having but three stones in
them, called therefore Pri^^^cum. We have at this day two kinds, the one
having here and there prickles, growing in every Wood and Thicket, very sour
before it be mellowed, and made so^t with frost, and cold of Winter: the other
having no prickles at all with a great fruit, which seems to be brought
hereunto by diligent planting and graffing. The wood of the wild Medlar we use
to make Spoakes for Wheels of, and the twigges of them serve for Carters
whippes. Next unto the Medlar for neyghbourhood sake, we must speak of the
Seruisse, a high tree with a round berry, or fashioned like an Egg: wherefore
it is called Ova as Theophrastus witnesses, The Seruisse t^^e.
and the fruit (...) the Latins call it Sorbus, the Italians as the Latins,
the Spaniardes Seruall, the Frenchemen Cormie or Cormier, the Dutchmen
Sporeffelbaum. The fruit grows in clusters as the Grape does: the wild is
better then the Garden fruit. It delights in cold places, and if you plant
it in hot countries, it will wax b^rrayne. It has no prickles as the Medlar
has, it grows of the stone, the set, the root, or the scyens, and
prospers in a cold and a wette soil upon hills: it is plan^ed in February
and March in cold coun^reys, and in hot, in October and N^uemb^r: it is
graff^d either upon his own stock, or on the Q^^nce, or H^w^horne, either in
the stock, or the bark.


THRA. I marueyle how you can have Pomegranates here, I pray you show what
o^der you use.


MARIUS. Pomegranates.
Among the strange fruits, there is none c^mparable to the Pomegranate so
called I think) because of his country Carthage and Africa, where the bent
do g^owe: the tree (as ye see) is not hie, the l^afe n^rrowe, and of a very
^aire green^, the flower purple, and long like a Coffin the Apple that is
compassed with a thick rynde, is all f^ll of graynes within: it ^s called of
the Greeks (...) or (...), as well the tree as the fru^te (...), the
Pomegranate sweet and sour: it is called in Latin Asalum ^un^^um and Malum
Granatum, in I^alian Mele grano, in Spanishe Granada, in French Tomos de
gran^^, in Dutche Granata^ssel. This tree only as the Fig and the U^^e, the
body being cloven, dies not: the bran^hes are full of prickles as the
G^rst^is: it loves both a ^ot ground, and a hot c^untrey, and likes not watr^
places. In some hot co^ntr^ys, it grows wild in the busshes: it is pl^^ted
in the spring ti^e, the roots b^ing wa^red with ^ogges doung and Stale. It is
gra^^ed upon his own stock, and also upon other trees, and lik^wyse o^ the
scyences that g^owe from the roots of the old tree. And though it may be
pl^n^d sundry ways, (...) the best way is the branche of a cu^^^^ in lengt^,
smooth^d with your knyfe at ^oth the ends, and (...) in the groun^, with both
his ends well smeared wit^ ^o^ges do^ng and Stale. There is also an other way
of plan^yng it, which i^, to take a very fruiteful stock, which may be br^^ght
to the earth, and him after the manner of other trees they g^asse by
^nfolliation, betwi^t the b^rke and the ^ynde, and well and clo^ely bind it
after they set it in the ground not touc^ing the gr^^^ed part, but the parts
beneath, annoynting it with the mother of oil, and make it fast with cords,
that it slyp not back, till the branche be grown. It much delights (as
Democritus says) in the Myrtill, insomuche as the roots will meet and tangle
together with great joy. The fruit will grow without kernels, if as in the
Uine the pith being taken out, the set be covered with earth, and (when it has
taken) the spring be proyned. There is as African reports, in every
Pomegranate a like number of graynes, though they differ in bigness. Basyl
writes in his Hexam, that the sour Pomegranate will grow to be sweet, if
the body of the tree near to the root be pierced through, and filled up with
a fat Pitche tree pin. You shall have them endure a very great while, if they be
first dipped in skalding water, and taken out quickly be laid in dry Sand, or
else in some heap of Wheat in the shadow, till they be wrinckled, or else so
covered with Chafe, as they touch not one the other. Other say, it is best to
keep them like Quinces, covered with Plaster, or Chalk: for in cold places
they are kept without corrupting. The rynde of the Pomegranate is called in
Latin Malicorium, the flower of ye Garden Pomegranate Dioscorides calls
(...), and of the wild (...).


THRA. I here also, the outlandishe Cytron is here very carefully planted.


MARIUS. The Cytron, Cytrons.
called also the Median, the Persian and the Assyrian Apple, because it was
first brought out of Persia, and from the Medes: others say, it was first
brought out of Africa into Greece by Hercules, and therefore Varro calls it,
the Apple of Africa: they are called in Greek (...), and in Italian Citroni,
in Spanish Zidras, in Dutch Giter^apf^el Pomerancen, in French Citron: the
fruit is called in Latin Hipericum, and Aureum malum, the golden Apple, also
the marriage Apple of Jupiter and Juno: such of them as are yellowe, and of a
golden color, they commonly call Oranges: such as are of a greenishe pale
yellowe, they call Cytrols, or Cytruls: thos^ that are long, fashioned like an
Egg, if they be yellowe, are called Cytrons, if they be green, Lymons: if
they be very great and round like Pompeons, they call them Pom^cydrons: the
tree does always bear fruit, some falling, some ripe, and some springing,
nature showing in them a wo^nderful fertillitie, as in the trees that Homer
describes in the Orchardes of Alcionous. The leaf is like the Bay leaf,
saving that there grow prickles amongst them: the fruit is yellowe, wrinckled
without, sweet in savor, and sour in taste: the kernelles, like the
kernelles of a Pear, a great resister of poisons. The tree is planted (as
Palladius says) four manner of ways, of the kern^ll, the scyens, the branche,
and the stock. If you will set the kernel, you must dig the earth two foot
every way, and mingle it with ashes: you must make short beds, that they may
be watered with gutters on every side. In these beds you must open the earth
with your hands a hand breadth, and set three kernelles togeathers with the
tops downward, and being covered, water them every day, and when they
spring, leave no weeds near them: they will spring the sooner, if you water
them with warm water: others say, it is best the graynes being taken out in
the spring, to set them diligently in good mellowed furrows, and to water them
every fourth or fifth day: and when they begin to grow, to remove them again
in the spring, to a gentle and a may ground, for it delights in much wet:
if you set the branche, you must not set it above a foot and a half in the
ground, least it rot^e. The scyens and the stock, ^a^la^ius thinks i^ better
to be planted, and shows which way. If any man mean to cherishe this tree,
let him def^nd it well from the ^orth, and set it toward the South, and the
sun in the winter, ^n frayles or baskettes: wherefore, some th^^ (...)
careful and ^il^gent t^ the rendering of this tree, do make little vaultes
toward the South close covered, and within the^ near the w^ll, (...) plant the
Ore^ge, suffering the (...) al summer to (...) to the sun, and to have the
heat the^^f: and as soon as winte^ comes^ they cover them straight with
straw, or matt^^, spe^ially with the stalks of Gourdes. This (...) delights
to ^e continually dug about, they are gr^^^ed (...) hot places ^n April,
in cold countries in May, not under the bark, but clea^ing the stock hard by
the root: they may (...) gra^^ed bot^ on the Pear tree, and the Mulbery: but
when (...) are gr^^^ed, must be fenced either with a wicker basket, or some
earthen vessel. The fruit will be sweet, if the kernelles be steeped in
water sodde with honey, or which is better in sheep milk. Such as you mean
to keep, must be geathered in the night, the Moon being down, and geathered
with branches and all, as they hang. Where the fruit burdeneth the tree, you
must pull them of, and leave but few on it, which will be the pleasanter, and
the kindlyer fruit. It is at this day nourished both in Germany and France,
and is planted in vessels full of earth, and in hot weather is set abroad in
the sun: in cold weather set in sellers, or in hot houses. I have seen in
Germany, certain hot houses o^ purpose made of Fyrre boordes, that in Winter
have warmed all the Garden, and in Summer the frames taken away, have given
place to the sun. If while they be young and little they be put into earthen
vessels, or glass, they grow according to ye propor^ion thereof: so that you
may have them fashioned either like a man, or like a beas^, according ^o your
fancy: but you must so order your mouldes, as the air may come to them. But
least I keep you too long with these ou^l^nd^she trees, I will speak
something of our own trees, wherewith we are be^ter acquainted: among which
we have the Mulbery, The Mulbery tree.
in Latin Morus, in G^eeke (...), the fruit (...), in Italian Moro, in
Spanishe Mora, in French Meure, in Dutche Mulbern: this is accounted of all
other trees the wysest, because he never blossometh, till all cold weather be
quite past: so that when so ever you see the Mulbery begin to spring, you may
be sure that winter is at an end: he is ripe with the first, and b^ddeth out so
hastily, as in one night with a noise, he thrusts out his leaves: they dye
the hands (as Pliny says) with the i^yc^ of the ripe berry, and wash it of
with the green berry: he changes his color thryse, first while, then read,
and lastly black: he loves hot places, and grauelly, and delights in
digging and dounging, but not in watring: his roots must be opened about
October, and the lees of wine poured upon them: it is set of the stones, but
thin: it often grows to be wild: the best planting is the seyens, and the
tops, a foo^e and a half long, smoothe at both ends, and rubbed over with
doung. The place wherein you set your (...), they cover with ashes mingled with
earth, but cover it not above four fingers thick. Palladius bids you to set
it in March, and to remove it in October, or November. Deritius tells, that
the Mulbery may be planted in the fall of the lease, by thrusting into the
ground the branches, after the order of the Fig tree, which I me self have
proved, special, if the end that is cut be well bruised, that it may the
quicklyer take root: and so when you have made your hole, with a stake thrust
it in: ^t is best graffed on the Beeche, and the white Poplar, either by
graffing in the stock, or by inoculation: and so shall the berries be white.
It is graffed also in the Fig, and the Elm, which in old time they would
not suffer, for fear of corrupting. Of the Mulbery is made a very noble
medicine for the stomach, and for the gout: they will longest endure (as it is
said) kept in glasses. The leaves do serve to feed Sylkewoormes withal,
whereof some make a very great gain, and set them rather for that purpose,
then for the fruit.


THRA. What tree is that with the ruddy colored fruit like a Chery?


MARIUS. It is a Cornell tree, called in Greek (...), in Latin Cornus, The
Cornel
in Italian Corneolo, in Spanishe Zereko seluestro, in French Corn^er, in Dutch
Cornelbaum, the tree is thought never to exceed twelve cubits in heyght: the
body is sound and thick like horn, the leaf is like the Almond leaf, but
fatter, the flower and ^he fruit, is like the Olyue, with many beryes hang^ng
upon one stalk, first white, and after read: the juice of the ripe beries, is
of a blooddy color: it loves both mountains and v^lleys, and prospers both
in moist gound, and dry: it grows both of the s^^ppe, and of the seed. You
must beware you plant it not near to your Bees, for the flower does kill as
many of them as ^as^eth it.


THRA. What tree is the same that grows next us?


MARIUS. Ziziphus.
That tree is called Ziziphus, in Greek (...), in Italian Giuggi^le, in
Spanishe Az^fe^fo, in French Imubae, in Dutch (...), the beries whereof, are
like the Cornel beries, the low^e like the Olyue flower, but more sweeter.
Columella speaks of two kinds thereon, the one read, the other white, they
are set of the stones, in hot countries in April, and in cold places in
May, or else in June: you may set both the stone, and the branc^e, it is very
slow in gr^wing: if you set the plant, you m^st do it in March in soft
ground: but if you set the stone, you must set them in a little trenche of a
hand broad, three stones together, with their points downward: it loves
not to rich a ground, but rather a l^ght gro^nd and a warm place: in winter
(as Palladius s^yth) it is good to lay stones about the body of the tree.
Italian ^^be^ts.
The next are Italian Fylbertes, in Latin Pista^ea, in Greek (...), in
Italian Pa^^inachi, in Spanish Alhozi^o, in French Pistaches, in Dutch Wels^e
pini^ernus, the leaf is narrow and brown, for upon the branches hang the
Nuttes, like the Nattes of the Pine. Of this tree it is thought there ^s both
male and female, and therefore they grow commonly together, the male having
underneath his shell, as it were long st^nes: it is graffed about the first of
April, but upon his own stock, and upon the Tereb^^th, and the Almond tree.
They are also set (as Palladius witnesses) in the fall of the leaf in
Oc^ober, both of the s^ippes, and the Nutte: it delight^th in a hot and a moist
country, and joys in often watring.


THRA. Because I remember you told me before, that of plants and trees some
do grow of the seed, or fruit, and some are graffed: and because I have
heard the graffing of most of them, I would now feign hear you speak of
such trees as grow only o^ the stone, or berry.


MARIUS Your remembrance is good: for though they commonly grow b^tter when
they be graffes, yet some therebe that prosper the better being sown, and wy^^
scarce grow a^y other way. And th^ugh same of the foresaid trees being set,
do well p^osper, as the Midl^r, the Cornell, and diverse other, yet sometimes
they wax wylde^ and are long before they come to perfection, which Virgill
also aff^rmeth, For that same tree that of the seed, the stone, or berry
grows,
Does slowly spryng, and ^long it is, ear any fruit ^e shows:
And when it comes, it proves wyld, and does degenera^e,
And loses that same relishe swee^e, that longe^h to b^^state.
but by graffing it is restored again. Some of them again, how so ever they
be sown or set, do not degenerate, or grow out of kind, as the Bay, the
Date, the Cypress, the Peache, the Abricoct, the Danison, the Pistace, the
Fyrre tree, and the Chery: and because they be not all of one order, I will
tell you severally of the chefest of them. To plant trees of the seed, nature
(as I said before) taught men at the first: the seed being devoured of
birds, and with the doung let fall in the cleftes of trees, where they after
sprung and grew. The Bay, in Greek (...), The Bay.
in Latin Laurus, in all other tongues almost as in Latin. The berry is
called in Greek (...) in Latin Lauri ^a^^s, in Italian Bacche de lauro, in
Spanishe Vaya de laurel, in Dutch Lorb^ren, a most grateful tree to the house,
a porter to Emperors and Bishops, which cheefely garnisheth the house, and
stands always at the entry. Cato makes two kinds thereof, the Delphick,
and the Cypress: the Delphick, equally colored and greener, with great
berries, in color betwixt green and read, wherewith the Conquerers at
Delphus were wont to be crowned. The Cypress Bay has a shorter leaf, and a
darker green, guttered (as it were) round about by the edges, which some (as
^linie says) suppose to be a wild kind: it grows always green, and
bears berries: he shoots out his branches from the sides, and therefore
waxes soon old and rotten: it does not very well away with cold ground,
being hot of nature: it is planted d^uers ways, the berries being dried with
the North wind, are geathered and laid abr^ade very thin, l^^t they cluster
together, af^erward being wet with urine, they are set in furrows a handful
deep, and very near together: in March they be also planted of the slip,
and the s^yens. If you set them of the sli^pe, you must set them not p^s^ing
^^ene foot a sunder: but so they grow out of kind. Some think, that they may
be graffed one in an other, as also upon the Serui^se and the Ash: the berries
are to be geathered about the beginning of December, and to be set in the
beginning of March. Nutte trees.
Nutte trees are most commonly planted of the Nutte, as all other shell fruits
are. Of all Nuttes the Almond is counted to be the worthyest, The Almond tree.
called in Greek (...), in Italian Mandorle, in Spanishe Almeidras, in French
Amandes, in Dutch Mandelen, they are set in February, and prosper in a clear
and a hot ground, in a fat and a moist ground they will grow barraine: they
cheefely set such as are crooked, and the young plants, they are set both of
the slipes, the root, and the kernel. The Nuttes that you intend to set, must
be laid a day before in soft doung: others steep them in water sodde with
honey, letting them lie therein but only one night, least the sharpness of the
honey spoil the plant: and being thus ordered Columella says, they will be both
the pleasanter, and grow the better. The tops and the sharp ends you must
set downward: for from thence comes the root, the edge must stand toward
the North: you must set three of them in tryangle, a handful one from the
other: they must be watered every ten days, till they grow to be great: it is
also planted with the branches, taken from the midst of the tree. The Almond
is graffed not near the top of the stock, but about the midst, upon the
bows that grow out. This tree does soon bear fruit, and flowreth before
all others, in January, or February. Virgil accountes it for a
prognosticatour of the plentifulnesse of Corn. When thick the Nutte tree
flowers amidde the woodde.
That all the branches laden bend withal:
And that they prosper well and come to good*
That year be sure, of Corn shall plenty fall.
The bitter ones (which are the holsomer) are made sweet, if round about the
tree, four fyngers from the root, you make a little trenche, by which he
shall sweat out his bitterness: or else if you open the roots, and power
thereon either urine, or Hogs doung: or if at the root of the tree, you
thrust in a fat wedge of P^tche tree. By this means (as Basyl says) they will
loose their bitterness: but no tree grows sooner out of kind, and therefore
you must often remove it, or graffe it when it is great. Wallnuttes, called in
Greek (...), in Latin I^glantes, Wallnuts.
in Italian Nocy, in Spanishe Nuezes, in French Noix, in Dutch Groisse nusz:
they are set in the ground (as Pliny says) the seame downward, about the
beginning of March: some think, that they will grow as the Filbert does,
either of the slip, or the root: it grows speedely, and likes a dry and a
cold place, better then a hot. The Nutte that you mean to set, will grow the
better, if you suffer it to lie four or five days before in the water of a
boy, and will prosper the more, if it be often removed: those Nuttes (as it is
thought) prosper best, that are let fall by Crows, and other Birds. If you
pearce the tree through with an Augur, and fill up the place again with a pin
of Elm, the tree shall lose his knotty hardness, neither will he lose his
fruit, if you hang by either Mullet, or a piece of Skarlet from a dounhill.


THRA. What is the reason you plant your Wallnut trees round about on the
outside of your Orchard, and not among your other trees?


MARIUS. Because his shadow is great, and unwholesome, beside the hurt he does
with his dropping. He sucketh out a great deal of good juice from the ground:
for as you see, they are very mighty and high trees, so as some of them are two
or three ^^dome about: they occupy a great deal of room with their standing,
and beguile the other trees of their sustenance: besides, there are certain
trees they agree not well withal, and therefore have I set them on the outside
of my Orchard, as standards to defend their fellows from tempest and weather.
Among Nuttes, is also to be recounted the Hasel Nuttes, a kind whereof is the
Filbert called in Greek (...), ^
in Latin Auellan^^, in Italian No^iuole, in Spanish Auellamas. in French
N^r^ee^^e, ^
in Dutch Haselnu^ez: they are planted after the manner of the Almond: it
delights in claye and watr^sh grounds, and upon hills, being well able to
abi^e the cold. They were first brought into Asia and Greece from P^^tus, and
therefore called Pon^ic^e, and Heracleotic^e. etc. Among the Nuttes also
chalengeth the Chestnut his place, Chestnuts.
though he be rather to be reckoned among mast, whereby is called the Nut, or
mast of ^upite^, in Greek (...), in Latin Castanea, in Italian Castagne, in
Spanish Castaua, in French Castagnes, in Dutch Kastey: it loves well to grow
on mountains, and in cold countries: it hates waters, and desires a clean
and a good mould: it misliketh not a moist gravel ground, and ioyeth in a
shadowy and Northerly bancke: it hates a stiff and a red clay ground, it
is planted both of the Nut, and the set: it is better planting Wooddes of them
of the Nut, then of the set, otherwise the safer way were the set, which in
two years bears fruit. It is planted when the sun is in the Aequinoctial,
both of the scyens, the set, the branche, and the root, as the Olyue is. The
Chestnuttes that you mean to sow, must be very fair and ripe, the newer they
be, the better they grow: you must not set them after that sort that you set
Almonds, or Filberts, but with the sharp end upward, and a foot a sunder: the
furrowe must be a shaftman deep. You were better (as I said) to make your
Grove of the Nut, then of the settes, which will be meet to be felled for
stays in seven year. Columella writes, that the Chestnut meet for the
supporting of Uines, if he be sowed in well dug ground, does quickly
spring, and being felled after five years, it prospers like the Wyllowe: and
being cut out in stays, it lasts till the next felling, as shall be showed
hereafter, when we speak of Wooddes. They will also have the Chestnut to be
graffed on the Wallnut, the Beeche, and the Oak: it has been seen, that where
they grow two and two together, they prosper the better. The Pine, in Greek
(...), in Latin Pinus, in Italian and Spanish Pino, in French Pin, in Dutch
Hartzbaum, is planted not much unlike to the Almond, the kernelles of the key
clocks being set as the Almond is: they are geathered in July, before the
caniculer winds, and (...) the Nuttes, the husk being broken, fall out. The
best time of sowing them, Palladius reckons to be October, and November: this
tree is thought to be a nourisher of all that is sown under it. The Pitche
tree is called in Greek (...), in Latin Ti^ea. in Italian Pezzo, in Spanish
Pino negro, in Dutch Rotdannenbau^, but I come now to the Chery. The Chery
tree, The Chery tree.
in Greek (...), ye fruit (...), in Italian the tree Ceraso, the fruit
Cerase, and Ciregio, in Spanish Cerezo and Cereza, in French Cerisier and
Cerise, in Dutch Kirsba^m, kirsea: the tree is easy to be planted, if the
stones be but cast abroad, they will grow with great increase: such is their
forwardness in growing, that the st^yes, or supporters of U^nes being made of
Chery tree, are commonly seen to grow to be trees. They are graffed upon the
Plome tree, upon his own stock, upon the Plane tree, and on the Bramble,
but best upon the wild Chery it ioyeth in being graffed, and bears better
fruit: if you graffe them upon the Uine, your tree shall bear in the spring:
the time of graffing, is either when there is no Gum upon them, or when the
Gum has left runnyng. They remove the wyld plant, either in October, or
November, that the first January or February, when it has taken root, it
may be graffed upon. Martial would have you graffe it in the stock: but in
deed it prospers better, being graffed betwixt the bark and the wood. It
delights to be set in deep trenches to have room yenough, and to be often
dug about. It loves to have the wythered bow continually cut away: it
grows best in cold places, and so hates doung, as if it be laid about them,
they grow to be wyld: it is also planted of the slippes, and will bear his
fruit without stone: if in the setting of the set, you turn the upper end
downward. Others will, that the tree being young and two foot hye, be slitte
down to the root, and the pith taken out of both sides, and joined together,
the seames close bound about, and covered with doung: which within a year
after, when it is well grown, the young graffes (which hitherto have borne no
fruit) if you graffe them, will bear Cherys without stones, as Martial says.
There are sundry kinds of Cherys (as Pliny reports, or Apronianus) that are
redder then the rest, Actianus as black as a cole: which kind in Germany yet
at this day, they call Acklische kirsen, Celicians that are round. Pliny in
speaking of the sundry sorts, prefers the Duracins, which in Campania they
were woonted to call Plinians: and a little after he says, upon the banks of
the Rhine, there grow als^ Kersis, of color betwixt black, read, and green,
like the Iumper beries, when they be almost ripe: in which the common sort of
books have Tertius for Kirsis amongst ye Germans: for Pliny whereas in many
places he usurps the Dutch words, as in the.9.10.17. and.18. book, and in
diverse other places, which being not understood of the Latin, came
altogether corrupted to the posterity. There are also Bay Cherys, graffed at
the first in the Bay, that have a pretty pleasant bitterness: at this day, the
small Cherys are best esteemed, growing upon a low bushe with short stalks,
round fruit, and very red, much meat, soft, and full of licour. It is said
they will bear very timely, if you lay Lime about them: it is good to geather
them often, that the^ which you leave, may wax the greater: for setting and
plantyng of Cherys, you may read a great sort of rules in the geatheringes of
Constantine. There are also found a kind of Cherys growyng wild in the Woods,
and He^gerowes, with little beries, some read, some altogether black, which
the Farmers in the Country do use for to fat their Hogs withal. The
Plome tree, in Greek (...), the fruit (...), Plome trees.
in Latin Prunus and Pruna, in Italian Prune and Succiue, in Spanish Ciruel^
and Ciruela, in French Prune, in Dutch Proumen, it is planted from the middle
of Winter, till the Ides of February: but if you set the stones at the fall of
the leaf, let it be done in November, in a good and mellowe ground, two
handfuls deep: they may be likewise set in February, but then they must be
steeped in lie three days, that they may sooner spring: they are also planted
of the young sets that grow from the body of the tree, either in January, or
in the beginning of February, the roots being well covered with doung: they
prosper best in a rich and a moist ground, and in a cold country: they are
graffed toward the end of March, and better in the cloven stock, then in the
bark, or else in January, before the Gum begin to drop out: it is graffed
upon his own stock, the Peache, and the Almond. There are sundry sorts of
Plomes, whereof the Damson is the principal, ioying in a dry ground, and in a
hot country, and is graffed as the other Plomes are. There are diverse
colored Plomes, white, black, purple, and read: wheat Plomes, and horse
Plomes, wherewith they use to fat Hogs. The finger Plomes are most
commended, being of the length of a man's finger, which are brought unto us from
Bohemia, and Hungary, and Iulians, and Noberdians, being blewe in color, but
later. The Damsons are dried in the sun upon Lattyses, Leads, or in an Oven:
some do dippe them before, either in sea water, or in brine, and after dry
them. The Peache tree, called in Greek (...), The Peache tree.
the tree (...), in Latin Persica, in Italian Perseo, in Spanish Durasuo, they
are also called Rhodocina, and Dorocina, or Duracina, whereof there are four
kinds: but the cheifest are the Duracins, and the Abrecocts: in November in
hot countries, and in others in January, the stones are to be set two foot
a sunder in well dressed ground, that when the young trees are sprung up, they
may be removed: but in the setting, you must set the sharp end downward, and
let them stand two or three fyngers in the ground: wheresoever they grow, they
rejoice most in watery grounds, which ground if you want, look that you water
them abundantly, so shall you have great store of fruit. Some would have them
set in hot countries and sandy ground, whereby they say, their fruit will
longer endure: the better will also the fruit br, if as soon as you have eaten
them, you set the stone, with some part of the fruit cleaving to it: it is
graffed either on him self, the Almond, or the Plome tree. The Abryco^^.
The Apples of Armenia, or Abricoct, does far excel the Peache, used as a
great dayntie among noble men, and much desired of the sick: they are best
graffed in the Plome, as the Peache in the Almond tree: the fairest graffes
that grow next the body of the tree, are to be chosen and graffed in January,
or February, in cold countries, and in November in hot: for if you take
those that grow in the top, they will either not grow, or if they grow,
not long endure. You shall inoculate, or imbudde them in May, or April, ye
stock being cut aloft, and many young buddes set in: neither must you suffer
them to stand very far one from the other, that they may the better defend them
selves from the heat of the sun. The Frenchmen, and our Gardners also, after
the Italians order, do graffe the Abricoct, taking a graft (not full a finger
long) or the budde that is well showte out, with a little of the rynde cut of,
and slitting the rynde of a young Plome tree cross wise, they set them in,
binding them well about with Hemp, or Towe, and that in the end of June, or in
July, and August. Some think they will be read, if they be either graffed in
the Plane tree, or have Roses set underneath them: they will also be figured,
or written in, if seven days after that you have set the sto^e, when it
begins to open, you take out the kernel, and with Uermillion, or any other
color, you may counterfaite what you will, after the stone closed up about it,
and covered with clay, or Hogs doung, you set it in the ground. Again, you
shall have them without stones, if you pearce the tree through, and fill it up
with a pin of Wyllowe, or Cornell tree: the pith being had out, the roots of
the tree must be cut and dressed in the fall of the leaf, and dounged with his
own leaves: you shall also at this time proyne them, and rid them of all
rotten and dead bows. If the tree prosper not, power upon ye roots the lees
of old wine mingled with water. Against the heat of the sun, heap up the
earth about them, water it in the euenyng, and shadow them as well as you may.
Against ye frostes, lay on doung yenough, or the lees of wine meddled with
water, or water wherein Beans have been sodden: if it be hurt with woormes, or
such baggage, power on it the urine of Oxen, meddled with a third part of
Vinegar. The Date tree, The Date.
in Greek (...), in Italian, in Latin, and in Spanish Palma, in French Arbor
de Dattes, in Dutch Dactelenbaum: the fruit in Greek (...), in Latin
Palmulae, in Italian Dattoli, in Spanish Dattiles, in French Dattes, in Dutch
Dactelem, it grows in a mild grauelly ground, and delights in a watery
soil: and though it desire to have water all the year long, yet in a dry
year it bears ye better: and therefore some think, that doung is hurtful unto
it. About the river Nilus, and in the East parts, it grows plenteously,
where as they use to make both wine and bread of it: this tree in Europe (for
the most part) is barrayne, though it be planted of many for novelty sake. The
stones of Dates are planted in trenches of a cubite in deapth and breadth, the
trenche filled up again with any manner of doung, except Goats doung: then in
the midst of the heap set your stones so, as the sharper part stand upward:
other would have it stand toward the East: and after, when first they have
sprinkled thereon a little salt, they cover them with earth, well meddled with
doung: and every day while it springs, they water it: some remove it after a
years growth, other let it grow till it be great. Moreover, because it
delights in salt ground, the roots must be dressed every year, and salt
thrown upon them: and so will it quickly grow to be a great tree. The settes
are not presently to be put in the ground, but first to be set in earthen
pottes, and when they have taken root, to be removed. Date trees have such a
delight one in the other, that they bend them selves to touch together, and
if they grow alone, they wax barrayne. They are planted (as Pliny says) of
the branches, two cubits long, growing from the top of the tree: also of the
slippes and slyuers. The same Pliny affyrmeth, that about Babylon, the very
leaf (if it be set) does grow.


THRA. I remember you told me once, the spring and scyens that grows out of
the roots of some trees, will very well be planted.


MARIUS. I told you before, that diverse of the trees whereof I spoke, might be
planted of the branches, and of the scyences, having some part of the root
plucked up with them: and so I said the Chery might be planted, as also the
Hasel, the Laurel, the Myrtel, and the Medlar: likewise, the fairest branches
slipped of, and the ends a little bruised, and thrust into the ground, commonly
do grow to be trees, as I me self have tried both in the Mulbery, the Pear
tree, and the Apple tree. One thing I will add beside, that the trees that
bear fruit over hastily, do either never come to their just bigness, or the
fruit that they bear, does never long endure: wherefore I think sprang
first that law of Moses, that fruit trees should for three years be counted
uncircumcised, and their foreskinnes with their fruit, should be circumcised:
that is, the burgens and blossoms should be plucked of, lest he should bear
before his time, or when he has borne, lose his fruit: but I keep you too
long in the describing of my Orchard.


THRA. O no, I rather (whilst I hear you) imagine me self to be amongst
them, planting and viewing of their fruits: but now remains, that in steed
of a conclusion to your talk, you declare the order of preserving them, to
that end specially, that those things that are appoyn^ed for remedy (being
not duly, or in time administered) be not rather a hurt, then a help.


MARIUS. Your motion is good: first therefore, and generally, dounging and
watring is needful for fruit trees, a very few excepted: and herein heed
must be taken, that you do it not in the heat of the Sun, and that it be
neither too new, nor too old: neither must it be laid close to the foot of
the tree, but a little distance of, that the fatness of the doung may be
druncke in of the root. Pigeons doung, and Hoggerdoung, do also heal the
hurtes or wounds of trees. The water wherewith we water them, must not be
Fountain water, or Well water, if other may be had, but drawn from some muddy
Lake, or standing Poole. Moreoner, you must take heed, (as I also told you
before) when we began to talk of planting of an Orchard, that your trees stand
a good distance a sunder, that when they are grown up, they may have room
yenough to spread, and that the small and tender, be not hurt of the greater,
neither by shadow, nor dropping. Some would have Pomegranate trees, and
Myrtels, and Bays, set as thick together as may be, not passing mean foot a
sunder: and likewise Chery trees, Plome trees, Quinces, Apple trees, and Pear
trees, thyrtie foot and more a sunder: every sort must stand by themselves,
that (as I said) the weaker be not hurt of the greater. The nature of the
soil, is herein most to be regarded: for the Hill requires to have them stand
nearer together, in windy places you must set them the thicker. The Olyue (as
Cato says) will have five and twenty foot distance at the least. You must set
your plants in such sort, as the tops be not hurt, or bruised, nor the bark,
or rynde flawed of: for the bark being taken away round about, kills any
kind of tree. You must also have a regard of the shadow, what trees it
helps, and what trees it hurts. Shadovve of trees.
The Wallnut tree, the Pine tree, the Pitch tree, and the Fyrre tree, what so
ever they shadow, they poison. The shadow of the Wallnut tree and the Oak is
hurtful to Corn: the Wallnut tree with his shadow also, is hurtful to men's
heads, and to all things that is planted near it. The Pine tree with his
shadow likewise, destroys young plants: but they both resist the wind, and
therefore good to enclose Uineyardes. The Cypress, his shadow is very small,
and spreads not far. The shadow of the Fig tree is gentle, though it
spread far, and therefore it may safely yenough grow amongst Uines. The Elm
tree, his shadow is also mild, norishing whatsoever it covers. The Plane
tree, though it be thick and gross, is pleasant. The Poplar has none, by the
reason of y^ wavering of his leafes. The Alder tree has a thick shadow, but
nourishing to his neighbors. The Uines is sufficient for him self, and the
moving of his leaf and often shaking tempereth y^ heat of the sun, and in
great rain well covers it self. The shadow of all those, is commonly mild
and gentle that have long stalks: Dropping of t^^^s.
the dropping of al trees is naught, but worst of al those, whose branches
grow so as the water can not redyly pass through: for the drops of the
Pine, the Oak, and the Mastholme, are most hurtful, in whole company you may
also take the Walnutte: the Cypress (as (...) says) hurts not. Moreover,
proyning and cutting is very good and necessary for trees, whereby the dead and
whytered ^owes are cut away, and the unprofitable branches taken of: but to
proyne them every year is naught, Proyning.
though y^ U^ne req^yreth cutting every year: and every other year, the (...)
the P^^egranate, and the Olyue, whereby they will the sooner bear fruit: the
others must be the seldome^ proyned. Olyue trees must be proyned in the fall of
the leaf, after the setting of the seven stars: and first, they must be well
dounged, is a help against their hurtes. You must cut away all the old rotten
branches that grow in the midst, and such as grow thick, and are tangled
together, and all the waterbawes, and unprofitable branches about them: the
old ones are to be cut close to the stock, from whence the new s^ringes will
arise. S^arifiyng also or (...), S^arefying.
is (...) hossesome for the trees, when they are screyned with their leaves,
and dryness of their barks: at which time we use to ^aunce the bark with a
sharp knife, cutting it straight down in many places: which, what good it
does, appears by the opening and gaping of the rynde, which is stayghtwayes
filled up with the body underneath. Abl^^ue^ton.
You must also trim and dress the roots of your trees after this sort. You
must open the ground round about them, that they may be comforted with the
warmth of the Sun, and the Rain, cutting away all the roots that run
upward. Removing.
The trees that you remove, must be marked which way they stood at the first:
for so teaches Virgil. And in the bark they set a sign,
To know which way the tree did grow:
Which part did to the South enclyne.
And where the Northern blactes did blow.
Also, you must consider well the nature of the soil, that you remove out of
a dry ground, into a moist, and from a barraine hill, to a moist plain, and
rather fat, then otherwise. The young plants being thus removed, must in the
second, or third year be proyned, leaving still about three or four branches
untouched, so shall they the better grow: this must you usually do every other
year. The old tree we remove with the tops cut of, and the roots
unperished, which must be helped with often dounging and watering. Apple trees
that blossom and bear no fruit, or if it bear, they suddenly fall away, you
shall remedy by slitting of the root, and thrusting in of a stone, or a
wooden wedge. When trees bear not, or hold not their fruit, a remedy.
Also, if you water your trees with urine that is old, it greatly avails (as
they say) both to the fruitfulness, and pleasantness of the fruit. If the
tree decay by reason of the great heat of the sun, you must raise the earth
about it, and water the roots every night, setting up some defense against the
sun. To cause their fruit to be quickly ripe, you must wette the little
roots with vinegar and urine that is old, covering them again with earth, and
often digging about them. The urine of men, if it be kept three or four
months, does wonderful much good to plants, which if you use about Uines,
or Apple trees, it does not only bring you great increase, but also gives an
excelent taste and savor, both to the fruit and the wine: you may also use ye
mother of oil, such as is without salt, to the same purpose, which both must
spedely be used in winter.


THRA. We see that frostes and mystes, do often times great harm to trees,
have you any remedy against it?


MARIUS. Against frostes and mystes, you must lay up round about your Orchard,
little Fagottes made of stalks, rotten bows, or straw, which when the
frostes, or mystes arise, may be kindled, the smoke whereof auoydeth the
danger. You must have also dry doung amongst your Uines, which when the frost
is great, you may set a fire: the smoke whereof dispearseth the frost.


THRA. What if the trees be sick, and prosper not?


MARIUS. When they have any such sickness, they use to power upon the roots,
the lees of wine mingled with water, and to sow Lupines round about them. The
water also wherein Lupines have been sodde, powered round about, is very good
(as Pliny says) for Apple trees.


THRA. Trees are often times also hurt with woormes.


MARIUS. If your trees be troubled with woormes, there are diverse remedies, for
the juice of Woorme wood destroys the Caterpillars. The seeds, or grain,
that are steeped in the juice of Sengreene, or Houseleeke, are also safe from
any woormes: also asthes mingled with the mother of oil, or the state of an
Ox, meddled with a third part of vinegar. Moreover they say, that the trees
that are smoked with Brimstone, or Lyme, are safe from hurtful v^rmine:
Galbanum likewise burnt upon the coals, drives them away. The blades also of
Garlic, the heads being of, so burnt (as the smoke may pass through the
Orchard) does destroy the Caterpillars: some mingle Soote with the seeds, and
sprinckle them with water: Democritus writes, that a woman in her
uncleanness, vngyrt, and her hear hanging about her shoulders, if she go
bare foot round about the place, the Caterpillars will presently fall: but
perhaps I trouble you with this tedious, or long discourse of hearb^s,
plants, and trees, and therefore though there be much more to be spoken of,
lest I should seem to over weery you, I will make an end.


THRA. A trouble? no, you have done me a singular great pleasure, in declaring
unto me the right ordring of a Garden, and an Orchard, which (not thoroughly
entreated of by others) you have breefely, and perfectly, to our great
commodity described. And whereas you have largely spoken of our trees at home,
it remains for you to say something of the disposing of Wooddes. It was my
chance to pass yesterday, by a great Wood of Oaks, and Coppisse, planted in
very good order, and hard by, a Wyllowe grew upon the side of a River,
excellently well ordered, where the Feeldes were enclosed round about with great
Elmes, which greatly beautifyeth your dwelling, and yield (I warrant) no
small profit: I therefore greatly desire to hear some thing of this part of
husbandry.


MARIUS. Though it be without my covenant, Of VVod.
and that you demand more then I promised, yet since you force me, I will not
refuse it, least you should think I would fail you in any thing. As
touching Woods, Ancus Martius (as Petrus Crinitus writes) was ye first in Rome
that ever dealt in them: the old Fathers had always a speiall regard of
Wooddes, wherefore Virgil says: If that of Woods I frame my song.
Woods unto Princes do belong:
If that of Woods I list to sing^
Woods may full well beseem a King.
It was ordained by the Romans, that the Consuls should have the charge of
the Woods, that there should no Timber be wanting for bulding of Houses, and
Ships, and other Timber works, both public, and private. The state of
Venis at this day, observes the same order, poynting a private officer for
their Wooddes, who has in charge as well to see to the yearly planting of
the^, as to let that there be wanting no Timber for their necessary uses. The
Wood that you told me you passed by, is of Oaks, Beeches, and other Mast
trees: some part serving for Timber, and other for Fuel. Of these therefore
will I first begin to speak, and then of Olyue Groves and Wyllowes, some of
them be wild, and grow of them selves, not needing any looking to, but such
as daily experience shows, are nothing so good, as those that are planted.
Wooddes and Forestes, do cheefely consist of Oak, Beeche, Fyrre tree, Byrche,
Pine, Pitch tree, Mastholme, Cork, wild Olyue, Medlar, Crabbe tree, Juniper,
Cornel, and Pyrry: other Wooddes have other trees, according to the nature of
the ground. The great Wood of Harteswald in Germany, as it runs through
diverse Countries, beareeth in some place only Oak, in others Beeche, in others
Fyrres. The Forest of Arderne for the most part bears Oak: Montisicello,
Larshe, Fyrre, Cornel, and Tamarice. Monte. D S. Cothardo, great abundance of
Chestnut trees. These wylder sort, though they grow of them selves, may yet
well be planted, if you have meet ground of the Acorne, and the berry: each
of them likes some one kind of ground better then an other, as first
Theophrastus, and after Pliny has declared. In the mountains delights ye
Fyrre tree, the Cedar, the Larsh, the Pitche tree, and such as bear Rosyne: as
also the Holme, the Terebinth, the Chestnutte, the Mastholme, the Oak, the
Beeche, the Juniper, the Cornel, and the Dog tree: though some of these also
prosper well yenough in the plain. The Fyrre, the Oak, the Chestnutte, the
Fyrrebeech, the Mastholme, and the Cornel, grow as well in the Ualley, as on
the Mountain: upon the playnes you shall have the Tamarix, the Elm, the
Poplar, the Wyllowe, the Hasel, the Wallnutte, the Hornebeame, the Maple, the
Ash, and the Beeche. You shall not lightly see the Plome tree, the Apple, the
wild Olyue, nor the Wallnutte, upon the Mountain: all such as grow as well
in the plain, as upon the Mountain, are larger and fayrer to the eye growing
in the plain, but are b^tter for Timber and fruit, upon the Mountain,
except the Pear and the Apple, (as Theophrastus says): In marrishe ground
delights the Wyllowe, the Alder, the Poplar, and the Priuey. And although the
most Wooddes do spring of their own nature and accord, yet are they by
planting, labor, and diligence, brought to be a great deal more fair and
fruitful: for as before I told you, how fruit trees were nourished and
brought up in Impe Gardens, so are these wild and fruitelesse trees, set and
planted for Timber and Fuel. He that is disposed to plant a Woodde, must
first, according to his soil, choose his sets: and if he have them not
springing of his own, let him make an Impe Garden of the seeds, enclosing
well the ground with Hedge, Rampyre, or Dytch, lest Sheep, Goats, or any
other cattle, come in to byte and brouse it: for what so ever they have once
bitten (as if it were infectted with a deadly poison) perishes: and therefore
those that mean to plant Woods, either for Timber, Fuel, or Mast, must
carefully provide against these hurtful enemies. The country laws have
therein well provided, that where such springes are, they shall feed no
Goats, nor such cattle. Amongst the Mast trees, and such as serve for
Timber, the first place of right belongs to the Oak, The Oak.
called in Greek (...), in Latin Quercus^ in Italian ^uercia, in Spanish
Roble^ in French Chesne, in Dutch Eichenbaum, he that will then plant an Oak
Groan, must provide him of ripe Acornes, not over dried, nor feut^e, or any way
corrupted: these must he sow in good ground, well tylled, with as great
carfulness as he plants his Orchard, and well enclose it, that there come no
cattle in it: which (when they be something grown) you must about February
remove to the place where you entende to plant your Wood: if you cut and
proyne them, it is thought they will prosper the better for Mast: but if you
reserve them for Timber, you must not touch the tops, that it may run up the
straighter, and higher. In remoouing them, you must make your trenches a foot
and a half deep, covering the roots well with earth, taking good heed you
neither bruise them, nor break them: for better you were to cut them. The Oak
agrees well yenough with all manner of ground, but prospers the better in
M^rshes, and warry places: it grows almost in all grounds, yea even in
gravel and sand, except it be over dry: it likes worst a fat ground,
neither refuses it the Mountain. We have at this day and Oak in Westphalia,
not far from the Castle of Altenam, which is from the foot to the nearest
bow, one hundred and thyrty foot, and three else in thickness: and an other
in an other place, that being cut out, made a hundred Wayne lode: not far
from this place, there grew^ an other Oak of ten yardes in thickness, but
not very hie: the Rouers in Garmany, were wont to use for their Shyps,
hollowed trees, whereof some one (as Pliny says) would carry thyrtie men. The
next amongst the Mast trees is ye Beech, in Greek (...), ^eechvvood
in Latin Fagus, in Italian Faggio, in Spanishe Haya, in French Faus, in
Dutch Buchen, planted almost after the same manner that the Oaks be. The
Mastholme, in Greek (...) in Latin Hex, in Italian where it is better known
^li^e, in Spanishe Enzina, in French Haussen: it grows hye, if it have a
ground meet for it: it prospers upon hills, and likes not the plain: it
bears Acornes lesser then the Acornes of the Oak, a leaf like a Bay, and is
continually green. The like has the Cork tree, in Greek (...)^ in Latin
Suber, in Spanishe Alcornoque, in French Liege, which is counted amongst
those that bear Mast, the bark whereof we occupy, for the flotes of our
fisshing nets, and in Pantofels for Winter: all other trees (saving only the
Cork) if you spoil them of their bark, do dye. An other Mast bearing Oak
there is, called in Greek (...)^ in Latin Quercus siluestrum, in French
Chesne, a kind whereof some think the Cerre tree to be, called in Latin
Cerrus, growing in wild and barrayne places. T^ere are some that do number
the Chestnutte tree amongst the Mast bearers: but of this I have spoken before.
The best Mast is the Oak Mast, Mast, and his differences.
the next the Beech and the Chestnutte, then the wild Oak. etc. all very good
and meet for the fatting of cattle, specially Hogs. The Oak Mast, or
Acorne, makes thick Bacon, sound flesh, and long lasting, if it be well
salted and dried: on the other side, Chestnuttes and Beeche Mast, make sweet
and delicate flesh, light of digestion, but not so long lasting. The next is
the Cerre tree, that makes very sound and good flesh: the Mastholme makes
pleasant Bacon, fair, and weyghty: Pliny says, that it was ordained by the
law of the twelve tables, that it should be lawful for any man to geather his
own Mast, falling upon the ground of his neighbor, which the Edict of the
chief Justice does thus interpret: that it shall be lawful for him to do
three days together, with this prouiso, that he shall only geather the
Acornes, and do no harm to his neighbor, as Vlpianus witnesses. Glans Mast
(as Caius says) is taken for the fruit of all trees, as (...) signifies with
the Greeks, though properly (...), be those fruits that are shield, as
Nuttes, and such other. Upon these Mast bearers there grows also the Gall,
in Greek (...), in French Noix^ de Galle, in Italian and Dutch, as in Latin,
in Spanish Agalla, a little ball rugged and uneven without, whereof some be
massy, some hollow, some black, some white, some big, some lesser. It
grows (as Pliny says) the sun rising in Gemini, coming all out suddenly
in one night: in one day it waxes white, and if the heat of the Sun then
take it, it wythereth: the black continues the longer, and grows sometime
to the bigness of an Apple: these serves best to curry withal, and the other
to finishe the leather, the woorst is of the Oak: and thus of such trees as
bear Mast. Now will I join with all the principalest of the other trees, to
make up your Wooddes, amongst which are the Elm, and the Wyllowe: the Elm in
Greek (...), The Elm.
in Latin Vlmus, in Italian and Spanish Olmo, in French Orme, in Dutch
Vlmbaum, and Yffenholiz: the planting whereof, because it is to great use, and
easily grows, we may not let pass: first, because it grows well with the
Uine, and ministers good food to cattle: secondly (as it is al heart) it
makes good timber. Theophrastus and Pliny, do both affirm the Elm to be
barrayne, peradventure because the seed at the first coming of the leaf,
seems to lie hyd among the leaves, and therefore it is thought to be some of
the leaf (as Columella affyrmeth.) He that will plant a Grove of Elmes, must
geather the seed called Samara, about the beginning of March, when it
begins to wax yellowe, and after that it has dried in the shadow two
days, sow it very thick, and cast fine sifted mould upon it, and if there
come not good store of rain, water it well: after a year you may remove it to
your Elm Grove, setting them certain foot a sunder. And to the end that they
root not too deep, but may be taken up again, there must be betwixt them
certain little trenches, a foot and a half distance: and on the root you
must knit a knotte, or if they be very long, twyst them like a garland, and
being well noynted with Bollockes doung, set them, and tread in ye earth
round about them. The female Elmes are better to be planted in Autum, because
they have no seed: at this day in many places, cutting of settes from the
fairest Elmes, they set them in trenches, from whence when they are a little
grown, they geather like settes, and by this dealing make a great gain of
them: in the like sort are planted Groves of Ashes. The Ash in Greek (...),
in Italian Fraxino, in Spanish Fresno, in French Fraisne, Ash groves.
in Dutch Eschen: the Ash delights in rich and moist ground, and in plain
countries, though it grow well yenough also in dry grounds, he spreads out
his roots very far, and therefore is not to be set about corn ground, it
may be felled every third or fourth year, for to make stays for Uines. The
Ash grows very fast, and such as are forwards are set in February, with
such young plants as come of them, in good handsome order standing a row:
others set such Ashes as they mean shall make supporters for garden Uines, in
trenches of a year old, about the Calendes of March: and before ye thirty
sixth month they touch them not with any knife, for the preserving of the
branches: after every other year it is proyned, and in the sixth year joined
with the Uine: if you use to cut away the branches, they will grow to a very
goodly heygth, with a round body, smothe, plain, and strong: Pliny writes
of experience, that the Serpent does so abhor the Ash, that if you enclose
fire, and him with the branches, he will rather run into the fire, then go
through the bows. Byrch, called in Greek (...) in Latin Betula, as
Theoprastus writes in his fourth book, is a tree very meet for Woods: it
prospers in cold countries frosty, snowie, and gravely, and in any barraine
ground, wherefore they use in barraine grou^des, that serve for no other
purpose, to plant Byrches: it is called in Italian Bedolla, in Dutche Byrken,
in French Beula, Pine Woods, Fyr Woods, Pytch tree, and Larsh, are common in
Italy about Trent. The Pine tree in Greek (...) in Latin Pinus, The Pine.
in Italian and Spanish Pino, in Dutch Hartzbaum, is planted of his kernells,
from October to January: in hot and dry countries, and in cold and wette
places, in February or March: the kernelles must be geathered in June, before
the clogges do open, and where you list to sow them, either upon hills or
else where: you must first plowe the ground and cast in your seed, as ye do
in sowyng of corn, and cover them gently with a light Harrow or a Rake, not
covering them above a hand broad: you shall do well, if you lay the kernells
in water three days before. The kernells of the Pine are called in Greek
(...), and (...), in Spanish Pinones. Fyrre trees.
The Fyrre tree in Greek (...), in Latin Abies, in Italian Abete, in Spanish
Abeto, in Dutch Deamen, loves not to have any great adoo made about it: if you
be too curious in planting of it, it will grow (as they say) the worse, it
grows of his own kernel in wild mountains, playnes, or any where. The Pitch
tree, in Greek (...), The Pytch tree.
in Latin Picca, in Italian Pezzo, in Spanish El pino de que se haze la pez,
in Dutch Rododemem, is a tree of the kind of Pines, and very like to the Pine,
sweating out his Rozen as he does: for there are six kinds of these Rozen
trees, the Pine, the Pitch tree, the wild Pine, the Fyrre, the Larsh and the
Tar tree, the planting of them al is alike. The Alder, a tree also meet for
woods, The Alder.
in Greek (...), in Latin Alnus, in Italian Auno, in Dutch Elsen, in French
Aulne, it grows in plain and marishe places near to Rivers. Theophrastus
says, it yields a fruitful seed in the end of Summer: many places are
commodiously planted with Poplar, whereof there are two sorts, the white
called in Greek (...), and the black (...): the white is called with y^
Italians Populo bianco, with the Spaniards Alamo blanco, Poplar, white and
black.
the black of the Italians, Populo negro, of the other Alamo negrillo, in
French Peuplier, in Dutch Peppelem, it is planted of the branches and settes,
and delights in watery places, or any other ground it proves very fast: the
black has the ruggedder bark, his leaves round while he is young, and
cornered in his age, white underneath, and green above. The timber hereof is
good for buyldinges, specially within doors: his Wood is whitishe within, and
the rind blackish, whence he has his name. Theophrastus adds a third kind
called in Greek (...), which some call the Poplar of Libya, and of the Alps,
it has a rugged bark like the wild Perry, a leaf like Iuy, and is in color
like a dark green, sharp at the one end, VVyllovves.
and broad at the other. The black Poplar grows in great plenty about the
lower parts of the Rhyne, though Homer call the W^llowe a fruitelesse tree,
because his fruit turns into Cobwebs before they be ripe: yet is the
soueraintie given him amongst Wooddes that are usually feld. Cato gives the
third place of husbandry grounds to the Wyllouwe, preferring it either before
the Olyue Grove, corn ground, or meddow, for it is oftener to be cut, and
grows the thicker, neither is there so great gain with so little charge in
any thing: it delights in watery grounds, dark and shadowy, and therefore is
plan^ed about Ryuers and Lakes, howbeit it grows in the Champion, and other
ground: it is planted of young settes, a foot and a half long, and well
covered with earth: a wette ground requires a greater distance betwixt them,
wherein you shall do well to ^et them five foot a sunder, in order like the
sink upon a Dye: in the dry ground they may be set thicker to geather, yet
Columella would have them five foot distance for passing by them. There are
two sorts of Wyllowes, one sort enduring for ever, called Osyar, Osyars.
serving for making of Baskets, Chayres, Hampers, and other country stuff: the
other kind growing with great and high branches, serving for stays to Uines,
or for quicksettes, or stakes of Hedges, and is called stake Wyllowe: it is
planted both of the tiwgge and of the stalk, but the stalk is the better,
which mu^t be set in a moist ground well dug, two foot and a half in the
ground before it spring, and when the twigs are bare, you must take them from
the tree when they be very dry, otherwise they prosper not so well: these
stakes or settes being taken from the young stock, that has been ones or twyse
cut, and in thickness as much as a man's arm, you must set in the ground
three foot, or a foot and a half deep, and six foot a sunder, laying good
moulde about them fence: them well, that there come no cattle to pill of the
bark of them. After three or four years you may pull them, whereby they will
grow and spread the better, and so you may continually cut them every five,
or fourth year, whereof you may make sets for planting of more, for the old
ones are not so good to be occupied. The time of cutting of them, is from the
fall of the leaf, until April, the Moon encreasyng, and in Westerly, or
Southerly winds: for if you do it, the wind being in the North, we find by
experience they will not grow so well: you must cut them clean away, that the
old branches hurt not the young springes: some think the young Wyllowe to
grow the better the nearer the ground, and the smoother he is cut. For
planting of Os^^res.
The Osyar commonly grows of his own self, and is also planted of his
rods, in watery and marishe grounds, the earth raised up, and laid in
furrows: it is planted and springes most plentifully, where the earth is
beaten up with the rage and ouerflowinges of the water: it serves as a sure
defense for making of Banks and Walls in Marshes, and that cheefely in March,
the Moon increasing: the Osyar may be cut every year, or every two year if
you will. Lo, here have you concerning Wooddes, what needefullest are for our
countrymen to plant: for as for Woods of Cedar, Cypress, and other strange
trees, it is not for our husbands to busy them selves about: wette and rich
grounds that are meet for corn, is also good to be planted with Oaks,
Beeche, Wyllowe, and Poplar, although the Oak and the Beeche refuse hilly, and
lighter ground: sandy, and barraine grounds, are good for Byrche, Bramble,
Broom, and Hethe, as I have sufficiently said before. Now perhaps you would
have me proceed with Coppisse wooddes, that are continually to be feld.


THRA. I would, if it were no pain to you.


MARIUS. Coppisse, or sale wood, were first brought up (as Pliny says) by Qu.
Martius. This kind of Wood grows commonly of his own accord in Forrestes,
and watery places: but all Wooddes are not for this purpose, for some trees
there are, which if you cut and poule often, will fade and dye, as the Ash, the
Iu^iper, the Chery, the Fyrre, the Apple, and the Pyrry: and some again, if
they be not cut, will perish: the Uine requires yearly cutting, the Olyue,
the Myrtel, and the Pomegranate, each other year. In cutting of them (as they
are diverse) so is their order: for the Oak, as he grows slowly, so is he not
to be cut, before he be of seven, or eight years growth: and the nearer the
ground you cut him, the better he grows, though he may be polled seven or
eight foot above the ground: the like is of the Beeche, saving that he may
sooner be cut. The great Wyllowe, and the Poplar, are cut after one sort, as I
showed a little before: though the Osyar may be cut every two year, or every
year. The Chestnut may be feld every seventh year, both for Fuel, or for
Uine st^ues. Trees are cut and pold sundry ways, for either they are feld
close by the ground, or the body is pold, when it comes to be of the bigness
of a man's arm, or more, as the Wyllowe is. Coppissed wooddes are commonly
severed into so many parcels, as may serve for yearly felling, some still
growing while others are a felling, and because some of them grow faster then
other some, every sort has his place, and his season appointed. Some are
felled every fourth year, some every fifth year, as the Wyllowe, the Poplar,
the Alder, and the Byrche: some, once in seven year, as the Chestnut, and some
in more, as the Oak. It remains, that I now show you the manner of felling
of timber, and what timber is meetest for every work.


THRA. I have a great desire to hear what time is meetest for felling of
timber, which much avails (as they say) to the long enduring of it: after, I
would know what timber is meet for every purpose.


MARIUS. The season of felling, no doubt is to great purpose, whether it be for
Timber, or Fuel: for such trees as are feld either in ye spring, or in
summer, though they seem dry without, are notwithstand^ng full of moisture and
wetnesse within, which in burning, will never make good fire: and therefore for
Coppisse and fire wood, your best felling is in Winter: and for building, it is
best cutting of your trees in December, and January, the mo^ne being in the
wa^e, from the twenty, to the thirtieth day. He are there some that say, they
have found by experience, that trees being cut in January, are full of sap:
and therefore think it better either to cut them before, or after. Cato says,
the best time is about the twelfth of December, for the timber tree that
bears fruit, is bent in season when his seed is ripe, and that which has
no seed, when it pills it is time to cut. Such as are flawed, serving for
pillars of Churches, or other round works, must be cut when they spring:
shyngles, and such as the Hatchet must flawe, are to be cut betwixt midde
Winter, and the beginning of the Western winds. Pliny affirms the best
season for felling of timber, to be while the Moon is in conjunction with the
Sun. Vitruuius an excellent fellow in building, does will you to fell your
timber from the beginning of Autumn, til the time that the Western winds
begin to blow, the which winds begin to blow (as Pliny says) about the
sixth Ides of February: for in the spring, all t^ees are as it were with
child, and bend all their force to the putting out of their leaf, and their
fruit. Since then they be sappy, an^ not sound, by the necessity of the
season, they are made by the reason of their looseness feeble, and of no
force: even as the bodies of women, after they have conceived, from their
conception, till the time of their deliverance, are not judged to be sound, or
perfect. In like sort the trees in Autumn, when the fruit and leaves begin to
fall, the roots drawing from the earth their sufficient sustenance, are
restored again to their old estate: beside, the force of the air in Winter
does fasten and make sound the trees, and therefore is it then thought the
best time to fell your timber. The manner of cutting of it is this, first to cut
it till you come to the middle of the pith, and so to let it stand, that the
sap that is in it, may dessend and drop out: so shall not the moisture
within putrify, nor corrupt the timber, but pass clearly away. When you have
cut it, and you see it dry that it has left dropping, you may cut it down,
and so shall you be sure it shall best serve your turn. There are some
masters in building, that think it best after you have sawen out your timber
in boordes, to lay them in water for three or four days, or if they be of
Beeche, for a longer time, eight or niene days: and being ordered in this
wise, they shall neither (they say) be rotten, or woorme eaten.


THRA. Now let us hear what trees are best for timber.


MARIUS. There are diverse and sundry uses of timber: such as are barrayne, are
better then ye fruiteful, excepting those sorts where the male bears, as the
Cypress, and the Cornel: in all trees the parts that grow toward the North,
are harder and sounder, which are almost covered with moss, as with a cloak
against the cold: the woorst are those that grow in shadowy and watrishe
places, the massyer and better during, are they that grow against the Sun:
and therefore Theophrastus deuideth all timber into three sorts, into cloven,
squared, and round, of which the cloven do never rent nor coame: for the pith
being bared, dries up and dies: they also endure long, because they have
little moisture. The squared, and the round, or the whole timber, does coame
and gape, specially the round, because it is fuller of pith, and therefore
renteth and coameth in every place. And such hye trees as they use for
pillars, and main posts, they first rub over with Bullockes doung to season
them, and to suck out the sap: for the moisture do always come sooner then
the dry, and dry better to be sawed then the green, except the Oak, and the
Box, that do more fill the teeth of the Saw, and resist it. Some again
refuse to be glued either with them selves, or any other, as the Oak, which
cleaves as soon to a stone, as any wood, neither do they well cleave, but to
such as are of like nature: to be bored, the green is woorser then the dry:
the light and the dry, are harder to be cut: for bands and wythes, the
Wyllowe, the Brom, the Byrch, the Elm, the Poplar, the Uine, the cloven
Reed, and the Bramble are best: the Hasel will also serve, but the best is the
Wyllowe: they have also a certain hardness and fairness, meet to be used
in graven works. Among those that serve for timber, are most in use the
Fyrre, the Oak, the Pine, the Larshe, the Escle, the Elm, Wyllowe, Cedar,
Cypress, the Box, Byrch, Plane tree, Alder, Ash, wild Oak, Da^e tree,
Beeche, wild Olyue, Mastholme, Walnut, Maple, and Holly, and diverse others,
used according to their nature, and the manner of the country where they grow.
The Fyrre tree, whereof I have also spoken before, gives out Rozin, and his
timber is meet for diverse works, and greatly esteemed for his heygth and
bigness, whereof are made the ship mastes, and pillars for houses: for it is
very strong, and able to abide great force. The Fyrre.
It is used also in building, for great gates and door posts: in fine, good
for any building within, but not so well enduring without doors, and very
soon set afyre. They used (as Theophrastus says) in ye old time to make their
Gallyes and long Boats of Fyrre, for the lightness sake, and their ships
for burden, of Pine tree, and Oak. Of Oak, I have spoken a little before, the
timber whereof is best, both for inward buildings, and for the weather, and
also well enduring in the water: Hesiodus would have yokes made of Oak. The
wild Oak serves also well in water works, so it be not near the sea: for
there it endures not, by reason of the saltness: it will not be pierced with
any Augur, except it be wette before: neither so will it suffer (as Pliny
says) any Nail driven in it, to be plucked out again. The Mastholme, in
Greek (...), a tree well known in Italy, The Mastholme.
the wood whereof is tough and strong, and of color like a dark read, meet
(as Hesiodus says) to serve for Plow shares: it may also be made in Waynscot,
and Payle boorde. The Larsh tree, in Greek (...), in Italian Larice, in Dutch
Lerchenbaura, The Larsh.
was in the old time greatly esteemed about the River Poe, and the Gulf of
Veniz, not only for the bitterness of the sap, whereby (as Vitruuius says)
it is free from corruption and woormes, but also for that it will take no fire,
which Mathiolus seems with his arguments to confute. It is good to sustain
great burdens, and strong to resist any violence of weather, howbeit they say,
it will rotte with salt water. The Escle is a kind of Oak, called in Greek
(...) in Latin Esclus, is soon hurt with any moisture: the Elm, the Wyllowe,
and the Poplar, whereof I have spoken before, will very soon rotte, and
corrupt: they will serve well yenough within door, and for making of Hedges. The
Elm continues very hard, and strong, and therefore is meet for the cheeks
and posts of Gates, and for Gates, for it will not bow, nor warpe: but you
must so dispose it, that ye top may stand downward: it is meet (as Hesiodus
says) to make Plow handles of. The Ash (as Theophrastus says) is of two
sorts, The Ash.
the one tall, strong, white, and without knottes, the other more full of sap,
ruggedder, and harder. The Bay leaf (as Pliny says) is a poison to all kind
of cattle: but herein he is deceived, as it should appear by the likeness of
the name, for (...) or (...) is the young tree, whose leaves (as is certainly
tried) kills all such beasts as chawe not the cudde. Ash, besides his
manifold use otherwise, makes the best and fairest horsemens staves, whereof
was made the staff of Achilles, which Homer so greatly commends: it is also
cut out in thin boordes. The Beeche, whereof I have spoken before, although
it be brittle and tender, and may so be cut in thin boordes and bent, as he
seems to serve only for Caskettes, Boxes, and Coff^^s, his color being very
fair: yet is he sure and trusty in ^earing of weight, as in ^xeltrees for
Carts, or Waynes. The bark^ of the Beech was used in the old time, for
vessels to geat^er Grapes in, and other fruit, and also for Cruettes, and
vessels to do sacrifyce withal: and therefore Cu^i^s swear, that he brought
nothing away of all the spoil of his enemies, but one poor Beechen Cruet,
wherein he might sacrifyce to his gods. The Alder is a tree with a straight
body, a soft and reddish wood, growing commonly in watery places, it is cheefely
esteemed for fund^tions, and in water woorks, because it never rotteth lying in
the water: and therefore it is greatly accounted of among the Uenetians, for
the fundations of their places, and houses: for being driven thick in pyles,
it endures for ever, and susteyneth a wonderful w^^ght. The rind is plucked
of in ye Spring, and serves the Dy^r in his occu^ation: it has like knottes
to the Cedar, to be cut and wrought in. The Plane tree is but a stranger, and a
new come to Italy, brought thither only for the commodi^ie of the shadow,
keeping of the sun in Summer, and letting it in in Winter. There are some in
Athens (as Pliny says) whose branches are.36. cubits in breadth: in Lycia^
there is one for greatness like a house, the shaddowe place vnderne^th
containing.^1. ^oote in bigness: the timber with his s^ftness ^at^ his use but
in water, as the Alder, but dryer then (...), the Ash, the Mu^bery, and ^he
Chery. The Lynder, in Greek (...), and so in Italian, in Spanish La^era, in
Dutch Lyndon: this tree ^h^ophras^u^ counts best for the woorkeman, by reason
of his softness: it breeds no woornes, and has be^wixt the bark and the
wood, sundry little ryndes, ^^ereof they were wont in ^linie^ time to make
Ropes and Wythes. The ^yrch is very beautiful and fair: the inner rind of the
tree, called in Latin Liber, was used in the old time in stead of paper to
write upon, and was bound up in volumes, whereof books had first the name of
Libri, the twigges and bows be small, and bending, used to be carried before
the Magistrate among the Romans, at this day terrible to poor boys in
schools. The Elder tree, called of Dioscoridus (...) in Latin Sambucus, in
Italian Sambuco, in Spanish Sauco, in French Suseau, in Dutch Hollenter, doo^h
of all other trees soonest and easelist grow, as experience besides
Theophrastus does teach us, and though it be very full of pith, yet the wood
is strong and good: it is hollowed to diverse uses, and very light staves are
made of it. It is strong and tough when it is dry, and being laid in water,
the rynde comes of as soon as he is dry. The Elder wood is very hard and
strong, and cheefely used for Bare spears: the root (as Pliny says) may be
made in thin boordes. The Fig tree, is a tree very well known and
fruitful, not very hye, but somewhat thick (as Theophrastus says) a cubite
in compass, the timber is strong, and used for many purposes, and sith it is
soft, and holds fast what so ever sticks in it, it is greatly used in
Targettes. Bore tree, in Greek (...), in Italian Boxo, in Spanishe Box, in
French Bouys, in Dutch Busthaum, an excellent tree, and for his long lastyng,
to be preferred before others. The Box that turned is, says Virgil. Juniper,
Juniper.
called both of Theophrastus and Diosco^ides (...), because it drives away
vermin: for with his savor, Todes and Snayles, and such like, are driven
away, in Latin it is called Iuniperus, in Italian Ginipro, in Spanishe Euebro,
in French Geueure, in Dutch Wachoi^er: it is very like to the Cedar, but that
it is not so large, nor so hye: though in many places it grows to a great
heygth: the timber whereof will endure a hundred years. And therefore Hanibal
commanded, that the temple of Diana should be built with rafters and beams of
Juniper, to the end it might continue. It also keeps fire a long time,
insomuch as it is said, the coals of Juniper kindled, have kept fire a year
together: the gum whereof our Painters use. The Cedar tree, The Cedar.
in Greek (...), in Latin Cedrus, and almost like in other tongues: the
hardness of this timber is only praised, and that it will neither rotte, nor
be woorme eaten, but continue ever. Solomon built that noble Temple of GOD at
Jerusalem of Cedar: it is very meet for the building of Palaces and Castles:
the Cedar, the Eben, and the Olyue tree, do never chinke nor coame. Images of
gods and saints were always made of Cedar, because it ever yields a
moisture as though it sweat. Theopra^^us writes of Cedars in Syria, of four
else and more in compass. The Rozen and Pitch of ye Cedar tree, is called in
Greek (...). The Cypress, The Cypress.
and the Pine, do endure a long time without either woorme, or rotting: Pliny
commends Gates of four hundred years old. The Pine.
The Pine (says Theophrastus) is of great strength, and very meet for the
streyghtnesse and handsomeness, to be employed in building. The VValnutte tree.
The Walnut tree is a great tree and commonly known, whose timber is much
used in ^eelinges and tables. Theophrastus writes, that the Walnut tree before
he falls, makes a certain kind of noise, which it once happened in
Antandro, the people being greatly afraid, fled suddenly out of the Bathes.
The wild Olyue, in Greek (...), The wild Olyue.
in Latin Olcaster, in Italian Oliuo Saluatico, in Spanish Azenuche, in French
Olive sauuage, in Dutch Wilder Olyboum, of his wood is made the hastes and
handles of Wymbles and Augurs. Holme, or Holly, is a tree whose leaves are full
of prickles round about the leaf, The H^lly.
and the bark, being both continually green, the berries like the Cedar: of
the rynde of the roots they make Birdlime: the wood is very hard, the branches
will well wind and bow, and therefore serves excellent well for quickset
Hedges: the Dutchmen call it Hul^en. The Maple, ^
called of Theophrastus (...), in Dutch (...). for the beauty of the wood is
next to the Cedar, having a very fair and pleasant grain, of the resemblance
called Peacokes tail: with this wood tables are covered most gorgeous to the
eyes, and other fine works made, specially of the knobbes or wennes that grow
out of it, called Bruscou and Molluscou: of which the knobbes has the fayrer
and the more courled grain. Molluscou is a more open grain, and if so be it
were of sufficient breadth for tables, it were to be preferred before the
Cedar: now it is but seldom seen, and that in writing tables, or about
beds. There is also a knobbe, or a wenne growing upon the Alder, but a great
deal worse then that of the Maple. The Date tree, The Date tree.
whereof we have spoken before, has a very soft wood. The Cork, his timber is
tough: The Cork
but now for a farewell, What turn each tymbe^ serves.
I will show you what works every timber is meet for. The Fyrre, the Pine,
and the Cedar, serve for Ships, for Gallyes, and Lyghters, (as Theophrastus
says) are made of Fyrre, For Shyps.
for the lightness sake: Ships of burden, are made of Pine. Upon the French
and Germany seas, they cheefely use Oak about their Ships: the self same
timber also serves well for building of houses, For Houses.
specially the Cedar, and the Cypress. The Fyrre, the Poplar, the Ash, and
the Elm, are meet for the inner parts of the house, but they serve not so
well in the weather, as the Oak does. For conueyances of water, the Alder, the
Pine, and the Pitche tree, For water courses.
are best made in pipes: being well covered in the earth, they last a
wonderful while, but if they sye uncovered, they sooner perish: the Oak
also, the Beech, and the Walnut, endure very well in the water. The timber that
longest endures, is the Olyue, the Oak, the wyld Oak, and the Mastholme: for
as Pliny witnesses, the Olyue has been s^ene to stand two hundred years,
and like the Cedar, and the Cypress, as has been said before: for Rafters,
and Mortisse pieces, the Elm and the Ash, For be^^ing of (...).
by reason of their length serves best. The best to bear weight, is the Fyrre,
and the Larsh, which how so ever you lay them, will neither bend, nor break,
and never fail, till woormes consume them. Contrarywyse, the Olyue tree, and
the Oak, will give and bend, and so will the Poplar, the Wyllowe, the Elm, and
the Byrch. The Date (a worthy tree) bends up against his burden. The Poplar
on the other side, gives at every light thing. The Elm and the Ash, though
slowly, are easily (...). These also are easily wound and bent: the Wyllowe,
the B^^ch, the Broom, the Oak, and the Oken boordes. ^
Shyngles to cover houses withal, are best made of Oak, Beech, and such others
as bear Mast: and also of such as yield Rozen, as the Pine, and the Pitch
tree: the Pitche tree, and the Oak, serve best for Cups, Tankardes, and such
like. Those that are cut for waynscot and thin boordes, the Cerre tree, the
Terebinth, the Maple, the Box, the Date, the Mastholme, the root of the Elder,
and the Poplar. For the beautifying of Tables, ^
serves cheefely the Maple, the Ash, the Walnut, and sometimes the Chery, and
the Pear: but the preciousest are the Cypress, and the Cedar Tables. For
Axeltrees, Wheels, and Spoakes, serves the Oak, the Maple, and the Beech,
^^^gil does also appoint the Cedar, and the Cypress to this use. Hereof they
make the Spoakes of Wheels, and hereof Carts and Waynes. The self same
timber also serves (as Hesiodus says) for Plowes, ^
Yokes, and Wagons: but that he adds hereunto the Ash, and the Cerre tree,
and as the Ash for his softness, so the Mastholme for his hardness. For
Pullye^, Wymbles, Sheathes, and Mallets, the meetest are the wild Olyue, the
Box, the Mastholme, the Medlar, the Elm, the Ash, the Maple, and the Bramble:
but the greater sort of Mallets, or Beetles, and the Wheels and Pullyes for
Mylles and Wells, are made of Pine, and Walnut tree. ^ato would have the
Waynes and Carts made of Holly, Bay, and Elm. Hyginu^ would have the handles,
For hastes, and handles.
or steals of husbandmens tools, made of Dog tree wood, Holme, Cerre tree,
and (which we have commonly in use) Box. Targettes are (as Theophrastus says)
made of Wy^^^w, and Uine, ^o^ Tar^ets
for being pierced, they close the harder (...) eathe^^ but the Wyllow is the
lightest, and therefore the better. The Fig tree also, and the ^ynd^e, the
Byrch, the Poplar, and the Elder, serve all w^ll for Targets. The best wood for
Horsemens staves, (...) ^aues.
is the Ash, and (as Virgil says) for valiant staves, the M^riel: the Ewe
tree serves (as the same Virgil witnesses) for Bows. The Ewe tree for the
Persian bow they bend.
For Gates, they use the Elm: for Hampers, or Baskettes, al such as easily
bend. For Cupplinges and Raf^ers of houses, the Elm, and the Ash for thin
boorde, the best to cleave, the Fyrre, ^or vv^te^ vvoo^^^^.
the Poplar, and the Beech: for long during, and abiding the weather, and
standing in water, the Oak is commended, for which the other serve not, save
for the water, the Beech, and the Alder: for fire, and light, are used the
Fyrre, the Pitch tree, and the Pine. The best coals are made of the fastest
wood, as the Oak, ^or co^^ng
and the wild Oak: but the Fyners rather desire the coals that are made of the
Pine tree, because they better abide the blowing, and dye not so fast as the
other. The Cerre tree, though the timber be of no great use, yet serves it well
to make cole of for the Brass Forges, because as soon as the bellows leave,
the fire ceasseth, and there is little waste in it: but for building, the
timber thereof is altogether unprofitable, because it does easily break, and
moulder away: but being in ^ostes vnhewed, it serves well yenough within
door. The aptest to take fire, is the fig tree, and the Olyue tree: the
Fig tree, because it is soft and open: the Olyue tree, for the fastness and
the satnesse. The Earth tree (as Vitruuius says) resists the fire, though
Mathiolus (as I said before) goes about to disprooue it. In all the bodies of
trees, as of lively creatures, there is skin, senowes, blood, flesh, veins,
bones, and marowe: their skin is their bark, of great use among country
people: the vessels that they geather their Uines and other fruits in, they
make of the bark of Lynd tree, Fyrre, Wyllowe, Beech, and Alder. The Cork
has the thickest bark, The bark.
which though he loose, he dies not, for so be benef^ciall has nature been to
him ^ that because he is commonly spoiled of his bark, she has given him two
barks. Of his bark, are made Pantoffels, and ^^yppers, and Floates for
fyshing nets, and Angles: if the bark be pulled of, the wood sinkes, but the
bark always swimmeth. The next to the rynde in most trees, is the fat, the
softest and the woorst part of the tree, and most subject to woormes: therefore
it is commonly ^ut away. The sap of the tree, is his blood, which is not
alike in all trees, for in the Fig tree it is milkie, which serves as a
rennet for Cheese. In Chery trees, it is gummy: in Elmes, saltishe: in Apple
trees, clommy and fat: in Uines, and Pear trees, watrishe: they commonly
spring the best, whose sap is clammiest. The juice of the Mulbery, is sought
for (as Pliny says) of the Physicians. Next to the fat, is the flesh, and
next to that, the bone, the best part of the timber: all trees have not any
great quantity of this fat and flesh, for the Box, the Cornel, and the
Olyue, have neither fat, nor flesh, nor marowe, and very little blood: as
neither the Seruisse, nor Alder, have an^ bone, but both of them full of marow.
Reeds for the most part have no flesh at al: in flesh of trees, there are
both veins and arteryes, the veins are broader, and fayrer: the arteryes are
only in such trees as will cleave, by means of which arteryes it comes to
pass, that the one end of a long beam laid to your ear, if you do but
fillippe with your finger upon the other end, the sound is brought forthwith
to your ear, whereby it is known, whether the piece be straight and even or
not. In some trees there are knoties on the outside, as the wenne, or the
kernel in the flesh of man, in the which there is neither vein, nor artery,
a hard knoppe of flesh being clong, and rolled up in it self: these are most
of price in the Cedar, and the Maple. In some, the flesh is quite without
veins, having only certain small stringes, and such are thought to cleave
best: others, that have not their stringes, or arteryes, will rather break
then cleave: as the Uine, and the Olyue, will rather break then cleave. The
whole body of the Fig is fleshy: as the body of the Mastholme, the Cornel,
the wild Oak, the Mulbery, and such others as have no pith, is all bony. The
grain that runs overthwart in the Beech, was taken (as Pliny says) in the
old time for his arteryes.


THRA. There are other commodities beside the timber, to be geathered of these
trees.


MARIUS. Uery true: for (as I said before) of the Medlar, the Oak, the
Chestnut, the Pine, and the Beech, these trees that grow in the Wooddes,
beside their timber, bear fruit also, good and meet to be eaten. So of the
Fyrres, the Pitch trees, and the Pines, we geather Rozen and Pitch, to our
great commodity and gain: as of the Oak, the Beech, the Chestnut, the
Medlar, and the Pine, we have fruit both meet for man, and also good for
feeding of Hogs, and other cattle. In time of dearth, both our forefathers,
and we, have tried the good service, that Akornes in bread has done: yea, as
Pliny and others have written, they were wont to be served in amongst fruit
at men's tables. Neither is it unknown what great gaynes some countries geat by
Akornes, Rozen, and Pitch: the Gaile also grows upon these Akorne bearing
trees, whereof I have spoken before. Amongst all the trees out of which
runs Rozen, the Tar tree, a kind of Pine, is fullest of sap, and softer
then the Pitch, both meet for fire, and light, whose boordes we use to burn
in steed of candelles. The Cedar sweateth out Rozen and Pitch, caled Cedria.
Moreover, of trees is Brydlime made, Byrdlyme.
the best of ye Cerre tree, the Mastholme, and the Chestnut, specially in the
Wooddes about Seen, and near the sea side, where they are carefully planted in
great plenty, by the Byrdlyme makers: for they geather the berryes from the
trees, and boil them, till they break, and after they have stamped them, they
wash them in water, till all the flesh fall away. Pliny affirms, that it
grows only upon Oaks, Mastholmes, Skaddes, Pine trees, and Fyrre. Byrdelyme
is also made of the roots of certain trees, specially of the Holly, whose
roots and barks withal they geather, and lay them up in trenches, covered
with leaves in a very moist ground (some do it in doung) and there they let
them lie till they rot, then take they them out and heat them, till they wax
clammy, and after wash them in warm water, and make them up in balls with
their hands, it is used (beside other purposes) for the taking of birds.
Besides all this, there sweateth out of trees a certain Gum known to all
men, as of the Chery tree, the Plome tree, the Juniper, the Olyue, the
Blackthorne, the Iuie, Vernishe.
and Almond. Out of the Juniper, comes Uernish: out of the Myrrh, Scorax:
out of the white Poplar, Amber. Amber.
Pliny writes, that Amber comes out of certain Pine trees in the fat, as
Gum does from the Chery tree. And thus these things that I have here at
your request declared, touching the order of plantyng and sowing, I beseech
you take in good worth: you hear my wife calls us to supper, and you see
the shaddowe is ten foot long, therefore it is hye time we go.


THRA. I give you most harry thanks, that you have thus freendly enterteyned
me in this your fair Orchard, with the sweet des^ription of these pleasant
herbs and trees.


IVLIA. Sir, your supper is ready, I pray you make an end of your talk, and
let the Gentleman come in here into this Arber.


MARIUS. Come let us go.


Soli Deo laus and gloria, per Christum Iesum.
The end of the second Book.
The third Book, of feeding, breeding, and curing of Cattle.
Hippoconus, Euphorbus, Hedio, Eumaeus. THAT the breeding and feeding of
Cattle is a part of husbandry, and near joined in kinrede to the tylture of
the ground, not only appears by Virgil, the prince of Poets, who has in his
Georgicks thoroughly set forth the order thereof, but also by the witness of
the more ancient Philosophers Xenophon, and Aristotle. The like does our
common experience at home daily teach us: for albeit yt trade of tyllage and
keeping of cattle is diverse, and the manner of occupying many times contrary the
one to the other: as where the grasyer and breeder, requires a ground full of
grass and pasture, the husbandman on the other side, a ground without grass,
and well tytled: yet in these their diverse desires, there appears a certain
fellowship and mutual commodity redounding in their occupying of one the
other, which Fundanius in Varro does seem by an apt comparison to prove: as
in a couple of Shalmes, or Recorders, says he, the one differs in sound from
the other, though the music and song be al one (the one sounding the Treble,
the other the Base) in like manner may we term the grasyers trade the Treble,
and the tyl^ers occupation the Base, following Dicaearchus, who reports, that
at the beginning, men lived only by breeding and feeding of cattle, not
having as yet the skill of plowing and tylling y^ ground, nor planting of trees.
Afterward in a lower degree, was found out the manner of tylling of the
ground, and therefore bears the Base to the feeder, in that it is lower, as
in a couple of Recorders the Base to the Treble. So this using to keep cattle
for plowing, caryage, dounging of our ground, and other commodities, and on the
other side, to till the ground for feeding and mayntenance of our cattle, it
comes to pass, that though the manner of occupying in tyllage, and keeping of
cattle be diverse, yet one of them so serves the turn of the other, that (as
it seems) they can not well be a sunder: for without the service of Horse and
Oxen, we can neither plow, nor doung our ground: and Chafe, Straw, and other
offal of Corn, is meet to be spent upon the ground, then to be sold, both
for the Farmers behoof, and the lords, and better bestowed upon the household
cattle, then upon the forreyners. Besides, the doung of the cattle enricheth
the ground, and brings great increase: and whereas there is no place (as
Columella says) but in the tyllage of their ground, they have as much need
of cattle, as men: the cattle serve not only for the tylling of the ground,
but also to bring in Corn, to bear burdens, carry doung for the ground, and
also for breed, and increase of the stock: whereby they have their name
iumenta, of helping, because they help and further us either in our labors by
plowing, or bearing. Neither is it only sufficient to nourishe and bring up
this kind of great cattle called iumenta, but also the other lesser sort of
beasts, as Sheep, Swyne, Goats: and of fowls, Geese, Peacocks, Duckes,
Pigeons, Hens, Chickinnes, and other poultry, and things belonging to
husbandry, wherewith the good husband, beside his own sustenance, makes great
gain: and if the ground be for it, and Pales favorable, there aryseth
oftentimes as great profit, as in sowing of Corn, and that with smaller
charges. For a proof that feeding is gainefull, the words pecunia money, and
peculium substance, or richesse, being both derived from the Latin name of
cattels, may very well serve: for in the old time they used their cattle in
stead of money, and their common penalties and fines, taken in cattle, the
greatest, was thyrtie Oxen, and two Sheep, every Ox valued at.v. s. and vi.
d. and every Sheep at.vi. d. the smalest was a Sheep: the very like is yet
observed with the noblest and warlikest people, whose substance lies
altogether in cattle. Cato being once asked by what part of husbandry a man
might soonest be made rich, made answer, by great grasing: and being asked
again, which way he might geat sufficient liuelihood, The vvoorthinesse and
antiquity of keeping of cattle.
he answered, by mean grasyng. Moreover, that the woorthynesse and first
original of keeping of cattle is of greatest antiquity, and that the trade
thereof has always, from the time of the Patriarchs hitherto, been counted
most honest, as well the scriptures, as profane histories do witness, The
worthiness and antiquity of keeping of Cattle.
which kind of life, how acceptable it has, always been to God, by those
that lived in the first world does, plainly appear. The scripture shows how
graciously the Lord accepted the sacrifice of Abel, a keeper and feeder of
sheep, besides Seth, Noe, Abraham, Loath, Jacob, Job, Amos. Holly and blessed
men are commended for keeping, and feeding of Cattle, whereby atteyning to
great wealth, they sustained them selves, their wives, their Children, and
their huge families. The Sons of Jacob, when as they were demanded by the
king of Egypt what manner of life they led: made answer, that they were
feeders and keepers of Cattle, from which trade Lot, Morses, Saul and David,
were by the will of God, advanced to the Crown. As among the Gentiles the
most ancient, and famous Princes were, some of them brought up by Sheaperds,
and some sheaperds them selves. Romulus and Cyrus being mighty Emperors, were
brought up among sheaperdes. Besides Galerius Maximinus, Constantine, Probus,
and Aurelianus, came all from the Oxstall, to the Imperial Seat. Homer
commends ^l^sses his swinherd, for his great valiance and noblenes. That the
valyant and noblest people have professed this trade, the Italians, Germans,
and Swytzers can testify, whose Countries being now grown to more delica^ye,
then they were wont to be, were wonted always, when their doings were most
famous, to glory and vaunt them selves of this life, as at this day the
Goodlyest and wysest do. And therefore the ancient writers, as well Greeks,
as Latyns, do count the chefest wealth to be in the numbers of sheep,
Cattle, and Fruit: for which estimacion the Cattle were supposed to be
cladde in Golden Coats: whence sprange first the fable of the Golden fleese of
Colchos, which Jason, and his companions attempted to fetch, and of the Golden
apples, kept by ye daughters of Atlas. Besides the signs of Heaven the seas,
Mountains, and Countries do bear their names of Beasts: among the (...)
the Bull: the mountain, Taurus: and the (...) took his name of Calves.
Moreover the (...) the worthier, in that it has some resemblance of the (...)
governor: and therefore the Prophets in their Oracles, and Poets in their
verses, do often times call kings and princes by the names of shepheardes,
and feeders of the people. Yea the LORD of the whole world does call him self
a shephearde. Since it appears by these examples, of what worthynesse keeping
of cattle is, and how near it is linked with tillage, I have here thought
good, after the entreating of tillage, Gardning, and Orchardes, to describe as
breefely as I can, the order and manner of keeping of cattle: which skill
though Varro deuideth only into three parts, I have divided into four. In the
first part I put the great cattle for burden, as Horses, Asses, Mules,
Camelles: in the second part the lesser sort, as Sheep, Goats, and Swyne: in
the third, such things as are belonging to the keeping and safegarde of
Cattle, not for the proffit they yield of them selves, but for their
necessary use, as shepheardes dogs, and cattes: of these three parts in this
third book I entreat, of: the fourth I refer to the fourth book. Having
thus declared the contention betwixt keeping of cattle, and tillage, with the
worthynes and antiquity thereof, I mean now to prosecute such things as are
belonging to the same. I have brought in the masters and keepers of every kind
of Cattle, resting them selves upon the hollyday in the green grass, and the
Summers shadow, every one declaring his skill and knowledge, according to his
profession. The parties are EVPHORBVS the Netheard: HIPPOCOMVS the Horsekeeper:
HEDIO the shepherd, and EVMAEVS the swineheard.

EVPH. How sir HIPPOCOMVS, whither wander you? do you not know that it is
hollyday, a day to dance in, and make merry at the ale house?


HIPPO. Eueryday is hollyday with lazy and slothful merchants: it lies me
upon to look to my profit, to see whether my Horses feed well, and that they
take no harm. The pastures are so burnt with ye heat of summer, that I am
afraid for w^^t of meat, they will seek to break into other grounds, and so
hurt them selves.


EVPH. Why bring you not them into this feelde, where there is both a good
grotten, and pretty store of grass among the headgroues.


HIPPO. You persuade me not the worst.


EVPH. Come on then, bid Mastix your boy bring hither your Horses, and you your
self, sit you down under this Hasel, that will yield us both shadow and
nuttes, and we will send for EVMAEVS, and HEDIO, if you think good, and we
will pass away the time with such talk as we shall find.


HIPPO. Agreed. Go Mastix, Fetch hither the Horses, with the Coults and the
Asses.


EVPH. And you EVMAEVS, and HEDIO, bring your Heardes together, and come
hither, every man shall lay down his shot, as they use in the Tavern, but
without money or any charges, declaring at large what belongs to the Cattle
he keeps. Your Horses HIPPOCOMVS are yet in good plight, I saw the Horses of
our neighbor Agrius of late, which are leaner and barer a great way.


HIPPO. Peradventure they have not so good loking unto, though they neither
want pasture, nor are much labored: but mine on the other side, are
continually labored, and are not so well fed, but are better looked unto then
my neighbors.


EVPH. Well, since both time and place requires it, I pray you let us hear
what you can say, touching the charge and looking to of Horses.


HIPPO. Surely I have not so much money to tell, but I may well be at leisure,
and therefore since you are so earnest with me, I will not deny your request:
although that of this matter, an honest and learned Gentleman of England,
master Thomas Blunduile has so thoroughly written to his comme^dacion and
benefit of his country, as there can not be more said: I referr you therefore
wholly to him: notwithstanding, breefely I will show you my fansy. Among all
other creatures that we use in our labor, Of Horses.
the Horse may worthiest challenge the chiefest place, as the noblest, the
goodliest, the necessariest, and the trustiest beast that we use in our
service: and since he serves to so many uses, I should here bestow some time
in his praise, and in declaring his service, but for this, an other time shall
better serve.


EVPHOR. We only here desire to know the signs of a good, and an excellent
Horse, and the right manner of ordring him.


HIPPO. First you shall know that Horses serve for sundry purposes. Some, for
the Plowe, the Carte, and the packesaddle, others, for light Horses, Coursers,
and Horses of service, others again, for Stallions, and breeders: and
therefore they must be chosen according to their service. Soldiers, and men of
war, desire a sierse Horse, courageous, swift, and well colored. The husbandman
would have his horse gentill, large bodyed, and meet for travail and burden.
Notwithstanding, the breeding, and bringing up of them, is almost one: for in
their breeding, we hope to bring them all to the saddle.


EVPHOR. What things are most to be considered in their breedinge?


HIPPO. He that has a fansey too breed Horse, must first provide himself of
a good race, and then of good ground, and plenty of pasture, which in other
Cattle, ought not to be so greatly observed, but in Horses there must be
special care thereof. And therefore, you must first see that your Stallion be
of a good race, well proporcioned, and framed in every point, and in the like
sort, the Mare. Some reckon their goodness by their Countries, wherein they take
for chie^e, the Genet of Spain, the Courser of Naples, the Sarmacian Horse,
the Pelo^on^han, the Turkey, and the Thessalian: but these serve chiefly for
running, and swift^nesse. For largeness of body, enduring of labor, and
fitness for breed, the best are to be had out of Freeseland, Holland, and
Artoy^. The shape and proporcion of the Horse, ought heedily to be considered,
for the very look and countenance oftentyme, declares the goodness of his
nature. Therefore, you must diligently consider his making, from the heel to
the hedde, and first you must cheefely regard his feet: for as in viewing of
a house, it is in vain to regard the beawty of the upper rooms, if the
foundation be ruynous: so the Horse that is not sound of his feet, will
neither serve the Soldier, the Husband, nor the Trauayler. In your looking
upon him therefore you must first consider his hoofes that they be not tender
and soft, but hard and sound, round and hollow, The hofe.
that the hollownesse may keep his foot from the ground, and sounding like a
Cimball as ( Xenephon says) may declare the soundnes of the foot, for the
hoof that is full and fleshy, is not to be lyked, and y^ Horses that have
such hoo^es do easily halt, wherefore diverse commend a Horse like the hoo^e
(...) ass, the pastors next to the hoof not to long as the got has, for
shaking of his rider, and breeding of windgall, nor to short, for being hurt
in stony ground. The legs and the thyes since they are the standards of the
body, they ought to be even, straight, and sound, not gouty, with much flesh
and veins. for such as have their legs clad with much flesh and veins, The
legs.
they with great Iourneis grow full of windgalls and swellings which will
cause them to halt, which Legs at the first foling, are as long as ever they
wilbee, by reason whereof you may guess what heygth ye Horse will be of, being
yet a coult. The knees must be round, The knees.
flexible, and small, and not bowing inward nor stiff, the Thies large and
well brawned, The thy^s.
his breast great and broad, The breast.
his neck soft and broad, The neck.
not hanginge like a Goats, but upright like a Cocks, and well reyning, his
mane thick, The mane
fauling on the right side, some like it better on the left, his head small and
lean, The head.
for a great and heavy head, is a sign of a dull Jade, his moussell short,
his mouth wide with large wrincles, still playing with the bytte and foming: as
Virg. There stamping stands the steed, and fomy bridell fyerce he champes.
The Horse that has a dry mouth is naught, The mouth.
his cheekebones would be even and small, for if they stand to far a sunder,
he will be ill to be brydled, and the vneuennes of the Cheeks, will make him
hedstrong, and never to reyne well, but to thrust out his head ilfauoredly, his
eyes great, bluddy, and fiery and standing out of his head, which is a sign of
quicknes and liuelynes: hollow and littell eyes are naught, The eyes
and black or pale stars in the eyes are to be dispraysed: these faults are
best spied in the night bye Candell light. Columella commends black eyes. A
wall eye is very good, such as they say Alexanders Bucephalus had. The ears
must be short, The ears.
standinge upright, and stirring, for the ears, be the tokens of a Horses
stomach, which if they be great and hanging, are signs of a Jade. The
nostrells must be wide, The nost^^l (...) ^houlder
the better to receive air, which also declares a lively currage, his
shoulders large and straight, the sides turning inward, the ridgebone over the
shoulders being something hie, The (...).
geeues the horseman a better seat, and the shoulders, and the rest of the
body, is stronger knitte together, if it be double, his sides deep, well
knitt behind, and something bowed up, ^
which both is better for the horseman, and a sign of great strength: his
Loins, the brother they be, ^
the better he lifts his forefeete, and follows with the hinder, and his
paunche shall the less apeere, which both disgraceth him and burdneth him, his
belly must be gaunt, his buttockes large, ^
and full of flesh, answerable to his breasts, and his sides, for if he be
broad hanched, and well spread behind, and goes wide, his pace will be the surer,
which we may perceive in our selves, if we assaye to take up a thing from the
ground, stryding, and not with our legs together, we take it up with more
case and strength. His tail would be long, bristly, ^
and curled, the length whereof, is not only a bew^y, but also a great
commodity to him to beat away flies: yet some delight to have them curtailed,
specially if they be broad buttockt. (...) fine, the hole body would be so
framed, as it be large, hye, lively sp^^ed, and well trussed. Some horsemen
would have their Horse to be limmed after the proporcion of diverse Beasts, as
to have the head and legs, of a Stagg, the ears and tail, of a Fox, the
neck of a Sw^nne, the breast, of a Lion, the butto^kes, of a Woman, and the
feet of an Ass. Virgill in his Ge(...) both very clarkely describe the tokens
of a good Horse. (...) advanced ^ie at the first the kindly colt does pace.
(...), as well beseemes his race^
And form^^st still ^e go^th, and through the ^treame he makes his way
And ventures first the bridge^ no sudden sound does him affray.
(...) is his neck, and (...) his head is framed small.
(...), his back is broad, and (...) big withal,
The ^ay is always counted good, so likewise is the gray.
The white, and yellow worst of all, besides, if far away
There happen any noise, he stampes, and quiet cannot rest.
But praunceth here and there, as if some sprite were in his breast.
His ears be sets upright, and from his nose the fiery flame
Does seem to come, while as he sauffes, and snorthes at the same.
Thick is his mane, and on the right side down does hanging ^al.
And double chinde upon his loins, a gu^ter runs withal,
He scraping stands, and making deep a hole, he paws the ground
Whiles as aloud his horned house, al hollowed seems to sound.


You see in how few verses the Poet has expressed the properties of a good
Horse: other conditions there be for which they be liked, when they be
pleasant, first lively, gentle, and tractable: For such as Columella says,
will both better be tought, and better away with travail. Xenophon accounts
it a sign of a good Horse, if after the werines of his iourny he seem to
labor lustely: again, we find also by experience, the better the Horse is,
the deeper he thrustes his head into the water when he drinks, and that (being
a colt) strives to out^^me his fellows in the pasture, and as Virgil says,
leap first into the water, and passes bridges, not tarriing for an usher, nor
^earing the Ise.


EVPHOR. What color in Horses count you the best. The Poet seems to mislike
the white, which others again, as I have sundry times heard, commend,
speci^lly in England, where they are well accounted of, and most esteemed.


HIPPO. Touching the colors, there are diverse opinions, and of all colors,
lightly you shall ^inde both good and bad: so that the color is not so greatly
to be regarded, if he have other tokens of a good Horse, yet for bew^y, and
many times for goodness, we make choice of color. The best colou^s as diverse
suppose are these, the rone, the white wa^d, the bay, the sorell, the dunne,
the daple gray, the ashy white, the flebitten, the milk white, the black, and
the iron gray, The Bay is most of price as far as I see at this day, and
preferred by the Poet above the rest. The Frenchmen call the bay Horse Le
Bayart loyal, trusty bayard: they are the better that have a starr in ye
forhed, and ye foot spotted a littel, with white, aforetime the dapple gray,
the flebitten, the mousedun, and the grisel wear most esteemed, and such as
came nearest to them, as the Iron gray, the bright sorell, the brown bay.
Only Plato commends the milk white, that Virgil, dispayseth. Others commend
the black, specially if he have either white star in his forhed, or struck
down his face, or has any white upon his foot, the Cole blake without any
white, is altogether misliked, the fleabitten Horse proves always good and
notable in travail: the yelowish and the skued or pyed Horses are discommended
almost of all men, notwithstanding either of them (if they be well marked)
prove often times well enough, specially the yellowish, if he have a black
list down his back from the neck to the tail. The Stallion therefore would
be of one color, The Stallio^.
strong bodyed, well limmed, according to the proporcion before. The Mares.
The Mares would likewise have the said proporcion of the stallion, specially
to have large bodies, fair and bewtifull, of one color, great bellyed, with
large and square breast and buttockes.


EVP. Age.
What age count you best for breed?


HIP. The Stallion may go with the Mares when his iointes and limbs be well
knitte and come to their grows, for if they be to young, they get but weak
and wearishe Coltes: some use to let them go together at two years old, but
three year old is the better: the Stallio^ will serve you from that time till
xx year, it has been seen that they have gotten Coltes till forty, being
helped a littell in their business, for it is not years but skill that abateth
lust, as Aristotle before Plini wrote. Yet some think them not meet for breed
before the fourth or fifth year, in which space they feed them lustely, to
make them more coragious, for the lustier they be, the better Coultes they
bring, neither would they have under xvi. mares, nor above xx. for one
Stallion. Herodotus writes that one Horse will well suf^^se xx. Mares, but ye
number ought not always to be observed, but sometimes more, sometimes less,
according to the state of the Horse, that he may the longer endure: a young
Horse should not have above fifteen or sixteen Mares with him: the Horses
must be sometime severed, for danger and hurting of them selves, having in the
mean time good regard to the state of his body, for some be weaker and
fainter then others.


EVP. what age do you think best for the mare to go to the Horse?


HIP. The Mares will conceive at two years old, but I take it the better not
to suffer them till they be three year old, as likewise I think them not
meet for colts after ten, for an old Mare will always bring a dull and a
heavy hedded Jade: they go with foale aleuen months, and fool in the twelfth.


EVP. How can you know their age when you be doubtful of it?


HIP. That may you know diverse ways, but specially by the teeth, and those
teeth that declare the age, the grecians call (...), which teeth when he
loses, he loses both estimacion and sale. Aristotel affirms that a Horse
has 40. teeth, of which he casts the thirtieth month after his foling
four, two above, and two beneth, again in the beginning of his fourth year
he casts likewise four, two above and two beneath, being full four, and
going upon his fifth, he casts the rest both above and beneathe: such teeth
as come up again be hollow: when he begins to be six year old the
hollones of his first teeth is filled up: in the seventh year all his teethe are
filled up, and no hollownes any longer to be seen: after which time, no
judgment of his age by his teeth is any more to be had: there are some yt take
upon them to tell his age bye the Joints of his tail, after the mark is out
of his mouth. Palladius shows, that a Horse when he begins too be old,
his temples wax hollow, his eye bryes gray, and his teeth long. Aristotle
says, that the age of all fourfooted beasts may be known by the skin of
their Jaws: for if it be pulde up and presently let fall again, if it fall
smoothe, it declares a young beast, if it lie in wrinkles, it shows he is
old. A Horse lives commonly xx. years, some thirty, or forty, and also to
fifty, as Aristotel says, if he be of a good disposition and well dye^ed, it
is said there have been Horses that have lived 75. years, the Mare lives not
so long as the Horse, nor the Stallion, so long as the Horse that is not
suffered to run amongst Mares: the Mare leaves growing at five year old,
and the Horse at six or seven.


EVPHOR. What time think you best for covering of Mares.


HIPPO. In the spring, after the twelfth of March, I take to be the best,
after the spring in the rest of the year they are to be kept from the Horse,
for hurting of the Horse: for the Mare, after she has conceived, suffers the
Horse no more, but beats and strikes him with her heels, yet in most places,
they suffer their Stallions to run with their Mares all the frowner long,
and take it to be the best way, for answering the Mares desire, for many times
the Mare will not abide the Horse till somer time, or August, and the August
Colt proves commonly very fair. Although the Colts that are foled in the
spring, are not to be desired, because they run all the year with their
dammes in good pasture, and therefore it is best at that time to put the Mare to
the Horse, for these creatures specially, if you restrain the^, are most
enraged with lust, whereas came at the first the name of that dedly poison
Hippomanes, because it stirred up a fleshly affection, acording to the burning
desire of (...), which grows in the forhed of the Colte, of ^he (...) of a
sigge, and black, which the damme does (...), as soon as she has foled,
byte of: and if she be prevented, she neither loves the Colt, nor suffers him
to suck, (...) is to be doubted, but that the Mares in some country^s so burn
with lust, as though they have not the Hor^e, with their own fervent desire
they conceive and bring forth after the manner of Birds, as the Poet notes. In
fu^iu^ lust the Ma^e exceeles all other beasts that be.
It has been said, that in Spain^ Mares have conceived with the wind, and
brought up their Colts, but the Colts have not lived above three years.
Aristotle writes, that a Mares desire is quenched by shearing of her mane.


EVPHOR. What if the Mare will not take the Horse, is there no means to make
him?


HIPPO. There are that rub her tail with sea onyons, nettles, or madder, and
so provoke her to lust, some time a skuruy Jade is put to her, who when he has
gotten her good will, is straight removed, and a better Horse, put in place. If
the Horse be to slothful, his currage is stirred up by wyping her tail with
a sponge, and rubbing it about his nose. If we would have a Horse Coult, we
knitte the left stone of the Horse with a cord, and for a Mare the right. The
like is to be observed almost in all other beasts.


EVPHOR. How often must she be Horsed after she take.


HIPPO. They take not all alike, some are sped at once, some twice, some more.
It is laid, a Mare will not suffer above fifteen times in the year: being
often times satisfied with fewer. They must be put to the Horse at times twice
a day, in the morning, and at night, when they are sped, it appears by
refusing and striking at the Horse. They say, there is amongst these beasts a
great regard of kindred, and that you can hardly force the Colt to Horse the
damme: for proof whereof they report, that where as a certain horsekeeper
did make his Horse, by covering his eyes, to cover his damme, the cloth being
pulled away, when he saw what he had done, he ran upon his keeper and slew him:
as soon as she is covered, the Mare must out of hand be beaten, and forced to
run, least she loose that she has received. Surely a Mare of all other
beasts, after her covering, does run either southward, or northwarde,
according as she has conceived either Horse Coult or Mare Could: her color
also does change and become brighter, which when they perceive, they oste^her
the Horse no more. Some after a few days if they douther, offer ye Horse
again, and if she refuse and strik (as I said before) they judge she has
conceived.


EVP. Must they be covered every year?


HIPPO. Such is our covetousness, as we seek to have them bear every year:
but if you will have good Coltes, let your Mares go to Horse but every other
year, so shall they well answer your desire, howebeit the common use is every
year.


EVP. We see asses sometimes to cover mares commonly, and thereof is engendered
the moyle, and foled in the xii. month, as shall be said hereafter. Some say
it is best to cut the mane of the mare that shall be covered of the Ass, though
others hold opinion that it shall abate her lust. The mares that be with
foale, must be well looked unto, and put in good pasture. And if through the
cold of winter, pasture be wanting, they must be kept in the house, and
neither labored nor ias^ed up and down, nor suffered to take cold, nor to be
kept to many in a straight rome, for casting of their foales, for all these
inconveniences will hasard their foales, yet too travail them moderatly, will
do them rather good then harm, for to long rest will cause them to be
restife, and to tyer sooner. Aristotle writes, that the Sithians did use to
travail their Mares great with fool after the time they began to stir,
supposing their foling should be the easier, but good heed must be taken,
that their bellies be not hurt with any thing while they are with fool, but if
so be the mare be endanger, either in casting her fool, or in foling, the
remedy is, Poilipo^y stamped, mingled with warm water, and given with a horn:
it is said that the smell of a Candell snuff causes them to cast their
foles: you must every year ouersee your Mares, and such as be unprofitable or
barrayne, must be put away, for from their first foling, they are not too be
kept above ten years, at which time they are lustly eynough, and may be well
sold, but so will they not be after: The young foales are not to be handled
with the hand, for they are hurt with the lyghtest touch that may be. It must
be seen unto, that if the Mare be horsed, there be room enough for her and
her fool, and that the place be warm enough, that neither the could harm it,
nor the damme ouerlye it, and therefore the place must be well chosen, that
is, neither to hot, nor to cold, and afterward by little, you must bring up
the Colte: when it grows to be something strong, it must be put to pasture
with the Mare, least the Mare receive hurt, by the absence of it: for chiefly
this beast of all others, most estemeth her young, and if she be kept from it,
takes harm: the fool that lackes his damme, is often brought up, of other
Mares that have Coltes: the Mare must go in very good pasture, that the Colte
may have store of milk. Being five months old, when you bring them into
house, you must seed them with barley flower and branne: at a tweluemoneth
old, you must either put them into good pasture, or feed them with branne,
chafe, and hay. Varro will not have you to weane them, till they be two years
old: and though I like not too soon weaning, yet we use commonly to weane them
at five or six months old, and to let them run in good pasture, which
custom proves not amiss. Moreover as long as they run with the damme, you
shall do well to handell them now and then, least, when they be put from the
damme, they wax wild: they must be tought to be gentill, and not only to abide
a man, but to covet his company, and not to be afraid at every strange sight,
nor at every noise but to come to it. Xenophon says, we must (as men) provide
skoolmasters for our chi^dren, so likewise teachers for our Horses, and appoint
how we will have them broken: for as their service is diverse, so must be their
breaking. But hereof we shall speak more hereafter, when we entreat of
horsmanship, and breaking of Horses: only now we will deal with those that
suck, and serve for the Plow. To make them gentler, the bridles, and other
horse harneyes, must be hanged by them, that they may the better be acquainted
with them, both with the sight, and the gingling. Now when they be well tamed,
and will suffer to be handled, Varro would have you lay a boy groueling upon
them twice, or thrice, and after to bestride them, and this he would have
done, when they be three year old, for then they grow most, and begin to be
great brawned. There be that think a Horse may begin to be handled at a year
and a half old, and Varro, at three year old, when their prouender is given
them: but we use commonly after two years to labor them gently, first in
harrowing of new plowed land, which is good both for their foot, and their
pace, and also with Plowing, and such like exercise, whereby we use to acquaint
the^ with cold and heat, in drawing together. It must be seen to, that they be
even matched, least the stronger spoil the weaker, while he dreadeth the
rating, and whipping. Horses take less harm with drawing, then with bearing.
Thus must they be used to reasonable travail, by reason whereof, they will be
the harder, and not so lightly take harm: but herein must be great discresion.


EVPH. What say you to Geldings? for in these parts we use Geldings most.


HIPPO. They serve for some purpose, but he that will have a good g^lding, must
g^ld (as they say) a good Horse, they are cut at a year old and elder: I my
self have cut them at five year old, and six year old: in cutting they
loose their stomach, you must look that they be in good plight when you cut
them, for as they are at their cutting, they commonly continue. The Mares also
use to be spayed, but not often, and with great danger.


EVPH. What manner of stable would you have, for I have sometimes heard, that
the stable is of great importance?


HIPPO. Stables.
Your stable must be buylt in a dry place, for wetting the Horses hoof, which
you shall avoid, if you planke it with good oken plankes, or (which Xenophon
would rather have you do) with round pauing stone, keeping it always clean
from doung, and straw, and after laying fresh litter, so as they stand hard,
and ly soft. Xenophon would have the stable so placed, as it may always be in
ye masters eye, and to be lightsome, least the Horse being used to the dark,
his eye dasel at the light. Some think they will be the gentler, if they be
used to the light, and the fayrer, if they have ye sun at his rising in somer
time: let as mutch air come to them both day and night as you can. In winter,
your stable should rather be warm, then hot, and therefore your stable must
stand toward the south, but so as the windows may open toward the North, which
being kept shut in winter, may be warm, and opened in somer, you may let in
the cool air.


EVPH. The like we use in our ox stalles.


HIPPO. Besides, whereas the bodies of Cattle, have need of rubbing as well as
men's bodies, for many times it does the Horse as much good to be stroked down
the back with your hand, as to feed him. Curriyng.
The Horse is to be continually curryed in the morning, at night, and after his
labor. In currying of them we must begin at the head, and the neck: for it is
a vain thing to make clean the lower parts, and leave the other foul. It is
good also to observe due times for his feeding, his watering, and his travail.
Thus much of his exercise. Now follows to speak of his diet: and because we
have spoken before of his pasture, Diet.
we must also say sumwhat of his other feding. The better a man would have his
Horse to prove, the better must he look to his meat, for the good feeding
(the country people say) is a great help to the goodness of the Horse. If the
Horse be young (as I said before of Coltes) he must be fed with grass, chafe,
and hay: if he be elder and mete to travail, his food must be the dryer, as
Chafe, Barley, Oats, and Hay. Chafe does not so well nourish, by reason of
y^ dryness, but it keeps the body in good plight: and because hard meat is
hardest of digestio^, it is therefore to be given to those that labor. The
stock or studde, must be pastured in large pastures and marshes, as also upon
mountains and hilly grounds, but ever well watered, not dry, rather champion
then woddy, and rather soft sweet grass, then hye and flaggy: if y^ pasture
be too short, they sooner wear their foreteeth, and are toothlesse before
their full age. And where as every kind of Creature is naturally moist, a Horse
ought cheefely (whether he be young, or old) to be fed with moist pasture, for
y^ better conseruatio^ of his natural temprature. Some would have you in no
wise to give your Horse grass in the spring time, but in June, or the fall of
the leaf: they would have you give them grass with the deaw upon it, and in
the night season Oats, Barley, and Hay. Howbeit, in y^ colder countries in
Germany, France, and England, where the pasture is very good, they doubt not to
skowre their Horses with green grass, Skovvring.
and weeds of the meddowes: and in the chotter countries, they do the like with
green blades of wheat, or barley. Some use to give the^ Aples shared in
pieces, to skoure the^ withal: and thus much of skouring of Horses. Generally
who so ever will have his Horse helthy, and a^le to endure travail, let him
feed his Horse with Oats, mingled with chafe or straw, so shall he be
temperatly and well fed, and if so he labor much, give him the more Oats. His
meat must be given him as some think best, in a low manger, set so low, as
they are forced to eat their meat with some difficulty or travail, which
they say is to make them bend their necks: by which exercise both the head,
and the neck grows bigger, and they will be the easier to be bridled:
besides, they will be the stronger, by reason of the hard setting of the
forefeete. Howbeit, in some places, they use hie standing mangers: after what
sort so ever they be, they must always be kept clean, and well swept before
you cast in their meat. Their prouender though diverse Horscorsers, Prouender.
yt live by sale of Horse, do feed them with sodden Rye, or beanemeale sodde,
pampering them up, that they may be the fayrer to the eye: yet is it not good
^oode to labor with. The best prouender that is, is Oats, and for def^w^e of
them, Barley: you must beware you give them neither Wheat, Ric, or any dry
pulse: their prouender must be given them rather often, and lit^ell, then once
or twyse a day in great porc^ons, least you glu^te them therewith: they are
used to be fed commonly ^iue times a day, when they stand in the stable, keeping
an equal number of hours between y^ times: when they travail you may give
them meat seldomer, but in greater quantity, and if their iournies be, long
they must have prouender besides in the night, always remembryng (as I said)
that you gl^^^e them not. The better a Horse feeds, the better will he
labor: you must also beware that you give him no prouender, neither Oats nor
Barley, after any great labor, till he be through cold: notwithstanding you
may give him a little hay to cool his mouth. The hay must be sweet and well
made, and (...) shaken, before it be cast in the rack: and specially seen
too, that there be no feathers of any foul amongst it. If the (...) very
hot after his labor, let him be well covered, and softly walked till he be
cold, before you set him up: when he is s^^ up, (...) him well, le^^t the
coldness of the ground st^^ke into him: in any wise wash him not when he is
hot, but when he is through cold, water him, and wash him, wiping him dry
when you bring him in. If the Horse forsake his meat, some use to stamp
Garlike and Pepper, and to give it him, rubbing his teeth well, till his
stomach come to him: some would have a cloute wette in salt water tied upon a
stick, and thrust into his Jaws. In watring, you must look well unto him,
for (as Aristotle says) beasts do feed, and are nourished the bet^e^, if
they be well watered. Horses and Camels, do love best to drink a thick
troubled water, in so much as if y^ water be clear, they will trouble it with
their ^ecte: For the most Bullockes again desire a fair clear water, and
(...). The same Aristotle also affirms, that a Horse may suffer thyrst^ 4.
days without drink. Varro wylles you to water your Horses twyse a day, which
order we observe, that is, once in the morning, and again in the afternone:
but in winter, if they drink but once a day, it suffiseth: before you water
him, he must be well rubbed, and then led into the water up to the knees,
specially if he be lean, if he be fat, he may go the de^per.
Notwithstanding, there are some that hold opinnion, they ought not to go so
deep, as their stones touch the water, specially if the Horse be young. After
March, and the spring, it is very good to ride them up and down in some
River, which will exercise their legs, for the water dries the legs, and
restrains the humors from falling down, and keeps them from windgalles: as
soon as they come from the water, you must with a little straw wipe them
clean, for the dampe of y^ stable causes inflammation in the Horses legs
that be wette. The water (acording to Vegetius his mind) would be clear, and
springing, other like it a little running and troubled in a clay ground: for
this water, by reason of the thickness and fatness, does better nourishe and
feed the Horse, then the swyft running stream: yet those Horses that are used
to the swyft and clear Rivers, are commonly the stronggest and best trauaylers,
and therefore it would be well considered how the Horse has been accustomed:
the colder ye waters are, the less they nourish, the deeper a Horse drinks,
the fatter he proves: and therefore some Horscoursers use to wash their Horses
mouths, first with water, and after to rub them with salt, to give them an
appetite to their meat and their drink.


EVPHOR. I pray you let us here some remedies for Horses diseases, for (as
Aristotle says) a Horse has as many diseases as a man.


HIPPO. As touching diseases in a Horse, it is better to prevent them by good
heed taking, and (as Vegetius says) to be more careful in keeping a Horse
helthy, then when he is sick to cure him: which health you shall continue with
ease, if you will observe those things, touching his diet, his stable, and his
labor, that I have told you of before. Who so ever will have a good Horse, and
keep him in good estate, must often times see him, come to him, handel him,
and stroke him: for that both makes him gentill, and geues him a fair coat:
and be still mindful of the old proverb, the Masters eye makes a fat
Horse, and to be short, to have him so still in his sight, as he rather want
his own meat, then his Horse should: for he that neclecteth his Horse,
neclecteth him self. To let him have moderate exercise, and to ride him now
and then (if the weather be fair) into the Feelde, will do him great good: the
morning is better to labor him in then the euenyng, neither must you in
Winter, or in Summer ouerlabour him, for being in a sweat, and after taking
cold, he falls into dangerous diseases. And therefore remember what I
said, that where so ever you have labored him, or rydden him, be sure you
cover him with some cloth, and walk him softly, that he may be cold, before he
either be suffered to eat, or drink: when he is cold, he may be led to the
water, and washed: so as when you bring him into the stable, you lytter him
well, and throwly rub him, and so give him meat. If he be over trauayled,
the only remedy is rest, and after his sweating, to wash his mouth in Summer
with water and vinegar, in Winter with brine: for the neclecting of these
things, has been the destruction of many a good Horse. Also, to power into
his mouth wine and oil, in Summer cold, in Winter warm (as Vegetius
teaches) and as we find by experience, is very good: for it is commonly
seen, that a tired Horse (if necessity forces a further journey) with
pouring in a quart of good wine, will travail lustyly. You must not suffer
your Horse to drink after his journey, till he be cold: howbeit, if he sweat
not to extremely, and be rydden soon after, it is not so dangerous: it is
far better to let him thyrst, then to give him cold water if he be hot. If
a Horse have long rested, he is not to be trauayled upon the sudden, either in
galloping, or long journey, but to be labored fair and softly at the first. A
Horse that is weery, or tired, wylbe woonderfully refreasshed, so as it would
seem he had never been trauayled, if he may wallow him self either in the
stable, or other dry place out of the wind and rain, and therefore Xenophon
would have near unto every stable, a place meet for their wallowing, wherein
after their iourneyes, they may tumble them selves: for in so doing, they
show they are in health, and refreashe them selves. You must look diligently
that they be well looked to at night, and that after their sweat, they be well
rubbed and curried, and that they be not disquieted when they should rest. In
Winter, they would be clothed with Woollen for taking of cold, and in Summer
with Camias, to keep them from flies. You must beware, that you journey them
not long without staling, but after you have trauayled an hour, or such a
thing, provoke them to stale (by ryding them out of the way) into some place
where sheep have dounged, or into some hie Grass, Fern, or Stubble, which
order was continually observed, by the best dyeter of Horses that ever I knew
in England, one Henry King, who having charge of that most worthy Gentleman's
Horses, sir Thomas Chalenour, carried a fair company of Geldinges from London,
to the Court of Spain, who notwithstanding their long journey through France,
and the painful passage of the Piremies, by ye skillful diligence of their
keeper, came thither in as good plight, as they came out of England. And if so
be you see he can not stale, or staleth with pain, you must bathe him with
bath appointed for cold, that is, oil mingled with wine powered upon his
loins: also a Louse put into his yard, or Soap put into his fundament, has
been seen to help him. If this do not help, you must squirt in Honey boiled
thin with Salt into his yard. Some would have the licour of the lyme
Bitumen squirted in: Aeliomus writes, that the Horse that can not stale, is
presently remedied, if so be a maid strike him upon the face with her gyrdell,
the feet (which is the cheifest matter in a Horse) you shall always keep
sound: if as I told you before, your stable be well paued with round stone, or
well plancherd and kept clean: which done, you must stop his hoofes with Cow
doung, or for want thereof with Horse doung watered, and the legs must be often
rubbed with a strawen wispe. To cause the hoof to grow, or to repair the
broken hoof, take of Garlic heads seven ounces, of Hearbegrace three
handfulles, of Allome beaten and sifted, seven ownces, of Barrowes grease very
old two powndes, mingle all these with a handful of Asses doung, boil them,
and annoint the hoofes therewith. After their journey, see you search their
feet well, suffering no grauel, nor filth to remain therein, you shall well
refreashe their hoofes with the ointment aforesaid. The joints, or the
pasternes, would be well bathed after their travail with warm wine, or an
egg or two would be thrust into their howfes, the legs them selves would be
washed, with warm beer, or some like bath. If the Horse thrust out one of his
feet, and stand not even, it is a sign of some fault in the foot: the Horse
halteth, either by reason of the spoiling of his hoof in journey, or by ill
showing, or by unwholesome humors fallen down, by long standing in ye stable,
or by windgalles. If the fault be in the showing, strike upon the head of every
nail with the hammer, and when you perceive him to shrink, pluck out that
nail, or power upon the hoof cold water, and that nail that is first dry,
pluck out: if it matter, squeese it out, and power in Pitch well sodden with
old Swynes grease: you must also speedely open his hoof below, that the
matter (if it be full of corruption) may descend, least it break out above the
hoof, and so cause a longer time of healing. The signs of it be, if he hold
up his foot, which if you do pare him to the quick, and where you perceive
it to look black, open it, and let out the matter: if he be hurt inward, and
stands but on his toe, it shows the fault to be in his hoof: but if he
tread equally with his foot, it declares the grief to be some other where,
then in his hoof: if in his haulting he bow not his joints, it is a sign
the sore is in the joints. For all halting generally, mingle Hemp with the
white of an egg, and stop the foot withal, and after clap on the show: if
it be a wound, put herein the powder of Oystershelles, and Uerdegrease to dry
it up, or the white of an egg, with Soote and Uineger. The Cratches (as they
commonly call them) is a malady that happens betwixt the Pastornes and the
Hoof, in the manner of a skabbe, and is engendered of the dampes of the stable,
while he stands wette legged: the remedy whereof, is all one with the pains,
which is likewise a s^raunce breeding about the joints, breaking the skin,
and m^ttring: taking away the hear, wash the sore with warm B^ece, or with
the broth wherein is sodden Mallows, Brimstone, and Sheep suet, which must
be bound about the sore place morning and evening, or else Sheep suet, Goats
suet, Swines grease, Uerdegrease, and quick Brimstone, Bolearmeniacke, and
Soap, boiled and made in ointment, wherewith you shall anoint y^ sore twyse a
day, washing it first with warm wine, and after it is dried annoint it, in the
mean time keep him out of the water: the lees of wine is also sometime used in
the curing of the Cratches. Windgalles, which are swellings, and risinges in
the legs, are cured with cutting, and burning: some think they may be
restrained and cured by rideing the Horse oftentimes up and down in some cold
and swyft stream, also by washing his legs with Salt, Uineger, Swynes
grease, and Oil, wrapping them up certain days, or by launcing, or
skarrifiyng they are cured: the outward sores are healed by burning. If the
back be wrong with the saddell, or otherwise hurt that it swell, Vegetius
would have you to sees Onyons in water, and when they be so hot as the Horse
may suffer, to lay them upon the sore, and bind them fast, which will assuage
the swelling in one night. Item salt beaten and meddled with Uineger, putting to
it the yoke of an Egg, laid upon the swelling, will heal it: besides,
Arssmart stamped and laid to, does presently assuage the swelling. If the
back be galled, wash it with Beer and Butter, or cast upon it the powder of
a Lome wall. There is a dis^ase that is common in Horses, called the Uynes,
which if he have, turn down his ear, and lance the sore at the root of the
ear, and take out the matter: but take good heed you cut not the vain that
lies a little above. If a Horse have been set up hot after his journey, and in
his heat has been watered, or taken cold, which the Germans call Verfaugen,
in English foundred, or in some places fraide: the remedy, is the skin of a
Weesel cut in small pieces, fresh butter, a rotten egg and vinegar mingled
together, and powered into the Horse with a horn: after which, let him stand
covered with a wet cloth, till he wax hot. A present, and assured cure for
this disease, I learned not long agone, of that honest, wise, and valiant
Gentleman, captain Nicholas Malbee, in whom there wants nothing belonging to
a woorthi soldier, his medecin was this: Garter each leg immediately one
handful above the knee with a list, good and hard, and then walk him, to
chafe him, and put him in a heat, and being somewhat warmed, let him blood in
both the breast veins, and in the veins of the hinder legs, between the
hoof, and the Pastorne, reserving the blood to make a charge withal in this
manner. Take of that blood two quartes, and of Wheat meal, as it comes from
the Myll, half a pecke, and six eggs, shelles and all, of Bolearmeniacke
half a pound, of Sanguis Draconis half a quarterne, and a quarte of strong
vinegar: mingle them all tog^^^her, and charge all his shoulders, breast, back,
loins, and forelegges therewith, and walk him upon some hard ground: three
hours after, lead him into the stable, and let him stand tied two hours to
the rack, without meat or drink, and walk him then two or three hours
more, and then give him a little warm water, with ground Malt in it, and
after, a little Hay, and prouender, then walk him again upon the hardest
ground you can geat: you shall ride him the next day a mile, or two softly, and
so from day to day, until he be well, which will be within three or four days.
Rememember to let him stand y^ first day after his first walking, two hours in
water up to the belly: this medecin is infallible. The collicke, or pain in
the belly, is thought will be eased in a Horse, or Mule, only with the sight of
a Ducke, or any water foul. To keep your Horse from flies, it is good to
wash him over with the juice of the leaves of the Gourde in the mids of
Summer. Many times Horses are troubled with worms, or bots, which you shall
perceive, if they cast their look upon their belly, if they wallow oftentimes,
and strike their belly with their foot: the remedy, is Hearts horn, Sauine
beaten, and given him with a little vinegar in a horn. Columella would have
you rake the Horse with your hand, and after that you have plucked out the
doung, to wash his fundament with sea water, or brine. B^asanolus in his
Commentary upon Hippocrates, declares how he cured the Duke of Ferars Horse,
being in great danger with woormes, by giving them quick silver, and
Scordium, or water Germander, when no other med^ines would help. The Rhewine,
or distillation, makes a Horse slothful, dull, and faint, yet will he be led,
and rydden, and moderate labor is not amiss for him, let him drink warm
water with Wheat branne: the mo^e fylth he voydes at the mouth, the better
will it be for him. There are some diseases thought to be incurable, which if
the Horse had, and was sold, by the old laws he was to be turned back again,
except the bargain were otherwise: of which number are ye broken wineded, the
lunaticke, and the manginesse, called the farcine, which disease if it come
once to y^ stones, is thought incurable, to this they add the through Splen^:
some think yt broken winded is not to be cured, because it is like to the
consumption of the longs in a man, yet some hope of recovery there is, if it be
taken in time: for letting of blood in dry diseases, is against reason. But you
may annoint the hole body with Wine and Oil, mingled together and warmed, and
curry him against ye hear till he sweat, and give him this drink inward from
the first day: the iu^ce of Pisan, Swines grease clarified, and Amylum, in new
sweet wine, which being boiled together, you may give it him with a horn, to
open his pipes, and set him so as he stand warm. The lunaticke eyes, are cured
by letting him blood in the temple veins, bathing the eyes on ye outside with
some warm bath, and putting into them some strong water certain days, till
they be hole. For the manginesse, take the woormes called Cantharides, bea^ing
them, and mingle with them a little Uerdegrease, and so annoint them with it,
warming the body of the Horse with a fyrepan. Others use to wash him with
warm water twyse a day, and after, to rub him with Salt sodden in water,
till the matter come out. Above al other they say it excels, in the
beginning to anoint him with the fat of a Seal: if it have run long, you
must use stronger medicines, as Lime, Brimstone, Tar, old Swynes grease, of
each a like quantity, boiled together, and with a little oil made in an
ointment: they use to rub it also with the Soote of a Caldron. Against many
diseases both of Horses, and Bullockes, they use the root of the herb called
black Ellebor, of some Bearfoote, of others Setterwort, which they thrust in
the breast of the beast, betwixt the flesh and the skin, making a hole before
with a Bookine. Against all diseases of Horses, Vegetius commends this
medecin as the cheifest, Centory, Woormewood, Dog Fenell, wyld Time,
Sa^apen, Betony, Saxifrage, Aristolochia Rotunda, take of each alike, beat
them small, and sift them, and if the Horse have an ache, give it him with
water, if he be ferme, with good strong, Wine. The old husbands would not
suffer their Horses to be let blood, but upon great necessity, least being
used to it, if it should at any time be omitted, it should breed some disease:
and therefore in very young Horses, and such as be healthy, it is best not to
let them blood but in the roof of the mouth. For those that be come to their
full age, you may let them blood before you put them to pasture, but beware you
bear a steady hand, and strike them not too deep: Geldinges you shall not
need to let blood, the Horses of Barbary (as they say) never need any
medecin.


EVPHOR. You have spoken yenough of Horses, it is time you say something of
Asses.


HIPPO. Asses.
It is greatly out of order, but since you will needs have me so to do, I will
not stick with you to say what I can therein, that each of you may do the
like in his charge. Asses are commonly kept, yet not to be little set by,
because of their sundry commodities, and the hardness of their feedyng, for
this poor beast contents him self with what meat so ever you give him,
Thystels, Briars, Stalks, Chafe, wherefore every country has store, is good
meat with him: besides, he may best abide the ill looking to of a necligent
keeper, and able to sustain blows, labor, hunger, and thyrst, being seldom,
or never sick, and therefore of al other cattle longest endures: for being a
beast nothing chargeable, he serves for a number of necessary uses: in
carrying of burdens, he is comparable to the Horse, he draws the Cart (so the
lode be not unreasonable:) for grinding in the Mill he passes all others,
therefore in the country the Ass is most needeful for carrying of things to
the market, and Corn to the Myll. In Egypt and Barbary (where the ground is
very light) they have also their use in plowing: and the fine Ladies of the
country do ride upon Asses richely furnished: yea, they be very apt to be
taught, so as at this day in Alcayre you shall have them dance very manerly,
and keep measure with their Musician. Varro makes mention of two sorts, one
wild, whereof in Phrigia and Lycaonia there are great store: the wild Asses
that are tamed, are passing good, specially for breed, and they are easily
broken: the other is tame, of which I mean to speak. The best are brought out
of Arcadia (although Varro seems to commend the breed of Italy for
goodness.) He that will have a breed of Asses, must have the male and the
female both of reasonable age, large bodyed, sound, and of a good kind: the
male must be at the least three year old, for from three, till they be ten,
they be fyt for breeding: they bring forth their Coltes sometimes at two
years and a half, but three years is the best age: the female goes as long
with her burden as the Mare, and discharges in all respects as she does: but
she will not very well reteyne, except she be forced immediately after the
horsyng to run about, she seldom brings forth two. When she foaleth, she
gets her into some dark place, and keeps her self from being seen. They
will bear all their life time, which (as Aristotle says) is thirty years:
they are put to the Horse a little before the tenth of June, and bear every
other year: they bring forth their Fool at the twelfth month. While they be
with Fool, they must not be greatly labored, for hazarding their Fool: the
male must never be idle, for he is as lecherous as the devil, and by rest will
wax naught. The Colt is suffered to run with the damme the first year, and the
next is gently tied up with her, only in the night times: the third year they
are broken, according to their use. The damme does woonderfully love her young
so much, as she will not stick to come through the fire to it: but the water
she dare in no wise come near, no not to touch it with her foot, neither
will she drink in any strange water, but where she is used to be watered, and so
as she may go and stand dry foot. They delight to be lodged in wide rooms,
and are troubled with fearful dreams in their sleeps, whereat they so pawe
with their legs, yt if they lie near any hard thing, they hurt their feet:
in drinking, they scarsely touch the water with their lips (as it is
thought) for fear of wetting their goodly ears, whose shadows they see in
their drinking: no beast can worse away with cold then this. If your Asses
halt at any time, you shall thus remedy the^, wash all the foot with warm water,
and afterward make them clean with a sharp knife, which when you have done,
take old chamber lie, as hot as may be, and melt therein Goats suet: or if you
have not y^, Ox tallow, and anoint al ye feet til they be hole.


EVPH. They say, that betwixt an Ass, and a Mare, is gotten the Moyle, as a
third kind, of two sundry kind, neither resembling the father, nor the mother.


HIPPO. It is very true: as of the she Ass, and the Horse, is engendered the
she Moyle, Moyles.
but altogether stubborn, and unreasonable dull. Also of the Mare, and the
wyld Ass, being broken, are bredde Moyles that run passing swy^tly, and are
wonderful hard hoofed, but rugged of their body, and mischeuous stomaked, yet
easy to be handled: the Mares for breed, must not be under four years, nor
above ten: they are faied in the twelfth month, as Horses and Asses are (as
Aristotle says): but Columella says, their foling time is not before the.13.
month. The female conceaueth (as experience teaches) assuredly after the
seventh day: the male does never better horse, the^ when he is most tired. She
yt conceaueth not before she has cast her coltes teeth, is taken to be
barraine, as she likewise yt takes not at the first horsing. Those that are
gotten betwixt a Horse and an Ass in old time, were called Neyars, and such
as were brought forth betwixt an Ass and a Mare, they called Moyles. The
Moyles them selves (they say) do never engender: and if at any time they did,
it was taken for monstrous, accounting the cause of their barr^nnesse, y^
contrariety of their kinds: which matter a long time troubled both Aristotle,
and the rest of the Philosophers. Though Aristotle has other where written,
that Moyles do both engender, and bring forth: and with him agrees
Theophrastus, affirming, y^ in Capadocia, they do commonly bring forth, and
engender of themselves. The like does Varro, and before him Dionysius, and Mago
affirm, that the breeding of Moyles in the countries of A^fryk, is neither
monstrous, nor geason, but as common as our breed of Horses: but the Moyle is
both fayrer and better stomaked, that is begotten of an Ass, and a Mare. The
Stallion that you mean to have for your race of Moyles, must be as fair as
you can geat, having only this regard, that he be large of body, big
necked, broad, and strong ribbed, large, and braw^y brested, his thyghes full
of synowes, and his legs well knitte, of color black, and spotted: for
Asses (though they be commonly dunne) yet that color agrees not well with a
Moyle: some say, that what color you would have your Moyle to be, with that
colored cloak you must cover your Ass. The Ass so proportioned (as I have
declared) that you mean to appoint for your Stallion, you must strayghtwayes
take from his damme, and put him to some Mare that has a Colt sucking of her:
you shall easily deceive the Mare, by setting her in a dark place, removing
her own Colt from her, and putting to her in steed thereof the Asses Colt,
which she will nurse as her own. Afterward, when the Mare has been used to
it a ten days, she will continually after y^ time give it suck. The Ass
being in this order brought up, will better acquaint him self with the Mares,
sometimes though he be sucked only with his own damme, being brought up when
he is young amongst Mares, will well yenough keep company with them (as
Columella says:) but our Asses are of themselves desirous yenough of the
Mares, that they need not to be trained to the matter: for it is a woonderful
Coltishe beast, and unreasonably weapned. He must not be less the^ three
years old when he covers your Mares, which must be in the spring time, when
you may well feed him with grass, and good store of Oats, and Barley: neither
must you put him to a young Mare, for if she have not been horsed before, she
will so beat her woer, y^ she will make him like the worse as long as he lives:
for remedy whereof, you must at y^ first put to the Mare a vilder Ass, y^ may
woe her before, but not suffered to Horse her, and when you perceive y^ she is
Horsing, away with y^ rascal, and put to your Stalion. A place fit for this
purpose, ye country people (as Columella says) were wont to have, which they
called a frame, or a brake, with two rayles on both sides, and a little
distance between, y^ the Mare can not strive nor turn from y^ Horse: the lower
part enclosed, and the Mare standing low, so the Ass may the better leap
her, having the upper ground for his help, which when she has conceived, and
at the twelve months end brought forth, the year after she must be suffered to
run empty, that she may the better bring up her Colte. The she Moyle (being a
tweluemonth old) must be taken from the dam, and let run upon mountains, or
wild places, for the hardening of his hoofes, and the better enduring of
labor, for the Male is y^ better for burden, and the Female the quicker and
liuelier: both the kinds does travail well, and till the ground, if the
plowman be not unreasonable, or the ground so stiff, as it requires a
drawght of Oxen, or Horse. They will leave striking and kicking, if you use to
give them wine (as Pliny reports) who likewise writes, that a Moyle will
live fourscore years.


EVPH. Since you have begun with trauayling beasts, what can you say of the
Cammell.


HIP. Cammelles.
The Camel is cheefely used in ye East parts, which some suppose to be the
seruisablest cattle for man that is, and as it were thereunto only framed: for
he is bumbast upon y^ back for bearing of burdens. Also, he has four knees,
where as ye Horse, the Ass, and such others have but two: for his hinder
legs bow forward as a man's knees does, wherewith he kneeleth to receive his
burden. There are two kinds of them, y^ Bactrian, and the Arabian, the
Bactrian have two bunches upon their backs, and the Arabian but one, and the
other on their breast to lean upon, both sorts of them lack their teeth
above, as y^ Bullock does: they al serve in those countries for burden, and to
carry men in y^ wars: they are as swyft as Horses, but some a great deal more
then others: neither will they break their pace, nor carry more burdens then
they are used to: they bear a natural hatred to the Horse, and can forbear
drink for four days: he drinks when he may, both for that is past, and to
come, troubling the water before with his foot, otherwise he delights not in
it: he is fed beside his pasture, and such things as he gettes in the woodde,
with Oats, or Barley, and Salt: he engenders backward, as the Elephantes,
Tigers, Lions, Connies, and such other, whose instruments grow backward, when
they mean to go to rutte, they seek the secretest and desartest places that
may be: neither may a man at any time come near them, without great danger.
They go with young a tweluemonth, and are meet for breed at three years
old, and after a year they conceive again: they bear but one at once, as
Elephants, and other great beasts do: they give milk, till they be great.
Again, (as Aristotle says) Didymus in his books of husbandry writes, that
the Camel has a regard to his blood, as the Horse has, and lies neither
with mother, nor sister. And the female Camel of Bactria, feeding upon the
mountains amongst the wild Boares, is often times breamed of the Boar, and
conceaueth. Of the Boar and the she Camel, is ingendered the Camel with two
iompes upon the back, as the Moyle is of the Ass, and the Mare, and in diverse
things resembles his sire, as in bristled hears, strength, and not fainting
in the mire, but going lustely through, and in carrying double so much as other
Cammelles, as the same aucthour says. The females of them are spayde, to serve
the better for the wars: they live (as Aristotle says) fyftie years, others
say a hundred years, and are subject to madness (as Pliny says) there are a
kind of them called Camelleopards, that have the resemblance of two diverse
beasts, the hoofes and hinder legs like an Ox, his forelegges and his head
like the Cammell, the neck like a Horse, being flecked white and read. Strabo
says, he is colored like a fallowe Dear, straight necked, and hye, like an
Ostryge, his head something higher then a Cammels.


EVPHOR. I remember I have seen the like beast for all the world in a piece of
tapestry with black Moors, with their wives and baggage upon their backs,
save that they had there little horns upon their heads, like as some sheep
have. I think Heliodorus in his Ethiopian story, did first describe this
beast, but these outlandishe beasts we meddle not much with.


HIPPO. Go to EVPHORBVS, let us now see you discharge your part, according to
your promise, and tell us some part of your cunnyng in keeping your cattle:
for next to the Horse in woorthynesse, comes the Ox.


EVPHOR. Bullockes.
Since it is so appointed, I am contended to show you what I can say touching
my poor skill: and first, I may not suffer the Horse to challenge the chief
place, when the old writers and ancient people did always give the garland
and chief praise to the Ox, as to a good plowman and faithful servant: for
Hesiodus, a most ancient writer, and the grauest aucthour of our profession
affyrmeth, that the famely does consyst of the husband, the wife, and the Ox.
The self same by his authority does Aristotle seem to allege in his
Pollytickes, and in his Economickes, which beast was always of that honor and
estimation, that he was condemned in a great penalty, who so ever did kill him,
being a fellow, and chief helper in our husbandry. By the worthiness of this
beast, many great things received their names of them: for of the number,
beauty, and fertility of Heyfars, did Italy (as they say) first take his name,
because Hercules pursued the noble Bull called Italus. This is the chief
companion of man in his labors, and the trusty servant of the Goddess Ceres:
in many great things for the royalty of the Ox, they derived their names
from the Ox, as in calling also the Grape Bumammam: in fine, Jupiter him self
thought good to convert into this shape his sweet darling Europa. Moreover, of
a rotten Steer are engendered the sweet Bees, the mothers of H^ny, wherefore
they were called of the Greeks (as Varro says) (...). The same Varro makes
four degrees in their age: the first of Calves, the second two Yeerynges, the
third Steeres, the fourth Oxen, the Sexes: in the first, the Bulcalfe, and the
Cowecalfe: in the second, the Heyfar, and the Steer: in the third and fourth,
the Bull, and the Cow: the barraine Cow he calls Tauram, the milch Cow^
Hordam, from whence came the feasts called Hordica festa, because the milchkine
were then sacrifised. The goodness of this beast is diverse, according to the
diversity of the country: the best were counted in the old time to be of the
breed of Albania, Campania, and Toscam: at this day we take the best kind to
be in Hungary, Burgundy, Frisland, Denmark, and in England. Of Bullockes, some
are for ye drawght, some for the staull, and some for the payle: to what
purpose so ever they serve, whether it be for labor, for milcking, or for
feeding, it is best always to chose such as are young, of lusty age, rather
then those that are old and barraine, the words of covenant in the old time
(as Varro says) in selling of Bullocks, were these: do you warrant these
Bullockes, or Steeres, that you sell to be sound, of a sound heard, and without
fault? The Butchers that bye for slaughter, and such as by for sacryfises, use
no word of warrantise: and though some Bullocks are chosen by their strength,
some by the greatness of their body, yet the best commonly have these
properties: large, well knit, and sound lyms, a long, a large, and deep sided
body, black horned, though in the color there be no great matter, yet some
mislike the white for their tenderness, which when Varro consents, who
would have them broad forheaded, great eyed and black, his ears rough and
heary, his chawes to be large and wide, his lips blackish, his neck well
brawned, and thick, his dewlappes large, hanging down from his neck to his
knees, his showlders broad, his hyde not hard, or stubborn in feeling, his
belly deape, his legs well set, full of synowes, and straight, rather short
then long, the better to sustain the weight of his body, his knees straight
and great, his feet one far from the other, not broad, nor turning in, but
easily spreading, the hear of all his body thick and short, his tail long,
and big heared. Palladius thincketh, the best time for bying of drawght Oxen,
to be in March, when being bare, they can not easily hide their faults, by the
fraud of the seller, nor by reason of their weakness be to stubborn to be
handled. It is best to bye them of your neighbor, least the change of air and
soil hurt them: for the Bullock that is brought up nere home, is better then
the stranger, because he is neither troubled with change of air, water, nor
pasture: if you can not have them near you, bye them from some like country,
or rather from a harder, and be well assured that you bye them even matched,
lest in their labor, the strongger spoil the weaker. Look besides that they
be gentell, skillfull in their labor, fearful of the goade, and the driuer,
not dreading any water, or bridge: great feeders, but softly, and not
ouerhastyly: for such do best digest their meat. In choosing of Bulle, or
Kine, the very like signs are to be required, that the Bull differs from the
Ox, in that he has a more frowning and fierce look, shorter horns, greater,
and thicker neck so big, as it seems the greatest part of his body, his
belly something gaunter, and meeter for Bulling of Kine. The Bull before he be
suffered to go with the Kine, must be well fed with grass, chafe, or hay,
and kept severally by him self, neither must he go to the Cow, till the
tenth of June. Varro would not suffer him before the rising of the Lira: but
Aristotle would have him all the reddring time to go in pasture with the
Kine. The Cow likewise would be hie of stature, and long bodied, having great
vdders, broad forheade, fair horns, and smoothe, and all other tokens almost
that is required in the Bull, specially to be young: for when they pass twelve
years old, they are not good for breed, but they live many times far
longer if their pasture be good, and they kept from diseases. The old Cow
gives more milk then the young, according to the country peoples proverbs,
old Kine more milk, young Hens more eggs. Again, under three years old,
you may not suffer them to go to Bull: if they chance to be with Calfe
before, you must put the Calfe from them, and milk them for three days after,
least their vdders be sore, afterward forbear milking. Pliny writes, that
at a year old they be fruitful, but the breed will be little, as it
happens in all too timely ingendringes. You must every year in these beasts
(as in all other) sort your stock, that the old that be barraine, or unmeet
for breeding, may be put away, sold, or removed to the Plowe: for when they be
barraine (as Columella says) they will labor as well as Oxen, by reason they
are dried up, but we use commonly to fat them: their age is known by the
knottes and circles of their horns, which Pliny marketh likewise in Goats.
The time for going to Bull, some take to be best in the midst of the spring:
Palladius would have it in July, for so in the twelfth month she shall Calue,
for so long she goes with Calfe (as the common people say) a Cow and a Queen
have both one time. In many places they desire to have their Cowes go to Bull
a thirty or forty days after the tenth of June, that they may Calue in
March, or April: they that would have much milk, so order the matter, as
their Kine go to Bull from the spring, to winter, whereby they always milk
some: at once bulling she conceaueth, if the chance to fail, she goes to
Bull again within twenty days after: some say, if so be the Bull come down
on the left side of ye Cow, it will be a Cow Calfe, if on the right side, a
Bull Calfe. The Greeks affirm, that if you will have a Bull Calfe, you must
knitte the right stone of the Bull, and for a Cow Calfe, the left: Varro
says, that if you put the Cow to the Bull immediately after gelding, she
conceaueth: Columella affirms fiftene Kine to be yenough for one Bull. I
think he will well yenough serve twenty Kine, if he be such a Bull as I
described: if you have good store of pasture, you may let them go to Bull
every year, but you must beware your Kine be not too fat, for that will
hinder their being with Calfe. The Cow should when she is reddring, have but
short pasture, and the Bull his belly full: so shall neither she be too fat,
nor he unlusty. If the Cow will not take the Bull, you must stamp sea Onyons
in water, and rub her under the tail with it: if the Bull be not lusty
yenough about his business, take ye peezell of a Stagge, burn it, and make it
in powder, and with a little wine and the powder, bathe his stones, and his
pezell withal, which will serve for the like purpose in all other beasts (as
Quintillian says) his courage is also stirred up by the like odours that you
speak of for your Horse. A Bull ought not to leap the Cow above twyse in a
day as some think, but we find by experience, that he may oftener. In some
places they have common Bulls, and common Boares to every town: a Bull will
wax furious at the sight of any read thing, as the Elephant, and the Lion,
which can not in no wise abide the sight of any white thing. A Cow will give
suck to a strange Calfe, but let not the Calves lie with them in the night,
for fear of ouerlaying them. Some weane them at the first, and suckleth them
with Milk, or Whaye, having a little Branne in it, or Flower, wherewith they
bring them up, till they be able to feed. Whether you mean to rear them for
breed, labor, or feeding, you must let them want no store of good pasture:
for though they be of never so great a breed, yet if their pasture be scantie,
they will never come to their full growth: for pasture makes the beast (as the
country people say.) Mago, and the old husbands, would have you to gelde
them while they be very young, which order we likewise observe in cutting of
them: and in the Spring, or at the fall of the leaf, when they be three
months old, or there about, we use to gelde the Bull Calves, and spay the
Cow Calves, sowing up the wound, and annoyting it with fresh Batter.
Columella would not have them cut, but their stones broken by little and
little with an instrument, which kind of gelding he best likes, because in
the little young ones, it is done without bleeding: for when they be something
grown up, it is better to cut them at two year old, then at a year old,
which must be done in the spring, or at the fall of the leaf, the Moon being
in the wane: you must tie up the Calfe to a frame, and before you cut him, you
must fasten about the synowes, whereby the stones hang, a coople of small
sticks like a pain of tongues, and taking hold therewith, cut away the
stones, so as a little of the upper parts of them may remain with ye foresaid
synows: for by this means you shall: not haz^rd the beast by overmuch bleeding,
neither is his stomach quite taken away, but has something of the f^^her
remaining, and yet loses his ability (...) rendering. Notwithstanding, if you
suffer him imme^diatly upon this new cutting to go to the Cow, it is
certain he may geat a Calfe, but let him not so do, for fear of bleeding to
death. The wound must be anointed with the Ashes of Uines, and Lytharge, and
he must not be suffered the first day to drink, but nourished with a little
meat: three days after he must be d^eted, according to his seeblenes, with
green bows, and sweet grass cut for him, and looked to, that he drink not
too much: and if you will, you may annoint the sore for three days with Tar,
and a little Ashes, and Oil, to heal him the sooner, and to keep the place
from flies. You must use them while they be yet young, to suffer to be handled,
and stroked, and tied up to the Manger, that when they should come to be
broken, they may be handled with more ease, and less danger: but Columella
forbiddes you to meddle with the breaking, or laboring of them, before three
year old, and after five: for the one is too soon, the other too late. Those
that you have taken up wild, and be well framed, and proporcioned, according
to my pattern, you shall handle and break in this sort. First of all, see that
you have a large room, where the breaker may easily go up and down, and out
at his pleasure, without any danger. Before the stable, you must have a fair
feelde, that the Steeres may have liberty yenough, and not be feared, or
haltred, with trees, or busshes. In the stable, you must have certain stalles,
or boordes, yokewyse set up, a seven foot from the ground, to which the
Steeres may be tied: this done, choose you a fair day for the purpose, and
taking them up, bring them into the stable: and if they be unreasonable wild
and cursed, let them stand tied a day and a night without any meat, to tame
them withal: afterward let him that keeps them, offer them a little meat,
not sidewayes, or behind, but before, coyng them all the while, and speaking
gently to them, stroking their backs, and their moosels, sprinckling them with
a little sweet wine, taking good heed, that they strike him neither with
head, nor with heel: for if he once get that trick, he will never leave it.
Thus being a little acquainted with him, you shall rub his mouth with Salt,
and let down into his throat certain lumpes of salt tallowe, and pouring
after a quart of good wine, which will make him in three days, as good a
fellow as you would wish him to be. Some use to yoke them together, and let
them draw some light thing, or plowe in a light plowed ground, that their
labor hurt not their necks. The redyer way of breaking them, is to yoke them
with an old Ox, that may easily in^truct them: if he happen to lie down in
the furrowe, do neither beat him, nor fear him, but bind his feet
together, and let him lie, that he may neither stir, nor feed: which being
well punished with hunger, and thyrst, will teach him to leave that sullen
trick. The feeding of this kind of cattle is diverse, according to the
diversity of Countries: if there be store of good pasture in the country,
there is no food to that: in countries where wants pasture, and specially in
Winter, he must be kept in the Stal, and fed with such fodder as the country
yeeldes. Where there are Tares to be had, it is the best feeding for them: and
Hay is very good, Chafe, and Coolestalkes with Chafe and Hay, and chopped
straw sodde together in water, is very good feeding for Winter. In some
places, they feed altogether with new threasshed straw: in many places they
give them Lupines steeped in water, or Chiches, or Peson, mingled with Chafe:
besides, the branches, and leaves of Uines, the green branches of Elm, Ash,
Poplar, and Holme: in Winter, when other green bows fail, the Fig tree
will serve, or the brousing of Oaks, and Holly. Oxen are soon fat in good
pasture, and with Wheat, Rapes, Apples, and Radishe: Oxen, or Kine, will be
passing fat where there wants pasture, by giving them Meal mixed with
Wheat, Chafe, and Rapes, or Graynes. They will wax the sooner fat, in
wasshing them with warm water, or (as Pliny says) by cutting their skins,
and blowing in wind to their bellies with a Reed. Sotion teaches, that they
will be fat, if when they are taken from pasture, you give them the first day
Colwoortes chopped and steeped in sharp Vinegar, and afterward Chafe, being
well cleaned, and mingled with Wheat branne, for the space of five or six
days, feeding them after with good store of fodder: in Winter you must feed
them at the first Cockcrowing, and again when the day begins to break: in
Summer first at the breaking of the day, then at noone, and at night: in Summer
you must water them twyse a day, three hours before noone, and three hours
after: in winter, once aday with warm water, which is also thought to be good
for fruitefulnesse: and therefore the Lakes that are filled with Rain water,
are good for them. This kind of cattle desires not clean, or fair water,
but foul and pudled: yet it were better to give them fair water. Also, you
must provide them of warm pasturs for the winter, and in summer, very cool:
chiefly Mountains where they may browse upon the bushes, and pick up a good
living among the Woods: but in low grounds and near the River, Oxen are
sooner fatted, and Kine give a greater quantity of Milk. In Summer, they lie
abroad all the nights in many places: yea, in England you shall have them
fodred abroad all the Winter. Though they be able to abide cold, yet must you
provide them of large stalles, for the succouring of such as be great with
Calfe. Your stables, or Oxstals, must stand dry, and be well floored, either
with stone, grauaile, or sand: the stone will suffer no water to abide upon it,
the other will soon drink it up and dry it: both sorts must be laid slope,
that the water may run away, for rotting the groundsels, and marring their
houses. Let them open toward the South, so shall they be the dryer, and the
warmer: notwithstanding, let your windows open North and East, which being
shut in Winter, and open in Summer, may give a healthful air. In fine, as
near as can be, let the houses be neither to hot, nor to cold, and as dry
as may be: Columella would have two Oxhouses, one for the winter, the other for
the summer both uncovered, but well and high walled, for keeping out of wyld
beasts. The stalls would be eight foot wide, that they may have room yenough
to lie in, that the Kine great with Calfe hurt not one the other, nor the
stronger Ox wrong the weaker: and that there may be room for their keepers to
come about them, and for yoking them. Vitrunius would have the Oxehouse open
toward the East, and to be near the fire: for fire is naturally beneficial
to cattle, both for the drying up of the infectiue dampes, and the keeping of
the cattle warm. Besides, by seeing of the fire, they are made gentler, and by
the heat thereof, what cold they have taken in the pastures, is expelled, and
diverse inward diseases cured. The houses must be severed with diverse rooms,
enclosed and racked, the rack must stand no higher then the Ox may easily
reach, and must have such particions, as one beast begile not the other,
whereto they must be well haltred and tied, for hurting one the other: Cato
would have the particions lettised. Moreover, it is to no purpose to feed them
well, except you also look to the keeping of them in health, and sound, and
therefore whether they be in house, or abroad, you must always have a
special regard unto them, and to ouerlooke them in the night, specially, if
there be any Kine amongst them with Calfe. And though it be needful at all
times to ouersee them, both morning and evening, yet most needful is it of
all other times, to see to them in the spring, when you first put them to
pasture: for at that time, by reason of their change of diet, both Oxen, Kine,
and Hayfarres, are most in danger of sickness: in Winter again to look to
them, that they be not, for sparing of charges, kept so poor, as they be
utterly spoiled. And therefore you must spare no litter, specially when they
come from labor, to rub them, and dry them, stroking them with your hands,
and raising the hyde from the flesh, which will do them great good. In coming
from work, or out of the pasture, you must wash their feet well with water,
before you bring them into the house, that the dirt and filth cleaning to them,
breed no diseases, nor soften their hoofes. Beware of too much cold, or heat,
for too much of either, fills them with diseases. You must take heed they be
not chaste, nor chafed up and down, specially in hot weather, for that
brings them to a Fever, or causes them to have a Flixe. Take heed also,
that there come neither Swyne, nor Poultry near their stalles, for both of
them with their dounging poysoneth the beast. The dounging of a sick Swine
does breed the Pestilence, or Murraine amongst cattle. You must away with
all manner of carryons, and bury them well for infecting your cattle. If so be
ye Murraine chance to come amongst them, you must presently change the air,
and sever your cattle far a sunder in diverse pastures, keeping the sound
from the sick, that they be not infected, not suffering them either to feed
together, The Mur^in and his diverse kinds.
or drink together. The Pestilence, or Murraine, is a common name, but there
are diverse kinds of it: in some Murraines, the cattle driuell and run both
at the nose and mouth, in others again they be dry, and fall away more and
more: sometimes it comes in the joints, and causes them to halt before, or
behind, sometime in their kidnes, and appears by the weakness of their
hinder parts, wherein they seem to have great pain in their loins. An other
kind there is, that ryseth like a Farcine, with Pimples over all the body, now
appearing, and presently vanishing, and coming out in a new place. An other
sort, betwyxt the hyde and the flesh, wherein the humor sweateth out in diverse
parts of the body. Sometime it is like a Leprosy, when all the skin is full
of little pimples, and sometime a kind of madness, wherein they neither hear,
nor see so well as they were wont, though they look fair and fat and lusty
yenough. Every one of these kinds, are contagious and infectiue, and therefore
as soon as you perceive them infected, you must presently put them a sunder
for infecting the whole stock, least you impute that to the wrath of GOD (as
many fools do) which happens through your own beastlynesse, and
necligence. The common remedy (as Columella says) is the roots of Angellica,
and sea Thistell mingled with Fenel seed, and with new boiled Wine, Wheat
flower, and hot water to be sprinkled upon them. The common people, when
they perceane either their Horse, or Bullock sick, or any other cattle else,
they use to take the root of black Ellebor, (...)
called of some Consiligo, of others Bearefoote, and for a Bullock, to thrust
it in the Dewlappe, for a Horse, in the breast, for Swyne, or Sheep, through
the ear, making a hole with a bodkin, and thrusting the root presently
through, which the new wound holds fast that it can not fall out, whereunto
all the whole force of the poison does strayghtwayes geather, and runs out
in filthy water. Perfumes in this case (as Vegetius teaches) do much good, as
Brymstone, vnslecked Lime, Garlic, wyld Mariorum, and Coryander seed, laid
upon the coals, and the Oxen so held, as they may receive the smoke by their
mouth and nose, that i^ may fill their brain, and their whole body with a
healthful air. It is good also thus to perfume ye whole body, both for ye
health of the sick, and preserving of the whole. Before I proceed any
farther, I will set you down what kind of Spices, and what quantity you ought
always to have in a readiness for your cattle. You must have one pound of
Fenicricke, half a pound of Liquerisse, one pound of Graynes, Turmericke,
half a pound, or a quarterne of Bay berries, one pound of long Pepper, half a
pound of Treacle of Gean, a pound of Amsseede, half a pound of Comin, half a
pound of Madder, Ortment, half a poun. The herb, whose root you must use (as
I said before) grows in many places in the woods: it was once brought unto me
by chance from Darndal in Sussex, by one Richard Androwes, a good painful
searcher out of such things: the picture whereof, I have here set before you,
for your better knowledge. For beside his present remedying of cattle, he
serves against diverse diseases in man, specially for the Quartane, as the
learned Mathiolus has in his description of plants mentioned. To return to
my cattle: (...) Crudity.
if they want their digestion, or chawe not Cud, which diseases is perceived by
often belching, and noise in the belly, with forbearing of their meat,
dullness of their eyes, and not licking of them selves. Take a handful of
Pelitorie of Spain, as much of Hearbgrase, as much of Fetherfew, Sage,
Horehound, and Baysalt, three pintes of very strong new drink: seethe them
together three or four wallops, and give it him bludwarme in the morning, not
suffering him to drink, till the afternoon: if you neglect this disease, so
that he be pa^ned in the belly, and full of grief, he will groan and never
stand still in one place. For remedy whereof, you shall bind his tail close by
the Rumpe, as str^yte as may be, and give him a quarte of Wine, with a pint of
the purest Oil: and after drive him a pace for the space of a mile and a
half: annoint your hand with grease, and rake him, afterward, make him run
again: some use to let him blood in the tail, within a handful of the rumpe.
There is a disease which they call the Woolfe, others, the Tail, The Tail.
which is perceived by the looseness or softness betwyxt the joints: take
the Tail, and feel betwyxt every joint, and where the joint seems to be a
sunder, or is soft and not close as the other joints, there take and slytte
him the longest way under the Tail, about two inches long, and lay in the
wound Salt, Soole, and Garlike, and bind it fast with a cloute about it. The
Colic, or pain in the belly, is put away in the beholding of Geese in the
water, specially Duckes (as you said before) of Horses: for the sight of the
Ducke, as Vegetius and Columella say, is a present remedy to this beast. For
the Flix, The Flixe.
or the Laske, which in some places they call the Ray, take Sloes and dry them
in powder, and give it them to drink: if it be the blooddy Flixe, the old
fellows were wont to cure it in this sort. They suffered not the beast to
drink in three days, and kept him fasting the first day, and gave him the
stoanes of Reazins or Grapes, dried and made in powder two pounds, with a
quart of sharp tarte Wine, and suffered them to drink no other drink, and
made them eat the browsing of wyld Olyue trees, and Mastyxe trees: and if they
mended not with this, they burnt them in the forehead to the very brain pan,
and cut of their ears. The wounds, till they were whole, Laske i^ Calves.
they washed with Oxpisse: but the cut parts were to be healed with Oil and
Pytch. If your Calves have the Ray or Laske, take sweet Milk, and put therein
the Rennet of a Calfe, make it no thicker but as the Calfe may well drink it,
and give it him luke warm. If your Bullock have the Cough, The Cough.
and if it be but beginning, give him a pint of Barlymeal with the yolke of an
Egg, the Reazins boiled in sweet Wine and strained, a pint: mingle them
together and give it him fasting. Also Grains beaten and mingled with Flower,
fried Beans, and meal of Lentylls, all stirred together, and given him in a
mash. Columella would have you give them Grass chopped, and mingled with Beans
that are but a little broken in the Myll, and Lentylls small ground, and
mingled with water. The old Cough they cured with two pound of Hysope, steeped
in three pintes of water, and mingled with Flower, which they made him to
swallowe, and afterward powered into him the water wherein Hysope had been
sodden, also Peason, with Barley water and sodden Honey, when they had the Cough,
and Consumption of the Loonges. To keep them alive, they used to burn the
root of a Hasell, and to thrust it through their ^ares, giving them to drink,
a pint of the juice of Leekes, with the like measure of Oil and Wine. For the
Cough of the Loonges, I use to give them long Pepper, Grains, Fenegreke, Bays,
Anysseede, Ortment balls, Turmericke, and Madder, beating them all together,
and seething them in good Ale grounes. If your Calves have the Cough, take
Sentury, and beat it to powder, and give it them. If they have the Fever, The
Fever.
or Ague, you shall perceive it by the watring of their eyes, the heaviness of
their head, the driueling at the mouth, beating of the veins, and heat of the
whole body: let them fast one day, the next day let them blood a little betimes
in the morning in the tail, after an hour give them a thirty little stalks
of Colwoortes sodde in Oil, Water, and Salt, which must be powered fasting into
them, five days together. Beside, you may give them the tops of Olyue
trees, Lentylls, or any tender brutinges, or branches of Uines, and wype their
mouths with a Sponge, giving them cold water thrice a day. The blood faling
down into the legs, causes them (as Vegetius says) to halt, Haltyng.
which as soon as you perceive, you must straightwayes look upon his hoofes,
the heat whereof will declare his grief, beside, he will scarce suffer you to
touch it. But if so be the blood be yet above the hoof in the legs, you
shall dissolve it with good rubbing, or if not with that, with Scarif^^ng, or
Pouncing the skin. If it be in the foot, open it a little with a knife
between the two claws, and lay to the sore, cloutes dipped in Uineger and
Salt, making him a shoe of Broom, and be well ware he come not into any
water, but stand dry. This blood, if it be not let out, will breed to matter,
which will be long ear it heal: if it be opened at the first with a knife, and
made clean, and after cloutes dipped in Water, Salt, and Oil laid to it, and
at the last anointed with old Swynes grease, and Goats suet boiled
together, it will quickly be whole. This disease, as I take it, the country
people call the Foul, or the Wyspe, which they sometime cure with drawing a
rope of straw, or hear, through the Cleese, till it bleed, or by searing of
it with a hot iron. If the blood be in the lower part of the Hoof, the
uttermost part of the Clee is pared to the quick, and so the blood let out,
and after, the foot wrapped with clowtes and shooed with Brom, you must open
the Hoof in the midst, except the matter be ripe. If he halte by reason of
the Crampe, or pain of the sinowes, you shall rub his knees, thighs, and
legs, with Salt and Oil, till he be whole. If his knees, or joints be
swolen, they must be bathed with warm Uineger and Linseede, or Mylet beaten
and laid to it, with water and Honey. Also Spunges wette in hot water, and
dried again, and anointed with Honey, are very good to be laid to the knees:
if under the swelling there be any humor, Leaven, or Barley meal sodde in water
and Honey, or sweet Wine, must be laid to it: and when it is ripe, it must be
opened with a knife, and healed as before. All greefes generally, if they be
not broken, must be dissolved whylst they are new, with bathes and
fomentations: and if they be old, they must be burned, and the burning
anointed with Butter, or Goats suet. If he have hurt his heel, or his Hoof,
stone Pitch, Brimstone, and greasy Wool, must be burnt upon the sore with a
hot iron. The like must be done when he is hurt with a Stub, a Thorn, or a
Nail, being first plucked out, or if it be very deep, it must be opened wide
with a knife, and so handled: for ki^ed heels, take and cast him, and bind his
legs fast together, then take your knife, and cut it out as nie as you can,
and let him bleed well: then take a peniworth of Uerdegrease, and the yolke of
an Egg, and temper them well together, and bind them close to the place, and
he shall heal. If the Udder of your Kine do swell, you shall bathe them with
Iuie sodden in stale Beer, or Ale, and smoke them with Honey Coames, and
Camomell. If the Bullockes feet be near worn, and surbated, wash them in
Ox pysse warmed, and kindling a few twigs or spraps, when ye flame is
done, cause him to stand upon the hot imbers, and annoint his horns with
Tar, and Oil, or Hogs grease. They will never lightly halt, if after they
have been labored, their feet be washed well with cold water, and afterward
their Pastorns, and the places between the Clees be rubbed with old Swynes
grease. The skabs or manginesse, Skabbes.
is gotten away with rubbing them with stamped Garlic, which also cures the
biting of a mad Dog: besides, Peniriall and Brimstone, beaten and boiled
with Oil, Uineger, and water, and after whilst it is warm, a little Alom made
in powder and cast into it, does cure the skabbe, being anointed in the
sunshine. Other use to annoint them with Butter and Bullockes piss: and some
again take Rozen, Tar, and Wine, and use it as a Pultesse. Hydebound, is
when the skin so sticks to his back, that you can not take it up from the
ribs, which happens by suffering him to take cold after his swette,
Hidebound.
or if after his labor he be wette with rain, or brought low with sickness:
which, because it is very dangerous, you must look, that when they come from
their labor, and are hot, you sprinkle them with Wine, and give them some
pieces of fat or suet. But if they be already Hydebound, it is good you sees
some Bay leaves, and with the warm decoction thereof, to bath his back, and
to rub him all over with Wine and Oil mingled together, and to lift and
pluck up the skin round about, and that abroad, while ye sun shines. If
his bleeding stench not after the cutting of the vain, the remedy is to lay
his own doung to the place. A common medecin for all diseases, as Vegetius
reports is this: the root of a sea Onion, the root of the Popler, and the
common Salt, of each a sufficient quantity, lay them in water, and give it
your cattle to drink till they be whole: which also being given in the
beginning of the spring, for the space of fourteen days, preserves them from
all sickness. Now that you have heard in what sort the old husbands did
remedy the diseases in their cattle, I shall breefely declare unto you the
remedies that are observed in sundry diseases at this day, whereof I have chopped
in some amongst the medecines before. First for ye Murraine: For the Mureyne.
it begins at the first in ye throat, and swells in the head, and rotleth
with much noise in the throat, whereby it is perceived: take a quart of new
Milk, half a peniworth of Butter, a peniworth of Garlic, two peniworth of
English Saffron, two peniworth of Cinnamon, two peniworth of Turmericke, a
quantity of Hearbegrace, a quantity of Bittony, mingle them altogether, and
give it him warm: then take an All, and thrust the top of his nose upward,
take but the very top to thrust through, and not to the headwarde, then let him
blood in the neck almost a pottell, if he be able: save the blood and let it
stand, if it change, he may live, if not, he dies. An other for ye same. Where
he swells about ye jaws and up to the ears, open him under the jaws to the
root of the tongue, and get in your finger, and open it a good wydenesse, then
take a good piece of ru^tie Bacon, and a handful of Raggewort, stamp them
well together, and fill the hole full with it: then let him blood at the nose,
and the tongue. A drink for the same. Take Tansie, Hearbegrace, Longwort,
Hisope, Time, of each a like quantity, half a handful, stamp them, and
take a quarte of good Alegroundes, and seethe them a wallope, or two: take and
strain it, and put the licour into a vessel, put thereunto a peniworth of
Grains, For the loonge^.
a peniworth of long Pepper, a peniworth of Ortment, and a peniworth of
Fenegreke give it the beast luke warm. The sickness of the Loonges is
perceived, if the Dewlappe be hard closed together very far up: also in hard
feeling the Hyde upon the back, it cracketh or snappeth much: also a short
husking, and thrusting out the tongue withal: if it be much perished on the
left side, he is incurable, which you shall perceive by the Hyde, which will
stick fast on that side, and likewise the Dewlappe, if he be far gone, he
will groan much. The remedy for this disease, is to take long Pepper a
peniworth, round Pepper as much, of Grains two peniworth, of Turmericke two
peniworth, of Fenegreke two peniworth, of Mace as much, Cloves a peniworth, of
Anisseedes a peniworth, of Madder two peniworth, of Tryacle of Geane, the utter
rine of Wallnuts dried, and made in powder, Juniper berries poudred, Ox
Loongworth, Fetherfewe, Hearbgrace, Tansie, Horse Mintes, Bay berries poudred,
a peniworth of Garlic, a quarte of Chamberly, a pint of Salt, a quantity
of Butter: Setter him before, or immediately after this medcine given. Settring
of cattle.
The order of Settring a Bullock is this, take Setterwort, otherwise called
Bearfoote, and Garlic like quantity, peele and stamp the Garlic, and pare
the Setterwort clean, and wrappe them wll in Butter, then cut the Dewlappe two
inches behind the sticking place, to the brestwarde, and cut it alongstwyse
about two or three inches, and pull the Dewlappe with thy finger, or with a
stick, round about one side from the other, as much as you can possible. Then
put the Setterwort, Garlike, and Butter, as much as thou can well put in, and
thus do on both sides the Dewlappe, then roll him so that the string may go
through both holes on both sides the Dewlappe, always remembering to cut the
Dewlappe a handbroade, or above the bottom, and in any wise to rent him to the
bottom, before you put in the medecin. The third day after the Settring look
to them, open the wound, and let out the corrupcion (if it be come down) if
not, put in more of the medicine, and turn the roll: and if it be much swolen
and hard, and will not rotte, take a hot iron, and take up part of the
soar, the skim^^, and the flesh, in such place as thou see most convenient,
so as it come not to the bone, and thrust the iron through on the one side, and
on the other, or once right under, if the swelling be right beneath, and tar
him well if the flies be busy. Which flies if they chance to get into the
soar, take a cloth or towell, and lap it about a stick, and put it into
skalding hot Tar, and so among the Maggottes, searching every corner well.
After you have pearsed him with the hot iron, remember to take a little stick,
and Towe, and dipping it in Sallet Oil, or Wool Oil, to rub the hole where
the iron passed. The sickness of the Gall, The Galle, or Yellovvs.
is known by the running eyes, if he have much yellowe earewaxe, it is also
discerned by the brown yellowes under the upper lip: the cure is this. Take
Chamberly, good Ale grounds, or Beer grounds, hard Soote in powder,
Gallwort, beasts Loongwort, Planten leaves, Hearbgrace, Hempleede, or Hemp
tops, Garlic stamped, a peniworth of Aqua vite, for a great Bullock, take
almost a quarte of this medecin, for a small Bullock, less: when he has
drunk, take Salt, Lome of the wall, and leauened bread, and rub well his
tongue, and all the roof of his mouth: then wash his back, and chafe it well
with Chamberlye lukewarm: geather all these herbs in Summer, and keep them,
and make them in powder. This medecin serves likewise for the Loonges. If a
Bullock be diseased in the Liver, For the Liver.
he complayneth first in the legs, which will so grieve him, that he shall not
be well able to stand, though he be in good liking: the remedy is this. Take a
quart of good Ale (if it may be gotten) if not, take Beer put therein
Lyuerwort, a good handful, Woormewood as much, a peniworth of Garlic, half
a peniworth of Madder, a peniworth of round Pepper, as much long Pepper, a
peniworth of Cloves and Mace, a peniworth of Tryacle, mingle them together,
the herbs being poudred, The Blaine.
and give the beast a drink lukewarm. The signs of the Blaine, are these:
swelling about the face, and the eye, and somewhat in the body: if it be in the
body, it swells much there, the only remedy is. Take and search him in the
mouth, if you perceive blisters under the roots of his tongue, or other place
there abouts, then cut them to the bottom, and let them out, and rub the
place with Salt: search him also for the body at the fundament, by the arm or
hand of some young stripling: and when his arm is in as far as he can, let
him turn his hand upward, and feel for the blaines, or blisters, and break
them with his nails, pulling them quite out: see that he annoint his hand well
with Grease, or Soap. There is a disease called the Sprenges, The Sprenge^.
wherein he will smite his head backward to his belly, and stamp with his
legs: you must put your hand into his fundament, as far as you can pull out
the doung, then shall you find blood, pull the blood quite out, and take a
good handful of Bay sal^, and put it in at twyse, as far as you can: if he
have this disease, he will swel in the body, and couete much to doung. If he
have the Staggers, The Staggers.
he will look very red about the eyes, and cast his head backward: take the
fourth part of an ounce of Pepper, broose it, and take half a pint of sharp
Uineger warmed blood warm, and power it into his Nosethrils, and hold his head
well upward, and let him blood at the Nose. If your Bullock turn round, and
have the Dasye, The Das^e.
you shall take him by the head, and feel upon his forehead, and you shall
feel it with your thumb: cut the skin crossewyse right in the place, and
wype away the blood as it does increase with a cloute, and bind a cloth over
his head, and keep it warm. If your Oxen piss blood, Pissing of blood.
keep them four and twenty hours from water, and then give to every one a
little dyshefull of rennet curdes in a quarte of milk, let them not drink in
four hours after. There sometime runs a blood upon the back of a Bullock,
which will make him draw his legs after him, and go as if he were swayde in
the Chyne: cut of a joint, or two of his tail, and let him bleed: if he
bleed too much, knit his tail, or fear it. If he have the Panteys, Panteys.
he will pant much, and shake in the Flank, and sometime shake down: give him
a little Rennet with Soo^e and Chamberly. If he swell of the Taint, Taynt.
or S^ingworme give him Urine, Salt, and Tryacle to drink: if he be Hydebound,
Hydebound
^^ampe the leaves of Floredelise, strain them, and give the beast to drink:
if he chance to have a stroke in the eye, take the juice of Smallege, Fenel,
and the white of an Egg. The Gargyse, Gargyse
is a swelling beside the eye upon the bone, l^ke a botch, or a byle: if your
Bullock have it, cut of round about it pieces of skin as broad, then cut
also round about those pecces, one narrow lap of the skin, which will keep
the disease from his lips, for if it come to his lips, it is incurable.
Then take Chamberly, and Salt, and sees them together, and wash the places
where the skin is cut of, and wash it therewith evening and morning, till
the swelling be gone, skraping of the skabbes, and other filth at every
dressing to the quick, till the swelling be gone, not sparing it, so long as
it watreth, and runs: when the swelling is clean gone, take Nerualle and
Honey, boiled together blood warm, and annoint all the said places, which will
both heal it, and cause the hear to come again. We have certain medicines
besides, that we use generally for all diseases, For all diseases.
as this, which is very sovereign: take a handful of beasts Loongwort, a
handful of other Loongwort that serves for the pot, a handful of inward
ryne of Elder, a handful of Rewe, choppe them small, and put them into a
pottell of good Ale, let them seethe till they be soft, then stir them, and
put into the licour a peniworth of long Pepper, a peniworth of Grains, a
peniworth of Liqueryse, a peniworth or Anisseede, a half peniworth of Comen, a
peniworth of Turmericke, all well beaten, and put into the licour, with a
quarter of a pound of Madder: and whylst all these do sees, take a great
bowledishe, and put therein a handful of Bay salt, half a handful of
Garlic, four new laid Eggs, shelles and all, two balls of Ortment, grind
all these things with a Pestell in the bowl: then take the licour aforesaid
from the fire, till it be half cold, and put the warm licour into the bowl,
with the Garlic, Salt, Eggs, and Ortment, brewe it well together, and give
the beast to drink blood warm, or a little more. An other of the same sort
is this, two peniworth of Comen, a peniworth of Grains, two peniworth of
Anisseedes, a peniworth of Bay berries, a peniworth of Fenecrycke, a peniworth
of Turmericke, one ball of Ortment, a peniworth of Tryacle, or rather for the
Loonges, three or four spoonefulles of Madder, beat them all to geather, and
put them in three quartes of drink, set them on the fire, till they be blood
warm, give the beast no drink in ye morning before, nor till noone after in
the Summer, and in the Winter till night: or if you will, you may give them
this medecin following: take Flint soote, that is hard dried upon a post or
roof, and beat it into powder with Salt, then take running water, and seethe
it, rank Iuie, with the Soote and Salt, and when the Iuie is soft, take and
wring out the juice, and strain all together through a lynnen cloth, and give
it your cattle to drink blood warm, in the spring, and at the fall of the
leaf. Bubale called of the common people Buffes, The Buffes.
of Pliny Bisonte, are common in Itally, beyond the Apenin: a wild and
savage beast, that for their fearsenesse, are handled with ringes of iron in
their noses, of color black, their bodies large, and mighty, their legs
well set, and knit very strong, and in respect of their body short, their
horns large cranyed, and black, their hear small and short, their tails
littel, they are in those parts used for carriage, drawght, and like uses, as
the Ox. Of the milk of this beast are made Cheese, that about Rome, and other
places are greatly esteemed: Columella countes them to be strong meat, and
heavy of digestion. Lo here is all that for my share I have to say, touching
my cattle: now HEDIO hold you the candell an other while.


HEDIO. Next unto the greater sort of cattle, the cheifest place is to be
assigned to Sheep: yea if you consider the great commodity and profit, they
are to be prefered before them: for as Oxen serve for the tylling of ground,
Sheep.
and necessary use of men, so is to this poor beast ascribed ye safeguard of
the body, for the Sheep does both with his fleese apparayle us, and with his
milk, and wholesome flesh, nourish us (as the Poet witnesses.) Poor beast
that for defense of man, at first created wast,
And in thy swelling vdder bearst, the juice of deynty taste:
That with thy fleese kepst of the cold, that should our limbs assail
And rather with thy life, then with thy death, do us avail.
Of Sheep there are sundry breeds. The rich and the champion country,
breeds a large, and a great Sheep: the barraine and the clyffy, a reasonable
stature: the wild and the mountain ground, a small and a weerysh Sheep. The
old husbands, did greatly commend the breed of Milet, Appulia, and Calabria,
and most of all the breed of ^aranto, next of Parma, and Modena. At this day
for the finenesse of their fleese, are most in price the Sheep of England, of
Germany about the Rhine, and of France. Varro councelleth all such as would
bye Ewes, to have their chief consideration of their age, that they be neither
to old nor to young, the one of them not yet come to it, the other already past
proffite: but better is that age, whereof there is some hope, then where there
follows nothing but a dead carcass. Your best is therefore to bye them at two
years old, and not to meddle with such as are past three: their age is to be
known by their teeth, The choice of Evves.
for the teeth of the old ones are worn away: next must you look, that your
Ewe have a large body, deep woolled, and thick over all the body, specially
about the neck, and the head, and good store upon the belly: for such as were
bare necked and bellied, the old husbands always refused. The neck must be
long, the belly large, the legs short, though ye Sheep of England be long
legged, the tail in some country short, in others very long: for in Arabia
some have tails a cubite long, but wonderful broad: others, (as both
Herodotus, and Aelianus affirm) three cubits long, so that the shepheardes
are forced to tie them up, for being hurt with trayling upon the ground. In
Egypt, a Rams tail has been found to way twenty pound, and more. The Ram
must have his horns great, wyneding inward, and bending to the face, though in
some place they have no horns at all, Rams.
and yet not better Rams: the horns must rather crookle inward, then grow
straight up. In some countries, that are wet, and stormy, Goats and Rams are
to be chosen, that have the greatest and largest horns, whereby they may
defend their heads from storm and tempest: and therefore in cold and stormy
countries, the horned Rams are best: in mild and gentle climets, the pold.
Beside, there is this inconvenience, when he knows him self to be armed, he
will always be fighting, and unruly among his Ewes: and though he be not able
to serve the turn him self, yet will he suffer no other Ram in the flock,
till he be even cloyed, and lamed with lechery. The Pollarde on the otherside,
finding him self unarmed, is milder and quieter by much: wherefore the
Shepherds, to restrain the rage of the unruly, do use to hang before his
horns, a little boorde with sharp pricks inward, which keeps him from his
madness, while he perceives him self to be hurt with his own blood: others
say, that if you pearce his horns with a Wymble next to the ears where they
wind inward, he will leave his brauling. In some places also the Ewes are
horned: but to the Ram his eyes must be brown, his ears great, his breast,
shoulder, and buttockes broad, his stones great, his tail broad, and long:
you must look beside, that his tongue be not black, nor pecled, for commonly
such will geat black and pied Lambs, as Virgil notes. And though the Ram
in sight be white as snow,
If black within his laws his tongue be wrought:
Refuse him quite, least if he leap thy Yow^.
He do infect thy fold with color naught.
Bye not your Sheep but washed and unshorn, that the color may plainlier
appear: the white color, as it is ye beautifullest, so is it ye profitablest.
In March is your best bying of Sheep: When to bye sheep.
for shepheardes like such as have well worn out the winter. Whosoever will be
a sheepemaister, must regard the ability of his ground: for it is not yenough
to have pasture in summer, But they must be well provided for in winter: in any
wise, you must have store of pasture, and better it is, and more proffitable to
the Master, to keep a few Sheep well, then a great number with scarsitie of
pasture. Florentinus is of that fancy, that he would your number should
rather be odd then even, thinking that number more fortunate, for the
healthynesse, and long continuance of the cattle: but these are superstitious
toys, as are a great number of others imagined by the faithless. Be sure
every year once, to make your muster, and supply the places of such as are
dead, or sick, with a new and a sound number, so that the Master be not
deceived with an old unprofitable flock. The hardness and cruelty of the
cold Winter, does oftentimes beguile the shepherd, and destroys many of
his flock: whereof (presuming of their strengh in the end of the Summer) he
had made no supply, and therefore Columella is of oppinion, that the age for
breed ought not to be less then three year, nor above eight, both because
that neither of the ages is meet to be kept: and also that whatsoever comes
of an old stock, has lightly a smack of his old parents imperfection, and
proves either to be barraine, or weak. The self same Columella would have
ye Ewes to be put to the Ram, after they had passed two year old, and the
Ram to be of five year old, and after seven, to decay. In many places at
this day, they suffer both the kinds to breed, from two year old, till
niene: but before two years, it is not good to put either the Ram, or ye Ewe
to breed, although in most places they suffer the Ewes at a year old. The
Ram is put by his purpose, by the Wyckers, or Bulryshes, tied to the Ewes
tail, but more commodiously, by going in several pastures: howbeit, they are
not commonly severed, but sufferd to go together. The Rams that you would
have to serve your Ewes, must before the blossoming, be kept in good pasture.
for two months, whereby they may the better be able to do their business:
but in our country, we commonly suffer them to feed together. To increase
their lust, you shall give them in their pasture, the blades of Onyons, or
Knotte grass: they rather couette the old Ewes, then the young, because they
be easiyer to be entreated, and the Rams them selves in age be the better. By
knitting of the right stone, you shall have Ewe Lambs, and of the leaft, Ram
Lambs: also their blossoming in ye Northwind, ge^tteth Ram Lambs, and in a
Southwind, Ewe Lambs. One Ram (as Dydimus affirms) suffiseth for fifty
Ewes: when they have all conceived, the Rams must again be banished, for
dangering and harming the Ewes. During the time of their blossoming, they are
to be watered in one place (as both Varro, and Pliny affirm) because the
change of water both discoloureth the wool, and dangereth the Lamb. The
policy of Jacob the Patry^rche, in procuring of party colored Lambs, is
well yenough known. The best time for blossoming, is from the setting of the
Bearwarde, to the setting of the Egle: (as Varro and Columella have written)
which is (as Pliny interprettes it) from the third Ides of May, till the
thirteen Kalendes of August, other think it good all the year long, many
prefer the Winter Lamb before those that fall in the spring, as a creature
that of all others, best brooketh his Winter birth. The thunder, if the Ewes
go alone, makes them cast their Lambs, and therefore it is good to let them
go with company, for avoiding that perrill: they go with Lamb.150. days, or
five months: such as are afterward dammed, are feeble and weak, and such
were of the old wrighters called Cordi: for the most part they bring but one
Lamb a piece, yet oftentimes two, and if they be well fed, six at a time.
It has been seen in Gelderland, that five Ewes have had in one year, five
and twenty Lambs: it may seem paraduenture to many incredible, and yet not
great marueyle, since they have twyse a year most times two, and sometime six
at a time. The shepherd must be as careful as a midwyfe in the yeaning time,
for this poor creature (though she be but a Sheep) is as much tormented in
her delivery, as a shrew, and is oftentimes the more dangerously vexed, and
payned in her lobour, in that she is altogether without reason: and therefore
it behooves the shepherd to be skillful in medcening of his cattle, and so
cunning a midwyfe withal, as if need require, he may help his Ewe, what
danger soever happen. The Lamb as soon as he is fallen, must be set on foot,
and put to the dammes vdder, and oftentimes his mouth held open, the milk must
be milked in, that he may learn to suck: but before you do this, you must be
sure to milk out the first milk called Colostra, whereof I will speak
hereafter: for this, except some quantity be drawn out, does hurt ye Lamb:
if the damme dye, you must suckle it with a horn: if the Lamb will not of him
self suck, he must be put to it, and his lips noynted with sweet Butter,
and Swynes grease, and seasoned a little with sweet milk. As soon as they
are lambed, they must be shut up together with their dammes, whereby both ye
damme may cheerishe them, and they learn to know their dammes. Afterward,
when they begin to wax wanton, they must be severed with Hardelles: or (as
Varro writes) after ten days they must be tied to little stakes with some
gentle stay, for hurting of their joints, and waxing lean with to much play.
The weaker must be severed from the stronger, for hurting of them. And in the
morning betimes, before the ^locke go to pasture, and in the evening when they
be full, the Lambs must be put to their dammes: and when they wax strong,
they must be fed in the house, with Clouer, and sweet grass, or else with
Branne, and Flower. And when they have gotten greatter strength, they must be
let out wit^ their dammes about noone, in some sunny and warm close near
adjoining. In the mean time, you must not deal with milking of the Ewes, so
shall you have them to bear the more wool, and bring the more Lambs. When
the Lambs are taken from the dammes, good heed mu^t be had, that they pine
not away: and therefore they must be well cherished in their weaning time with
good pasture, and well (...), both from cold, and extreme heat. Now after
that they have forgotten the vdder, that they care not for their dams, then
shall you let them feed^ with the flock: howbeit in most ^^^ces the Lambs are
su^^ered to feed in the flock together with t^eir dammes, and to suck till
harvest time, till the dammes them selves do weane them. Varro would have you
not to g^ld your Lambs under five months old, and that in a season neither
too hot, nor too cold: but experience teaches us, that the best gelding is
under the damme when they be youngest: for in the older (as in all other
beasts) it is dangerous. Those that you will keep for Rams, you must take
from such Ewes as use to have two at one time. The best pasture for Sheep, is
the grass that is turned up with the Plowe, and grows upon f^llowes: the
next is that, that grows in dry Meddowes: the marshy ground is to be
refused, and that which grows near unto Lakes, and Fennes: the plain and
the champion Feeldes and Downs, are best for the delicatest and sonest woolled
Sheep. To be short, the shorter and fyner the grass is, the meeter is it for
Sheep: and yet is there no pasture so good, or so fine, but with continual
use, your Sheep will be weery of, except ye shepherd remedy th^s fault with
giving of them Salt, which (as a sauce to their food) ^e must set ready in
Summer when they come from pa^ture, in little Troughes of wood, by licking
whereof they ge^t them an appetite both to their meat, and their drink. For
where as Sheep wax soonest fat with watring (as Aristotle affirms) you must
in summer every fifth day let them have Salt, a pecke to every hundred: so
shall your Sheep be always healthy, wax fat, and yield you plenty of
milk. Moreover, against the winter rotte, or hunger rotte, you must provide to
feed them at home in Cratches. They are best fed in the warmer countries,
with the leaves and bro^singes of Elm, and Ash, and the Hay that is made
after harvest in the end of summer, because it is softest, and therefore
sweeter then the other. With what heed and carfulness this cattle is to be
sed, Virgil declares, who wyls a regard to be had of the times, both of their
watring, and feeding. When Summer fair with Western winds does call,
Your lusty flocks, to woods and pasture send
Betimes, when day does spring and over all,
The gladsome grass the hoary deaw does bend.
From thence when as the fourth hour of the day,
With lofty Sun does make them dry to be,
To wells or waters deep go take the way,
And make them drink in Troughes of Oken tree.
But in the noone time, and the heat of the day, you must drive them to the
vallyes, and shades (as he says) a little after. Wheresoever of love the
ancient Oken tree,
His broad and mighty branches spreades, or where:
In sacred Groves of Holmes the shadows be.
After, when the heat is past, you must drive them again to the water, and so
bring them again to feelde. When Sun is set, and euenyng Star appeeres,
That cooles the air, and deawy Moon she cheeres.
Varro affirms, that they divided their pasturing times in Puglia, after this
manner. First they put them out to pasture betimes in the morning, when as the
deawy grass does far exceed in pleasantness, and sweetness: the grass
that being burnt with the heat of the Sun, is over dry. About noone again,
till it wax cooler, they are to be driven under some cold or watery Rocks, and
broad shadowed trees, and toward the euenyng be suffered to feed till sun
set, always having regard, that in their driving, their heads be from the
sun: for no beast is so tender headed. Within a little after the setting of
the sun, they must be driven to water, and after, suffered to feed again,
till it be dark: for then is the pasture sweetest. This order is to be
observed from ye rising of the seven stars, and the lesser Dog, till the
latter Aequinoctial. The like does Columella, and Pliny teach, that after
the rising of the Dog, the flock must before noone be driven Westwarde, and
feed with their face toward the West, and after noone they must be brought
again Eastward. The feeldes whence the Corn is newely had of, is good to
past^re them for two causes, both for that they are well fed with the
leauinges of the sheaues, and that with the trampling of the straw, and
dounging, they make the ground richer against the next sowing: but our country
men do not well like, that Sheep should feed upon the ears of Wheat. The
p^sturing of them in the other seasons, as winter, and the spring, differs in
this point, that they put them not abroad, till the sun have drawn up the
deawe, and hurtf^ll vapors of the ground, and so feed them all the day long,
thinking it sufficient to let them drink at noone: but our husbands use not
to suffer their Sheep to feed abroad in the summer time, neither before the
sun rysyng, nor after the setting, by reason of the deawe being more hurtful
in summer, then in winter. In winter, and the spring time, they keep them in
the fold, till such time as the sun have drawn up the rymes and hoare
frostes from the feeldes: for the frosty grass at this time of year, do
stop their heads with rhume, and fylles their bellyes full of water: and
therefore in the cold and wette seasons of the year, it is yenough to let
them drink once a day. Moreover the shepherd, as also the keeper of all
cattle, must deal gently, and lovingly with their flock, and comforting, and
cheering them with synging, and whystling: for the Arabians (as Alianus
writes) do find, that this kind of cattle takes great delight in music,
and that it does them as much good, as their pasture. Beside, they must be
well ware in the driving of them, and rulyng of them, that they guide them with
their voice, and shaking of their staff, not hurting, nor hurlyng any thing at
them, nor that they be any time far of from them, and that they neither lye^
nor sit: for if they go not forward, they must stand: for it is the
shepherds office to stand always as hie as he can, that he may plain and
easily discern, that neither the slow, nor the great bellyed in lanyng time,
nor the quick, nor the lively, while they roame, be severed from their
fellows: and least some thief, or wild beast, beg^ile the ne^ligent shepherd
of his cattle. Of their pasturing, I think I have spoken sufficiently, and
therefore I mean now to show you of their houses, or sheepecots, Sheepecots.
whereof there ought to be a special regard, that they be conveniently placed,
not subject to winds, nor storms, and that they rather stand toward the East,
then toward ye South. Columella would have them built low, and rather long,
then b^ode, that they may be warm in the winter, and that the straightness of
the room hurt no^ the young. And beside, he would have them stand toward the
South: for this beast (though his garments be warm) can not away with cold
weather, ney^her ye^ with the great heat of the summer. I have seen some
sheep houses so framed, as they have had their gates toward the South, and
toward the East, that they might answer to the seasons of the year.
Columella would have the house set toward the South, and on the Backside a
close Posterne, where they may safely take the air. You must look besides,
that where they stand, the ground be made fair and even, some thing hanging,
that it may be clean kept, and that the urine may be well voyded away: for the
wettenesse hereof does not only hurt, and corrupt their feet, but also
spoyleth their coats, and makes them rowfe, and ill-favored. Let there
therefore be no moisture, but always well strawed with dry Fearne, or straw,
that the Ewes that be with young, may lie the softer, and cleaner. Let their
beds be very clean, for the cleaner they lie, the better they feed: let
them in any wise be well sedde: for a small number (as I said before) well fed,
yield more profit to their Master, then a great flock barely kept. You must
also have several partisions to keep the weaker and the sick, from the
strong and unruly. And thus much of housed Sheep, that are every day brought
home, but in some places they are kept a^^o^de, far from either town, or
house. In Forestes, and upon (...) feeldes and downs, in these places the
shepherd carri^th with him his Hard^lles, and his Nets, and other
necessaries, to sold his flock withal. In the desarte feeldes, when as the
winter pastures, and the summer pastures, are distant certain miles asunder
(as Varro says) he would have the flocks that have wintred in Apu^ia, to be
kept in summer upon the mountains of ^^e^e, and Virgil thus writes of the
shepheardes of Ly^ia. What should I here of Lybian shepheardes tell,
Or of their pastures wryt, and dwellinges poor:
That night and day on downs, and desartes dwell,
Where wanders still the flock without the door.
And on the ground does lie the shepherd hear,
While he remoues with him continually:
His house, and all his household goods does bear,
His staff, his dog, and all his armory.
The like have I my self seen in Swycherland, and other places of Germany,
where the shephearde, lying still abroad with his flock, foldes his Sheep in
the night with Hardels, tying their dogs about them for watchmen: the
shephearde him self in a little house upon wheels, sleeps hard by his
charge. The Sheep of Greece, Asia, an Toranto, and those which they call
covered Sheep, are commonly used to be kept in houses, rather then abroad,
for the excellency and sinesse of their wool.


EVPHOR. What times do you appoint for the shearing of your Sheep?


HEDIO. The times of shearing, Shearing of Sheep.
are not in all places one, but varry, according to the disposition of the
air, the cattle, and the country: the best way is to have good regard to
the weather, as the Sheep be not hurt by shearing in the cold, nor harmed by
forbearing in the heat. In some places they have two seasons in the year for
shearing of their Sheep: the first season for their shearing, is either with
the beginning of May, or else with the ending of April: the second season of
their shearing, is about the beginning of September. Such as do use to sheare
their Sheep but once in the year, do commonly appoint for their season, the
tenth of the month of June, about which time also such as do sheare twyse a
year, do sheare their Lambs. Three days before you sheare them, you must
wash them well, and when they be full dry, you may sheare them: they do not
in all places sheare their Sheep, but in some places (as Pliny says) pull
them. The old husbands did account for the best wool, the wool of Puglia,
and that which in Italy was called the Greek fleese: the next in goodness
they took to be the wool of Italy: in the third place they esteemed the
Milesian fleese: the wool of Pullia is but short, and meet to be worn only
in ryding clokes. The wool about Toranto, and Canas, is thought to be passing
good: but the best at this day, is the wool of England. The fyner your
pasture is, the fyner (as it is thought) you shall have your wool. The wool
of such sheep as are slain by the Woolfe, and the garments made thereof (as
Aristotle says) is aptest to breed Lyse. If you happen in the shearing to
clip the skin, you must forthwith annoint it with Tar: when you have
shorn them, some think it good you annoint them with the juice of sodden
Lupines, Lees of old Wine, and the dragges of Oil made in an ointment, and
after three days to wash them (if it be near you) in the sea, or if the sea
be far of, with rain water sodden with Salt. And being thus ordered, you
shall not have them to lose their wool all the year, but to be healthy, and
to carry a deep and a fine fleese, and therefore Virgil biddes you, Go plonge
them often in healthy streams.
There be some again, that would have you to annoint them three days in the
year, the da^es being soon after you have washed them, with Oil, and Wine
mingled together. Against Serpents, that many times lie hid under their
Cribbes, you must burn Cedar, Galbanum, or woman's hear, or Hearts horn: in
the end of Summer is your time for drawing and seuering of them (as I told
you before) when you must sell your Sheep, that through feebleness, they
fail not in the Winter. Beside, killing one or two of them, you must look
well upon their Livers, and if the Liver be not sound (for hereby is foreseen
the danger) then either sell them, or fat them, and kill them: for very hard
is it to save them, their Livers being perished. Infected Sheep, are more
subject to skabbes and manginesse, then any other cattle, which comes (as the
Poet witnesses.) When coldest storms do wette them near,
And ^oary frostes on ground appear.
Or if you wash not of the sweat of the Summer with Salt water, or
otherwise. If when they be shorn, you suffer them to be hurt with brambles or
thorns: or if you put them into houses, where either Horses, Mules, or Asses
have stand, but specially lack of good feeding, whereof proceeds poorness,
and of poorness, skabbes and manginesse. The sheep that is infected, is thus
known: if he either scratch, stamp with his foot, or beat him self with his
horn, or rub him self against a tree: which perceiving him so to do, you
shall take him, and opening his wool, you shall find the skin ruff, and as it
were itchy: diverse men have diverse remedies for this malady, but such as are
not at hand to be had, Virgil thinks there is no presenter remedy, Then at the
first to clyppe away the sore,
For being hid, it festereth the more.
Constantine out of Dydimus affirms, that ye skabbes of Sheep are healed by
washing them with Urine, and after annoynting them with Brimstone, and Oil.
The common shepheardes, when they perceive a Sheep to fall a rubbing, they
strayghtwayes take him, and shedding the hear, do sear the place with Tar:
others do teach other remedies more hard to be come by, which are not for
every sheephard, nor every country to use. And if the hole flock be infected,
it does many times so continue, as it shall be needful to change houses, and
(which in all other diseases) behooves both country, and air. This on alonely
medecin have I always proved, for the keeping in health of this cattle, to
be most present, and sovereign: take the berries of Juniper, beat them small,
and sprincle them with Oats, and Salt, mingle them all together, and give it
your Sheep, three or four times in the year: for though they refuse to eat
the Juniper berries of them selves, yet for the desire of the Salt, and the
Oats, they will easily take them altogether. If they be lousy, or full of
tickels, they use to beat the roots of Maple, and seething them in water, and
opening the wool with their fingers, they pouer the licour, so as from the
ridge of the back, it run all over the body. Others use the root of
Mandracke, being well ware that they suffer them not to taste it. If they have
the fever, you must let them blood in the heel, betwixt the two Clees, which
the Poet teaches, saying: It eases straight the flaming fevers pain,
If in the foot you strike the spinning vain.
Some let them blood under the eyes, and some behind the ears. The Foul, a
disease betwixt the Clees, is taken away with Tar, Alome, Brimstone, and
Uineger mingled together: or powder of Uerdegrese put upon it. The swelling
betwixt the two Claws, must be cut with great wariness, lest you hap to cut
the woorme that lies in it, for if you do, there comes from her a hurtful
mattring, that poysoneth the wound, and makes it incurable. Master (...) for
(...).
Master Fytzherbert, a Gentleman of Northamptonshyre, who was the first that
attempted to wrighte of husbandry in England, appoynteth this cure: his words
be these. There be some Sheep that have a woorme in his foot, that makes him
to halte, take that Sheep, and look betwixt his Cleese, and there shall you
find a little ho^e, as much as a great pinnes head, wherein grows five or
six black hears, like an inche long, or more: take a sharp poynted knife,
and slytte the skin a quarter of an inche long above the hole, and as much
beneathe, and put thy one hand in the hollow of the foot, under the hinder
Clee, and set thy thumb above, almost at the slytte, and thrust thy finger
underneath forward, and with your other hand, take the black hears by the
end, or with thy knives point, and pulling the hears a little and a little,
thrust after thy other hand, with thy finger and thy thumb, and there will
come out a woorme, like a piece of flesh, near as big as a little finger:
when it is out, put a little Tar in the hole, and it will shortly mende. If
they happen by the extreme heat of the sun to fall down, and to forsake
their meat, give them the juice of the wild Beete, and cause them beside to
eat the Beetes. If they hardly draw their brethe, slytte their ears, and let
them bleed. If they be troubled with the cough, Almondes beaten with wine, and
powered a pretty quantity into their nostrylles, remedieth them. A Sheep, or
Swyne, that has the murreyne of the Loonges, The m^rreyne of the Loong^s.
you shall help by thrusting through their ear, the root of Setterwor^: this
sickness does commonly spring of want and skarsetie of water, and therefore
(in Summer time specially) you must suffer no kind of cattle to want water.
Their legs if they happen to be broken, are to be cured in like sort as men's
be, being wrapped first in wool, dipped in Oil and Wine, and afterward
splented. L^mbes.
The young Lambs, and other Sheep also while they go a broad, are troubled
with skabbes, and manginesse about their lips, which they geat by feeding
upon deawy grass: the remmedie, is Hysope, and Salt, of each a like quantity
beaten together, and their mouths, their pallattes, and their lips rubbed
withal: the vlcerous places, must be noynted with Uineger, Tar, and Swynes
grease. If they chance to swell with eating of any woorme, Eating vvoormes, or
venomous grass.
or venomous grass, you shall let them blood in the veins about the lips,
and under the tail, and after power into them chamberly. If they happen to
swallowe a Horsleache, power into them strong and tarte Uineger warm, or Oil.
Against the murrion, or the rotte, I have seen given them, certain
spoonefulles of Brine, and after a little Tar: this medecin was used by
Master Ihon Franklin of Chart in Rent, Master Ihon Franklin.
who was in his life time a skillful husband, and a good housekeeper^ In like
sort have I seen this medecin. Take for every fore, one peniworth of
Treacle, and likewise one little handful of Hempseede, ground Iuie, Elder
leaves, and Fetherfewe, as much as a Tenisballe of Lome, and as much Bay salt,
put thereto Chamberly, and alittle Soote, make it all luke warm, and give to
every one three spoonefulles good, and after every one a little Tar, before
they go out of hand. In some places they use to take the dried flowers of
Woormewood, and mingling them with Salte^they give them to their Sheep, as a
general medecin against all diseases. This medecin is commended by Hierominus
Tragus both for aswaging of any pain, and driving away any hurtful diseases
from cattle.


EVPHOR. Good HEDIO forgeat not to speak something of your Goats.


HEDIO. Goats have many things common with Sheep, Goats.
for they go to Buck at one time, and go as long with young as the Sheep
do: they yield commodity with their flesh, their milk, their cheese, their
skins, and their hear: the hear is profitable to make ropes of, and packes,
and diverse like instruments belonging to sea men, by reason that it neither
rottes with moisture, nor is easily burnt with fire. Varro makes mention of
two sorts of them, a heary sort, and a smoothe. Such as have Wennes, or
Wartes under their Chynnes, are taken to be most fruitful: their Udders would
be great, their milk thick, and the quantity much. The he Goat would be
softer heared, and longer, his Neck short, his Throat Boll deeper, his Legs
flesshy, his Ears great, and hanging: it is thought better to bye the whole
flock together, then to bye them severally. At the Chinne of every one of
them hangs a long beard, which Pliny calls Aruncu^, by which, if any man
draw one of them out of the flock, the whole flock (as amassed) stand gazing
upon him. The he Goat, because of his beard, and (as Alianus says) by a
certain instinct of nature, preferring the male before the female, goes
always before his woman. The bargayning for this cattle, is not after the
manner of bargayning for Sheep: for no wise man will promise that they be free
from sickness, being as they be, never without the Agewe: but he assures them
that they be well to day, and can drink. One thing is to be woondred at in
this beast, that he draws not his wind as all other beasts do at his Nose,
but at his ears. The best kinds of them, are those that bring forth twyse a
year, and such you must seek for your breed. The Goat is able to engender
at seven months old, being even as lecherous as a Goat: for while he is yet
sucking, he will be upon y^ back of his damme: and therefore he wa^eth feeble,
and unable, before he be six years old, being now soked and consumed with
his ouertimely lustiness of his youth: and therefore after he come to be five
year old, he is no longer to serve your turn for breed. The time when you
shall suffer them to go to rutte, is in Autumn, a little before December, that
at the coming of the spring, and blossoming of the trees, the young may be
brought forth. The Goat goes with young (as I said) five months, as the
Sheep does: she bringes forth commonly two, and sometime six (as Pliny
witnesses) Such as bear twyse, you must keep for your stock, for the
renewing thereof, and the increase. As touching their breeding, you must in the
end of Autumn sever your he Goats. The young Goats of a year old, and two
years, bring forth Kiddes: but (as Columella says) they are not to be
suffered to bring them up, except they be three years old: and therefore you
must away with the young, that the Goats of the first year may breed: and
suffer the Kydde of a two year damme, to suck no longger then it is meet to
be sold. When the Kyddes are brought forth, they must be brought up in like
sort as I told you of the Lambs: saving that the wantonness of the Kydde,
is more to be restrained and heedelyer to be kept in, and must be fed beside
their milk, with young bows. Pliny affirms, that they be skarse good for
breed at three year old, but if they pass four, they be stark naught, and
that they begin at seven months even while they be under the mothers breast.
The first ryding prospers not, the second is somewhat to the purpose, the
third spredth, she bringes forth, till she be eight years old, and
therefore the she Goats, when they be above eight years, is not to be kept:
for she then becomes barraine. Those which want horns (as in the male kinds
of all others be the best) for the horned, by reason of their weapons, are
hurtful, and unruly. Besides, the female of such as lack horns, do give
always greater plenty of milk: but Columella (as he commen^eth the Pollardes
in a temperate and mild country) so in a boisterous and a stormy region, he
would have them horned. Such as have horns, do show their age by the cirkels
of their horns: it is thought, that they see as well by night, as by day, and
that they always lay their faces turned one from the other, and in that order
also feed. Cold (as it is said) is very hurtful to this kind of cattle,
specially to those that be with young, as likewise the extreme heat. The
wit of this beast Nutianus reports, he once had experience of, whereas a
couple of them chanced to meet upon a very long and narrow bridge, and the
straightness would not suffer them to turn, and to go backwarde blindfolde
in such a straight, considering the swyftnesse of the stream under them, was
more impossible, the one of them lying down, the other passed over his body.
Varro does commend sundry little flocks kept several, then great flocks
together, using for example one Ga^erijus, because a great flock is sooner
subject to the murrine, thinking fyfty to be yenough for one flock. Columella
also affirms, that there ought not to go above one hundred of them
together, whereas of Sheep he allows a thousand in one flock. The biting
or brusing of them, is poison to all kind of trees: and therefore were they in
old time sacrifysed to Bacchus, because they were so hurtful to Uines. Their
stables Columella would have to stand upon a stony ground, or else to be paued,
for this beast needs nothing under him but a few bows: when he lies
abroad, the shepherd must often sweep and make clean their houses, not
suffering any doung, or moisture, to remain in them, that may be hurtful to
the flock: for as I said before, they are seeldome without fevers, and much
subject to the pestilence. And whereas other cattle, when they have the
Murrayne amongst them, as soon as they be infected, begin to languishe, and
pine away: only these Goats as soon as they be taken, though they be never
so lusty to look upon, suddenly fall down together, and dye as thick as
hayse: which disease does cheefely happen, by too much rankness of pasture.
And therefore as soon as you perceive one or two of them fall down, let the
whole flock blood with as much speed as you may, and suffer them not to feed
all the day, but shut them up the four middle hours of the day. If they be
diseased with any other sickness, you must give them the roots of Reeds, and
of the great white Thystle, stamping them with iron Pestels, and strayned with
rain water let them drink it: and if so be this medecin heal them not, your
best will be to sell them, or to kill them, and powder them: and when you bye
new, bring them not home too hast^ly, till the disposition of the air be
altered. If they fall severally sick, cure them in such sort as you do your
Sheep. Florentinus says, if you stamp with water the Guysard of the Storke,
and give them to drink a spoonefull a piece, it preserves both Sheep and
Goat from al murrayne and pestilence. If their bellyes be swelled with water,
which the Grecians call (...), the Dropsey, if the sk^nne be la^m^ed a little
under the shoulder, it lets out the hurtful matter, and you may heal the sore
with Tar.


EVPHOR. You have for your part very well satisfied us, touching the good
ord^^yng of your cattle: there remaynes yet one thing for you, which we all
forgate to speak of, and that is the orderyng of Milk, our cheifest food and
sustenaunce.


HEDIO. Seeing that of this cattle whereof I have en^treated, Milk.
the profit of the Milk is not small, it is no great reason we should
ouerpasse the orderi^g of the same: ^or Milk (as Varro says) of all liquid
things wherewith we seed, is the greatest nourisher. Milk differs in
goodness, ^ecording to the nature of the beasts that give it: as the Milk of
Women, of Kine, Sheep, Goats, Asses, Mares, and Camme^s: the greatest
nourisher is Woman's milk, the next Goats milk, whereby the Poets feign, that
their god Jupiter him self, was nursed with Goats milk: the sweetest next to
Woman's milk, is the Cammels milk: the holesomest, is Asses milk: the Ass as
soon as she is with Colt, gives milk: the Cow, never till she have Calued:
most comfortable to the stomach, is Goats milk, because he rather feeds on
bruttes and bows, then upon grass. Cow milk is most mede ^mable, and most
of al loses the belly. Sheep milk is sweeter, and nourishes more, but is
not so good for the stomach, by reason it is fatter and grosser. All milk
that is milked in springtime, is watrisher then the milk of summer, as
likewise is the milk of young cattle: it is holsomest being sodden, specially
with the Prebbles of the Sea. The Sheep about Poncus, near to the River
Astace, do give (as Pliny says) black milk. Black milk.
All milk generally (as Dioscorides writes) is of good nourishment, Error in
the understanding of Dioscorides.
but fylleth the stomach and the belly with wind: that which is milked in
the spring, is thinnest, but loses the belly most. The difference of milk,
is taken (as Varro says) of the pastures, the nature of the cattle, and the
milking. Of the pasture, when the ca^tell is fed with Barlye, Straw, and all
other hard and dry meats, and this greatly nourishes. For purging of the
belly, the grass pastures, specially where the cattle feed of purging
herbs, as Cardamus in his book de plantis teaches, that if you will purge
Melancholy, you must feed your mylche Goa^e, or Ass, with Polipodi, and for
all other humors Seen, for the Dropsy with Spurge, or Agarick: for cleansyng
of the blood, with Fumitorie, or Hoppes: and if you will but only loose the
belly with Mercury, or Mallows: so far Cordanus. Our countrymen do chiefly
commend for milk, the pastures where grows Spery, and Clauergrasse, and that
is all bedeckt with yellowe flowers. For the cattle, the difference is betwixt
the sick and the healthy, the young, and the old: and for the milking, that
is best, that is not long kept after the milking, nor that is milked immediately
upon the Caluing, a gross unwholesome kind of milk. To try whether milk be
mingled or not, you shall take a sharp Rushe, and putting it into the milk,
let it drop from thence upon your nail, and if the drop run abroad, it
is a sign there is water in it: if it keep together, it shows it to be pure
and good. Of milk is made Butter, Butter.
whose use (though it be cheefely at this day among the Fleminges) is yet a
good and a profitable food in other countries, and much used of our old
fathers, yea even of the very Patryarches (as the Scriptures witnesses) the
commodity thereof, besides many others, is the aswaging of hunger, and the
preserving of strength: it is made in this sort. The milk, as soon as it is
milked, is put out of the payle into bowls, or pannes, the best are earthen
pans, and those rather broad then deep: this done the second, or the third
day, the Cream that swyms aloft, is fleeted of ^and put into a vessel rather
deep, then big, round and Cylinder fashion: although in some places they
have other kind of Charms low and flat, wherein with often beating and
moving up and down, they so shake the milk, as they sever the thinnest part
of from the thick, which at the first gather together in little crombles, and
after with the continuance of the violent moving, comes to a whole wedge, or
cake: thus it is taken out, and either eaten fresh, or barrailed with Salt.
The Buttermilke that remains of the Butter, is either kept for the famely, or
given to Calves and Hogs, as a dainty food. Cheese is also made of the
milk of cattle, Cheese.
the milk being powered into a vessel of earth, putting into it a little
Rennet, the quantity of a Walnutte, in a great vessel of milk, whereby it
turns into curd. Varro does better like the Rennet of the Leuret, or the
Kydde, then the Lambs: howbeit, we commonly use the Calves Rennet: others use
sundry other means only with heat, warming it in Tin vessels, and after
dipping these vessels in cold water, which is the sweetest and cleanliest
manner: others put in the seed of wild Saffron, and being so turned, the Whay
does greatly purge fleame: others again use the milk of the Fig tree, and
then does the Whay purge both choler and fleame: some turn it with Oxymell, or
syrope of Uineger, which is of all other ways the holsomest: some besides, use
the little skin of Birds guysards, and others, the flowers of wild
Thystels, or Har^^chockes. The newer and better the milk is, the better will
be the Cheese: for made of two sorts of milk, or milk that is to near
fleeted, it soon sowreth, and waxes hard and naught, and is not to endure any
while. Again, being made of fat and ^^we milk, it will very long endure,
and long continues in his fatness and softness: about a two or three hours
after you have put in your Rennet, the milk comes to a curd, which is
straightwayes put into Forms, or Cheesefattes, and pressed: or if they be but
small, they are only pressed with the hand. If they be of any quantity, they
have great weight upon them: it is very needful you press out the Whay with
as much speed as you can, and to sever it from the curd, and not to let it
lie slowly drayning of it self. Those that make great Cheeses, have mouldes
for the purpose, and weyghtes and presses answerable. After this, they take
them out of the press, and say them upon Hardelles, or fair smoothe tables,
in a shadowy and cold place, and close from all winds, springsing them all
over with Salt, that they may sweat out all their sowrenesse, laying them so,
as they touch not one the other. When they be now well hardened and thickened,
they are taken up, and pressed again with greater weyghtes, and rubbed over
with parched Salt, and after laid in press again, whereby it is thought they
will neither have ey^s, nor be over dry: which faltes happens to come when they
be either not well pressed, or too much salted. Some use to put into the
bottom of their p^yles, the green kernelles of the Pine apple, and milking
into them, do cause it so to turn. You may also cause your Cheese to relish^
of what soever you will, as Pepper, or any other spyce: but Columella countes
that for best Cheese, that has least mixture in it. The strongest Cheese, and
hardest of digest on, are those that are made of Buffes Milk, the next are
such as are made of the Milk of Ewes, but the myldest, and lightest of
digestion, are those that are made of Goats Milk: the Cheese that is made of
Mares Milk, is of the same quantity that the Buffe Cheese is. There is Cheese
also made of Cammels Milk, and of Ass Milk: the Cheeses that are made of
Buffes Milk, are at Rome in great estimation of all other cattle. Such as are
touched both above and beneath, and have more then four pappes, you can make
no Cheese of their Milk, for it will never curd. In our days, the best
Cheeses are counted the Parmasines, made about the River of Po, esteemed for
their greatness, and daynetinesse, of which you shall have brought into other
countries that way above threescore pound. Next are commended the Holland
Cheese, the Cheese of Normandy, and the English Cheese. In England, the best
Cheese is the Chesshyre, and the Shropshyre, then the Banbury Cheese, next the
Suffolk, and the Essex Cheese, and the very worst the Kentish Cheese. The
places where the best Cheese is made, appears by this old english
Distichon, better sensed, then footed: Banbury, Langtony, Suffolk good Cheese,
Essex go thou by, Shropshyre, cum Cheshyre, Hertford may well with the best
peer.

Of the discommoditie of Essex Cheese, our English Martial John Heywood, thus
meeryly writes: I never saw Banbury Cheese thick yenough.
But I have seen Essex Cheese quick yenough.
Cheese they say will best endure, and is longest preserved, if you keep them
in heaps of Pulse, or Wheat, and if you steep your Renuce in the juice of
Byrch, you shall be sure to have neither Myte, nor Creeper in your Cheese. The
Cheese that is soft and new, does more nourish then the dry, and be more
comfortable to ye stomach, not long in digesting: the old is contrary,
according to the proverb, No Cheese good but the new. Old Cheese will become
new in taste, if you lay them in Time, Uineger, or in Wine: if through age it
be hard and bitter, let it be rubbed over with Meal of vndryed Barley, and
then dipped in water, and after, the outer rynde scraped of. We have often times
proved, that hard Cheese wrapped in cloutes wet in Uineger, or Wine, and
oftentimes sprinkled with wine, and so laid up, return to a softness, and a
very pleasant taste. Some lay it in leaven, covering it close therewith, and
thereby make it soft. It is reported, that Zoroastes ^^ued twenty years in
wilderness with Cheese so ordered, as it never waxed old.


EVPHOR. Of the Whay that comes from the Cheese, VVellcurds.
being sodde with a soft fire, till the fatness of the Cheese swym aloft, are
made Welcurdes.


HEDIO. You were wont to love them well.


EVMEVS. I do in deed, specially if there be good store of new milk put
into the Whay. The old writers do teach the making of a kind of white
meat, not much unlike to Welcurdes, which they called Melcan, Melca.
and made it in this sort. They put into a new earthen vessel Uineger, and
suffered it to boil softly upon the fire, till the vessel had drunk up the
Uineger, and into that vessel they powered in milk, and set it where it might
stand steadfast, whereby they had within a while their desire. But me thinks
I have for my part done yenough, it comes now to your turn EVMEVS to go
forward with the rest.


EVMEVS. That the keeping of Swyne belongs to husbandry, Svvyne.
does evidently appear by the saying of the ancient husbands, counting him
asseuthful and an vnthristie husband, that has his Bacon rather from the
Bu^cher, then from his own roof: for there aryseth as great profit many
times to us of our own Swyne, as does to you that be keepers of greater
cattle of your flocks: for if Bacon be away, the cheifest supporter of the
husbandmans Ritchin is wanting. And whereas Swynes flesh seems abominable to
ye ^oolish Jews, I believe verily they never tasted the G^monds of France, so
highly commended by Varro, Strabo, Athenens, and other learned writers: which I
suppose were no other but the flyches of Westphaly, so greatly esteemed at this
day, not only in Germany, but in Rome, and that they were called by the names
of Celtyck Gamonds, because the old writers, specially the Greeks, called all
the countries on this side the Alps, both French and Dutch, by the name of
Celtyck. Surely there is no beast besides, that makes more daynty dishes, there
is in him near fifty different tastes, where every other beast has but one:
and hereof came at first the sharp law of the Censores, forbidding it to be
used at suppers, the vdders, the stones, the trypes, and the forepart of the
heads of Swyne, (as Pliny witnesses). And most apparent is it, that not only
the French, and the Dutch in those days, but also the Italians, and the
Greeks, nourished great heardes of Swane. Among the Greeks, Ham^^ makes
mention of one of my name, that had twelve Hogsties, every stye containing
^ifty Porklinges, and Polybius writes, of more then a thousand to be rered at
a time, among the ancient Italians, Tuskans, and French, Varro accounts a
hundred but a small heard. Who so will nourishe Hogs, must have regard both
to the fayrenesse, and the age: Varro adds beside, the nature of the kind,
and the country. And because the young do commonly resemble their parents, he
would have you choose such as are fair, and large bodyed, and which makes most
to the matter, as fruitful as may be: which Varro, does cheesely commend
those that be of one color, their bristelles would be thick, hard, and
black, if it be in a cold country: if in a temperate, you may nourish the
smooth. Their proportion would be long, large syded and bellyed, wide
buttocked, short legged and footed, big necked, and well brawned, short
groyned, and turning upward, his tail wrynckled. The kind is most commended,
that brings many Pigges, the country that breeds large and great: the best
age for the Boar, is a year old^ though at half a year old they are able to
serve a Sow: one Boar is yenough for tenae Sowes and m^^e. The Sow is
sufficient to bring Pigges at a year old, and so for seven years after, the
fruitfuller she is, the sooner she w^reth old: at her first farrowing, you
shall easily see what number she will bring forth: for she will not much
differ in the other. The best kind of Sowes have twelve pappes, the common sort
ten, or not so many. Every Pigge does know his own pappe that he was borne
to, and sucketh only that, and none other: if you take away the Pigge, the
pappe dries, as both Pliny, and experience shows. They were wont to be
bought and bargained for in this sort. Do you warrant that these Swyne are
sound, that I shall well enjoy them, that you will answer the faults, and
that they be of a healthy breed? A wet moorish ground, is meetest for this
cattle, for he delights not in water, but in dirt and mire, so much (as
Varro writes) that the Woolfe, as soon as he has caught a Sow, draggeth her
to the water, because his teeth is not able to abide the heat of her flesh.
And although this beast will away with any ground, (for he seedeth both in
mountains, champion, and marish) yet his cheese delight is in the Woods that
is full of Quagmires, where there grows store of Oak, Cork, Beech,
Mastholme, wyld Olyues, wyld Dates, Haselnuttes, Crabbe trees, Plome trees, and
Chery trees: for these do fruit diverse times, and feed the herds almost all the whole year. Where there wants Woods, they must be fed from the ground,
wherein a marrishes to be preferred before a dry ground, that they may mousell
in the marsh, dig up woormes, wallowe in the mire, and toomble in the puddels
of water, which in summer is most needful. They also hunt after roots,
specially Fearne roots, and the roots of Bullrushes, Rushes, and Sedges,
beside good grass well feeds a Swyne, and Orchardes of Cheryes, Plomes,
Apples, and Nuttes. And notwithstanding all this, the Barn, for you must feed
them often by hand, when meat fayles abroad, and therefore you must preserve
store of Acorns, in Cestornes in the water, or dried upon smoky Floores, also
Beans, Pease, and Tares must be given them, and not so much as Barley spared:
for this kind of feeding does make them fair, and not only fattes them, but
gives the flesh a pleasant taste. When they are yet young and suck, both
they, and their dammes must be well fed, they must be put to feed early in
the morning before the heat of the sun, and after kept in shadowy places,
where there is good store of water. Before they go to pasture, they must be
medecined, least the grass skarre them to much, by which they wylbe greatly
weakened. In winter they must not be put abroad, till the frost be of the
ground, and the yse thawed. And though the Swyne will roame at the known voice
of their swyneheard, yet Varro will have them be brought both to pasture, and
homeward, with the sound of a horn: their meat must be given them (kattred
thin, so shall both less suffice, and the greater shall not harm the
smaller: as soon as they hear the horn, though they be never so far of in
the Woods, they come running with all haste. Polybius tells, that the
Italians use not to follow their heardes, as the Greeks and others do, but
going a pretty way before them, they blow their horns, their heardes being
aquainted with the blast, do follow them in great order. They do so well know
and obey the call of the swyneheard, if we may believe Alianus, A vvonderfull
knowledge in Svvyne.
that when certain Rouers landing upon the coast of Tuskan, and taking great
numbers of them out of their styes, carried them aboard, the thieves having
wayed up their anchor, and being under sail, y^ Swine upon the hearing of their
keepers voice, suddenly ran to ye one side of the ship, and ouerturned her,
whereby (the Pirates drowned) ye Swyne came safe to land to their masters. As I
have here told you of the conditions of the Boar and the Sow, and of their
keeping, so will I now show you the manner of their breeding. The breming time
is reckoned to be from winter, till the twelfth of March, so shall you have
them to farrowe in summer: for the Sow going four months with pigge,
farroweth in the fyfth. She is with pigge at the first breming, but they use
to let them go often to Boar, because they soon miscarry. And if you will
have two farrowes in one year, you must put your Sow to Boar in February, or
January, that she may farrowe by April, or May, when as there is good pasture
abroad, and milk is in his chief strength: and when they be weaned, they may
well feed upon straw, and grottens, and after, the Sow may farrowe again in
the end of Autum: for Varro says, her farrowing times are so divided for the
nonce, as she may farrowe twyse a year, while she has four months to bear
them, and two to feed them. As soon as they be with pigge, you must keep the
Boar from them: for with his unruliness, he makes them to cast. Young Swyne
for breed, must not be less then a year old, as Varro would have it:
howbeit, they begin at eight months, and continue seven years. The Boar
begins at eight months, or six, and continues well four years, and after
at three or four years old you may geld them, and fa^te them. Some would not
have you keep up above eight, others not above six: not that the Sow is able
to keep no more, but that she that keeps more, sooner fails. Varro
reports, that the Sow of Aeneas Lauinus, farrowed at one time thirty white
Pigges: but it is monstrous when she farroweth more then she has pappes. Every
Sow must have her stye by her self when she has farrowed, and not suffered
to go with the whole heard, as other cattle are, but little Cotes to be made
for them, wherein they may be kept either farrowing, or with farrowe: for
Swyne, if they lie together in any number, being commonly ill manered, do lie
one upon the other, whereby they hurt such as are with pigge. And therefore
you must have several styes where they may farrowe, and made hye, that ye Sow
can not geat out: for covered they must not be by no means, that the
swyneheard may look that the Sow ouerlay none of them, and to see what they
want, that he may make it clean, and as often as he cleanses it, he must straw
sand, or such like, to dry up the moisture: for though she be but a swynishe
creature, yet loves she to have her chamber clean. When she has farrowed,
she requires greater quantity of meat, whereby she may give the more milk,
specially Barley steeped in water, or ground and tempered with water. And if
you have not good store of meat, your best is to sell the Pigges: so shall the
damme being delivered of her burden, be sooner with farrowe again. Such as are
farrowed in winter, are commonly poor and wretched, both because of the cold,
and that their dammes do not like them for wanting of milk, and biting their
pappes. If the Sow eat her pigs, A child eaten by a Sovve.
it is no wonder, for swyne of all other beasts, can worst away with hunger,
which when it provoke, they eat not only their own, but young children,
which not long since happened in Sussex, to the pitiful discomfort of the
parent. They suffer not the Sow to go abroad in ten days after her
farrowing, except it be to drink: after, they suffer her to go about the
house, that she may the better give milk. When the Pigges ware great, they
desire to go abroad with their dammes, at which time they are fed by them
selves aparte, to the e^de they may the sooner forgeat their mother: which they
will do in ten days. It behooves the swyneheard to be careful and
diligent about his charge, that he have in memory every one of them, both old
and young, that he consider every farrow, and shute up those that be great with
Pigge, that they may farrowe in their Stye. He must have special regard of
every young Pig, that every one of them be brought up under their own damme:
for if they geat out of the Stye, they strayghtwayes mingle one company with an
other, whereby the poor Sow is forced to give milk many times, to more Pigges
then her own: and therefore the swyneheard must sh^tte up every dam^e with her
own Pigges. And if his mem^ry serve no^ to know them al, let him pitch every
Sow and her Pigs with a several mark: for in a great number it shall behooue
him so to do, for confounding his memory. The old husbands observed always
two times in the year for cutting of them, the spring, and the fall of the
leaf, whereby they avoided the danger, both of the heat, and the cold. The
Bore pigges they ^utte when they were six months old, and again at ^oure
year old, to make them fat, making two wounds, and taking out the stone of
every side: or else when you have taken out one stone, you mu^t thrust your
knife again into the wound, and cutting asunder the skin betwixt both ye
stones, draw out with your fingers ye other, so shall you make but one skarre,
but this kind of cutting is somewhat more dangerous. The Sowes are said by
burning y^ Matrixe with an iron, and the skarre healed up, whereby they will
both have no more Pigs, and be y^ fatter. Aristotle, and following him Pliny,
would have the Sow after two days fasting, hanged up by ye fore legs, and so
cut, whereby she will be y^ sooner fat: but I judge it better to cut them when
they be young, at two months old, or younger, for so are they in least
ieopardy. After they be cut, you must keep them from drink, and give them but
little meat: the wound must be anointed with fresh butter, and sowed up. As
the wrystlyng and turnyng up of the tail, is a sign of a sound Hog, so be
there certain and assured signs of their sickness: for if you pluck of the
bristles from the back, and find that their roots have blood in them, it
shows the Swyne is not well. Of diseases in Svvyne, and the cure.
Besides, if your Hogs be sick, or taken with a fever, they hang their
heads a toneside, and suddenly as they run abroad, they stay, and being
taken with a turning giddiness, they fall down: and therefore you must mark
well on which side they hang their heads, that you may cut the ear of the
contrary side to let them blood: and under the tail beside, two inches from
the roompe, you shall strike the vain, which there is easily to be seen: for
the bigness of it, you must first beat it with a little stick, and after it
swells with the beating, open it with your knife, and having bledde
sufficiently, bind it up with the rind of Wyllowe, or Elm: after this, keep
them up in the house a day or two, and give them warm water, with a good
quantity of Barley flower. Quinsey.
If the Quynsey or Vnula, (to which desease this beast is wondrous subject)
chance to take them, Dydimus would have you let them blood behind above the
shoulders, others under the toug^e, some again cure them with settering. If
the kernells swell in the throat, you must let them blood under the tongue,
and when they have bledde, rub their mouths within with salt, finely
beaten, and Wheat flower. Democritus would have you give to every Sow, three
pound weight of the beaten root of Daffadyll. If they vomit and loathe their
meat, it is good to give them before they go abroad, the shauinges of Iuory,
with fried salt, and ground Beans: Swyne while they feed abroad, by reason
of their great devouring (for it is an insatiable beast) do wounderously labor
with the abundance of the Splen: for remedy whereof, you shall give them water
as often as they thyrst, in Troughes made of ^amaryce, the juice of which wood,
is very wholesome for them. Democritus teaches to give unto Hogs that have the
Splen, the water wherein the Coals of Heath have been quenched. This beast has
sometime a sickness wherein he pines away, and forsakes his m^ate: and if you
bring him to the feelde, he suddenly fall^th down, and lies as it were in a
bead sleep^: which as (...) as you p^rc^iue, you shall shu^^e up the h^ly heard
in so^e house, and make them to fast one day, both from water and meat: the
n^xt day, the root of the wyld Coucumber (...) and (...) with water, is given
them to drink: w^^ch a^ soon as they have taken, they fall a vomitting, and
so purge themselves. When they have thus expelled they^ c^^ller, you shall give
them hard Beans, strained with brine. An ex^elle^t (...) against all
pestilence of Swyne, does Hiero^^mus ^ra^us teach, which is when you see them
infect^d, ^o give them the roots of Polipodi, or Oak Fern boiled in wine,
whereby they shall purge what so ever is evil from them, and most of all
choler, wherewith Swyne are most troubled: t^^ same Hie^^n (as I remember)
teaches for a Horse^ though it be without my commission to meddle with them ^
If he be sick, and suddenly fall down of a disease that you know not, to put
under his tongue a piece of a Fern root, whereupon you shall see him
immediately void upward and downward what so ever is in his body, and
presently amend: this he says (and truly I dare believe him) that he proved
with a Horse of his own. But to my Swyne, whereas thyrst in summer, is
hurtful and dangerous to all kind of cattle, to this beast it is most
hurtful, and therefore you must not water them as you do Sheep and Goats,
but twyse, or thryse a day: but if you can you must keep them by the water
side, that they may go thereto at pleasure: for the Swyne is not content with
drinking, but he must often cool and plong his filthy panch in the water:
neither delights he in any thing so much, as to wallowe in the dirt. And if
you have no such places near, you must draw some water from the Well, and
give it them in Troughes abundantly: for except they drink their fill, they
will fall sick of the Loonges, which disease is cured (as Columella writes)
by thrusting the root of Setterwort through their ears: Pliny affirms the
Tode to be a present remedy for the sickness of Swyne. Some say, that if a
Sow lose one of her eyes, she dies soon after: otherwise she lives fyfteene
years. There is a kind of disease amongst Swyne (though otherwise they be
healthy and fat) wherein their flesh is all infected with little grains as
big as Peason: the Greeks call them Chalazos, and we at this day measled
Swyne, Measled Svvyne.
which you shall soon perceive by the sight of the tongue, and the horsenesse
of their voice: this disease they say, is natural unto them, from which you
shall preserve them, if you nail certain places of lead in the bottom of
their Trough. You shall also keep them from this disease, if you give them to
drink, the root of Briony: the general and common remedy, is Allome,
Brimstone, and Bay berries, of each alike: add thereunto a handful of Soote,
beat them all together, and put them in a bag, which bag you shall cast
into their water when they drink, and renew it twyse in the year.


EVPH. I pray you EVMEVS do not dissemble, but tell us truly how you do to
have your Hogs so fat. I believe you are in the Barn sometime when you
should not be.


EVMEVS. What means soever I use in ordring my flock, is not to my mauters
loss, no more then is your diligence, whereby you bring your cattle to be so
fair. I told you before, that he was an unthrifty husband that had his Bacon
from the shambles, and not of his own provision: and besides, my masters the
Physicians give great commendations to Hogs flesh, in that it has such a
nearenesse and agreement with our bodies, neither is there (as I said before)
a beast that makes more dishes. And therefore it is greatly for profit, to have
the husbandmans kytchen well stored with Bacon, wherewith he may sustain his
household al ye whole year. You shall easily (though woods be wan^ing) ^ind
Barnes, Marshes, and Corn feeldes to feed them with. They will be fat (as
Pliny supposes) in threescore days, specially if they be kept from meat
three days before you feed them: they are fatted with Barley, Otes, or other
Corn, or Pulse, either given whole, or ground: but of all others, best with
Mast: and that flesh is better, and of more substance that is fed with Acorns,
then that which is fatted with either B^^^^ mast, or Chestnutte. This beast
will in time be so fat, as he will be able neither to go, nor stan^: Yea
Varro tells, that there was seen in Arcadia a Sow so fat, that she was not
only unable to rise, but suffered a Mouse to make her nest in her body, and to
lay her young there. The same Varro reports, that there was sent to Volumius
a Senator of Rome, a piece of Porke of two ribs, that wayed three and twenty
pound: the thickness of which Sow from the skin to the ribbe, was one foot
and three inches. Your best is to put to fatting your Swyne of two or three
years old: for if they be younger, their growing will hinder their seedyng.
To keep your Bacon any long time, you must use great diligence in the saltyng
and drying of it, whereby you shall have it both holsomer and sweeter, and
besides to continue diverse years to serve the turn, if scarsitte happen. Your
Hog being in this sort fatted, you must shut up, and not suffer him to drink
the day before you kill him, whereby the flesh will be the dryer. When you have
thus after his thyrst killed him, you shall either skalde him with water, or
with a flame made with straw, or sticks, sing him: for the manner of such as
flea him. I like not. After that, hangyng him up by the heels, you shall
pluck out his bowels, and put them to dressing: his flesh being cold and
hard, you shall lay upon a table, and cutting out the head, the gammon, and
the fleetches, powder them with salt, thrusting great store thereof in every
place, specially where the bones be: that done, put it into your pouldring
tubbe, strowing salt yenough under it: some would have you salt in the wane of
the Moon. Before you powder it, you must press and dry out all the blood and
the water. Some before they salt it, do pluck out the bones, thinking it the
best way for preserving it, and to keep it longest sweet. Others again do
not strayghtwayes put it into the pouldering tubbe, but do leave it upon a
table for ten days after, and then hang it up in a pure air, to dry in the
larde. And when it has been dried in the wind certain days, by little and
little they let the smoke come to it, and afterward more abundantly. The Bacon
will be the sweeter, if beside the smoke, the wind may come to it: if you hang
it in grea^e smoke at the first, it will be rustie. Dydimus says, that the
Bacon will long continue sweet, if after the dressing, cooling, and drying, it
be hanged up in shaddowy and moist places, rather toward the North, then toward
the South, and that it will be sweeter, if it be covered with Snow, and
Chafe: the tubb^s that you poulder in, must be such as have had Oil in,
rather then those that have had Uineger. Although I have before spoken of the
woorthynesse and antiquity of shepheardes, and heardsmen, Of ^heph^ard^s.
yet must I here say, that it is in vain to meddle with the ordering and
keeping of cattle, except you have handsome, and skilful men that may take the
charge. For the knowledge of keeping of cattle has a discipline, wherein a man
must from his very Chyldehood be brought up: and surely it is meet that ye
husband, or Bayliffe, have been brought up, or trained in all these trades, and
to come by degrees to his masters pryze: As from a swyneheard, to a shepherd,
from a shepherd, to a netheard, etc. And most true it proves in this that
comes to pass in all other gouernmentes, that such are best able to take
charge of government, that passing by degrees and offices, have from being
under government, come to govern them selves: for though (where the flock is
but small, and feeding not far of, is brought home every day) Children, and
young folks, are able to serve the turn: yet where the flocks be great, and
must be kept night and day in Forestes, and wild feeldes (as I said before) of
the flocks that wintred in Appulia, and sommered in the mountains of Kiete,
here I say the shepherds must both be men of lusty age, strengh, and
diligence, as also skillful in that belongs to their office: for neither old
men, nor children, are able to endure the hardness of clyming the hills, nor
the sharpness of the cold mountains, which they must always do that follow
their flocks, specially they that keep Bullockes and Goats, that delight to
feed upon Rocks, and Clyues. You shall se on the mountains of Swycherland,
great and goodly fellows furnished in warlike manner to follow their heardes
and flocks, and to lodge in the wild desartes, far from the company of men,
and there also to make both Butter and Cheese; wherefore such as are meet to
take charge in these places, must be light, swyft, and well limmed, and not
only well able to follow their flocks, but if need be, to defend them from
wyld and ravening beasts, to lift great burdens, to follow the chase, and to
be good archers: in fine, such a one as Homer does make his EVMEVS to be. And
therefore the old husbands in hyring of a shepherd, did always covenant
among others, that he should be sound of body and limme, and free from filching
and theft. In Slauony, the heardsmen do use to have their wives abroad with
them, as companions of their journey to dress their meat, and such things as
they need: such things as are for the health of his beasts, the shepherd
must always have in a redynesse. Varro would have him both for this purpose,
and for the better order of his reckoninges with his master, to write and
read. Of the number of the herds men, how many every flock ought to have, is
to be measured by the country, and kind of the cattle. The same Varro
allows for every four score Goats one shepherd, which Atticus allows to
a hundred, to every fyftie Mares two men: in our country one shepherd
suffiseth for a hundred, or two hundred Sheep, yea many times for three
hundred, and above, specially where they be every day brought home. One
swyneheard will keep twenty, or thirty Hogs, or more, if ye ground be
thereafter, the like for Bullockes and Kine. For Horses we seeldome have
heardsmen, but every man keeps them at home either in stables, or pastures,
not commonly exceedyng the number of twenty. In what order you shall feed
your cattle, either in Summer, or in Winter, and when toward the South,
Dogs.
and when to the West, I have told you before. The Dog (though the Lawyer
allows him not in the number of cattle) and though he yeeldes of him self no
profit, yet is he as the shepherd (for his trustiness, and watching of ye
flock) to be esteemed, and set by: for they have been seen to fight in the
defense and quarrel of their master. Yea diverse of them have been known after
their masters death, upon great affection and love, to famishe themselves,
whereupon the price of good Dogs grew to be very great. It is written, that
Alcibiades gave for one Dog, eight score pounds. There is not a more
necessary creature, then the Dog about husbandry: for beside his singular
faythfulnesse and watching in the night time, he is also a quarter master in
keeping of the cattle, and very needful for the defense of them: specially
Sheep and Goats, which would be soon destroyed by Woolfes, Foxes, Grayes,
and other vermin, if Dogs were not set to be their keepers. Swyne feeding in
heardes, if the wild beasts invade them, making as it were a larum with their
gruntyng and crying, assemble them selves in their own defense. The greater
cattle defend them selves some with their heels, some with their horns,
only the poor Sheep has no soldier but the Dog. Of Dogs that serve for
profit, there are but three sorts: for of the fourth (which are but for
pleasure) I make no account. One of the sorts, is such as by sent, or
swiftness serve for the chase, and killing of wyld beasts: these, what manner
of ones they should be, and how they should be ordered, Xenophon and Oppianus,
in their Cynigetickes have taught, and I in my last book, where I shall speak
of hunting, will declare. But now I will only speak of Dogs for the husband,
and keepers both of the house and the cattle: and first of the Mastie that
keeps the house: The Bandog for the house.
for this purpose you must provide you such a one, as has a large and a mighty
body, a great and a shryll voice, that both with his barking he may discover,
and with his sight dismay the thief, yea being not seen, with the horror of
his voice put him to flight. His stature must neither be long, nor short, but
well set, his head great, his eyes sharp, and fiery, either brown, or gray,
his lips blackishe, neither turning up, nor hanging too much down, his mouth
black and wide, his nether iawe fat, and coming out of it of either side a
fang, appearing more outward then his other teeth, his upper teeth even with
his nether, not hanging too much over, sharp and hidden with his lips, his
countenance like a Lions, his breast great, and shaghard, his shoulders broad,
his legs big, his tail short, his feet very great, his disposition must
neither be too gentle, nor too cursed, that he neither fawn upon a thief, nor
fle upon his friends, very waking, no gadder abroad, not lauishe of his mouth,
barking without cause, neither makes it any matter though he be not swyft: for
he is but to fight at home, and to give warning of the enemy. The Dog that
is for the fold, must neither be so gaunt nor swyft as the Grayhound, The
shepheardes Mastie.
nor so fat nor heavy as the Masty of the house, but very strong, and able to
fight and follow the chase, that he may be able to beat away the Woolfe, or
other beasts, and to follow the thief, and recover the pray, and therefore
his body would rather be long, then short and thick: in all other points he
must agree with the Bandogge. Touching the kind, the Dog is thought better
then the Bitch, because of the trouble she brings when she is sawte:
howbeit, the spayde Bitches do byte sorest, and are more waking. For their
age, they must neither be Whelps, nor too old: for the Whelpe can neither
defend him self, nor the flock, where as yet the old has some use about a
house. If you have a Whelpe (which age is better to be trained, either for the
house or the fold) you shall perceive by his foot whether he will be great or
no. His head must be great, smoothe, and full of veins, his ears great, and
hanging, his joints long, his forelegges shorter then his hinder, but very
straight and great, his claws wide, his nails hard, his heel neither fleshy
nor to hard, the ridge of his back not to much appearing, nor crooked, his
ribs round and well knitte, his shoulder points well distant, his buttockes
fat, and broad, and in all other parts (as I said) of the Bandogge before.
For his color it makes no great matter, though Varro would have him white,
and so would Columella, the Dog for the feelde, as he would have the house
Dog to be black: but the pyed color is judged naught in them both. The
wh^te they commend, because he may be discerned from the Woolfe in the night,
whereby they shall not strike the Dog in steed of the Woolfe. The black
again for the house, is best commended, because of his terror to the thief
in the day, and the hurt that he may do by night, by reason of his not being
seen: the dunne, the branded, and the red, do not mislike me, so they be
well marked beside. Thus must you judging him as a Lion by the clawe, either
buy one, or bring up one for your purpose. How much teaching, or bringing up
preuayleth, appears by Lycurgus, his example in Xenophon. To make them fyerce
and cursed, you must pluck them by the ears, set them together with your
hands, and keep them from being hurt: so shall you have them the bolder, and
the fiercer, and such as will never give it over. You must use him first to the
cheyne, by ty^ng him to a clogge, setting him draw it a while by his neck,
and when you have a little space used him in this sort, then may you either
lead him, or tie him: it is best to keep them tied in the day time, to make
them the cur^ter, and to let them loose in the night time: so shall they in the
night time watch, and in the day sleep. To arm them against the Woolfe, or
other wyld beasts, you may put broad c^llers about their ne^kes full of
nails, and iron studdes, lyning it with soft leather within. You must look
that your Dogs be of a good kind, and (if you can) all of one kind, so shall
they stick the better together: choose them that have the curstest dammes,
and such as have their pappes even. They begin to litter at a year old, and
continue mean years, after ten they be worth nothing. The Dog (as
Columella says) gets whelps lu^^yly, till he be ten years old: the whelps
of old Curres, are slow, and naught. Homer seems to make the life of a
Dog, above twenty years, where he speaks of the coming home of Ulysses,
and the knowledge of his Dog: and I me self have seen Dogs that were
said to be so much, but altogether unprofitable. Their age may be known by
their t^eth, the young having (as Aristotle says) white teeth and sharp: the
old, black and blunt. In the spring they begin to be sawte, and go with
whelpe (as Aristotle and Xenophon says) threescore days, or at the most
threescore and three. Varro writes, that they go three months with young:
the Dogs of Lacedemon engender at eight months old, and all other Dogs
also at half a year: they are with whelpe at once liming: they lytter about
June: when they be lyttred, they are blind, and the more milk they have, the
longer it is before they see, but never longer then one and twenty days, nor
sooner then seven days. Some hold opinion, that if there be but one at a
lytter it will see the nienth day, if two, the tenth day, and so a day added
for as many as be, and that those that be of the first lytter do soonest see:
the best of the lytter, is that which last sees, or which the Bitch first
carries to her kennell. As soon as they be Whelped, cast away such as you
mislike: of seven, keep three or four: of three, two: while they be young, at
the first they must be suffered to play with the dame, that they may grow the
better, afterward, let them be taught, and tied (as I told you) tying them in
the day, and letting them loose in the night, and such as you know to be of a
good kind, and would have them prove well, suffer them not to suck a strange
damme: for the milk and blood of the mother, is of great force to the
goodness and growth of the Whelpe. And if so be the Bitch lack milk, suckle
them with the milk of a Goat, till they be four months old. Lay underneath
them in their kennels straw and Chafe, that they may lie warm: for they can
not well away with cold. You must cut the tails of the Whelps, when they be
six weeks old, in this manner, there is a sinnowe that runs from the ridge
of the back, to the tippe of the tail, which being held fast with a pyncer,
and a little drawn out, you shall cut a sunder, whereby neither the tail shall
grow to any foul length, nor the Dog shall at any time after (as they say)
be mad. They are thought to lift up the leg when they piss, at six
months old, which is a sign of the perfectness of their strength. The
feeding of both kinds is all one, they may be fed with bones, porredge, and
such like: in any wise let them want no meat, for if they do, they will for
hunger raven abroad, and forsake both the house, and the flock. Xenophon would
have you give them Milk all the year long, and such food as they shall feed
with all their life time, and no other thing: if you feed them too full, it
will breed (as he says) diseases in their legs, and rotte them within.
Bread is their common meat, but Varro would have it given either with Milk,
or Whay, by use whereof, they will never forsake their cattle. You may give
them beside, bread, with the broth of sodden bones, and the bones them selves
broosed, which will make their teeth the sounder, and their mouths and jaws
wyder, and they wylbe the keener, by reason of the sweetness of the Marowe.
You must beware they eat no dead Sheep, least by reason of the taste, they
fall to the live ones. While the Bitch has Whelps, you must feed her rather
with Barley bread, then Wheaten bread: for they prosper better with it, and
makes them give more milk. You must feed them thryse a day, in the morning
when you tie them up, at noone, and agaynt at night, when you set them loose.
Their names that you give them, must be short, that they may sooner hear when
they be called. The Greeks, and the Latins, gave them names of two syllables,
the Germans lightly but one syllable, ^
as Ball, Slut, Patch, Grym etc. al though Columella would not have their names
under two syllables, showing for example the names of Dogs among the Greeks,
and the Latins, as (...), and Lupa, Tigr^^, Cerua: Xenophon reckons up
thousands al for the most part of two syllables. The diseases and greeuances
of Dogs, are the biting of Flies, Tycks, and Manginesse. Against this, you
must wash them, when they be Whelps, with bitter Almondes stamped and
strayned with water, wasshing them both about their ears, and betwixt their
claws, that neither Flies stick to them and blister them, nor Tycks or Lyce
molest them: and if they be already mangy, you must annoint them with Tar, and
Hogs grease: the Tycks also, if you touch them with this medeci^e, will
presently fall of, for you must not pluck them of by force. If your Dog be
full of Fleas, the remedy is Cummin beaten with a like quantity of Neesing
powder, and mingled with water, rub him over with it, or the old dregs of
Oil rubbed over all his body. If he be skabby, take Cyt^isus and S^samum, beat
them together, and mingling them with Tar annoint the sore: this medecin
will also remedy a christian creature. They say also, that if you thrust the
skin through with an iron, it will heal the manginesse, or if you smeare
them over with Gunne powder, or cast them into a Tanners Fat. Aristotle
writes, that Dog^es are cheefely troubled with three diseases, madness,
Qui^s^y, and the Gout, and wha^soeuer he byteth in his m^dnesse, becomes
also mad^ and dies thereof: the madness is must extreme in the (...): what
so ever is bitten by them, fai^^th stra^ghtwayes into a lo^hyng, and fear of
water. To preserve them from it, you must mingle with their meat for thirty
days together, or if they be already infected, give them Neesing powder to
eat. Pliny writes, that there is in the tongues of Dogs a little woorme,
called of the Greeks ^yrta, which if it be taken out while they be whelps,
they will neither be mad, nor greedy, or ravenous. If the Dog be mad,
Mad Dogs.
he refuses both meat, and drink, and driueleth ylfauoured fomie matter,
both from his nose, and mouth, he looks with a loathsome countenance, his
body his lean, and more clong together then it was wont to be, he bears
his tail betwyxt his legs, and biteth without any barking what soever he
meets, falling as well upon men, as beasts, making no difference betwyxt his
friends, and strangers. As the Dog is a watchman and keeper of the house and
the flock, so the Catte is also a household servant to be cheryshed. Cattes.
The Egyptians for their profitablenesse, did woorship for their God a golden
Catte: for whereas Rattes and Mise, as well in Cities, as in Granges, are
greatly hurtful, we keep up Cattes for the avoiding of the m^schiefe, neither
is there a speedier remedy. The Catte is a beast of nature enemy to the Mouse,
watching in the night, and sleeping in the day, stealing suddenly and swiftly
upon the Mouse: she sees better by night, then by day (as Alexander
Aphrodiseus writes) her eyes shine and glister in the dark. They go a
Catterwalling about February, and other times in the year (for they often
engender) and bring forth their young ones blind, as ye Bitch does. Herodotus
says, that after the Catte has kitned, she comes no more at the Bucke,
which when he perceaueth, and can not have his purpose, he kills ye young,
whereof when she sees her self bereft, for very desire of young (whereof this
kind is most desirous) she comes straight to the Bucke. For my part I would
rather counsel you to destroy your Rattes and Mise with Traps, Banes, or
Weesels: for besides the sluttishnesse and lothsomenesse of the Catte you know
what she lays in the Malt heap) she is most d^ungerous and pernicious among
children, as I me self have had good experience.


Soli deo honor and Gloria.
The end of the third book.
The fourth Book, entreatyng of Poultry, Foul, Fish, and Bees.
PVLLARIVS. CHENOBOSCVS. MELISSEVS. PISSINARIVS. PVLLA. AS keeping and breeding
of cattle, does yield no small commodity and gaynes to the husband, so the
nourishing, and maintenance of Poultry, Foul, Bees, and Fish (if the
country be for it) does commonly arise to his great advantage, whereby both
the revenue is greatly increased, and the table daily with dayntie, and no
chargeable dysshes furnished. Cages, and houses for Birds, wherein were kept al
manner and sorts of Foul, were first devised by M. Lelius Strabo at
Brundisium, from which time it was first put in use, to pen up such
creatures, as naturally were accustomed to flee at their liberty in the air.
At which time also began to be brought in strange and outlandish Fowls, the
keeping and breeding whereof, yields to the husband both pleasure, and
profit. We have here brought in PVLLARIVS, CHENOBOSCVS, MELISSEVS, and
PISSINARIVS, every one of them severally entreating of such things, as
belongs to his charge.


MELISSEVS. I see you have here (PVLLARIVS) great store of Foul, and Poultry,
and I believe verily, the profit and commodity of them, will not quite half
the charges they put you to.


PVLLARIVS. Yes verily they quite your cost, whether you sell them, or keep
them for the Kitchen. It is said, that Auidius Lurco made yearly of his
Poultry and Foul five hundred pound.


MELISSEVS. But I do a great deal better like the common Poultry, that we
keep about our houses.


PVLLARIVS. We have also of the same here at home with us.


MELISSEVS. Then let me understand (I pray) in what order you keep them, for
herein you seem to be most skillful.


PVLLARIVS. It is meet that every one be skillful in the trade that he
professes. If you will I will not refuse to show you that little cunning that I
have: so you on the other side vouchsafe to show me the ordring of your Bees.


MELISSEVS. I will not stick with you for that, to tell you the best that I
can.


PVLLARIVS. Well then with a good will I declare unto you my knowledge,
beginning first with those kinds that are most in use: for amongst all other
household Poultry, the chief place is due to the Cork and the Hen, that are
beside so common, as the poorest wyddowe in the country is able to keep them.
In this Byrd there are three points of natural affection cheefely to be
woondred at. The first, the great carfulness that they have during the time
of their sitting, wherein for the desire of hatching their young, they seem to
be carlesse of either meat or drink. Secondly, that they bear such love to
them, as they stick not to hazard their own lives in the defense of them. And
thirdly, that in the storm, great cold, or sickness, they preserve and
nourish them under their wings, not making for the while any account of their
own selves. There is hereof a most sweet comparison in the Gospel, wherein our
Savior CHRIST compares him self to the Hen that gathers her Chickins
under her wings. And therefore, since these are common for every man to have,
and that they always feed about the house, I think it best to begin with
them, and to tell you which are best to be liked, which to be brought up, and
which to be fatted. First, the bell to be bought for broode^ The ^^or^e (...)
b^oode.
are the dunne, the red, the yellowe, and the black, the white are not to be
meddled with, because they are commonly tender, and prosper not, neither are
they besides fruitful, and are always the fairest mark in a Hawke, or a
Bussardes eye. Let therefore your Hen be of a good color, having a large body
and breast, a great head, with a straight read and duble comme, white (...) and
great, her tallons even. The best kind (as Columella says) are such as have
^iue claws, so that they be free from spurs: for such as wear those Cockish
weapons, are not good for brood, and disdain the company of the Cock, and
lay but seeldome, and when they sit, with their unruly spurs they break
their Eggs. The little Pullets, or Hens, though the old age, both for their
unfruitfulness, and other causes disalowed them, yet in many places they prove
to be good, and lay many Eggs. In England at this day, they are used as a
daynty dishe at men's tables. The choice of the Cock.
In the choice of your Cocks, you must provide such as will tread lustyly, of
colors, as I told you for the Hens, and the like number of tallons, and
like in many other points, but of stature they must be hyer, carr^yng their
heads straight up, their commes must be ruddy and hye, not hanging, nor falling
down, their eyes black and sharp, their bylles short and crooked, their
ears great and white, their wattelles oryent, having under them as it were a
kind of grayish beard, the neck feathers of color diverse, either a pale,
golden, or a gylstering green, which must hang rufl^ng from his neck, to his
shoulders, their breasts must be large, and well brawned, their wings well
feathered and large^ their tails dubled and flagging, their rumpes and thyes
full of scathers, their legs strong, well armed with sharp and deadly spurs:
Their disposition (for you shall not need to have them great fighters) would
be gentle, quick, and lively, and specially good wakers, and crowers: for it is
a Byrd that well aporcioneth both the night and the day, and (as Prudentius
witnesses) exhorts to repentance. Neither must you on the other side, have
him a Craddon, for he must sometime stand in the defense of his wife and his
chyloren, and have stomach to kill, or beat away a Snake, or any such hurtful
vermin: but if he be to quarrellus, you shall have no rule with him, for
fightting and beating his fellows, not suffering them to tread, though he
have more then his hands full him self. This mischi^fe you may easily
prevent, with shackling him with a shoe sole: for although such lusty fighters
are bredde up and cheryshed for the game, yet are they not to serve the
husbands turn at home. A Cock framed and proporcioned after this sort, shall
have ^iue or six Hens going with him.


MELI. I pray you let me understand what time of the year is best for bringing
forth of Chickins?


PVLLA. In some places, specially the hottest countries, the Hens begin to
lay in January in colder countries, e^ther in February, or at the latter end of
January: you must also further their laying, be giving them meats for the
purpose, as Barley half sodde, which makes both the Eggs the fayrer, and
causes them to lay the oftener. Some think it good to mingle therewith the
leaves or the seeds of Cytisus, which both are thought to be greatly of force
in making them fruiteful. If this be not to be had, you may supply the want
with Spery, or (as Ca^dan^^ says) with Hempseede, which will cause them to lay
all the W^n^^r. When they lay, you must see that their nestes be very clean,
and kept still with fresh clean straw: for otherwise they will be full of
Flease, and other vermin, which will not suffer the Hen to be quiet, whereby
the Eggs do not hatch even together, or many times wax adle and rotten. The
Eggs that you set under them, must be new laid, howebeit, so they be not
above ten days old, it makes no great matter: if you l^oke not to them,
they will straightwayes sit after their first laying, which you must not
suffer, for the young Pulle^s, are better for laying, then sitting: the desire
of sitting is restrained, by the thrusting a feather through their nose. The
old Hens must rather be suffered to sit, then the younger, because of their
experience. Herein must you have a special regard to know which be best to
sit, for some be better to bring up Chickins, then to sit. Others again
will either break, or eat up both their own Eggs, and their fellows Eggs:
such you must put aside, and if their nails and bylles be sharp, rather
employ them in brooding, then in sitting. Democritus tells, that Chickins may
be brought forth without setting under the Hen, if so be the doung of
Hens, syfted very fine, be put in little bags, basted about with soft
feathers, upon which the Eggs must be laid straight upright, with the sharp
end upward: upon these again must the like quantity of Hens doung be laid,
so that they be of every side closely covered. This done, you must suffer them
to lie for the two or three first days, and after, every day turn them,
taking good heed, that you knock them not one against the other in the
turnyng. After twenty days, you shall find the Eggs broken: and therefore
the twentieth day, plucking away the shelles, and taking out the Chickin, you
may commit them to the Hen. It is written, that Chickins have been hatched by
the continual warmth of a woman's bosom: beside, it has been seen, that
Eggs being laid in an Oven, or warm place, covered well with Straw and
Chafe, having a little fire beside, and one to turn them continually, have
disclosed and broken at their accustomed time. Aristotle writes, that Eggs
put in warm vessels, or covered with doung, will hatch of them selves. The
number of the Eggs that your Hen shall sit upon, some would have to be
odd, and not always alike, but in January and February fifteen, and no
more, in March nieneteene, and no less: which number you shall continue all
the summer, till September, or October, after which time it is to no purpose to
breed any longer: for the Chickin, by reason of the cold weather and
diseases, never prosper. Yea some be of opinion, that after the tenth, or
twelfth of June, you shall never have fair brood, and that the best season
for sitting, begins at the tenth of March. And herein you must always be
sure to have the Moon encreasyng, from that she be ten days old, till
fyfteene: for that is the best time to sit in. And so must you again dispose
the time, as the hatching may fall out in the increase of the Moon: for the
just time of hatching, there are sundry opinions. Aristotle writes, that they
are hatched in nieneteene days, Varro (for Chickins) one and twenty days, or
twenty days, for Peacocks and Geese, seven and twenty days, and sometimes
more: Ducks, in the like space to the Hen, specially if they sit night and
day, allowing them only the morning, and the euenyng to feed: which times
they must of necessity have. If so be you will set under your Hen Peacocks
Eggs with her own, you must set her upon the Peacocks Eggs, ten days
before she have her own eggs, whereby they shall be hatched all at once,
neither must you set above five Peacocks or Goose Eggs under a Hen. If you
would have al Cock Chickins, To have Cock chickins, or Hen Chickins.
you must choose such Eggs as be longest and sharpest, as again (for Hens)
the roundest, (as both Pliny and Columella write) though Aristotle seem not
of that opinion. To understand which be good eggs, which not, you must (as
Varro teaches) put them in water, and such as be naught, will swyme aloft, and
the good, go straight to the bottom. Others do hold them up against a
candle, and if they see through them, they judge them light and naught. You
must in no wise shake them, or shoggle them, lest you break the stringes of
life, that are but newely begun: it has been seen, that by shaking of the
eggs, the Chickins have been hatched lame. We may beside perceive whether the
Eggs will prove well or no, if four days after the Hen have sitten, you
hold them up in the sun, or other light, and if you see that they be clear,
cast them away, and put other in their places. Against thunder, Against hurt of
thunder.
that many times marreth the Eggs, some do set about them the leaves or
branches of Bays, or Bentes, or Grass, others (again) the heads of
Garlic, and nails of iron. In the great heat of the Summer, you must now
and then sprinckle the Eggs a little with water, and wet them, least by the
extreme heat they wax dry and adle, specially the Eggs of Turkies and
Hens. When so ever you mean to make clean their nestes, you must take up
the Eggs, and lay them tenderly in some l^ttle basket, and so lay them
speedyly again in the clean nest, near to the place where the Hen sittes:
you must set water, and meat, that they may better keep their nestes, and
that by their long absence the Eggs wax not cold. And although the Hen
does always turn her Eggs, yet it behooves you when she is from the nest
to turn them softly with your hands, that by receiving a like warmth, they
may the sooner be ready. And if she have happened to brust any of them with her
feet, you must presently remove them. At the nienetenth day, you must look
diligently whether the Chickins do iobbe the shell with their bylles, and
hearken whether they peep: for many times by reason of the hardness of the
shel they can not com forth, and therefore you must help them out with your
hands, and put them to the Hen, and this you must do no longer then three
days: for the eggs that after one and twenty days make no noise, have
nothing in them, and therefore you must cast them away, that the Hen loose not
her labor. Upon the twentieth day, if you stir the eggs, you shall hear the
Chickin, from that time begin the feathers, the Chickin lying so, as the head
rests upon the right toote, and the right wing lies upon the head, the
yolke vanishing by little and little away. You must not take the Chickin away
as they hatched, but suffer them to remain one whole day with the Hen in the
nest without meat or drink, till such time as they be all hatched. It is
wonderful, and yet the experience seen, that before they be suffered to eat
they take no harm, though they fall from a great heygth. The next day, when
all the flock is come forth, Columella would have you to put them under a
sieve, and to perfume them with the smoke of Peniryal, or to hang them in a
basket in yt smoke, which preserves them (as it is thought) from the Pippe,
which many times distroyeth the poor Chickin: then must you put them into a
Coope with the Hen, and feed them at the first with Barley meal, sodden in
water, and sprinkled with a little Wine. Afterward, when they go abroad,
you must feel every one of them, whether there remain any of ye meat they
received the day before: for if their Croppes be not empty, it betokens want
of digestion, and therefore you must keep them fasting till al be digested. You
must not suffer them to go far from the Hen, but to keep them about the
Coope, and to feed them till they wax strong with bruised Barley, and Barley
meal: you must also take good heed, that they be not breathed upon by either
Toade, Snake, or Euet, for the air of such is so pestilent, as it by and by
distroyeth them al: which mischief is avoided by burning of Hearts horn,
Galbanum, or Woman's hear, ye smoke of al which preuenteth this pestilence. You
must see beside that they lie warm: for they neither can suffer cold, nor to
much heat, ye feathers about their tails must be pulled away, lest with the
hardening of their doung, their passages be stopped, which if it be, you must
open softly with a little quill: you must keep them with the Hen for a
months space, and after suffer them to go at liberty. Both the old and the
young, are of all other diseases most troubled with the Pippe, Against the
Pippe.
specially about harvest time, which is a little white skin, covering the
tippe of their tongue, which is to be plucked away with the nails, and the
place to be pouldred with Ashes, or Garlike pouldred and sprinkled upon it.
From this plague you shall preserve them, by feeding them in clean vessels,
and giving them always the purest and cleanest water, and keeping their houses
always clean and smoked, or by smoking them as they sit, with the smoke
cheefely of Bays and Sauyn. The wives of the country do commonly cure them,
by thrusting a feather through their nose, and stirring it every day: their
diet must be Hearbgrace wrapped in Butter or Garlike, mingled with meal or
water, or Cloves of Garlike wette in warm sallet Oil, and put into their
mouths. Some (says Columella) do use to wash their mouths with piss, and
keep their bills so long close, as the salt and bitter taste force them to
cast at their nose the spring of the disease. Others again do cut Garlike in
gobbettes, and putting them in skallding Oil, after it is cold, do wash
their mouths. If they happen to eat Lupines, they will straight swell under
the eyes, which if you do not gently open, and take out the Core, to
presently kills them. And if so be the Pippe have now closed up the eyes,
and that they forsake their meat, you must lanch their Cheeks with a sharp
knife, and thrust out the water that lies under the eyes, and put in the wound
sal^e sinely beaten: this happens cheefely when in the summer time they
drink foul water, and also when they want meat, or take cold. If their eyes
be sore, you may heal them with the juice of Purcelane, and Woman's milk,
annoynting on the out side, or with Cummin, Honey, and salt Armoniacke. You
shall rid them of Lyse, with parched Cummin, and Stauesacre, a like quantity
of each beaten together, and powered on with Wine: also the water wherein
wild Lupines have been sodden. If your Hen fall to ea^ing of her eggs,
taking out the white, you must power in plaster or some liquid thing, that may
come to a hardness in the shell To keep them from eating of Grapes, you shall
give them the berry of the wood called the wyld Uine, gathered from the Hedge
before it be ripe, and sodden with Wheat flower, the evil cast whereof will
cause them to loathe Grapes. Choice of Pou^^y.
Pliny affirms, that if you give them the flowers of the Uine with their
meat, they will not touch the Grape. As in all other cattle of the country,
so in these kinds the best are to be kept, and the worst either to be sold, or
to be killed in the house. And therefore every year about the f^^ of the lease,
when they cease to breed, you shall lessen their number and put (...) the old
ones. Such as are above three^ e^res, and such as are either unfruitful, or
not good bringers up of Chickins, but specially those that eat up either their
own Eggs, or their fellows, or such as after the Cockishe manner either
crow, or trende: to the which number you shall also add, such as were hatched
after the ten^h of June, which never prove to be fair, but the Cock as long
as he is able to tread you may keep: for you shall seldom meet with a good
Cock. For fatting, the best are those that have the skins of their necks
thick and fattysh. The place where you mean to fat them, (...) of (...).
must be very warm, and of little light, because as both Varro, and our own
experience shows, the light, and their often sturring, keeps them from
being fat: thus must they be kept for five and twenty days, wherein they will
be fat. Let them hang every on^ in his Basket or Cage by him self, which must
have in it two holes, one to thrust out his neck at, the other to cast out his
doung, that he may discharge him self, and let them be strawed either with
straw, or course heye: for the harder they lie, the sooner they fat. Pull
away besides their feathers from their heads, their wings, and their tails,
the one for avoiding of ^^^e, the other for binding their bodies. The meat
that you give the^, must be Bar^y mea^e, which mingled with water, be made in
little pellets, wherewith they wylbe fat (as some thinke^ in fourteen
days: but see that you give it them but moderately at the first, till they
well digest it, after give it them in quantity, according as they digest it:
(...) them no new, till you perceive, by feeling of their croppes, that the
old be endewed. Others do sprinckle their meal with Honey sodden in water,
putting to three parts of water, one of Honey, and one of Wine, and wetting
herein Wheaten bread, they therewithal do cramme them. Others say, that if
you put hereunto a little Milk, they wylbe wonderful fat. The Cockrelles
are gelded (as Aristotle says) in the hinder part, Making of Capons.
which when they tread, falls out: this part, if you burn two or three
times, they will be Capons. And if they be right Capons, their coames becomes
pale, neither crowing, nor treading any more. Our wives of the country,
cutting them betwyxt the legs, take out their stones, and sowing up the
wound, annoint it with Butter, which done they shut them up in a Coope, not
suffering them to drink in a day or two. From the beginning of harvest, and
all Winter long, the offal of the Corn, and the Barnes door does feed them
sufficiently: where they plant Uines, sparing others more costly foodes, they
feed them with the kernelles o^ the Grapes: and where there is neither the
offall of Corn, nor Grapes, they must be fed with Oats, Spery, or such
like. To cause them to lay in Winter, Of Eggs.
you must give them (as I told you) Hempseede. If you would have great Eggs,
Leoncus teaches to beat in powder Brick, or Flaunders Tyle, and mingling it
with Chesyll and Wine to make it in Dowe, and give it to your Hen, or to put
a Saucerful of the powder of the Brycke, to a gallon of Branne, and to feed
them with it. The Eggs of Pigions, Geese, Peacockes, and Turkies, be all
white, the Eggs of water Fowls be greenish, and pale, the Ginny Hens Eggs,
be like to the Pehennes in all things, saving that they be speckled as the
Turkey Hens. The Phesants, and the Rastryls Eggs, are reddish. The Eggs of
all Fowls (as Pliny says) are of two colors, wherein the water Fowls
Eggs, having a great deal more yolke then white, and that more black then
others. The Eggs of Fishes, are all of one color, having no white in them.
The Eggs of Byrds, are by reason of their heat, brittel: and Serpents Eggs,
by reason of their coldness, tough: Fishes, by means of their moisture, soft
in laying, the round part of the Egg comes first out, the shell being soft,
and presently after hard: what form soever they have the long are most
commended^ as witnesses the Poet. The Egg in fashion framed long, no of them
(as I said before) is brought forth the Co^ke Chickin, as of the round ones
the Hen, though Aristotle be against it. Some Hens do lay very great
Eggs, and those most times with two yelkes, having the shell d^uided as it
were with a circle, which both Aristotle writes, and our experience
approoueth. Some both lay double, and hatch double: some are so fruitful, as
they lay great numbers at ones, some every day, some twyse a day: some are so
fruitful, as they kill them selves with laying. In the midst of al Eggs,
there lies as it were a drop of blood, which is suppos^d to be the heart of the
Bird, which is first in all the body framed: the body it self is wrought of
the white. The sustenance is the yelke, the head while it is in yt shell, is
bigger then all the body, the eyes shut up more then the head. While the
Chickin increases, the white goes to the midst, and the yelke compasses it
round about. The twentieth day (as I said before) if you stir the Egg, you
shall hear the Chickin, from which time ye feathers come forth, lying so, as
the head rests upon the right foot, and the right wing covers the head.
The adell Eggs are thought to come of the vain lust and treading of the
Hens together: some suppose them to be bredde of the wind, and therefore
call them wind Eggs, as Aristotle before Pliny has written. Eggs are
preserved in Winter, if you keep them in Chafe, Straw, or Leven, and in
summer, if you cover them with Branne, or Wheat. Some do cover them before in
fine beaten salt for the space of six hours, and after wash them, and so lay
them in Chafe, Straw, or Branne. Others again cover them in Beans, and some
in Bean flower, and some in heaps of salt: but salt, as it suffers not the
Eggs to corrupt, so it greatly deminisheth the substance of them. Your Hen
houses must be made in that part of your house, as lies in the Winter toward
the rising of the sun, and joining as near as may be to some Rylle, Oven, or
Chymney, or to the Kitchen, so as the smoke may come amongst them: for smoke
is very wholesome for this kind of Foul. And that was (I think) the cause that
the old people made choice in their quitrentes of smoke Hens, as of the
best, as it appears by old rentalles. Let the front of your Hen house
stand always toward the East, and to that coast let the door open. Let the
inner roo^es be well furnished with Loftes and Lathers, and small wyndowes
opening Eastward, at which your Poultry may flee out in the morning, and come
in to roust at night. Look that you make them close at night, and let the
wyndowes be well lettysed for fear of vermin. Let your nestes and lodginges,
both for laying and brooding, be orderly cast, and against every ne^t and
rousting place, place steps and boordes to come up by, making them as rough
as may be, that the Hens may take good hold when the^ flee up to them, and
not by their over ^ind^t^enesse, be forced to flutter and hurt their Eggs. I^
shall not be amiss, if you ^arget the house both within and without with good
(...) by n^i^her Weesel, nor other hurtful vermin may enter in. Boorded
floor are not for Foul to roust upon, which almost all kind of Birds r^^^se,
because of the hurt that they receive by their doung, which if it cleave to
their feet, breeds the G^u^e. And therefore to roust (...), you must make
them Perches, which Columella would, should be made fouresquare: but it is
better to have them round, so that they be not too smoothe for them to take
hold by. Let the Perches reach from one side of the wall to the other, so as
they stand from the floor a foot in height, and two foot (...) one from the
other: and thus have you the fai^on of your Hen house. The court where they
goe^ must be clean from doung and durtinesse, not having water in it, saying
in one place, and that must be very fair and cle^^^: for if it be pudled, or
durty, it b^eedeth (as I said before the Pippe. To keep their water clean,
you may have fair e^rthen, or stone vessel, or trowghes of wood, covered in
the coppe, in the which there must be several holes so big, as the head of
the Foul may easily enter: for if you should not keep them thus covered, the
Poultry would in their drinking (...) and poison it with their doung. Their
meat must be given them betimes in the morning for straying abroad, and a
little before night, that they may come the timelier to their rest. Those that
be in the Coope, must (as Columella says) be fed thryse in the day: the
others must be used to an acquaynted voice, that they may come at the calling.
The number must be well marked: for they soon deceive their keeper. Beside,
you must have round about by the walls, good plenty of dust, wherein they
may bathe and proyne them selves: for as the Swyne delights to wallowe in
dirt, so does this kind to bathe and tumble in the dust. And this is (I
think) almost all that is to be said of Pulleyne.


MELISSEVS. Yea, but we must hear something also touching the other sorts of
Foul that are kept about ye house, which peradventure CHENOBOSCVS can instruct
us of.


CHENOBOSCVS. And if you will needs have me^ I will not refuse to show you
somewhat also of my feathered cattle.


MELISSEVS. I pray you do so.


CHENOBOSCVS. Amongst the Foul that we keep about our houses in the country,
^
the second place of right, is due to the Goose and the Ducke, which are of
the number of those that they call Amphibia, because they live as well upon
the land, as the water. And because the keeping of Geese requires no great
labor, it is a thing not unmeet for the husbandman, for that (if he have
place commodious for it) it is done without any charges, and yields good
advantage has with their brood, and feathers, for beside the profit of their
Eggs, you may twyse in the year, at the spring, and the fall of the leaf
pull them. Moreover, they are a very good dishe for the ^able, yea being more
watchful then the Dogs, they give warning when they sleep. And therefore
they were with the Romans had in great honor, because they with their gagling
bewrayed the enemy, that otherwise in the night time had taken the Town:
Pliny writes of a Goose, that would never be from the Philosopher Lacydes.
Your choice must be of those that be of the fairest kind: Varro likes best
the white ones, which color was most esteemed in the old time, as appears
by the presents that were given: the same Varro accounts the gray for a wyld
kind. They are kept in Marshes, Fennes, Lakes, and Moorish commons: for to
Corn ground, Meadows, and Pastures, it is a very hartful Foul: she biteth
whatsoever young spring she may reach, and what she once has bitten, does
never lightly prosper again. Besides, she stencheth the ground with her
unprofitable, or rather most hurtful dounging: wherefore (as I said) it is
best to keep them in Fennes, Lakes, and Marshes. If you have store of such
ground, you shall do well to keep them: for you can not well keep them
without good store of water and pasture. The Goose delights in such meat as
is naturally moist and cold, and shunneth naturally such things as are
hurtful for her, as the leaf of the Bay, and (as Alianus writes) the
Oleander: the best and meetest time for them to breed in, is from the Kalends
of March, to the tenth of June. They tread most commonly in the water, while
they swymme in the Ryuers, or Fishponds. Columella would have you keep for
every Gander, three Geese, thinking by reason of their vnweldynesse, this
number to suffice: within your court, you must make them for their better
safety, several, and secret pens, in sundry parts thereof, where they may
sit and breed. Some would have the Goose room framed in such order, as
every Goose may have her place to her self: which, if any man think too
troublesome, he may make one sufficient wide room to serve them all. The
places where they shall lay, must be dry, and well strawed with straw, or such
soft matter, and well defended from vermin. The Goose must not be suffered to
lay out of her nest, but when you shall perceive they seek it, you must gr^pe
them, and if they be with Egg, which you shall easily feel, shut them up in
their nestes, which you shall not need to do above once, or twyse: for where
she has once laid she will always of her self se^ke to be. They will lay
(as some hold opinion) thryse in the year, if they be not suffered to sit,
as it is best you do not: for their Eggs are bett^r to be hatched under a
Hen, then of them selves, and will ^etter a great deal prosper. The Eggs of
Geese, and Swans, were used (as Alianus witnesses) as a most daynty dyshe at
^^nkettes, among the Kings and Princes of the Indies. Aristotle affirms,
that the Goose always uses to sit, and never the Gander, contrary to the
order of many other Foule^, continuing always till she have hatched. After
the last laying, you shall suffer them to sit, and mark every ones Eggs with
a several mark, that they may be set under their own Goose, for it is
thought they will never hatch a strangers Eggs, without she have her own
under her. Of Goose Eggs, as of Pehennes Eggs, you shall (as I said before)
never set under a Hen above five, nor under three: but under the Goose you
shall set at the least seven, and at the most fifteen. You must keep to lay
under your Eggs, the roots of Nettles, which they say, preserves them
against the stinging of Nettels, which otherwise many times kills the
Gosling, if they sling them. The Eggs will not be hatched if the weather be
cold, before the thyrtieth day, if it be warm, in lesser time: howbeit for the
most part, the Gosling is hatched the thirtieth day after the sitting. Some do
use to set by the nestes, Barley steeped in water, or Malte, whereby the Goose
shall not be forced to be any while absent from her Eggs. When your Goslinges
are come forth, you shall for the first ten days feed them with the Goose
in the nest. Afterward, when the weather is fair, you may suffer them to go
abroad, taking good heed that they be not stinged with Nettles, nor that you
let them go a hungerd into the pastures: but to give them before they go
abroad the leaves of Endive, or Lettuse chopped, to assuage their hunger: for if
you put them a hungerd into the feelde, they strain and break their own
necks, with pulling at the tough and stubburne weeds, by reason of ye sudden
starting back again of the weed. The Goslings of diverse broodes must not go
together, nor be shut up together, for hurting one another. When they be
four months old, Fatting of Geese.
or somewhat before, is the best time for fatting them: the young ones are
soonest and easeliest fatted. If you give the^ ground Malt, and wheat flower,
you need to give the^ nothing, so you let them have drink yenough, and keep
them from going abroad. The Greeks did use to put to two parts of ground Malt,
four parts of Bran, tempring it with water, letting them drink thrice a day,
and at midnight. If you would have their Lyuers soft and tender, you shall
mingle dry Figs well beaten with water, and making pellets thereof, cram them
with it for the space of seventeen, or twenty days. The Jews at this day,
being the skilfullest feeders that be, do use a strange order in the fatting
of them, wrapping the Goose in a linen Aporne, they hang her up in a dark
place, stopping her ears with Peason, or some other thing, that by neither
hearing, nor seeing of any thing, she be not forced to stroggel, or cry:
after, they give her pellets of ground Malt, or Barley steeped in water thryse a
day, setting by them water and gravel, by which manner of feeding, they make
them so fat, as the Liver many times comes to be five pound in weight.
Whylest I was at the council of Worms, there was a Liver of a Goose brought
me by a Jew, that wayed four pound. Pliny is also a witness, of the
greatness of the Lyuers of fat Geese, affirming, that they will grow after
they be out of the bodies, being sprinkled with milk. The common order of
fatting with our country people, is to shut them up in a dark, and a
narrow place, and to set before them Barley, or Beech wheat, giving them water
with a little Sand, or Grauel in their Troughes: and with this order they have
them fat in fourteen days. After harvest, they wylbe fat with the
Grotten, or Stubble. They are plucked (as I said before) twyse in the year, in
the spring, and in the fall of the leaf. Some use to clippe them, but then
their feathers never grow so well: but if you pull them, you shall have them
to come very fair again: and this is yenough for a Goose. Duckes and Teales,
Duckes.
are to be ordered in like manner almost as the Goose, saving that they delight
more in waters, and marshes: and therefore you must force some Waters, Lakes,
or Pooles, for them, whereunto they may easily go and swymme, and dyue at
their pleasure. Columella would have you have a court for the nonce for them,
where no cattle use, and near to the house, round about the which you shall
buyld for them little handsome ^oomes, three foot square, with pretty doors to
every one of them: which when they breed, you shall keep shut. Hard by,
you must have either some Pond, or River, wherein (as I said) they may swym:
for without the help of the water they can as evil live, as without the land.
It is good also to have near unto them, some good pasture, or meddowe, or to
set about the Ponds or Rivers, such herbs as they best like, as Clauer,
Fenegreeke, Endyue, Lettise, and such other as they most delight in, and
wherewith their young do well feed: beside, you must give them Otes, Barley,
and other corn in water. There is nothing that they more love then Acornes,
nor that better fatteth them. They delight wonderfully to be amongst Reeds and
Sedges, wherein they may lie safe from ravenous Birds, but so, as there grow no
great stalked weeds, that may hinder their swymming: for they delight greatly
to play them selves in the water, and to strive who can swym fastest, when the
weather is fair and warm: for as they love such places where they may best
pray upon the creatures of ye water, so are they much offended, if they be
restrained of their liberty in swymming. In Winter, when the waters be frozen,
you must ply them sometimes with meat. They delight to make their nestes in
some secret Covert, but therein you must prevent them, and make their nestes
in their own lodging, or abroad, well covered and closed with weeds: to which
nest you must have some little sluice, or gut^er, by which you may every day
power in water and meat. Their food must be (as I said) Otes, Barley, Pease,
Panicle, Millet, and Spery, if you have any store. They lay great store of
Eggs, wherewith as with Goose Eggs, you may well feed your family. The
Eggs of Duckes and Geese, are kept in like sort as I told you of Hens Eggs:
and beside in Bran, Wheat, or Ashes. They breed in the same season that Geese
and other Foul do, about March and April. And therefore where you keep them,
you must straw sticks and strawes for them to make their nestes withal. Their
Eggs must be suffered to be hatched by themselves, or else removed and set
under some Hen: for the Ducklinges that the Hen hatcheth, are thought to be
gentler and tamer. You must take good heed, that the Eggs which they lay,
be not eaten and spoiled by Crows and Pyes, while the damme is seeking abroad
for meat. If so be you have Rivers, and Lakes for the purpose. It is best to
let the dammes bring them up, for when they be hatched, they will live very well
upon the water with their dammes, without any charge at all: only taking good
heed, that they be defended from Buzards, Rites, Crows, and other like
vermin: but so you use them, as they will every night come home to the house,
for it is not good to let them be abroad in the night, for danger of losing
them, and making them wild. Yet has it ben seen, that such as have hatched
abroad, have afterward come home, and brought with them a great number at
their tails. When I was Ambassador in England, it was told me by men of good
credit, that there was in Scotland near to the Sea, certain trees, that
yearly brought forth a fruit, that falling into the Sea, became a kind of
wild Duckes, or rather Barnacles, which though it seemed strange unto me, yet
found I Aristotle a witness of the like, who writes, that the River Hypanus
in Scythia, brings forth trees, whose leaves being somewhat larger then
Maple leaves, whereof comes a kind of four footed Byrds. But now to
Peacocks, Peacocks.
which Birds being more for pleasure then profit, are meeter to be kept of
noble men, then of poor husbands of the country, though Varro writes, that
M. Aufidius Lurco, who first began the fatting of this Foul, made yearly of
his Peacocks four hundred pound, whose example numbers following, the price of
Peacockes grew to be great, so much, as their Eggs were sold for half a
crown a piece, the Peacocks them selves, at four nobles a piece. The flesh
is very good and delicate, meet for noble men's tables, and will be long kept
without corrupting, the Eggs also be very pleasant, and good to be eaten.
Hortensus they say, was the first that ever killed Peacocke for the table in
Rome, as a new dyshe at the Priests feast. To this Byrd, is ascribed both
understanding and glory: for being praised, he settes up straight his tail,
and (as Pliny eloquently discrybes it) chefely against the Sun, whereby the
beauty may more be seen. His tail falling every year with the fall of the
leaf, he mourns, and creeps in corners till it be sprung again. They go
abroad, as Hens and Chickins do, without a keeper, and get their own
liuinges. They be best kept in little Islands: for they flee neither hye, nor
far of. Some think it to be a spiteful and an envious Bird, as the Goose to
be shamefast, and that he deuoureth his own doung, because he would have no
man receive benefit by him. He lives (as Aristotle says) five and twenty
years: he breeds at three years old, the Cock having his feathers diverse
colored: he hatcheth in thirty days, as the Goose does, and lays three
times a year, if his Eggs be taken away and set under a Hen. You must
look, that those that you set under a Hen, be new laid, and that the Hen
from the first of the Moon, be set upon niene Eggs, five of the Peacocks,
and four of her own. The tenth day after she has sit, take away the Hens
Eggs, and put under the like number of fresh Hens Eggs. They must be
turned, and therefore marked upon one side. And see that you choose the
greatest Hens: for if the Hen be little, you must take the lesser number of
Eggs, as three Pehennes Eggs, and six Hen Eggs. When they be hatched, you
must as you do with ye Hen, let them alone: the first day afterward bring
them out, and put them with the damme into a Pen, and feed them at the first
with Barley flower sprinkled with water, or pappe made of any other corn, and
cooled. A few days after, give them beside this, chopped Le^kes, and Curdes,
or fresh Cheese, the Whay well wrong out: for Whay is thought to be very
hurtful for the Chickins. After they be a month old, you may let them go into
the feeld and follow the Hen, tying the Hen with a long line, that she go
not to far abroad, but that the Chickin may come home in time. After the sixth
month, you may give them Barley, and bread: and after the seventh month, you
may put them to roust in the house with the other Peacocks, not suffering them
to sit upon the ground, but upon Pearches for taking of cold. And although
when they wax great, they cheefely delight to sit upon the tops of
houses, and be as the Goose is, which are the best watchmen, and also the best
warnyng geuers in the night time: yet is it best for you to use them to sit
upon Pearches, in houses made purposely for them. Columella thinks it not good
to suffer sundry Hens with their Chyckins to feed together, because the
Hen after she sees a bigger then her own, makes the less account of her
own Chickins, and many times by that occasion forsakes them. The Cock, for
the great lust that he has of tread, breaks a sunder the Eggs that be under
the Hen, and therefore it is best to have the Hens to sit as secretly as
may be: they also use to beat and chase their own Chickins, till they see
them cressed upon the head, taking them till then, to be none of their own.
One Cock suffiseth for five Hens, who by two often treading, does many times
cause that the Eggs never come to good. In warm countries they begin to
tread in February, when setting v^ his tail round about him, taking him
self for no small person, he begins to woo, and therefore at this time
both the Cock and the Hen, are to be cherished with meats for the purpose
to increase their lust, as Beans tosted a little by the fire, and given them
warm every five days in the morning. The quarellous and troublesome Cocks,
must be severed from their fellows, for hurting the weaker, and keeping others
from t^eading. The Hens must be kept so, as they may lay only in their
houses, and every day groped for their Eggs, and heedely looked to, with soft
st^awe laid under their Pearches: for many times they say as they sit upon
the Perch. Dise^ses.
The diseases of this Foul, and the remedies, are almost one with the diseases
of the house Cock and the Hen spoken of before, that is the Pipp^, and ill
digestion. Their greatest danger is, when their Coames come first out, for then
are they payned, as children are in breeding of teeth.


MELISSEVS. Turkey Cocks.
I would feign learn the right ordring of their outlandish Birds, called Ginny
Cocks, and Turkey Cocks.


CHENO^OSCVS. This kind of Poultry we have not long had amongst us: for before
the year of our Lord. 1530. they were not seen with us, nor I believe known
to the old writers. Some have supposed them to be a kind of the Birds called
in the old times Meleagrides^ because of their blewishe Coames: but these
kinds have no Coames, but only Wattles. Others again reckon them for a kind
of Peacockes, because they do in treading time after the same sort, spread and
set up their tails, bragging and vaunting them selves: howbeit, they neither
resemble these in all points. But because this kind of Foul, both for the
rareness, and also the greatness of their body, is at this day kept in great
flocks, it shall not be much amiss to speak of them: for in dayntinesse and
goodness of meat, the Hens may compare with either the Goose, or the
P^henne, and the Cock far excel them. The color of their feathers, is for
the most part white, black, or p^ed white and black, some blewe and black.
Their feet are like unto the Peacockes, their tails short, but spread, and
borne up after the Peacockes guyse, specially when they tread. The heads and
the necks of them, are naked without feathers, covered with a wrinckled
skin, in manner of a cowle, or a hood, which hanging over their bylles, they
draw up, or let fall at their pleasures. The Cork has the greater Wattles
under his c^inne, and on his breast a ^uf^ of hear. The color of that
wrinckled skin about his head (which hangs over his byll and about his
neck, al swelling as it were with little blathers) he changes from time to
time like the Cham^leon to al colors of the Rainebowe, sometimes white,
sometimes red, sometimes blewe, sometimes yellowe, which colors ever altring,
the byrd appears as it were a miracle of nature. The dieting and keeping of
them, is almost all one with the Peacocke, saving that this Byrd can worse away
with cold, and wette. It is a Byrd woonderfully given to breeding, every Cock
must as the Peacocke, have four or five Hens with him: they are more forward
in breeding then the Peacocke, beginning either the first year, or at the
farthest at two year old: they begin to lay in March, or soone^. In hot
countr^s they lay great numbers of Eggs, if they be continually taken from
them and set under Hens, and if so be you take them not away, they begin ^o
sit at the first: for they be of all others most given to sitting, and ^o much,
that if you take away al their Eggs, they will sit upon a stone^ or many
times the b^re nest. You must therefore restrain them of this desire, either by
thrusting a ^eather through their nose (as I before told you) or by wetting
their bellies with cold water. You must set under their Eggs (as I taught you
before) in the Peacocke: for they have both one time of hatching. The keeper
must mark ye one side of the Eggs, and always turn them, sprinckling them
now and then gently with fair water, and take heed the Cock come not at
them, for he will break them as well as the Peacocke: for the Cock of this
kind, is a froward and a mischiuous Byrd. The Chickines being hatched under a
Hen, may be kept with the Hens Chickins, or else very well alone with the
Hen, growing faster a great deal then the Peachicke. You shall feed them in
like sort as you do the Peacoke, or other Poultry: for they will eat any
thing, and delight in grass, weeds, gravel, and sand. And because they can
not away with cold, nor wette, you must keep them in Winter, in the warmest
and dryest places you have. The Pearches whereon they use to sit, must not be
hye, but an eight or ten foot from the ground, neither ^e they able to flee
any great height, and therefore must be helped with lathers, or steps. The
greatest disease that they are subject unto, is the Pippe and the Squecke,
which must be hol^en in like sort as the Hens, and the Eggs kept after the
same manner. In some places they use to make Capons of them when they be young,
which are served as a daynty dishe to the table, as was much used in ye house
of that godly and virtuous Semproma, ye Lady Hales of Kent, Lady Hales a m^^ro^
of Gentilvvomen.
who was first the wife of sir Walter Maun^yll of Northamtonshyre, a woman in
whom all virtues and bounties in her life time flourished.


MELISSEVS. I well remember that Lady, and have heard her highly commended of
such as in her life time best knew her, for a number of gracious and goodly
gifts that were in her, as her special love and delight in God, and in his
service, her helpful hand and comfort to such as were poor and distressed, ^s
well in releeuing them with meat and money, as with healing diseases, and
curing a number of loathsome, and almost incurable ulcers and wounds, her mild
and sweet disposition, her great humility, and carelessness of the vain
world, and other such virtues. I would to Christ that al other Gentlewomen,
that profess Christ outwardly, were as well given to follow him in deed, as
she was unfeignedly.


CHENOBOSCVS. She was the very Phaenix and Parageon of all the Gentlewomen that
I ever knew, neither am I sure I shall ever see the like: but she happily
rests with him, whom in her life time she so earnestly served. If you be not
weerie, I will return to my Foul, and show you the best order for keeping and
mainteyning of Pigions.


PVLLARIVS. I think both MELISSEVS and PISSINARIVS would gladly hear you to
tell us some thing of this, as I me self most wyllingly also would.


CHENOBOSCVS. Though you PVLLARIVS are better able to speak hereof then I am,
yet because of my profession, I will not refuse to take it upon me. Pigions.
What so ever he be, that given him self to the trade of husbandry, it
behooves specially to have a care for breeding of Pigions, as well for the great
commodity they yield to the Kitchen, as to the profit and yearly revenue
that they yield (if there be good store of Corn feeldes) in the market. Varro
writes, that in his time a pair of Pigions were sold for.1000. HS. And that
Lucius Axius, a knight of Rome, before the civil wars betwixt Caesar and
Pompey, sold his Pigions at.x. li. the pair: so much was that time given to
wantonness and gluttony, yea at this day in our time, has been seen given
for a pair of Pigions.x. li. Flemmish. And therefore the Douehouses are
commonly built with great cost and beauty in the tops of Turrettes and
Houses, from whence by narrow grated wyndowes, they flee abroad to their
feeding. Pigions (if the country be for them) are fed and maynteyned with
little cost, feeding them selves all the year long with such meat as they
find abroad, except at such time as the ground is covered with Snow, when as
you must of necessity help them with a little meat. There is two sorts of
them, one wyld kind, that is brought up in D^uehouses, and is of color either
bluish, white, speckled, or dunne: howbeit, the white is not good to be kept,
because they be soonest destroyed with vermin. In Italy, there are of this
sort, as big again as ours, and are now common in Flaunders. An other sort
is more familiar and tame, and something more large of body, with rough feet,
and commonly of color white, and sometime speckled and yellowysh: this kind is
commonly kept in Cities and Towns, where the others can not be kept, and is
fed with meat at home, and because they are ever in danger of vermin, and
ravening Birds, they are still kept within doors, and always fed at home.
This kind the common people call tame Pigions, or month Pigions, because they
breed every moonth, save in the dead of Winter. Both these sorts are
wondrous fruiteful, breeding commonly eight times a year (if the kind be
good) yea sometimes ten, and ^leuen times: for in Egypt^ as Aristotle
tells) they breed al ye Winter long. And though Hens are more fruitful
in laying of Eggs, yet Pigions are more profitable by often bringing forth
young: and therefore you must provide you such breeders, whose bodies be great
and fair, not too old, nor to young, o^ a good and perfect color, and a
fruiteful kind. It behooves him that will begin a Douehouse, not to begin
with the young and little ones, but with the breeders, and to bye so many
Cocks, as he does Hens, and to keep them if he can, matched together of
(...) ne^t: for if they be so matched, they will breed a great deal better.
They bring forth commonly a Cock and a Hen together (as Aristotle writes)
and our experience shows it: in March they begin to breed, if the weather be
w^^me, before. There is no Byrd fruitefuller then the ^^^ion, for in forty
days she conceaueth, lays, sits, and bringes vp^^ that for the most part
all the year, except (as I said before (...) She lays two Eggs, and when
she has (...) is a Cock, the next she lays, which is a Hen, the (...)
never ^^htly comes to g^od. Both the kind^^^ do always (...), the Cock in
the day, the Hen in the night, they hatch in twenty days, they lay after
five the ^inges. In (...) they sometimes bring forth in two (...) for upon the
nienetenth day they hatch, (...) again. And therefore you shall often ^^nd among
the young Pigions, Eggs some ready to hatch, and some flying: if there be no
Cocke^, the Hens will tread one the others, but their Eggs never come to
good, but are wind Eggs: Aristotle, and Theodorus calls them water Eggs,
whereof there never comes any thing, and because the young ones will breed
at five months old, we suffer the first flight to fly, to increase the
breed: as being hatched in March, will breed again in July, or August. Those
that we mean to t^ke for the Kitchen, or the Markette, are best to be drawn
at the latter time of the year, when they are worst able to de^end them selves
from the cold, and from Buzards, and Crows: the best for brood among all
Fowls, is the March brood. They that mean to fat Pigions to sell them the
dearer, do sever them when they be newely feathered, and feed them with
chawed white bread twyse a day in Winter, and thryse in Summer: and such as be
now hard pend, they leave in the nest, plucking the feathers of their wyng,
and breaking their legs, that they remove not from their places, giving the
dammes good plenty of meat, that they may better feed them selves, and their
young. Some (as Gelius writes) do softly tie their legs: for if they should
break them, they think the pain would keep them from fatting: but this
tying does little good, for while they struggle to geat them selves loose, the
labor will keep them from being fat: but their legs being broken, the
pain will not remain above two days, or three at the uttermost, and will
keep them that they shall never stray from their places. Some use only to
p^^on them, but so fall they many times out, and become a pray to (...)
therefore it is good to bring them to the Kitchen before they ^e full ripe. The
unfruitful and noughty colored, and the otherwise faulty, ought cheefely to
be fattes, and must be crammed in such sort as you cram Capons. Douehouses, or
places for Pigions to buyld in, are made a ^e^ di^ers manners: for the tame
Pigions, and such as are fed at home, they make in the highest parts of
their houses lying toward the South, certain hollow rooms, and celles for
them, such as (...)RIVS has described for his Pullen: and if the pla^ (...)
not so serve, dryuing in certain pin^es into the wall, they ^ay v^on them
frames of boords, with par^^^ions in them, or ^art^^en pottes to breed in,
letting certain ledges run from (...) to hole, that they may the better come
to their nestes, and walk up and down in the Sun. But the houses for the
other wylder kind, because they conteyne great numbers, are buylt after a more
handsome order, although under the eues of houses, and in steepels of Churches,
you shall have thousands breeding. Varro appoyntes the Douehouse to be buyld in
this sort: a towrie adjoining to the house, and well lofted and seeled above,
with one little door in it, and four windows, aunswering the four quarters
of the Heaven, which windows must be well grated, so as they may give light
yenough, and keep out vermin. All the walls within must be fair white limed,
for with this color is the Pigion woonderfully delighted: besides, it must be
well pargetted and playstered without, specially about the windows, so as
neither Mouse, Weesel, nor other vermin may enter: the windows must be so
placed, as they may let in the Sun all the Winter, having a hole of
sufficient wydenesse over against them, well netted and tunnelled, in such
sort, as the Pigions may easily flee out and in at, and yet not suffer any
hurtful byrd to enter: for the Pigion takes great delight in flying now and
then abroad, where after she has recreated her self, she comes with joy
to her nest again: as on the otherside she mourns, if she be restrained of
her liberty. Round about the walls within, you must have little round holes,
from the top to the bottom, wherein they may breed: Varro would have them
three handfulles in length, and ledged from hole to hole for them to walk
upon. Some think it best to make your holes of Lome, or Lime, and not of
Brick and Stone, as many do, because of the warmth. There be some that buyld
their Douehouses upon pillars, in the midest of some Pond, or great Water,
both because they delight in water, and because they will have them safe from
vermin. The meat that they most delight in, is Tares, wild Fytch, Pease,
Wheat, Myllet: where these be not, you may give them Spery, specially in
winter Rape seed, and Cocle: for by gathering and pecking up these little
seeds, they geat them selves a heat in cold weather. When you give them
meat, you must throw it hard by the walls: for that part is commonly
cleanest from doung. And though Varro biddes you to sweep and make clean your
Douehouses continually, and that the doung is good and profitable for the
feelde, yet seeing this kind of Foul does delight in places sprinkled with
their own doung, you shall not need to be careful in cleansing of it. Look
well that they be not frayde, or disquieted with Gunnes, or noise of people, or
other like, specially when they sit: and if you have occasion to go into the
house, see that you do it about noone time, when they be abroad a feeding, and
be sure to knock well before you come in. Some say, that it will cause them to
love the house, and alure others to come thither, if you sprinckle them with
Commyn, before they go to feeding, or perfume the house with Sage, and
Francensence. Some have an other experience for this purpose, and that is
Potshards beaten small and searced, mingled with the herb Coast, and good old
wine, and given unto them. Others take Barley flower, sodden with dry Figs,
and a part of Honey. Cardan teaches this, as the best for this purpose, of
Barley, or Myllet, of Common, of Cost, of Agnus Castus, of Honey, of old Lome, or
Mortar, of good Muskadell, boil them al together, and make a stone of them to
be set in the midst of a house. Tragus teaches to take the roots of the
Thystel, and to boil them with the pickle of Hearings. Constantine out of
Didymus, writes of diverse other things for this purpose, which who so will,
may try. Look well that they be not destroyed by the Hawk, or Buzard: the
Hawk is a special enemy to this Bird, whose taking, Varro teaches you in
this manner: to lay a Pigion upon the ground, and to stick, bending closely
over her, a couple of Lyme rods. There is a kind of Hawk, that naturally is
terrible to other Hawks, and preserves the Pigion: the common people call it
Castrel. Columella affirms, that if you take the young Castrels, and preserve
them every one in earthen vessels well covered and plastred all over, and
hang them in the corners of the Douehouse, it makes the Pigions have such a
love to the house, as they will never forsake it. They have many other
adversaries, Crows, Dawes, and Owls, which all destroy the Pigions, specially
when they breed. I found of late in mine own Douehouse, an Owl sitting
solemely in the nest upon her Eggs in the midst of all the Pigions, and
hard by the house in an old hollow tree, I found pieces of young Pigions,
that the Owls had brought to feed their young with: and though the Owl seem
to be greater then the Pigion, by reason of the thickness of her feathers, yet
will they creep in at as little a place as the Pigion will: so small and
little is their bodies, though they be bombased with feathers. Against Weesels,
Stoates, and such like, Palladius would have you hedge the Douehouse about
with sharp prickly branches void of leaves, as Gorse briars, and such like, as
they dare not pass through for pricking. Didymus and others, do bid you
hang great branches of Rue all about the house, specially at the entrance of
the door, or to put wyld Rue under their wings, or to sprinckle them with
Rue: for this herb (as they say) has a special force against such hurtful
vermin. Some say, that if a Wolves head be hanged in the Douehouse, it will
drive away all hurtful vermin.


MELISSEVS. We have heard yenough of Pigions, I pray you proceed with such
other Birds as you keep in the country. Keep you any Fesantes here?


CHENOBOSCVS. Phesantes.
This kind of Birds (though they be very seeldome keept among the country
people) yet of many curious and fine fellows, for their rareness and
dayntinesse, they are brought up, and kept. And because they benefit the
keeper, and profit the husband, (if the soil and country be for them) the
old writers have placed the keeping of them, within the compass of husbandry.
Palladius teaches, that you must provide such as be young and lusty, that were
of the last years bringing forth: for the old ones be never fruiteful. One
Cock is sufficient for two Hens: they breed once a year, and lay to the
number of twenty Eggs, beginning in April, and somewhere in March, but they
are better to be brought up under a Hen: so as you set under one Hen
fifteen Eggs, observing the time of the Moon, and the number of the days,
as I told you before of the Hen. The thirtieth day they come forth: for the
first fifteen days you must feed them with Barley flower tenderly sodde, and
cooled, upon which you must sprinckle a little Wine. After, you shall give them
Wheat, Grasshoppers, and Antes Eggs: let them not come near the water for
catching the Pippe, which if they chance to have, you shall rub their
bills with Garlic stamped together with Tar. They are fatted in thirty
days with Wheat flower, or Barley flower made in pellettes, the pellettes must
be sprinkled a little with Oil, and so put into their throtes, you must take
heed you put it not under their tongues, for if you do, you kill them:
neither must you give them any meat, till you perceive the first be digested.


PVLLARIVS. What say you to Turtle Doves, Turtles.
these are also brought up and kept in some countries.


CHENOBOSCVS. Columella affirms, that Turtles will neither lay, nor bring
forth in the house, nor Partredges: and therefore they used to take them wild
when they were full ripe, and to feed and fat them in little dark rooms like
Pigion holes: the old ones be not so good, as neither the Pigion is. In Winter
you shall hardly have them fat, in Summer, they will fat of them selves, so
they may have plenty of Wheat and Corn: the water must be very clear and
fresh that you give them. They hold opinion, that the Turtle after he has
lost his mate, continues ever after solitary. But because there is greater
store of Thrushes and Blackbirds, we care the less for keeping of Turtles.
Thrushes, and Blackbyrdes.
Though Thrushes and Blackbirdes be kept in diverse places: yet as Pliny says,
there is in no place greater company, then is taken in the Winter time in
Germany: that they were used for great daynties, appear by Horrace. No
dayntier dishe then is the Thrush,
Nor sweeter then the Trype.
They are commonly dressed whole and not drawn, for their inward parts may
well be eaten, so they be new: their Crops are commonly full of Juniper
berryes, M. Varro writes, that Thrushes were in his time at twelve pence a
piece. Where they use to keep them, they also put as many as they take wyld
among the others, that they brought up before, by whose company and fellowshyp,
they pass away the sorrow of their prisonment, and fall to their feeding: for
you must always have old fellows for the purpose, by whose example they may
learn both to eat and drink. They must have houses warm, as your Pigions
have, crossed through with small Pearches: for after they have flowen about, or
have fed, they desire to rest. The Pearches must be no higher then a man's
heygth, so as you may easily reach them standing upon your feet. The meat
must be cast in such places of the house, as lie not under the Pearches, for
filing of it. Columella, and Palladius write, that unripe Figs beaten and
mingled with Wheat flower must be given them, that they may eat thereof their
filles. Aristotle makes many kinds of them, among which he also puts the
Colmons, that feeds upon Grapes. Our Thrushes do feed for the most part
upon Juniper berryes, which their Crops being opened (as I said) do show.
They use also in many places to keep Quails, Quayles.
which is rather a Bird of the earth, then of the air, (as Pliny says) but
because they feed upon Elebor, and venomous seeds, and beside are vexed with
the falling sickness, many do marvel (as Athenaeus writes) why they be so
greatly esteemed. They say, their young must be fed with Ants, and Emets
Eggs, as the Partryge. It is thought, that he flies over into other countries
in the Winter time, as the Crane, and the Storke does, following for their
guide the oldest Quail, called the mother Quail.


PVLLARIVS. You have forgotten one noble and goodly Foul, that is used to be
brought up in the husbandmans Ponds, Lakes, and Rivers, I mean the Swanne.


CHENOBOSCVS. The (...).
You say true: for this Bird is commonly brought up in the low countries, and
kept in great numbers in Linconshyre, a country replenished with Gentlemen of
good houses, and good house keepers. And Athenaeus aledging the authority of
Aristotle, accounts this Foul to be very fruitful, and of great stomach,
so much, as it is thought they dare give battle to the Egle. They are bredde
and kept (as you well said) in Lakes, Rivers, and Fishponds, without any charge
at all, and do great good in the Rivers by plucking up the weeds, and other
annoiances: for the excellency of his down, and dayntinesse of his flesh, he
is greatly esteemed. There is one excellent kind of them, that takes his name
of the goo^ watch that he keeps, and is always cherished and kept in the
Ditches of Cities, and Fortresses, for his great faithfulness in giving
warning. They be kept almost in like manner as Geese are, but that they use to
sit longer, sitting a whole month, or there aboutes: they bring forth
seeldome above eight, and so many did my Swannes bring me, and sometime five.
They make their nestes hard by the water of Sedges, Weeds, and like stuff:
their young ones they carry straight into the Rivers. If the Lakes and streams
be frozen in winter, you must house them. This Byrd is counted among such as
live longest, foreshewing her own death, as Plato and Martial witness, with
a sweet and lamentable song. Thus much concerning my profession I have told, I
trust you that be my friends, will take it in good part, and now PISSINARIVS
I resign my place to you, to whose turn it is come.


PISSINARIVS. It falls out in good order, Of Fisheponds.
that from talking of water Fowls, we should come to entreat of Fisheponds,
and Fish: although I do mean to entreat larglyer both of keeping and taking
of Fish in my Halientycks, but because the husbands house, both for watering
of cattle, and other uses can not be without Ponds, and Lakes, and that every
house is not so seated, as it has earable ground about it, it is lawful for
the husband to make his best advantage of his Ponds, and Waters. The Noble men
and Gentlemen of Rome, were wont to buyld about their houses fair Fysheponds,
and many times satisfied herein their pleasure, with exceeding cost and
expenses, as M. Varro writes, of the sumptuous and costly Fyshponds of
Hortensius, Hircius, and Lucullus. M. Cato, when he had the wardship of
Lucullus, made four hundred pound of the Fyshe in his Pond. The same Varro
makes mention of two sorts of Fishponds, the one of sweet water, the other
salt, the one amongst the common people, where the springes feed them, and of
great profit, the other near to the Sea, where Neptune does yield them both
store of water and Fish: for examples, may serve the Fishponds of Hortensius,
which rather pleased the eye, then the purse. The best making of Pondes, is
either by the sea, as Lucullus, who to let in the Sea into his ponds, made a
passage through the midest of a great hill, whereby he thought him self as
great a Lord of Fish, as Neptune him self: or else to have them feed from
some great stream, or River, that may bring in both water and Fish, which by
Fludde or Sluse, may let in always fresh water, not suffering the old to
corrupt, but always refreshing it, and bringing more Fish. The next in
goodness, are those that are fed with Pipes, or secret passages under the
ground, and may be let out again by Sluse, which Sluses must so be made, as
when you lift, you may let the water into your Meddowes, to make them more
fruitful, as is to be scene in the countries of the Swytches, and Heluetians,
and in many other places. And therefore the waters (as I said) must be well
enclosed with good Bays, Banks, and Wales, that they may be able to abide the
rage of the fluddes and the water. The worst and last kind, is such as are made
in Lakes, standing Pooles, and Rain waters. These kind of pondes, though they
be the worst, by reason of their unclean stinking and corrupt water, yet where
there is no better, are to be made account of: for though they be not the
holsomest for keeping of Fish, yet they yield some commodity, and are most
necessary about the house, either for watering of Cattle, keeping of Beef and
Duckes, and washing, and other like uses: but if so be you can make them either
by the Sea, or near some great River, so as the water may be let in and out at
your pleasure: and when so ever you open the Sluses to let out the w^ter. Be
sure that you have them well grated, that the Fish can by no means pass
through, and let the passages, if the place will suffer it, be made on every
side the Pond: for the old water will best void, when so ever the stream
bendes, the current lie against it. These Sluses or passages, you must make at
the bottom of ye Ponds, if the place will so serve, that laying your level
with the bottom of the Pond, you may discern the Sea, or River, to lie seven
foot higher: for this Columella thinks, will be a sufficient level for your
Pond, and water yenough for your Fish. Howbeit, there is no doubt, the deeper
the water comes from the Sea, the cooler it is, wherein the Fishes most
delight. And if so be the place where you mean to make your Pond lie level
with the brym of the Sea, or the River, you must dygge it nine foot deep, and
lay your current within two foot of the top, and so order it as the water
come in abundantly: for the old water lying under the level of the Sea, will
not out again, except a greater rage come in: but for the Pond that is subject
to the fludde and the ebb, it is yenough if it be but two foot deep. In the
banks and sides of these Ponds, you must have Busshes and Creek holes, for
the Fish to hide them in from the heat of the Sun: besides, old hollow
trees, and roots of trees, are pleasant and delightful harbors for Fish.
And if you can hansomely convey them, it is best to bring from the Sea, little
Rocks with the weeds and all upon them, and to place them in the midst of
your Ponds, and to make a young Sea of them, that the Fish may skarsly know
of their imprisonment. About Turwan in France, and in other places, you shall
find in Loughes and Rain waters, even in the wilderness and Heathes, great
abundance of Fish. In diverse places of the low countries, where they have
their Ponds fed with the River, which they may shut out at their pleasure,
they so order them, as they be either environed, or divided with deeper
Ditches, wherein the Fish does live in the Summer time: and the rest of the
ground betwyxt the Ditches, the water being voyded and kept out by Sluses and
Banks, is sowed with summer corn, and after harvest, the water let in again,
whereby the ground being wonderously enritched, does yield great croppes of
Barley, and Summer corn, and (as the Poet says) for the land, so may be said
for the water, Not every ground for every seede^ but regard must be had, what
for every one meet. The Romans keep in their Ponds Lampryes, Oysters, Luces,
Mullettes, Lamporns, Guyltheddes, and all other Fish besides, that are used to
be kept in fresh waters. Ponds for Oysters, were first devised by Sergius
Orata, at the Baynes, about the time of L. Crastus the Orator, before the
battayl of Marsie, not so much for delicasie, but for his commodity and gain.
Cocles, and Musles, were kept in Ponds by Fuluius Hirpinus. Moreover, diverse
Fishes delight in diverse places. The best Pykes and Luces, were thought to be
in the River of Tyber, betwyxt the two brydges: the Turbottes, at Rauenna: the
Lampreys, in Sicylli so Rivers, Lakes, Pooles, and Seas, in some places have
better Fish, then in others. Whereto to return to my Fishponds from whence I
came, neither may all sorts of Fishes be kept in every one, for some sorts
are Grauellers, delighting only in Grauelly, Stony, and Sandy waters, as
Menowes, Gudgi^s, Bullheddes, Ruffes, Trowtes, Perches, Lamporns, Creuisses,
Barbylls, and Cheuins. Others delight again in Muddy places, seeking ever to
lie hyd in the Mud, as the Tench, the Ele, the Breame, the Carpe, and such
others. Some again delight in both, as the Pyke, the Luce, the Carpe, the
Breame, the Bleake, and the Roach. The Grauelly Fishes, specially the Menowes,
are engendered of Sheep doung, laid in small baskettes in the bottom of a
grauelly River. The Luce, or Pyke, grows (as likewise does the Carpe) to be
great in a short time, as in three or four years, and therefore in such Ponds
as have neither the Sea, nor River coming to them, we use every fourth, or
third year, to draw the ol^, and to store them with young. And in these parts
we cheefely store them with Carpe, having small Ponds, and Stews for the
purpose to keep them in, so as you may come by them at your pleasure. Thus
much I thought good to declare unto you touching my profession, let us now see
what you ( MELISSEVS) can say for your Bees, and your Honey.


MELISSEVS. Bees.
Because I will not have our discourse of husbandry deprived and maimed of such
a profitable member, whose use may in all places, be they never so desert, or
barren be had, I think it good as a conclusion to the whole, to show you for
my part, the manner of keeping and ordering of Bees: for the good husband by
cherishing of them, picketh out many times a good piece of his living, yea the
poo^e soul of the country that has no ground to occupy, may raise hereof,
and that without charges a great commodity. Merula reports, that Varro had
yearly for the rent of his Bees, a thousand gallons of Honey: and that in a
house in Spain, having not passing one Aker of ground to it, has yearly
been made of the Bees, fourscore pounds worth of Wax and Honey. This little
poor creature the Be, does not only with her labor yield unto us her
delicate and most healthy Honey, but also with the good example of their
painful diligence and travail, encorageth man to labor and take pains,
Industry of Bees.
according to his calling; in such sort, as it seems the almighty and most
excellent majesty, has of all other specially created this little poor
creature, for the benefit and commodity of man: by whom, besides the commodity
of the Honey and Wax that they make, we might both take example to spend our
life in virtuous and commendable exersises, and also to honor and reverence
the wonderful bounty and goodness of the most gracious LORD showed toward
us, in the creation of this small and profitable worm. They are continually
busied in laboring, they show great cunning and workmanshyp in their
trauayles, they have always amongst them the lively image of a perfect common
wealth, Bees, their common weals.
they yield obedience to their Prince, not liking the government of sundry
heads, but love to be ruled by one: each one of them labors and trauayleth
in his charge, in so much, as the wysest Governors and Councillors in commonweals, have taken the Bees for their pattern in choosing of Princes,
distributing of offices, rewarding of virtues, and punishing malefactors. Varro
did always call them the birds of the Muses, The birds of the Muses.
and Virgil with wonderful colors, does eloquently set forth the Bees,
their common weal, Palaces, buyldinges, cities, laws, manners, wars, and
trauayles, supposing them to be partakers of reason, and that they have some
instinct from above, in that they so near resemble the minds of men, yea many
times excel them, touching their obedience to their Prince. Virgil.
Not Egypt in his prime, nor Lydia large and wide,
Ne yet the Parthian people great, nor all the Medes beside.
Do so their King obey, who being safe and well,
Their minds are all together one, he only bears the bell.
On him they cast their eyes, and guard him day and night,
And often they bear him on their backs, in his defense they fight.
But if he chance to dye, then all is dashed and done,
Their coames asunder down they tear, and all to ruin run.
If the King be taken, the whole swarm is had: if he be gone, they dispers
them selves abroad, for they can not live without a King, hating as well the
hedlesse government, as the subjection to many heads. If the King, or (as we
term him) the master Be dye, the whole swarm droupeth and mourns, they
strayghtwayes cease from gathering of Honey, they stur not abroad, but only
with a heavy and sorrowful humming, they swarm and cluster together about his
body. The nature surely of this poor creature is greatly to be wondered at.
They only of their brood have common care,
Virgil
And neighbor like their houses nearely stand:
And ruled are by laws that none do spare,
Alone they know their home and native land.
And mindful of the stormy Winter neere^
In Summer geat, to live by all the year.
Their Princes Palace is sumptuously buylt, in some several part of their
Hyues, being mounted above the rest, which if you happen to broose, you
destroy the brood. They live all as it were in a camp, and duly keep their
watch and ward, working together, and oftentimes sending abroad their
Colonyes: they are warned at their Captains appointment, as it were with the
sound of a Trumpet, by which they know both their times of wars, and truce:
they ward all the day time at their gates in warlike manner, and have great
scilence in the night, till one of them in the morning humming out the
discharge of the watch: they get them abroad to their business, as the Poet
has eloquently expressed. Together all they quietly do lie,
Together all they toyll with equal might: Virgil.

And in the morning forth together fly,
And home as fast they come again at night.
Where as they lay their weery lims to rest,
And trim their wings, and set their legs in frame:
Till every one him self has thoroughly dressed,
Then synging at their doors a while they game.
Till one geues warnyng for to go to bed,
Then down they lay to rest their sleepie head.
For when the sleepie time of the night comes in, they make less and less
noise, till one of them goes about with the like sound that he gave in the
morning, setting as it were the watch, and giving them warnyng to go to rest:
at which time they al suddenly hold their peace. In the morning (as I said) at
the discharge of the watch, they roame straight to the gates, but fly not
abroad, except they see the weather will be fair: whereof by nature they have
perfect understanding. Nor from the Hiues, if likely it be to rain,
They far do stray, Bees foreshevvers of stonnes.
nor trust they will the sky:
If that the Southwynd blow, but still remain
At home, or busyed be with waters nie.
Short flytes they make, and when such storms they see.
They bear about the smalest stones they find:
And as the Botes in fluddes that balast be,
So with the same they counterpayse the wind.
Being loded, they fly with the wind: if any tempest suddenly arise, they
counterpayse them selves with little stones, flying in the wind as near the
ground as may be: their labor, both at home, and abroad, is certaynely
appointed. They labor at the first, within the compass of threescore pase
about the Hyues: and when the flowers there have been sufficiently wrought,
they send abroad their discouerers to find out more food. And when they fall
all together to their business, some work the flowers with their feet,
others carry water with their mouths, and drops in their little fleeses: the
young lusty fellows labor abroad, the elder at home. Those that go abroad,
do with their forelegges lade all their thighs, which nature for the nonce
has made roffe: thus being loaded, legs, head, back and all, as much as
they may bear, they return home, where there wayghteth commonly three or four
at the door to unload them. Within all this while are some laying in order,
some buylding, some making clean, and some making ready their meat: for they
feed not severally, for fear of veguiling one the other. They frame their
houses archwyse within the Hyues, with two passages, so as they may enter one
way, and go out an other. Their coames that they make are wrought full of
holes, which holes (as Varro says) are their celles, or lodgings, made every
one six square, according to the number of their feet: these celles they do
all fill with Honey, filling every one in a day or two. These coames are fastened
to the upper part of the Hyue, and hang a little upon the sides, not cleaving
to the Hyue, being now cornered, now round, according to the fashion of the
Hyue, as both Pliny reports, and I shall hereafter show you, when I speak
of the framing of the coames. The coames are kept up from falling, with small
pyllers and proppes below, so buylt as they may go round about to repair
them. The three first loftes of their celles beneath, are left empty for fear
of the Hyue: the uppermost are as full as may be. Such as are loyterers and
idell vagabonds amongst them, The puni^^ment of loyterers.
are noted, and punished with death. Some range for fool and ply the feeldes
abroad,
Some still at home do labor busily:
And round about with ware the Hyues do load,
Which from the gummes they paynefully do try.
The first foundacions for the coames they make,
And clammy cleaving Wax they fasten by:
While others of their brood the charge does take,
And fosters up the seed that shall supply.
An other sort does work the Honey pure,
And fylles the celles with lycour that you see:
And others are appointed to the door,
To look abroad what weathers is like to be.
Or to unload such as have labored well,
Or else to drive the drousy Drone away:
Their labor smokes and all of time does smell,
The Honey sweet that in their coames they lay.
And a little after. The great do guide the Hyue,
Make fast their coames and Palaces contriue.



CHENOBOSCVS. Of the worthiness, travail, workmanship, and good order of this
little creature, you have sufficiently spoken, it now remains that you
declare unto us their sundry kinds, their keeping, and their ordering.


MELISSEVS. Aristotle makes many sorts and kinds of them, The kinds of Bees.
whereof he counts the short speckled and well knitte, to be best: and next to
them, the long ones like Waspes: the third, the kind that they call the Thief,
The thief.
with a very large body: the fourth, the Drone, The drane.
being bigger then all the rest, wanting both his sting, and courage to
labor: and therefore they use to make at the entry of their Hyues small
grates, wherein the Be may enter, but not the Drone. And the same Aristotle in
the Chapter before says, that there are two kinds of kings, or master Bees,
the one of a golden color, which is counted the best, the other black, and
more party colored: they be twyse as bygge as the other Bees, the tails of
them as long as one and a half of the other, they are called of some, the
mother Bees, as the chief breeders, Breeders.
because the young of the Drones are bredde without a king, but the other Bees
never. Virgil following herein Aristotle, The best sort of Bees.
does most commend the little, long, smoothe, and fair Be, and making
mention of two sorts of kings, the worser whereby he shall do no harm. The
shape of the king.
Destroy (says he) and let the other live,
Whose golden how does glyster in the eye:
And decked with glyttring skalles fair show does give,
Of far more Grace and far more Majesty.
With loathsome look the other dot^ appear,
And dragling draws his tail with heavy cheer.
And as there is two sorts of kings, so is there of the other Bees. Some
ougly seem, and some again do shine,
Be dashed with drops of goldin color fine.
Being mylde and gentle: for the Be the greater he is, the worse he is, and
if he be angry, and fyerce, and round, he is worst of all. And because (as I
said before) the best are only to be meddled with, sith the good and the badde
are alike chargeble, and require like tendance, and special heed to be had
that you meddle not the badde with the good: for less will the increase of
your Honey be. if some of your swarms be ill matched. You may store your self
with Bees three manner of ways, either by bying them, taking the wyld swarms,
or making them by art. Such as you bye, What to be considered in buying of
Bees.
let them be of the kind and shape that I told you of, and be sure before you
bye them, that the swarms be whole and great, which you may judge by looking
into the Hyues, or if you can not be suffered so to do, you may guess it by
other tokens: as if so be you see great numbers clustring at the door of the
Hyue, and if you hear a great huzzing and humming within: or (if they be all
at rest) putting your lips to the mouth of the Hyue, and blowing therein, you
shall casely perceive by their aunswering sound, wheather their number be
great or no. In bying of them beside, you must look whether they be sound, or
sick: the signs of their being in health (as shall be showed when I speak of
their diseases) is, if their swarms be great, them selves fair, and well
colored, and work lustely. Again, a token of their not being well, is if
they be heary, look lothsomely, and dustely, except at such time as they
labor: for then they wax lean and roffe with extreme travail. You must
make your conjecture likewise by their age: such as are not above a year old,
look fair and smoothe, and shine, as if they were oyled: the old ones are
both in sight and feeling, roffe and rugged, and by reason of age, wrinkled:
which nevertheless for cunning in making their coames, experience, industry,
and skilfullnesse in the weather, do far pass the others. In any wise see
that you bye them rather from your next neighbor, then from a strange country,
or far of: Transporting of Bees.
for they many times perish by change of air, or shaking in the carriage. And
if you be driven to carry them far, take heed you neither iogge, nor iumble
them: the best way to carry them, is upon a man's shoulders, and that in the
night time, suffering them to rest in the day, and pouring into them such
sweet things as they delight in, and keeping them cloose. It is better
removing them in the spring, then in winter: for they do not so well agree
with winter. If you carry them from a good place to a barrayne, they will
straight ways bid you farewell, and forsake their Hyues. When you have brought
them to the place where you mean they shall stand, if it be day time, you must
neither open them, nor place them, till it be night, to the end they may after
the quiet rest of the night, go cheerfully to their work the next morning.
Be sure to mark them well besides for two or three days after, whether they
go all out or no: for if they do, it is a shrewde sign they will away.
Sometime, if ye place be good, you shall assay to store your self with wild
Bees: The taking of vvild Bees.
for although that Bees (as Pliny says) can not be rightly termed either
wild, or tame, yet Varro calls them wild, that breed in wild places, and
tame, such as we keep at home: and affirms the manner of keeping them to be
diverse. There is great store of these wild sort in Sarmatia.


PVLLARIVS. They say, that in Liuonia, and Sarmatia, (from whence is brought
hither great store of Wax, and Honey) the country people do geather it in
great abundance in hollow trees, and desert places.


MELISSEVS. The greatest token of Bees, and Honey near, is where they be in
great numbers about the waters: for if you see the number but small, it is a
sign it is no good place for Bees: and if so be you see they come in great
numbers, you may soon learn where their stocks be in this sort, as Columella
and others have taught. To find out the Bees.
You shall carry with you in a saucer, or such like thing, some read color,
or paynting, and standing near to the springes, or waters there aboutes, as
fast as they come, touch them upon the backs while they are a drinking, with
some little straw dipped in the color: and carry you there, till such time as
you see them return. If the Bees that you marked do quickly return, it is a
token their houses be not far of, if it be long ear they come, it shows
they dwell farther of: wherefore you may judge by ye time. If they be near, you
may easily find them, if they be far of, you shall come to find them in
this sort: take a piece of a Reed, or a Kex, with his knottes and joints, and
making a small hole in the side, power into it either Honey, or some sweet
thing, and lay it by the water: and when you see the Bees have found it, and
entered the hole for the savor of the Honey, stop you the hole with your
thome, and let but one go out at once, whose course you shall follow, as
far as you can see him: and this shall bring you part of the way. When you
can no longer see him, let out an other, and follow him, and so an other, one
after an other, til you come to the place. Others use to set some little
vessels with Honey by the water: which, when some one Be or other has
happened to taste, she gives straight knowledge to her fellows, whereby by
their flying in number, they come to find out their dwellinges. If you find
the swarm to be in some such hole as you can not come at them, you shall drive
them out which smoke, and when they be out bring them down with the ringing of
a lattin basin, so as they may settle upon some tree, from whence you may shake
them into your Hiue. If the swarm be in some hole above in the branches, you
may saw of the branche handsomely, and covering it with a white cloth, place
it amongst your Hiues. If they be in the body of the tree, then may you softly
saw of the tree above the Bees, and afterward, close underneath them: and
being covered as before, carry them home, stopping well the chinkes, and
ryftes, if there be any. He that seeks the Bees, must begin in the morning,
that he may have the hole day before him to mark their laboring. Thus far
of the kinds of Bees, and getting to them: now will I show you of the
placing of them, Standing for Bees.
ordring, and keeping of them. The place for your Bees and your Hiues must be
so chosen, as they may stand quietly, and secret, standing specially in such
place, as they may have the Sun in winter, and in the spring time always at
the rising, and such as is neither to hot, nor too cold: (for the excess of
either, does hurt them) but rather temperate, that both in summer and winter,
they may have moderate warmth, and wholesome air, being far removed from the
company of either man, or beast. Where neither wind may come, whose blastes
forbids
Them bringing home their loades, nor Sheep, nor wanton Kids.
To spring among the flowers, nor wandering best,
Shake of the dew, and trampling spoil the rest.
For they most of all delight in quietness: beware beside, that there be no
hurtful creatures near them, What vo^mine annoyeth the Bees.
as the Tode, that with his breath does both poison ye Be, and also draws
them to him: the Woodpecker, the Swallowe, the Sparro, the Storke, Spydars,
Harnettes, Butterflyes, Serpents, and Mothes. Drive from thy Hyues the hurtful
Lysart green,
Keep Throstells, Hens, and other birds vntrewe^
And Progne, on whose breast as yet is seen,
The blooddy mark of hands that I tys slew.
All these destroy thy Bees, and to their nestes do bear,
Such as they take in flight, to make their young once cheer.
Of such things as hurt your Bees, I will hereafter speak more, where I shall
show you of their diseases and harms: in the mean time I will go forward
with the placing of them. The place where they should stand, would rather be in
the valley, The valley better for the Be, then the hill.
then very hie: but so, as the rebound of no Ecco do hurt them, which sound
is very noisome unto them: so shall they flee with more case and speed to the
higher places, and come laden down again with less travail. If the seat of
the house will so suffer, it is good to have your Bees stand near your house,
and to be enclosed with a hedge, or a pale: but on such side as they be not
annoyed with the sent of sink, privy, or dounghill. The best standing, is
within the sight of the master, by whose presence they are safest kept. For
their better safety (if you fear them) you may set them a yard or more from
the ground, enclosing them with little grates left open against every Hiue, or
so lettysed with stone, as the Be may easily come out and in, and escape both
birds and water: or if you list, you may make a little house by for the
keeper, wherein you may lay your Hiues for your swarms, and other necessaries
meet for your Bees, setting near to the Hiues some shadowing trees for them
to swarm upon, according to the Poets advise. And plant the Date tree near,
or pleasant Olyue tree,
That with their floury branches sweet, thy Hiues may shadowed be:
That when the captains young, lead out their lusty swarms,
The pleasant shade may them allure, to shun the greater harms.
Not needing for their ease, in places far to roame,
When as they may more safely sit, and better speed at home.
If it may be, Fa^re water (...) for Bees.
let them have some fair spring near them, or else some water conveyed in
pipe: for without water they can neither make Honey, Wax, nor breed up their
young: and therefore says the Poet. Have s^unt aynes sweet at band, or mossy
waters green,
Or pleasant brook that passing through, the Meades is sweetly seen
And straightwayes after: If either standing poole be neither to them ny.
Or ^^rning stream with hasly course, their dwellings passes by,
Cast ^ow^^ of Wyllowe cross, and mighty stones withal,
That may preserve the faynting Be, that in the fludde does fall.
Round about the Beeyard, and near to the Hiues, set herbs, plants, and
flowers, both for their health, and profit: specially such as are of the
sweetest and delicatest savor: Herbs that Bees delight in.
as Cithysus, Thyme, Cassia, Rosemary, Sauery, Smallage, Uiolettes, Sage,
Lauender, Myrrh, wild Marierum, wild Thyme, Balm, sweet Marierum, Saffron,
Beans, Mustardseede, Poppey, Mellilot, and Roses. And if there lie ground
near it for the purpose, sow it with Rapeseede, and Beechwheate: for they
wonderful delight in the flowers hereof. Pliny writes, that Bees delight
greatly to have Broom flowers near them: of trees, they most delight in
these. The Pine, the Wyllowe, the Fyrre tree, the Almond, the Peache, the Pear
tree, and the Apple, and such as the flowers thereof be not bitter. Of the
wild sorts, the Terebinth, the Lentise, the Lyndtree, the Cedar, and the
Mastholme. The best Honey (as Palladius says) is made of Time: the next, of
wild Time: the third, of Rosemary. You must remove from your trees, Yew tree,
the Box, and the Cornel: Pliny would also have the Olyue away. Banishe also
all the kinds of Sporge: for with that, as also with the flowers of the
Cornel, they fall into a Flixe and dye. Besides, you must suffer no Woormewood,
nor wild Cocomber to grow near them: Herbs noisome to Bees.
for they both destroy the Bees, and spoil the Honey. And because the flower,
or fruit of Elmes does specially hurt them, therefore in such parts of Italy
where plenty of Elmes grow, the Bees do not long continue. Touching your
Hiues, Of the Hiues.
they are made of diverse fashions, according to the manner of the country. Some
are made round, some square, some three foot in height, and one in breadth,
made very narrow toward the top, least the Bees should ouerlabour them selves
in filling of them. Some make their Hiues of Lantern horn, or Glass, to the
end (as Pliny says) that they may view the manner of their woorking. Varro
makes mention of earthen Hiues well plaistred within and without with good Ox
doung, so as the roffenesse and ruggedness can not displease them: but for all
that, the earthen Hiues be the woorst that may be, because in Summer they be
too hot, and in Winter too cold. The best Hiues, are those that are made of
Cork wicker, or ryndes of trees, because they keep out both cold and heat:
the next are such as are made of Straw and Bentes matted together, two foot
in breadth, and so much, or more, according to the number of your Bees in
height. In some places they make them of one piece of wood, cut and hollowed
for the nonce, or of joined boordes, five or six foot in height, and these
neither are to hot in Summer, nor to cold in Winter. Of these wooden Hiues,
the best are those that are made of Fig tree, Pine, Ash, and Walnutte, of
such length (as I told you) and a cubitte in breadth. Besides, they would be
covered with either Lyme, or Ox doung: for so (says Florentine) you shall
keep them long without rotting. You must also boar them through slopewyse,
whereby the wind gently entering, may dry up all cobwebbes, or such like
noyances. You must always have good store of Hiues lying by you, that may be
removed and easily carried where you list: for the fixed, or standing Hyues, be
discommodious, as which you can neither sell, nor remove: though Celsus seem
to commend the standing Hiues, because they are neither subject to stealing nor
burning, being made of Brycke, How you must place your Hiues.
or Loame. Your Hiues (as Columella out of Celsus does teach) must stand upon
some table of stone, a yard from the ground, and so much in breadth, so smothed
and playstered, as neither Toade, Euette, or Snake may creep up: and in such
order they must be placed, as there may be betwyxt every one a little wall, or
particion, being open both before and behind. If you have no such particions,
then place them so, as they be a pretty way distant one from the other, that in
dressing and looking to any one of them, you shake not, nor hurt the other: for
a little ^^^ling does soon mar all their houses, and many times spoil the
Bees. It is yenough to have three ranks of them, one above the other: for the
keeper shall have yenough to do, to over look the uppermost. The part where
the Be does enter, must stand a little lower then the hinder part, so as the
rain can not run in, and the water (if there be any) may easily void. And
because cold does more annoy the Be, then heat, you must arm your Hiues
well behind, against the hurt and bitterness of the North wind, and let the
sun come bountifully to them in the Front. And therefore it is best for you,
to make the holes where they come in and out, as small as you may, that they
suffice only for the bigness of the Be, partly for avoiding of cold, and
partly to keep out Euets, Beetels, Butterflyes, Battes, Mothes, and such
other hurtful vermin, that would otherwise destroy the Coames: wherefore it
is good you have two or three such small holes together in every Hyue, for the
commodity of the Be, and restraynt of the enemy.


PVLLARIVS. Well, I pray you let us know when the Be begins to labor, and
when he cease.


MELISSEVS. Because I have declared unto you before their toil, When the Be
rests. The beginning and order of his travail.
their diligence, and order of their travail, I will now likewise show you
what time they begin to labor. In the winter time, from the setting of the
seven stars, till the beginning of the spring, they keep their houses, and
come not abroad, by reason of the cold: in the spring, they come straight
abroad, and from that time forward (if the weather let them not) they never
rest day. First of all, they frame their Coames, and Wax, that is, they make
their houses and chambers, whereof they make so many, as they think them
selves able to fill: then fall they to breeding, and last of all, to making of
Honey. Their Wax, they make of the flowers of trees and plants: their Honey, of
the gummes and clamminesse of trees that are glewy, as Wyllowe, Elmes, Reed,
Juice, Gum, and Rozen: Aristotle says, they make their Coames, of flowers,
their Wax, of Gummes, and their Honey, of the dew of the air, that falls
cheefely at the rising of the stars, and that there is no Honey made before
the rising of the seven stars, and their Coames of flowers, and that the Bees
do not of them selves make the Honey, but only geather the honyed dew that
falls, because the keepers find the celles to be filled in some one, or two
days: and that the Honey being taken away in the end of Summer, the Hyues are
not found to be furnished again: though there be flowers yenough at that time.
This, and much more hereof (says Aristotle) whom Pliny following him,
affir^meth Honey to be made of the air, most of all, at the rising of the
stars, cheefely the Dog shining out early in the morning: therefore you
shall find in the morning betimes, the leaves of the trees bedewed with Honey, as
you shall likewise have the Apparayle, Hear, and Beardes, of such as have been
early abroad. In the morning, our common people call it Manna, Manna.
or Honey dew, cleaving to the leaves before the rising of the sun as it were
snow, or rather candied Sugar. Whether it be the sweat or excrement of the
heavens, or a certain spittell of the stars, or a juice that the air
purges from him self, how soever it be, I would to GOD it were such as it
first came from above, and not corrupted with the vapors and dampes of the
earth. Besides, being sucked up from the leaves by the Bees, and digested in
their mawes (for they cast it up at their mouths) and also distempred with the
sent of the flowers, ill seasoned in the Hyues, and so often altered and
transfourmed, loosing much of his heauenish Virtue, has yet a pleasant and a
special celestial sweetness in it. The best Honey is of Time, The best Honey
of Time.
(as I have said before) and good likewise of Cithisus, of the Fig tree very
pleasant: Varro says, they take not their sustenance, and their Honey both from
one. A great part of their food is water, which must not be far from them,
and must be very clean: which is greatly to purpose in making of good Honey.
And when every season suffers them not to be abroad, they must at such times
be fed, least they should then be forced to live all upon the Honey, or to
leave the Hyues empty. Some give unto them, water and Honey sodden together in
little vessels, Bees^ their vvinter food.
putting into it Purple wool, through the which they suck it, for fear of
drinking to much, or drowning them selves: others, dry Figs, either stamped
by them selves, or mingled with water, or the dross of Grapes, or Reasons
mingled with sweet Wine, and tostes made therewith, or with Honey: yea I have
seen some use (but in my fancy without reason) to give them Bay salt.
Moreover, as Bees require great looking to continually, and their Hyues daily
attendance, so most of all they crave diligent regard, when they are about to
swarm, Going away of Bees, and the tokens thereof.
whereunto if you have not a great good eye, they will b idde you farewell, and
seek a new master. For such is the nature of Bees, that with every Prince,
is bredde a common wealth, which as soon as they are able to travail, do as
it were disdain ye government and fellowship of the old Be, which most
happens when the swarms be great and lusty, and that the old stagers are
disposed to send abroad their Colonies, and therefore you shall by two tokens
specially know, when the new Princes with their people will abroad. The
first, when as a day or two before they cluster and hang (specially in the
evening) about the mouth of the Hiue, and seem to show by their coming out,
a great desire to be gone, and to have a kingdom and country by them selves:
which, if you prepare them at home, they content them selves very well with it.
And if the keeper provide not for them, taking them selves to be greatly
injured, they depart, and seek a new dwelling. To prevent this mischief,
Columella wylles you to look diligently to them in the spring time about eight
of the clock, or at noone: after which hours, they commonly go not a way,
and to mark well their going out, and coming in. The other sign is, that when
they are reddy to fly, or going, they make a great humming and noise, as
soldiers ready to remove their camp. At their first coming out, they lie
aloft playing up and down, as it were tarryng for their fellows, till all
their company come. Yea, many times the old inhabitants, being weery of their
dwellinges, do leave their Hiues, which is perceived when they come so out, as
none remain behind, and presently mount into the air, then must you fall to
ringing of pannes and basins, to fear, or bring down the runnawayes, who
being amassed with the great and sudden noise, do either presently repair
to their old Hiue, or else knitte them selves in swarm upon the branch of some
tree near to the place: then must the keeper out of hand be reddy with a new
Hiue prepared for the purpose, and rubbed with such herbs, as the Be
delights in, or sprinkled with little drops of Honey, (I have seen in some
places used Cream) and so shaking them into the Hiue, and covering them with a
sheet: let him leave them till the morning, and then set them in their place.
He must (as I told you before) have diverse new Hiues in a readiness to serve
the turn withal. And if so be you have no trees nor bushes growing near the
Hiues, you must thrust into the ground certain bows and branches for the
purpose, whereupon they may knit and settle them selves, and rub over the
bows with Balm, or such pleasant herbs, that when they (as I say knitte and
settle, Bees delight in nevve Hiues.
putting under the Hiue, and compassing them with some little smoke, you man
cause them to fall into a new country: for they will rather go into a new
Hiue, then into an old: yea, if you offer them the Hiue that they came from,
they will forsake it for a new. Some of them will suddenly leave ye Hiue without
any tarrying, which ye keeper may perceive, (...) of (...) and (...).
if he use to lay his ear in the night time to ye Hiues: for about three days
before they go, they make a great noise, like soldiers ready to raise their
camp: which Virgil notes. Their minds are easily known for such as stray,
The brazen sound commandes to come away.
When through them all a warning voice is sent.
That does the warlike Trumpet represent.
And therefore when such noise is heard, they must be very well watched, whether
they come out to fight, or to flee, the keeper must be at hand: their fightes,
whither it be among them selves, or one Hiue with an other, are easily
stickled. A little dust cast up on hye,
Does end the quarrel presently.
Or Honied water, sweet Wine, broth of Reasons, or any pleasant licour,
wherein they delight, cast and sprinkled amongst them, does straightwayes part
them. The self same remedies makes two Princes of them, being fallen out, to
be quickly good friends again: Diverse ^^nges in (...) Hiue.
for when there happens many times to be in one Hiue sundry kings, by whose
dissension yt whole number of the subjects in the Princes quarrels, go
together by the ears, you must by all means seek to remedy it, least by
ciuel dissension, the poor people be destroyed. And therefore, if you perceive
them often to fight, your best is to kill the heddest of the dissension, and to
appease the fury of the fighters, by those means that I told you before. And
when the Marciall swarm is settled upon some branch of a tree, look if they
hang al together like a cluster of Grapes, which is a sign, that there is
either but one king, or if there be more, they be agreed: and then you shall not
trouble them, but take them into the Hiue, but if so be they hang in two or
three clusters, like ye pappes, or vdders of a beast, it is a sign there are
diverse master Bees that agree not together: for which you shall search, where
you see ye Bees to cluster most. Therefore annoynting your hands with the
juice of Balm, or Beewort, that they may abide you, thrust in your fingers
softly amongst them, and shedding ye Bees, search well, till you have found
the ringleader of the dissension, whom you must take away. What the proporcion
and shape of the king is, I have told you a little before, that is, something
longer then the other Bees, The shape of the king.
and lesser wingged, of a fair and glistring color, smooth, and without
sting. Howbeit, some of them be shagheard, and ill colored, which are naught,
and to be killed. Let the best (as he says) were the Crown, who must him
self also be deprived of his wings, if he be to busy headded, and will
always be carrying his people abroad. So shall you with the loss of his
sails, keep him at home spitte of his teeth, while he dare not for want of his
wings venture out of the doors, To keep the king at home.
and so shall he keep his people at home. Dydimus writes, that your Bees will
never go away, if you rub the mouth of your Hiue with the doung of a new
calued Calfe. To the same end serves it, if you stamp the leaves of wild
Olives, and garden Olives together, and anoint ye Hiues in the evening
therewithal, or if you wash ye Hiues and the walls with Honey sodden in water.
When an old stock is come to a small number, and that there be not Bees
yenough to furnish ye Hiue, you must supply the want with a new swarm,
destroying the king of the first swarm in the spring, so shall both the
swarms dwell together in amity with their old parents, as shall be showed
you hereafter, where I mean to speak of repairing the stock. The summer
being past, ensues the time for taking of Honey: to which harvest, the travail
of the whole tends. G^l^ing, o^ (...) the Hiues.
The time for gathering thereof, Columella teaches to be then, when we
perceive the Drones to be driven out and banished by the Bees: for, thence they
Drive the drousie Drone away. This Drone is an untimely birth, The Drone.
and an vnperfet Be, but very like unto the Be, save that he is bigger
bodyed, lying always idle in the Hiue, not laboring him self, but feeding
like a lubber of the sweat of his fellows, yet serves he for the breeding and
bringing up of the young: which when he has done, they thrust him out of the
Hiue. Time for (...).
Varro apointeth three seasons for taking out the Honey: the first, at the
rising of the seven starres^ the second, in summer: the third, at the setting
of the seven stars: this sign is when the Hiues be heavy, and that they be
double furnished. You may make your conjecture by the Bees, when they make
great noise within, and when you see them stand daunsing and playing at their
doors, as also if looking into the Hiue, you perceive the mouths of the
Coa^^es to be covered with a Honey filme. Dydimus thinks it to be the best
time for the first harvest, the rising of the seven stars, or the beginning
of May: the second, the beginning of Autum: the third, the setting of the seven
stars, which is about October. Howbeit, these times be not always precisely
to be observed, but according to the forwardness of the season: for if so be
you take the Honey before their Coames be ready, they take it ill, and presently
leave woorking. The time for gelding, or driving your Bees, is early in the
morning: for you must not at noone trouble your Hiues. For this kind of
gelding of your Hiues, you must have two instruments for the non^e, a foot
and a half long, and more: the one of them must be a long knife of a good
breadth, having at the end a bending crook to scrape withal: the other must
be plain, and very sharp, that with the one you may cut the Coames, and
with the other scrape them, and draw out what so ever dregs or filth you
^inde in them. And if your Hiues be not open behind, you shall make a smoke
with Galbanum, or dry doung, being put into an earthen pan made for the
purpose, small at the one end, from whence the smoke shall come, and broad at
the other, from which you shall blow up the smoke from the fire, in such
sort, as Colum^lla shows you. This pot you must suffer at the first, to smoke
into the Hiue, and afterward round about without, and so shall you drive them.
He that medleth in this case with the Bees, ^
must speciall^ keep him self from lechery, and drunkenness, and wash him
self clean: for they love to have such as come about them to be as pure and
clean as may be. They delight in cleanliness so much, as they them selves
do remove from them all filthiness, suffering no filth to remain amongst
their labors, raking up in heap together the excrement of their own bodies,
which in rayny days, when they work not abroad, they remove and throw out
of the Hiue If you set Garlic by them, they will sting al yt come near them.
Their anger is cheefely assuaged by the presence of those that use to tend
them, at whose coming they wax wylder, being well acquainted with those that
are their keepers. If there be two swarms in one Hiue, and agreed together,
they have two sorts and manner of Coames, every swarm observing his own
order: but all the Coames so hang by the roffes of the Hyues and sides, as they
touch not the ground where the Bees use cheefely to walk, as I said before
in their buylding of their Coames. The fashion of their Coames, is always
according to the fashion of their Hyues, Fashionyng of the Coames.
sometimes square, sometime round, sometime long as the Hyues are, in which
they are fashioned as in a moulde. Pliny writes, that there were Honey Coames
found in Germany, of eight foot in length, but howsoever they be, you must not
take them all out, but must use discretion in taking of them. Amongst our
people in the first, be harvest (if I may so term it) they use with their
crooked knife, to pare away no more but the empty celles, till they come to
those that be full, taking good heed that they hurt them not: and this they
do in the spring. In the latter harvest, that is, at the end of Summer, they
take the Coames full of Honey, in such sort (as I told you) burning the old
Bees, and always keeping and preserving the young swarms. In the first taking,
when the Meddowes are full of flowers, they leave the fifth part of the Coames
behind: in ye latter harvest, when winter approaches, they leave a third of the
Coames for the sustenance of the Be. But this quantity can not certaynely be
prescribed for all countries, but must be measured according to the abundance,
or want of flowers. Dionysius Thaseus, thinks good to leave them a tenth of
their Coames in the Summer time, if the Hyues be very full, otherwise,
according to the proportion: and if they be empty, not to meddle with them.
Pliny would not have the Honey of the spring time (which he calls flower
Honey) to be meddled with all, but to be spared. Others leave no Honey at all for
them, because of the abundance of flowers that are then springing, which is the
chief fundation of their Coames. Such as be skilfullest, do leave the Bees a
twelfth part of their labor: and this they do about a thirty days after the
swarm, which they make an end of commonly in May. The old and the corrupt
Coames, are for the most part at this time taken away, and the sound, and such
as are filled with Honey, left: in taking of the Honey at the latter time of the
year, they use to destroy the oldest stocks, to save the charges of feeding
of them. This driving and gelding of Hyues, is not commonly used in the
country, but they rather according to their custom, at the end of the year
burn them, alleging for their authority an old english proverb of their
own. Drive Bees, and loose Bees: burn Bees, and have Bees: and in some places
they drown them. When you have thus spoiled your Hyues, you shall carry all
your Coames into some handsome place, where you mean to make your Honey, and
stop up all the holes and creuisses of the walls and wyndowes, as close as
you may: for the Bees wylbe very busy to recover the pray. Your Hyues being
thus driven, if there be any ill placed Coames at the entry, you shall alter
them, and place them in good order, so as the tops stand downward, so when
you next geld them, you shall easlyer take out the old Coames, and leave the
new, and the Wax shall be the newer: which the older it is, the worse it is.
When so ever you take out your Coames, look that you strain out the Honey the
same day, while they are hot and new. The Honey that you take at the full of
the Moon (as Pliny says) yields most, and the fayrer the day is, the
thicker it is. The Coames being taken out, let them rather be warmed then
heated, least by over heating them, you strain out the Wax with the Honey:
afterward, put them into a good strong bag, and with a press, or other
instrument made for the purpose, or with a wycker baskette, press out the
Honey, but see that before you press it, you sever from it such Coames, as
have in them young Bees, called with some Grubbes, or any read or rusty
dross: for these with their evil juice corrupt the Honey. When the Honey is
this strayned out, it is put into earthen vessels, and suffered to stand
uncovered a few days till it have wrought, and cast up a loft all his drags,
which you must often skim of with a little stick: but in many places they are
not so curious, but iumble alltogeather, and so sell it gross as it is. The
best Honey is always in the bottom, as the best Oil aloft, and the best Wine
in the midst.


CHENOBOSCVS. What countries yeeldes the best Honey, and which count you the
best?


MELISSEVS. The best Honey was in the old time thought to be in Athens, The
best Honey.
and in Sicil: it is now thought very good that comes from Moscouia, and the
Northeast regions. The Honey at the beginning is thin as water, and after the
strayning, it works like new Wine, and spurgeth: at the twentieth day, it
waxes thick, and afterward, is covered with a thin rine, or filme, where
the froth of ye purging is geathered together. The best Honey, and least
infected, the Bees do geather from the leaves of the Oak, the Lindtree, and
the Reed. There is three sorts of Honey, Three sorts of Honey.
the best kind is that which is called Authim, or flower Honey, made in the
springtime: the next, is Summer Honey, or hasty Honey, made in thirty days after
the tenth of June, when the Dog begins to come in, the third is Heath Honey,
a wyld kind of Honey, and not allowed, being geathered after the first shewers
of Autum, while the Heath is in flower: and therefore like the Sandy Honey. The
best Honey (as Diophanes says) is clear, yellowish, smoth in touching, and
fine, roping, if it be drawn in length, and long, sticking together, clammy,
and hard to be got asunder: the Honey that is of the worst making, is to be
boiled. Bread, Bread corrupts Honey.
if it be dipped in it, does straight corrupt it, and therefore take heed you
put it not where Bread has been. The fragments of the Coame that have once
been pressed, being taken out, heated, and strayned again, do make a second
Honey, which you must put up, and keep by it self, for spoiling of the other.
Noughty, and counterfeit Honey, is diserned by the burning, for the ill Honey
burns not clear, as the said Diophanes witnesses. The dross that remains
after the pressing, after that you have diligently washed it in sweet water,
The Making of Wax.
must be put in a brass Caldron, and putting a little water thereto, melted
upon the fire, which when you have done, you must strain the Wax through a
Sieve, or such like thing made of Straw, or Rushes: and after seethe it again,
and pouring it into some vessel with water, from whence you may eassy take it,
make it up in cakes, or what fashion you like. Pliny writes, that the Coames
must first be washed well, and afterward dried in the dark, for the space of
three days, and the fourth day set upon the fire in a new earthen vessel,
so as the Coames be covered with water, and then strayned through a Ciue: last
of all, boiled again in the same vessel, and the same water, and so poured
into vessels with cold water, having their sides noynted with Honey. The Wax
will be very white after it has stand in the Sun, and been twyse sodden: you
shall make it black with the ashes of Paper, and being mingled with
Uermillon, it wylbe read, and so otherwise colored as you list.


CHENOBOSCVS. If in the making of your Honey your Bees be almost consumed, what
ways have you to repair them?


MELISSEVS. Bees decayed.
When as an old stock is come to be small, and that you are to furnish out the
number, you must destroy (as I said) the new king in the spring time, The
repa^ring of them
when there is a new brood in the Hyue, that the new people without discord,
may dwell with their old parents. And if so be the Coames have not yielded a
new brood, you must take the dwellers of two or three other Hyues, and put
them into one, but so (as you remember before) to sprinckle them with some
sweet lycour, and so shut them up with food convenient for them, till they
be fully acquainted, leaving but little breathing holes about the Hyue, and
keep them thus enclosed three days. Others do use to kill the eldest king,
but that Columella allows not: but if the king be very old, (the age of Bees
shall shortly be showed unto you) and the people always given to sedition,
then shall you choose a king from the Hyues, that have most number of kings. I
told you before how you should make them agree, when you put to swarms
together, least they should destroy one an other, that is, to take away the
kings of the new swarms.


CHENOBOSCVS. What if the whole stock be decayed by taking the Honey, or by
sickness and diseases, will they breed again, or may they be repaired by art?


MELISSEVS. By both, Breeding of Bees.
though the breeding and ingendring of Bees, is very doubtful with Aristotle,
neither dare he after his long disputacions, affirm any certainty thereof:
sometime he resiteth the opinions of others, some thinking that they are
engendered by coppulation, the Drone being the male, and the Be the feemale:
Other saying, that they bring forth young, but do not engender, but that they
geather their young ones, but from whence, they know not. Some say, from the
flowers of Marioram: some, from the flowers of the Reed: others, from the
Olyue flowers, because when soever there is great plenty of Olyues, there is
also great swarms of Bees. There are again, that think the Drones to be so
geathered, and the Bees to be bredde only of the kings: and a little after, he
says, The young are best bredde, when the Honey is made, they labor with their
legs the Wax, and with their mouth they cast out the Honey into the celles,
and having laid their young, they sit upon them as birds do. The little
Worm, or Grubbe, being thus hatched while he is small, lies crumpled up in
the Coame: afterward, sprawleth abroad by his own force, and falls to
feeding, cleaving so to the Coame, as he seems to be tied. The brood of the
Be, and the Drone, is white, of which comes little Woormes, that after grow
to Bees, and Drones: thus much, and more, says Aristotle. In other places he
would seem to gather, that the Bees are engendered of the kings, saying, that
if this were not, there were no reason for such things as are committed in
their gouernm^nt, and that the kings by good reason remain still in the Hiue
without any travail, as only borne for breeding. Beside, they be greater, as
though their bodies were purposely framed for generation: and they punish the
Drones. It is not very likely, that the children should punish the parents,
therefore the Bees are not engendered of Drones. Besides, it is a great
argument, that Bees are engendered without copulatio^, that their brood lies
very small at the first, wrapped up in the holes, or celles of their Coames,
whereas al other Flies and Worms, that are bredde by copulation, do long
engender, and quickly lay, in greatness, according to the kind of the Worm.
P^inie following herein Aristotle, affirms, that Bees do sit as Hens do
upon their Eggs: and that which is hatched, is at the first a small white
worm lying cross the hole, and cleaving in such sort, as it seems to feed.
The king is at the first, of a yellowish color, as a chosen flower, framed of
the finest substance, neither is he bredde a worm, but with wings at the very
first. The other common sort, when they begin to have fashion, are called
Nymphs, as the Drones, the Sireus, and the Cepheus, whose heads, if any man
chance to pull of, they serve as a delicate food to the breeders. After a
little time, they power into them food, and sit upon them (making a great
noise as it is thought, to procure a heat necessary for their hatching) till
breaking a sunder the filmes that encloseth every one of them like an Egg, the
whole brood comes forth. Pliny adds, that this was seen and observed at
Rome, in a Hiue made of latterne horns: the whole brood is finished in five
and forty days. As soon as they are brought out, they are taught to
travail straightwayes with their dames, the young people waiting presently
upon their young king. There are sundry kings bredde for failing, and when
they come to age, by common consent, the foulest and vntowardest of them are
destroyed. That there is two sorts, and what fashion they be of, I told you
before.


CHENOBOSCVS. Let us now hear something of their age.


MELISSEVS. Their age (they say) may thus be known. Such as are not above a
year old, ^
do shine, and look as they were newly oyled: the old ones be rooffe,
shagheard, wrinckled, loathsome, and yllfauoured to look upon, howbeit, for
making of Coames, these are the best. Aristotle in his book before mentioned
affirms, that Bees live six or seven years, and that if a stock continue
niene or ten years, the keeper of them has good luck. ^linie writes, that
one stock was never seen to continue above ten years, not though you supply
the places of the dead every year with new: for commonly in the tenth y^ere
(...) their first ^^^ng, the whole stock dies. And therefore to avoid the
mischief of being utterly destitute, it is good to increase the number of your
Hiues, with new swarms every year. And if so be your Bees, through sudden
storm, tempest, or cold, lie dead upon the ground, you must geather them
together into a platter, To reuyue Bees that b^ dead.
or a broad basin, and lay them in your house toward the South, specially if
the weather be good, after, cast amongst them ashes of Fig tree wood, being
something more hot, then warm, shake them gently up and down, so as you
touch them not with your hands, and so setting them into the Sun, they will
(as Varro says) quicken again. To whom Columella subscribing, adds, that
such Bees as you find dead under your Hiues, if you lay them up in a dry
place all the Winter, and bring them out into the Sun in the Spring, when the
weather is fair, and sprinckle them with the foresaid ashes, they will
recover within a few hours. They that list, may prove it: I have not
hitherto tried it. Marcus Varro holds opinion, that Bees are engendered
sometime of other Bees, Making of Bees.
and sometimes of the body of a young Bullock putrified, resiting this
Epigrame of Archelaus. Of Steer that strangled is, are children strangely bred,
Of Horse engendered is the Waspe, and Bees, of Bullock ded.
The Horses breed the Waspes, the Bullockes breed the Bees.
For a young Ox, or Steer, being strangled, corrupted, and cast into some
such place, where the putrified vapor can not breath out, and store of
herbs and flowers agreeing with the nature of the Bees thrust into the body,
as Time, Caslia, and such like, wherewith the vapor may be tempered, you shall
hereof quickly have Bees, even as you may of the body of a Horse likewise
ordered, have Waspes and Hornettes. Virgil has described both the manners of
ingendring of Bees, and the first sort, in these words. This use, you wonder
would, does please the Be,
The chains unchaste of Venus they detest!
To fyle them selves with fylthy lechery,
They judge unmeet, nor wylbe so increast.
But from the plants and pleasant flowers sweet^,
They fetch their tender brood, and hence they get:
Both King and Court, and whatsoeuers meet,
To raise their walls, and Empire up to set.
The other manners, Bees made of a Steer.
or repairing Bees by art, the same Poet eloquently this touched. But if your
Bees do happen all to dye.
The breeders gone, that should the race renew:
His lesson learn, whose skillful cunnyng bye,
Made Bees, with blood of Bullockes that he slew. etc.
The manner how Bees are engendered of a Bullock, Virgil does largely discourse
out of Mago, and Demberitus. You must frame a little house fouresquare, about
ten cubits in breadth, and as much in height, with four wyndowes on every
side, one. A young fat Steer being brought hither, his Nose, his Ears, and
al other open ventes stopped, and filled with linen, dipped in Pitche, must be
beaten with numbers of Clubbes to death, so as both the bones and the flesh,
may be broken without any blood: for of the blood, comes the Be. Afterward,
the house being deep strawed with Time, and the Bullock laid upon his
back, the doors and the wyndowes must be close shut up, and so plaistred, as
there can no air enter. Three weeks after, the wyndowes must be opened on
every side, save where the wind blows strongest, and the light and the air
let in: when it has been well cooled and refreshed, the windows must be shut
up again, and made as close as before: and being opened the eleventh day
after, you shall find the house full of Bees, and nothing left of the Ox, save
the horns, the hear, and the bones: they hold opinion besides, that the
kings are engendered of the brain, and the other Bees, of the body.


TVLLARIVS. I like not so costly coming by Bees.


MELISSEVS. Of the same opinion is Columella: I tell you but the order of the
old skillful fellows, you may choos^ whether you will try it.


CHENOBOSCVS. I had rather you would tell us what siicknesses and diseases they
are subject to, and how we may know the sicknesses, and in what sort to help
them.


MELISSEVS. I will wyllingly show you. Signs of sickness in Bees.
The signs and tokens of their health, is if they be lively, quick, and many
in number: if their woorkemanship be neately, and equally wrought: if they go
about their business cheerfully, and if they look taire and smoothe. Their
signs of their not being in health, is if they look lothsomely, be roffe and
heary, except in the time of their labor, when they commonly look like
laborers, or be drousie, or if you see them carrying out of dead carcasses,
and following the Corses, after the manner of mourners, or that you hear no
noise, nor sturring amongst them. These signs when you see, Columella wylleth
you to give them meat in little troughes of Reeds, specially Honey sodden, and
ground with Galls, or Roses. You must also to heal them, perfume them with
Galbanum, Reazins, or old strigges of Grapes. If the king happen to dye, the
common people wayle and mourn with great heaviness, neither will they make
any provision for their own sustenance: and therefore if you feed them not,
they will famishe them selves.


PISSINARIVS. With what diseases are they most vexed?


MELISSEVS. They are many times infected with the pestilence, The diseases of
Bees, and the remedies
against which you have no other remedy, then to sever the Hiues far a
sunder. Their cheifest and early sickness, is in the beginning of the spring,
when the Spurge and the Elm do both flower: for as upon new fruits, so at
their first coming abroad, entysed with these new flowers, being almost
hungerstaruen with the winter passed, they feed so greedily, as they fall into
a Flix, whereof if they be not quickly remedied, they dye. For Spurge does
loose the bellies of all other creatures, but the flowers of Elm, brings
only the Flix to the Be. And therefore in such countries, where there is great
plenties of these trees, the Bees continue but a while. Columella teaches you
against this disease, to give them Rosemary sodden with water and Honey: some
again use to give them the stale of man, or Bullock: as also the grains of
the Pom^g^a^^te beaten, and sprinkled with Wine, or Rezins, with the like
quantity of Manna kneded together, and given them (...) sharp Wine, boiled
in an earthen vessel, and powered (...) Reeds. Virgil discribeth an herb
called Aumellus, with a yellowe stalk, and a Purple flower, the juice of whose
roo^e, being sodden in old Wine, and strained out, is very good to be given
them. Columella out of Higimus, teaches to remedy them in this sort. First, to
take out all the rotten and corrupt Coames, and to give them fresh meat, and
after, to perfume them with smoke. It is good also to put to a decayed Hiue, a
new swarm, as I said before. Many times, they dye of a disease that they
call the great devouring, which happens when they have made so much Wax, as
they think they shall be able to fill, and afterward, by storm and tempest,
many of them be destroyed, so that ye remain suffiseth not to fill the Coames,
whereby the empty parts of the Coames becomes rotten, and so by little and
little infecteth both the Honey, and the Bees. For which the only remedy is,
either to put in a new swarm to fill up the celles, or if you have no such
swarms, to cut away part of the Coames before they come to be naught, which
you must do with a very sharp knife, for fear of displacing the rest of the
Coames. A cause beside many times of the death of the Bees, is their too much
prosperity, as when there are diverse years great abundance of flowers, and
the Bees so busy in their feeding, that they forget their breeding, who
ouerweerying themselves with travail, they dye, not leaving any brood behind
them. It is called Blapsig^nia, when either by sickness, slothfulness, or
barramesse, they leave no fruitte behind them. To remedy this, it is good every
third day, to shut up the Hiues close, leaving but very small holes, out of
which they can not creep: so shall they be forced to look to their brood,
when as they can not otherwise range abroad. What hurts Be^s.
Many times besides they are the cause of their own deaths, when perceauing
their Honey to go away, they feed to greedily. Their own Honey does also many
times destroy them: for being touched with it on the back, they are so limed,
as they can not stur: and Oil does not only kill Bees, but also all other like
creatures, Flies and Woormes. They hate all filthy favors, and sting such as
smell of oyntmentes: they are often beseeged with Waspes, Hornettes, and great
Gnattes: the Swallow does oftentimes spoil them: the Woodpecker does with his
long tongue, thrust into the Hiue, lick up their Honey, and diverse other Birds
(as I have said before) annoy them. The Toade blows them, and sucketh them up
at their own doors, who sustaines no hurt by their stinging. Sheep are also
hurtful and troublesome to Bees, in whose fleeses, they so tangle them selves,
as they can hardly geat out. In the waste woods of Sarmatia, where they make
their Coames in the hollow Fyrre trees, the Bear for the desire of the Honey,
climeth up to them, and robs them. Against these Bears, the Beekeepers use
to hang before their Hiues, To keep Bees from Bears.
great Maules and Beetles, which the more angerly the Bear shoueth aside, with
the greater sway they come upon his head again, whereby the Bees are well
de^ended. The savor of Creuisses, if any man boil them near to them, does
kill the Bees: the Ecco is also a great enemy to them, that with her
resounding, does shake and fear them, and hurtful to them is also the mist.
The Spyder is also their deadly foe, and where they can prevail, make havoc
of the Hiues, setting their webbes and nets in every corner, to overthrow the
poor Be. The night Butterflye, that flies about the candell, is hurtful to
them two ways: for they both consume the Coames, and of their excrementes left
behind them, is ingendered Mothes, in the very wood beside, breeds a Woorme
that consumes the War. These hurtful vermin, the careful keeper must
diligently labor to destroy, and prevent, and look that he pluck up all such
bushes and plants, as offends them, not suffering any such to grow near
them: and to keep all hurtful cattle from them, letting them always have
such things at hand, as they most delight in. For the keeper has work
yenough to turn him to all the year long: for after the twelfth of March,
Hiues pur^ed in the s^^ng.
their Hiues must be opened and looked unto, that all the rubbish and filth of
winter, may be swept away, and the Spyders that spoil the Coames, plucked out,
and that they may be smoked with smoke made of Ox doung, Smoke good for Bees.
or linen, (as I spoke of before): for smoke is of nature profitable to the
Bees. And though it be troublesome for the time to them, yet is it certainly
very wholesome for them. The Worms, besides Mothes, and Butterflies, must be
killed, which cleaving like a pestilence to the Coames, do fall away if you
mingle with your doung the marow of the Ox, and laying it upon the coals,
make your smoke: with this order shall your swarms be kept still in health,
and shall be better able to abide their labor: this kind of purging them must
be often used, from the Calends of April, till the fall of the leaf. The
keeper must keep him self (as I said before) clean from drunkenness,
lechery, and all unclean and strong sauering sents: for they love to be purely
and faithfully looked unto, (as has been often said) About an eight and forty
days after the entering of the sun into Aries, they begin to swarm, and at
the same time do many stocks perish, that have few and diseased Bees. About
the same time, are bredde in the uttermost parts of the Coames a brood of a
greater biggnesse, which some count to be the kings: O^stri.
others call them Brees, because they course and chase the Bees, and therefore
think it good to distroy them. From the rising of ye seven stars, that is,
from the fifth Ides of May, till the tenth, or ye twelfth of June, they use to
cast their swarms, at which season, they must be carefully looked unto for
going away: from that time, Times for s^^^m^ng.
till the rising of the Dog, or the coming in of the Dog days, which is
almost thirty days (as Columella says) the harvest is both for Honey, and
Corn. In what sort the Hiues are to be driven and gelded, is showed before:
but at this time, and till the twelfth of September, the Hiues must be opened
every tenth day, and smoked. The Hiues being thus smoked, you must refreshe the
Bees, with sprinckling and casting into the empty parts of their Hiues, very
fresh and cold water: and if any thing remain, not washed away, you must
sweep it of with a Goose wyng. Besides, the Mothes, if they appear, must be
sweeped away, and the Butterflies killed, which dwelling in the Hiues, are
commonly a bane to the Bees: for they both eat up the Wax, and with their
doung, do breed a kind of woorme that they call Hiue Mothes. To destroy
Butterflyes.
These Butterflies, as Columella teaches, you may when the Mallow flowreth (at
which time there is greatest number of them) destroy in this sort. You must
have a vessel of Brass very high and straight, narrow necked and mouthed, in
the bottom whereof, you must have a light, and set it in the evening near
unto your Hiues, and you shall see all the Butterflies straightwayes fall to
the light, and while they play about the flame, they burn them selves, while
they can neither geat up, by reason of the straightness, nor shun ye fire, by
means of the brazen walls. Betwixt the risinges of the Dog, and of the
Bearward, which are almost fifty days, you must take good heed your Bees be
not spoiled by Hornettes, which at that time lie in wait for them, even at
their own doors. After the rising of the Bearward, about ye twelfth, or
fourteenth of September, is the second harvest of your Honey: from that time,
till the setting of the seven stars, which is about forty days, the Bees do
provide for their winter store, of ye flowers of Heath, Tamariske, and other
bushes and shrubbes, of which provision you must take nothing, least you
discourage them, and drive them away: from the setting of the seven stars
(which is about the entrance of November) the beginning (if we may believe
Pliny) of winter. The Bees live all the winter long, upon such store of Honey,
as they have laid up: at this time, the Hiues must be opened and cleansed of
what so ever filth is in them, and diligently ordered, for during the winter
time, your Hiues must neither be opened nor stirred, and therefore in the end
of the Summer, No stuning of Bees in VVinter.
while the weather is yet mild and temperate, your Hiues being made clean in
some Sunny day, see that you thrust under them, certain close couers that may
reach to the very bottom of the Coames, not leaving any void space, whereby
the Hiue shall be the warmer. When you have this done, close up every rift and
open place with Clay, and Bullockes doung mingled together, dawbing it all
over without, leaving only a little hole to come in and out at. You must arm
them also against the cold and tempest, with good couerturs of straw and
bows. Some use to put into the Hiues, small Byrds being drawn, which with
their feathers keep the Bees warm all the Winter, and wherewith, if they
happen to lack food, they feed them selves sufficiently. Yea, it has been
seen they have so fed upon them, as they have left nothing but the bare
bones: howbeit, as long as their Honey suffiseth, they never meddle with the
Birds. It is very good and necessary (as I told you before) to set them
meat in little Troughes of Reeds, to defend them selves against famine. When
Winter is past, in the space of forty days, they make an end of all their
Honey, except their keeper deal the more liberally with them. It has often
also been seen, that their Coames being empty, they have continued fasting,
till the Ides of February, and cleaving to the Coames, as if they were dead,
have yet retained their life: but least they should lose it altogether, it is
good to power them in some sweet licours by little pipes, whereby they may
sustain their lives, till the Swallow with her appearing, promise a welcomer
season. After which time, when the weather will suffer them, they begin to
seek abroad for them selves: for, after the Sun is in the Aeq^inoctial, they
never rest, but travail painefully every day, and geather flowers, and
necessaries for their breeding. Besides, because few places are so fruitful,
as they yield flowers both Summer and Winter: therefore in such places, where
after the Spring and Summer (at which times, both Beans, Rapes, Wyllowes, and
other plants and herbs, in every place do flower) the flowers do fail,
they are carried of diverse (and that in the night, as I told you before) into
such places, whereas there is good store of late flowring herbs, as Time, wild
Marierum, and Sauery, wherewith they may be fed, geather food at their
pleasure, and, as Columella writes, that Bees in the old time, were brought
from the feeldes of A^^aia, to the pastures of Athen^, and so transported in
diverse other places. So may we with us carry them, from places where the
flowers be consumed in the Spring, to the summer flowers, as Clouer, and such
other: and after that, about the end of the Summer, to places furnished with
Heathe, Tamariske, and such other late bearing flower. For the avoiding of this
inconvenience of carrying from place to place, I will show you in what sort I
have ordered my Beeyard at home. And because master Hers^ach has showed you
before in his Garden many good herbs, and yet not whereto they serve, I will
show you a few plants that I have set about my Bees, serving both for their
commodity, and the health of my household. I have chosen of a great number,
such as be most necessary, and of greatest virtue: whose special virtues,
and wonderful woorkinges, given only by the most gracious and bountiful
framer of the World, and being as it were sucked and drawn out by the
careful toil and diligence of the Be, must needs add a greater perfection
to their Honey, and their Wax. I have first enclosed the yard, where my Bees
stand, with a quickset hedge made of Black thorn, and Honysoc^e the one of
them serving the Be with his flowers at the beginning of the spring, Black
thorn
and the other at the latter end of summer. The first, the Black thorn
bears a pleasant white flower, so much the welcomer to the Be, as it is the
very farewell of the Winter: for he commonly flowreth not till the Winter be
past. These flowers newly geathered and steeped all a night in the best and
strongest Wine, and afterward destilled in Balneo Marie, being drunk, helps
any pain in the sides, as has been certainly proved. Tragus the Germane
confesses, that with this only water, he has cured all manner of pains
about the stomach, heart, or sides. Wine made of the Sloe, and preserved until
July, or August, when the blooddy flixe most reigns, is a sovereign medecin
against it. VVoodbine
The other, the Honysocle, or Woodbine, begins to flower in June, and
continues with a passing sweet savor, till the very latter end of the
summer. The water thereof destilled and drunk, two or three days together at
times, asswageth the heat of the stomach, helps the Cough, and shortness
of breath. Rags of linen dipped therein, and applied, do heal any heat of
the eyes, or liver. Next unto my Hiues, I have planted the sweet herb
Melissa, or Apiastrum, called in English, Balm, Balm.
with a square stalk, a leaf like a smoothe Nettle, and a yellow flower, and
grows almost in every Hedge, an herb well known to the old women in the
country, and greatly desired of the Be. This Melissa, or Balm, sodden in
white wine, and drunk two or three morninges together, purges the breast,
helps the shortwinded, comfort the heart, drives away the dumpishe
heaviness, that proceeds of Melancholy, helps the falling sickness and
almost all other diseases: being chopped small, and steeped a night in good
white wine, and afterward destilled, is greatly commended, not only in
delivering women from their panges and greefes of the mother, being drunk to
the quantity of three or four spoonefulles, but also cures the pains or
fainting of the heart, called commonly the passion of the heart. Cardamus greatly
commends this herb, for the comforting and renewing of a decayed memory,
and affirms, that it is a causer of sweet and pleasant sleeps. Next unto
this, have I growing that sweet and precious herb Angellica, Angellica.
whose seeds I first received from that virtuous and godly Lady, the Lady
Golding in Kent, a Gentlwoman that sets her whole felicity in the fear and
service of the Almighty: this herb is in flower, seed, leaf, stalk, and
savor, so like unto Louage, as they may hardly be discerned ye one from the
other, the leaf does in a manner resemble the Fig leaf, saving that it is
more iagged, and indented round about. If any man be suddenly infected with
the pestilence, fever, imoderate sweat, let him take of the root of this
Angellica in powder, For want of Treacle, you may take the whole dram
half a dram, and putting to it a dram of Treacle, mingle them together
with three or four spoonefulles of the water destilled of the said root, and
after he has drunk it, let him lie and sweat fasting, for the space of three
hours at the least: thus doing, by the help of God, he shall escape the
danger: the root steeped in Uineger and smelt unto, and the same Uineger
sometimes drunk fasting, does preserve a man from the pestilence: to be short,
the root and the water thereof, is sovereign against all inward diseases, it
scowreth away the collections of a Plurisie beginning, helps vlcered and
corrupted Loonges, and is good against the Collicke, Strangury, and restraint
of women's purgacions, and for any inward swelling, or inflamacion, the juice
thrust into a hollow tooth, aswageth the pain, the water dropped into the
ear, does the like: the said juice and water put into the eye, quickens ye
sight, and takes away the thin skins and rines that covers the eye.
Besides, a most present remedy in all deep and rotten sores, is the juice, the
water, or the powder: for it cleanses them, and covers the bone with good
flesh. It was called in the old time Panacea, or Heal^al. Next unto this
Angellica, have I growing in great plenty, Cardus Benedictus, Cardus Benedictus.
or blessed Thistell, which the Empirickes, or common Proalisers, do commend
for sundry and great Uertues, affirming, that it was first sent out of India,
to Frederyck the Emprour, for the great Virtue it had against the headache, or
megrime, being eaten, or drunken. Likewise they say, it helps against the
dasing, or giddiness of the head, makes a good memory, and restores the
hearing. For the proof of his great force against poison, they bring forth a
young maiden of Pauy, that having unawares eaten of a poisoned Apple, and
therewithal so swolen, as no Treacle, nor medcine could cure her, was at the
last restored to health, by the destilled water of this Thistell: and likewise
that a boy, into whose mouth as he slept in the feelde, happened an Adder to
creep, was saved by the drinking of this water, the Adder creeping out behind,
without any hurt to the child. In fine they affirm, that ye leaves, juice,
seed, and water, heals all kind of poisons, and that the water has healed a
woman, whose breast was eaten with a canker to the very ribs. I have also set
in this little piece of ground, great store of the herb called Numularia, or
Penigrasse, Penygrasse.
which creeps close by the ground, having upon a long string little round
leaves, standing directly one against the other, and a yellow flower, like the
Crowfoote. It is a sovereign herb for healing of wounds, not only outward and
green wounds, but also inward sores and ulcers, specially of the Loonges,
whereof there has been good proof. Tragus affirms, that he has seen
dangerous, and desperate wounds cured with this herb, being boiled with Honey
and Wine, and drunk. It heals exulcerations of the breast and Loonges, and
may be well given to those that cough, and are short breathed, and to little
children diseased with the dry cough, who by reason of their tender age, may
take no stronger medicine: I have seen good plenty of it growing by the
shadowy Ditches, about great Peckam in Kent. I have beside there, growing
Scabious, Scabious.
an herb that grows commonly in Corn, with a iagged leaf, lying round
upon the ground, and thrusting out in Summer a long stalk, with sundry
branches, the flowers growing in blewe knoppes or tuftes, like Honycomes. This
herb being sodden with white wine, and drink, does help the Plurisie,
against which diseases, the women of the country, that many times take upon
them to be great D^ct^esses in Physic, do still the water thereof in May, and
give it to be drunken at each time, two or three sponefuls, not only against
the Plurisie, but against inward imposternes, coughes, and all diseases of the
breast. Against imposternes, diverse (as Tra^us writes) do make this
composition, they take a handful of Scabious, the herb dried, of Liquerisse
cut small an ounce, twelve Figs, Fenell seed an ounce, Aniseede as much, Or
as half an ounce, these they lay al a night in water: the next day they boil
them, till a third part be consumed, and after making it sweet with Sugar, or
Honey of Roses, they give it wa^me in the morning and the evening, wherewith
they say, the imposterne is ripened, made soft, and cought out.


^VLLARIVS. I remember, that passing by the house of that honorable Baron, the
Lord Cobham (whose house you shall seeldome see without great resort, by
reason of his noble disposition, and honorable intertainement that he gives
to all comers) I chanced to see in his Park at Cobbam, a certain herb
called Veronica, Veronica.
whereof I have heard virtues.


MELISSEVS. That can I also show you amongst the herbs that I have about my
Bees: it is called of some Feueriuum, and Veronica, as it is supposed of a
certain French King, who was thought by the juice thereof, to be cured of a
great Leprosy, it is called in english Fluellin: it creeps low by the
ground, as Penigrasse does, and bears a leaf like the Blackthorne, with a
bluish spe^kled flower, with a seed enclosed in little powches, like a
shepeheards purse, and grows commonly under Oaks. D Hieron writes, that the
force thereof, is marvelous against the pestilence, and contagious airs, and
that he him self has often times proved. The water of the herb steeped in
white Wine, and destilled therewithal, he has cured sundry times, hot
burning and pestilent fevers, as well in young men, as in old. Hieron
Transchweyg, commends it to be singular good for all diseases of the Spleen:
the shepheardes of Germany, give it with great profit made in powder and
mingled with salt, to their cattle diseased with the cough, being steeped in
Wine and destilled, it is a most present remedy in all pestilent fevers: being
given two ounces thereof with a little Treacle, and after laid warm in bed,
and well covered, it expels the poison by sweat, and drives it from the
heart. The water of this herb taken certain days together, two ounces at a
time, helps the turnesicke giddiness of the head, voydeth fleame, purges
blood, warmeth the stomach, opens the stopping of the Liver, heals the
diseases of the Loonges, and the Spleen, purges the Uaines, the Matrice, and
the Bladder, it drives out sweat and venom, helps the Iandise, the stone of
the Reygnes, and other grievous diseases. You shall also have amongst these
plants of mine, the good sweet herb Cariphilata, or of some, Benedicta, of
others, Sanamanda, called in English Aueus, Aueus.
whose root whether it be green, or old, resembles the Cloue in savor: the
leaf is iagged, rooffe, of a darkish green, and not much unlike to Agrimony:
the flower is yellow, and after the falling thereof, leaves a prycly knoppe
like a Hedgehogge: the root, the longer it has grown, the sweeter it is: the
special use of this root in some countries, is to be put in Wine in ye spring
time: for it makes the Wine to taste and savor very pleasantly: which Wine, as
many hold oppinion, does glad the heart, opens the obstruxion of the Liver,
and heals the stomach, that is over burdened with cold and gross humors:
this root boiled in Wine and given warm, does ease the grief of the
stomach, or ye belly, proceading of either cold, or wind. Hard by this herb,
have I planted the great water Betony, called of some, Ocimastrum, of
Mathiolus, Scrophularia Mayor: it has a great square stalk, and big leaf
indented round about: the the flower is in color Purple, and in fashion like
the shell of a Snayle, it flowreth in June and July, and grows most by waters
in shadowy places. Tragus teaches to make a special ointment thereof, serving
against all scabbes and sores, wherewith he says, he has seen people so
mangy, as they have seemed even Lepers to be cured: his ointment is this. Take
the herb, roots and all, gathered in May, washed and well cleansed from all
filth, stamp it, and strain out the juice, and keep it in a narrow mouthed
glass well stopped, wherein you may keep it a whole year, and when so ever
you list to make your ointment, take of the same juice, of Wax and Oil, of
each a like quantity, and boil them together upon a Chafingdish of coals,
stirring them well, till they be incorporated, and so use it. Mathiolus
teaches to make a singular ointment thereof against Kernells, the Kings evil,
and the Hemrodes: his order is this. You must gather the roots in the end of
summer, and after that you have made them very clean, stamp them together
with fresh Butter, and putting them into an earthen vessel close covered, set
them up in some moist and dampishe place, suffering it there to remain for the
space of fifteen days: afterward, let the same Butter be melted with a soft
fire, and being well strained, lay it up for your use. There have I also an
other excellent herb, called in Latin Cardiaca, Cardiaca.
I know no name for it in English, except you will call it Motherwort, and in
deed it is the very true Motherwort: it grows by high ways, and near to
stone walls, it has a leaf something like a Nettell, but more indented, the
leaves next to the root being iagged like the Crowfoote: it grows bushing
with many stalks, I have seen it plentifully in Surry, and some store of it
about Maydstone in Kent: it is of great force against any sickness of the
heart, whereof it takes his name: it helps Crampes, and Palseys, it cleanses
the breast from fleame, it kills Woormes in the body, opens cold
obstructions, provoke Urine, and women's Courses: being made in powder, and a
sponefull of it given in Wine, it wonderfully helps the hard labors of women.


CHENOBOSCVS. I maruayle you have no store of Betony also: Betony.
for I have seen the Bees labor diligenttly upon it, and have heard, that it
is of great virtue.


MELISSEVS. I have great store in deed of it, but that I forgot to tell you of
it, it is known so commonly, as I need not to discribe it unto you: whosoever
is troubled with breaking of wind, and weakness of stomach, and those whose
stomachs retain not their meat, or whosoever feels a sour belching from
his stomach, and is therewith often troubled, let them continually use Betony,
either the herb and flower boiled in Wine, or the water distilled, or the
Conserve (as they call it) of the flowers. And if so be you lack the Conserve,
or the water you may use the dry herb in powder, either by it self, or with
Honey: women that are troubled with the mother, may use this herb for their
remedy. To be short, the flower, leaf, and root of Betony sodden and drunk,
or howsoever you will, in Electuarie, Conserve, Sirope, Potion, or Powder, as
you list to take it, is singular good in y^ diseases of y^ stomach, liver,
spleen, kydneyes, and bladder, it freeth the Matrice from obstruction, and
draws from thence all hurtful moystures. For consumptions of the Loonges,
Coughes, Dropsies, continual and putrifyed Feuars, proceeding from the
stomach, boil the leaves and flowers of Betony in Honyed water, and you shall
have present help. Thus have I showed you what kind of herbs I have planted
about my Bees, to the end they should have food at hand of the sweetest, and
the holsomest: I have showed you also the virtues of the herb, the flower,
and the water, that you may use for your own commodity: only this warning I
give you, that you do not distill them, as the unskillful do, in stilles of
Lead, Tin, and Brass, which poysoneth and spoyleth the water, but in Glass
Stils, set in some vessel of water upon the fire, whereby your water shall be most
perfect and wholesome. The difference of these two distillinges, appears
plain: for example, in Wormwood, which if you distill in your common
Styllatories, ye water comes out sweet, having gotten a corrupt quality by
the nature and corruption of the metal: whereas, if you do it in Stils made of
Glass, looking that the Glasses be well closed round about, your water shall
have the very taste, savor, and property of the herb. With these Glass
Stils you may so order your fire, as you may draw out of every herb, the
water, spirit, oil, and salt, to the great comfort of sick and diseased
persons. I set besides, great plenty of Sauery, Heath, Tamariske, and without
the Beeyard, Broom, in whose flowers the Be much delights. I keep you here
peradventure too long in so small a matter. Small is the thing, yet small is
not the gain:
If gracious gods permytte, and Phoebus not disdain.
As the heathen Poet writes: but I will here make an end of my talk, that
has perhapes been thought too long.


FINIS.
Soli Deo.
Old English rules, for purchasing land.
Who so will be wise in purchasing.
Let him consider these points following.
FIRST see that the land be clear,
In title of the selleare.
And that it stand in danger,
Of no vvomans down.
See whether the tenure be bond or free,
And release of every feoffee.
See that the seller be of age,
And that it lie not in morgage.
Whether a tail be thereof found.
And whether it stand in statute bound.
Consider what service longs theretoe,
And what quitrent thereout must go.
And if it be come of a vvedded woman,
Think thou then on couerte baron.
And if thou may in any wise,
Make thy charter with vvarrantise.
To thee, thine heirs, assigns also,
Thus should a wise purchaser do.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Leaf. Page. Line. Faults. Corrections. 2. 1 2 Now if We if 3. 2 7 hear he
preaches here preaches 26. 2 18 part for ye wheat part for the whole 27. 1
22 wy or blade with one blade 46. 1 14 great occupiers great occupyinges 47. 1
35 For law For right law 5. 2 11 him self her self 47. 1 14 that be
subject. etc. or be subject to invasions 49. 1 12 In chargeable ne chargeable
52. 2 28 In Gellaci Nigella 100. 1 9 Wyllow grew Wyllow grove 111. 1 13 tytled
tylled 112. 2 3 meet meeter 115. 2 29 at the first at first 115. 2 29 lymme
lymmes. 118. 2 34 Horsed housed 124. 2 17 ache agewe 124. 2 17 Fern free 124.
2 36 wherefore whereof 128. 1 23 which when with whom 128. 2 11 that save that
133. 1 16 for Ortinent, read Orlament where 134. 2 16 so ever you find it in
beasts medecines. 134. 2 17 as broad as broad as a Grote 146. 1 8 the beasts
the bodies 149. 2 3 roame run

A TABLE OF ALL such principal matters and words as are contained in this
Book, wherein the first side of the leaf is signified by A. and the second by
B. and whereas the Book is in sundry places noted with one number tvvyse,
the second number is shevved by this mark * before the number.
A.
ABlaqueation of Vines. 82. b. Africa, her fertility. 19. a. Aglaus judged
happy by Apollo. 7. a. Ambition to bemoderated. 1. b. Almondes. 94. a. Almond
tree. Annyse. 57. b. Angelica. 68. a. Angelica, the virtues. 190. b. Anthony
the saint, his answer 4. b Arcturus, his setting. 139. a. Armaracia. 59. a.
Abrecocks. 96. b. Aruneus, what. 144. b. Ass, her foaling. 125. a. Ass, the
stallion. 126. a. Ass, his remedy for haltyng. 125. b Ass, his use. 125. a
Asparagus, the berries. 54. b Asparagus. 54. a Axeltrees the best vvood. 108.
b. Ashes for doung. 20. b. Ash grove. 102. b. Ash tree. 106. b. Appletrees,
how to set. 90. a. Apples, their kinds. 90. a. Asses vvylde. 125. a. Apple
loftes. 12. b. Apples, their ripeness. 88. a. Amber. 110. a. Auens, the
virtues. 192. a.
B.
Basyll. 65. a. Barnacles grovvyng out of trees. 165. b. Bees delight in nevve
hyues. 181. b. Bees lost, their repairing. 186. a. Bees tame. 177. a. Bees best
to be bought, and how. 176. b. Bees clustering, what betokens. 181. a.
Bees bred of a Steer. 186. a. Bees, how to be carried. 177. a. Bees, what
angreth them. 182. b. Bees vvyld^. 177. a. Bees expelled by smoke. 177. b. Bees
Mases birds. 174. a. Bees, plants pleasing them. 179. a. Bees, plants
hurtful to them 179. a. Bees to (...). 186. a. Bees if they br^ede not. 187.
b. Bees vv^lde, their taking. 177. a. Bees fo^eshevvers of vveather. 175. a.
Bees sit. 185. Bees not to be removed in vvinter. 189. a. Bees in hollovve
trees. 177. b. Bees how to order. 188. a. Bees must stand near the master.
178. b. Bees clean water. 178. b. Bees attendance all the year. 188. a. Bees
hunted by Harnettes. 189. a. Bees hurt by Echo. 188. a. Bees, smoke good for
them. 188. b. Bees to keep from Butterflyes. 189. a. Bees, what hurts them.
187. b. 178. a Bees, vvh^t does them good. 188 b Bees hurt by Elm flovvres.
187. a. Bees hurt by spurge. 187. a. Bees better the valley, then the hill.
178. b. Bees, to heal their diseases. 187. a. Bees, their age. 185. b. Bees
clensing the hiues. 189. a. Bees health, the tokens. 187. a. Bees idle, their
punishment. 175. b. Bees harvest, or diuing. 182. a. Bees to drive, what
smoke. 182. b. Bees meat. 180. b. Bees several labors. 175. b. Bees, the
master, where to seek. 182. a. Bees svvarming time. 188. b. Bees hatching.
185. b Bees their vvatch. 174. b. Bees, the t^king of the comes. 182. a. and
188. Bees, the drones. 176. a. and.182. a Bees romyng away, to restrain. 181.
b. Bees roming away, the signs. 180. b. Bees, their industry. 174. a. Bees
how to find. 177. b. Bees their vvinter food. 180. b. Bees angry, to
appease. 183. a. Bees, the breeders. 176. a. Bees harvest double. 183. Bees
diseases, their preserving. 187. a. Bees when they begin to labor. 180. a.
Bees rest. 175. a. Be, the old master, what to do. 182. a. and 184. b. Be
the master, diverse in one hiue. 181. b. Bees, their palaces. 174. b. Bees,
their government.174. b. Be the master, his making. 176. b. Bees common
wealth. 174. b. Be the master restrained. 182. a. Bees to make. 186. b. Bees,
their standing. 178. Bees removed for food. 189. b. Boar and Bull common. *
127. b. Beetes. 57. b. Betony. 66. a. Betony, the virtues. 193. a. Byrche. 102.
b. and.107. a. Bizontes. 137. a. Borage. 61. b. Bullockes, their fatting. *
128. b. Bullockes, how to bye. 128. a. Bullockes, their shape. 128. a.
Busses. 127. Bullockes, their food. 128. b. Bullockes halting, remedy. 131. b.
Bullockes ill digestion. 130. b. Bullockes bitten with a mad dog. 132. b.
Bullockes hydebound. 132. b. and 134. b. Bullockes fever, the cure. 131. b.
Bullockes ache in the synovves. 132. a. Bullockes mangers. 129. b. Bullockes,
their houes worn. 132. a. Bullockes, the flixe. 131. a. Bullockes, to
preserve them. 129. b. Bullockes, mangie. 132. b. Bullockes sores mattring.
132. a. Bullockes heel hurt. 132. a. Bullockes hoof hurt. 132. a. Bullockes
vvatring. 129. a. Bullockes pasturing. 129. a. Bullock, the tail. 131. a.
Bullock, the cough. 131. a. Bullock how to setter. 133. a. Bullock, the
murryne. 132. b. Bullock^ long sick. 133. a. Bullockes, the yellovves. 133. b.
Bullockes liver sick. 134. a. Bullockes, the blame. 134. a. Bullockes, the
sprenges. 134. a. Bullockes, the staggers, and the dasie. 134. Bullockes
pissing blood, the panteys, taynt, and g^rgyse. 136. b. Bullockes, for all
diseases. 136. b. Blackethorne flovvres, the virtues. 190. a. Balm, the
virtues. 190. a. Buglosse. 61. b. Bean, the straw, and the off^ll. 33. a.
Beeche grove. 101. b. Beeche. 106. b. Bull common. 127. b. Bull, his making.
128. a. Beeche wheat. 31. a. Birdlime, the making. 110. a. Baytree. 93. b.
C.
Cammell of Arabi. 126. d. Cammell of Bastria. 126. b. Cammell, her foaliug.
127. a. Cameleopard. 127. a. Cammels engender backwards. 127. a. Corn feeldes
and Vineyard compared. 77. b. Caution in buying of land. 46. a. S. Tho.
Chaloner. 122. a. Courtiers, their gorgeous misery. 7. a. Colvvoortes, the
seed for oil. 56. b. Chalk used for doung. 20. b. Cammell ingendring with
Bores 127. a. Candles of trees. 110. a Coals of vvylde Oak. 109. a Coals of
Iumper. 107. b. Coals, what vvood to be made of. 109. a. Carottes. 59. b.
Cheese of huge bigness. 147. b. Cheese parmasia. 147. b. Cheese not to be made
of be^ste^ that have more then four pappes. 147. b. Chestnuts. 94. b. Catoes
answer touching bicedyng. 111. b. Catoes Oracle. 15. a. Cabbedge. 56. a.
Co^le crompled. 56. b. Cyt^ons. 91. a. Cordum, a kind of Hay. 45. b.
Cotryander. 57. a. Corn^lltree. 92. b. Cresinus, his diligence. 46. a.
Coucomber. 62. a. Cumyn. 57. a. Cypress. 107. b. Cyrus king, nursed by
shepheardes. 113. a. Cytisus. 37. b. Cattle their breaking. 128. a. Colts
their handling. 119. a. Cattle keeping and tyllage their fellowship. 111. a.
Cattle keeping, the antiquity and vvoorthynesse. 113. a. Cork tree. 109. a.
Cork grove. 101. b. Gornefloore. 12. b. Covve barreyne. 128. Castryl. 170. a.
Covve, her age. 128. b. Covve, her making. 128. b. Covve, her caluing. * 127.
a. Calves their geldyng. * 127. b. Cocks their choice. 158. a. Capons, their
making. 161. b. Chickins hatched without the Hen. 159. a. Chickins diseases
and remedy. 160. a. Cock, a moouer to repentance. 158. a. Crosses. 58. a.
Cardiaca his virtues. 192. b. Carduus Benedictus, the virtues. 191. a.
D.
Date tree. 97. a. Damsons. 96. a. Dyll. 57. b. Drone Be. 176. a. and 182. a.
Dog the star, his rising. 189. a. Dogs to rid them of Tycks. 156. a.
Dog for the house. 154. a. Dog for the sold. 154. b. Dog ma^^de, the
tokens. 156. b. Dog, his age, 155. a. Dogs tail, the cutting. 155. b.
Dogs, their feedyng. 155. b. Dogs coolours. 154. b. Dogs, their kinds.
154. a. Dogs kind to be regarded. 155. a. Dogs of vvoonderfull p^ice. 153.
b. Dogs diseases, and remedies. 156. a. Dogs names. 156. a. Dogs, their
lyttures. 155. a. Douehouse, buildyng. 169. a. Doves to keep from the Halke.
170. a. Doves, their food. 169. b. Doves, their foes. 170. a. Doves, their
price. 168. a. Doves, their kinds. 168. b. Doves, to allure them to the house.
107. a. Doves young, their feedyng. 169. a. Doung, the sorts. 19. b. Doung
nevve, best for medovves. 20. a. Doung old, best for come ground. 20. a. Doung
for Vines. 82. a. Dounghill. 13. a. Dwelling house. 10. b. Doung best, the
masters foot. 30.
E.
Elm. 102 Elm, his use. 106. a Eggs, their sorts. 161. b. Eldar. 107. a.
Elecompany. 68. a. Emperors of Nethardes. 113. a. Endive. 55. b. Eggs to be
hatched. 158. b. Eggs how to choose. 159 b. Eggs kept from thunder. 159. b.
Eye of the masters, fattes the horse. 121. b.
F.
Flax. 38. b. Fur tree, his use. 106. a. Flovvre gentle. 65. b. Filbert. 94.
b. Fruitefulnesse of diverse countries. 19. a. Fig tree. 107. a. Fenell. 57.
b. Fenugreeke. 36. a. Fodder for Cattle. 36. b. Fish delighting in mud. 173.
b. Fish delighting in gravel. 173. b. Eishepondes, their sundry sorts. 172.
b. and 173. a. Fishpondes, where best. 172. b. Fishpondes. 172. a Frye. 173.
b.
G.
Garlic. 60. a. Galls. 102. a. and. 110. a. Garners. 42. b. Goose pens,
their standing. 163. b. Goose liver of great bigness. 164. b. Goose, her
hatching. 164. a. Goose, their fattyng. 164. a. Garden herbs, the sowing. 52.
b. Garden, the standing. 52. a. Garden, what mould best. 51. b. Garden
dounging and digging. 52. a. Gardens of great antiquity. 48. a. Garden, a
shambies. 48. b. Garden without water. 49. b. Garden ill, declares an evil
husvvyfe. 48. b. Garden when to water. 50. a. Graffing. 72. a. Graffing, the
season. 71. a. Graffing, a nevve way. 74. a. Graffing, diverse sorts. 72. a.
Graffing with the top downevvard. 73. b. Gelliflovvres. 66. a. Gourdes. 62.
b.
H.
Helecampany. 68. a. Husband, his good nature. 17. a. Husbandmen most happy. 7.
a. Husbandmen come to be Emperors. 5. b. Husbandry nurse of all other
sciences. 6. a. Husbandry Cosen Germane to vvysedome. 6. b. Husbandry, her
nobility. 6. a. Husbandry, her antiquity. 6. b. Husbandry pleases GOD. 6. b.
Husbandry no base trade. 7. a. Holly, the tree. 107. b. Honey coames, what
fashion. 183. a. Honey coames. 175. b. Harvest for Otes. 41. a. Happy, who is.
7. b. Haru^st of H^mpe. 41. a. H^ru^st of Wheat. 41. a. Harvest of Rye. 41.
a. Harvest of Rapeseede. 40. b. Harvest of VVinter Baily. 40. b. Harvest of all
other Corn and Pulse. 41. a. Hemp. 39. b. Hartichocks. 63. a. Heavens, their
state for the ground. 52. a. Heavens, their state for planting and sovving. 53.
b. Horses age how to know. 117. a. Horse loves troubled water. 121. a.
Horse his proportion. 115. a. b. Horse broken vvynded. 124. a. Horse forsaking
his meat, the remedy. 121. a. Horse halting, the remedy. 123. a. Horses their
colors. 116. a. Horses, the Cratches. 123. a. Horses soundring. 123. b. Horses
gald. 123. a. Horse described by Virgil. 115. b. Horse vvyndgalles. 123. a.
Horse to be in health. 121. b. Horse provoked to stale. 122. a. Horse tired,
the remedy. 122. a. Horse having vvoormes, the signs and the remedy. 124. a.
Horse to keep from Flies. 123. b. Horse when to be broken. 119. a. Horses
feet, the cure. 122. b. Horse his rhume, the cure. 124. a. Horse mangie. 124.
a. Horse the vyues. 123. a. Horse payned in the belly. 123. b. Horse how long
he lives. 117. a. Horse wholesome to travail. 121. a. Horsing of Mares, the
time. 117. b. Horses vvatring. 121. a. Hors^s gelding. 119. b. Horses carrying.
120. a. Horse is ordring after tratrauayle. 121. b. 120. b. Horse his
prouender. 120. b. Horse his skovvring. 120. a. Horses general remedies. 124.
b. Horses stables. 119. b. Horse clothes. 122. a. Horse less hurt by dravving
then bearing. 119. b. Horses vvallovvyng, wholesome. 122. a. Horse hot, not to
be vvatred. 121. b. Horse cold, to have. 118. a. Horse how to choose. 115.
Horse suddenly sick, the cure. 151. b. Heye making. 45. b. Heye cutting. 5. b.
Heye when to cut. 45. b. Husbands bestovving of time. 2. b. Hog sick, the
signs. 151. a. Hog mesled. 152. a. Hog sound, the tokens. 151. a. Hogs
their breaming, and farrovvyng. 149. b. Hog sick of the Quinsey, and the
Kernels. 151. a. Hogs, their gelding. 150. b. Hog, the fever. 151. a.
Hogs, their herdes. 148. b. Hogs diseases, and the remedies. 151. a. Hogs
long sick, remedy. 151 b. Hogs sick of the mylt. 151. a. Hogs turnesicke.
151. b. Hogs made to the horn. 149. b. Husbandry commended. 5. a. Hedge
dead. 50. a. Hedge quick preferred. 50. b. Hedge quick, sundry vvayes of
making. 50. b. Hens for brood, their choice. 157. b. Hens how long in
hatching. 160. a. Hens house, the standing. 162. a. Hens how long in
sittyng. 158. b. Hens their feeding. 163. a. Hens how to fat. 161. a.
Hens must have dust. 163. a. Hens what ligges to set under. 159. a. Hens
to keep from sittyng. 158. b. Hens the number to a Cock. 158. a. Herbs
for pleasure and beauty. 65. a. Herb what for pastures. 45. a. Hippomanes.
117. b. Horda, what. 128. a. Hysope. 64. b. Honey of the ^eath. 184. a. Honey
making. 185. b. Honey, the kinds. 184. a. Honey the best. 184. Honey how
corrupted. 184. Hill how to plovve. 21. a. Hiues of Bees. 179. a. Hiues the
entry small. 180. a. Hiues fed with birds. 189. b. Hiues their mothes. 189.
a. Hiues decayed, their repayring. 184. b.
I.
Implastring. 74. a. Inoculation. 74. a. Instruments of husbandry. 11. b.
Italy why called the Orchard. 19. a. Italy why so called. 127. b. Iumper.
107. a. Ioab. 113. a. Impes^ their remoouing. 76. a. Images that sweat. 107.
b.
K.
Kitchen. 12. a. King. H. 122. a.
L.
Larshe. 106. a. Lauender. 65. b. Land what it requires. 46. b. Land
neighborhood to be regarded. 46. b. Land the degrees. 17. a. Land good, the
tokens. 18. a. L^querize. 62. b. Lettise. 55. a. Lettuzins, a surname. 48. b.
Lentiles. 34. b. Leeke. 59. b. Lyndtree. 106. b. Lechery, what hurt to the
body. 144. b.
M.
Maple. 107. b. Maple boordes. 108. a. Marioram. 65. b. Moovves for Corn. 13.
a. Mallovve. 61. a. Manna. 180. b. Melca. 148. a. Mellones. 62. a. Mellon
pompeons. 62. a. Medlar. 89. b. Mares whether they should be covered yearly.
118. a. Mares with Foale how to use. 118. b. Mares time of Fo^ling. 118. b.
Mares conceauing by the vvinde. 117. b. Mescelin. 32. b. Meddovve nevve to
make. 44. b. Meddovves why so called. 43. b. Meddovves, their ordering. 44. a.
Movvles to catch and destroy. 69. a. Mast, what. 102. a. Mast, the difference.
101. b. Mast, the use. 110. a. Mastholme grove. 101. b. Milk black. 146. a.
Milk to try. 146. b. Milk the ordering. 146. b. Milk the difference. 146.
a. Milk, the vvhay. 14^. a. Milk to purge Melancholy, and all other humors.
146. a. Milk to purge the dropsy. 146. a. Milk to purify blood. 146. a.
Milk to loose the belly. 146. b. Moon observed in sovving. 53. b. Moon
observed in dounging. 53. b. Mynt. 64. b. Myllet. 31. b. Mulbery tree. 92. a.
Mulbery, the vv^^est (...). 92. a. Moyles, their color. 126. a. Moyles do
breed. 126. a. Myse to destroy. 69. a. Moss to destroy. 44. b. Myrtle tree.
65. b. Musterdseede. 58. a.
N.
Nauevves. 59. b. Netheardes made Emperors. 113. a. Neyghbourhood. 9. a. 46.
b.
O.
Of choosing of ground. 16. b. Of corn ground. 16. b. Of Duckes. 164. b. Of
Bees. 173. b. Of Geese. 163. a. Of plovvyng. 20. b. Of Asses. 124. b. Of
Bullockes. 127. b. Of Horses. 114. a. Of Colvvoo^^^. 56. a. Of Buffes. 137. a.
Of Butter. 146. b. Of Cammels. 126. b. Of Dogs. 153. b. Of Goats. 144. a. Of
Cheese. 146. b. Of Wax. 184. a. Of Pigeons. 168. a. Of Cattes. 156. b. Of
Hens. 157. b. Of Pothearbes. 54. a. Of Gardens. 52. a. Of Turkycocks. 166. b.
Of Milk. 146. a. Of P^lse. 33. a. Of Honey. 180. b. Of Harvest. 40. b. Of
Moyles. 125. b. Of Sheep. 137. b. Of Eggs. 161. b. Of Shepheardes. 153. a. Of
Pecocks. 165. b. Of blood lettyng. 124. b. Of Orchardes. 69 b. Of fatting of
Svvyne, saltyng, and preseruyng of Bacon. 152. b. Of seeds, and their sorts.
53. a. Of dounging. 19. b. Of Svvyne. 148. a. Of vvooddes. 100. a. Of good
ground. 18. a. Of Wheat. 26. a. Of Turtle Doves. 171. a. Of the Bailey of
husbandry. 13. b. Of the Vine. 77. a. Orange alvvayes bearyng. 91. a. Orenges
their plantyng. 91. b. Olyue Grape. 85. a. Oak grove, the planting. 101. a. Oak
of a vvoonderfull bigness. 101. a. Oak his use. 108. a. Olyue. tree. 84. b.
and. 107. b. Olyue ripe, the tokens. 86. a. Olyue vvylde. 107. b. Olyue
geatherers law. 86. b. Oysters. 173. b. Order, his commodity. 12. a. Oyster
pondes. 173. b. Oil, the making. 86. b.
P.
Panicle. 32. a. Parsnep. 59. a. Patriarchs shepheardes. 113. a. Plovve, his
vvyng. 21. a. Plovving, the season. 22. Plovving in the night. 21. Plovv, his
parts. 21. a. Poppey 58. a. and. 39. a. Peache tree. 69. b. Peache with an
Almond curnell. 72. b. Pestilence in Cattle whereof. 129. b. Persely. 57. a.
Pitch tree. 103. a. and.95. a. Pimpernell. 64. b. Pine tree. 95. a. Pistaces.
93. a. Pitche. 110. a. Plants prospering with cursing. 55. a. Plants
prospering by theft. 55. a. Planting, the time. 71. b. Planting, the Moon
observed. 71. b. Plants steeped. 75. b. Plants, their diversity. 75. b.
Plane tree. 106. b. Popular grove. 103. a. Poplar, his use. 106. a. Poplar
white and black. 103. a. Pigges thirty at one farrovve. 150. a. Purcelane.
61. b. Plome trees, their kinds. 96. a. Plome tree. 96. a. Ptsan. 29. a.
Pullettes. 158. a. Pomegranate. 90. b. Pomegranates have like number of
graynes. 91. a. Pears read. 88. b. Pear tree his plantyng. 88. b. Pears
how to keep. 89. a. Pear tree. 88. b. Penygrasse, his virtues. 191. a.
Pastures. 129. a.
Q.
Quayles. 171. b. Quince tree. 89. a. Quinces when to be geathered. 89. b.
Quinces how to keep. 89. b. Quicksettes, their plantyng. 80. b. Quickset.
80. b. Quayle, mother. 171. b.
R
Radyshe, his use. 58. b. Rams, which to be bought. 138. Rape. 59. a. Rape
harvest. 40. b. Rape of great bigness. 30. a. Rape root. 30. a. Radishe of
great bigness. 58. b. Radishe root. 58. b. Remedy against Gnattes. 69. a.
Remedy against VVyuels. 43. a. Remedy against Caterpillars. 68. a. Rozyn. 110.
a. Reasyns small. 62. a. Romulus nursed by shepheardes. 113. a. Rose. 66. a.
Rosemary. 64. a. Raspis. 62. a. Revve. 54. b. Rennet for Cheese. 146. b.
Rakyng. 25. b. Rye. 27. b. Rye harvest, 41. a. Rise. 32. a. Rich, who. 8. a.
S.
Svvan. 171. b. Saffron. 63. b. Saurye. 65. Settervvoort and his use. 68. a.
124. a. 130. a. Servants their looking to 15. a. Servants health to be
regarded. 15. a. Sauine. 68. b. Sallettes. 48. Sorell. 57. Sauce of Apples. 88.
b. Sauce of Pears. 89. a. Sheep pild. 137. b. Smalladge. 57. a. Se^^^ and
La^ders. 12. b. Sheep sick of the loonges, the cure. 143. b. Sheep cough,
the cure. 143. b. Sheep their time of blossoming. 139. a. Sheep what number
to be kept. 138. b. Sheep tail of vvoonderfull bigness. 137. b. Sheep
leg broken, the cure. 143. b. Sheep yearly to be drawn. 138. b. Sheep
their vvynde perished. 143. Sheep having the fever. 343. a. Sheep their great
increase. 139. a. Sheep the sorts. 137. b. Sheep to keep in health. 143. a.
Sheep the Foulde. 143. a. Sheep skabby chynd. 143. b. Sheep their feedyng.
140. a. Sheep their lamming time. 139. a. Sheep the murreyne. 144. a. Sheep
skabby. 143. a. Sheepecoates. 141. a. Sheep shearing, the time. 142. a.
Shepheardes resemblance with princes. 113. a. Shepheardes care in feedyng.
140. b. Slevves for Fish. 173. b. Sauge. 64. b. Sovve farrovvyng, her age.
148. b. Soommer seeds. 26. a. Seeds their coming up. 53. b. Seeds what for
every ground. 25. a. Seeds the choice. 24. a. Sovving, the order. 24. b.
Sovvyng, the season. 25. b. Semyn oil. 32. b. Sesamum. 32. b. Solitary life,
his use. 2. a. Seruisse tree. 90. a. Spinach. 57. a. Sponge. 54. a. Spery. 38.
b. Sovve four moonethes with pigge. 149. b. Svvynestyes, their standing. 150.
a. Shepheardes of Zuytcherland. 153. a. Sellars. 12. b. Ships, of what
timber. 108. a. Sheep delight in music. 141. a. Sheep fevve, and well
fed. 138. b. Sheep of what age, and how to buy. 137. b. Sheep kept
abroad. 142. a. Sheep when to buy. 138. a. Sheep covered. 142. 2. Sheep
having svvalloved a Horseleeche, his cure. 144. a. Scabious, the virtues. 191.
b.
T.
Timber for buyldyng. 108. Timber for Pumpes, and water pipes. 108. Trees the
Northside mossy. 105. b. Tree of knowledge, why created. 70. a. Tree
foreshevvyng his fall. 107. b. Tree never without fruit. 91 Tree the vvysest.
92. a. Trees best for timber. 105. b. Trees how to keep from vvoormes. 90.
b. Trees springing best of the seed. 70. b. Trees soon grown, the fruit
lasts not. 97. b. Trees graffed in the stock. 72. a. Trees graffed betwixt
vvood and ryade. 72. a. Trees vvhereon to be graffed. 72. a. Trees when to be
proyned. 98. b. Trees spring slovvly of the seed. 9^. Trees alvvayes green.
70. b. Trees to be pilled. 104. b. Trees removed, their standing. 99. a. Trees
helped with urine. 99. a. Trees the trymming of their roots. 99. a. Trees
their fat. 109. a. Trees to save from mistes. 99. b. Trees sick, the remedy.
99 b. Trees their flesh. 109. b. Trees their skin. 109. b. Trees a great
benefit. 69. b. Trees bearing fruit, their forres. 70. b. Trees to ripe
timely. 99. a. Trees not bearyng, the re^edy. 99. a. Trees their distance in
standing. 68. a. Trees young, their proyning. 99. a. Trees standing Savvtyer
wise. 69. b. Trees standing Checkervvyse. 69. b. 71. Trees their bovves. 109.
b. Trees their order for graffing and plantyng. 72. a. Trees their blood. 109.
a. Trees launced. 98. b. Trees their seed plot. 76. a. Trees their kinds. 70.
b. Trees their dounging. 98. a. Trees their dropping. 98. b. Trees their love.
71. b. and. 97. b. Trees their remoouing. 99. a. Trees their vvennes. 109. b.
Trees their veins. 109. b. Trees their shadows. 71. b. and. 98. a. Timber
for Plovves. 108. b. Timber for water works. 109. a. Timber for bovves.
109. a. Throstels. 171. a. Timber for boordes. 108. b. for Axeltrees, for
Haftes and Handles. 108. b. for Gates. 109. a for Lances, for Tables, Ships,
Targettes, Sheathes, Pulleyes. 108 for beams. 107. b.
Tenantes changing, not good. 47. b. Their labor more to be regarded then
their rent, their ordring. 47. a.
V.
Veronica, his virtues. 191. b. Vine plants which, and how to get, their
keeping, their length. 81. a. Vine plants, their planting. 81. b. Vernishe.
110. a. Vine his easy husbandry. 79. a. Vintage. 84. Vineyard stony. 80. a.
Vine the plucking of his leaves. 83. b. Vine his propping. 83. b. Vine his
first planter. 77. a. Vine his vvoonderfull increase. 77. b. Vines but late in
Germany. 79. b. Vines yoked. 79. b. Vines guttered. 79. b. Vines mingled, not
to be planted. 81. a. Vines how to stand. 80. b. Vines planted, their
ordering. 81. b. Vines how to be dounged. 82. a. Vine his freendship and
hatred with certain trees. 79. b. Vine when to plant. 80. a. Vine his
graffing. 80. a. Vine who first found. 77. a. Vine when he flovvreth. 27. a.
W.
VVoormevvood. 68. VVood for cups. 108. b. VVinter grain the best. 27. a.
Wheat fifteen days in blade, fifteen in flower, and fifteen in riping.
48. VVyllovve groves. 103. b. VVyllovve his use. 108. b. VVyllovve the kinds.
108. b. VVood cutting, the season. 104. b. VVoods coppised. 104. a. VVoods
coppised their seuering. 104. b. VVoods for Mast. 101. a. VVoods greatly
cherished by the Romans. 100. a. VVoods vvylde, their fruits. 100. a. Wheat
harvest. 41. a. Wheat the kinds. 26. b. Wheat sovving. 27. a. Wheat and
the Vine flower together. 27. a. Wine of Apples. 88. b. Wine of Pears. 89.
a. VValnut tree, his use. 108. b. VValnut tree foreshevveth his fall. 107. b.
VVools the best. 137. b. Water Betony, his virtues. 192. a.
Y.
Yevve tree, his use. 109. 2.
Z.
Zo^ 29. a. Ziziphes. 92. b.
FINIS.

