A new Herball of Macer.

Translated out of Laten in to English.



AGnus castus, is an herb called Tutsayne or park leuys, and the leuys be some
dele red, like to the leuys of orage, and he has a yelow flouer asmoche as a
penny, and beryth in the top black betye when they be ripe, and if they ben
not type, they be yelow as the flower of the herb, this herb grows much in
woods and dry places. The virtue of this herb is to keep men and women
chaste. Chaste
And therefore as Diascoridon and Placent says it is cold, and called Agnus
castus. Also this herb opens the poores, and lets out wicked humors and
spyrites of a man's body. Body Man's seed.
This herb distroyeth the moyster of a man's seed. Also the same auctours
says if this herb be soden with Fenell sede and with a little aysell, Dropsye.
it will destroy the cold dropsye. Also if it be soden with Smalache and Sawge
in salt water, and then wasshe the hinder part of a man's head, it helyth and
unbinds an evil that is called lytarge. Lytarge. Lechery.
Also this herb destroys the foul lust of lechery if it be dronken, and men
use to lie upon him or sleep upon him, and therefore sometime men eat this herb
roasted, for if men eat it raw, he will lightly engendre hedach. hedach Mylt.
This herb is good to destroy hardness and stoppynge of the liver and the
mylte. Also a plaster made of this herb is good to do away the head ache, Head
humors.
that is ge^dred of wicked humors, this herb is cold and dry, and there
be.iii. spyces of her.

Smallache, or March.
APium is an herb clepyd Smallache or March, This herb has leuys like to
louage, but the leuys ben not so long and it is not so strong of savor as
louage is, and his sede is like persely sede. The virtue of this herb is to
cause a man to make water. make water. Liver.
And he openyth the stoppyng of the liver, Also the sede hardnethe a man's womb
and draws away wicked humors of a man's body to the head and the stomach
and the womb, womb falling evil.
and noyeth him much that has the falling evil, and women with child, and
other suckynge children, should not eat of this herb for taking of the
falling evil This herb is hot and dry, and has.v. spyces of her.

Anetum.
ANetum is called Anyce, This herb has leuys like to Fenyll other dyll, and
the same savor, she beryth sede somdele as the sede of orage. The virtue of
this herb is to make a man to pass, Rumblynge The yoske. wound yerde.
also this her be swageth the rumblynge of a man's womb. Also he destroys
the yoske. And the seed of this herb brent and strawed on a wound will hele
it soon, and namely if a man be scaldyd on his members, or on his yard,
straw the powdre thereon, and it will hele soon Or what other manner evil
aryseth in a man's yerde. Also a plaster of the seed brent and laid to the
Emerawdes hot heleth the^ soon. Emerawdes
This herb is hot and dry. etc.

Cherfoyle, Cheruyle.
APetium is an herb clepyd Cherfoyle, or Cheruyle. This herb has small leuys
like hemloke, but this herb is sweet in savor, and he has a white flower and
a long sede like otes. The virtue of this herb is if he be dronken he makes a
man to pysse well. Ache. raynes wyndes.
Also he delyuereth the ache in a man's Raynes and of the bledder. Also if he
be drunk with wine, he lets out wicked wyndes from the sides, and stoppyng
of the womb and of the liver and all manner wyndes. Also this herb witholdeth
castyng. Casti^g
Also a plaster made of this herb and temperyd with eysel distroyeth wild
fire, and heleth the canker, Canker wounds.
and other wounds, and puts away the chylle from all wounds. This herb
is one of the spyces of Smallache, and he hot and dry.

wormwode.
ABsynthium is an herb called wormwod, and his leuys ben somdele white, and he
has a great moore, and out of that moore come many branches, and he flowreth
as does Mugworte. The virtue of this herb is to comfort the stomach and
cleanse ye heart. Stomach Heart.
Galyen says that this herb has two virtues, one is laxatyfe, the other
costy patyfe. And therefore he says that if this herb be given for an evil
of the which the matter is not fully defied, it shall hard the stomach and
let digestyon. Digestion. Lax.
And if the matier of the evil be ryped, than this herb will make a man
laxatyfe, and easily put away dro^kenes. And if this herb be drunk with
spykenarde it aswageth the akynge of the stomach and the womb, that is
gathered of wicked wyndes. wides.
Also if this herb be temperyd with ho^ny, and dronken it heleth the swellynge
in a man's mouth, Swellinge. Iyen.
and puts away the blackenes of a man's iyen and cleryth them much. Also
if this herb be stamped with the galle of a Bulle, and after that put in to a
man's iyen, it does away all manner of shemeryng and dymnes of a man's iyen.
Iyen. moyster.
Also the iuce of this herb stylled in to a man's nose thryle dries up ye
moyture that ronneth out of them. Also Diasco rides says if this herb be put
in to a press among clothes it saves them from motthes Also if it be laid
among books written with ynke, Motthes. books
the worms shall not eat them.

Mugworte.
ARtemesia is an herb called mugwort This herb is like to ye leuys of
wormode, but they ben not althyng so round, and this herb has a long
stalk, and many stalks comen out of the rote, and flowreth as does wormwod.
The virtue of this herb is if a man trauaylynge bear this herb about him, he
should not be weary for his travail nor in his way. Travail. spirit. Ache.
Also where this herb is in any house, there shall no wicked spyrite abide.
Also this herb stamped with talowe helyth the sorenes and ache of men's
feet. Also this herb made in powdre and dronke with blood warm water helyth
the ache of a man's guts and many other, guts
and it is hot and dry. etc.

Affodylle.
AFfodillus is an herb called Affodyll This herb has leuys like to leekys
and a yelowe flowere at the top, he has round coddes, in the which is sede
like onyon sede. The virtue of this herb is the branches ben good to hele the
dropsye. Dropsye. Deno^.
Also the leuys and the flowers dronken with wine helyth the bytyng of venomous
beasts. Also the iuce of this herb and the rote with a little Myrre and a
little saffron soden in old sweet wine, and than strayned, is good to hele
ronnyng iyen. ro^ning iyen. Here grow
Also the rote of this herb brent in powdre and put in to iyen that have lost
their here shall make here to grow. Also and a hard sharp clothe be wet in
the iuce of this herb and therewith anoint with the cloth in the son the
Morfue and the bow shall fall away, this herb is hot and dry. morfu.


Red Mader.
AStrologia lo^ga, is called red Mader This herb has leuys like to mader, and
he has a branch the length of a cubyte, and many branches comes out of
one rote, and the branches have many knottes right as mader, and has a white
flower. The virtue of this herb is, that it will unbind the stoppyng of the
liver, Liver. wides. wounds.
and let out all wicked wyndes that been stoppynge in a man's body. Also this
herb clensyth wou^des that been rotten. This herb must be gathered in harvest
and is hot and dry.

Galyngale.
AStrologia rotunda, is called Galyngale, This herb has leuys like to
Burres, and has but one branch and grene leuys above and under ben white,
and it flowreth as it were betayne save the flowers ben white. The virtue as
Ipocras says if he be drunk with hot water it is medycynable for men that been stopped in the breast and for falling evil, Breast Evil Cra^pe
and for the podagre and the crampe, and he must be gathered in Harvest he is a
spyce of Mader, and he be hot and dry. etc.

Sothernwode.
ABrotanum is an herb named Sothernwode, This herb has a stalk like to Rue
but he has streyghter leuys tha^ Rue. The virtue of this herb is if the feed
be broken and dronken with water it helyth men that have been bytten with
venomous bestes. Veno^.
Also it distroyeth worms in a man's womb. womb
Also the powder thereof meddled with old oil and put to the place there
lacks here it shall grow again. Here
Also the powder of this herb breketh ye hard passion, passion
this herb is hot and dre.

Ameos.
AMeos is an herb called Amee, this has leaves leke to Elderne, but they ben
less and a long branch and flowreth and sedeth as it were persely, and the
sedeis like to the sede of Persely. The virtue of this herb is if it be drunk
with honey it sleeth worms in a man's womb, worms.
and unbinds great stoppynge of wicked wyndes in a man's womb, he breketh
the stone, he heals a man's stomach if it be cold, Stomach.
he cleanses the liver and the reins and wou^des, he helps the bytynge of
venymous beasts, and it is hot and dry.

Allaluya.
ALleluya is a herb called woodsore or stubworte, this herb has.iii. leaves
of the which.ii. ben round and a little departed above and it has a white
flower, but no long stalk. The virtue of this herb is if it be roasted upon
the coals in leaves of the red docke, then he shall frete away deed flesh,
dead flesh.
and it is hot and dry.

Agrimonia.
AGrimonia is an herb called Egrimonye, and the leaves be like to Tansey, but
the leaves of this ben greater, and he has a ^lewe flower, and when the flower
is fall he has feed that will hang in a man's clothes, this grows by
dyches, or hedges, and wodes. The virtue is if he be eten grene with the rote
he heleth the akyng of the womb. akyng womb A sore hurt mylte.
Also this herb tempered with eyfell will heal a sore hurted with iron. Also
if it be used in meats it will hele the sorenes of the mylte, and it is hot
and dry.

Auancia.
AVancia is an herb called Auendre, it has leaves like to an hare foot, this
herb is called harefote, and he has a yelowe flower as it were Turmentyll.
The virtue is if he be dried and made in powder, and put in a little wine or
hot water and given to a man that has the Fevers to drink, the fevers the
canker,
it shall help him soon. Also it helps much wounds, and the canker if it
be drunk.

Altea.
ALtea is an herb called the Holihocke or wild malowe, it has leaves as it
were malowe and has a long branch, he sedeth as does malowe. The virtue is
if it be shreded with talow, Potagre.
and taken to a man that has the potagre, he shall be hole within three day.
Also if this herb be soden with vynegre and with lynsede, and laid unto a
man's sides it departs wecked gatheryng that been gendred together in a man's
body it grows in feldes and hot places. wicked gatheryng.


Amarista.
AMarista is an herb called Mawthen or docterfenel, this herb is much like to
Camamyll, and flowreth as Camamyll, for it has white flowers, and this herb
stynketh as it grows in the field, and in corn. The virtue of this herb is
that the joyce thereof drunk is good for the canker. the canker. Emerawdes
Also to hele the pypes of the Emerawdes and there be two spyces of this herb,
one has a white flower, the other a yelowe flower.

Anisum
ANisu^ is an herb called Annies, it has leaves as Comen or Fenel, but the
sede is more than Fenell sede. wicked wides.
The virtue of this herb is that he unbinds wicked wyndes and great humors,
and he opens the stoppynge of the lever. Liver.
Also he makes womanes milk to wax. Also he styrreth man and woman to works
of kind. works
Also it makes a man to make water and to sweet. Also it makes the womb
hard if it be laxe, this herb or else the sede should be take moist, womb
and roasted or perched in manner of medicines this herb is hot and dry.

Alleum
ALleu^ is an herb called Garlyke, this herb is comen. The virtue of him is
that he will unbind all great stoppynges and wicked wyndes in a man's body.
wicked wi^des.
Also he helps a man to make water, but nevertheless he greueth ama^nes iyen
for the great vnbynding and drawing that he virtuously draws the sight. Also
he dystroyeth a venym within a man. Also he heals cold sores as it were
Tryacle. venym within a man.
Also he does away the morfewe of bladders in what place that they ben of the
body if it be well rubbed therewith, and it is hot and dry.

Astraton.
AStarton is an herb called Lunarye, this herb grows among stones or hye
places, this herb shyneth by night, this herb has his moisture yfounde by
shepherdes in the field, and it has yelowe flowers hole and rownde as
cokobell, or flowers of Fogxloue, the leaves of this herb ben zende blewe, and
they have the mark of the Moon in the mids as it were.iii. leued grass,
and the leaves ben more then.iii. leued grass, and ben rownde as a penny, it
has a stalk and that is red, it smells as it were Musk, and the joyce is
yelowe, this grows in the new Moon without leaves, and every day wareth a
new life.xv. days, and after.xv. days he leseth a lefe as the Moon wareth
and wayneth, and where soever this herb be he grows in great quantite. The
virtue of this herb is that who so eteth his bayns or else of the herb in ye
waynynge of the Moon when he is in signo verginis, falling evil.
if he have the falling evil he shall be hole. Also who so has the falling
evil bear this herb about his neck and he shall be hole. And it has many mo
virtues than I can tell at this time.

The.ii. letter begins with. B.
Betonia.
BEtonia is an herb called Betayne or byschoppes worte, this herd has hole
leaves, but they be ende^ted by the sides without, and it has a red flower in
the croppe of the stalk. The virtue of this herb is if he be pune and put to
the wound in the head that is smytten with a stroke, wound in the head
he shall hele the wound fair and well, and the better if it be fresshe. Also
this herb will draw out broken bones of wou^des as some Auctours sayen. Also
take the water of Betayne, or else break the leaves and take the joyce and put it
in to thine iyes, than shall you find that it is good for akynge or sorenes of
ye iyen. Also take of Betayn a^ragma and pune it and meddle it with water that
is warm, broken bonesi^ ye head.
and drink it.iiii. times fasting and it will break the web about the
iyen, and cleanse them well and fair. Also if thou have waterynge iyen eat
every day a little Betayne and it cleanses them. sore iyen
Also if thou have akynge iyen, take the leaves of Betayne fresshe by them
self, or else with a little water, and then wrynge out the joyce and put thereto
a little rose water, warm them well together, and still it in to thine iyen,
and afterward put above wolle, and so thou shalt be hole. Also if thou blede
much at the nose take Betayne and pune it with a little salt, Nose blede.
and do it to thine nose thyrlles, as much as thou may with thy thombe and
thy meddle finger, blood.
and than hold thy nosethyrlle with the same fyngers, and the blood shall
stau^ce. Also if thou have sore tethe, sore teth.
take Betayne and seth it in old wine, or in eysell till it be sodde to the
third part, and hold it in thy mouth, and thou shall amend. The cowgh.
Also if thou have the cowghe take two ounces of the powder of Betayne and a
little honey, and seth it with esy fire, and use it.ix. days. man's yard be
swolen
Also if a man's yearde be swollen or else sore, take Betayne and pune it with
little wine, and after lay to the yard and he shall be hole. Also if a man may
not hold his mete within him, take.iiii. dragmes of the powder of Betayne and
meddle it with ho^ny that is sodde, vometynge.
and make pellettes as great as a walsche nute, and give him.iiii. days each
day a pellet, and do him to drink.ii. sponefull of that water, and than he
shall be hole. Also if a man be potagre, take Betayne and pune it and lay it to
his feet, potagre.
and he shall be amended. Also take a little Betayne or the powder and eat it
erely, and it shall help the fro dronke^nes that day, Dronke^nes.
these medycynes ben proved, and has many moo virtues. This herb grows in
woods and holly places among busshes in dark places, this herb is hot and
dry.

Balsaminta.
BAlsaminta is an herb that men call horsemynt, this herb has leaves like unto
other myntes, and some men calls it water mynt, it grows much by the
water, but it has a stronger sauer then has another mynt. The virtue is that
he will conforte the stomach, Purge man's stomak
and make a man well to defy his meat Also this herb purges a man within the
body, and makes him well to speak. Also the joyce of this herb meddled with
ho^ny and a little wine does away the schylke of amans stomach, and other
wicked wyndes of him. Also the joyce of this herb dronke with wine ysode
makes a woman with child esely to bear her child, women with child.
and soon to be delivered, this is hot and dry, and has two spyces.

Beta.
BEta is an herb called Beat, this herb is common, and grows in Gardaynes,
and there be two spyces thereof, and Diacolides says, one is white another
black,

The virtue of this herb is that the joyce of this herb put it in to the
nosethyrlles, Heed ache.
it cleanses a man's heed. Also this herb swageth the akynge of a man's heed.
Also it cleanses the heed from nyttes, nyttes
and from other vermen. Also it repayreth and keeps the here of a man's heed.
Here.
Also this herb dystroyeth botches and byles. Also Diacolides says, Botches.
that upon the rote of this herb may be planted a graffe that will afterward
bear fruit, as upon the cole rote.

Borago Domestices.
BOrago Domestices is an herb called Borage, this grows in Gardaynes, and he
has short leaves and a blewe flower. The virtue of this herb is yt he will
cleanse the red color of man. color Merry.
Also this herb meddled with wine makes a man glade and merry, and it is hot
and dry.

Bigula.
BIgula is an herb called Brom Bugle this has leaves somewhat round, and
somewhat tournynge to black, and he has a blew flower and somewhat boystous.
The virtue of this herb is that he will hele wounds in a man's heed. wounds
in ye head
Also it breketh and dystroyeth the rewme in amans head and the akynge, he
grows in woods, and he is hot and dry, and there ben.ii. spyces of him.
reume.


Burneta.
BVrneta is an herb called Burnet, and it has ablewe flower as has Hayhoue,
and leaves like to Tansey, but they be not so great. The virtue of this herb is
that he will distroy the great humors and the laxatyue within a man. Laxatyue.
Also he heals and opens the stoppynge of the liver, and makes a man to
pysse. Also he heals a man of the yelow evil. Liver.
Also the joyce meddled with ho^ny and drunk, unbinds and heals the sore of
the rybbes and pappes, and there be.ii. spyces of this herb one grows in
hard land and has little leaves, Sore rybbes.
another grows i^ meadows and have more leaves.

Bursa pastoris.
BVrsa pastoris is an herb called shepardes purs or tocheworte, this has
leaves departed somdele as Burnete, and has a white flower, and when he has
lost his flower, he has the manner of a purs, in the which is sede THE virtue
of this herb is he will sone staunche blood if he be drunk, Forbledynge.
it grows in feldes and gardaynes well nyghe all about, and he is hot and
dry.

The.iii. letter begins with. C.
Camamilla.
CAmamilla is an herb called Camamyll, this herb has leaves like to the mauth
and white flowers but he smells sote, and the mawth stynketh. For ye stone
The virtue is if he be drunk with wine he breketh the stone. Also he stroyeth
the yelowe evil. Also be heals the akynge of the liver. Evil. Liver.
Also if he be chowed he heals the sore of the mouth, this is hot and dry,
and grows most in gardaynes.

Calamintum.
CAlamintum is an herb that is called Calamynt. this herb has leaves like un
to Mynt, but the leaves ben whyter and rou^der then the leaves of Mynt, and more
stronger of savor, and it has a white stalk.

The virtue of this herb is that he will distroye a manes talent as ypocras
says, and there be three spyces of this herb, one that is stonye, another yt
is hery, another that is waterye, and they be hot and dry, and he that is
hery makes a man moist, he that is stony if he be drunk he makes a man that
has dronke venym hole. for venym
Also this herb made in plaster and laid to any venymous sore, it draws
the venym from within outward. Also who so drynketh this herb.iii. days, it
heleth the yelow evil, Evil.
he that is herye it helps from the sepour, the joyce of this herb put in to
a man's ears, it kylleth the worms therein, ears. stomac
it comfort the stomach and helps to defye and it withdraws casting.

Crassula mayor.
CRassula mayor, is an herb called Orpyn or Ormale, this herb has so^what
thycke leaves as it were Penny worte. The virtue of this herb is if it be laid
to a wou^d he shall hele it without any help, Sore wounds
this herb grows in gardaynes.

Crassula minor.
CRassula minor is an herb called Stonor or Stonecrope, it has little leaves
like to Orpyn, and it grows upon howses and walls and grows somewhat
hangyng. The virtue of this herb is, For ye ague.
he will make a man to live chaste, and is drunk for the ague.

Cituca.
CItuca is an herb called Hembloke or herb Benet, it has leaves like to
Persely, and so he flowreth and sedeth as does Persely, but this herb
stynketh. The virtue is he keeps may dens pappes from great waxynge. Lechery.
The potagre.
Also if the joyce of this herb be drunk he distroyeth the great appetite of
lechery. Also the joyce of this with the spume of silver and swynes greece
distroyeth the hot potagre, and swageth the swellyng, this herb is cold and
dry.

Centuaria mayor.
CEntuaria mayor is an herb that me^ calls the more centory or earth gell,
this has leaves like to the less ce^tory, but they be more whyter, and has a
stalk and yelowe flowers, and flowreth not but in the tope. The virtue of this
herb is if it be sodden with good wine and given a man to drink, For ye liver
it heals the syckenes of the liver. Also this herb sodden in wine and
drunk, dries up wild humors of a man's mylt, Mylt.
this has been often proved. Also the joyce of this herb sodden in water is
good to heal a wound of another place that is smytten with a canker if he be
anointed therewith, it is hot and dry, Ca^kers.
and grows in dry ground.

Centuaria minor.
CEntuaria minor is an herb called the less Centory or cristus lader, this
has leaves like to the more Centory, but the leaves ben more grener, and he has
three branches coming out of the more, and the flower somewhat read. The
virtue is if the powder or the joyce be meddled with old wine and drunk is
good to hele the styngynge of an adder, venym
or any other venymous be. Also if you have sore iyen, iyen.
take the joyce and anoynte your iyen and thou shall be hole. Also if thou have
any venym within the, venym
take and pune this herb and tempre it with Aysell and drink it and you shall
cast up all the venym, and it grows in dry places.

Carin.
CArin is an herb called caraway, it has leaves like somewhat to Fenell, and a
long stalk and round sede, more then the sede of persely. The virtue of him
is that he dystroyeth wicked wyndes, For ye coughe
and the coughe, and heleth men that has the frensy, and bytyng with venymous
beestes. Also this herb meddled with aysell heleth scabbes and tetters, scabes
and restores here where it falls away, this herb is hot and dry, Here.
and grows in gardayns.

Celodonia.
CElodonia is an herb called Celondin or Detenwort, this has leaves that been
grene and yelowe flowers, and when he is broke he droppeth milk, and the leaves
be somewhat like to Columbyne. The virtue of this her be as Plinius says, if a
swallows bird be hurt the da^me fetches of this herb and heals him
again. Toeth ache
Also it heals the ache of ye tethe. Also it clnseth a man's head. Also it
heals ye canker and other sores in the mouth, kanker.
this is hot and dry.

CIdamu^ is an herb called Herinote, or Dylnote, or Flete, or Haleworte, this
has leaves like to Fenell, and white flowers and small stalks, and grows in
woods and meadows. Dead flesh.
The virtue is yt he will fetch away dead flesh. Also this herb put on a
sore, or on a place that lacked here, it heleth it and restores here, this is
hot and dry. Here.


Caulis.
CAulis is an herb called Coleworte, this herb is common to you. The virtue
of him is that he will cleanse fresh wou^des, and the canker, For sore iyen
and hele sore iyen that have almost lost their sight. Also it makes woman's
milk to wax, and he comfort the stomach. stomac Lepre.
Also the joyce of this herb tempred with alym and eysell swageth the lepre.
Also it is good for dro^kenes, and grows in gardayns

Coriandrum.
COriandrum is an herb called Cetriander, he has leaves like to erthenote
somdele, and has alytell white flower and round sede somwhate white, and he
is stronger in savor. worms in ye body
The virtue is if the joyce be drunk with honnye, it sleeth all the worms in
a man's body, and also hardeth a man's womb. Also if the sede of this herb
be eat it drives away the Fevers that come the third day, fevers.
this herb is hot and dry.

Capillus veneris.
CApillus veneris is called maiden here or water wortes, this has leaves like
to Fern, but the leaves hen small, and grows upon stones and walls, and in
the myddle of the leaves is as it were a black here.

For ye stone venym.
The virtue of this herb is that he will break the stone. Also if it be drunk
with wine it dystroyeth the venym, he is cold and dry.

Crocus.
CRocus is an herb called Saffron, this has little leaves as it were grass,
and blewe flowers. stomac
The virtue of him is that he will dystroy all manner of abhomynacyon of the
stomach. To make a man sleep
Also he makes a man to sleep. Also the flower is good for many medicines, and
namely for cokes to color their potage and it is hot and dry.

Centinodium.
CEntinodium is an herb called Centinodi or swyngrasse, this herb grows
welnye over all. For ye stone
The virtue of this herb is that he will break the stone, this herb is hot
and dry, and may be gathered at all times.

Caprifolium.
CAprifolium is an herb called woodbynde or withwynde, this grows in hedges
or in woods, and it will beclype a tree in her growing, as does ynye, and has
white flowers. The virtue of this herb is that he will hele cankers and
wounds, canker. Teth.
and bladers, and akynge of the teth, and sores in a man's toes. Also it is good
to hele swellynge that is smyten or stonge with been, sweli^g.
this is hot and dry.

Canabaria.
CAnabaria is an herb called wild hemp, and this has leaves like to hemp.
The virtue of this herb is that he is good for the Fever, and grows much by
water: Fever.
or moist ground.

Costus.
GOstus is an herb called Cost, or less dytayn, this has leaves as dytayn,
but they be not so much, and the leaves be more whyter then the leaves of
dytayn. Also it is sote in sauoure. The virtue of this herb is that he helyth
the sekenes of the breast and of the long and also he will break the Postym. ye
breast. longes
Also he drawyth the humors of man's eyes. Also he is good for the stomach and
it is hot and dry. postim


Cepe.
CEpe is an herb called an Onyon this is common enough. The virtue thereof is
that he will greatly comfort the stomach. stomac
Also he nesshyth the womb. Also this herb with honye and eysell and drunk
is good to hele the bytyng of a hounde. hound.
Also this herb meddled with woman's milk heleth the akynge of earyn. earyn.
Also the Iuce of this drunk with any lycure is good for a man that has lost
suddenly his speech. Speech. reume.
Also the Iuse put to a man's nostrell breketh out the reume or any other
wicked stoppyng this herb is hot and dry.

Columbina.
COlumbina is an herb called Colu^byne or culuerfote, this herb is somedelle
like Celydoyne, but he droppeth no milk. The virtue of this herb is that he
is good for a man that has the Quincy and he should be gathered in August.
Quincy.


Co^minum.
COminum is an herb called Co^myn, this has leaves like to Coriander and he
has many branches coming out of ye stoke and has strong savor. wicked
wind.
The virtue is that he distroyeth wicked wyndes and other evil of the stomach.
Also he healpeth a man to make water this herb is hot and dry. water.


Cardiaca.
CArdiaca is an herb called Cardiake or cylsper, this herb has leaves somdele
like to blind nettell and he is pryckyd some dele upon the tongue, and he has
little coddes and therein his sede is. Falli^g evil.
The virtue is yt he is good for men that have the falling evil. Also he is
good for sauces.

Cicera.
CIcera is an herb called frenshe Pesche has leaves like another Pese and also
coddes, he has not so great leaves another so long coddes as has the other
pese, and there be.ii. spyces of her white and read, and he grows in gardayns
and her sede in shape as other pese.

Camelion.
CAmelion is an herb called woluesciftyl or a white thystyll this herb has
white leaves great and broad kene and read flower and grows in ways. The
virtue of this herb is great that if thou take this herb while the son is in
capricorn with the new moan if thou bear it with the or upon the, good.
there shall no myschyfe come on the.

Consolida mayor.
COnsolida mayor is an herb called co^fery this has leaves like to horshele,
but they be not so white and grows in watery places and there be.ii. spies of
her the one has a white flower, the other a read and like they be of one
virtue. The virtue is, if a man be^ bursyd within him or broke take the rote of
this herb and roste him well among askyn and take him to the seek fasting
with honey and let him eat it, For brusyd.
and he shall be hole. Also this herb has broken leaves and he is hot and
moist and he bears blake sede.

Consolida minor.
COnsolida minor is called Daysye or bruseworte and he has leaves like to the
less Centory and a white flower. The virtue is that he is good to break
botches if he be punyd and laid thereto, Botches.
this is a spyce of co^fery and he grows well nigh over all about in many
diverse places.

Consolida media.
COnsolida media is called white Gotho^ or white guldes this herb has leaves
so^dele enlouge and they be endentyd a little without and has a white flower
that is somedele like to dayse and it grows in meadows and lees, and has
diverse virtues.

The.iiii. letter begins with. D.
Dragancia.
DRagancia is an herb called Dragance, or Elderworte or cerpentyne, this herb
has.iii. leaves in each brau^che and they be so^dele sharp as a neddyr. The
virtue is and he be punyd with wine he puts away all venym. venym
Also he helyth akyng of eres and they be anointed therewith. Also if the powder
of this herb be blown in a man's nose it cle^syth the nose from connyng. Eres.
Also it is good to dystroy the Gout and the canker and the festeri^g of
wounds. Gout
This herb grows in wodes and hills, canker.
and he is hot and moist in the month of June and July he must be gathered.

Diptanum.
DIptanum is called Dyteyne, or ditander this herb has leaves like to Cooste
but they be grener then the leaves of cooste and it has a little white flower.
women with a deed child.
The virtue is if a woman be with a deed body it will deliver her thereof, this
herb will draw out a thorn or iron out of a man's foot or other place and
it is hot and dry.

Dancus asinius.
DAncus asinius is an herb called brydnest or Danke this herb has leaves like
to hemloke and a white flower. The virtue is that he is good to hele the dropcy
and ^y^i^g of venymous bestes. dropcy
Also he opens the stoppynge of the liver and of the mylte. mylte.
Also he vnbyndyth a man's womb and makes him laxatyfe, Laxatife
this herb grows in feldes and bears his flower like to a birds nest and
he is hot and dry.

Dancus cleticus.
DAncus cleticus is an herb called The less Tanke this has leaves like to
wild popy but the leaves be more whytter and he has a flower yt is purpull
color this grows in wete and is hot and dry.

Dens leonis.
DEns leonis is an herb called Daundelyo^, or lions toth this has leaves like
to hou^des toth and he has a yelowe flower and he has no branches but as
each flower stretches out of the moore with a little branch and it droppyth
milk when it is broke. The virtue is that the more of it is good to hele ye
Fever cotidian and it be drunk with wine it grows all about. Fever.


Dragancia feminea.
DRagancia feminea is an herb called, dragons femall it has leaves like to yue
but they have white spectes and it has a yelowe stalk the lenght of.ii.
cubyttes other while as it were a crooked stafe and like to a snake and she
beryth her sede as it were a cluster of grapes, and when the sede is ripe it is
yelowe this her be grows in dark places. The virtue thereof is that if the
sede be punyd with oil and put to a man's eron it heleth the akynge of eron.
Eres.
Also the joyce of this herb with a little wole put in to the nostryll
clensyth the nose from al fylth. Nose.
Also the more of this herb punyd with white wine and ho^ny, wound
heleth all wounds and the canker therein. Also he frotyth his hand well with
the rote of this herb he may take eddyrs without any peril. For sore iyen
Also the joyce of this rote destroys the darkness of the eyes if they be
anointed therewith Also this herb dronke with wine styreth a man to lechery.

The.v. letter begins with. E.
Elena campana.
ELena campana, is an herb called Elen campayne or horshelme and this herb
has leaves as it were Comfery, but they be more whitter then the leaves of
comfery and he has alonge stalk and a yelowe flower. The virtue is if a man
have waggynge teth and eat thereof fasting it will fasten his teth. Teth.
Also if a man drink this herb it heleth him from the stone and helpyth him
to make water. stone.
Also if it be drunk, it delyueryth a woman of a dead child. laxatyf For ye
coughe
Also it hardyth a man's womb if it be laxatyfe this herb helith a man of the
coughe this herb is hot and moist it grows in wodes and feldes.

Endiua.
ENdiua is an herb called Endyue or horse thilstyl, this herb has leaves like
to sow thy still, this has pryckes in the rygge and a yelowe flower. The virtue
of this herb is that the joyce thereof meddled with hot water and drunk helyth
the stoppynge of the myl^e and of the liver. For ye mylte. Fever.
Also it is good to hole the yelowe evil and the fever tercian and the hot
postym. Also this herb swagyth the great hete of the liver and of the stomach
and it is cold and moist.

Eruca.
ERuca is an herb called Skyrwhy^^ this has leaves like to byl^e, but they be
not so long and it has a great more. The virtue is that the joyce of the
leaves wrong o^^ hold in a man's mouth helyth all the fore of the mouth. Stone
Also it brekyth the stone. Also the joyce of this herb fodde and drunk
distroyeth black color. Color
Also it styreth a man much (...) ^heep and he use it. Also it helps a man
to make water. water. The cough.
Also the joyce of this herb cleanses a man if he be auoynted therewith. Also
the joyce of this herb delyueryth men and children from the coughe, this is
hot and dry.

Eufragia.
EVfragia is an herb called eufrasse, this herb has little leaves like to here
colored but they be much like here, Sore eyes.
and he has a white flower. The virtue is that he is good to hele sore eyes,
this herb grows in medes.

Ebulus.
EBulus is an herb called walworte, it has leaves somdele like Erderen and he
has a long stalk and grows in feldes. Dropsy. For scabes.


The virtue is that he is good to dystroye the dropsy, and scabbes, or tetters.
Also this herb draws wicked humors out of a man this herb is hot and
dry.

Edera.
EDera is an herb called yue, this is common it does cover howses, and
towers, and has leaves like to an herb called bryan, and it bears fruit as
it were bays. The virtue thereof is if it be sod and laid on a botche it
heals it soon. For ye botche
Also if thy head ache take the joyce of this herb with oil of roses, and
seth them together in wine, and anoint the head therewith, For ye head ache.
and thou shall be hole. Also if thou will keep thy head from akynge in the
son, take the leaves of this herb, and pune them small, and then tempre them
with eysell and the oil of Roses, and then anoynte thy forheade therewith.

Edera terrestris.
EDera terrestris is an herb called orpyn, or heyhoue, this has leaves like to
Carmynt, For to make flesh tender.
but they be not so much, and has in the croppe a red flower. The virtue is
if it be put in potage among flesh, he will make the flesh tender and
nesshe.

Eborus.
EBorus is an herb called long wort, or Pelyter of spain, this is like to
Pedelion, but the leaves of this herb be not so much slytte without, and he
has a flower as it were a pasnepe. Tetters. Scabbes.
The virtue is that he will hele scabbes, the morfewe, and tetters. Also he
heleth the emerawdes, if it be laid to the place there it bledeth. Also he
purges the color of the fleume. Also he helps the from the tothache if it
be sod with eysell, Toth ache. stomac worms. Fleese
and hold a quantite in your mouth. Also this herb purges well the stomach
and the womb. Also the powder of this herb meddled with a little growell shall
slay worms. Also the joyce of this herb meddled with milk shall slay flees,
this herb is hot and dry.

Elabrus.
ELabrus is an herb called Clouentonge, or Pedelyon, this herb is much like
to longeworte, but not so flat as be the leaves of this herb, and he has
somdele a broad flower, more than a penny, he has a black rote and he is
horrible in sight. The virtue of this herb is that if the powder thereof be
meddled with growel or with meele it will slay rattes and if a be pysse blood,
Rattes.
give him this herb and he is hole

Epatica.
EPatica is an herb called liuerwort, this herb grows in brymmes of waters,
and in wells, and it will join to stones, and he grows much in walls of
stone, and it has another stalk, another flower but small townde leaves, and the
more the leaves be ye better to medycynes. The virtue is yt he will dystroy and
cleanse the hardenes of the liver. Lyuerwoundes. Fever
Also the leaves thereof medeled with swynes greece will hele wounds. Also it is
good to hele the Fever quartayne.

The.vi. letter begins with. F.
Famula.
FAmula is an herb called sperwrot, or lau^secle, this has leaves like to a
sper head, it has a stalk, and in the top comes out many small stalks, and
it has a white flower, and it grows in waters. The virtue thereof is that he
is good to hele the fevers, Fever Byles
and also for to break botches and byles, and it is hot and dry.

Fumus terre.
FVmus terre is an herb called fumetetry this herb has leaves that been
somewhat white under, and they ben small, and it has a flower of purpul color,
and this herb grows in stalks, but not full long. The virtue is that he
comfort the stomach. Stomach. water Liver Blood ytchi^g
Also he makes a man to have appetyde to mete, it helps a man to make water,
and it opens the stoppynge of the liver, and clereth a man's blood. Also if
the joyce thereof be drunk it distroyeth scabbes and ytchynge, and bladders
that been gendred of wicked humors, and it is hot and dry.

Fragra.
FRagra is an herb called strawbery, and this herb is common. The virtue
thereof is that he is good to dystroye a web in the iyen. Also it is good to
hele wounds. wounds. eyes. Mylte
Also the joyce medeled with ho^ny, and drunk heleth the akynge of a man's
mylte, this grows in clean and dark places.

Fabaria mayor.
FAbaria mayor is an herb called brokeleues, this herb has rownde leaves and
much like to myntes. The virtue thereof is, if he be puned with shepes talowe,
and made hot in manner of a plaster, Swellynge.
and laid to any swellynge it will hele it, this herb grows in small brokee,
and most among belton.

Filex.
FIlex is an herb called Fern, this herb is common, and there be.iii. spyces
thereof, one is called Fern, Laxe.
and another is called polipode, another called Osmonde, and that is the.ii.
spyces, another is called verrew and that is the.iii. spyce, Broken bones.
polipode is good to make a man laxatyue, and grows in trees, Osmonde is good
to hele broken bones, and it grows in dyches and woods, the.iii. that me^
call ever verrew grows on walls, and is good to hele the potagre, Potagre.
and he makes strong a man's senewes, and he grows in woods, dyches, and
feldes.

Filipendula.
FIlipendula is an herb that men calls Filipendull or dropworte, this is
like to yaron, and he grows next the ground, the leaves be more than the
leaves of yaron, it has a small stalk, and a flower somdele white, and in the
more small pelettes like yshape as it were small pelettes rownde. The virtue is
yt he will destroy wicked wyndes about the liver and the mylte. Liver
Also he helps to distroy the stone, stone.
it grows in holowe places, and dry, and it is hot and dry.

Feniculum.
FEniculum is an heebe that men calls Fenell, this herb is common enough.

The virtue is, the sede when it is dry, it distroyeth wind in the stomach.
Stomach.
Also it comforts a man's stomach. Also he opens the stoppynge of the
raynes and of the bladder. Also ye joyce of this herb stilled in to a man's iye
does away the web. venym
Also if if be drunk with wine, worms.
it dystroyeth all manner of venym. Also the joyce dropped in to the eres sleeth
worms, that been within. Also if it be drunk with wine, it heleth the dropsy.
Dropsy.
Also it heleth all manner of swellynges. Also if he be drunk with wine or
water, it makes a woman's milk to wax. Also if he be drunk with wine it
keeps from casting. Also if he be meddled with oil it will hele ye swellynge
of a man's yerde. Swellynge.
Also if thou will be steryed to lecherye, take and drink the sede thereof with
good wine.

Faxmus.
FAxmus is an herb called hertwort or odobrame, this has leaves yshape as a
heart and has a flower as were bugle, and a short stalk. The virtue is if he
be broke and laid to a sore it heleth anon, A sore
this grows in feldes and meadows.

Finiculus porcinus.
FIniculus porcinus is an herb called swynes fenel or worm sede, this herb
has small leaves like to yaron, and of a stalk coming many branches it
grows upon walls, and has small coddes and small red sede. The virtue of
this herb is, worms.
if a man ete the sede thereof, it distroyeth and sleyeth the worms within the
womb, and it is hot and dry.

Febrifuga.
FEbrifuga is called fetherfoy or vethurfoye, this herb has many stalks
coming out of one stalk, and it has a white flower as it were Mayes. The
virtue is that he will comfort the stomach. stomac
Also it swageth the fever cotydyan. Also it is good to heal the crampe that
comes of a cold stomach. Fever. Cra^pe
Also if this herb be puned and laid to a sore that is bytten with a venymous
worm or be it shall be hole. Also this herb tempered with eysell does
away the morfew. Morfewe.
Also if this be puned and laid to a wound, in the which is broken bones, it
shall hele the bones. wounds.
Also the rote of this her be is good to staunche the blody me^son, this is
hot and dry.

Filago.
FIlago is an herb called field worte, this herb has leaves a little enlong,
and it is like to horehound, it is a little herb and it grows in wete.
Eyes.
His water is good for eyes

Flamula minor.
FLa^mula minor is an herb called the less sperwort, it has leaves as it were
grass, but it is sharp as it were a spear. For bityuge.
The virtue of this herb is if it be puned and laid to a hand that is byte,
it shall be hole anon.

The.vii. letter begins with. G.
Granum.
GRanum is an herb called Gromell, or little wale, this has leaves that been
part enlonge, and has a little white sede shape as a stone that men call
mariery perle. The virtue of this herb is that he is good to hele the stone,
stone.
and the evil of the bledder, this herb makes a man to make water, and this
is hot and dry. water.


Genescula.
GEnescula is an herb called Genestre, or brom, this has leaves like to
Spygurnell, and they ben a little longer, and it has a yelowe flower. The
virtue is yt he is good to knyt bones and synewes together. bones.


Genciana.
GEnciana is an herb called bladmoyne or field wort. The virtue of this herb
is that he cleanses the stoppynge of the stomach, the liver and the mylte,
Stomach.
and it be drunk with ho^ny and water. Liver For bitynge.
Also it heals the bytynge of venymous beestes. Also it delyuereth a woman of
a dead child, and this herb is hot and dry.

Galanga.
GAlanga is an herb that men call Galyngale. stomac
The virtue of this herb is that he comfort the stomach, and it makes a
man to defye his meat. wicked wind For ye mouth Reins.
Also it unbinds and lets out wicked wyndes out of a man's body. Also it
makes a man's mouth sweet. Also it heals the reins. Also it makes a man
to have appetyte to a woman, and it is hot and dry.

Granum solis.
GRanum solis is an herb called wild Gromell, this has leaves somdele like to
Gromell, and his sede is like somdele to that other gromell sede. Also he has
somdele such a flower, nevertheless they dyffereth in the stalk, for the
stalk of this herb is sharp and it grows much in wete.

Gladiolus.
GLadiolus is an herb called Gladyoll, or Gladur, this herb has leaves like
to an herb called Getus, but it is not so grene, it has a yelow flower and a
long stalk, Laxe.
and it grows in water.

Graciadei.
GRaciadei is an herb called graciadei, this has leaves somdele like to dens
de lion, but the leaves of this be somewhat sharp, and it has yelowe flowers,
and it grows in dry land.

Graciadei mayor.
GRaciadei mayor is an herb called graciadei the more, this has leaves like to
cokyll, and it has a white flower, it grows in dry ground, and when that
it is broke it droppeth milk.

The.viii. letter begins with. H.
Hastula regia.
HAstula regia is an herb called wodrofe, it has leaves like to croyes wort,
and this herb is sote in savor, and a woman smell much thereto it makes her
head to ache. mouth
The virtue thereof is if the more of it be puned with wine it shall hele sores
of the mouth. For ye womb
Also take the sede of this herb and pune it and tempre it with the sowrest
eysel that ye can find and, drink it, and it shall staunche the flyxe and,
hard the womb.

Herba crucita.
HErba crucita is an herb called Eroys worte or Exean, this has little leaves
and a small stalk, wounds.
and also a white flower. The virtue of this herb is that he will hele well
wounds.

Herba christofori.
HErba christofori masculus is an herb called herb christofer male, this
herb has leaves much like to less crowesape, but they ben more white and not
fully so long, and it grows in dry ground, and also in watery places,
Pestylence.
and it has a yelowe flower The virtue of this herb is that he is good to
hele the pestelence.

Herba walteri.
HErba walteri is an herb called herb water, this has leaves like to the
leaves of Persely, and the leaves be thycke, fat, and tender. wounds.
The virtue of this herb is that he will cleanse wounds and hele them.

Herba Roberti.
HErba Roberti is an herb called herb Robert, this has leaves like to herb
Benet, wounds. Ka^ker
it has a small flower that is somdelered, it grows in feledes and in
hedges, and in walls. The virtue of this herb is that he will hele wounds,
and also the powder will slay the Canker.

Herba martis.
HErba martis is an herb called mortagon, this herb has leaves like to a
letter. M. when he is a capytall letter, and in some brau^che he has.ix.
leaves, and some more, and some fewer, and brings forth her leaves and sede
together, this herb has many wonderful virtues.

Herba Iohannis.
HErba Ioha^nis is an herb called saint Iohanes worte, it has leaves like to
the less Centory, it has a yelowe flower and a long stalk, and many stalks
coming of one. The virtue is if he be in a house, wicked spirits
he suffers no wicked spryte dwell therein.

Herba petri.
HErba petri is an herb called cowslope, this herb has leaves like to herb
x^pofor femall, but they be more whyter, and it grows in meadows.

The.ix. letter begins with. I.
Iusquiamus.
IVsquiamus is an herb called He^bane or He^nebel, this herb has leaves
somewhat white under and the leaves be flat a little without as it were
sowthistell, it has a flower so^what white, and it has a great stalk and
many branches coming out of one more, and it grows in hye ways. The
virtue of this herb is that the oil made thereof is good to dystroye all manner
of gowtes, gowte.
and namely that, that comes of melancolye. Also the sede of this herb laid
on a slayte stone and hete with the fire, worms. cough.
and let it smoke in the man's mouth, it sleeth worms in the teth. Also he
swageth the coughe and hot postume and hot potagre. Potagre. Tothache.
wounds.
Also ye more is good for the to thach and the joyce of this is good for all
manner of wounds, and the sede thereof should be gathered in August. Also if
thou cast the sede thereof in the fire, all the hens that been over the fire
shall fall in to the fire, and it is cold and dry.

Isopus.
ISopus is an herb called Isope, it has leaves like to Sauery, but they be not
so broad, and he flowreth as does Sauery. The virtue thereof is that the joyce
thereof meddled with eysell, A sore mouth worms.
and put in a sore mouth heleth it. Also it sleeth worms in the womb and
makes the womb nesshe. Also if it be drunk grene or else the powder, it
makes a man well colowred, it is hot and dry.

Ireose.
IReose is an herb called Save, and his leaves be like to flowerdelyce, and it
has a white flower, and grows in water. Senewes. The couhe. venym The
cra^pe. A dead child.
The virtue thereof is that he will hele the akynge of the senewes. Also it
dystroyeth the coughe. Also if it be drunk with wine it dystroyeth the wicked
humors of the breest. Also it helps the bytyng of venymous beestes or
worms. Also it dystroieth the crampe Also it delyuereth a woman of a dead
child this herb is hot and dry.

Iris.
IRis is an herb called flowerdelyse, and it is like to Save almost in all
manner fetures, but this herb has a flower almost of purpull color, this
grows in waters and gardaynes, and he has the same virtues that Save has.

Iua.
IVa is an herb called Iue, this herb has a rote even down to the ground
growing, Swellynge.
and it has small leaves growing even by ye ground. The virtue is if a man
have a sore swellyng about his eres, take this herb cumbonfitatibus of her in
wine and oil and co^myn, Ears.
and than make a plaster thereof and lay to the ears and it shall hele them.
Also so take the knobbes of the rote and dry them and cleanse them, and they
have virtue to make ye laxatyue, Laxe.
and it is hot and dry.

Iasia alba.
IAsia alba is an herb called wild Tansey or gose grass, but they be more
whyter, and it has a yelow flower, and it grows down by the grownde, as
does the strawberyes.

The virtue of this herb is good for ye clensynge of a man's lymmes, Clensynge.
it grows in meadows, lees, woods, and ways.

Iasia nigra.
IAsia nigra is an herb yt men call matfelon, or bulwede, or yrenharde, or
knopwede, this has leaves like to scabyous, and it has a purpull color.

Ippia mayor.
IPpia mayor is an herb called pympernel, or self hele, or wayworte, or more
croppe, this has leaves like to chycke wede, but the leaves of this ben less,
and it has a flower of purpull color, wounds. venym Postume.
and it grows in wete. The virtue of this herb is that he is good to hele
wou^des, and to destroy venym, and is good for the Postume, and to hele the
fore iyen.

Ippia minor.
IPpia minor is an herb that men call chykwed this herb has leaves like to
pympernel, and it has a white flower, and it grows in gardaynes and in
feldes. The virtue of this herb is, Scabbes.
seth it in ronnynge water and wasshe your scabby hands therein often times,
and they shall be hole.

The.x. letter begins with. L.
Lanisticum.
LAnisticum is an herb called lonage, this her be has leaves like to Louage,
but they be somdele more, and it has a long stalk, and it is strong in
savor. The virtue is in the sede of her. Also the mores thereof dronke with
wine, is good for the stomach, Stomach.
and for good dygestynge, this is hot and dry.

Lingua ceruina.
LIngua ceruina is an herb called hertes tongue, this has leaves like to the
tongue of a heart, and it grows in walls and dry places, and has no sede,
nor flower, nor stalk. The virtue of this herb is that he will ripe the
postume and break it, Postume.
if it be sode with oil of Roses. Also if it be drunk with old wine, womb
cough.
it hardens the womb. Also it heals a man of the coughe, this is hot and
dry.

Lilium.
LIlium is an herb that men call Lylye. The virtue of this herb is that if
thou pune it with talowe, and sees it with oil, and lay it to the place
there as the cold postume is, Postume.
it shall ripe him and break him. Also take the rotes of lylye, and the rotes
of the read docke and the more of louage, and put all these in wine and oil,
the space of.ii. days and afterward let it seth and cleanse it, and do thereto
wax and oil, and make anoyntment and that is good to hele the sores and
hardenes of a man's mylte. Mylte
Also take the knobbes of the rotes of ye Lylye and roste them among the
coals, and take oil Olyue and anoynte there as ye sore is.

Ligustrum.
LIgustrum is an herb called prymerose. The virtue of this herb is good for
to make potage. Also the joyce put in a man's nose will dystroy the Megrym.
Megri
Also the water that the rote is soden in is good to unstop the conduytes of
vryne. vryne.


Lingua bouis.
LIngua bouis is an herb called Langdebefe. The virtue of this herb is good
to do away the read color of a man. Color.
Also if it be dronken it does away the cardyacle and other wicked humors in
a man's lunges. lu^ges.
Also the joyce of this herb dronke with hot water, wit.
makes a man to have a good mind and good wit, this must be gathered in June
or in July, and this is hot and dry.

Lingua serpentis mayor.
LIngua serpentis mayor is an herb called Adder tongue, this herb has leaves
like to Affodyll, but they be more grene, and also more sharp in the end,
this must be gathered in the month of Apryll.

Lyngua serpentis minor.
LIngua serpentis minor is an herb called the less Adder tongue, this herb
has leaves somewhat like to Pygyll, and it has a yelowe flower, and out of the
stalk comes many branches, and it grows in woods

The virtue of this herb is good to lay to a cut, if it be bruised and laid
thereto. A cut.


Lingua canis.
LIngua canis is an herb called hounds tongue. The virtue of this herb is yt
he is good to dystroy the coughe and ^postume, and it will ripe a botche.
cough. Botches.
Also this herb eaten is good for shaking of the head, and makes the throat
and the breath smothe and souple. flux of ye womb.
Also it is good for ye flux of the womb if thy fete bewasshed in the water
that it is foden in.

Lingua hircina.
LIngua hircina is an herb called Bucke shorn, or swyneskerce this herb has
leaves flatered as it were an hertes horn, and it grows crepynge by the
ground, and it has a little white flower, it grows in watery places. stomac
The virtue is that it cleanses the stomach and refreyneth the great hete and
heals the brennynge of fire, burni^g of fire
if that it be soden and laid thereto.

Lupinus.
LVpinus is an herb called Lupyne, this herb has leaves like to five leued
gras, the Lupyne has.vi. leaves and it has a white flower, and a white sede
that is somewhat brother, and it bears coddes somewhat like to been coddes. The
virtue of this herb is, if a man have worms in his womb, take the sede and
make meele thereof, and the joyce of wormwode and ho^ny, and make a cake thereof
and ete it, liver.
and it unbinds the stoppynge of ye liver and of the mylte. Also it is good
to dystroye the dropsy. Dropsy.
Also take the same meele and the joyce of arsmerte, and make thereof paste and
lay it to thy ears, worms.
and it shall kill the worms within them or if thou make a cake thereof and
hete it, it will do the same. Also if thou wylt take the joyce of Lekes, Ears
and tempre it with ye mele and put it in thy eres, it shall cleanse the^ from
all wicked humors and stynkyng. Also take the same meele and tempre it with
oil, postume.
and it will break and ripe all manner of postumes. And this herb is hot and
dry.

Labrum veneris.
LAbrum veneris is an herb that men calls Sowthy still. The virtue of this
herb is this, if a man have a hot fever, Fever
take the joyce thereof and tempre it with hot water, and let him drink it and
he shall be hole. Also if a man have venym within him, venym
take this herb and dry it and make powder thereof, and do the powder in good
wine, and let him drink it, and it will cast up all the venym, this herb is
hot and dry.

Lauendula.
LAuendula is an herb called Laua^der, if this be soden in water, Palsy
and given to a man that has the palsye, it will hele him, and this herb is
hot and dry.

Lactuca.
LActuca is an herb that is called Lettyse, or stope worte. The virtue of this
herb is this, if it be eaten raw or soden it engenders good blood. blood
Also this herb soden with a little eysell and Saffron and than dronken, it
helps a man that is stopped in the liver and in the mylt. liver. Mylt.
Also if a man may not sleep, take the sede of this herb and stamp it to
powder and tempre it with woman's milk and make a plaster thereof on lynt, Sleep
and lay it to the temples of thy head, and thou shall sleep well, or else
drink ye powder thereof with milk. Also take the sede and tempre it with oil
of roses, and make a plaster and lay it to thy stomach, Postume. Flyx.
and it is good to dystroye the hot postume. Also drink the joyce of this
herb, or powder the sede for it is good to hele the flyx, but who yt uses
this herb ouermoche, it will dystroye their sight, this herb is cold and some
moist.

Lactuca siluatica.
LActuca syluatica is an herb called wild Lettyse, this herb has leaves like
to the thistell, and they be sharp and kent, and it has a flower of purpull
color, and it grows in feldes and in whete, this herb is hot and dry. The
virtue of this herb is that it takes away the dymnes of the iyes, Eyes.
meddle ye joyce of this herb with wine or ho^ny and the gall of an Austour, or
other foul of pray, and put it all meddled in a glass, and put it in thy
iyes.iii. times in a day or more, and in short space thy iyes shall be clear,
Eyes.
for it is a sovereign medicyne. And because this herb is good for to clear
the sight, some say that the Egle eats this herb when that he will flee hye.

Lactuca leporica.
LActuca leporica is an herb called Hare thystell, this herb has leaves like
unto Sowthystell, but the leaves be not so endented, it droppeth milk. Madness.
The virtue of this herb is thus, if a hare eat of this herb in so^mer when
he is mad, he shall be hole. Also take this herb and lay it to a man's side
when he slepeth, Fever
or else that he know not thereof, and it will hele him of the fevers.

Lollium.
LOllium is an herb that men call Cokle. The virtue of this herb is thus, if
it be dronken with Radysshe, and a little salt, Ca^ker wounds. stomac water.
Eyes.
it is good to hele the Canker, or other wou^des in peril. Also it is good to
comfort the stomach and the liver. Also it will unbind the worms in a man's
stomach. Also it helps a man to make water, and it is good for sore eyes.
Also subfumygacyon thereof will make a woman to bear her child without any
peril or harm. child
Also it will assuage the great pains of akynge of ye lypur, lypur.
it is hot and dry.

Laparium rubeum.
LAparium rubeum is an herb called red docke, Tothche. The kings evil.
if that a man take the joyce thereof and hold it in his mouth, it will assuage
the tothache. Also if a man have ye kings evil take this herb and seth it in
wine, and strain it and give it him to drink, and he shall be hole if he use
it often. Also if that a man rub him with the joyce, ytchi^g.
it does away evil ytchynges. Also this herb is good to deliver wyndes that
be stopped in a man's stomach by balkynge. stomac Scabbes. botche. womb.
Also this herb is good to make scabbes and botches ripe. Also it is good to
make a man to have a hard womb, and this herb is hot and dry.

Linum.
LInum is an herb that men call Flex, and it is good if a man take the sede
thereof, and seth it in water, it makes a man laxatyue, and it is good to make
a plaster thereof for akyng sores. Also there is another spyce thereof that is
called Custula, and it is named i^ english Dodure, to purge.
and it grows among flex. The virtue of this herb is that he good to purge
a man of the color. Also if a great quantyte thereof be taken, and soden in
Myrre and oil together, and a plaster made thereof, Raynes.
it is good for the raynes and for the breest, and for other akynge lymbes.

Lauriola*
LAuriola is an herb that men call laurel The virtue of this herb is that it
will make a man laxatyue, Laxatyue. to purge.
and it is good to purge a man of fleume and of color, it is good for a man
yt may not eat, for if the joyce thereof be put i^ his eres, or if ye said
herb be sta^ped, and a suppository be made thereof and laid on cotton, it will
hele it. Eres. Humores.
Also for the^ yt here not well put ye joyce in to his eres, and if there be
any rotten humors it will dry them, and it is hot and dry.

Licorisa.
LIcorisa is an herb that men call Lycoryse, ye rote of this herb is sweet,
and it moysteth ye kyndly hete of a man and it is good for ye coughe. Also if
it be soden in water, Hete. cough. thirst
it will dystroy a man's thirst. Also it makes a man's breast, his throat,
and his lunges moist and in good tempre. Breest Postume.
Also ye water ye lycoryse is soden in, is good against all syckenes of ye
breast and for the postume of the rybbes called Pleueresy, it is cold and
moist.

The.xi. letter begins with. M.
Millefolio minor.
MIllefolio minor is an herb that is called the less Mylfoyle, there is no
dyffere^ce of kind nor virtue between mylfoyle the less, and Mylfoyle the
more, save ye more grows in gardaynes, and the less in wild places they be
both of one strenght. The virtue of this herb shall be declared in Mylfoyle
the more following by lettre.

Mercurialis.
MErcurialis is an herb ye men call Mercurye. The virtue of this herb is yt he
is good if a man have akynge in his womb give him to drink the joyce and he
shall be hole, womb.
it will cleanse the stomach, and the sede will do the same. stomac
Also the joyce tempred with white wine is good to hele sore iyes, and if a
worm or other vermyn have bytten a man, Eyes. Byti^g
take the joyce and warm it, and wasshe it. Also if there be any worms cropen
in to a man's eres, take the joyce and warm it and put it in to his ears,
Ears
and he shall be hole, this is hot and dry.

Menta.
MEnta to an herb that men call Mynte The virtue of this herb is that if it
be often eaten, worms. botche. swelli^g
it will slay the worms in a man's womb. Also if a man have botches or other
rennynges or swellynges in his head, take this herb and stamp it, and lay it
to the sore, and it will hele it. Also if a man's toth or the flessh of the
toth ache or stynke: Tothache.
take this herb and seth it in white wine and in eysel and take that lycour
and wasshe his mouth therewith, than take the powder of the herb and rub well
his teth therewith, mouth Tale^t.
and he shall have a sweet smelling mouth. Also take thou this herb and eysell
and make sauce, and it will make the to have a talent to thy mete. Also when
there shall be given any medycyne to destroy venym, it will be good to be
given with ye joyce of this herb, for it has many virtues, venym
and namely for venym, there be many spices thereof, and it is hot and dry.

Menta romana.
MEnta romana is an herb ye men call white Mynte. The virtue of this herb is
that the joyce thereof will slay worms in a man's womb. womb.
Also the joyce will slay worms in the nose thyrlles of a man. Nose.
Also ye powder thereof cast in a man's meat, shall make him well to defye
his meat. Also the joyce drunk sleeth the worms of the womb if it be
dropped in the eres, worms.
it sleeth ye worms

Malua.
MAlua is an herb yt men call Mallowe. The virtue of this herb is good if the
leaves be stamped and laid to a man's stomach, postume.
it will break a hot postume in the begi^nynge, or else meddle this herb with
fresh swynes greece, and lay it on a hot tyle, and lay it all hot to the
postume, and it shall ripe it, and break it. Also it is good to dystroy ye
hardness of a man's liver and mylte. Liver
Also it will make a man laxatyue, and it is good for playsters, it is cold
and moist.

Morell or nyghtshadowe.
MOrell is an herb that men call nyghtshadowe, this herb is cold and dry in
the.ii. degree, the leaves, the branches, and the fruytes thereof be right good
and best when they be grene. The virtue is they be good for stoppynge of the
splen and the liver, Splen liver. Postume.
and best for the Iau^dese to drink the joyce of it with a little Ruberbe.
Also it is good for a postume in the stomach, in the bowels, or in the liver,
sethe the joyce thereof with barley water and drink it.

Mastyke.
MAstyke is an herb that men call gu^me and it is hot and dry in the.ii.
degree, and it is a gu^me of a tree growing in a part of ye country of Greece,
in the latter end of Dear the men of that country slytte the trees, and tha^
make the grownde clean all about and lay clothes round about the trees, or
some other co^nynge to keep the gu^me from the ground in closing of it, to
know which is best, to take the best is white and clear, the white color is
next the best, and that is meddled with earth and somewhat dark, Clensynge.
the best mastyke has virtue of constraynyng, co^fortynge, clensyng, and
losing of humors dysce^dyng from the head above to the iyes and to the teth,
and for the disease of ye temples made of an asce^dyng wind from the stomach
to the head. Take powder of mastyke with white sweet wine, and the white of an
egg, and meddle them well together, and ye will ye may put in frankense^ce, and
plaster it to the temples. Also seth mastyke in water and drink it and it
will comfort well the stomach and make good degestion, stomac
and it comfort and relaxeth the stomach, and put to it fenel sede, and it
puts out wind out of the stomach. Also a plaster made of Mastyke and bole
armonyake, and the white of an egg and vynegre, and lay it on the forke of
the stomach or breast, Coloryke.
it will constrayne well the coloryke vanyte. Also seth mastyke in rain water
and drink it warm, and this medycyne is very good for the flux of the womb
yt comes of a sharp lax that was taken before to stop him. Flux.
Also boil Mastyke in rain water or Rose water, with two or three cloves, and
drink it warm, and that comfort the vomyte and the flux of the womb that
comes of sharpnes and vyolence of the medycyne. Also Mastyke must have but
little boylynge for hurtynge of his virtue, and it should be given warm, for it
constrayneth the more wha^ that it is given warm, than when it is over much
hot.

Magerum.
MAgerum is an herb that is hot and dry in the second degree, the flowers and
leaves be used in medycynes, and it should be gathered in so^mer when it
flowreth, and dry it in the shadow, and it may be kept a year. The virtue of
this herb is good in co^fortynge, losing, consumynge, and of clensynge if the
powder of it be dronken in wine, or else boil the powder of it in wine, stomac
and it will hete well the stomach. Also it comforts the degestyon. Also take
the leaves and flowers of Magerum, and pune them a little and make the^ hot in
a pan, stomac
and lay it to the greuau^ce and it takes away the disease in the stomach
that comes of wind. rewme
Also for the rewme in the head, take this herb and bind it warm about thy
head. mother
Also it dries the mother and consumes the superfluyte of it.

Myllefolium mayor.
MIllefolium mayor or yarow is an herb that king Achylles did find, and
therewith heled his men yt were wounded with iron. The virtue of this herb is
good for wounds, wounds.
stamp this herb with swynes greece, and plaster it to the wound, and it
shall hele it, and the same is good for an ache in the breast or side, it is
good for him that may not pysse take the joyce of this herb and vyneger and
drink it, and merueylously it helps a wound that has taken cold, stamp
this herb in butter, and lay it to the wound, Stomach.
and it will hele it well. Also to degest the stomach or that lies therein,
take the joyce of it, and meddle it with water and ho^nye, and drink it warm.
Also it is good for dyseases in the body, Body:
take the powder and meddle it with wine or with good ale, Heart. Head. For
bitynge of wod dogs. for womyti^g
and drink it and it helps much. Also it is good for the heart brennynge.
Also for the head ache stamp this herb, and plaster it to the head. Also
for bytynge of a wood dog stamp this herb with the graynes of whete, and it
heals it. Also for him that may not hold his meat, take and stamp this
herb with wine, and drink it warm.

Mother worte.
MOther worte or mogworte, this herb is called in latin Artemesia, and it is
hot and dry in the third degree, this herb helps a woman to conceive a
child, cle^seth the mother, child.
and makes a woman to have her flowers, and it dystroyeth the emerawdes on
this manner. First it must be gathered, than take the powder of motherworte,
Pappes. a dead child.
and of Horehound together, and straw it on the pappes Also if a child be
dead in the mothers womb, take motherwort, and stamp it small, and make a
plaster thereof and lay it to her womb all cold, and with the grace of God
she shall have delyueraunce without perell, it is good for the stone and the
gravel in the raynes of a man or of a woman, stone.
if a man bear this herb upon him, there shall no venymous be grieve him. It
is good for the yelowe Iaundes and it be dronken with wine, stomac
for it comfort the stomach, and makes a man or woman to have a good
color. color. bowels
Against ache of the bowelles powdre of mugwort dronke^ with ho^ny eases
greatly, and is good for diverse syckenesses.

Maces.
MAces is a spyce that is called Mace, this spyce is hot and dry in the
soco^de degree, maces is the rynde or husk that grows about the Nutmege, as
the rynde grows about the hasell nutte, it may be kept. ^ x. year in his
virtue, it is comfortyng, dyssoluynge, and consumyng, the knowledge of fine
maces is thus, it should be in color like to fine gold, or else like to
gold that silver is gylt with, the which has a sharp talage with a
bytternes, and it looks like to earth, it is to be refused, for it has no
sharp savor, for a cold stomach that may not defye nor degeste well, stomac
take maces and boil them in wine and drink it. Also a good plaster the
which is best for a feeble stomach, and make powder of mastyke and of maces,
and meddle them with oil of Roses and wexe, and make a plaster thereof and lay
it on the stomach of the sick person. Also to cle^se the brain of
superfluous humors, take a quantite of Maces, brayn.
and chewe them well in thy mouth, and hold them there a while, and that shall
lose the feumosyte of humors that rise up to the brain, brain
and purge the superfluyte of it. Also for feebleness of the stomach and the
liver of a cold cause, stomac Liver
and for the colyke, and for the dyseases of the spyrytuall members, or flewme,
boil maces in the joyce of fenell, and in the end of the boylynge put in a
little wine, tha^ strain it and drink it for it is the best remedy for the
foresaid dyseases. Also for the ache of ye heart, use powdre of maces in thy
meats and drynkes. ye heart.


Menta.
MEnta is an herb yt is called red mynt it is hot and dry in the second
degree, and there be.ii. other myntes, but I mean house mintes the which
properly is said gardaine myntes, for that most commonly is in medycines both
grene and dry, for great holsomnes it should be dried in a shadow place, and
so it will be kept a year in great virtue, to dyssolue or lose, to consume of
his proper qualyte, and to comfort of his sweet sauoure. The virtue is this,
mouth
for the stynkyng of the mouth and fylth of the gu^mes and of the teth, wasshe
thy mouth and gu^mes with vynegre that myntes be sodden in, and after rub him
with the powdre of myntes, or with dry myntes to provoke ye appetyte when an
impedyment of the stomach comes of cold humors being in the mouth of the
stomach, make a salve of myntes and vynegre with a little synamum and peper,
and use it well against vomytes yt comes of feebleness of the stomach or of
cold causes, Stomach.
sethe myntes in sauge water and vynegre, and deep it in and lay it on the
mouth of the stomach with the myntes yt be soden therein. Also give to the
pacient to eat of the same myntes for the syncopyne, and feblenesse in fevers,
and without fevers, or of medycyne, or of what cause it be, stamp myntes with
vynegre, and a little wine if the pacyent be without fever, and if he be with
fever, stamp myntes with vynegre alone, tha^ make a toste of sour bread, and
toste it well till it be almost brent, then put it in that lycour, and let it
lie therein till it be well soked, than put it in to his nose and rub his lyppes,
and gu^mes, teth, and temples, therewith, and bind it to the poulse veins of
his arms, and let the pacyent eat the moystnes that is left and swalowe it
in. For to cleanse ye mother, take the tender croppes of myntes, to cle^se
and sethe them in water or wine, and plaster it to the share, and to the
raynes. Against the co^gylynge in a woman's breast, take the small stalks of
myntes and seth them in wine and oil, and plaster it about the tears. Also
be it known that when any medycyne should be given against venym, it should be
given with the joyce of myntes, for myntes have a manner of strength of drawing
out venym, venym
or else it should be given with wine that myntes have be soden in. Splen Liver
For stoppynge of the splen and the liver, and of the ways of the vryne of a
cold humor and a hot without fever, take the joyce of myntes alone, or
myntes sode^ in wine, or the joyce of myntes meddled with honny, and give it to
the pacyent. worms.
To slay worms in the belly, take the joyce of myntes and drink it, and thou
shalt be hole. Also the joyce of myntes sleeth worms in ye ears. A tetter.
For a tetter take the joyce of myntes, and put thereto brymstone and vynegre,
and meddle them well together, and anoint the tetter therewith and thou shall be
hole. wounds.
For a wound in the head, stamp myntes and lay on the wound. etc. For pain
in ye side, Side.
take myntes and seth them in old wine or ale, and with it stamp.xviii.
graynes of peper, and drink it in the night, and it will ease the of thy pain.

The.xii. letter begins with. N.
Nux muscata.
NVx muscata is a herb the which is called a Nutmeg, it is hot and dry in
the second degree, the best grows in ynde, and in the time of his rypynge it
is gathered and seven year it may be kept, they that be plain and heavy after
their kind, be best to be chose^. And when they be broken they fall not to
powder, but they have a sweet and sharp savor, if they lack any of these
aforesaid, they be not good for medycyne. Co^fortynge.
The virtue is of comfortynge by his sweet sauoure. For coldness and feebleness of
degestion of the stomach, take in the morning half a nutmeg or a hole nutmeg,
and eat it. stomac Liver.
Also for a cold stomach yt is feeble of degestyon, and for the liver, give
him wine that nutmeg is boiled in. Also for the same boil nutmeges and Mastyke
in wine and drink it, this is good for the dyseases in the stomach, and in
the bowels to break wind. bowels
Also in the recourynge of a syckenes to comfort the spyrytual members, boil
Nutmeges and Mastyke in wine, and drink it. Also take Nutmeg and smell to it,
and it will comfort ye spyrytuall members.

Napo.
NApo this is named Nauew, it desires ground that is fatty, and sandy, it
grows best in such ground, the properte of the Nauewe is, he changes and
turns in to rape and after that it turns in to Nauewe, the best does grow
in ground well dunged and turned. Also it proves well in places that stubble
of corn has been in that same year, if they grow to thycke pluck some up
here and there, so that the other may prove the better, and those that ye
pluck up, set them in void places. They should be sowe^ in the end of July,
and in August, the best sauoured Nauewes be they that be long and strayghte,
and not over great, nor branches in the rotes, but a straight rote. Also of
Nauewes may be made a passing good mete with a little salt and vynegre, ho^ny
and mustarde, and with sweet spices, and it may be made without spyces,
Nauewes be hot in the second degree, and they no rysshe much, but they be
hard of degestyon, they make the flesh soft and wyndy, but less wind then
rapes. Therefore when ye seth the^ in water, cast that water away, and seth them
in another water, and so his hard substance is te^pred by that, and so menely
between good and evil they gendre norysshynge, for they yt be thus well soden
be not hard of degestion, they make one wyndy, and they make stoppyng of
veins and of poores, but yet they be profitable if they be soden twyse, and
both the waters to be cast away, and they to be soden in the third water with
fat flesh.

The.xiii. letter begins with. O.
Olibanum.
OLibanum is called Frankensence, this is hot and dry in the third degree, it
is a gu^me of a tree in ynde, the clenest is the best. Also there be trees of
that kind growyng in Damask, but not so clear nor good for it is darker of
color, therefore it is to be refused in medycyne. The virtue is of comfortynge
by his sweet savor. Also of closing and constraynynge, Tothache.
for the tothache that comes of superfluyte of humors of ye head, and
specially by the veins, make a plaster of the powder of Frankensence with
wine, and the white of an egg, and meddle the^ together and plaster them
about the temples. Also to stop the ways of the veins above, take
Fra^kensence, and chewe it well in thy mouth, and that shall stop and let the
flux of humors coming down to the nostryles, to stop flux.
take pylles of Frankensence, and swalowe them down in the morning, than
boil Frankensence in wine, and at even drink that when thou go to bed.
stomac
Also these pylles be good to help the degestyo^ of the stomach, and good
against sore balkynges. Also to the comfortynge and clensynge of the matrice,
and helpinge of concepcion in the receyuinge the fume of Frankensence binds.
Also boil powder of it in wine, and when it is metely warm dyp a cloth in it,
and lay it so warm to the share of the pacient, and greatly it comfort the
matryce.

The.xiiii. letter begins with. P.
Plumeus.
PLu^mes be cold and moist some be white, and some be black, and some be red.
They that be black and somewhat hard be the best, they be called Damsons, and
when they be ripe gather them, and slit them, and spring vinegre upon them,
and so they may be kept in a vessel of wood a year and first when they be
cut they must be laid in the son.xv days to dry. The virtue of these
Damso^s have coldness and clensynge of the inward parts, Fever.
wherefore they be good in fevers that be sharp, and for costyfnes of the belly
that comes of drynes, or of coloryke humors dryinge, if it be new give it
him to eat, if it be dry boil it in water, and give it the pacient to drink
thereof, Liver
this is good for the fever tercian, for stoppinge of the liver, for the
Iau^des and sharp fevers, it softeth the belly, Iau^des.
it is good for defaute of appetyte, and also for many other diseases.

Pyper.
PIper this is called Peper, it is hot and dry in the fourth degree. There be
three manner of Pepers, black, white, and long Peper. Diascorides and
Constantyne say, that they be fruytes of trees growing in ynde, and some say
that Peper is made black with brennynge in the fire, for when it is gathered
there be great multitude of serpe^tes about it, and therefore they put it in
the fire, to brenne the serpents that be about it, the Sarasyns dry it in an
oven, because it shall not increase in another land, but of al ye Pepers the
black is best, and the most wholesome. The virtue is, take Peper and put it in
to thy nose thrylles, to nese
and it will make the to nese and seth Peper and Fygges in wine, and drink it,
Cle^si^g
and it will cleanse the spyrytuall members of though humors, and it is good
for the pose that is taken of cold. Pose.
Also for the same eat powder of Peper with Figs. Also powder of Peper put
in a man's meat comfort ye degestion of the stomach. stomac
Also put long Peper in a roasted apple, and eat it, and it shall comfort the
degestio^. Also powdre of Peper will frete away deed flesh, Degestion.
or proud flesh, and long Peper comforts more then black. Also black
Peper has virtue of losing, comfortynge, and of drawing, it cleanses the
spyrituall members of cold flewme, fleume
and vycious humors, and best when the powder of it is eaten with Fygges, for
he has great stre^ght of hetynge and comfortynge the stomach, stomac
provoking appetyte, but to sanguyne and coloryke persons it is not good to
use Peper, for it dries and brenneth blood, and it enge^dreth lepre, and
other evil syckenes. Pluto says, that Peper is foul to se in syghte without
black, and within white, a sharp sauoure and a sweet odor, little i^
qua^tyte, and much i^ virtue.

Pympernell.
PImpernel is an herb yt grows in sa^dy places at the foot of the hills.
The virtue is he is good for the fystula and Canker, Ka^ker.
and he be puned and laid thereon. Also it is good for dimnes of iyen, if yt
they be washed with the water that it is soden in. venym wounds.
Also ye joyce of this herb dronke^ will put away all venym from the body.
Also this herb is good to hele wounds.

Pulegium.
POlegium is an herb called Puliol royal it is hot and dry in the third
degree, in the time of flowerynge it should be gathered, and it may be kept in
his virtue a year, when it shall be used in medycines, take ye leaves with the
flowers and strype them from the stalks. The virtue is of losing and
consumynge. For a cold humor in the head, Head
take powder of it and hete it well in a skyllet, and all hot bind it to the
greuau^ce without any lycoure. Also for a great cold taken in the head, and
for a toughe humor or a watery humor, Humors.
make a gargarysme, seth Pulyoll royal, and dry Fygges in tarte vynegre, and
take a good sponfull thereof as hot as ye may suffer it, and hold it in thy
mouth till it be almost cold, than put it out and take as much more, and do
so three or four times, For ye head.
and that shall spurge thy heed well of flewme. Also seth it in wine and drink
it, and it is good for the dyseases in the stomach in guts, stomac
and for cold causes, or for wind in the stomach. Also it is good for toughe
flewme in the breast, if thou take powdre of it, fleume
and meddle it with claryfyde ho^ny, and make a lectuary thereof, and use to eat
thereof, or take the herb thereof and boil it with wine, ho^ny, or water, and
use to drink thereof. Also for the black color drink the joyce of it, color
but boil it with wine, and thou shalt be hole. Byle. ytchi^g.
Also for an ytchynge byle, lay this herb in water, and use to wasshe the
ytchynge therein warm, and thou shall be hole. Also for ache take this herb al
grene, Ache.
and stamp it and plaster it to ye ache, and it will ease it. Also against
the coughe boil this herb in wine, coughe
and drink it luke warm, and this will make one pysse well. For the disease in
the belly, Belly.
stamp this herb with co^myn and water, and lay it hot to the navel, Liver
and lightly it shall be hole. For the disease in the liver, stamp this herb
and tempre it with water and vynegre and drink the joyce thereof and thou shall
be hole. For an ache in ye legs or arms, take the leaves of elder and Pulyall
royal of eueryche alyke much, and stamp them together well and plaster it
to the greuau^ce, and it is good for the fever tercyan, if thou take the
branches of this herb, and wrap it in a good lock of woll, and give it to
the pacyent, and let him smell thereto before the fyuer come on him, and that
shall do him great ease. For the heedache, headeache
take this herb and bind it fast round about thy head, and anon it
seaseth the ache. Also if a woman have a deed child in her womb, stamp this
herb, a deed child
and give it her to drink with old wine, and she shall be delivered of it thy
ye grace of god. For the crampe drink the joyce with vynegre fasting, and it
will put it away. Cra^pe


Pencedanum vel Feniculus Porcinus.
PEncedanum, this herb is called mayth hogs fenel, or maiden wede, this
herb is hot and dry in the third degree, when this herb is gathered for
medycynes, the rote is better then the herb, when the rotes be gathered they
may be kept all a year. stra^gulion. Flyxe. Liver.
The virtue is he purges, it is good for the strangulyon or the Flyxe, and
good for stoppyng of the splen and the liver, boil this herb in wine, or
water, and give it to the pacyent to drink. Also seth it in oil and wine, and
plaster it to the share, and it will help the Strangulion or ye flyxe. Also
the same plaster is good for hardenes of the splen, Splen Humors.
it molyfyeth that. Also against the cold humors of the spyrytuall members,
give him to drink water with barley, and this herb soden together, and if it
be a fervent cold humor, then seth the barley and the herb in wine, and give
it to the pacyent to drink with lycoryce.

Petrocilium.
PEtrocilium, this is called Persley, this is hot and moist in ye third degree.
The virtue is it multyplyeth greatly man's blood and does away the tysyke.
blood Tisike Fever. Heart. stomac
It helps well to dystroy the Fever tertyan. It is good for the side and the
dropsye. It comfort the heart and the stomach. And it is good in potage,
and to stop chekyns.

Peritorium.
PEritorium, this herb is called Peritory and it is hot and dry. The virtue
of this herb is thus, if a man have an evil stomach or else akynge within
him, stomac
take this herb and seth it in thy potage, and ete thereof and thou shall do
well. stone.
Also this herb is good to hele one of the stone, if he be bathed with it.

Plastinaca.
PLastinaca, this is called a Pesnep, it is hot and moist in the second
degree, there be two manner of Pasneppes, the one is the Pasnep of the gardayne,
and the other is the wild Pasneppe, they be more used to meat than to
medycyne. The virtue is to gendre thycke blood and much, blood
wherefore it styreth the lust of the body if it be much used, therefore it is
good for a man that is newly recovered out of his great syckenes to use to eat
of it a while. Also they be good to be eaten raw or soden for the melancoly
humors grene and not dry. Humors.
To make a syrope to stir the lust of the body, and for to comfort the
degestio^ take rotes of Pasneppes, Degestion.
and seth them well in water, than take them out and cast away the water, and
the rotes that be in gobettes boil them again in water, than put thereto ho^ny
well claryfyed, and let them boil unto the thyckenes of ho^ny, and co^tynually
stir it that it cleue not to the vessel and in the mydle of the boylynge,
put in almondes if ye have them, and in the end of the boylynge put in Gynger,
Galyngale, and a little Peper, Nutmege, and other sweet sauoured spyces. Also
Pasneppes may be sown in dece^bre, January, and March, in fat ground and
deep dolue^, and lose ground, and best dygged, and they be somewhat wyndy,
boil the^ in two waters, but cast away the first water. Also there is a
Pasnep that is somewhat red, the which may be eaten both raw and sode^, and
with them and Nauewes together ye may make a very good meat, and fair and red
in color, the which be soden as Pasneppes be.

Plantago.
PLantago, this is called Playntayne, it is cold and dry in the second
degree. The virtue is this, for hedache take Plantayne and bind it about thy
neck, Head
and the ache shall go out of ye heed. Also for dyseases in the body, Body
seth this herb in good lycoure in what ye will, and use to drink it, and it
shall cleanse the mawe, and ye other inwardes. Also for him that bledeth at the
nose, bledi^g.
give him to drink the joyce of it, and it shall sease lightly. Also if that
the body of any man be wexen hard, Body.
stamp this herb with greece and make a plaster of it and lay it on the
hardness, and lightly it shall be soft and make it hole. Also for bytynge of a
serpente, biting.
take this herb and drink it with wine. Also for the disease in the mouth,
mouth
take the joyce of this herb, and hold it long in thy mouth, and eat the
leaves of this herb. For him that may not well pysse, water.
sethe this herb and drink it. Also for a rotten humor in the breast, rotten
humor
and about the heart take the joyce of this herb ye wayght of.x. d. and meddle
it with ho^ny, and give him to ete a sponeful at one time, and that shall spurge
the breast For ache i^ fete, take this herb with vynegre, Ache.
and drink it. Also it heals wounds, and cleanses the fylthe out of
wounds. Also it swageth rankelynge, and stauncheth the mencions both with
drink and with playsters made with powdre of Armonyake, and of sankdragone,
and barley mele, with the white of eggs, made in a plaster, and laid to the
sore. For the canker and the pain in the gu^mes, take, Ca^ker.
the joyce thereof and meddle it with ho^ny and vynegre, and powdre of Alume, and
that shall slay the Canker in the mouth. Also for the fevers stamp three rotes
of Plantayne and tempre it with water, Fever.
and give it him to drink that has the Fevers, and he shall be hole. For the
Iaundes stamp Plantayne and Letuse together, and tempre them with vynegre,
Iau^des.
and make a plaster thereof and lay it to the right side, and use it till thou
be hole, biting.
and it is good for the bytynge of an adder, drink the joyce of it, and lay
the substance of the herb to the sore. For the same hang the rote of
plantayne about the neck of the pacyent, and meruaylously it helps. Potagre.
For the potagre, and for the disease in the synowes, stamp the leaves of it
with a little salt, and plaster it well thereto, and meruaylously it helps.

Porrum.
POrrum, this is called a Leke, it is hot and dry in the third degree, it
desires lose ground and fat, and well donged, in that they shall best profit
in hot places and temperat, they may be sown in Decembre in te^perat places,
and cold. They may be sown in January. The virtue is for a wound, take Lekes
and stamp them well with ho^ny, wounds.
and lay it to the wound, and it will hele it. For the coughe take the joyce
of lekes and use to drink it. coughe
For the same, take the joyce of lekes, and meddle it with woman's milk, and use
to drink it, and it will cleanse ye lo^ges of al vice. Fracturas solidat,
duritasque relaxat Vulnusque appositum: cito cum sale claudit.

Piretrum.
PIretrum, this is called Pelleter, it is hot and dry in the third degree,
the rote is used in medycynes, five year he may be kept in his virtue, and
know ye well that his sharpnes is not known anon, it should be puned and
holden in the mouth. The virtue is of losing, and drawing, and of co^sumynge.
To make a gargarysme, take Pelleter and Fygges, and boil the^ in vynegre or in
sweet wine, and it will cleanse the brain of superfluyte of flewme. Also if it
be chewed in the mouth, fleume
it helps the Palsy in the tongue. Palsy. Potagre.
Also for the palsy and the Potagre, stamp it and sethe it in wine and oil,
and plaster it to the greuaunce this plaster helps much therefore, if thou
may have grene pelyter stamp it, and lay it sokynge in wine.xv. days, and
after boil it well and put thereto wexe and oil, for this is ye best oyntement
for all the foresaid dyseases.

Papauer.
PApauer, this is called Popy, it is cold and dry. There is two manners of
them, the white Popy is cold and moist, and it is good to cause one to sleep,
the sede thereof well gathered may be kept.x. year. The virtue is of clensynge,
it is put in medycynes with a determynacion as the sede may be received of
white Popy or black. For to provoke a sleep, make a plaster of each of them,
Sleep.
or one of them with woman's milk, and the white of an egg, and lay it to the
temples. The women of Salerne gave to young children the Popy, but they would
give the^ no black Popy, for it made them much heavy. Also for a hot Postume
in the beginning, Postume. Liver
and for chafynge of the liver, take the sede of white Popy, or else the herb
of it, and stamp it and meddle it with oil of Roses, and plaster it to the
greuaunce. Fever.
Also for drynes in fever etyke and in other fevers, take and hete oil of
vyolet meddled with powder of Popy sede, and anoint the small of the back
therewith.

Polipodium.
POlipodium, this is called Polipodye, it is hot in the third degree, and dry
in ye second degree. This polypody is a fern that grow the upon oaks, or in
walls, or stones, but the Polipody that grows on Oaks is the best, gather
the rotes of it and lay it a day in the son, chose that is grene, and that
which appears dry, when it is broken it is to be refused. The virtue is of
dyssoluyng, of drawing, fleume
of purgynge flewme, and specially of mela^coly, wherefore commonly he is put in
boylynge, and to flewmatyke, and melancolyous old men, he is given to preserve
their health, and know well that in the boylynge of Polypody should be put in
some thing to exclude and put out ventuosyte as Anyse sede, Fenell sede, for
they exclude out much wind, Humors.
and unbinds humors. Also for the cotydyan, and for Illica passio, and to
keep a man's health, do thus stamp half an ounce of Polipody or an ounce, if ye
will have it much laxatyue, than boil it with prunes and vyolettes in fenel
water or anyse, in a great quantyte, than strain it and give it the pacyente
at evening and at morning. Also stamp it and seth it in water with fenel
sede, and make a good broth thereof with a Chekyn therein, with sweet sauoured
spyces, and give the pacyent to eat. Also make a drink thereof after this
manner, stamp it and boil it in wine and after put more wine thereto, and so
make up your drink with sweet sauoured spyces.

Pienium.
PIenium, this is called Pieny, it is hot and dry in the second degree, so
says Ipocras and Galien the good Philosophers say that the rote thereof goth
to diverse medycynes, and it will last.x. year, and it is cold. The virtue is
good for the Palsy, Palsy.
dry the rote and drink powdre with Caster soden in wine. Also the same is
good for ye stone. stone.
Also if a man be costyue and may not go to draught take and straw the powdre
thereof on cotton, costiue
and put in to his fundement, and drink the powdre in white wine. Also for a
man or woman yt has the falling evil, Fali^ge evil.
ete it and drink it in wine. Also hang the rote about his neck, and it
will save him without doubt within.xv. days. Also it helps the sores in the
mouth. mouth
Also if thou seth it in wine it helps the splen. Also drink Pyeny with
water and ho^ny, and do thereto powdre of Colyandre, and this is good for the
stomach, stomac Mylt.
for the mylte, and for gravel in the raynes. Also it is good for women for
diverse dyseases, and seth it in white wine, and give a woman to drink thereof,
and it will hele her blader, stone.
and make her to pysse ye stone, and it will hele her of the matrys. Also Pyeny
sede when it is black, it makes delyueraunce of the bed of the child in her
womb, and at every time when she shall use to drink it, she must drink.xv.
seeds at one time.

The.xv. letter begins with. Q.
Quinquefolio.
QVinquefolio, this is called Qui^ckefoyle, it is cold and dry in the second
degree, this herb is good for ache in a man's lymbes and for ache of the heed,
mouth, tongue, Lymbes. Head
and throat that is sore, take and sethe this herb in wine, and give the
pacyent to drink there of three days first and last, and he shall be hole.
Also stamp it and drink the joyce of it in ale, and it will sease the akynge
and gnawynge of a man or woman. Gnawynge bledi^g.
Also if a man blede sore at ye nose give him to drink the joyce of it with
wine, and anoint his head well with the joyce of this herb, and anon the
blood shall stau^ce. For to slay a canker, Ca^ker.
sethe it in wine with the greece of a swyne, and make a plaster thereof, and
lay it on the Canker, and it shall slay it. Also take powdre of Quynquefoyle,
and meddle it with honny, and therewith rub thy mouth, tongue, throat, and the
chekes within, and it will spurge it well. Poyso^
Also for poison or bytynge of a serpent, take the joyce of quynckefoyle, and
drink it with wine, and meruaylously it resysteth venym.

The.xvi. letter begins with. R.
Rybbeworte.
RYbbeworte is an herb that grows in gardaynes. The virtue is good for ye
fever quartayne, Fever.
take ye joyce of this herb, and drink it two hours before that ye think
the disease shall come to you, and by the grace of god it shall go fro you.
Eres.
For the^ that here not well, put in to their eres the joyce, and if there be
any rotten humors it will dry them.

Rednetle.
REdnetle is called a palyfe of the greeks it is hot of virtue, for it
bre^neth them that touch it. The virtue is good for the Iaundes if it be soden
in wine and drunk, Iaundes. cough.
it cle^seth the color meruaylously. For ye old coughe seth the seeds in
water, and put ho^ny thereto, and drink it, and it will hele ye cough, and take
away the coldness of the lunges, and swellynge of the belly. Also vynegre that
the sede of netels is soden in is good against scurfe in the head, Head.
if ye head be washed therewith.ii. or.iii. times, and then rynsed with fair
water.

Rosa.
ROsa, this is called red Rose, it is cold in the first degree, and dry in the
second degree, dry Roses and grene roses be used in medycynes, and of grene
Roses be made many confectyons. Also dry roses be put in medycynes, when a
receyte of Roses is made, for they be sone made i^ powdre, of roses is made
mell roset, sugre roset, syrop of roses, alectuary of Roses, water of roses,
and oil of Roses. Melroset is made thus, take fair puryfyed ho^ny, and new
red roses, the white ends of them clyped away, then chop them small, and put
them in to the ho^ny, and boil them menely together, to know when it is boiled
enough ye shall know it by the sweet odor and the color rufe, five year he
may be kept in his virtue. The virtue of the roses be of comfortynge, and by
the ho^ny he has virtue of clensynge. Clensynge.
In winter and in so^mer it may be given compete^tly to feeble, sick,
flumatyke, melancolye, and coloryke people. Also Mulsa is made of water and
mele roset, and it may be given after ye third day that it comes out of ye
bathe. stomac
For to cleanse the stomach of cold humor, give him melroset with water that
fenel sede is boiled in puttyng therein.iii. graynes of salt, if the sick may
take it, this should be the quantyte of Roses and ho^ny. In.vii. pound of honny
put a pound of roses. Sugre roset is made thus, take new gathered roses, and
stamp them right small with sugre, than put it in a glass and.xxx. days let
it stand in the son, and stir it well and meddle it well together, and so
it may be kept three year in his virtue. The quantyte of sugre and roses should
be thus in.iiii. pound of Sugre a pound of Roses, Flux.
he has virtue of constraynynge, and comfortyng of the flux in the womb,
take sugre roset and powder of mastyke, of every one a dragma, and meddle them
well together and give it to the sick, after that give him rose water that
Mastyke and cloves be soden in. Syrop of Roses is made thus, some do take Roses
dyght as it is beforesayde, and boil them in water, and i^ that water strayned
they put sugre and make a syrope thereof, and some do make it better, for they
put Roses in a vessel having a straight mouth, and they put to the roses hot
water, and they let it stand a day and a night, and of that water putting to
it sugre they make Syrope, and some do put more of Roses in the foresaid
vessel, and more of hot water, and let it stand as is beforsayde, and so
they make a red water, and make thereof a syrope, and some do stamp new Roses,
and they strain out the joyce of it, and sugre therewith they make syrope, and
this is the best making of Syrope, and know well that syrope made of fresshe
and new Roses, somewhat menely they be laxe, in the end they bind, but syrope
made of dry roses, first and last they bind. Syrope of Roses has virtue of
comfortynge, and constraynyng against the Flux of the womb, Flux.
and he vomyte give it him with rain water, or with Rose water in a fever.
After lettynge of blood, Blood
give it to him with cold water. Also ye same for the syncopyne. syncopyne.
Oil of Roses is made this, some boil roses in oil and keep it. Some do fill
a glass with Roses and oil, and they boil it in a caudren full of water, and
this oil is good. Some stamp fresshe roses with oil and they put it in a
vessel of glass, and set it in the son.l. days, and this oil is good
against chafynge of the liver, Liver
if it be anointed therewith. Also it is good for the disease in the head that
comes of hete, Head
anoynte the forheed, and the temples with oil of Roses, the water of roses
has virtue of co^fortynge, and constraynynge against the flux of the womb,
and vomyte. Flux.
Also give him rose water to drink, or else rose water boiled with Mastycke
and cloves, it is best against the flux and feebleness of virtue if it come of
a flux by a sharp medicine. Also rose water is good for the syncopyne, and the
Cardyacle, cardyacle.
give it him to drink, and spryncle the water on his face, and the water is
good for iyes, and in oynteme^tes for the face, for it takes away the wembes
and the superfluyte and straineth the skin. Also dry roses put to the nose to
smell, Heart.
do comfort the brain, and heart, and quenches the spyryte. Also against the
flux of the womb, Flux.
and color, give him roses boiled in rain water. Also a plaster made of
roses, and the white of eggs and vynegre, and dyp a sponge in it, and lay it
on the mouth of thy stomach, Sincopyne.
against the Syncopyne, give him to drink water that Roses have be boiled in,
and give him powdre of roses i^ a rere egg, to make oil of roses, take.ii.
pound of oil, and a pound and an half of roses, and put all in a glass,
and put the glass in a cawderon full of water, and hang it therein, and boil
it till the third part be wasted, and after strain it through a lynen
cloth, and keep it for your use, for this oil is losing, and serves for many
things. Some do put Rose water in a glass, and they put roses with their dew
thereto, and they make it to boil in water then they set it in the son till
it be red, and this water is best, this has virtue of comfortynge, and
constraynynge, and for the flux of the womb, and against vomyte.

Rosemarye.
ROsemarye is an herb that is hot and dry. The virtue is good against al
euylles in the body, take the flowers and put them in a lynnen cloth, Body.
and so boil them in fair clean water to the half, and cool it and drink
it. Take the flowers and make powdre thereof, and bind it to the right arm in
a lynnen cloth, and it shall make the light and merry. Also ete the flowers with
honny fasting with sour bread, and there shall rise in the none evil
swellynges. Swellynge.
Also take the flowers and put them in a chest among your clothes or among
books, and mothes shall not hurt them, boil the flowers in gotes milk, and
than let them stand al a night under the air fair covered, and after that
give him to drink thereof that has the Tysyke, and it shall deliver him. Boil
the leaves in white wine, and wasshe thy face therewith, thy herd, and thy
brows, and there shall no corns grow out, but thou shall have a fair face,
put the leaves under thy beds heed, and thou shall be delivered of al evil
dremes. Break the leaves small to powdre, and lay them on a Canker, Dremes.
Ca^ker.
and it shall slay it. Take the leaves and put them in to a vessel of wine, and
it shall preserve it from tartnes and evil savor, and if thou sell that wine,
thou shall have good luck in the sale. If thou be feeble with unkindly sweet,
take and boil the leaves in clean water, Swet.
and when the water is cold, do thereto as much of white wine, and then make
therein soppes, and eat well thereof, and thou shalt recover appetyte. If thou
have the flux, boil the leaves in strong aysell, and bind them in a lynen
clothe, and than bind it to thy womb, Flux.
and anon the flux shall withdraw. If thy legs be blown with the gout,
gout.
boil the leaves in water, and then take the leaves and bind them in a lynen
cloth about thy legs, and it shall do the good. Take the leaves and boil them
in strong Aysell, and bind them in a cloth to thy stomach, and it shall
deliver the of all euyls. stomac cough.
If thou have the coughe, drink ye water of the leaves boiled in white wine,
and it will hele the. Take the rynde of Rosemary, and make powdre thereof, Pose.
and drink it for the Pose and it shall help the. Take the tymbre thereof, and
brene it to cooles, and make powdre thereof, and then put it in a lynen cloth
and rub thy teth therewith, and if there be any worms therein it shall slay
them, Teth.
and keep thy teth from all euyls. Also make the a box of the wood and smell
to it, and it shall preserve thy youth. Also put thereof in thy doors, or in thy
house, and thou shall be without danger of adders and other venymous
serpents, make the a barell thereof, serpe^tes
and drink thou of the drink that stands therein, Poyso^
and thou needs to fere no poison that shall hurt the. And if thou set it in
thy gardayne, keep it honestly, for it is much profitable. Also if a man have
lost his smellyng of the air, or else he may not draw his breath, Smelling.
make a fire of the wood, and take his breath therewith, and give it him to ete,
and he shall be hole.

Ruta.
RVta, this is called Rewe, this is hot and dry in the second degree, the
leaves and the seeds be used in medicynes, the seeds may be kept.x. year, and
the leaves a year. The virtue is of purgynge, dyssoluyng, Head.
and consumynge. For the headache, take the joyce of Rewe, and hete it and put
it in to his nose thyrlles, for it spurgeth out flewme and cleanses ye brain,
the joyce sode^ with wine is good for the same. For feebleness of sight, put rewe
in a pot with ale, and let the pacyent use to drink of it. For stopynge of the
splen and liver, Eyes.
the strangury and the flux, sethe Rewe in wine with rotes of Fenell, or
powdre of rewe with the joyce of Fenel and drink it warm. Also for an ache or
fretyng, Ache.
stamp rewe with powdre of co^myn, and plaster it to the greuau^ce. Also
against venym, drink ye joyce of rewe. For bytynge of a venymous best or
worm, Bytig
plaster rewe to the bytynge. For feeble iye sight, still water of rewe and
roses together, and put thereof in your iyes. Eyes.
Also an ointment for sore iyes, stamp rewe and fenell together of each like
much by weight, and meddle them with ho^ny and Eufrose, and it is a good
oyntement for sore iyes. Take rewe, Common, and Peper, of each a like much by
weight, and grynde them small together, and meddle them with ho^ny and vynegre,
Breast.
and it is good for ye ache in the breast, and in the taynes.

The.xvii. letter begins with. S.
Sinapium.
SInapium, it is called Mustarde, it is hot and dry in the mydle of the.iiii.
degree, and not the herb but the sede is put in medycynes. Five year he may be
kept i^ his virtue. The virtue is of losing, of drawing, of making thyn, and
of consumynge. For the Palsye of the tongue, Palsy.
take and chewe the sede in your mouth, and hold it under the tongue and it
shall do you good. Also for the palsy in other members, seth the sede in wine,
me^bres
and lay it to the sore place, and it is best in the beginning of the disease.
Also take the powdre of it, and put it in to your nose thyrlles, and it will
make you to nese, and it cleanses the brain, and superfluyte of flume. Brain
Also seth it in wine and fygges, and hold it warm in your mouth till it be
almost cold, then take as much more, and do so.v. or.vi. times a day, and as
much another day, and this is good for an old pose of toughe and flumy humor
in the heed. Pose.
Also for stoppynge of the splen and the liver, Head Liver
seth the sede in water with rotes of fenell, then strain it and put thereto
honny, and give it to the sick to drink. For hardness of the splen, seth the
herb of it in wine, Splen
and plaster it to the greuaunce. For to ripe and break a Postume, Postume.
stamp this herb well with hogs greece and lay it to the postume. Also for
the strangury, take this herb, and seth it in oil and wine, strangury.
Cyatica.
and plaster it to the greuau^ce, and it will lose it. Also for the Ciatyca,
and for old sores, take mustarde sede, and ye third part of cro^mes of white
bread and Fygges, ho^ny, and vynegre, after as the ache of the sore requires,
the more of the fygges and ho^ny, that is there the more sharper is the
strength of the sede, and the more bread and vynegre that is in it, the more
weker is ye sede, but I say not that ye shall put this confection to al sores,
but to great and old sores his virtue is if he be eaten, it sharpeth a man's
wit, Belly. stone. stomac
it cle^seth the belly, it breketh the stone it purges the vryne, menstruosyte,
and comfort the stomach.

Smalage.
SMalage is an herb that grows in gardaynes, it is hot and dry in the
beginning of the third degree, and dry in the mids of the same. The virtue
is good for cold and wicked humors in the stomach, and comfort the
stomach, stomac
the liver, and the lu^ges, and it is good for wounds, take Smallage sede,
wounds.
rewe sede, Peper, and salt, and grynde them well together, and tempre them
with wine and drink it. For ranklynges and to cease the brennynge and akynge,
and to bring them to their kind again. ra^kli^ges Fever.
Also it is good to drink for the Fever tercyan.

Saluia.
SAluia is called Sage, and it is hot in the first degree, and dry in the
second degree the leaves only be taken in medycynes, both grene and dry, he
may be kept a year. There be two manner of Sages, the gardayne and ye wild
Sage, if thou wylt have sage for medycynes, take the leaves of gardayne Sage.
The virtue is it consumes more, and conforteth more then the other does. Palsy.
For the Palsy seth the leaves of Sage in wine, and use to drink it, for the
same seth the leaves in wine, and plaster it to the greuaunce. Also it is good
to put in sauce, for the strangury, the flux, Flux. Clensynge.
and the matryce it cleanses, seth the leaves in water and let the pacyent sit
over it, and receive ye hot fume of it, and it shall do him much good. Also it
is good for venym or poyso^, venym Poyso^
seth Sage in ale or wine, and use to drink it.iii. days, and thou shall be
hole by the grace of god. For the stomach drink the joyce of Sage with water
and ho^ny, and it is good to cleanse a man's body to use it both ripe and grene,
it will make a man's body clean, Body.
therefore who that uses to eat of this herb or drink it, it is marvel
that any inconuenyence should grieve the^ that use it. ychi^ge.
If ye have an ytchynge on you wasshe it well with the joyce of this herb, and
it shall slay the ytchynge. Also drink Sage with wine, and a little wormwode,
and it shall cease the ache under the sides, stomac Palsy. dropsy
the womb, and the stomach, it is good for ye palsy and dropsy.

Satureia.
SAtureia is called Sauery, it is hot and dry in the.iiii. degree. The virtue
of this is, Body. raynes
it purges the body, seth it in wine or water and drink it, and it purges
the raynes, the bladder, the menstruosyte in the bowels, it purges the lu^ges
and loses great humors, Lunges
and conpelleth and puts him out by the mouth by spyttynge, therefore he is
bre^nynge and styreth him that uses lechery, therefore it is forbid to use it
much in meats. Soke it in vynegre or wine, and drink it, and it shall make
the have a meke stomach. stomac
Also when it flowreth, it should be gathered and dried, and powdre made
thereof. Also take the powdre of Sauery, and boil it with claryfyed honny, and
use to ete thereof, or boil it in wine, and drink it, fleume Frettynge.
and it will lose toughe flewme in the breast. Also for frettinge in the belly
drink powdre of it in warm wine, and thou shall be hole. Also if ye take the
less Sauery, it has the same virtue and strength that the other Sauery has.
Also make grewel with water and flower, me^bres
and powdre of Sauery, and eat thereof and that shall cleanse all the spyrytual
members of a man.

Saxfrage.
SAxfrage is hot and dry in the third degree. The virtue is good for the
stone, stone.
seth the ro^e of it in wine, and drink it. Also it is good for the disease of
Colyke and the strangury, and the powdre of it be eaten with an egg, it is
good for the same. Colike
It may be kept in his virtue.iii. year.

Scabiosa.
SCabiosa is called Scabias, it is hot and dry in the third degree, to dry it
there is no profit in it. The virtue is good for the scabbes, take the joyce
of it, vynegre, and oil, scabs.
and boil them together till they wax thycke and keep it, for it is good for
scabbes. For the Emerawdes seth them in water, Emeraudes
then sit over it, and take the fume of it and use it, and thou shall be hole.
Stamp it and seth it in wine, and the drink is good to dystroye humors in
the stomach, and drink it every day fasting with Eurose, and thou shall be
hole, and thou shall never have the Pestylence bredyng within the while thou do
use it. Pestylence.
For the liver sta^pe it and seth it in wine, and drink it

Sothernwood.
SOthernwode is an herb that grows in the field. The virtue of it is good
for the coughe, cough. Belly. Breast.
and for byndynge in the belly, and in the breast, and for disease in the bones,
and good for them that may not well pysse, take the sede of this herb and
stamp it, and drink it with water, and it is good for all the aforesaid. Also
for the dyseases in the side, stamp this herb with byttayne and drink it,
Side. Byti^g
and it helps well. Also for the bytynge of a serpent, and for venym, stamp
this herb and drink it with wine, and it is good. Also for the cold fever,
Fever.
stamp this herb with wine, and drink it, and thou shall be hole.

Syngrene.
SIngrene. is cold and moist in the.iii. degree. The virtue of this herb, and
also the joyce of the same herb is necessary for many dyseases, stamp this
herb with greece and plaster it to the disease and meruaylously it helps.
For dyseases and darkness of the iyes, stamp this herb and put of the joyce
in the sore iyes. Eyes. Liver
For chafynge of the liver, take the joyce of it and vynegre, and dyp a cloth
therein and plaster it to the greuaunce. For bytynge or scaldyng, Biti^g
make an ointment of the joyce of this herb, and oil of roses and wax, but
lay it not to till after the three first days, but first anoint it with greece
and such other. Also for a disease of a hot cause, this is good to be laid
thereto.

Stytcheworte.
STytchewort or byrdestonge, stytche wounds. Eyes.
this is hot and moist in the first degree. The virtue of this herb is this,
it is good to hele stytches, wounds, and also sore iyes.

Scamony.
SCamony is hot and dry in the.iii. degree, the leaves only be best in
medycynes, it may be kept a year in his virtue or two for need. The virtue is
good for the disease in the stomach, stomac
boil the leaves of it in wine, and drink it. Also the aforesaid drink is
good for the belly. stra^gury. Flux.
For the strangury and flux, also a stewe made with boylynge of it in water or
wine, is good for ye foresaid if it be boiled in oil, and plaster it to the
same aforesaid, it is better.

Seen.
Seen is hot and dry in the.iiii. degree it grows on the other side the sea,
and most about Babylon, the best be the flowers and the branches of it.
Falli^g evil. splen.
The virtue is good for many dyseases, as the falling evil, for the syncop,
for the splen, for the Emerawdes, Quartayne.
and for the quartayne, syrope made of it boiled in water, and sugre is good
for all the aforsayd, syrope made with the joyce of Borage is good for the
aforsayde. Also Dy^scorydes commands to make Exmell of the aforesaid with
boylynge of vynegre and ho^ny, and it will be good for the aforesaid. And this
herb may be kept.x. year in his strength and virtue.

Selondyne.
SElondyne is hot and dry in the.iiii. degree, and Galyen says yt it is good
for sore iyes. The virtue is good for sore iyes, take the joyce of selondyne,
and the rote boil it well together in a pan, Eyes.
and when it is cold anoynte thy iyes therewith. Take selondyne and wrynge out
the joyce, Frakles in ye vysage
and meddle it with white wine, and anoynte thy vysage therewith, and it shall do
away frakles of the vysage. The joyce of selo^dyne and gotes donge meddled
together small in a mortar, Ca^ker.
then if thou lay it to a Canker in a woman's pappe, it shall slay the canker.
Also take the joyce of Selondyne, Morfewe.
and powdre of brymstone, and meddle them well together, and it will help to do
away the morfewe, and sethe the rote in wine, and when the pot is taken down
let him hold his mouth open over it, that the breath may go in to his body, and
that shall slay the Canker in the mouth, Ca^ker. venym
it is good for him that has dro^ken venym with his own stale, and that will
save him.

Sauayne.
SAuayne is hot and dry in the second degree. worms.
The virtue is good to slay worms in the womb, and to bring them out if it
be soden in wine, and given to the pacyent to drink. It is good with butter or
greece to make an ointment for the scabbe that re^neth to hele it and dry it
up, Scab. Head ache.
and it is good for the hedache, if it be stamped and te^. pered with vynegre,
and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to thy temples and upon the molde of
thy head.

Scabiose.
SCabiose is cold and moist in the.ii. degree. Liver.
The virtue of this herb is good for the liver, stamp it and seth it in wine.
stomac
And it will dystroye wicked humors in the stomach, and drink it every day
fasting with Eurose, Postume.
and thou shall never have postume bredynge within the, as long as thou doste
use this medycyne.

The.xviii. lettre begins with. T.
Townecresses.
TOwnecresses, is hot and dry in the third degree, the sede will endure
good.v. year. The virtue is good to stau^che the flux and the mensyon, Flux.
Me^sio^
if thou take the sede and broyse it in a mortar of brass, and give the sick
to drink thereof three days every day a penny wayght at ones with red wine
warmed, and in these.iii. days he shall be staunched, or else he shall dye of
that evil, Palsy. Malefra^ke.
it is good for the palsy, and for the maleflanke, take the sede and seth it
with wine and do it in a pocket, and bind it to the side there as the
greuaunce is. Also it is good for him that may not pysse, water.
take the sede and seth it in wine and oil Olyue, and bind it to thy share.
Fu^dament.
It is good for a man's fundament that goes out, if it be taken of cold, then
it must be put in again, and straw the powdre on the foundement, thy raynes
with ho^ny, and then straw the powdre above with the powdre of Comen, or
powdre of Calafyne, for all these be kyndly for it. Also take the stalks of
Townecresses, and bren them, and there shall no venymous be, ne worm abide
the savor nor smell thereof, but he shall dye or else fly away.

Tapsuberbesto.
TApsuberbesto is called Melon, it is cold and dry. The virtue of it is good
for the Emerawdes, Emerawdes.
and it be soden in wine and sco^med clean. Also it is good to wasshe the
greuaunce therewith. It is good also for the flux in the belie. To provoke
vomyte, take two dragmes of the powdre of the rote of Melon, and drink it in
wine, Flux.
and it will provoke vomyte. vomit water. stone.
Also the seeds provoke vryne and causes the to pysse, and cleanses, the
raynes and the bladder of gravel and stones.

The.xix. letter begins with. V.
Vyolet.
VYolet is cold in ye first degree, and moist in the second. The virtue of
it is good for a blast in ye iyes take the rotes of vyolettes, Eyes.
and stamp the^ with myrre and saffron, and at night lay it to the sore iyes
Also for a wound in the head, wou^des.
stamp the leaves of vyolettes with honny and vynegre, and plaster it to the
wound, and it shall hele it. Also for them that may not sleep for syckenes
sethe this herb in water, Sleep
and at even let him soke well his fete in the water to the ancles, when he
goth to bed, bind of this herb to his temples, Sleep
and he shall sleep well by the grace of God. Take Vyolettes Myrre, and Saffron
and make a plaster, Eyes.
and lay it to the sore iyes that be swolen, and it shall cease akynge, and
bate the swellynge

Vua suauis.
VVa suauis, this is called the sweet raysyn, it is hot and moist. The virtue
is of clensynge, scowryng, or smothynge Raysynges eaten or boiled in wine is
good for the cold coughe. cough. Postume. stomac
Also seth them in wine and they be good to plaster on the cold postume, and
also good for ye cold stomach.

Veruayne.
VEruayne, this is hot and dry in ye second degree. The virtue is good for
all manner of euylles of venym, venym
if ye pacyent drink it tempred with wine, and stamp the herb, Byti^g
and lay it on every manner of bytynge of venymous be, and it will draw out
ye venym and save the sore, who that uses it, it will make good breath, Breath
and do away the stynke of ye mouth Also who that has the Fever tercyan,
take.iii rotes and.iii. croppes of the same herb and, Fever
stamp them and tempre them with fair clean water, and give it to the pacient
to drink. Also who that has ye fever quartayn, Fever
let him take the same drink. Also it is good for the stomach, the liver, and
the lunges. stomac Liver
Also take Veruayne, Betayne, and Saxfrage, of every of them a like much, and
stamp them with white wine tempred, stone.
and this is good for them that has the stone. Also they yt bear Veruayne upon
them, Love.
they shall have love and grace of great masters, and they shall also grant
him his asking, if that his askyng be good and ryghtfull, this herb is hot
and dry.

The.xx. lettre begins with. w.
watercresses
WAtercresses be hot and dry in the second degree. The virtue of this herb
is good if ye sethe them in water by them self, Members. stra^gulion. Flux.
and drink it, or seth it i^ flesh and sup of the broth, and it will cleanse
well the inward me^bres. Also it is good against the strangulyon and the flux.

wild neppe or wodbynde.
Wild neppe or woodbynde, this herb be reth a flower like to the hop, and
after the flower he bears a grene bery, and it has a great root. The virtue
of this herb is most in the rote, it is good for synowes that be shronken,
Synowes.
or cut to make them souple, and to have their own course i^ their propre
kind. Go to ye rote of wild Neppe, that is like woodbynde, and make a hole in
the mids of the rote, then cover it well again yt no air, go out nor yt no
rain go in nor water, powdre, nor the son come not to much to it, let it
stand so all a night and a day, then after that go to it, and thou shall
find therein a certain lycour, take out ye licour with a spone, and put it in
to a clean glass, and do so every day as long as thou fyndest ought in ye
hole and this must be done in ye month of Apryl, or May, the^ anoint the sore
with it against the fire, then wete a lynen clothe in the same lycour, and lap
it about the sores and it shall be hole in short space on warantyse, by the
grace of god. gowte.
For the gowte a sovereign medycyne, take the rote of wild Nep, and the rot of
ye wild docke soden by it self, and cut them in thyn pieces, and pare away
the utter rynd and cut them in quarters, then boil them in clean water.ii.
or.iii. hours, then stamp them in a mortar as small as can be, then put
thereto a quantyte of sote of a chymny, and tempre them with the milk of a kowe
that the here is of one color, then take ye pysse of a man that is fasting,
and make a plaster thereof, and boil it together, and as hot as ye may
suffer it, lay it to ye greuaunce a day and a night and so do.ix. times and it
shall hele the on warantyse by the grace of God.

wormwood.
WOrmwood is hot and dry in the second degree. The virtue is good for worms
in the womb, worms.
if it be stamped and the joyce wrong out, and myngled with sweet milk, and
give to the pacye^t to drink, and seth this berbe in wine, and make a plaster
to ye womb, make powdre of wormwood, Centory betayne, of each a like much by
wayght, and meddle all well together, and the powdre will slay worms in ye womb
both when it is eaten in potage and dronken. womb.
Also for the mylte that is swollen of a cold matter seth it in wine and let
the sick drink thereof and that shall hele him, Mylt.
and make a plaster of the substance of the herb, and lay it all hot to thy
womb against the greuau^ce. Also stamp, wormwood and tempre it with vynegre,
and with tosted sour bread grou^den therewith and ye joyce of myntes, and the
joyce of plantayne of each a like much, and frye them well together, then make
a plaster and lay it to the mouth of the stomach, stomac
and this shall staunche, brekynge or castyng, For worms in a man's eres be it
serpent or erewygge, worms. Dropsy.
take ye joyce of wormwood, and put it in the ere. Also for the dropsy seth it
in wine, and give ye sick to drink at morning and at evening, and it shall
help him.

FINIS.
Hereafter follows the virtue of the Oken tree.
IN the Oak be.iiij. things beside the lefe the which be right profitable to
the, health of a man, that is to wit the Acorne, and the cup that it grows in,
the galls and the lyme. The carnels in powdre be profitable against the
feebleness of vertiuer of the retentyfe, yt is to say against feebleness of brain,
and against the passyo^ called diabetican, Brain stra^gurye. stone.
and against the strangurye, and against the syckenes called dissenturian, and
against the stone in the raynes, and the bladder, and it is good for them yt
may not hold their water. water. vomit
The cup of the A corns is good against vomytes of color, and against
nesyng, and it dries, Nesi^g. stomac
and co^sumeth flewme in the mouth of the stomach. The gall after the opynion
of Albert, so that they be not greatly holowe be good against the flux, and
against slydyng and slypernes of guts, Flux.
and against the flowers of women, and that powdre helps them of many
infyrmyties. etc. Also by experyence of Gardyners, and planters, the powdre of
the gall mynged with honny, perce a hole in a tree, and put it therein, and the
fruit shall be black. Now with the lyme of the Oak, Physycio^s, and Surgyans
do many cures therewith, and of it is made an ointment for the palsy, and of a
man's yard, Palsy.
and against an infyrmyte called Deabetan^. Also thereof is made sayrope for the
Dropsy that comes of cold called yposarco, and it consumes watery humors.
Debetan^.
And also men be cured by the fruit of ares quartayne, tercian, and cotydyan.
Tercian. Cotidian.
Also in ye tree is a thing growyng, which women know by experyence it makes
them hastily to be delivered of child, which dowche men call it Archemsel,
and thereof is made bedes. The last conclusyon of this Oken leaves, of this leaves
is distylled a water, Flux. women. Emeraudes bledi^g. Liver. Splen Nesi^g.
cough. Head ache. stomac
which heals all the Flux of the womb called Dyssentuaryan, Lauaryan, and
Dyaryan. Also it is good for the flowers of women, and for the Emerawdes. Also
this lefe in powdre put in the nose, stau^cheth the bledynge thereof, and
spyttynge of blood. Also this lefe is wholesome against the ache of the heart,
against the epilacion of the liver, and of the splen, and against the nesynge,
and against the coughe, and the head ache, and against the ache of the
stomach, and the wind of the stomach, and against the colyke, and the ache
of the womb, and the flanks, stone.
and it breketh the stone of the raynes, and the bladder, and also women that
be cold, it dysposeth them to be able to conceive, it is wholesome to all manner
of creatures of all manner ages, and for all dyseases to be taken at al times of
the year. etc. wherefore Surgyans knowing the troth leyth Oken leaves upon
wou^des, and that done they need none other ointment, wounds. Ca^ker. Dropsy.
it heleth all manner of wounds, ye Canker, the Fystula, and saint Anthonies
fire a vain made in the water of the Oak heleth the Dropsy, and all
lepournesse. Also who so ever ones in the weke eats one of the leaves, he
shall never have stynkynge breath, nor the toth ache, nor putrefaction in his
gu^mes. Toth ache. Ears.
etc. nor of his ears.

This is the making of Aqua vite perfectissima.
TAke the rote of Saxfrage, and Parcely, Alyssau^dre, Fenel, Time, Ysope,
Pynyryall, Rosemary Laue^der, Prymerose, Mynt Origan, Sauge, Calamynt, Auence,
Byttayn Saueyn, of each half a quartron, Galyngale, black Peper, white Peper,
long Peper, Cloves, Nutmegges, of each an ounce, Canell, Maces, Quybybes, of
each two ounces, Setwale, Pelettre of spain, tree of Aloes, of each an ounce
and an half, and stamp thine herbs, and powdre thy spyces, and put them
together in the wine, and let them stand al night and on the morrow dystyll
them through a serpentory, this water has many virtues, and it is better at
the first dystyllacion of the Canon, then at the third dystyllacion of the
Serpentorye.

To graffe and plant.
TO graffe fruit yt they shall have no core. Take a graffe and bow it in both
ends combynge, and cut both ends graftwyse, and so fasten them in to the
stock. And if it grow so with the tree cut away the great end, and let the
smaller end grow and his fruit shall have no core.

Thus ends this Herball.
Here begins the table of this present book.
A
Agnus castus. Apium. Anetum. Apium risus. Absynthium. Artemesia. Affodyllus.
Astrologia longa. Astrologia rotunda. Abrotanum. Ameos. Alleluya. Agrimonia.
Auancia. Altea. Amarista. Anisum. Alleum. Astarton.
B
Betonia. Balsaminta. Beta. Borago domestices. Bigula. Burneta. Bursa pastoris.
Camamilla. Callamyntum. Crassula mayor. Crassula minor. Cituca. Centuaria
mayor. Centuaria minor. Carin. Celodonia. Cidamum. Canlis. Coriandrum. Capillus
veneris. Crocus. Centinodium. Caprifolium. Canabaria. Costus. Cepe. Columbina.
Cominum. Cardiaca. Cisera. Camelion. Consolida mayor. Consolida minor.
Consolida media.
D
Dragancia. Diptanum. Daucus asinius. Dancus creticus. Dens leonis. Dragancia
feminea.
E
Elena campana. Endiua. Eruca. Eufragia. Ebulus. Edera. Edera terestris.
Eborus. Elabrus. Epatica.
F
Famula. Fumus terre. Fragra. Fabaria mayor. Filex. Filipendula. Feniculum.
Faxmus. Finiculus porcinus. Febrifuga. Filago. Flamula minor.
G
Granum. Genescula. Genciana. Galanga. Granum solis. Gladiolus. Gracia dei.
Gracia dei mayor.
H
Hastula regia. Herba cruciata. Herba christfori. Herba walteri. Herba Roberti.
Herba martis. Herba Iohannis. Herba Petri.
I
Iusquiamus. Isopus. Ireose. Iris. Iua. Iacia alba. Iacia nigra. Ippia mayor.
Ippia minor.
L
Lanisticum. Lingua ceruina. Lilium. Ligustrum. Lingua bouis. Lingua
serpe^tisma. Lingua Serpe^tismi. Lingua canis. Lingua hircina. Lupinus. Labrum
veneris Lauendula. Lactuca. Lactuca siluatica. Lactuca leporica. Lollium.
Laparium rubeum. Linum. Lauriola. Licorisa.
M
Millefolio minor. Mercurialis. Menta. Menta romana. Malua. Morell or night
shadow. Mastyke. Magerum. Millefolium mayor. Motherworte, or Mugworte. Maces.
Menta.
N
Nux muscata. Napo.
O
Olibanun.
P
Plumeus. Piper. Pympernell. Pulegium. Pencedamum vel Feniculus porcinus.
Petrocilium. Peritorium. Plastinaca. Plantago. Porrum. Piretrum Papauer.
Polipodium. Pienium.
Q
Quinquefolio.
R
Rybbeworte. Rednetell. Rosa. Rosemary. Ruta.
S
Sinapium. Smalege. Saluia. Satureia. Saxfrage. Scabiosa. Sothernwood.
Syngrene. Stytcheworte. Scamony. Seen. Selondyne. Sauayne. Scabiose.
Towncresses. Tapsubarbesto.
V
Vyolet. Vua suauis. Veruayne.
W
watercresses wild Neppe or wodbynde. Vvormwoode.
The virtue of the Oken tree. The Oken lefe. The making of Aqua vite
perfectissima. Graffynge and plantynge.
Finis Tabule.
Imprynted by me Robert wyer, dwelling in saint Martyns paryshe, at the sign
of saint John^ Euangelyst, beside Charynge Cross.


