A TRVE RELATION of the French King his good success, in winning from the
Duke of Parma, his Fortes and Trenches, and slaieng 500. of his men, with the
great Famine that is now in the said Dukes Camp. With other intelligences
given by other Letters since the second of May. 1592. A most wonderful and
rare example, the like whereof, never happened since the beginning of the world,
of a certain mountain in the I Will of Palm, which burned continually, for five
or six weeks together, with other both fearful and strange sightes, seen in
the air, over the same place.

printer's device of John Wolf, featuring a fleur-de-lis seeding (McKerrow
216)

Imprinted at London by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop, over
against the Southdore of Paul's. 1592.

A true Relation of the French King his good success, in winning from the
Duke of Parma, his forts and trenches, and slaieng 500. of his men, and the
great famine that is now in the said Dukes Camp.
MOst true it is which the Apostle saint Paul in the 13. to the Romans
avouches of Kings and Princes, saying there is no power but of God, and the
powers that be are ordained by God. And no less true is that Golden saying of
the princely Prophet David, speking in the person of God: by me kings rule,
and by me do princes exercise authority.

Then it follows necessarily, that as kings and princes upon earth are the
ordinance of God, (and therefore those that do resist or rebel against them
do resist the power of God, and purchase to themselves eternal damnation, as
the same Apostle bears record: so the Lord will, and daily does (as we see
by experience every day) bless the same his ordinance, confounding,
scattering, and dispersing the practices, or rather the treacherous conspiraces
of all those that rise up against his anointed.

Which thing the Lord has most notably performed even the last day upon the
French King, that valiant soldier of his, giving unto him most happy and
fortunate success against the Duke of Parma. Who albeit he be otherwise a man
of puissance and valor, yet the Lord our God (blessed be his holy name
therefore) to manifest to the world, how much his attempt in aiding the
rebellious Leaguers, against their Sovereign King and liege Lord, does
displease him, he crosses him in his actions, and as it were stands before
him, and fights against him, sometimes striking a sudden terror and fear
into his heart, with the rest of his accomplices, and other-sometimes
overthrowing them altogether in their own plats and devises, according to the
saying of the Psalmist, The wicked has dug a pit for others, but is
fallen into it himself.

But to come to the matter, as it pleased god it fell out thus.

The Duke of Parma having now the second or third time invaded the kingdom of
France with a puissant and mighty Army, with intent to aid the rebellious
Leaguers, against their lawful King, passing the confines, and entering (as
it were) into the bowelles of the Realm, approached with his army near unto
the Cyttie Roane, who being pursued by the King and his people, drew himself
farther off toward Newhauen, and there he encamped himself, raising most
strong Fortes, and erecting (as he thought) trenches invincible for his own
and his soldiers better defense: yea so strongly had he entrenched himself
there, planting ordinance, Baricadoes, and other military munition of infinite
variety, that he thought himself not only able to counteruaile what
strength the king should be able to bend against him, but also he supposed
himself to be in effect inexpugnable.

But as the prophet Esaias says, there is no wisdom, there is no pollycie,
there is no power, nor strength against the Lord, nor against his anointed.

For the King by secret intelligences or spials, being advertised of the Duke
his proceedings, and how strongly he had fortified him self in Trenches and
bulwarks, with all possible speed marched toward him, taking with him such a
competent number of horssemen, and footmen, as he thought sufficient to
withstand the forces of the adversary.

Being come somewhat near the place, he caused his army to march forward
both leasurelie and advisedly, the better to prevent secret ambushes: and
viewing with prouidente eye the manner of his enemies lyeng, their Fortes,
their trenches, and other their munytions, at the last with mature advise, and
most peremptory resolution (as one that fights the Lords battles) in most
fierce manner assailed his enemies on every side.

And albeit the fight was both long and cruel, and seemed a great while to
hang in equal balance, neither inclining unto the one nor to the other, yet
it pleased God, who continually fights for his servants, that the King
prevailed.

And although he had not in his band so many as the Enemy was by odds, yet
he wanne the Duke of Parma his Fortes and Trenches, mauger the heads of all his
enemies, and forced his men to fly back and to retire to a more narrower
place, being constrained to fortify themselves anew, in such place as they
could get on the sudden, and it is verilye thought that they can not be able
to hold out long against the forces of the King.

The Duke of Parma also (such was the mighty hand of God against him) not
only lost his fortes and trenches, but 500. of his chiefest soldiers also,
besides other munition and great spoils.

The Duke is now presently so driven to the wall, and so corbed up, al hope
of new supplies of viandes or victuals, being in some sort intercepted and cut
off from him, that he with his whole army are so sore assailed with famine, as
that they are forced to eat their horses for very hunger.

Thus haste thou heard Gentle Reader the noble exploits of that valiant King of
France, with his good success (which God continue:) and the present state of
the duke of Parma with his retinue, whose hand the Lord of Hosts shorten,
and strengthen that illustrious and renoumed French King, that he may fight
the Lords Battles still, that once (if it be his blessed will) popery,
superstition and Idolatry may be clean rooted out, and true religion may
universally be planted in all Christian Kingedomes of the world, Amen.

By letters received on the second of May. 1592.
ON Thursday last being the seven and twentieth day of April, 1592. The Duke of
Parma did go away by night to Clear, which is within four leagues of Roane,
without any drum or trumpet sounding, and on the next day being Friday, the
king followed him with a number of his horsemen, to move him to the battle.
The Duke left behind him his artillery, and his baggage.

On the Saturday before, the king had taken the Dukes Trenches, and one Fort
which he had made, and at the same time there was about eight hundred of the
Dukes men slain.

The Duke of Sauoy, has been forced to retire out of Prouence.

The city of Aix, which held for the said Duke of Sauoie, who married the king
of Spain his daughter is revolted from him, and now presently houldeth for
the king.

The Muscouites have given a great overthrow to the Tartarians.

There is in Germany some rumor of civil wars amongst themselves.

Cicilia and Italy do fear an other great dearth this next year.

FINIS.
News out of the Low Countries.
THe County Mauritz having assembled a great power is now before Steinwiche
in Frizeland, with fiftye good pieces of ordinance and does besiege it
fiercely, with purpose to recover the same if by any possible means it may
be performed. The Lord grant such success as may stand with his glory, and
the good of his church, Amen.

FINIS.
A MOST VVONDERfull and rare example, the like whereof, never happened since
the beginning of the world. OF A CERTAIN MOVNtaine in the I Will of Palm, which
burned continually, for five or six weeks together. With other both fearful,
and strange sights, seen in the air, over the same place.

printer's device of John Wolf, featuring a lion, tiger or dragon's head
facing outward (not in McKerrow)

Imprinted at London by John Wolf,

TO THE COVRTEous Reader: Grace and peace.
GEntle Reader, thou have here before thine eyes a most rare example, and no
less strange instance, of the vvonderfull works of God, the truth vvherof is
such, as is avouched by diverse, both honorable and worshipful, and others of
good credit. Wherefore read it with judgment, make thy profit of it, and
give God the glory, who be blessed and praised for ever.

A most wonderful and rare example, the like whereof never happened since the
beginning of the world, of a certain mountain, in the I Will of Palm, which
burned continually, for five or six weeks together, with other both fearful
and strange sightes, seen in the air, over the same place.
IN the Gospel of S. Matthew, the 24. Chapter, our savior Christ tells us of
many signs and tokens, which shall be sent unto us and appear before the day
of judgment, as that the son shall be darkened, the Moon shall loose her
light, the Stars shall fall from heaven, the earth shall tremble, and shake
under us, the hills shall be supplanted and removed out of their places: the
Seas shall roar and make a hideous noise, there shall be wars and rumors of
wars in all countries, and such like. All which signs and tokens we see to
be come to pass already. For if we take the son in that place, for the
son of God Christ Jesus (as all sound expositions and interpretors have
done:) how often have we seen him darkened, and obscured with the filthy
mistes, and stinking vapors of men's traditions. The Moon that is the Church
of God, how was she darkened, yea almost deprived of her light under the
tyranny of Antechrist the pope of Rome and his shauelings? The Stars, that
is the pastors, and ministers of the Church, how were they driven away amongst
the Papists, from the firmament of sound doctrine, and pure conversation. But
if we take these signs literally, how many times have we seen the sun and
moon to be eclipsed, and almost many times to lose their whole light. What
wonderful and strange conjunctions of Stars of signs and plannets,
threatening even an universal consummation of all things have we seen of late
years. The like was never seen of many years before. What fiery meteers,
blasing Stars, Comets, and other fearful impressions have we seen in the
air of late years? What inundations and ouerflowings of the seas and waters?
What fearful earthquakes? What removing of hills out of their places? What
Abortiues, fearful and monstrous birthes? What wars and rumors of wars
in all countries, do we hear of in these days? All which are infallible
tokens, and apparent arguments that the day of judgment is at hand, and as it
were before the doors. But although the Lord our God has and does daily as
well by these signs and tokens above named, and the like, as also by others of
infinite variety, summon us to the doom, and warns us to be always ready
and prepared, yet has he not in any age, nor to any people, sent a more
fearful, strange, or wonderful example (as it were a warning or caveat to
all the world) then this that follows, the truth whereof was thus.

There is a certain Island called Palm nere to the Ingenio of Tertia court,
three leagues from the City, and a league and a half from the sea side,
wherein grew a certain mountain or hill of three hundred faddam in height, and
a league and a half in compass. This mountain or hill, the 19. of May
began to burn, and so continued still burning till the 19. of Iulie next
after, in most strange and fearful manner.

Upon the top of which hill there seemed to be a great cave or gulf: whereat
issued out great flames of fire; burning in such forcible and vehement manner,
as they raised up withal and cast forth huge and mighty stones into the
air, stinging them up with great violence, which stones at the length
descending down again forth of the air, fell down at the foot of the same
hill. And yet notwithstanding that it continually burned in this sort, and cast
forth infinite great and monstrous stones, yet the said hill remained still in
all men's judgments as big as it was before. The heat of which fire was such,
and so great that the inhabitants thereabouts were sore annoyed thereby, having
their vineyards and their corn scorched and burnt up through the rage and
vyolence of the flames of fire that issued thereout. And in this sort it
continued until the 20. of Iulie about midnight at which time the said mount
or hill, brake in sunder, and shiuered in pieces, caused such great cracks and
roringes, as though it had thundered, or a hundred cannons had been shot off,
to the great terror of the hearers.

It being thus disseuered and broken, continued burning: And burning
(contrary to the nature thereof before) consumed and wasted, till it came to
be as it were a great coal of fire, from which cole there seemed to ascend
and to rise up into the air as it were great mountains of smoke and
sparkles of fire, as big in appearance as little barrels, and so at the last
the whole mountain consumed and burned away.

There gushed also forth of the said mountain (before it was consumed) great
streams of water, burning like oil in the fire, and casting up wonderful
flames into the air, which entered into the Sea forty faddame, making all the
water thereabout so extreme hot, as it melted the pitch and rosine wherewith
the Fishers botes were pitched.

The heat of this burning water was such, as it scalded and killed all the
fish near thereabouts, so that abundance of fish of all sorts was found
dead many days after.

From this mountain also there tumbled down to the Seaside, being distante
from thence a league and a half three mighty great stones, one of them being
25. faddom in compass, and with a wonderful violence threw themselves into
the Sea fifty faddame at the least.

The hill being in this sort quite consumed, the second of August next
following there rained down forth of the air, as it had been whole shewers
of black ashes, like gunpowder in bigness, which spoiled and consumed all the
Corn, grass, and vines in the whole country about.

After this, namely the fourth of August, it rained again great store of
white ashes in the City, the streets being so thick covered therewith as the
people could not travail about their necessary business. Immediately after
this: to wit, the fourth of September following, there appeared over the same
Island in the air, other strange and wonderful sights, as namely armed men to
the number (as a man would have thought) of 40000, one fighting against
another in most cruel and bloody manner, with such fearful thundering, and
terrible lightening, as the like was never heard nor seen before. The people
seeing these strange sightes, and fearful wonders, called to God for mercy:
repented of their sins, and instantlye besought the Lord that he would not
enter into judgment with them, nor punish them according to their deserts:
which done, the Lord in mercy withdrew his plagues, and punishments,
(messengers of his wrath) from them, and received them to mercy. Thus have
thou heard courteous Reader, the true narration of the wonderful judgments
of God against this people. The Lord give both them and us all grace, to make
profit of them, and to amend our lives, that we may altogether in the great
day of the Lord receive the crown of everlasting glory, promised unto us
thorough Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, this note coming to my hands before the impression hereof
was ended, I thought it good to impart it unto thee, rather out of place, then
not at all, as a thing which will give thee great light to the great
understanding of the whole book.

This I Will of Palm spoken of before, is one of the seven Islands of the
Canaris, well known to diverse merchantes here in London. Ingenio is
situate within the same Island.

Many of the inhabitants whereof I mean of the I Will of Palm, were forced
to go out, and to depart from thence, forsaking their lands, goods and all,
and to dvvell some of them at Gomorra, some of them in the I Will of Tenerife, and
othersome to the graund Canaris, supposing verily that the same Island vvoulde
have sunk. And for the great abundance of ashes, which rained down, they
could not sovv their corn in October follovving.

The lieuetenant of the Island, sent the narration hereof to the court of
Spain being at Madrill, penned by a notarie public, with three other
notaries hands to it, desiring certain Lords of the same Court, to send their
opinion, what these fearful tokens might prognosticate.


