An excellent Treatise teaching how to cure the French-Pockes: with all other
diseases arising and growing thereof, and in a manner all other sicknesses.

Drawn out of the Books of that learned Doctor and Prince of Physicians,
Theophrastus Paracelsus.

Compiled by the learned Phillippus Hermanus, Physician and Surgeon. And now
put into English by John Hester in the Spagiricall Art, practitioner.

AT LONDON, Printed. Anno, Dominj. 1590.

To the worshipful the Master Wardens, and general Assistants of the
fraternity of Chirurgions in London: John Hester wysheth them all the true
direction to the perfect way of knowledge in their Science, according to their
profession.
AFter I had translated out of the German tongue into English, this little
treatise of the French Pockes (a work of more worth then the smalnesse of the
Bulcke peradventure may seem to import) I advised with my self a while to whom
I might best assign the patronage thereof, and meeting with no one degree,
from the Prince to the Pesant, that would not highly scorn and disdain a
matter of so base and vile a reckoning, as harshe to the hearing of many, as it
is in the feeling of others odious, I found none likelier to give countenance
thereunto, then you my Masters of chirurgerie, who by the profession thereof,
maintain no small part of your countinaunce, Leuis est labor cum lucro. And
though there be among you at this day some, which to the profit of the rest, by
their writings have travailed therein with commendations, others, that by their
painful and dilligent cares, have endeavored many hard and perrilous cures
of this filthy disease: yet bear with me I pray you, if after so many learned
and well experienced men, I also (the meanest of many) bring forth with the
poor widow my little poor myte: and yet neither so little nor so poor, but
that the intelligent Reader shall find as well in the discourse, matter worth
the discovery, as in practice, Medicines worthy the knowledge.

In the preparing of which Medicines, if leaning to mine Author, I seem to
leave others of more autentique credit, neither blame me, nor condemn him,
but waying the case in balance of indifferency, allow us so far forth to
follow the authority of the ancient, as they have or do follow the truth it
self; a liberty which hitherto the best men have ever challenged: and sure in
my opinion, these fellows that to fill large volumes, rather set down what
other men have said, then what they should have said, as many of our VVriters
now adays do, thinking him the best Clark that voucheth most Authors, neither
waying their reasons, nor pondering their proofs, but hudling run on with ipse
dixit, I say these fellows, by blotting a great deal of good paper with much
superfluous matter, lead a great many good wits a woolgathering, enforcing them
to seek for that they never find, or else to find somewhat not worth the
seeking. For who I pray you of any judgment, would seek in Gallen or
Hipocrates, men in cuery wise man's censure, without doubt, well worthy the
credit they are in, who I say would seek in the^, or their Appothecaries,
Medicines for diseases whereof they never took notice. I deny not but their
method may well be followed, even so far as general rules may prescribe in
particular actions: but to be tied to a Medicine neither applied nor approved
by them, is more then they allowed in others, or (for ought that I see) more
then others should allow to them. Now that the diseases of the French Pocks was
neither known to them, nor to their successors for many years, (although I
know some aver it to be Lepram Arabum) is a matter so far out of question,
that it refuses all show of disputation, and therefore as this latter age of
ours sustaineth the scourge thereof, a just whyp of our lycentiousnes, so let
it, (if there be any to be had) carry the credit of the cure, as some reward
to some men's industries: neither let us peeuishly distrust our own wits,
furnished with so many helpers, and apishly admire other men's, only for their
antiquity: this were to tie God to times and seasons, and to play bopeepe in a
secure shroude of idleness, utterly dis-franchizing our selves of the free
legacy, Dij laboribus dona dant sua. Great courtesy is made who shall carry
the name, the Frenchman posting it over to the Spaniard, the Spaniarde to the
Neapolitan, and either of these returning it back to other, but I would we in
England were not as deeply interessed in the thing, as either of the^ are in
the name, which because I fear we are, as knowing more herein then every man
knows, I thought good for the benefit of such as are distressed, to deliver
to the Surgeon, that which many (I am sure) have not yet seen: offering
therewithal my pains, labor, and industry, as well in the preparation of
Medicines here set down, as in any other, by any of my friends otherwise
proved by experience, all yours, and freende to every one of you.

John Hester.

To the Reader.
IN this Book I have taken upon me (gentle Reader) to describe the ground and
the original of the disease called the Pockes, and therewithal to correct the
abuses which have hitherto been used in the curing thereof, as namely in
fumigation, washing, anointing, opening of tumors and such like, and (the
abuses being corrected) I mean to show (God willing) how they may be used
without any perrill to the Patient, and further to teach you a rare way (with
Lignum Guaiacum, commonly called Pockwood) how to care your Patie^ts going
about their business, after a more better and perfect manner then heretofore
has been taught, whereby you may minister help and comfort to the forsaken
and comfortles Patient, and may be able to perform that which both you promise
to him, and he expects at your hand, that is to say the recovery of his
former health, for which he so greatly longs. But there are many now adays,
which take cures in hand, which neither know the disease, nor the manner of
curing of it, and yet they dare promise health to the Patient: these men go to
work with their Patients as the blind man does with the Crow, at all
adventures, for they minister that to the disease, which appertains nothing
at all to it, and so in steed of health, they give the Patient his bane. For
redress whereof, and that you may the better take heed of such, I have
therefore written this little Book, which does teach you perfectly to cure the
aforesaid disease without any danger, so that the Patient after that he is
cured, shall be more healthful in all his body the^ he was before such time as
he first got this disease, but for your better understanding of that which is
aforesaid, I wish you with diligence to read that which follows. And so fare
ye well.

A Table containing the principal matters in this Book.
The first part.
OF the Pockes, how to know them, and the cause whereof they spring. Folio. 1.
Of the abuse used in curing of the Pockes, by anointing or saluing. fol. 5. Of
fumigation or smoking, with correction of the abuse used therein. fol. 9. Of
washing with Water. fol. 14. The correction of this washing with Mercury. fol.
16 Of launcing or opening of Tumors. fol. 17. An attractiue Plaster. fol. 18.
Of curing the Pockes by sweating. fol. 19 The Drinks which are usually given
for the Plague. fol. 20. The correction of sweating, whereby the Pockes may be
cured. fol. 21. The preparing of Mercury to provoke sweat. fol. eodem. Of
curing the Pockes by Seege, with laxatiue Medicines. fol. 24
The second part.
Of the nature or virtue of the Wood called Lignum vitae, or Guaiacum. folio.
29. How to choose this Wood, and which is the best. fol. 32. How to prepare
the Drink. fol. 34. What regiment the Patient is to observe. fol. 37 Of the
great pain in the head, which takes away the sleep. fol. 40. The curing of
the pains in the head of those that are Phlegmatic, and Mellancholick. fol.
42 Of madness or idleness of the head called Insania. fol. 43 How to cure the
Phlegmatic and the Mellancholicke of this disease. fol. 44. Of the
Falling Sickness, called in Latin Epileptia. fol. 45. The curing of the
falling sickness in Phlegmatic and Mellancholick persons. fol. 47. Of Polipus
an ill disease in the nose, whereof comes the Cancer. fol. 48. How to cure
the Phlegmatic and Mellancholicke of this disease. fol. 49. Of shortness of
wind, coughes, and stuffings in the breast. fol. codem The drink for the
Phlegmatic and the Mellancholicke. fol. 50. Of the diseases in the stomach,
as pains, quesinesse, vomiting, etc. fol. eodem For the Phlegmatic and the
Mellancholicke, how he is to be cured. fol. 51. Of diseases of the Liver, as
obstruction, Aposteme and the Dropsy. fol. 52. To cure the diseases of the
Liver in Phlegmatic and Mellancholick Patients. fol. 53. Of the diseases of
the Mother, as the superfluous issue of menstrues, and to stay them, and of
barrennes. fo. 55 To cure the diseses of the Mother in the Phlegmatic and
Mellancholicke Women. fol. eodem To cure the Cancer in any place of the body,
wheresouer. fol. 56 To cure the Cancer in cold complexions. fol. 57 Of all
other Vlcerations, whether they come of the Pockes or otherwise. fol. eodem For
the Phlegmatic and the Mellancholick. fol. 59. How to cure the Rupture. fol.
eodem To cure the same in Phlegmatic and Mellancholicke persons. fol. 60 Of
Podagra or the Gout. fol. 61. To cure the Phlegmatic and Mellancholick
thereof. fol. 62
FINIS.
Capit. 1. Of the Pockes, how to know them, and the cause whereof they spring.
TO know the original of this filthy sickness, there is further regard to
be had, then to the only act of intemperancie, for the chief cause thereof,
was the influence of the heavens, which in the very instant when this disease
first showed it self, did so strongly infect the secret parts both of man and
woman, that thereby the said disease (first in the Parents, and after in the
children) has with a certain secret poison, infected and spoiled the whole
body, showing it self commonly (though not always) in the secret parts. For
those parts by the influence of the stars are first of all infected, and then
the person so infected, giving him self to incontinence, does cause the said
disease to show it self, first in the secret parts, and afterward throughout
the whole body, and being infected themselves, do also engender infected
children, as they also do that are infected with the Leprosy. For the
Leprosy and this disease are so near of kin, that they are Cozen-germanes
to each other, therefore such infected persons, must of necessity begette
corrupt children, because that their seed is also infected, and afterward such
children are yet more corrupt, by reason of the corrupt milk that they suck
from their Mothers: so that it is almost impossible to cure the said children
the disease being so rooted in them. First through the infection of the seed,
(...) and next of the milk: but such children so borne and nourished, are
sometimes not so greatly troubled with open sores and botches as their Parents
have been, but they have many greefes and pains in their hodies, so that it
should seem that they are not troubled with this disease, but with the Gout or
some such like, notwithstanding it is nothing else but the Pockes, but that it
changes by means of generation, and the complexion of the child which
differs from the Parents. These two, to wit, the influence or impression of
the heavens, and the generation, are the first and principal causes of this
disease, and for that the influence is partly past and gone, we may also
perceive the fury of this disease to be partly assuaged, and therefore not so
terrible as it has been, and the older it is, the feebler it becomes, but
though the Pockes do vanish away, yet there spring other diseases enowe,
different from those that heretofore have reigned, so that we are enforced to
seek for new remedies to heal the said new diseases. For every disease has
his proper remedy wherewith to be cured, and until the same remedy be used,
the Patient cannot be helped, but is the longer the more spoiled, until in the
end there comes one, who by chance uses the right remedy, and so
ignorantly by good fortune heals the Patient. Whatsoever shall be needful to
the curing of the Pocks or any other disease springing thereof, shall by Gods
help be perfectly taught in this Book, so that nothing shall be wanting
therein.

To proceed now with other causes of diseases, you shall understand that there
are many other causes besides those before mentioned: for though those are the
principal, yet it chances notwithstanding, that some do fall into this
foul disease, which through the impression or influence were not so much
inclined thereto, and that chances through companying with women, where
through the secret parts are first infected, then ye blood throughout the whole
body, and lastly the news, the flesh and the bone. It happens also a man to
be infected by sweat, and that comes by lying with another, for when one man
lies with another that is infected, and the ^^me do sweat sore, he must
needs be infected with the venom of his sweat. But this infection does not
always chance, for if the person infected have had it a long time, and that
it does not appear outwardly, but lies hidden inwardly, he does not infect
so sore, nor so soon as those that are but newly infected with it. Therefore
let every man take heed, that he do not lie with them whom he knows not,
for that it is very dangerous, therefore I counsel every man to have great
regard hereof, to eschew such a danger.

Now we will show the signs whereby one may know when any man is infected
with this disease, for a thousand are taken in hand to be cured with the
receipts for the Pockes, which are not infected therewith, but with some other
disease, as the Gout, the Dropsy, and such like, these and other more as are
all old Ulcers, and other infections of the skin, are altogether, or for the
most part, taken in hand to be cured with such remedies, as pertain properly
to ye Pocks, which happens oftentimes, to the great hurt of the Patient, yea
to his utter ruin. Therefore you ought to take great heed that you use not
the remedies pertaining to the Pockes, till such time as you know perfectly,
that the disease springs from no other cause but the Pockes. Therefore you
shall learn to know it thus.

When this disease does first attach any man, he does always feel great
pricking and shooting between the skin and the flesh, and when he begins
to were warm, it troubles him so that he cannot abide it, and whosoever has
not (for a certain space) felt or been greatly troubled with such pricking or
shooting, although their disease seem ouglie or loathsome, yet it is not so ill
as they suppose, but is sprung of some other cause. And if a man chance to get
any infirmity in his secret part, as botches, running, or such like, and have
not felt the said sign of pricking or shooting, you shall then know, that as
yet no certain judgment can be given, for such infirmities come sometime
before the sign can show it self, but when the wound is healed up, and that
nature is not sufficiently purged, then comes the aforesaid sign, and the
other evil diseases sometimes many years after. But to instruct you perfectly
in all things, you shall understand, that this disease takes place first of
all in the sinews, upon the bones, and in all the joints of the body, so
that it is very hard to be known from the Gout, because it also does show it
self always in those places: but the pain of the Pockes is always greater
in the eueninges then in the morninges, and does incline to an Ague. And
always (this excepted) thou shall have regard to the aforesaid signs of
pricking or shooting, for if those signs want, it is not the Pocks, but the
Gout or some other cold disease. And if the Patient have many open holes very
read and inwardly white, which do not greatly spread abroad, but continue
at one stay without much matter, and will by no means heal outwardly,
understand also the same to be a great sign, yet not so great as the first:
for if the first sign of pricking have not appeared, it is no sufficient token
of the Pockes, but some other disease proceeding of Melancholy.

There are yet many other signs of the Pockes, as great Biles, with great
pain in the head, and many read pushes on the forehead, under the hair, and
in the neck, but although these do resemble the Pockes, and that very
nearly, yet you may not judge them to be the Pockes, unless the aforesaid
sign have gone before, because that is the most certain token of all other,
and if so be that that have showed it self, then doubt not, for it is without
all doubt that they are the Pockes, and so much the stronger as there has
been greater Biles, or holes as aforesaid where Biles have been, and also if
there be great pain in the members, and ye more in the evening then at other
times of the day, and that the aforesaid sign have appeared, then you need
not doubt it to be the Pockes.

Thus much of the Pockes, with the signs thereof, now shall be showed the
means to cure them.

Capit. 2. Of the abuse used in the curing of the Pocks, by anointing or
saluing.
THe first abuse of those that with anointing or saluing think to cure this
foul disease, springs of this, that they do not know the disease, and
therefore they can give no good counsel thereto. For how is it possible to
heal a disease which a man neither knows, nor the nature of it? For a man
shall as soon spoil it as heal it, with that which blindly and without
understanding he does minister unto it. The second error is, in the
composition of their receipts, which they do so wonderfully ru^ble together
through their blind ignorance in the disease, that it is a great wonder that
they bring not more men to the grave then they do, although they kill enowe,
and too many toe. Therefore to shun these inconveniences, we will teach thee
to cure thy Patients by a better manner of anointing, whereof shall not only
ensue no perrill, but also the health of the Patient, according to thy will and
his own desire. But first, to make their error more manifest, I will set
before thine eyes the simples whereof they compound their receipts, whereby
thou may perceive what abuse is in them: the simples are these. Euforbium,
Staphisagria, Scamonea, Sal gemmea, Lapis Calaminaris, Pepper, Ginger,
Camphier, Vermelion, Axungia, Saunders, Bolus armenus, Terra sigillata, Common
gum, Ceruse, Litargirium, Minium, Crued quicksiluer, Mercurius sublimatus,
Mercurius precipitatus. These with other things more, which they ought not to
do, they use in their anointing, which are hurtful in diverse respects. And
first because they do use laxatiue Medicines which are very hurtful to be
used in such manner without the body. For Mercury being a thing that does
pierce so sore, does also draw the other laxatiues with him into the body, and
they both being so venomous and so extreme hot, do infect the blood in the
veins, and inflame the whole body in such sort, that nature (after she is
lightened of her burden, and discharged of that which oppressed her, must alone
heal ye disease) cannot by any means recover herself, but by reason that she
is so sore pined, is not able to make any resistance but remains vanquished,
so that the Patient is brought to a consumption, or to the Dropsy, or else to
death, therefore you shall in no wise use any laxatiues thereto, how light so
ever they be, because they are always hurtful, and not profitable, sor of all
that is used in curing the Pockes, there is nothing that does any way profit
being outwardly ministered, but only Quick silver, therefore they are greatly
deceived, which with strong Purgations do purge the Patient, thinking thereby
to expel the matter of the Pockes by stools, which is impossible, other wise
then by purging with Mercury, and being purged therewith, he does expel it
by stools, but there are not many that have the knowledge to bring Mercury to
that strength of purging, for it is a noble secret: and it is also neglected of
the most part, because of the great labor and cunning that is to be used in
preparing of it. But I will sufficiently instruct them in the Chapter that
follows.

Now for the correction of those things that are needful to be corrected in
the anointing. First and foremost you shall eschew all laxatiues, and all other
things before mentioned, only Mercury excepted, for it is that which in the
anointing performs the action, and without Mercury there is nothing
profitable in this disease ministered outwardly, but inwardly there are many
noble remedies beside Quicksiluer, which both in this, and also in all other
diseases, are of great force, so that the like has not often times been seen.
But because in this Book we have taken in hand to write only of the Pockes,
we will therefore meddle with nothing but Mercury. In these two we will use
such diligence, that nothing shall be impossible for you to help in this
disease, if so be that you follow our counsel.

Now to prepare your Mercury that it may outwardly be ministered without
perrill to the Patient: you shall take in Gods name of the earth wherein
Mercury grows, which is found in Dutch-land in the gold and silver Mines,
this earth is called in Dutch Berch ciuober, of this earth you shall take the
softest which is not yet hardened, take twenty pounds thereof, this you shall
beat and put it into a Kettle, and pour fair rain water thereto, and let it
sees an hour long, and the earth and the other filthiness will separate it
self, which you shall scumme off very clean, then that which remains in the
Kettle, you shall rub small, and put it into a Cucurbit, and set it to
distill upon the fire with great heat, (according as I have taught you in my
Book of Mineral distillations) and you shall see a white juice arise like
Milk. And when you perceive that it will drop no more, then take that white
juice, and set it alone to distill in Balneo marie, and the moisture that is
thereby, will come alone, and in the bottom of the Cucurbit there will remain
an Oil, as heavy in a manner as Quick silver, (the manner to distill by
Balneo marie, I have showed you sufficiently in my Book of the distillation of
Herbs, to which Book I refer you for breuities sake.)

The Oil remaining in the bottom of the Cucurbit, as before said, you shall
take and use to anoint withal as follows. Take two ownces of the aforesaid
Oil, and six ounces of Spike Oil, these you shall mingle together and warm
them a little upon the fire, and therewith anoint the diseased parts of the
Patient, but those parts which are not diseased you shall not anoint therewith,
because it would do more hurt then good, for that there is no matter
whereupon they may work, and not finding other matter to work upon, it would
dry up the natural moisture from those parts, but the diseased parts you
shall anoint as aforesaid in every part or joint, and if there be any holes or
blaines, you shall anoint those also in the evening when he goes to bed, and
you shall cover him very warm that he may sweat, and let him lie and sweat two
hours long, and he must not in any wise stir himself, because he may sweat
the better, the said time being expired, you shall abate the clothes from of
him, and give him warm clean clothes, that he may dry up the sweat clean
in every place, and being well dried, take off his wette shirt, and put him on
a clean shyrt well warmed, then set him by a good fire of Oken wood, and dry
his head with warm clothes, in the mean while make his bed, and lay on a
pair of clean sheets well warmed, then let him go to bed again before it
be cold, but cover him not too warm, but that he may sleep quietly. In the
morning when he awaketh, you shall use as you did in the evening, to wit,
with fire and drying, and being well dried of his sweat, you shall apparel
him, and let him wash his hands and his face in warm water, and then let him
eat his meat, which shall be such as here follows.

First he shall eat no Swines flesh, nor no salted flesh, no Hares, Conies,
Hearts, nor other venison, nor no Cowes flesh, nor no pottage, but broth made of
good Mutton, sodden with Borage and a few Beetes and with a good deal of
Bor^age, other Pottage he shall eat none, he shall eat good Mutton, Hens,
Partriges, and all manner of wild foul, excepting all water fowls, and all
that seek their living or swim in the water, for that their flesh is ill to
digest for a sick man, ingendering naughty and mellancholie blood, he may
also eat good young Beef, being newly killed, and not long salted, but he
must not eat much of it, because it is hard of digestion for a weak stomach:
but of all other there is nothing better for such a Patient, then good young
Kiddes flesh that yet sucketh his damme, with good Partriges and good young
Hens, he shall not refuse to eat, for that of all other meats they are
best: he shall abstain from Pepper, and Ginger, but in his meat he may use
Cinnamon, Cloves, and such like, also Nutmegges and Saffron: he shall also
abstain from Onions, Garlike, Skallions and such like, either raw or sodden,
because they vex the blood and inflame and dry up the Liver. His drink shall
be good Renish wine, tempered with water sodden with Annis seeds, Barlie, and
Masticke, of each as much as a Chestnut, of this water he shall take one part,
and of Wine two parts, and he shall drink thereof until he be cured: he
shall keep himself very warm, and out of the air within the house, he shall
keep the windows and the doors shut: this order he shall in all respects
keep with anointing, sweating, and diet, until he be perfectly cured, for if
he do as is aforesaid, he shall undoubtedly, by Gods help be cured, although
he had it twenty years, if so be he have not been spoiled with other
Medicines before.

Cap. 3. Of fumegation or smoking, with correction of the abuse used therein.
THere is yet another way of curing the Pocks, found out by practitioners, for
when they perceived that of force they must use Quick silver, they took and
killed it with Brimstone, making Cinober thereof, because it should not be
known to be Quick silver: for the common people, perceiving so many to be
spoiled and killed with Quick silver, would not willingly be cured
therewith: therefore because they might the better use it without gainesaying
of the Patient, therefore they brought it into another form, using it also
after another manner without any anointing, because anointing was become
odious to the Patient, therefore they found out a device to perfume or smoke the
Patient, with the smoke of Cinober or Vermelion and so to cure him, for they
knew Quick silver to be so subtle or piercing, that they would enforce it into
the body at any place, through the pores or sweat holes. And therefore they
set the Patient under a Tent or Canopie naked, with a Chafingdish of coals
between his legs, wherein they strowed the Cinober, stopping him close round
about, the Patient then beginning to sweat, the Mercury with his whole
substance creeps into him in such sort, that it causes all the slime in his
body to ascend into his mouth, infecting and corrupting all parts of the
Patient in such sort, that it is pitiful to behold, so that the one after
long Martyrdom at length creepes into his grave, the other becomes cripple
and deformed, the third toothlesse, and such like miserable accidents which
are befallen them, that it would grieve a man to see, how they have handled a
number of their Patients.

For Mercury being used corporally, has this nature, that it does draw all
the corrupt matter of the Pockes into the mouth, and because they have dealt so
disorderly therewith, taking more of it then they ought, they have therwithall
drawn the corruption into the mouth in such abundance, that it could not have
sufficient egresse, but for want thereof is returned, and has sought him a
place in the entrails, as in the Liver, the Lunges, the Milte, and the
stomach, etc. So that some are fallen into the diseases of the Lunges, as
Plurisies, shortness of breath, Coughes, consumptions, and such other, almost
altogether incurable diseases. Others are fallen into diseases of the stomach,
as vomitings, quesinesse, great and intolerable pains, and Apostoms of the
stomach, not being able to digest any good nourishment. Others are fallen into
diseases of the Liver, as the yellow Iaundies, or Ictteritia, the Dropsy, the
Bloody flixe, hot fiery Agues, and such like. And some into the diseases of
the Milte, as the Fever quartaine, the Cancker, the Woolfe, the Leprosy, to
all which diseases they were not any way subject or inclined, until such time,
as they were brought thereto by the unskillfulness of foolish Chirurgions, and
all these aforesaid diseases, are altogether in manner incurable, and in the
end deadly. Wherefore I would wish every man to take heed, not to deal with
Mercury in any such sort as is before expressed. But if thou will use it in
any such order as hereafter shall be showed thee, it shall not only not be
hurtful, but thou shall also therewith perform that which thou promisest to
thy Patient, that is to say the curing of his disease.

Now we will show wherewith they are wont, and do yet perfume or smoke their
Patients: the simples are these that follow: Cinober natural, Mercury
calcined, Artificial Mercury sublimed, Alipta, Muscata, Cloves, Cinnamon,
Ireos, Musk, Franckincense, Mastick, Mirha, with other such sweet things.
These sweet things they have therefore taken, because the Patient should not
smell the stink of the Brimstone and the Cinober: but though at the first they
have not known him by the smell, yet in the end he has made himself known
unto them by the feeling, for that he performs his work with great force,
as those Patients know very well which have had experience of him, for as a
sharp poison, so goes he to work in all his operation. Their first and
greatest error therefore is, that they do fume the whole body of the Patient,
where as they should not fume any more then the place where they know that ye
place desires to have issue. For in all diseases, nature has her certain
emunctories or purging places, where through she coueteth to purge her self.
As sometimes by stools, sometimes by vemits, and sometime sweating: but in
this disease, she has more places to purge by, as the groyne, the arme-holes,
and such like, and sometimes other open holes in other places of the body,
where a man must smoke, and not in any other place. But for your further
knowledge you shall understand, that Mercury may be prepared in diverse
manners, as laxatiue, opilatiue, corosiue, and attractiue, and also
diaphoreticke, so that it may be prepared according to ye desire of him that
will use it.

But in this fumigation or smoking, the intent is only to make him
attractiue, that is, to draw out of the body, that which is hurtful or
hindersome to nature, but herein our cunning Chirurgions have both been
deceived themselves, and thereby have also spoiled their Patients, first in
that they perfumed or smoked the whole body of the Patient, for by that means
the venomous matter, which before occupied but one or two places of the body,
they have now drawn throughout all the whole body, secondly in using the
Mercury so grossly with his whole substance, and that in such great
quantity, they have also by that means brought their Patients to utter ruin,
and thirdly, in that they have mingled other things with the Mercury, where
as it is the Mercury alone that must perform the action without help of any
other thing, being outwardly used by fumigation.

Now we will show thee the manner or order to prepare it to be attractiue,
with the correction of the abuse heretofore used in the ministering thereof.
Although it has chanced sometimes, that there has a Patient or two been
cured by means of this aforesaid fumigation, and also by anointing, yet you
shall understand, that ye came to pass alone through the goodness of nature,
which is willing to help herself, and strong to resist and overcome the
violence of the Medicine, but yet for one so cured, there has been ten
thereby spoiled, besides those that have been sent ad Patres, to rob Moles,
but to eschew all these inconveniences, you shall prepare your Mercury in this
order.

Take Cinober made by art (not natural Cinober, and beat it as small as is
possible, whereof you shall take one pound, and one pound of Salt Peter, mingle
them very well together, and set them to sublime (as shall be taught you in
another Book, which shall entreat of the preparing of Minerals) the Mercury
being sublimed, you shall grind it small upon a stone, then you shall take an
instrument or Earthen pot of two spannes in length, very well glazed within, it
shall be one spanne wide in the bottom, and the mouth shall be as wide as a
big Apple, in this instrument you shall put of the aforesaid Mercury, one
dram at a time, and you shall set the Patient and the said instrument in
such sort, that the mouth of the instrument may be placed upon the emunctorie
or place, where the disease desires his issue, and the other end upon a
Chafingdish with coals, making it hot in such order, that it may warm the
emunctorie, but hereof you must take great heed, that you make it not so
hot, that you cause it bodily to ascend, for this is the thing that has
killed so many, that the Mercury with his venomous hot body, has been
enforced into the body of the Patient.

Therefore you must have great regard, that you make your fire in such
reasonable manner, that you do not cause him to ascend, but that his spirit
or dampe alone may perform the action, then you shall see the matter issue
forth in such abundaunce, that the Patient shall thereby be delivered from his
disease. You shall hold the said instrument with the Mercury so made, hot
upon ye emunctorie, the space of half an hour at a time, and you shall use
this manner of fumigation every night when the Patient goes to bed, and let
him sweat every time in such order as is before showed in the Chapter of
anointing, using him in all points as is there specified, to wit, in sweating,
in drying, etc. In this order you may fumigate or smoke without any danger, if
you take heed that the Mercury do not ascend, so that you shall not only
avoid all perrill in your curing, but shall also purchase to your selves,
praise and thanks whenever you shall use it. Thus much of fumigation, with
the correction of the abuses therein used, now concerning washing.

Capit. 4. Of washing with water.
THere is yet another piece of cunning devised by the subtle Pock-maisters,
which perceived yt they could not longer use their Mercury without hurt or
shame, and also without thank of the Patient, for the Patients perceiving the
great perils that ensued by the anointing, and how many were thereby spoiled,
would not any longer trust their anointing, and so fared it also with their
fumigation, for when they saw the numbers that thereby were killed, they
feared, and would not any longer be smoked: whereupon the Pock-Maisters,
were enforced to prepare their Mercury after another order, that he might be
more secret and unknown, that they might yet use him, for they wist well, that
without him there was no cure to be wrought, for as yet Guaicum was unknown,
therefore they took sublimated Mercury, and sodde it in Aqua vitae, and with
the said Aqua vitae, they washed the Patient: which is a very subtle and
forcible manner of curing, and very perrilous, which manner of curing, I do
counsel all men to leave undone. But in this manner following, you shall not
only avoid all danger, but shall also have good success in your works,
which if (for the great labor and charge which is required in the preparing of
your Mercury) you will not follow, I would wish you to leave washing: for of
all manners of curing, there is none the like for force and danger, therefore
if you will not otherwise correct your Mercury, it is not lawful for you to
cure any man by washing, for that they which are this way cured, are in greater
danger then one man which does fight against two other for life and death.
But if you will prepare your Mercury as hereafter shall be showed, you shall
not only eschew all danger which otherwise may happen, but shall also
perform as much as shall be requisite to the curing of this disease, and as
much as has been hitherto performed by any man, wherefore fly sloth, and use
diligence in preparing your Mercury, whereby you shall not only obtain your
desire in curing the disease without fear and danger, but also with great
credit to your self, and profit to the Patients.

In this washing, besides this before written, there is yet another abuse, that
is, that they have washed all the parts of the body, as well those that were
sound, as those yt were diseased, then the which they could not have committed
a greater oversight, for by that means they have brought the sound parts into a
worse case then the diseased, for Mercury used in such sort, is in the
operation as hot as fire, so that in those parts wherein there is no corrupt
matter to be dried out, there he goes to work, and dries out all the good
and natural moisture, and thereby spoyleth the whole member.

Therefore above all things you must take heed that you do not wash the whole
parts, but only those that are diseased, for the diseased parts have matter,
wherein the Mercury may work, and which is needful to be dried out. Now I
will show you how to prepare and to use your Mercury, but first I will show
you those simples wherewith these Masters use to wash, which are these.
Mercurius sublimatus, Auri pigmentum, Arsenicun, Cerusa, Camphier, Aqua vitae.
These things if I should minister in this sort crudlie without other
correction, I think I should kill all the Patients that I should take in
hand. For by reason of the strength of the Aqua vitae, the Mercury becomes
so subtle and so fiery, that it is a great wonder that they die not all that
are taken in hand to be cured in this order. For of all other, this manner of
curing is most dangerous, for the Mercury by his subtlety, and by means of
the heat of the Aqua vitae, does perform his operation in the inward parts of
the Patient with such force, as many sick Patients have better felt then I
can describe, and though this be most true, yet there are some ye use it
daily, as though it were good, but I say that it is a secret kind of poison,
which though it be but outwardly applied, does yet not withstanding (with
great force) perform his work inwardly in the body, for it inflameth and
stirs up the blood in such sort, that the Patient oftentimes falls a
bleeding, bleeding themselves to death, others are like to be choked, so
forciblie draws this venime to the heart, but peradventure some will defend
his doings herein, and say, I have helped many therewith, but I would feign
hear the Patient himself report it, yet nouerthelesse, I do think well,
that some one amongst a hundred, may be cured by this means, but I conne them
no thank therefore, but rather nature, which herself healed the disease, and
resisted the storm, but how many have they spoiled and helped under the
ground before they have cured one, verily a great number I am certain, but
to avoid such a danger, and to attain credit in this art, do as is
aforesaid, leave off your washing, or else prepare your Mercury as follows.

The correction of this washing with Mercury.
Take Mercury which is sublimed, by himself without any addition, as I will
teach you in the fore alleged Book, the same you shall sublime yet four
times with common prepared Salt, then you shall pour upon the said Mercury,
good rectified Aqua vitae, as I have taught you to rectefie it in my book of
Distillations. This Aqua vitae you shall set on fire with a little Paper, and
let it burn till it be consumed, then pour on more, and do likewise, doing
it so often until the Mercury do cease to bite or eat upon the tongue,
then sees the Mercury in Persic^^ie water, or in Celendine water, half an
hour long, then let it be cold, and pour of the water, that the Mercury be
not used with his body, but that his spirit and his strength may come forth,
and be coupled to the disease, for in the spirit of the Mercury is the virtue
to cure the disease, and in the body of it, is the force to kill and spoil
the Patient. Therefore it is the greatest oversight that may be, to take
Mercury and to sees it in Aqua vitae, and therewith to wash the Patient, for
by that means, it enters corporally into the body of the Patient, and
spoyleth and kills him, as all other poisons naturally do, therefore take
heed that in no wise you use it corporally, but only the spirit as is
aforesaid, and so nothing can ensue to the Patient, but good.

With the aforesaid water ye shall wash or make wet, the diseased parts of the
Patient, every night when he goes to bed, then you shall lay him to sweat,
using him in all points as is showed in the other Chapter, and you shall
continue this manner of washing, every day once, until such time as he be
perfectly cured, and that he feel no more pain. You need not fear to use this
manner of curing in this disease, for if you do as I have here taught you in
this Chapter, there can happen nothing but good to the Patient, and credit to
your self, so that you shall wonder to see what shall come to pass in this
order of curing, so that you may with credit and a good conscience, ask your
reward. Thus much concerning washing.

Capit. 5. Of launcing or opening of Tumors.
THere have been some that have held opinion, that because of the great pains
that men have had on their shinnes, and the pypes of their arms, that
therefore the root of the disease must needs lie there, (but they are
deceived, for the root lies in the blood) these going forwards in their
opinions, have made holes upon the shinnes, and diverse other places of the
body, thinking that the disease would have run out at those holes, and so
have been gone, but their expectation was deceived, for although they had made
the skin full of holes, yet the matter they looked for, ran not out at
them, but there issued a certain yellow water, which proceeded of the pain
which the Corosiue had made, and not any matter of the disease, neither did it
concern the Pocks any thing at all. But I find no great fault in this, for as
it help not, so it hindered not, yet it was a great foolishness of them to
think the disease to be so cowardly to give over his hold before any assault
were laid to it. But because there may chance sometimes, much matter to lie
about the shins, or such like places, which causes intolerable pains, to
remedy the same you may use the aforesaid means, to draw away the said
matter, yet not as they did, for they did nothing but set open the door,
forgetting that which was most needful, that is, when they had opened the
place, they should have applied a Plaster, to have drawn out the matter,
which otherwise of it self would never have come forth.

But for your further help when any such maines do happen. I will set down
certain things whereof you may make Plasters, and apply to such open
places, whereby the matter may be drawn forth, and the pain diminished.

An attractiue Plaster.
Take Serapini, Galbani, Amoniaci, of each two drams, Oppoponacis, four
drammes, Bdellij, six drammes, dissolve it in Vinegar, then strain it through
a cloth, then sees it so long till it begin to wax thick, then put thereto
of Rhabarbe two drammes, Radicis affodeli half a dram, Yellow Amber, two
drammes, this you shall beat very small, and then use it. This draws so
forciblie, that it leaves nothing untouched. But because this is no certain
rule for the curing of the Pockes, but only to diminish part of the matter,
we will not stay any longer about it, but proceed to the perfect curing of the
same, and first of another manner of cure used by sweating.

Capit. vj. Of curing the Pockes by sweating.
THere is yet another opinion sprung up, and that is this, to cure the Pockes
by sweating. This came first out of Italy into Dutchlande or Germany, and at
length it became common here in this Country: and indeed for some it was
good, but for others hurtful, for flegmaticke and moist bodies, are thereby
dried and made curable, but the Chollericke and Melancholic bodies, are
thereby spoiled, not with the sweating, but with the hot Medicines that they
used to provoke sweat, which Medicines so enflamed and dried up the blood in
the veins, the Liver, the Lungs, the Milte, and the Kidneys, that thereby
many Patients fell first into the Fever quartaine, secondly into the Dropsy,
and lastly into the grave. Well the Pocks are not to be cured in this sort.
For though it be good for one, yet is it hurtful for annother, but if ye will
cure, you must provide such remedies as may be good for all complexions, and
hurtful to none, especially here in sweating.

But for your better instruction, it shall be necessary first to show you
wherewith they use to provoke sweat. They have taken good strong Wine, and
mingled the same with Treakle, and with other things which you shall hear
anon, and given the same to the Patient to drink, and the^ covered him to
make him sweat, and this they have so long continued, until either the Patient
was cured, or that they were hindered by hot Agues which they brought upon the
Patient, for by this means they had so spoiled the Liver and other parts with
heat, that they could not any longer use their natural strength, but went
backward, ingendering evil black enflamed blood, which must needs bring forth
Agues and the Fever quartaine, therefore now I will show you the simples whereof
they make their Medicine to provoke sweat, that you may the better eschew
them, and these they are.

The Drinks which are usual given for the Plague.
Aqua vitae mingled with Treakle, Aqua vitae mingled with Camphier cardamomum,
Grana paradisi, Pepper, Euforbium, Radix vngulae caballine, Radix flammule.
Beside these aforenamed, they have yet used many other things, and moreover
devised a mean to cause the Patient to sweat of himself, without help of any
Medicine, and to perform the same, they used Crocks or great Earthen pottes,
filling them with hot water, and stopping them so close, that no moisture
could issue forth, these they laid in bed by the Patient, and covered him with
clothes in such sort, ye by means thereof, and the warmth of the Pottes
together, they caused him to sweat. This way, though it be very good to
provoke sweat, yet in this disease it is not good, because this disease does
not suffer it self to be expelled so easily, without other greater helps,
but in the Plague. This is a very good way and profitable, yet in this
disease, sweating is also very needful. Now follows the correction of this
manner of sweating.

The correction of sweating, whereby the Pocks may be cured.
The pores or sweat holes in the skin, are also emunctorium, (that is to say
a place wherethrough nature does purge herself) yea one of the most
principal emunctories, therefore through the said pores or sweat holes, a man
may very well purge nature, and also expel the matter of the Pockes, but not
through the heat of clothes, neither of the aforesaid simples, as Aqua vitae
and such like, for the aforesaid remedies they are not good for this purpose:
but the strength is in the Mercury alone, and it is he ye must work the
feate, that is, he can through sweating, expel the matter of the Pocks, and
knows also where to find it, for which cause he must be made to be
diaphoreticke, that is, to expel sweat by the pores, for being brought
thereto, he is so subtle in his operation against the Pocks, that it is
almost incredible, for he leaves no corner in the whole body unsearched,
expelling all the corrupt matter that he finds. But the preparing of him (I
fear me) will be too troublesome for lazy Practisioners, and therefore I
think I may spare my labor, yet notwithstanding, I will reveal it for their
sakes that are dilligent, knowing that he that desires the health of his
Patient, will spare no labor, nor refuse any travail to obtain the same, and
therefore I will now show you the preparing of it.

The preparing of Mercury to provoke sweat.
Take of Aqua fortis, a fourth part, Tin, and Quicksiluer, of each half an
ounce, put this together in a Glass, and set it in a Chafingdish with warm
ashes, (you must remember to put it into a Glass, because the Aqua fortis does
pierce through all things but only glass, you must therefore take a Glass
with a flat or round bottom without a foot, and put it therein, setting it
in the ashes as aforesaid) in the end, when you perceive the Quick silver to
be dissolved, take it out of the ashes, and let it stand till one may say the
Pater noster three or four times, and there will be a little sand in the
bottom, the^ pour off the clear, putting it into another clean Glass, and
set it again in the ashes as aforesaid, and make under the Chafingdish a
small fire, until you see the water be all dried or sodden out, then let it
be cold and break the Glass, for otherwise you cannot get it out it will
be so hard, when you have taken it out, you must grind it small upon a stone,
and put it in a small vessel of Silver and gylt, or of gold, for that is best
for this purpose, the said Vessel must be about the bigness of a Spoone, and
so deep, that it may contain the said matter, and that you may cover the
said matter with Aqua vitae the breadth of a finger. This vessel you shall set
in geod strong wine Vinegar, a little deeper then the said matter that is in
the Vessel, and then set the Aqua vitae on fire that it may burn (note this,
that your Aqua vitae must be rectified, that it do not co^taine any fleame,
according as I have taught you to rectify it in my Book of Distillations.)
The Aqua vitae being consumed, you shall immediately pour on more, and let if
likewise burn away, doing this so often, until the Mercury, with the tin,
do convert to a certain kind of Oil that is thick and fat. Of this Oil you
shall take one grain and mingle it with good Wine, and give it to the Patient
to drink in the morning fasting, and then cover him reasonably (not too warm)
and you shall see that which will make you to wonder, that is, you shall see
such abundance of sweat issue from the Patient (though he be not very warm
covered) that will cause you greatly to marvel: and of this you may be bold,
that he shall sweat so much as may be good and profitable for his nature and no
more. This you shall give him every day once, and when he sweateth, let him be
well dried with warm and clean clothes, and he must take dilligent heed to
keep himself from cold, and out of the air, and that principally when he
sweateth, his diet and his drink shall be in all respects as is before
specified in the Chapter of sweating, and you shall not regard what has been
written heretofore by diverse, concerning the not eating of salt, for that
they have therein greatly erred, therefore you shall use so much salt as
shall be needful for the seasoning of your meat to give it a good taste.

But always provided you must use measure in all things, and that principally
in salt and sour things, because that they two being two much used, are
very hurtful to the sinews, and for that cause you must take the^
mesurablie, but in any wise not to use your meat without salt, for that salt
is the only thing requisite in the body, to preserve the humors from
corrupting, for in what part of the body soever the salt begins to lose
his virtue, in the same part immediately begins a filthy rotting, not much
unlike to the Leprosy, wherefore in any wise you shall not forbid your Patient
the eating of salt, for by that outward salt, the inward salt (which is in
the blood, and in all the other parts of man) must be nourished and maintained.

But that you may the better believe, that there is salt in all the parts of
man's body, you shall understand, that the body of man (by all Philosophers,
and by me also) is accounted for a little world, which was called (by them)
Microcosmos, which little world does contain in it, all such things as the
great world does naturally contain in her. By which reason it must also
contain salt, yet not bodily but spirituallie, and that this is true, a man
may perceive by this, that all whatsoever issues from man, is altogether salt,
as the tears, the sweat, the urine and such like, wherefore it is necessary
for the Patient to use salt to maintain the same as is aforesaid.

But concerning Vinegar, you shall use as little as is possible, because it is
not only unprofitable, but also hurtful to nature, for which cause you may
not use it much: the Patient must also refrain from drinking too much strong
Wine, and principally from sour Wine, so that his drink shall be of the best
and sweetest Renish wine that can be gotten, and he must also drink it
measurablie, thus much concerning diet and drink. And here you shall
understand, that by this manner of sweating, all kinds of the Pockes may be
cured, although they were never so ill, yea though one had had it xxx. years
long, so that to him that follows this prescribed manner of curing, there shall
be nothing impossible (pertaining to this disease) but only that which God
will not suffer to be cured, wherefore I would wish you to use it, assuring
you that you shall not find any other means that shall be much better then
this is. Thus much concerning sweating.

Capit. 7. Of curing the Pockes by Seege, with laxatiue Medicines.
THe Doctors of Physic have also herein tried all their cunning, and used
diverse means with laxatiue Medicines, yt (as though it were very agreeable to
nature) they might by Seege expel the matter of the Pockes, but because that
nature diverse times chooses other emunctories to purge herself by, therefore
their devices have had no good success, for though there be many remedies
whereby to purge the body from his uncleanness, yet not one of them is able to
deliver the body from this disease, wherefore I would not wish any man to
purge with any such laxatiues, because it is not only in vain, but also very
hurtful, for they do not so much as once meddle or touch the matter of this
disease, as being altogether unable to expel the same, and yet because they
must work being once received in, they go to work upon that which they
ought not to meddle withal, expelling that which is profitable to nature: yea
and being too often used, or in too great a quantity, they do expel the
blood, the flesh, and at last they do melt the marrow in the very bones,
expelling it also, according as we have seen the experience thereof in those
which thus have been purged, for their flesh falls away, their cheeks wax
hollow, they become lean and pale of color, which palenes of color so long
continues, as nature continues unable to cleanse the blood, and to overcome
the disease. What avails it then to purge with sharp laxatiues, when it is
the nature alone that must heal the disease.

But I know there be many that will say, and I grant it to be true, that by
purging they have cured diverse Agues, and such like diseases, but though it be
granted that the disease heals after such time as the Patient is purged, yet
notwithstanding it is nature herself which heals the disease, after that her
enemies are put to flight: but as for those laxatiues, they do not so forsake
the body of the Patient, but that they leave many relics behind them, which
afterward are the causes of many great evils, and also the body is brought
thereby to such a custom, that it does look daily to be purged, and
therefore will not perform the accustomed digestion as it ought to do, and
notwithstanding all the evils that do ensure these purgations, there is no
help nor comfort to be expected of them toward the curing of this disease,
because they do not so much as once touch it.

Now I will show you wherewith they have used to purge, to the end you may
take heed of it, because it cannot any thing profit you. First they have given
the Patient of these Iuleps or Sirops, and after have purged them with the
laxatiues following. These are the Iuleps and Sirops, Sirupus de fumo terre,
Sirupus acetosus, Simplex et compositus, Sirupus de Pomis compositus, Sirupus
de menta, Sirupus de bisantijs, de Absinthis, et Epitimo, de Cicorea, et de
Eupatoria. Iulep violatum, et Iulep rosatum. In very hot diseases these
aforesaid Sirops they mingled with these distilled waters following, because
they might the better be received. The waters are these, Aqua boraginis, Aqua
buglosse, Fumus terr, Aqua cuscut, Aqua meliss, Aqua scholopendri, Aqua
maioran, Aqua finiculi, Aqua cicore, Aqua endini, Aqua lupuli, Aqua capillorum
veneris, Aqua eupatorij, Aqua lactuc, Aqua scabios, Aqua cardo benedicti. These
aforesaid waters with other more, they used to mingle with their Syropes, and
then gave them to the Patient to drink, to prepare the matter, and afterward
purged them with these laxatiues following. Diasene, Diacitoniton, Diacarthami,
Agaricus, Coloquintida, Turbith, Elleborus, Confectio, Hamech, Electuarium,
Iudum, Diagridiu^, Ezula, Hermodactilus. And also with these Pills following.
Pillule cochi, Pillule ind, Pillule lucis, Pillule artecite, Pillule fedit,
Pillule are, Pillule de hermodactilis, Pillule de lapide armeno. Upon all these
aforesaid, I will God willing show you the correction, but principally upon
the laxatiues, for that the other need not greatly to be corrected.

First you shall understand, that it is not evil or hurtful that the matter
in the Liver and the stomach, be first prepared, and then afterward purged
with these Medicines following, which are very easy and not burtfull to be
used. These are they, Diacatholicon, Cassia fistula, Manna rhabarbarum, Aloes,
Polipodium, Sena, Epitimum, Mirobolanorum five sorts or kinds. For these help
to lighten nature, and to cleanse the blood of all uncleanness proceeding of
meat and drink, they deliver also from Agues if they be often used, and are
hurtful neither to old nor young, every man may use them with out danger.
But as for the matter of the Pockes, they do not so much as once meddle with
it, but let it lie still untouched. For that requires another manner of force
wherewith to be roused and driven forth, which pertains to the Mercury alone,
for being brought to be laxatiue, he can find out that which the other could
not find, and does expel that which he knows to be offensive to nature, not
only in this matter of the Pockes, but also in all other diseases, therefore I
counsel all men to use diligence in learning to make the Mercury laxatiue,
as hereafter shall be taught.

The correction of this that has been said, is nothing but this, that you
purge with no other laxatiue but only with Mercury, and to make him
laxatiue, you must prepare him thus.

First you must have a kind of water, that with extreme heat of fire is
distilled of Egge-shels, of this water you must take four ounces, of Quick
silver one ounce, and put them together in a Glass, which Glass you must
set in a Chafingdish or some other thing with sand, and set the Chafingdish
in or upon the fire, and the Mercury shall dissolve through the force of the
water, and being dissolved, you shall distill of the water, and pour other
upon it, this you must do so often, until the Mercury become as red as
blood, when the water is drawn from it: this Mercury is the right Purgation
to expel the matter of the Pockes by stools. The Mercury then being as red as blood, you shall grind it to fine powder, and of the said powder you shall
give the Patient to drink (with good sweet Wine, or other Wine that is not
sour) every morning fasting three grains: or you may also mingle it with
Theriacle or Metridatum, and give it him to eat every morning fasting, and
let him fast after it at the least four hours, and then shall he purge that,
that is needful to be purged, and is the right matter of the Pockes, and it
shall not any way be hurtful unto him, but shall cleanse him from all
unhealthful things, restoring him to a healthful state, clensing all
superfluity, and leaving all the other humors of the body untouched.

This is that, that purges the matter of the Pockes by the stool, and there
is no other laxatiue that is any thing auailable, but only Mercury being
thus prepared. The Patient must be kept with meat and drink, according as is
said of the other in the Chapters going before, he must also be kept from
cold, and out of the air, but principally from the company of Women, because
that is the root of this disease, which being frequented by the Patient, it
renueth the disease, making it worse and more venomous then before, therefore
above all things that must be eschewed. And thus much concerning the curing of
the Pockes by Mercury.

Here ends the first part.
The second part of this Book, which treats of curing the Pockes with
drinks made of Lignum guaiacum, after a good and perfect order.
Capit. I. Of the nature and virtue of the vvood called Lignum vitae, or
Guaiacum.
THis wood is found in the Islands of the Indian sea, and is as common there, as
our Oak is here with us, the people of that Country do use nothing of it but
only the leaves and the smallest twigs, which they stamp small, and wring out
the juice of it, and so drink it. But because this Country is so far from us,
we cannot have it so fresh, as to take and use the leaves as they do, but are
feign in steed thereof to use the boughs or branches, and thereby to seek
help for the Patient, and so it is come to this pass, that of the said
branches we make a certain decocted drink, by which the said disease is cured.
But yet there has been a great abuse committed by diverse, as well in the
making or seething of this drink, as also in the diets, with other like
things, all which hereafter God willing shall be corrected. But ere we
proceed herein any further, I will declare unto you the nature and property
of this wood.

The ancients in times past have had knowledge of this wood, and have given it
his name, although some men be of the contrary opinion, supposing that they
knew it not, yet I say that they are deceived: for though in all points it do
not agree with that which they call Hebena, yet I say that it can not be any
other, but a certain kind of the said Hebena. The ancients describing the said
Hebena or Hebenum, do say, that it does not swim, but goes to the bottom
like a stone, and that within it is as black as ynke, and therefore some do
say that this is not that Hebena. To such wise men I answer, sending them to
Dioscorides, willing them to mark his description of herbs and flowers, etc.
For there he describes many herbs and flowers, which if a man should seek
for in that order which they are there described, I know they will scarcely be
found, because they do not in all points agree with the description: and the
reason thereof is, the nature of the Country where the said Herbs do grow,
for in one Country they are of one fashion, and in another somewhat different
from the same, and sometimes also by remoouing from place to place, Flowers do
alter their colors, and become more double of leaves then they were before,
and yet they remain the same Flowers still, even so is it with Hebena, for
that which grows in India, is of another color then that which grows in
Grecia, and yet notwithstanding it is a kind of Hebena, for it goes to the
bottom, as Hebenum does, and is also of the same virtue, curing the same
diseases.

Having proved that this Wood with his name have been known in old time,
we will now show his virtue and operation, what he works in the body of
man, being ministered as it ought to be. The virtue of this wood is drying more
then any other Medicine, and to drive away the opilations or stoppings of the
Liver and the Milte, being ministered with opening Medicines, according as shall
be taught hereafter. It may be used (almost) in all diseases, being used with
such Medicines as are appertinent to the disease, and being so used, his
virtue is increased, and he becomes of more force. How to apply him with
other Medicines, shall be taught in other Chapters that follow.

But peradventure you will muse why I do now so much praise this wood,
considering that I have so much before praised the Mercury, I say therefore
that amongst all other remedies, there is none that can be used with less
danger then this of Hebenum. Considering the great danger consisting in the
Mercury, by reason that he is so venomous, and that there are so few which
either can or will prepare him in such order as he ought to be prepared, as
well for the labor therein required, as also the cost and cunning that
necessarily belongs thereto. These with other more are the causes why we have
written thus in commendation of this Wood, praising it to be the best and most
surest in the curing of this filthy disease, excepting only the well
prepared Mercury, according as we have mentioned and taught in the Chapters
before going: but as I say, Mercury being excepted (amongst all other
Medicines) there is none comperable to this Hebenum.

For being used in such order as it ought to be, it may be ministered without
all danger, as well in hot and dry, as also in cold and moist complexions:
and does also work great wonders in many diseases, such as are almost
incredible, but it must be used orderly, as in the Chapters following shall be
taught at large, wherein the curing of each disease shall be taught you in
such good order, that thereby you shall perceive how greatly they have been
deceived, which (after one manner with this aforesaid drink) have taken upon
the^ to cure all manner of diseases. Even like a Shoemaker which would make
every man's shoes upon one last, which is impossible. Now we will proceed to
the choosing of this wood.

Capit. 2. How to choose this Wood, and which is the best.
YOu shall take and use the young and small branches with the bark upon them
if they be fresh, and have not been long gathered, if you may so have them, if
not, then you shall take of the biggest having the bark upon them, because
that as they are greater and thicker, so they are harder, and dry not so soon
as the lesser branches do, for if you take the small ones, having been long
gathered, they will be too dry, therefore it is best to take the old being
gathered both at one time. For if a man might have it being green, it were
much better then otherwise, but because that is not possible, therefore a man
must help himself with such as he can get, but this is a thing to be
wondered at, that there should be such virtue in a dry stick, to expel the
matter of the Pocks, yea it is almost incredible, but that we see the
experience of it daily in diverse persons, of all manner of complexions, so
that we are enforced to believe it because we see it.

Further you shall understand that, that Wood is best which is of middle age,
which age must be understood of the growth, because the young Trees are not
yet come to their perfection, and the old Trees are decayed, and therefore it
is necessary to choose that which is of middle age, and that as green as is
possible with the bark upon it, there is yet one thing more to be observed,
and that is this, the place where it grows, this and such like a man must
know of the^ which bring it over. For that which grows in S. Dominicus Island,
is not good for this purpose, for in hot and dry complexions it is very
hurtful, because of the heat and dryth of the Country where it grows, which
makes it much hoter and dryer then that which grows else where, as in S.
John's Island, for the Island of S. Dominicus lies right under the Equinoctial
line, by reason whereof, the inhabitants are greatly troubled with heat, and
also the fruits of it, are much hoter then in other Countries, but the best
Wood is found in the Island of S. John, being not so hot and dry as that of
S. Dominicus, and may therefore be used with lesser danger, in hot and dry
diseases, as hoarsenesse of ye voice, with shortness of breath called Asthma,
and in a consumption called Ptisis, these may well be cured with the wood of
S. John's Island, which were not good to be attempted with that of S. Dominicus
Island, because the Patient might thereby be brought to a greater drith, and in
the end to death. For though there be some kind of men, so cold and moist of
complexion, that they might better be cured with the wood of S. Dominicus
Island, then with that of S. John's, yet notwithstanding there are very few of
them, and of those that are hot and dry, or at the least wise hot and moist,
there are many more, for that those which are most troubled with this disease,
are for the most part young women, and young men, and are for the most part not
so cold of nature as they should need such hot Medicines; and cheefely such
dry Medicines, for by reason of the great heat they dry up the natural
moisture, and thereby shorten the life of the Patient, but ye wood of S. John's
Island a man may use without fear, in hot and dry diseases, being prepared
accordingly in the seething, and also in cold and moist diseases being
prepared thereafter, for it is not so much drying as the other, and is
notwithstanding as excellent in cold diseases as any other can be. For the
Island of S. John lies different from the Equinoctial line, almost eight
degrees, being in such sort moistened with springs and Rivers, that the
fruits thereof are much more excellent, and more natural then are the fruits
of the other Island. In what manner this wood must be prepared, shall hereafter
be showed.

Capit. 3. How to prepare the Drink.
SEeing we have already showed you what wood is to be used in this Drink, we
will now show you the making or seething of it. I have seen the Physicians
use this drink almost in all diseases, and toward all men, after one kind of
order, but in so doing, whether they did well or not, I leave to your
consideration. For how can a Shoemaker make every man's shoes upon one last,
even so is it with this drink, which has caused me greatly to wonder, so see
that it has been so done by almost all Physicians. For how is it possible
for a man to find any one thing, which being ministered after one kind of
order, should cure all kind of diseases, considering how contrary one
disease is to another.

But in that we have heretofore said of this wood, that it may be used in
cold, and hot, moist, and dry complexions, that is thus to be understood. It
may be so prepared in the seething, that in hot diseases it may be a cooling
Medicine, and it may also be prepared to be a hot Medicine in cold and
Melancholicke diseases, and to cure them all perfectly. Therefore when it is
to be ministered in hot and dry diseases and complexions, it must be sodden
with greater quantity of water, then when it is to be used in cold and moist
diseases, and the disease by reason of the moisture and coldness of the water,
shall be made temperate, and by the wonderful virtue which secretly lies
hidden in the wood, it shall be perfectly cured.

For in this wood is contained a certain secret or hidden virtue, in curing
diseases not alonelie the Pocks, but in manner all diseases: expelling by the
urine and the sweat, whatsoever is hurtful or contrary to nature, therefore
you must dilligently consider the nature of the disease, whether it be hot or
cold, that you may make your drink accordingly, for in cold diseases, you
must use more wood and less water the^ in hot diseases, and sometimes you
must use wine, and sometimes not, and sometimes the drink must be made of the
wood alone, and sometimes with other additions, as you shall hear more at
large hereafter.

Now I will teach you how to sees or prepare your drink, after a better and
more perfect order, then of many has hitherto been used, which is after this
manner. You shall take of the wood, being made as small as is possible, and
put it into a stone Pot, which must be so big, that it may not be more then
half full, when your wood with the other receipts appertine^t to the disease,
are put into it, your receipts therefore being put into the Pot, you shall set
it upon the fire to sees in a Kettle with water, and (because it shall not in
seething loose any of his virtue) you shall therefore stop the Pottes mouth
so close, that no air do issue out, for if it get vent that the air come
forth, it does lose of his virtue, and is so much the worse.

Therefore you must use great diligence in the stopping of it, for that is
principally herein required, and being close stopped, you shall set it to
sees in a Kettle of water, binding it so in the Kettle that it fall not, and
then make it sees, keeping the Kettle continually so full of water, that it
may always be higher then that which is in the Pot. In this order you shall
keep it seething at the least ten hours, but peradventure you will think
that it cannot sees, because it is so close stopped and has no vent, but that
is not material, for our desire is, that it should boil or sees without
walloping, for seething in this manner, it retains all his virtue, whereby it
shall perform his operation in better order then he has done heretofore,
being simply set upon the fire to sees with a cover of wood or stone.
Moreover, it may be you will think, that if it be stopped as aforesaid, it
may as well be set upon the fire to sees, as in a Kettle of water, but
herein you should be deceived, for being set upon the fire to sees in that
order, it will rather burst in pieces then sees, and therefore the best way is
to set it in water as is aforesaid. For as the water seetheth in the the
Kittle, so shall that also sees which is in the Pot, although you do not
perceive it to move or wallop, which is by reason of the close stopping, and
that it can get no vent, yet notwithstanding it does sees although it do
not wallop, and by this still seething; does retain or rather increase in
virtue, much more then if it had walloped.

To prove the experience hereof, you may take a Hen or some other piece of
meat, and put it into a Pot, and as much liquor as you mean to have broth,
and stop the said Pot, setting it to sees in a Kettle of water, as
aforesaid, letting it sees in that order, as long as you use ordinarily to
sees your meat, and you shall find it will be as tender, as if it had sodden
and walloped with great force in an open Pot. This is excellent for all sorts
of men in all kinds of diseases, to have their meat dressed in this kind of
order, as shall be showed more at large, when we shall come to describe the
diet of the Patient.

Thus we have showed you in what order you shall sees this drink, hereafter
when we shall say, you shall take thus much, or so much of the wood, and shall
sees it as is aforesaid: you shall understand it of this manner of seething,
and none other, because that this manner is of all other the best, how good
soever they he. The quantity how much of each thing shall be taken, is showed
more at large in the Chapters following, where the drink shall be appointed
according to the nature of the disease. Thus much concerning the preparing of
the Drink. Now follows the regiment of the Patient in his diet.

Capit. 4. What regiment the Patient is to observe.
FIrst and foremost you must take diligent heed that you do not pinche your
Patient with much hunger, but let him have as much as shall be sufficient to
quench hunger with, for hunger does weaken and pull down a man more then any
other thing, drying up the natural moisture, and extinguishing the natural
heat, whereby the life of man is shortened. For when a man has kept a very
strait diet, and been greatly pinched with hunger a great time, the said
time being expired, and that he comes to eat his fill, all his nourishment
turns to a certain waterish humor, turning to the Dropsy and such like
foul diseases, the cause hereof is, that his nourishment is given him too
late. As for example, a flower which has been long parched with yt heat of
the Sun, in the end comes a rain, which rain serves the flower to no
other end but to spoil and rot it the sooner, the reason is, because the rain
came too late. Even so is it with a man having been long pined with hunger,
therefore you shall cause him to abstain, not from that which is good, but from
that which is naught, according as has been taught in the other Chapters
before.

The best and wholesome meat that you can give your Patient, is Mutton, Veale,
and Hens, which shall be boiled in a Pot stopped close, and set in a Kettle
of water to sees, as is showed before, and he shall not eat his meat fresh,
that is to say without salt, as has heretofore been taught by certain
Doctors, but it shall be seasoned in such reasonable sort, that it be neither
too fresh nor too salt, but that it may have a pleasant taste. The reason why
we allow of salt is showed, as we have set down in another Chapter before, and
therefore not to be repeated now for anoiding of tediousnes. The quantity of
meat and drink to be used by the Patient, cannot well be described, for that
men's stomachs are not all alike, the one eating more, and the other less,
therefore you shall give the Patient so much as shall be sufficient for him to
suffice hunger, taking heed that he do not gorge or glut himself, but that
he do always leave off with an appetite, and concerning his drink, that
shall be such as is appertinent to the disease, whereof he may drink as much
as him lists, being always made warm ere he drink it, but if he chance
to be feeble or faint, you shall not give him of his drink alone at meals, but
you shall give him some wine with it, either Renish, or small white wine,
mingling the same with his drink, half one, half another, but as for Beer
(how good so ever it be) he shall not drink any, until he be perfectly
cured, because it is hurtful for him.

In this aforesaid order you shall diet all your Patients, old and young, to
wit, with such good meat dressed in this order, until they find themselves
reasonably satis-fied, always leaving with a little appetite, that the
Medicine be not hindered in his operation with over much meat. Concerning the
observation of the time, you shall begin with the Patient in the morning at
five of the clock, giving him then his Medicine to drink, which being done,
you shall cover him so warm that he may sweat very well, he shall lie still
and sweat at the least two hours, if he be able to endure so long) and you
shall give him warm clean clothes, to dry of the sweat from his body, and
you shall take away his wet shirt, giving him a dry one well warmed to put on,
then he shall put on his clothes, and sit by a good fire, and make him
ready, and when he is ready, let him walk up and down the Chamber till
eight of the clock, and then he shall go to dinner, he shall first suppe of
the broth with a little Bread, and then eat of the flesh as much as shall
suffice him, as is aforesaid. After he has thus dined, he shall walk up and
down the Chamber recreating himself with some pastime or other to drive away
Melancholy, till about four of the clock in the afternoon, and then he
shall go to supper, using himself as at dinner, after which he shall fast
till seven of the clock, then he shall go to bed, then give him of his
drink as much as in the morning, to wit, at each time eight ounces, whereupon
you shall cause him to sweat, drying the sweat from him as you did in the
morning, and principally you must dry his head well, and his shirt which he
put of in the morning you shall dry it very well, and let him put it on again
warm, and then you shall make his bed with a pair of clean warm sheets,
and so let him go to bed, and let him rest quietly till five of the clock
the next morning. And then you shall give him his drink, using him in all
things as is aforesaid.

In this manner (with sweating and diet) you shall use all those which may
keep their Chamber in ye time of their curing: but as for those that must go
abroad, their drink must be prepared with wine, as shall be showed
hereafter, and as for their sweating and their diet, it must be in all
respects as the other, which being performed, they may go about their
business, although it were better and more sure for them to tarry within
doors, and that chiefly in foul, rainie, or blustering wether, for although
the wine do resist the contagion of the air, yet it cannot resist all,
especially, when the wether is so intemperate, notwithstanding, I have in this
manner aforesaid cured many that went abroad, but yet I counsel you to cause
your Patient to tarry at home in his Chamber by the fire in fouls wether.

The best time to take in hand to cure the Patient, is the Harvest and the
spring time, and next to that is the winter, but the Summer is not good,
principally for hot Chollericke persons, for in it self it is contrary unto
them by reason of the great heat and drith, which it increases so much the
more in them: but to cold, moiste, and flegmaticke bodies, the Summer is not
so hurtful as to the chollerick, and therefore in time of need, such Patients
may be cured in the Summer.

Thus much concerning sweating, with the time, and the ordering of the diet,
now follows the order of curing, and first of the great intolerable pain
in the head, which happens often in this disease, suffering the Patient not
to take any rest.

Capit. 5. Of the great pain in the head, which takes away the sleep.
THis intolerable pain is called Cephalea, or Hemicrauea, and is so great and
so vehement above the eyes, that oftentimes the Patient is like to run mad
therewith, and although many means be used, yet the pain decreaseth not. To
cure this and such like pains in the head, you must first consider the
complexion of the Patient, whether be be chollerick, phlegmatic, melancholic,
or sanguine, which you shall know in this sort.

If the Patient be chollericke, his urine is very yellowe colored, and the
pain is sharper upon the right side of the head then in other places, he is
lean of body and his mouth is commonly bitter. If he be sanguine, he is
somewhat fatter of body, but not much, and has a sweet mouth, his urine is
also very much colored, and thick. The phlegmatic is commonly fat, and
gross of body, and slow, his water is white and thick. The mellancholicke
are lean and withered, or dry, and beauie spirited, envious, and angry,
wishing well to no man, his urine is bleake and thin, in manner like water, and
he is always sad.

Having taught you to know the complexion of the Patient, we will teach you
the preparing of each of their Medicines severally. And first of the
Chollericke and the Sanguine, because in this they do agree, to wit, in heat,
although the Chollericke man be much dryer then the Sanguine, yet because they
are both hot, we will conclude them both under one cure, which shall be in
this order.

First you shall take Diacarthami, and Diaphenicon, of each three drammes, this
you shall break and mingle together with Fewmetorie water, that it may be a
drink, which you shall give the Patient to drink at four of the clock in the
morning warm, and suffer him not to sleep, to eat, nor to drink, till such
time as it have done working, for ye shall expel part of the matter (whereof
the disease grows) by siege, ye same day you shall cherish him well with good
meats, such as are before showed for his diet, being dressed after the
aforesaid order. The next day you shall give him of this drink following, eight
ounces, the drink is this. You shall take of the best wood that you can get
(being broken as small as is possible) half a pound, of clear spring water
eight pound, this you must sees as is taught in the third Chapter, and give
the Patient thereof to drink morning and evening, at each time eight ounces,
causing him to sweat in such order as before is showed.

But if so be that the Patient cannot keep within doors but must go abroad
about his business, you shall then make his drink of half wine, half water,
taking four pounds of vach, but in seething your drink with wine, ye must
see that the Pot be very closely stopped, because the wine is of such a
subtle and piercing nature, so that if it once get any vent, the virtue of it
flies away. Your drink being thus prepared with Wine, may well be ministered
to such Patients as cannot keep at home but must go abroad, but yet in very
foul wether they must tarry at home, and in fair wether they may go abroad
about their business, after such time as they have sweat and taken their diet as
aforesaid. In this sort are all such Patients to be used (for the pain in the
head) as are hot of complexion, the space of eight days, until the ninth day
early in the morning, at which time you shall give him the aforesaid
Purgation, keeping him from sleep, from meat, and drink, till the Purgation
have done working, and that the Patient feel no more pain or grief in his
belly, and then you shall give him his diet, the same day neither in the
morning nor the evening shall he drink any drink, but only the Purgation,
except at his meals you may give him of his drink, mingling the same with
wine, half one, half another.

In the morning he shall again drink of his drink, and do in all respects
as I have taught you before, until eight days more be expired, and upon ye
ninth day you shall purge him again, and then he shall drink again as is
aforesaid, in this order he shall continue until he be whole, and that the
pain have clean forsaken him. This aforesaid drink does excellently help
hot and dry complexions by cooling them, and is contrary to such diseases as
are of nature cold and dry, expelling them.

The curing of the pains in the head of those that are Phlegmatic, and
Mellancholick.
THe drink for the Phlegmatic or Mellancholick persons, must in operation be
warmer and dryer then that aforesaid, and must therefore be made in this manner.
Take of the wood three quarters of a pound, being broken as small as is
possible, with six pound of water, and as much Wine, and put it in a stone
Pot, and being very close stopped, set it to sees ten hours in a Kettle
of water as is aforesaid, whereof the Patient shall drink morning and evening
eight ounces at a time, and at the end of eight days, you shall purge him
with the aforesaid Purgation, using him in all points as is aforesaid, with
sweating, and otherwise, and he shall undoubtedly be cured. But you must have
great regard in sweating, that you dry his head well, for that shall much
further his health. And here you shall understand, that the pain does
commonly increase til it be at the strongest, and then it every day decreaseth
till at the last he feel it no more, therefore you shall not be dismayed though
the pain increase in the cure, for that comes to pass by the strength of
the drink, and it is a very good sign, therefore let not the Patient be
discomfited, but let him rejoice, because it is a certain sign of health.

Capit. vj. Of madness or idleness of the head, called Insania.
THis idleness or madness in the head, called in Latin Insania, proceeds of
a certain venomous humor or dampe, ascending from the stomach and the Liver
into the brains, and because the brains through the infection of the Pockes,
or some such like cause is become weak and tender, they are not able to repel
or drive back the said dampe or humor, but remain vanquished and overcome
of the same in such sort, that they forget to do their office, going quite out
of order, so that the Patient has no rule of him self, but does and speaks
he knows not what.

To cure this disease, as well that which proceeds of the Pockes as
otherwise, (excepting only when it comes of or with a hot sharp Ague,
because therein is great danger of death) you may do it with the drink made
of this Wood, without any impediment: which must be prepared after this manner,
for such as are hot of complexion, as the Chollericke and Sanguine are. Take
of this Wood, being made very small, one pound, fair water eight pounds,
which you must sees as is aforesaid, and give him thereof every morning and
evening eight ounces, at a time and cause him to sweat well, and you must dry
the sweat from his head very well, because the disense lies altogether in the
head. His diet and his drink shall be as is mentioned in the former Chapter,
notwithstanding as little as may be, for in this disease much meat is very
hurtful, and therefore he must be content with a little, he must drink no
Wine, for that it is contrary both to his disease and complexion, because it
ascends up into the head, he must drink of his drink alone as much as he
will, and it must always be a little warm. Thus doing, he shall without
doubt be cured by Gods help.

The Phlegmatic and the Mellancholicke must be thus cured.
TAke of this Wood one pound, of Water four pound, of Wine two pound, this
you must sees as is aforesaid, and give him thereof every day to drink
morning and evening eight ounces at a time, continuing the same until he be
cured. And although in the beginning the Wine do him no good, yet you shall
not leave to use the same still in his drink, for that it is a notable
Medicine for his complexion, being measurablie used, and therefore you shall
sees him his drink as aforesaid, and it shall in the end perfectly help him.

You may give these Patients less meat then the Choleric or Sanguine, yet
you shall not famish them, and that principally the Mellancholicke, and he
shall also not sweat so long as those that are moist of complexion, because he
is dry, yet he must sweat at the least an hour and a half, because the
Phlegmatic to sweat much more if he be able to endure it, because that of his
own complexion he is very moist, and yet much more moist by reason of his
disease.

Therefore it is very good for him to sweats, because it dries up all such
overplus moistnes, and in the end restores him to his health and his
understanding, and drives awais all nodes or tumors upon his head, if he have
any, and all open fores in any place of the body, shall by virtue of this
drink be healed within the forty days, and therefore let him not refuse to
use it.

Here is to be observed, that such Patients as are idle headed, shall not in
any wise go abroad, till such time as they are perfectly cured, but shall
remain at home in their Chamber, keeping them as quiet as is possible, for
rest is very good and profitable for them. If you observe this order before
showed, the Patient shall undoubtedly be cured if God will.

Capit. 7. Of the Falling Sickness, called in Latin Epileptia.
THis disease springs of overmuch moisture in the brain, wherethrough at
certain times the brains being troubled, there chances unto them a certain
obstruction; by means whereof, the Patient is bereft of the strength of his
sinnewes, and so falls to the ground. And according to the situation of the
place which the disease occupies, so the accidents do manifest themselves, as
sometimes with contraction, that is, in plucking of the joints, and sometimes in
foming at the mouth, with barking and other such unseemly gestures.

But peradventure it will cause some to marvel greatly that I should teach
the curing of such a hard disease, with a Drink made of this Lignum Guaiacum,
yet notwithstanding, because I have learned the same by experience, and have
therewith cured more then ten Patients, I will therefore publish the same for
the commodity of all, that such as are therewith troubled, may have recourse
hereto in time of need and find remedy for the same, which by the help of GOD
they shall undoubtedly obtain, (though they had had ye said disease ten
years together) following the order here set down, which is this. You
shall use nothing but only this drink following, purging the Patient in such
order as I shall teach you.

First for the Chollericke and Sanguine complexion, you shall take of the said
Wood half a pound, fair water eight pounds, this you must sees in such
order as is showed in the third Chapter before: and you shall give the Patient
thereof every morning and evening eight ounces at a time, and shall cause him to
sweat very well, for it is excellent good for him, and having drunk thereof
eight days, you shall purge him with this Purgation: Take of Hiera picra
galeni, half an ounce, Diacarthami three drams, and beat amongst it of
Epirimi, and Agarici trocistati of each two drammes, this you must mingle with
Betoni water, and Cuscuta Water, putting thereto so much water, that it may be
a Potion, this the Patient must drink at four of the clock in the morning, he
must neither sleep, eat, nor drink, until the Medicine have done working,
and that he feel no more pain or rumbling in his belly. Then you shall give
him his diet, and the same day he shall not drink, but at his meals according
as he is wont to do, the next morning he shall begin again with his drink,
doing in all respects as he did the eight days before, with sweating and
otherwise.

This order you shall in all points observe, until forty days be expired,
purging the Patient every eight or ninth day once. But this is always to be
noted, as well in this Chapter as in all the other, that when you begin your
cure, the first day the Patient must be purged, with the Purgation mentioned in
the said Chapter, and then to proceed in such sort as is there specified,
continuing the cure as I said before, the space of forty days. For though in
this manner aforesaid I once cured a Woman of this grievous disease, within five
and twenty days, yet I would wish the cure to be continued forty days, that
you may be the more assured yt it should not return again.

In this foresaid order you may cure all kinds of lamenes in hot and dry
complexions, and also all lamenesse proceeding of the Palsy, though it
proceeded not of the Pockes, but of the influence of the stars, or the
constellation of Saturn and the Moon in his birth, as Astronomy teaches.
These and all other lamenesse whatsoever, may in Chollericke persons be cured
in the aforesaid manner, without all imperfection, of how long continuance
soever they have been. In his diet he must behave himself mesurablie, least
any Ague or other accident do happen unto him, for the^ his health would be
far to seek, for which cause, sobriety in his diet is very requisite. This
is sufficient concerning Choleric and Sanguine complexions.

The curing of the falling sickness in Phlegmatic and Mellancholie persons.
FOr these, the Drink must be made more warming and drying then in other
co^plexions, the making of it is thus. Take one pound of this Wood, with five
pounds of water, and three pound of good Wine, this must be sodden as is
aforesaid, being stopped very close, and you must give the Patient thereof
every morning and evening seven or eight ounces at a time, observing the same
the space of eight days, upon the ninth day you shall purge him with the
aforesaid Purgation, using him in all points as is aforesaid of the choleric
persons, excepting only in his drink, which must be made as is above said, to
be more warming and drying then the other. Thus much concerning such diseases
as spring up in the brains.

Capit. 8. Of Polipus an ill disease in the nose, whereof comes the Cancer.
POlipus is a certain fleshie Apostemation growing in the nose, converting it
self at last to a Cancer, the cure thereof is not long to be protracted, for
if it be let run to a Cancer, it is so much the harder to be cured. Therefore
the Patient must thus be purged, four days together you must give him this
Iulep or Sirop.

Take of Sirope De fumo terre, one ounce, Sirope De cicorea, two ounces,
Burrage water, Endive water, Cicore water, Fumiterre water, of each two ounces,
this he must drink at four times: upon the fifth day you shall give him this
Purgation. You shall take Confectionis Hamech, and Electuarij, De suco rosarum,
of each three drams, this you shall give him with Burrage water, and Fumiterre
water, using so much of the said water that it may be a drink, which you shall
give him to drink at five of the clock in the morning, suffering him neither
to sleep, to eat nor to drink, til the Purgation have done working, and that
the Patient do not feel any more rumbling or pain in his belly, and then let
him eat measurablie. Then for the Chollericke persons, you shall make this
drink following, giving him thereof every day morning and evening eight ounces
at a time, and while he is drinking of it, you shall with an Instrument cut
away the superfluous flesh out of his nose, as much as shall be requisite,
causing him once every hour to cleanse his nose with a little stick wet in
Honey of Roses, and having drunk of his drink eight days together, you shall
purge him again with the aforesaid Purgation. This is the Drink.

Take of the Wood half a pound, and of water eight pound, this you must sees
as aforesaid, and give it to the Chollerick person to drink, as aforesaid.

For the Phlegmatic and the Mellancholicke, it must be prepared thus.
TAke of the Wood a pound and a half, Angelica and Gallingale of each one
ounce, of water seven pound, of Wine three pound. This must be stopped very
close, and sodden as aforesaid, giving thereof to the cold and moist of
complexion, every morning and evening eight ounces at a time, purging him every
ninth day with the aforesaid Purgation, he shall also wash his nose with the
Drink, for it digesteth, cleanses, and heals above measure, and therefore he
shall often wash and cleanse his nose therewith, and in so doing, he shall
undoubtedly in short time be healed.

Capit. ix. Of shortness of vvinde, coughes, and stuffinges in the breast.
FOr the Chollericke and the Sanguine, you shall make this drink following.
Take of the Wood three quarters of a pound, Isope a handful, Dates a quarter
of a pound, Lyroris two ounces, this must be sodden in ten pounds of water,
as in the third Chapter, and the day before he begin to drink thereof, you
shall give him this Purgation. Take Electuarij inde maioris half an ounce, put
there to Agarici trociscati, three drammes, give it him to drink with Buglosse
water, the next day give him of the aforesaid drink morning and evening, six
ounces at a time, using him with sweating, diet and drink as is aforesaid, and
purging him with the said Purgation every ninth day, and he shall be healed in a
short space, and shall be as long winded as ever he was in his life.

The drink for the Phlegmatic and the Mellancholick.
TAke of the Wood one pound, Isope and Dates, of each a handful, Agarici
trociscati two drammes, water five pound, sweet Wine five pound, sees it as
is aforesaid, being very close stopped, and give the Patient thereof to
drink morning and evening eight ounces at a time, doing as is aforesaid. But
for his ordinary drink at his meals, you shall make him this that follows,
(for he may not use other at his meals because of the Agaricke.) Take of the
Wood one pound, Isope, Dates, of each a handful, Lycoris two ounces, water
six pound, sweet Wine three pound, this shall he drink at meals, in all
other respects as in diet, sweating, purging, and such like, you shall use him
as is aforesaid, and he shall by Gods help be cured. Although this disease
sometimes be somewhat long in curing, yet you need not fear, for in the end
it shall undoubtedly by Gods help be cured, though the Patient have had it
never so long time.

Capit. 10. Of the diseases in the stomach, as pains, quesines, vomiting, etc.
THese diseases do arise of abundance of cold, phlegmatic, and moist
humors, and sometimes of black choler or mellancholie, to cure these
diseases, you must first prepare the matter with this Drink, and after purge
the Patient. Take of Mintes, Wormwood, Isope, Betonie, Buglosse, Cicorey,
Lettice, of each a handful, Senne leaves, and Polipodium, of each two ounces,
this must be sodden as aforesaid with a pint of water, giving the Patient
thereof to drink every morning six ounces, till it be drunk out, then you
shall purge him with Benedicta laxatiua, and Stomaticom luxatium, of each three
drams, putting thereto three ounces of Wormwood water, and give it the Patient
warm to drink, keeping himself as I have showed in other Chapters before.
The same day yt he purges, he shall neither eat much, nor any gross meat,
nor drink much at his meals, and at the end of his meal you shall give him a
slice of Diacitron, for that does comfort the stomach excellently, and the
next day you shall give him this drink.

Take of the Wood half a pound, water six pound, Cicore and Borage of each a
handful, this you shall sees as aforesaid, giving the Patient thereof
morning and evening six ounces at a time, purging him every ninth day once
with the aforesaid Purgation, and the same day that he purges, you shall give
him after his dinner one slice of Diacitro^, observing this, he shall
undoubtedly be cured.

For the Phlegmatic and the Mellancholick, how he is to be cured.
FIrst you shall make him this drink to prepare the matter withal. Take Sage,
Isope, Margerome and Mints, of each a handful, Cardus benedictus, Sorrel and
Endive, of each a handful and a half, Polipodij three ounces, Rhabarbe half
an ounce, this you must sees as aforesaid, with a pint of Wine, and a pint of
Water, giving the Patient thereof every morning six ounces until it be drunk
up. Then give him this Purgation, Electuarij, Elescoph half an ounce,
Agarici trociscati, Rhabarbari of each a dram, and a half, break and mingle
them in two ounces of wine, and two ounces of Betonie water. This you shall
give him in the morning at four of the clock, and at noone after his meat
you shall give him a slice of Diacitron, and let him not drink upon it,
afterward you shall give him this drink following.

Take of the Wood twelve ounces, Minte and Anis seeds of each a handful, water
four pound, wine three pound, let it sees as aforesaid being close
stopped, and give the Patient thereof every morning and evening eight ounces at
a time, purging him once every day with the aforesaid Purgation, and he shall
be cured of all diseases of the stomach how ill soever they be.

Capit. 11. Of diseases of the Liver, as obstruction Aposteme and the Dropsy.
ALl the diseases of the Liver (as stopping, hardness, apostemation and the
Dropsy) may all be cured with this excellent Medicine, if so be the disease be
not joined with a hot Ague, for then it should not be profitable, but very
hurtful to use it, and therefore in such a case you must use cooling
Medicines, until the Ague be clean gone, and then you shall give him this
drink. Take Agrimonie, Liuerwort, Cicorea, Endive, Acetosa, or Sorrel, of
each a handful, Lettice one ounce, Mellon seed, Gowrde seeds, of each half
an ounce, Polipodij two ounces, Agarici trociscati, and Rhabarbari, of each
three drams, this you shall sees in a pynt of water, the space of six hours
in the aforesaid order, then take it out, and strain it through a cloth,
putting in so much Sugar that it may be very sweet, then put in a little good
Wine Vinegar. Hereof you shall give the Patient to drink every morning six
ounces, until it be drunk out. You shall not need to give the Patient any
other Purgation, for this shall give him every day two or three stools, and
more then that is not good for him, by reason of the tenderness of the Liver,
and upon his Liver you shall lay a cloth made wette in Agrimonie water, and
Cicorey water, taking dilligent heed in keeping the said cloth alike warm and
moist, least the cold do increase the disease for cold is very hurtful in
Apostemations, and therefore you must keep the cloth always warm, when he
has thus continued fourteen days, he shall then take the drink being made
in this order.

Take of the Wood eight ounces, of water ten pound, Cicorey, Endive,
Agrimonie, Cuscuta, of each a handful, Reupontice, Rubarbe of each an ounce,
this must be sodden as aforesaid close stopped, and give the Patient thereof
every morning and evening six ounces at a time, continuing the same until he
be cured. But if he chance to be so hard bound that he cannot go to the
stool, then you shall every ninth day give him this Purgation.

Take Electuarij de succo rosarum, half an ounce, put thereto Rhabarbari electi
two drams, make this in form of a Potion, with Agrimonie water, and give it
him in the morning at four of the clock to drink, using such order therein
as I have prescribed in other Purgations. But if his drink do purge him, then
you shall not need any other Purgation for it does purge sufficiently in many
Patients. All this aforesaid, is to be understood of the Chollerick and the
Sanguine complexions.

To cure the diseases of the Liver in Phlegmatic and Mellancholike Patients.
FIrst you shall lay upon the Liver of the Patient Emplastrum de Melilote,
spread upon white Lether, which shall continue upon it the spare of eight
days; in ye mean while he shall use this drink. Take Maiden hair, Wormwood,
Betonie, Agrimonie, Cypres, Fumiterre, Red Coleworts, of each a handful,
Cuscuta, Camomill flowers, of each half a handful, Licoris two ounces,
Polipodij three ounces, Senne leaves two ounces, Agarici trociscati, half an
ounce, wine one pound; and water one pound, this must be sodden in a pot,
stopped very close, as a foresaid, make it sweet with Sugar, and give the
Patient thereof to drink every morning six ounces, until it be drunk out.
Then give him this drink following, taking away the aforesaid Plaster, in
the place whereof you must lay an Oxicrociu^ plaster, which shall there continue
until such time as you perceive the Patient to be cured.

The drink is this, take of the Wood one pound, of water five pound, and of
Wine five pound, put thereto of Fumiterre, Agrimonie, Cypris, of each one
handful, Polipodij, Senne leaves, of each three ounces, Rhabarbari half an
ounce, all this put together, must be sodden as aforesaid, giving the Patient
thereof to drink every morning and evening eight ounces at a time until he be
cured: the Patient shall not need any other Purgation for the drink shall purge
him sufficiently, his diet shall be young Hens flesh, and such other things
as are light of digestion, and do give much nourishment; and he shall also not
eat much, but shall be so spare in his diet, that he shall rise from his
meals with great hunger, which shall help greatly in the curing of this
disease.

This foresaid cure observed in all points as is here described, shall not
fail you, for I have had often experience thereof, and have always had good
success: but one thing I must warn you of, that is, if there be great heat
in the Dropsy, and that the disease do originally spring of heat, that then
you take not in hand to cure it with this drink of Lignum Guaiacum, unless he
be before sufficiently cooled, because it will rather increase then diminish
the disease.

observing the aforesaid order, you cannot be deceived, for it is perfect in
all the aforenamed diseases of the Liver.

Capit. 12. Of the diseases of the Mother, as the superfluous issue of
menstrums and to stay them, and of barrenness.
FIrst for those women that are of Chollericke and Sanguine complexion, you
shall give them this drink. Take Fennel, Betonie, of each a handful,
Polipodij, Senne leaves, of each three ounces, this must be sodden as before in
a pynt of water, give the Patient thereof every morning five ounces, until it
be drunk out, then give her this drink following.

Take of the Wood one pound, Wine and Water of each six pounds, this must be
sodden very close stopped as aforesaid: giving the Patient thereof every
morning and evening six ounces at a time, purging her every ninth day with
this Purgation. Diacobicum turbit, half an ounce, Mirabolanorum Citrinorum, et
Indorum, of each two dramnes, this give her with Fumiterre water, doing as is
aforesaid the issue shall cease, but if it do lack issue, it shall hereby
obtain issue in due time, for by this order of curing, the Mother is wholly
renewed, by means whereof, all her accidents do cease. And if by means
hereof the secret part be infected with any open sore or otherwise, she shall
with this said drink wash the place often, and she shall in short space be
cured perfectly, both within and without. Let this suffice for the Chollerick
and the Sanguine.

To cure the diseases of the Mother in the Phlegmatic and Mellancholick women.
THese Patients must first be purged with this Purgation. Diapheniconis half
an ounce, Mirabolanorum Kebulorum and Embelicorum, of each two drams, then you
shall sees her this drink. Take of the Wood a pound and a half, of Water six
pound, of Wine five pound, sees this as before said, giving the Patient
thereof to drink every day morning and evening, at the least six ounces at a
time, purging her every ninth day with the aforesaid Purgation, continuing this
order the space of forty days, she shall undoubtedly be cured, and shall be
more healthful then ever she was before.

Capit. 13. To cure the Cancer in any place of the body wheresoever.
THis loathsome and fearful disease being once settled, is not cured with any
Medicine, and therefore you must in time have recourse to this excellent
remedy, for there have many been cured by means of this, which could not
find help by any other. The Patient must first be purged with this drink.
Take Hounds tongue called in Latin Cinoglossa, and Agrimonie, of each two
handfuls, Wine half a pound, water one pound, Polipodii and Senne leaves, of
each one dram, Agarici trociscati half an ounce, Elebori nigri two drammes,
this altogether shall be sodden as aforesaid, and then make it sweet with
Sugar, and give the Patient thereof to drink every morning six ounces, until
it be drunk out, then give him this drink following. Take of the Wood half
a pound, water ten pound, Ciuoglossa, and Agrimonie of each a handful:
sees this as aforesaid, and give the Patient thereof to drink, every morning
and evening eight ounces at a time, purging him every nynth day until he be
cured, with Confectio Hamech half an ounce, and if the Patient be strong of
body, you shall give him six drammes with Fumiterre water, his meat that he
shall eat, shall be sodden in such order as is aforesaid, putting thereto
Lettice and Buglosse, and he shall be sober in his diet: but if it chance the
Patient not to be cured in forty days, yet he shall not leave of the cure
until such time as he be whole, for that this is the surest remedy that can
be found against this loathsome disease, and therefore I would wish you not to
leave it until you be perfectly cured.

To cure the Cancer in cold complexions.
FIrst you must purge the Patient with an ounce of Confectio Hamech, mingled
with Agrimonie water, this shall be given him in such order as is used in other
Purgations. And then you shall give him this drink following. Take of the wood
a pound and a half, Water and Wine, of each five pound, Agrimonie and
Cinoglossa of each a handful, this must be sodden as aforesaid, being very
close stopped at the least ten hours, giving the Patient thereof every
morning and evening, eight ounces at a time, keeping him very warm that he
may sweat, not forgetting to purge him every ninth day, with six drams of
Confectio Hamech, so doing, he shall by Gods help be cured, although he had
had it ten years.

Capit. 14. Of all other Vlcerations, whether they come of the Pockes or
otherwise.
ALl other Vlcerations whether they proceed of the Pockes or otherwise, as
Fistoles in the Mother, and other open sores in the secret parts both of man
and woman, which cannot with any other Medicine be healed, and all open sores
wheresoever, also all pain and grief in the arms and legs, and all pushes
or byles in any place of the body, may altogether be cured with the drink
made of this excellent Wood aforesaid, after this manner. First you shall purge
the Patient with Pillulae Iudae, giving him in the evening three hours after
his supper four scruples of the said Pills in the night when he awaketh,
feeling great pain and rumbling in his belly, he shall prepare himself to
the stool, and having begun to purge, he shall not sleep until he have
done purging, and that he feel no more griping or rumbling in his belly, and
then he shall eat some good meat, as Mutton or Veale, which must be sodden as
heretofore I have taught you, then you shall give him this drink following.
Take of the Wood one pound, water twelve pound, this must be sodden as
aforesaid, give the Patient thereof twice every day, eight ounces at a time,
causing him to sweat well, for that does help very much in the curing of his
disease, and every ninth day you shall purge him with the said Pills, but in the
evening when you give him the Pills, you shall not suffer him to drink but at
his supper, this order he must observe forty days.

But if it come to pass (as oftentimes it does) that the Patient is sooner
cured, as sometimes in twenty or five and twenty days, yet I counsel you
not to leave of the cure until the forty days be expired, that you may be
the more assured that it shall not return again, for oftentimes it seems to
be cured when the root remains still within, which in the end breaks out
again, and so is worse then at the first, and therefore I counsel you to
continue ye same forty days, that the root being taken away, you need not
fear the return of the disease.

For the Phlegmatic and the Mellancholicke.
YOu shall purge the Patient with Pillulae cochiae, and Pillul Aggregatiu, of
each two scruples, this must be given him in the evening, using him in all
respects as is said of the other, then you shall give him this drink.

Take of the Wood a pound and a half, wine six pound, Water seven pound,
this you must sees as aforesaid, giving the Patient thereof morning and
evening eight ounces at a time, purging him every ninth day once with the
aforesaid Pills, causing him to sweat very well. The sores he shall wash
every day six or seven times with the aforesaid drink, for it is the best
salve that can be used herein, for it cleanses and mollifieth more then any
other Ointment that is used, and to conclude, I say, if you do according to
the contents of this Chapter, there is no Malladie so ill proceeding of the
Pockes, nor other open sores how ill soever, but may by this means be cured.

Capit. 15. How to cure the Rupture.
SOmetimes it happens a man first to be broken, and after to get the
Pockes, and sometime it chances him to break while he has them, these cannot
any other way be cured, but with the Drink made of this excellent Wood, the
order of it is thus. You shall first purge him with Pills De fumiterr, and
being purged you shall give him this drink following. Take of the Wood one
pound, of Water twelve pound, this you must sees as aforesaid, and give the
Patient thereof twice every day eight ounces at a time, purging him every ninth
day once with the aforesaid Purgation. This he shall observe forty days, and
he shall undoubtedly be cured, though he were fifty years old and had had
it twenty years and if he have the Pockes, they shall also herewithall be
cured, and he shall be made whole and sound in all his members.

To cure the same in Phlegmatic and Mellancholicke persons.
THese must first be purged with Pillulis fetidis, whereof you shall give the
Patient four scruples, making thereof nine Pills, which he shall take in the
evening, as aforesaid, the next day you shall give him of this drink. Take of ye
wood, one pound, Wine and water, of each four pound, this you must sees as
aforesaid, giving the Patient thereof every morning and evening eight ounces
at a time, purging him once every ninth day with the aforesaid Pills. His
meat shall be sodden as aforesaid, with Sanikell and Consolida Mayor, whereto
you shall add Wine and Cinnamon to amend the taste.

In this sort I cured one in the space of a month, which was seauentie years
old, making him whole and sound from all such greefes as he had besides.
Therefore you shall not use any other means, for those that have the Pocks, and
are also troubled with the rupture, but only this aforesaid, for without
this, nothing else can help.

Capit. xvj. Of Podagra or the Gout.
THis disease is of a wonderful strange nature as experience teaches us,
coming to man first by the influence of the stars in his birth, that is when
the Moon is infortuned with Mars and Saturn, which causes the person then
borne, to be more inclined to the said disease the^ others are, and then
withal, leading his life disorderly in lechery, surfeiting, and drunkenness,
is by and by attached with this said disease.

The opinion of many men is, that this disease cannot be cured, but that is not
so, for there are very many that are cured of it, which by their disordered
living do fall into it again, which if they would lead their lives well and
in good order, they should remain whole being once cured, especially those
that are healed in this sort: notwithstanding, I grant it will very hardly
be cured, if it run so far that it have hardened the knockles of the hands,
and the joints of the foot, for then the matter is become so dry, that it is
almost impossible to resolve it, but if it be taken in any reasonable time, it
may in this sort be cured.

First you must purge the Patient with Pillule de hermo dactilis, whereof you
shall take one dram, making thereof seven Pills, which you shall give the
Patient at midnight, letting him sleep thereon three hours, and then you
shall awake him if he awake not of himself, keeping him awake that the
Purgation may the better work upon him, not suffering him to sleep until it
have done working, and then he shall eat his meat, the next day you shall
give him the drink mentioned in the former Chapter for the Chollericke, but in
the seething of it, you shall put into it a handful of Cipres, which is an
Herb so called, purging him every ninth day once with ye aforesaid Pills,
doing in all respects as is mentioned in the Chapter going before: but you
shall cause him to sweat very much, for that is very good and also to dry the
sweat very well from him with warm clothes, that it go not in again, for if
it go in again, it were as good for him not to sweat at all. Thus much for
the Chollericke and the Sanguine.

For the Phlegmatic and the Mellancholick.
YOu shall also purge him with the aforesaid Pills, and then you shall give
him of the drink mentioned in the former Chapter, for the Phlegmatic and the
Mellancholicke, remembering in the seething, to put in a handful of Cypres,
purging him every ninth day with the aforesaid Pills, which you shall
continue until he be healed.

This suffiseth for the Gout, showing the order how it is to be cured. We
have also entreated sufficiently of all accidents which chance by means of
the Pocks, with diverse other diseases, springing not of the Pockes but of other
causes, how all such diseases are to be cured by means of this excellent
wood, is before sufficiently made manifest. I have also in the first part of
this Book (for their sakes that have any understanding) opened many noble
secrets of Mercury, but because the most part are not enstructed in the Art
of preparing the Mercury, I have for their sakes written this second part,
for the help of the Patient, because I would not have them remain uncured,
wishing the health of all men.

Yet notwithstanding, Mercury being rightly prepared, does seem to work
miracles, so short and so excellent he is in his operation, whereof hereafter
(God wylling) we will write more.

Thus I conclude this treatise, desiring God to spare me until I have
performed my purposed intent, in writing to his glory and to the profit of my
neighbor. Thus loving Reader I commit thee to GOD almighty, to whom be all
praise, honor and glory, both now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Printed by John Charlwood.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
PAge 2. line 3. put out the first and. Page 7, line 2, read Mercury and
Lignum vitae. Page 7, line 9, for Ciuober, read Cinober. Page 8, line 25, for
Bernagie, read Borrage. Page 18, line 31, for dissolve it, read dissolve them.
Page 21, line 3, read Emunctorij, line 4. read places. Page 21, line 30, for
in, read on. Page 26, line 4, read feniculi, and for endinie, read endiui Page
26, line 13, for Iudum, read Indum. and for Hermodactilus, read Hermodactiles.
Page 26, line 15, read Arthriticae, and for aree, read aurae. Page 26, line 16,
for sieve, read sine. Page 51, line 7, read stomaticum laxatiuum. Page 51, line
13, read Dicitonion, and for Diacitron, line 21. read Diacitonion. Page 52,
line 5, read Diacitonion. Page 55, line 18, for Diacobicu^ turbit, read
Diacatholicon. Page 58, line 5, read Indae.
Also I admonish the friendly Reader, to take heed how he do minister any
purgative receipt, according as it is here in this Book set forth, without
the good advise and counsel of the learned Physician.


