GREAT BRITTANS Mourning Garment.

GIVEN To all faithful sorrowful Subjects at the Funeral Of Prince HENRY.

LONDON. Imprinted by G. Eld for Arthur Ionson. 1612.

To the Honorable Knight, Sir DAVID MVRRAY.
AND To the other Nobly descended, and honorably minded followers of the late
deceased Prince HENRY.
ON whom shall I these funeral notes bestow,
Newly bedeaw'd and hallowed with my tears?
But on you chiefly, for your secret woe
The heauiest burden of our sorrow bears;
We but as strangers on the shore lament,
A common ship-wracke, but you that did owe
Your service to that golden vessel (rent)
What wonder if your griefs do ouer-flow?
By how much greater your fair fortunes were,
The loss is so much greater you sustain,
We meaner men may our mischances bear
With lesser trouble, and more equal pain,
Yet spare your tears though you have cause to moan
It is not meet you should lament alone.
II.
MElpomene, and all you sacred brood,
Of Mnemosine with living Laurel crowned,
You that have filled your veins with heavenly food
And scorn to pray upon the barraine ground,
Help me these Funeral Anthems to resound.
For his sweet soul, who living loved you dear
But now is dead, and other Saints has found,
Leaving you to lament his fortunes here.
Strew Cypress, and pale Violets on his Tomb,
And on his fair Crest fix a Crown of Bays
Immortal, That who'euer there does come
May view the Ensigns of his endless praise:
And let some Spirit guard the holy Cell,
Wherein the bones of that brave Prince shall dwell.
III.
YOu gentle spirits that turn not your eyes
From common griefs, nor are of metal made
Such as these Iron Ages do comprise;
Come see, wherein our humane glory lies:
See living virtues in death daily fade,
Withered and wasted in th'vnthankfull grave:
For as a flower, or Summers passing shade;
Such is the hope and fortune worldlings have:
Oh noble Prince, thy days but new begun,
And that same Ensign long since brought from France
By Edward the black-Prince, third Edwards Son,
Being by thee but lately re-aduanc't;
Why should such honor into darkness go,
And leave so many friends so full of woe?
IIII.
OH froward Saturn, and maleuolent,
That every blooming glory do envy,
And with thy frosts do nip the buds yet pent
In their green bowers through thy vilde Jealousy,
And hateful malice to all living things.
Why do thou spread on us thy dismal light
Covering our fairest flowers with thy cold wings?
How far art thou unlike to Phoebus bright,
That joys to see the smallest blossom thrive,
And throws his gentle light on every thing?
But thou, perverse, do all of life deprive,
Man, Beast, and Plant thou do to ruin bring:
Unlucky Star, albeit thou thought him fit
To stoop to thee, thou might have spared him yet.
V.
ANd you foul wrinckled destinies that do sit,
In darkness to deprive the world of light
Making the thread, and sudden mangling it,
through peevish rancour, and perverse despite.
Your hand appears in this our Tragedy,
The wound we feel, by your sharp edge was made,
That edge which cut the golden twist so nigh
Of our Prince HENRY, who in liueles shade
As yet amassed of his sudden change
Looks for those loving friends whom he loved best;
But when he sees himself so far estranged,
He Yields his spirit to eternal rest:
Hard-hearted fates, that him of life deprive,
That leaves so many mournful friends alive.
VI.
SAd Melancholy lead me to the Cave
Where thy black Incense and dim Tapers burn,
Let me some dark and hollow corner have,
Where desolate my sorrows I may mourn:
And let thy heauiest Music softly sound
Unto the doleful songs that I recite;
And ever let this direful voice rebound
Through the vast den: Ah dead is Britans light;
Then if thy heart be with compassion moved
Of my Laments, come rest thy self by me,
And mourn with me, for thou have ever loved
To bear a part in every Tragedy:
And if to plaints thou will inure thy mind,
Thou never could a fitter season find.
VII.
WHo in some earthly Paradise has espide,
And long time viewed with pleasure of his eye
A well grown Plant, adorned on every side
With beauteous blossoms lifted up on high,
Ready when his due season shall require,
To yield the sweet fruit of his boasted flowers,
But all on sudden with heavens liquid fire
Is blasted, and on earth untimely powers,
His unripe glory by his Fate prevented:
Who such a luckles spectacle has known;
Let him compare the fortune then presented
Unto Prince HENRY'S Fate, and let him moan
That he to leave all Tropheis now is seen,
Whose Crest of late was honored with, ICH Dien.
VIII.
THey that shall see Prince HENRY'S sad built Tomb,
And think his corpse are only shrouded there,
Err far from truth, nor seem to understand
How many virtues in that Worthy were.
A thousand graces with him buried lie,
A thousand Triumphs, and a thousand loves,
With him the life of honor seems to die,
And that brave troop of Nymphs that from the groves
Were wont to tread the measures through the green;
Since Henry's death into dark caves are fled,
Nor ever since of mortal eye were seen,
So that the world reports that they are dead,,
And sooth, I know not, but they loved him so,
That it is no wonder if they died for woe.
IX.
EVen as the substance of a shooting star
Grown great by Time, now ready with new light
Throughout the world to spread his glory far,
And emulate the rays of Titan bright,
Soon as the hoped fire has given him power,
To show his glory, and aloft to shine,
Even in a moment in the selfsame hour,
His golden head does down to earth incline;
And those Illustrious beams which lately sent
Such star-like brightness do to darkness turn,
And all his glorious hope so quickly spent,
Leaves but a smoaky cloud his end to mourn,
So did Prince HENRY in his glory fall,
And left us nothing but his funeral.
X
YOu sacred Forests, and you spotles streams
That part the flowery meadows with your fall,
You water-Nymphes and Ladies of the Tea'ms,
And thou dread Thamesis, mother of them all;
With brinish tears weep in your sandy Ford:
Weep fields, and groves, and you poor Driads weep,
The sudden Funeral of our British Lord,
Whose eyes are now closed up in iron sleep.
Both trees, and streams, lament his loss that loved
Your silver waters, and wide spreading shades,
But now is far away from you remoov'd,
Unto a Paradise that never fades,
There in eternal happiness to remain,
But we in sorrow here, and ceasless pain.
XI.
OH how uncertain are the days of Man?
How many dangers undermine our joys?
Suppose we shun the stormy Ocean,
Nor stand aghast at Cannons fearful noise,
Admit we put Achilles Armor on,
That never could be pierced by mortal Iron,
Or live enclosed in towers of brass or stone,
Such as no power of enemy can enuiron.
Yet are we not secure from stroke of death,
Our foe we nourish even in our breasts,
The venomous disease that stops our breath:
Oh learn to cast out such ungrateful guests,
Thy fortunes Henry had not fallen out so,
If thou had feared none but an outward foe.
XII.
AWake Euterpe my dull drooping Song
With thy melodious thundering blastes awhile:
Help thou my fainting fury to prolong,
And power new fire into my frozen style:
Then like a bold enchaunter I will call,
The mournful shadows from infernal deep,
They know best how t'adorne a Funeral
Or what rights do belong to them that sleep.
No: Rest you ghosts, possess your quiet peace,
My griefs forbid me to disturb the dead,
And rest fond tears, and fruitless Dirges cease,
But thou that with thy Trumpet shril do spread
The praise of worthies (oh impartial fame)
Help me to celebrate Prince Henry's name.
XIII.
WHat grace, what fortuns could our hearts invent
While yet Prince H. in his cradel lay?
That did not following join in one consent
To make him fortunate to his dying day.
Shall I recount the honors with him borne,
Which from his worthy Ancestors were derived?
Or those rare virtues, which his mind adorned?
Or shall these notes his man-like actions praise;
(Whereof too soon our senses are deprived?)
Or comely gestures when he pleased to grace
The Lordly reuells, and a thousand ways,
The winding measure with his steps to trace:
I, there my Muse if thou for grief could stay,
We might pass over a long summers day.
XIIII.
You holy Angels, and you powers of light,
And you that in old Abraham's bosom rest,
The glad enioyers of Gods glorious sight
Have you received your sanctified guest?
Has Henry the Caelestiall seat obtained?
Shines he in roabes of immortality?
And of his well run race the crown now gained,
Scorns he our earthly Pomp, and Majesty?
For while his jolly Pilgrimage did last,
His guiltless hands were free from blood, and strife;
Void of vain pride, and as the snow new chac't
From her high Mansion, was his thread of life,
True Christian faith endu'd with constant mind,
And unto such the promise was assigned.
XV.
VVHereto shall I Prince Henry's life compare?
His Infancy even to those beams that shine,
Before the Sun vnmaskes his visage bare
Beating the shadows from his goulden eyne.
And those bright hours, that with their temperate heat
Glad the green earth, and teach the birds to sing,
And Swains their ancient Carrols to repeat:
Those that present his ripe years in their spring
Thus still with fresh delights, and glory led,
Till the slow shep-heard does his flock enfould,
And th'euening Sun on the dry earth does spread
New pleasing light, then suddenly behold
Night comes, and chases HENRY'S life away,
And makes it like unto a Summers day.
XVI.
I Muse from whence these forward tears should flow
Or when our mind of secret grief complains,
Why though unwilling through our eyes we show
The inward passion of our hidden pains.
I know our sighs are but the cooling air,
Wherewith our fainting heart we do sustain,
That else would smother in her own despair,
All comfort thankles breathing back again.
But wherefore Nature should in open view,
Create two fountains full of living source:
Whether so soon as we find cause to rue,
Our Passions make their general recourse
Who knows? unless thereby we should reveal
That our true sorrows we should not conceal.
XVII.
MOther of heaviness yield me one request,
For many drops upon thine Altar shed,
Since thou thy mournful galleries have dressed
With careful monuments of th'untimely dead:
To feed with view of their callamities
Thy pensive humor, and selfe-hating sight,
For there Troyes Queen in painted languor lies,
And forlorn Dido robbed of her delight
Kneeles on the burning pile: There Mausolus tomb:
There stands Pyrene wept into a spring,
And with his love Mark Anthony of Rome,
Their grief in dead imbracements uttering,
Among these spectacles let a Hearse be made
For woeful HENRY that may never fade.
XVIII.
ONce more Melpomene grant thy willing aid,
I sing not now of frantic Progne's change,
Nor of the boy transformed into a maid:
Nor how the girl did like a Heifar range.
Far sadder notes, my sullen Music yields,
Far other dreams afflict my sad repose
Of broken Tombs, and of the Elisian fields,
And of the scathfull floulds, that Dis enclose.
But let such vain thoughts vanish with my sleep,
And of Prince Henry's death now let us sing,
And teach the Rocks on Monas shores to weep,
And fright the sea with their vast bellowing:
That Neptune hearing of their pitteous cry,
May think that all the Western world did die.
XIX.
THou shall not die Prince HENRY, if my songs
Hereafter tuned to a higher key
Can sound the honor that to thee belongs,
With sacred murmur of eternity:
With Cordelion in the Towers of Fame,
And with the dreadful HENRY'S of this land,
(Oh never on earth did sound a mightier name)
Thy meeker Image crowned with Bays shall stand:
Then shall my Accents break with more success,
But now rude grief that no adornment bears
Smothers my notes, and bids me but express
A sudden sorrow with my simple tears:
Suffices me while thy sweet Ghost does sleep,
Long over it with watery eyes to weep.
To the sad household of Prince HENRY.
IF virtue, goodness, and a sober life,
If gravity, and wisdom in young years,
If a thrice honored state, void of all strife
And all good gifts that man's perfection bears,
Could but have stopped the fatal hand of death,
Then worthy HENRY still had drawn his breath.
Whose flesh and Spirit disioyn'd but for a time,
With steadfast hope parted to meet again,
His heavenly parts upwards to heaven do climb;
His earthly must a while in earth remain,
Till death has left to kill, and man to die,
And Time given place to all Eternity.
Fo so the Canon of eternal date,
Has praeordain'd (things bounded must obey)
Virtue is an immortal estimate,
Which neither Time nor Death can ouer-sway
By her Prince HENRY lives; for virtues fame
Eterniseth his memorable name.
Whose hope-full Age not come to Twenty years,
In place of Honor and Authority.
Did bear a burden in the Countries cares,
That gave his name an happy Memory.
So just, so wise, S'vpright in every thing,
As stopped the venom of foul enuies sting.
You that his friends and household followers were,
That saw the sober carriage of his life:
How he him self to all estates did bear,
So Nobly minded, and so free from strife.
Oh you and none so well, can sound his praise,
That knew the upright treadings of his ways.
I do but sound the Accents of Report,
And sure Report gives him a worthy name,
That from his Cradle lived in virtues Court,
Now free from change being registered by fame.
Enioyes in heaven, heavens immortality,
And here on earth, earths happy Memory.
FINIS.

