The History of Herodian, a Greek Author, treating of the Romayne Emperors,
after Marcus, translated out of Greek into Latin, by Angelus Politianus, and
out of Latin into English, by Nicholas Smyth. Whereunto are annexed, the
Arguments of every Book, at the beginning thereof, with Annotacions for the
better understanding of the same Historye.

Cum gratia and priuilegio regali ad imprimendum solum.

(?)

WILLIAM Coplande.

To the right honorable Lord, Wyllyam Earl of Penbroke, etc. Lord President
of the King and Queens Majesty's Counsel, in the Marches of Wales, and one
of their Majesty's most honorable preuie Counsel, his humble Orator Nycholas
Smyth, wysheth all things prosperous.
Amongst all those, that have by their writing, beautifyed the Greek and
Latin tongue, none are supposed (right honorable and virtuous Lord) so much to
have profited mortal affairs, as Historiographers, who have faithfully
reduced into writing the acts and deades of such, as in fame (either good or
evil) have passed this transitorye life. They have put before our eyes, the
lives, manners, and doings, of all sorts of men, with their counselles,
fortunes, and adventures, the which their posterity may, as in a painted
Table behold: and thereby learn to profit, as well the Common wealth, as
their own private estate. Chieflye, through the manyfold examples, both good,
and evil, contained in Histories, all sorts of people may attain by them, to
more knowledge in short space, then otherwise they might in all their lives, if
ye same were much longer then the common age of man. For proof whereof, we have
the memory of Lucius Lucullus the noble Roman: who (as Cicero writes) at
his departure from Rome against the great king Mythridates) being utterly
unskillful in warfare, whiles he sailed on the Sea, so trauayled, in conferring
with learned men, and reading of Histories, that when he arrived in Asie, he
was so excellent in warlyke knowledge, that by the confession of Mythridates,
he deserved preferment above all the Chieuetaynes in war, that were before
his time. Alexander Seuerus also, Emperor of Rome, when so ever he made
preparation to war, accustomed to consulte with such as were expert in
Histories. And good cause why. For if Use (as says Afranius) has engendered
wisdom: and Memory as the Moother, has brought her into light: Who ought
to be more sage, and discrete, then they which reteyne in memory, the deades,
and manners, not only of one age, or City, but of al ages, and nations? This
much considering (right excellent Lord) and enduced by the prudente words of
Salust, in his Preface to Catilines wonderful Coniuration, whereby he exhorts
man (if he entende to be reputed worthyer then other mortal Creatures) so to
employe his whole labor, and study, that he ouerslyp not his life, in
slouthful silence, as savage, and brute beasts, whom Nature has fourmed
prone, and subject, to ye filthy lusts of the bealy: I have enterprysed to
translate out of Latin this present History of Herodian, a Greek Author,
treating of the Romayn Emperors, between Marcus the Philosopher, and Gordianus
the younger, not before (I think) brought into our English tongue. And have
presumed, to dedicat ye same unto your good Lordshyp, whom not only fame, but
also experience, does apparau^tly prove, to be the perfect Patron of
knyghtlye prowes, and virtue. Humbly besechyng your good Lordshyp, of your
accustomed clemency, so to accept this my simple gift, being the Croppe of my
barreyne Harvest, as may embolden other ioyfullye to embrace it, and encourage
me, to employe my poor labor further hereafter. And so I remain a continual
Intercessor to almyghtye God, for the prosperous estate of your Lordshyppe,
with contynuall increase of virtue, and honor.

THE PROHEME OF the history of Herodian, treating of the Romayne Emperors,
after Marcus.
THey which have delivered unto their posterity ancient tradicions, and
endeavored to renew by writing the old memory of hystories: They I say,
earnestly affecting the renown of erudicion and learning: and busyly studyeng
to preserve their names from thiniurie of oblivion, did employ much less
labor in searching out the truth, then in trimmynge the style of their
Histories. Knowinge precisely, that although they falsefyed any thing long
before their time passed, the same could not be reprehendid, and yet
nevertheless them selfs should (through the pleasant eloquence, of their finely
penned talk) obtain very much commodity, of their paynefull travail. Other
some being moved, with particular enmityes and hatred of Tyrauntes, or else
fallen into unmeasurable flaterye, with praysyng of Princes, Cities, and
private persons, did through skylfull knowledge of writing, blase and extol
far above truth, things that by them selves were simple and of no
estimacion. But I in contrary wise, have enterprysed to write an historye, not
received of others, unknown, or else wanting witnesses, but at this present,
fixed and remaining in the memories of the Readers, and collected with synguler
truth and diligence. Trustyng, that the knowledge of those things, (being
many and great, and not long agone happened) will not be unpleasant to the
posterite. For if a man will well ponder all the ages since the time of
Augustus, (when the Romayne superiority was committed to the arbitrament of
one man) he shall not find in all those.ii.c. years (so many almost perdy are
reckened between Augustus, and Marcus) so diverse successions in thempire, so
variable chances and happes in the wars either Ciuyle or foreyn, so many
nations raised up, or so many of our own and barbarous Cities destroyed,
besides earthquakes and plagues, the lives also of Princes, and Tiraunts so
strange and incredible, that none or at the lest very few like examples can
be found amongs our elders. Of which princes, some of long time remained in
authority, other some a short while enjoyed the dominion yea many of them
scarcely entered into honor, and being only named Emperors, lost thempire
the very same day they took it upon them. And when by the space of.lx.
years, the City of Rome had sustained more governors then for the time
sufficed, it came to pass, that many strange things and worthy admiracion
chanced. For the Princes somewhat stricken in age, as men expert in sundry
affairs, did prudently govern themselves and their charge. On the other side
the young men ledinge their lives in voluptuousnes, invented and commanded new
things daily. wherbie it happened, that the young princes, being of unlike
age and license, did also follow unlike study and manners. How these things
were done, in obseruinge a just order of the true time and princes, we will now
declare.

The contents of the first book.
THe Author begins his historye at the end of Marcus Antoninus reign, who
was successor unto Aurelius Antoninus surnamed Pius: And it behooves to know,
that after ye opinion of Eusebius in his tables, Marcus Antoninus was
the.xiiii. Emperor of Rome. But after the opinion of other Historiographers,
he was the.xvii. The first was Julius Caesar. The second Octauius Caesar,
Augustus. The third Tiberius Caesar. The iiii. Caius Caligula. The.v. Claudius
Caesar. The.vi. Nero Claudius Caesar. The.vii. Sergius Galba. The.viii. Otho
Siluius. The.ix. Aulus Vitellius. The.x. Flauius Vespasianus. The.xi. Titus
Vespasianus. The twelve Domitianus. Of which twelve Suetonius Tranquillus
has written compendiouslye. Paulus Orosius says, that Nerua succeaded
Domitian, after Nerua Traian, after Traian, Adrian, after Adrian Antoninus
Pius, with his two Sons Aurelius, and Lucius, whom Marcus Antoni^us Verus,
and Aurelius Commodus, his brother succeaded. Which Marcus Antoni^us (of whom
presently the question is) ouerliued the other, and remained sole Emperor
being the.xvii. in nombre, reckening Julius Caesar for the first. Of the
lignage, virtue, science, and decease, of this Marcus, Herodian speaks in the
beginning of this first book: after whom his Son Commodus, reigned: being
in the beginning, gentle, meek, and of good disposicion. But after he had
escaped the Treason of Lucilla his own Sister, Perennes the Captain of his
guard, Ma^ternus, and Cleander the liuetenaunte of his army, he altered to
dissolute and dishonest life, and Tirannie. Wherefore he was poisoned by Martia
one of his Co^cubynes, Letus the Captain of his Guard, and Electus his
principal Cha^berlaine: And after at their appointment, strangled by Narcissus.

FINIS.
The first book of the history of Herodian.
The Emperor Marcus had many daughters, The childerne of Marcus. Verissimus.
and.ii. sons only, of whom the younger named Verissimus, by myschaunce died
in his tender age. The other named Commodus, Commodus.
the father brought up with great diligence and care. And having gotten from all
parts excellent learned men, waged the^ with large stipendes, that they
should every man for his part, garnysshe the manners and disposicion of his
Son. He married his daughters at their ripe age, unto the best of the
Senators, choosyng to his Sons in law, not such as could show furthe
large pedegrues of their auncestrie, or such as vaunted them selves of their
great treasoure, but those which excelled in perfect modesty of manners, and
Innocence of life. For that he esteamed, to be the only, perfect, and
stable, richesse of the mind.

He forgate no virtue, The good disposicion of Marcus.
wherein he exercised not him self: being so studious of the antiquity of
learning, that in the same, he might be compared, to the best either of the
Greeks, or of the Romans. For proof hereof, there are many things both
spoken, and written, by him, commen even unto our time. He was so curteis, that
he would gentely take every commer unto him by the hand: not permytting, that
any man should be forbidden by his guard, the approaching unto his person. And
he only, among all the Emperors, used the study of Sapience, not in
words, or knowledge of decrees, but in gravity of manners, and continency of
life. Whereby it came to pass, that the same age and time, brought furthe a
great increase of wise men, for communely, men are wont to follow the lives and
manners of their princes. But now, as touching the notable acts by him done,
as well at Rome, as else where, how he behaved him self also, toward the
Barbarous nations enhabytinge the East, and the North, the same are contained
in the monumentes of many excellent learned men. But those things, which
(after the death of Marcus, by all ages.) I both saw and hard, (whereof many
by experience my self knew, as one traded in common affairs, and princes
business) I have taken upon me to write.

Pannonie.
Whiles the old Emperor Marcus soiourned among the Pannoniens, a very
grievous disease came upon him, not only worn with age, but also sore broken
with continual travail and care. Wherefore, when he perceived no remedy but
death, he began greatly to doubt in him self, lest his Son, (who was but
then entered the first years of his Adolescencie) either through vehemency of
his youth, Adolescencie.
or else through an inordynate license, which he should have after his
fathers death, leuynge all good exercise, and study aparte, would addycte him
self to drunkenness, and superfluous riot. For he knew well, that the minds
of young men, easily declyne, to immoderate superfluytie, from laudable and
honest dysciplyne. He was troubled besides, with the memory of many princes,
which being but young men, took upon them the governance of royaulmes: as
well of Dionisius the Tiraunt of Sicile, Dionisius.
(whose intemperatenes of life was so great, that he endowed with richest
rewards, thinuentours of new pleasures: as also of them which succeaded
Alexander, of Macedonie: who did so shamefullye and Tiranouslye raygne, that
they purchased to his kyngedome, a notorious obloquy. For Ptolomeus, fell into
so detestable life, Ptolomeus.
that contrary to the laws of the Macedoniens, and all the Greeks, he was
entangled, with thincest marriage of his own Sister. Antigonus also, Antigonus.
Bacchus
(to represent the GOD Bacchus) was wont, in stead of the Macedonien Diadem
and crown to were a Garlande of yuie, and for a scepter, to carye a thystell.
The old man was vexid besides, with late examples, as of Nero, Nero.
who abstayned not from the murdering of his own moother, and made him self
as a laughing stock, unto all the people. He remembered Domytian, Domitia^
who left nothing undone that he thought to appertain unto extreme
Crueltye. Wherefore, wayeng with him self thiese images of tyranny, he was
tossed between hope and fear. The nygh nation of the Germaynes, increased also
his perplexity: for he had not thoroughly brought them in subjection, but
some he had taken into his frendshyppe, and the rest, he had vanquysshed by
force of battle. Many of the same were escaped, and hid them selves, for
fear of the prince. Wherefore he doubted greatly least after his death,
they would rebelle again, in setting at naught the youth of his Son: for
he knew, the nature of the barbarous people, was to be sturred with every
small tryfle. Being turmented with thiese troublesome waves of care, he caused
as many his friends, and kynsmen as were then in his company to repair unto
his presence, and at their coming togythers, having commanded his Son to
stand before them, he lyfted him self somewhat upon his pylowe, and made this
oracion unto them.

It is not to be meruayled at, The oracion of Marcus upon his death bed
that you are sorrowful and pensyfe, beholding me in this plighte: for it is
the nature of man, to bewail the misfortune of other. And those things we see
with our eyes, do provoke much more compassion and pity. Besides this my
reason is commune with you: for in the recompense of the good will I have
heretofore borne you, I hope and as of duty look for a mutual benevolence at
your hands. And at this present it is so happened, that I must make proof,
whether I have in vain so long to fore exhybited honor unto you, (having you
always in estimacion) and employed all my diligent study toward your
welthe: And you in recompencing the same to show your selves not vnmyndefull
of the benefytes you have received: ye see my son whom your selves have
norished, entering now the first bounds of his youth. And (as it were) in
the swolowe and waves of mortal life, wanting governors: lest ye through
ignorance, being drawn from his right course, he acquaynte himself with
disordered exercyses. Be you therefore, (for me but one) many fathers unto him,
in garnyshing his manners, with prompting, and minystring wholesome precepts unto
him: for, neither may the abundance of treasour, satisfy the sensual lusts
of tyranny, neither can the Emperor, be assuredly defended by the band of
his guard, enuyroning his person, except, he have the good wills of those whom
he governs. For evermore they reign long, and peaceably, by whom no fear
through cruelti, but love through gentleness, is powered into the hearts of the
Citezyns: neither they whom force constrayneth, but those which of their free
wylles obey, are either in doing or suffering, exempt from all suspicio^ of
flatery. The same do not at any time, (except they be outragiously handeled)
grudge, or impugn, the rule of their superiors. But it is very hard for a
man, which lives in most inordinate license, to govern him self, and bridle
his affections. Wherefore, if ye will be Authors of well living unto him, and
oftentimes admonyshe him of those things he presently hears, ye shall with
that one labor, both make him a good prince unto your selfs, and all other,
and also deserve the participation of our memory, which with this one point
ye may make immortal. Whiles the emperor Marcus was speaking thiese words,
his vital spirit began so sodeinly to fail, that furthwyth, he was enforced
to cease his talk, and slide down into his bed again. Then so great
compassion, perced the hearts of all that were present, that many of them,
being through sorrow almost berafte their right senses, raised a dolorouse
clamor. He having languysshed, only a day and a night after ended his life:
leuing behind him, a great want, and desire, of him self, unto men of that
age, and unto their posterite, a perpetual renown of virtue. When the fame of
his death, was spreadde abroad, an incredible lamentacion was, as well amongst
the hole army self, as the common people: So that no man within the Roman
dominion, received this message, without abundaunt sheading of tears. And
bewayleng the loss of him, with one accord, some called him a good father,
other some a bening Emperor, Certain a most valiant Captain, and many a
ryghteous and moderate prince: And truly, there was none of them deceived.
Now after a few days passed, when the funeral obsequies were performed, it
seamed good unto his friends, to bring the young Emperor unto the army, that
he might, both speak unto the soldiers, and (as the usage of new Emperors
is) in distributyng of money largely amongst them establyshe their minds, (as
it were by obligacion) unto him. It was therefore commanded, that the
soldiers, according to the old custom, should repair togithers in the
field: After whose assembly, The Emperor Commodus came furthe, and having
finyshed the divine ceremonies, ascended themperiall throne, (for the same
purpose) in the mids of the camp erected: Where having about him his fathers
friends, (who were many excellent learned men) he spoke these words, or much
like that ensue.

I am fully persuaded, The oracion of Commodus.
that the dolor of this calamite, is common to me with you: And that you are
no less sorrowful, then my self. For during my fathers life, I never behaved
my self as superior unto you, for that he loved us all equally, and did more
wyllingly call me companion, then Son: because he esteamed the one, to be a
name of nature, and the other, he reckened to be the participacio^ of virtue.
And often times, he carried me in his arms, whiles I was an infant, delivered
me into your hands, and (as I might say) gave me wholly unto your custody,
and fidelyte. Wherefore, I doubt not, but that ye will exhibyte unto me your
favor, for mine elders, ought to repute me as their son: and mine equalles
in age, I may lustly call companyons in arms: for even so, did my father love
us all as one, and provided to have us enstructed in all exercyses of virtue
and learning. Now after him, has fortune, given me for a prince unto you: not
a stranger, (as some has been before me,) nor one which vaunteth him self
of a conquered Empire: but I was only borne unto you, and brought up in the
very Imperyall Palayce: And as soon as I was out of my moothers womb,
thymperyall purple received me, in so much that I was no sooner a man, then a
Prince. Ponderynge therefore these things in your minds, love and embrace
your ryghtful Emperor, not given, but borne unto you. For my father is taken
up intoo the heavens, and made companyon with the Gods: And unto us, the
regymente of the earth, and governance of mortal causes do appertain. What
success and effect they shall come unto, it rests in your power: If ye will
therefore, valyauntly fynisshe the resydue of the wars, and enlarge the
Romayne Empire, unto ye great Ocean: ye shall not only purchase unto your
selves, exceadynge much glory: but also, duly requyte, the memory of our
commune parente. And believe verelye, that he now hears us, and presently
beholds what we do: And let us account our selves most happy, for that
we have such a witness of our good deeds. As for the acts, ye have unto this
day, valyauntly and prosperously atcheued, are attrybuted unto his prudente
governance: But what you shall hereafter notablye bring to effect with me,
that is to say, with a young man your Emperor, the same shall win unto
your selves, as it were, a peculier fame, as well of truth, as of prowess:
whereby ye shall bring mine age in more estymacyon, with executing boldly
our affairs. And the Barbarous people, being in the beginning of this new
pryncypalitye throughlye repressed, will not hereafter over boldelye advance
them selves, in despysyng my youth: but being ones taught by their own
peryls, will he restrained and kept under, with contynuall awe and fear. When
he had thus much spoken, he dystrybuted among the Souldyours, a great sum
of money, (that he might thereby confyrme their hearts faythefull, and
loving toward him) and then returned into his Palayce. By a little space
after this, all things were ruled by his fathers friends, who were at no time
absente with their prudent counsel, giuyng him as much liberty withal, as
they thought suffycyent, for the preseruacyon of his health. But anon after,
certain of themperours household crepte by little and little forward,
omyttynge nothing undone, that might corrupt the good dysposycyon of the
young Emperor. For the table parasytes, The table of parasites.
who measured felicytie by their belies* and filthy lusts, enfourmed him
often times of the City pleasures, now, recytynge those things which were
delectable too be heard, or seen there. And then extollynge with praise, the
abundaunce of all things. They dyspraysed besides the banks of Histria,
Histria.
as unprofitable at all seasons, for yt it had no pleasant apple trees, or
other fruit, and was enuyroned with contynual cold and clouds. Wylt thou
never, O Emperor (said they) leave drinking of water dug, and congeled
together as yse. Shall other me^ enjoy the clear well springes, the pleasant
cold of the runnynge ryuers, and the wholesome air of Italye? By these
allurynges to wantonness, they easily enflammed the young man's mind with
vehemente desire of those plesures. Wherefore furthwyth: having called his
friends together, he dyssymuled not, that he was very desirous of his natyue
country: But yet fearing to declare, the very cause of his sodeyn alteracyon
of mind, he feigned that he stood in great doubt, least any rich manne of
the nobylytie, would take possessyon, of the Imperyall Palayce: And thereupon
gatherynge unto him a great power of me^, would, as out of ye strongest
fortress, challenge unto him self the princypall domynyon of all the^pyre.
For (said he) among the people, may easily be levied a mighty and approved
company of young men. Whiles he thiese causes moved, (all the rest, having
their eyes cast upon the earth, with still and sorrowful countenance)
Pompeianus, (who in age was the most ancient, and had married Co^modus eldest
sister) arose up and said It is no marvel, o Son and sovereign, The
oracion of pompeianus unto Commodus.
that you are holden with desire of your country, for the very same desire of
seeing our housholdes, does urge and stir us also. But we repress that
affection, for that thaffaires we have here in hand, require the first part,
and lies us more upon to dispatche. As for the pleasures of the City, you
shall longer enjoy hereafter: And Rome is contynually, where the Emperor
soiourneth. Now to give over the war lately begone, besides that it is
shameful, it is also very peryllous: for thereby we minister occasion of
audacitee, unto the Barbarouse people: who will think, that we are not
departed for cause of recreacio^, but that we are fled being daunted with
fear. And unto your self, how gloriouse will it be, after ye have vanquished
all your enemies, and enlarged the bounds of your Empire unto the ocean, to
return to Rome with tryumphe, and therein, to have led bound as captyues,
the barbarouse kings and Lords? for truly after this sort, in the former
worlds, did the Romans, were noble and famous. There is no cause, why you
should fear that your affairs in the city, are in any hasarde. For every
principal senator is here present with you, and the hole army, does before
your eyes defend your Empire: yea, and all your chiefest Treasoure, is with us
also. The memory besides of your father, has establysshed a steadfast and
perfect benevolence toward you, with all estates. When Pompeianus persuading
him to the better, had thus much spoken, he did somewhat at that present,
repress the will and endeavor of the young Emperor: who fearyng the old
man's sayings, having nothing wherewith he might well replye, dismyssed the
counsel: promisyng, that he would more diligently at leisure, debate with him
self those things. Yet afterward (his servants and parasites calling more
instantely upon him) he made no further relacion unto his Counsailours. But
(having sent his letters unto Rome, and appointed whom he thought meet, to
defend the banks of Hister, and restreigne the attemptes of the Barbariens)
he caused furthwith his removing to be proclaimed. They that were left
behind, diligently executed the offices appointed them, and within a little
space, brought many in subjection. And some they joined by great gifts in
frendeshyp unto them. The which was not very hard to do: For the Barbarouse
people being naturally gready of money, and despysers of all dangers, do
either get their living with invasions, and pylleng of their neighbors, or
else for an appointed salarie, sell their peace. The which thing Commodus
perceyuyng, (that he might with money (whereof he had innumerable abundau^ce)
purchase him self securitee and quiet) he denied nothing unto the demaunders.
Now as soon as the fame of his setting forward was spredde in the army,
suddenly a great stir was among all the Souldyours, every man desyring to
return unto Rome, and affecting the pleasures of the city, to leave their
enemies country. And when it was blown abroad, by report of purseuauntes
and posts, that the Emperor was retourning to the City, an incredible joy
wandered among the common people, every man conceuing in him self, a
singular hope of the^perours presence, and trusting assuredly that he would
follow his fathers steps. Him self making speade in his journey, and
passing with a certain feruencie of youth, in his charyot through the
mids of all the^ cities, was received with princely reverence, and joyful
assemblies of the people, and welcomed, as one most acceptable, and wyshed for
unto them. And when he approached nygh unto Rome, the hole Senate, and the
Romayne commons, (each of them coueiting to prevent other) crowned with
laurel, and caryeng all ^ynde of flowers, (that the present season of the
year ^yd minister) met as far as they could from the city, their prince
notable in the flower of youth and nobility of birth. For truly, they loved
him with most fervent affection, being borne and brought up among them, The
nobilite of Commodus.

Faustina Commodus mother. Antonius puis. Hadrian Traian. The beauty of
Commodus.


and then possessynge in the third degree thempyer and regimente of Rome. For
of his fathers side he issued from the chiefest of the Senators. And his
Mother Faustina a Princes wife, the daughter of Antoninus Pius, and niece by
her mother unto Hadrian, did refer the Pedegrue of her kynred, unto Traian
her great graundefather. Of this parentage was Commodus descended: unto whom,
besides the flower of his age, was given also an excellency of beauty, a
congruent stature of body, an amiable and manly countenance, pleasant and
shining beams in his eyes, and a yelow and curled hear, which when he came
into the Son, did so glyster, that many deamed the same, as he passed by
them, to be sprinkeled over with golden duste. Many also esteemed it a token of
diuinyte, coniecturing that the rays about the top of his head, were by
generation and nature given unto him. The soft hears besides sprange out of
his cheeks, and covered them as it were with flowers. They received therefore,
this such an Emperor, with joyful showtes, and strawing of Garlandes, and
flowers in the way as he passed. After he was enteryd into the City, visyted
and saluted the Temples, first of Jupiter, and then of the other Gods, and
given thanks to the hole Senate, and the Pretorian Soldiers, for their
fidelite observed toward him, he went into thimperiall palayce. For a few
years after this, he did honorably entrete his fathers friends, and used their
counsel in all his affairs. Those years expired he committed the charge of
the hole Empire unto other, and co^stituted Captain of his guard, an Italyan
named Perennes a man very expert and skylfull in warfare. Pere^nes
The same, abusyng the age of the young Emperor, permytted him to be corrupted
with sensual lusts and ruffyans. And taking upon him self all charge and
labor, ruled the hole Empire. There was in the man, an insatiable thyrste of
money, so that little regarding what he had already gete^, he daily gredely
gaped for new lu^our and gain labouryng earnestly to oppress by accusacions
ye friends of Commodus father, and to bring every noble and rich man in
suspicion, that thereby, the young man, being put in fear, and they destroyed,
himself might have opportunite and power, to ransake their goods and
possessions. But yet a while, partly the memory of his father, and partelye
the reverence of his friends, did restrain Commodus. And afterward a
certain enuyous fortune, subverted his disposicion, being as yet good and
moderate, for thus it chanced. Lucilla was eldest Sister unto Commodus.
Lucilla Commodus eldest Sister.
She was first married unto the Emperor Lucius Verus, whom Marcus had
asseciated as his fellow in thempire: And by giving him his daughter in
Marriage, bound him with an insolluble knot of frendeshyppe unto him. But after
that Lucius was dead, (the habites and tokens of dignyte, Lucius Verus.
remaining as yet unto Lucilla) her father married her unto Pompeianus. And
Commodus nevertheless permytted her to enjoy her former estate and honor.
For he suffered her to sytte in themperiall seat in the Theater, and to have
the fire borne before her, as the aunciente usage was. But after Commodus had
married Cryspina, and that it was expediente, to give the first place unto the
Emperors wife, Lucilla grudged thereat wonderfullye, reckenynge the others
honor, to be her reproach, but yet knowing, that her husband Pompeianus,
entierlye loved Commodus, she durst not ones make any mocion unto him, of
inuadynge Thempyre. Wherefore having proved the mind of one Quadratus,
Quadratis.
a very noble and rich young man, (with whom also it was thought she had
committed aduoutrie) she did so greuouslye complain unto him of thiniurye she
had received, that she enduced the young man, most perniciousely to consent,
to the vttre undoing of him self and the hole Senate.

For among all other of the order of Senators which conspyred with him in
this execrable enterprise, he adjoined unto him a certain young man named
Quintianus, Quintianus.
of a prompt mind, and stout stomach, whom he persuaded, to hide a dagger in
his bosom, watch for convenient opportunite and place, and there with a
sodeyne assault slay Commodus: As for the rest, in distributing of money,
Lucilla promised to see unto* Quintianus therefore, standing in the entrye of
the Amphitheatre, Amphitheatre.
(for he trusted in that dark place to be well hydden) furthwith drew out
the dagger, and cried with a loud voice unto Commodus, saying. This does the
Senate send unto thee. Whiles he spoke thiese words, he was apprehended by
themperours Guard, and received condign punishment for his madness: being by
his own fondnes, the Author of theschewing his myschiefe, his intent being
rather opened then accomplyshed. This loo was the first and chiefest occasion
of Commodus hatred against the Senate. For thiese words had so perced his
heart, that he reputed them all his enemies, the voice of the young man, which
would have slain him, stickynge continually in his memory. Perennes (not
omyttinge, so great an occasion) persuaded the emperor, to put unto death,
every one of the principal malefactors, and suffer not one of them to remain
a live. Thexaction of pere^nes.
Into whose possessions, him self making invasion, became without difficulty,
the rychest of all men in those days. And after Perennes had diligently made
inquisicion of the said Treason, the very Sister of Commodus, Lucilla and her
co^plices put to death.
with all the Coniuratours, and all other (which any suspicion had caused to
be apprehended,) were put unto death. Those being ones dispatched out of the
way, who^ the young Emperor stood in awe of: and who loved him with a
certain fatherly affection, Perennes took upon him the tuicion of the
Emperors person: And having obtained very much auctorite, compassed
incontinently in his mind the occupieng of thempire self. And for this
purpose he enduced Co^modus, to constitute his sons young men, being
capitaynes over thyllyrian armies. He gathered together a wonderful great some
of money that he might with rich bribes and gifts alienate the Pretorian
Soldiers from the Emperor. His Sons also, priuelie levied their power, to
the intent, that as soon as their father Perennes had slain Commodus, they
would by violence: take the dominion and rule upon them. The treson of
Pire^nes discovered.
But this conspiracy, was bewrayed by a wonderful and incredible mean. The
Romans used to celebrate certain plays in the honor of Jupiter Capitoline,
whereunto assembled so great a multitude of people, as is meet to resort at
any notable show to such a mighty Cite. The Emperor is also accustomed to
behold the same plays, and to sit in the Theater with the high Priests,
whom the order does yearly appoint. Now when Commodus sat in Themperiall
Throne, earnestly beholding the gorgeous preparacions for the Tragedies, and
when the Theater was replenished with people, every man's place according to his
estate being appointed him: Sodeinly, before any thing was done or spoken on
the scaffoldes, one in ye habit of a Philosopher, bering in his hand a
clubbe, and half naked, having a scryppe hanging down from his sholder, came
forth in a Chariot: And stayeng in the mids of the Scaffolde, with his hand
commanded silence, and then said. This is no time of play (O Co^modus)
neither to behold pageauntes, for the Sword of Perennes is hanging over thy
sholders, and except thou take good head, to avoid it, the danger is not
immynent but present, and thou art undone: for him self here present, does
leuye power and money against the. And his Sons do solicit Thillirian
armies to rebellyon. Which if thou do not preuente, thou art but dead. With
thiese words, (whether the man were styrred thereunto with any divine
inspiracion, or being but simple, was so bold to purchase him self thereby
renown, or else hoped to obtain some great reward of The Emperor) truly he
dysmayed him. The rest which were present also, (although they they
coniectured that it was not for naught spoken) yet did they feign not to give
credit unto it. And Perennes commanded the man furthewt to be apprehended and
as a furious and idle talkatiue fellow to be burned. This reward had he for
his intemperate lybertye. but they which seemed to favor Commodus, and had
tofore detested Perennes, as a man of intolerable pride, having gotten a
conuenyente time, labored with accusacyons, too bring him out of co^ceyte
with the emperor. And truly, so must it come to pass, that Commodus should
escape this Treason, And Perennes with his sons be for their demerytes
worthily rewarded. For no long while after, certain Soldiers had conveyed
privily from Pere^nes eldest Son, sundry pieces of money, coined with the
stamp of his pycture: And those, unawares of Perennes (although he were
principal Magistrate) they delivered unto Commodus. And having opened thole
cyrcumstaunce of the pretended Treason, were with great gifts recompensed. The
night following were sent certain from Co^modus, to strike of Pere^nes head,
The death of Pere^nes
who was ignorant of all this business, and at that Instant lest looked for any
such matter. That done, the same executyoners, (as they were commanded)
furthwyth went unto his Son, and making very hasty speed, prevented the
rumoure of those things that were done at Rome. At their coming unto him,
they delivered him friendly letters from the emperor, the which puttyng him in
great hope, willed him to return unto Rome: whereby he was ignorant of all the
dryfte, and finally of his fathers hap. For some of the messengers, told him
that he was called alsoo for by his father, who (they said) would have
written unto him likewise, if he had not supposed, yt he would suffycyently
regard themperours letters. The young man believed it, and although he grudged
somewhat that his enterprise was thus interrupted, yet affying him self, in
his fathers might and authority (whom he thought too be as yet in
prosperouse estate,) he prepared him self to return with them. But as soon
as he approached the borders of Italy, he was slain by them unto whom the
charge of thexecutyon was committed. This end had the father and the Son:
After whom Commodus appointed.ij. governors, thynkyng it to be more sure, not
to commyt so great an aucthoritye unto one man alone: but dividing ye same
in.ij. parts, make it by ye mean, the more weak to rebel against the prince.
A new conspiracye.
But no long time after, there were other Treasons conspyred against him in
this manner. There was a certain Soldier named Maternus, Maternus.
bold in enterprysyng many facynorous factes. The same sodeinly forsaking ye
Camp and adioynyng into his fellowship certain of his co^panyons, gathered in
a short space an huge multitude of desperate ruffynes. First he destroyed
vyllages and cornefeldes, and than having gotten a great Sum of money, he
joined daily more vacabondes unto him, and by promysyng them great rewards,
and calling them to the division of the pray, he brought the matter unto such
point, that they seemed to have the aucthorytye, not of thieves, but of just
enemies. For they occupied great Cities, and therein brake ye common gaoles,
and took out of prison without respect all offenders, whom through that
release and benefyte, they annexed unto them. Then they spoiled with inuasyons
all France and Spain, and wha^ they had taken any great City, they would
ransake burn and utterly deface the same and than depart. Whereof when
Commodus had knowledge, he sent letters not wantyng angry checkes, unto the
lieuetenauntes of the Countries there aboutes, reprouyng their cowardyse, and
therwyth commaundyng them to levy an army, for ye subduyng of those
rebellious vacabondes. Which thing when the Ruffines knew, they thought it best
to depart from those Countries. Wherefore pryuely by secret bypathes and
unknown ways, they came into Italy, where Maternus consulted with his
accomplices, of thinuasion of thempyre, and other weyghty affairs. For seeing all
things hytherunto had prospered with him beyond his expectacyon, he determined
to attempt some notable enterprise, or at the least wise, if it chanced
amiss, too dye not obscurelye or like a coward. But yet perceyuyng him self,
not to have so great a power, as should suffyse to resyst Commodus, with an
approved and chosen army, (for he knew that Commodus was well beloved of the
Romayne people and men of arms) he concluded to work his feate by crafty
conueyaunce. And therefore Invented this wyle. In the beginning of the spring
time, upon an appointed holy day, ye Romans used to celebrate a pomp unto ye
mother of ye Gods. In yt solempnitie, the best of every man's riches, and
Iewelles, and all thimperyall ornaments, (which are either for matter or work
worthy to be looked on) are wont to be brought furthe, before the Goddess. And
every where a license too play, is granted all men, and too take upon them
the persons of whom it likes each man best. There is no magystrate or
offycer, but he is there represented in the counterfaytynge of their persons
by such as lyketh so to do: so that a man can not rasshely discern the true
parson from the dysguysed. This did Maternus reckon to be a conuenyente time
for the close atcheuyng of his traiterous enterprise. Trustyng assuredlye, (if
him self took upon him the person of one of themperours guard, and armynge his
confederates after the same sort, mingle them selves among the spearemen,
wherebye they should be thought to be of themperours retynewe, no man forsyng
the matter) with a sodeyne assault to slay Commodus. But being betrayed by
certain of his adherentes that entered intoo the City with him, (who grudged
that they should hereafter accept him not as a Souldyoure their companyon, but
as their prince) before the festyual day were nygh, he was taken and beheded:
The death of Maternus.
and all the residue of the same facio^, were punisshed with condign torments
of death. Now after the sacrifice was finisshed, Commodus did with
thanskesgeuing pass furthe the feast of the Goddess: yea and the people being
Joyful for the preseruacyo^ of their Emperor, celebrated meryly that day.
But what the reason is, wherefore the Romans do so much honor this
Goddess, it seems not amysse for me to make mention of it, as I have learnid
out of Histories, especially because that matter is unknown unto most of the
Greeks. The same Image therefore (as they say) came down from heaven, no
certayntie remaining of what metal, or by what artificer it was wrought: yea
they constantely beleaue, it was never made with manes hands. Therefore, they
affirm, that it fell down from heaven into a certain fyelde of Phrigya, the
which they conjecture to have the name Pesinuntis, Pesumtis.
(by the fall of the same Imaege) put upon it. For there they say, it appeared
first. Yet do I find among other authors, that there between Ilus the
Phrigian, The battle between Ilus ye phrigian, and Ta^talus the Lidian.
Ganimedes.
and Tantalus the Lydian was foughten the battle, (either bego^ for the way or
rather for ye rauysshing of Ganimedes And when they had long foughten, with
equal strength, and very many on both sides slain) that the name was given
unto the fyelde by that calamite. There also (the report is) that Ganimedes
being drawn to and fro by the hands of his brother and lover, was depryued of
his life: And being taken away, a fable was invented for the comfort of his
lover, that he was endowed by Jupiter his rauisher with many dyuine honors. In
that field Pesinuntes, (whereof I have spoken) did the Phrygians in times
paste worship, and celebrate the ceremonies of the infernal Gods even at
the river of Gallus, The river Gallus.
of the which the women pryestes of the Goddess are surnamed. But when the
Romayne Empire increased, (an Oracle being received that the Empire should be
augmented to the vttermoste, if the Romans would transporte the Pesynuntian
Goddess unto them. The Pesynuntya^ Goddess
) There were Ambassadors sent into Phrigya, too require the Statue of the
Goddess, the which was easily granted unto them, because they said that
the Romans were of kynred unto the Phrigians, being descended of Aeneas the
same country manne. When as therefore, they had brought the image in ship
unto the very mouth of Tiberys, which the Romans then used in stead of a
haven, suddenly with a certain dyuine power, the ship stoke fast, neither
could it be removed with any strength of the people drawing at it, until a
Vestall vyrgin came thither. Vestal vyrgyn.
The same being sclaundered, that she had deflowred her virginitye, (which
ought evermore to be inuiolatlye preserved) fearing condempnacion, instantlye
entreated the people, that they would commytte the judgment of her, unto the
Pesynuncian Goddess. That ones obtained, she bound the maste of the ship
with her gyrdell, most humbly desyringe, that if the Gods knew her an
incorrupt virgyn, she would command the ship to come forwards. And when
she had so said, she drew the gyrdell in her hand, and the ship began
to follow. So did the Romans together wonder at the manifest divinity of the
God head, and the innocence of the virgyne. But this much have I hythervnto
treated of the Pesynuncian Gods, peradventure sumewhat more tedyouslye then
it behooved, but yet like to bring no unprofitable knowledge unto them that are
not throughlye skylfull in all the Romayne affairs. Now Commodus (having
escaped the treason of Maternus, did with a greater Guard strengthen him self,
and came very sealdome abroad, consumed most part of the time in the
Suburbs, or in his Principal Manours far from the Cite, and utterly
abstayned from sitting in judgment, and all Imperyall acts. At the same
time, a wonderful plage vexed all Italy: The pestilence.
but it was most furiouse in the city of Rome, as in a place replenysshed
with people, and receauynge strangers from all parts of the world. Whereby
there happened a meruaylouse great morreyne of men and beasts. Then Commodus
departed unto Laurentum, Laurentum.
(for so had some conninge Physicians counseyled him) because it was a more
could Regyon, and shadowed with many woods of Laurel, of whom also the
Country has his name. For they said that the sauoure of the Laurelles, The
remedy against the pestilence.
and the plesauntnesse of the shadows, did greatly prevail to the avoiding
of the contagion of the air: And therefore in the Cite self, by the
Phisycians aduysementes, many stopped their ears and noses with sweet
oyntementes, and used daily delectable vapors and perfumes, that the pores of
the senses should not admytte into them any pestyferouse smell, and if they
received any, that the perfumes with a greater strength should vanquysshe
the same. But nevertheless the sycknes increased, destroyeng every where both
men and cattle. Yea there did also a great famyne vex and oppress the Cite,
by this occasion. There was a certain Phrygyan named Cleander, of that sort
of men that are soulde openly by Cryers: Clea^der
The same being put to service in the Emperors house, increased gretelye in
favor with Commodus, and was enhaunsed unto so high dignytie, that he alone
obtained the custodye of the Emperors parson, the charge of his Chamber, and
the governance of his Guard. Richesse and pride did besides stir him to hope
of Thempyre. Wherefore having gathered together a great sum of money, he
boughte a wonderful quantytie of wheat, and the same he had costely shut
up, trusting that he should win the hearts of the people and the army, if
that he releued with large gifts, those that before were in great penurye of
necessary food. He had also builded a very large schole for exercyses, and
many common bathes, that he might by that means allure the people unto him.
But the Romans were offended with him before, imputynge all the cause of this
dearthe unto him only.

And detesting him, as man insatiable of richesse, they first assembled by
embushmentes unto the Theaters, Theaters.
and afterward (Commodus being in the Suburbs) suddenly they came all
thither, with huge clamors, demanding Cleander unto death, and when the hole
suburbs were filled with noise and tumulte, and Co^modus him self was at his
accustomed pleasures in an upper chamber, ignorant of all that was done,
(Cleander perdy had so provided) suddenly beyond all men's expectacion: the
Emperors horsemen armed brass furthe with violence by the commandment of
Cleander, driving down and wounding every man they met. The people being on
foot, and without weapon, were not able to sustain the brunte of the
horsemen: Wherefore with hasty fleing they retired into the Cite, where many
of them were destroyed, not only those whom the horsemen slew with weapon,
but also they whom the horses had with their feate trodden down, and they that
fought either in the prese of the fotemen, or else among the horses. The
horsemen so pursuyng them without any impedimente unto the gates of the City,
destroyed a great part of the people. But they that remained within, knowing
the calamytie of their friends without, shut their doors and gatte up into
the roofes, and tops of their houses, and threw down upon the horsemen
both stones and tyles: Thereby was the fortune suddenly changed, when no
horseman durst at that present strive, all the people fyghting safely from
above against the^. Wherefore many of them being wounded when they could no
longer endure, turned their backs and fled: many of them were also slain
through the contynuall and thick falling of weapons, and many stricken from
their horses, which founderid amongs the stones that were thrown down. Yea,
and the footeme^ which had stations within the cite, came to rescue the people
against the horsemen, whom they utterly detestyd. And although this were a
Cyuyle battle, yet durst no man for fear of Cleanders power declare it unto
Commodus, until his eldest Sister named Fadilla unto him (for the approchynge
unto his presence was ease for his Sister) with her hear loose fell down on her
knees, defourmed with a mournyng garmente, and said. Truly (O Prince) whiles
ye lie here in peace, ye are in extreme peril. And we that are of your blood
are almooste undone. The people of Rome are destroyed. The most part of your
army is consumed. And those things we thought not to suffer of ye
Barbariens, the same does our own household servants unto us. And they upon
whom you have bestowed most bountyfull benefytes, the same are your most
extreme enemies. Cleander has armed the people and Souldyours against you,
among whom he is of some abhorred, and of some entyerely beloved. Yet are
they both in arms, do commit murdre within them selves, and fill Rome with
Cyuyle blood. But upon our necks will the myserye of both companyes light,
except you do deliver unto death with all haste, a most pernycyous and wicked
Servant, which has been aucthour of so great a calamitye unto them already,
and entendeth shortly to be so unto us. Whiles she thus said, she rent her
clothes, and many that were present, having taken courage of the woman's
words, did put Commodus in fear also. He being amassed, and dreadyng the
danger, not as Immynente, but present, commanded Cleander to be called
hastily unto him, not knowing any certayntye, but yet suspectynge that
somewhat was told themperoure. And as he came before him, themperoure
commanded him too be apprehended, and too have his head strycken of: The
punyshme^t of Cleander.
And being set upon a Spear too be carried about. Knowing that he should
show unto the people a pleasant and desired syghte. Thus was this myschyefe
appeased, and the fight on either side assuaged. For the Sduldyours (when they
saw him dead, for whom they fought) feared the indygnacyon of the Emperor,
whom they perceived too be deluded, and that nothing was done by his
commandment. The people on the other part accounted the^ selves satisfied with
the death of the begynner of the mischief. The children also of Cleander, (for
he had two sons) and all his friends were at one time slain, and their
bodies being drawn through the City, and most filthely ordered, were at the
last thrown into the common synkes of the City. This was the end of
Cleanders destenies. And in him only man's nature, can (as I might say)
boldly brag, that a man may be advanced, from most vile and low estate,
unto the highest type of dignitye, and being so exalted, fall down in the
least and sodeyne momente of fortune. Then Co^modus, (although he feared that
the people would move some new tumulte against him) yet by his friends
perswasyons, returned into the City. And being received with joyful shoutes
and assemblyes of ye people, The begi^ninge of Commodus tyra^nye.
entered into thimperyal palayce. And certainly so many perils being paste,
he began from thencefurthe to trust no creature: but to destroy now this, and
now that man, gyuynge credyte unto every false accusatyon. He took besides
into his frendshyp, no man in whom was any virtue remaining, but did
withdraw his mind equallye from all good study. For the unbridled lusts of
the body, did both day and night oppress him with most grievous bondage. He
removed as a spy from his gate, every man whom either goodness, or any mean
and honest quality, did beautify. But slaves and such as used most filthye
manners, had him as wholly addicted unto them. ^arting.
He used alsoo above measure cartynge and sleing of beasts. For the which
exercyses, the flattering Parasites extolled him with fame of fortitude. There
by he behaved him self in those things more dishonestly, Prodigyouse tokens
in ye air.
then became a sober and prudent Prince. At that season were apparaunte in the
sky, certain prodygyouse tokens. For stars appeared contynually by day
light, and many of them being stretched out in length, seemed too hang in
the mids of the air. Beasts besides of all kind were brought furthe, not
observing their nature, with monstrous shape of body, and members nothing
agreeable. But the greatest calamytie partly brought present doloure, and
especyally afterward with most miserable conjecture, did put all men in fear.
For when there had neither any shoures or clouds, saving only a little
earthquake preceaded (wheather it were by chance with lightening in the
night, or else with any fire kyndeled in the earth) the hole Temple of
peace was sodeynelye burnte. The Temple of peace burned.
The which work, of all other in the City was greateste and most
beawtyfull, and of all the Temples most rich, and gorgyouselye builded, and
adorned with much gold and silver. For almost every man brought his
substance thither, as intoo a treasourye. And therebye the fire so ragynge in
the night, brought many that were rich in to extreme pouertye. Wherefore
all men bewailed the common calamity openly, and every man lamented his own
loss pryuatelye. When all the Temple was consumed, vearye many the
beawtyfullest buildinges of the City were enflamed with fire also. Among the
which ye temple of Vesta was one, so that the Palladiu^ was seen, The Temple of
Vesta. The Image of Pallas. Vestal virgins.
the which the Romans do chiefly worship and keep secret, being brought
(as they say) from Troy, and at that time first sythens it came into Italye,
seen of all men. For the Vestall Virgins, having with much difficultye saved
it, carried it through ye street named Sacra via, unto themperours palayce. Many
the goodlyest parts besides of the City were burned. And the fire ragyng many
days was not ceased, before that sudden shoures quenched it. Wherefore all men
that time referred the hole matter unto the Gods, by whose will they thought
the fire to be begone and ended, interpreting wars (yt did ensue) to be
signified by ye burning of ye Temple of Peace. The which conjecture of things
the hap did afterward verify. For (ye City being vexed with many grievous
disco^modities) the people did not (as they were wont) behold Commodus
beneuolentlye, but every one imputed the cause of their myserye unto his
dyssolute and pernycyouse vices, for his wickedness was not hydden from them
neither would he it should be kept close. But those things that were in his
house committed, not without infamye, the same he feared not to blase and
blow a broad. He waxed so insolent, that he abandoned the name of his father,
and for Commodus the son of Marcus, commanded himself to be called Hercules
the son of Jupiter. And leuing aparte the apparayle of the Romayne princes, he
ware a Lions skin, bearinge in his hand a clubbe, and covered himself with
purple, and clothes wouen with gold, not with out the derysion of all men. For
in that one garment, he represented the wantonness of women, and the prouesse
of noble men. Thus did he daily behave himself. He also changed the names of
ye months, and for their ancient tytles, appointed them new of his own
surnames, of the which many were referred unto Hercules, as unto one most
puysaunt. He caused also Images to be erected unto him throughoute the Cite,
and among them, one in the Court of the Senate, the which held a bow
bente, that the Images them selves, should show terrors and manaces. The which
Image the Senate after his death pulled down, and for it erected again the
Image of lybertye. But Co^modus (when he could not aswage and bridle
himself,) taking upon him to show forth pageantes unto the people, promised
that he would with his own hands, slay before them all kind of wild
beasts, and strive by a synguler contencion, with every valiant young man.
When the rumor of these tryalles was spredde abroad, there assembled people
out of all Italy, and other nighe nations to behold that sight, which they had
never before seane, The ^tee of Commodus.
nether by talk herd of. For his hand was reported to be so steadfast, that
what so ever he had thrown or shot at with darte or arrowe, the same would he
assuredly strycke. And he retained daily about him most approved archers of
Parthia, Parthie^s and Numimidiens.
and Numydyane slyngers, all the which him self in cunning far excelled.
Now when the day of this Pageande was come, there was builded in the mids
of the Amphytheater, Amphitheatre.
a gallerie for Commodus. In the which he might run round about, lest that
fyghting beneth with the beasts, he should be in danger. But by casting his
darts from above, as out of a safe place, he should rather show his cunning
of throwing then any valiau^tnesse. In pursuing them he struck hearts and
hyndes, and other horned beasts besides bulls, and preventing the^ with a
swyfte course ouerthrewe them, by most assured strokes. The Lions and
Pa^thers with other fierce beasts of that kind, Lions and Pa^thers
runnynge round about he slew with darts from above, so that no man saw the
second darte thrown at any of them, nor any wound but that was deadly. For
as soon as the beast ones sturred, he wounded him either in the foreheade, or
at the heart, vsyng none other scope, nor appoyntinge to throw at any other
part of the body, so that the beast with the very stroke, was berafte his
life. There were beasts besides gotten from all parts of the earth. And the^
did we behold with our eyes, those things we meruayled at in paynting. For
out of India and Ethyope, Inde and Ethiope
and out of the South and North, (what so ever were unknown in the former
worlds,) the same did he both show furthe, and slay at one time, every man
being abashed, at his so steadfast a hand, and at the darts never faylynge
stroke. He also stroke with darts, Oystriches of Mawritany, the which
(through the swyftnes of their feate, and as it were with sail of their
wings) ran very swiftly) touching the tops of their necks, and there
withal strikenge of their heads, and the hinder part of the neck (where the
stroke lighted) being cute of, they would a little while continewe their course,
as though they were yet lyuinge. Yea and a Pa^ther (the which having with a
very vehement course overtaken a man) thruste into the Theater (seamed ready to
devour him) he wounded so sodeinly that the beast being killed, he preserved
the man, preventing the edge of her teathe, with the sharp hedde of his
darte. He also slew an hundredth Lions, brought furthe of a cave with like many
strokes, their bodies so laid in order, that they might easelye be nombred,
no darte being thrown in vain. These things therefore that were hythervnto
done (although they seamid vnmeate for a Prince) yet because they declared a
certain fortytude and cunning deserved commendacion of the people.

But when he enteryd naked into the Amphytheater, and wearynge harness
supplied the nombre of the sword players, then appeared a lamentable syghte to
the Romans, that their noble Emperor, after so many tryumphes of his father
and ancestors, did not only bear arms appertaynynge to the Empire against
beasts, but did also spotte the chiefeste dignitye with most filthy
apparel. In fighting he easelye conuynced his equalles, without being ones
wounded, every manne wythdrawynge his force, and acknowlegynge him rather an
Emperor then a swoorde player. And he fell into that furye that he intended
to forsake the Imperyall Court, and to remove into the schole of defense.
Neither suffered he him self any more to be named Hercules, having adopted
the name of an excellent sword player, the which a little before dyed. Yea
having taken the head from the great Image called Colossus that represented
the symilytude of the Son, Colossus
(being very much worshypped of the Romans) he put thereon the pycture
of his own head, and wrate at the foot thereof, not his accustomed ty^les of
the Empire and his father, but for the name of Germanyen, he put in the
vanquyssher of a thousand Masters of defense. But it was requysyte, he
should ones fynyshe his madness, and the City be delivered from his
Tyranny. And that in the beginning of the year, the which day the Romans
hold very solemn, dedicatynge it unto Ianus the aunciente GOD of Italye.
Ianus. Saturn Jupiter.
Of the which Regione, they reported Saturnus (being expelled by his son
Jupiter) to be a stranger, and because that he there hid him self, the name
of Latium to be given unto it. Latium.
Wherefore the Romans do first celebrate, after their custom the feasts of
Saturnus, Saturnus feasts.
and then the beginning of the year. The Image of this GOD is wroughte with
two faces, as of him by whom the year begins, and in whom the year
endyth. When the Cite held (as I said) this day with solempnitye, in the
which the Romans do send one to an other new years gifts, and all sorts
of presents, New years gifts.
and the magistrates were bewtyfull scarlette, (all men with gladness
celebratynge the same day) Commodus determined to come abroad, not out of
the Emperors palayce (as the old usage was) but out of the very schole of
defense. And for gorgyouse apparayle and Imperyall purple to go armed in the
company of the Romayne people. Which his counsel, when he had declared
unto Martia one of his concubynes, Martia one of Commodus concubynes
(unto whom he opened the greatest parts of his secrettes and esteamed her
almost as his wife so that all honors saving the fire were borne before her
as Empress) the woman having perceived his so dyshoneste entente, fell upon
her knees before him, incessauntelye desiring him with many tears that he
would not suffer the Majesty of the Romayne Empire to be defiled, or commit
him self so daungerouslye unto myscheuouse and desperate persons. But when
she could nothing avail she departed weeping. And he having called unto him
the Capytayne of his army named Letus, and Electus his Chamberlayne, Letus.
Electus
commanded them to prepare all things for his lodging the same night in
the schole of defense, that he might in the morning goo from hence to
sacryfyce, and show himself armed unto the people of Rome. They endeavored
with many intercessions to dysswade him from enterprysynge any thing
vndecente to a Prince. But Commodus chauffed with anger (having commanded them
to avoid his presence) returned into his chamber that he might, (as he was
accustomed) sleep at noone. And there taking into his hands a thynne book made
of the bark of a tree and foldynge to either side, he wrote in the same all
those he intended to slay the same night. Of whom Martia was first, and next
unto her Letus and Electus, and after them a great number of those that bare
most rule in the Senate. For he determined to destroy all tholde men that
were his fathers friends (least their aucthorytye should hinder his w^^kednes)
and to dystrybute their goods among ye Souldyours and sword players, yt the
one company should with strength defend him, and the other with pleasures
delight him. The same book so written he threw down on his bed, not
suspectynge that any man would enter into the chamber. But there was a little
Boy, yet of the sort of them, that being clothed with no garments, saving
such as are decked with gold and precyouse stones are wont too be the
pleasures of every delycate Romayne. The same Boy was so entyrelye beloved of
Commodus, that he oftentimes lay with him, Philoco^modus.
and was called Phylocommodus (the name it self declarynge the Princes
affectyon. This child by chance playinge (when Commodus was occupied in the
bayne and ryottinge) entered into the chamber, and taking the book in his
hand to play wythall, went out of the doors, and by chance met with
Martia, who for that she loved the Boy, first enbraced and kyssed him and
took the book out of his hand, fearing least the child should through his
infancy, unawares empayre things of Importance. Afterward knowing the hand
of Commodus, and moved with desire too read it, when she perceived the
pernycyouse ententes therein contained, and her self to be first mentioned,
Letus with Electus to follow, and finally so great a murdre of others lykely to
ensue, she inwardly lamented, saying. Ah Commodus, are these the rewards of
frendshyy and love? Have I thus deserved of the after I have so many years
abyddden thy checkes and dro^kennes? But these things shall not so prospere
with the indiscreet and dronken person against a sober and well aduysed woman.
When she had thus spoken she called Electus (with whom she was accustomed to
talk famylyarelye, because he was the Emperors Chamberlayne, and with him she
was also supposed to have carnal company) and delivered the book unto him,
saying. Behold Electus what banquet we should have been at this night
following. He being astonyed with the reading of it (for he was an Egiptyan
borne, stout, fumysshe, and quyckelye styrred to anger) sent the book closely
sealed by a trusty friend of his unto Letus to read. The which also abashed
with it, came furthwyth unto Martia, feynyng that he would consulte with her,
concerning the preparatyon in the schole of defense as the Emperor had
commanded. Vsyng therefore this gloss, they determined to do, or suffer some
thing out of hand, knowing that there was no time of deferring the matter.
They consented at last that the feate should be wroughte by poison. The
which Martia took upon her to mynyster speadelye. For she was wont too
prepare drink for him, and to give him the cup that it might be thought
more sweater being delivered from his lover. She gave unto him therefore as he
came from the bayne poison myngled with very pleasant wine in a goblet. And
he having caughte a thyrste in washing him self and hunting, drank
rasshelye the drink as of custom proffered unto him. Wherewyth being
immedyatelye troubled with atche in his head and desirous of sleep,
(supposing it came by labor,) gave him self to rest, Electus and Martya
commanded incontynentelye every man to depart to his own house, least they
should dysturbe the Emperor having need of sleep, which he was accustomed
also to do at other times through Immoderate dronkennes. For when he bath^d
him self, or else fell to banquetinge, he kept no certain time of sleep.
The sensualities risinge and much differynge one from another, so constrained
the man, (yea sometime unwilling) to serve the^. Wha^ he had for a small time
rested him self, and the vehemence of the poison was now entered his stomach
and belie, a gidines co^bred his head, and vomytynge furthwyth followed, either
through the meat yt he had before largely eaten, or the drinkyng of much wine
that resysted the poison, or else through the usage that Princes observe in
taking of medicines before they eat any meat, for fear of poysonyng. But when
he had vomited very much they fearing least all the venyme being avoided, he
would thereby recover, and the command them altogyther to be slain,
persuaded for a great reward a certain bold and stout young man named
Narcissus, Narcyssus. Commodus stra^gled to death.
to strangle him in his Chaumber. This end of life had Commodus, when he had
reigned after his father in the Empire.xiii. years. A man of al other Emperors
most noble, and of all men in yt age the most beautiful. But too speak of his
prowes and fortitude he might in yt be preferred to any other, especyallye in
sure strikyng that he had thrown at. Nevertheless he defiled (as before is
told) all the state of his life with abhomynable vices.

The end of the first book.
The Argument of the second book.
IN the second book is declared how Pertinax was chosen Emperor, how long
time he reigned, and how he was slain by the men of arms (which sold
thempyre afterward unto Iulianus) How Seuerus became Emperor by the delays
of Niger. And how Iulyanus was slain, and the death of Pertynax revenged by
Seuerus.

The Second Book of the History of Herodian.
AFter that Commodus was strangled (as we have in the former Book declared)
the murderers entending to co^ceale the fact, and to deceive ye Emperors
guard, delivered the body wrapped in an old couerlet, unto.ii. trusty and
faithful servants to carry furthe of the Palayce, as it were some stuff that
pestered the chamber. And they that bare it passed through the mids of the
watchemen, of the which some were drunk and slepte, letting their halberdes
fall out of their hands. The other which were awake, neglected the fardell
which they supposed not to appertaigne unto their charge. Then they sent the
princes body, (thus conveyed by stealthe, and in the night laid in a wagon)
unto a place named Aristeus. This ended, Letus, Electus, and Martia, after they
had long consulted what was best to be done, at the last concluded to
spread a rumor of his death, that he sodeynlye fell into an Appoplexie. The
which brute they knew would soon be credyted, Appoplexie.
because it was evidently known that he oftentimes accustomed to stuff him
self with immoderate superfluity of metes. But first of all it seamed good
unto them, to chose for Emperor some aged, reverend, and modest person, by
whom themselves might be in safetye and all other exempt from cruel
tyrrannye. And having long consulted they found no man so worthy as
Pertinax. Pertinax.
This Pertinax was an Italian borne, famous at home and abroad through his
valyaunte acts, and manyfolde victoryes obtained against the Germaynes, and
Barbaryens of the Oryente, and he only remained alive of all the grave
counsayllors, that were left unto Commodus by his father, and unto him among
all the capitaynes his Companions, he had showed most honor and reverence.
Being yet safe, either for that Co^modus feared his gravity, or else
dyssymuled because of his pouertye. For this also did amplyfye his renown,
that having most aucthoritye of all men, yet of all men he seamed the
pooreste. Unto this Pertynax therefore went Letus, and Electus, with a few of
their accomplices about mydnyghte, whiles all men slepte. And finding his gates
locked they called up ye porter. Who when he opened the gate, and saw Letus
the chyefe Capytayne and the souldyors present with him, being sore dismayed
wythall, ran and told Pertynax. He furthwyth commanded them to be let in,
saying that anon would happen the myschiefe he had unto that day looked for.
He was of so constante a mind, that he moved not ones from his bed, nor
changed his countenance. But with a bold and stout stomach nothing
abashed spoke unto Letus and Electus when they were entered (although he
beleaued they were sent to slay him) these words. I have of long time every
night looked for this end of my life, the which only am remaining of all his
fathers friends? Wherefore I meruayled for what purpose Co^modus so long
deferred the matter. Why do you therefore thus stay and not execute that ye
are commanded and deliver me from this doleful and continual dread. Unto
those words answered Letus saying. Cease (quod he) to talk of things
unworthy your self and your former life, we come not to desire your death,
but the preseruacion of our selves and all the Roman Empire. For the
Tirau^te is dead, and has suffered condign punyshmente, receauynge at our
hands those things he intended to do unto us. And we are commen hither to
deliver the Imperial power unto you, whom only of all the senate for
temperau^ce of life, authority, age, and grauyte of manners, we know to be
best and entyerly beloved and reverenced of the people, Trusting that we do,
shall be acceptable unto the^, and profitable to our selfs. Unto whom Pertinax
answered. Leave of (said he) thus to scorn and mock an old man and so reprove
him of timoriousnes, entendynge first to deceive, and after to flea him. Why
quod Electus seeing that you do not credyte us, take this little book (for
suerly ye know the hand of Co^modus) read it your self and ye shall
perfectly perceive what great danger we have escaped: neither shall ye find
in our words any temptacion, but trustye report of truethe. The which when
Pertynax had done, thinking it best to beleaue them which had been always
theretofore his especial friends, and understanding all the matter, he
committed him self wholye unto their power. It seamed good therefore unto them
to go first unto the hooste and to assaye the minds of the Souldyours, whom
Letus promised easily to win unto his sentence, because he knew that his
aucthoryte (being their Captain) would somewhat prevail among them.
Wherefore as many as were present hasted them unto the Camp, when much of
the night was passed next before the first day of Ianuarye. They sent
besides trustye messengers to spread abroad the rumor that Commodus was dead.
And that Pertynax (which should be Emperor) was now going toward the
host. That bruyte being ones blown, suddenly all the people (as they were
mad) ran through the streates. All men reioysed, and every manne
severally went to tell his friend, which had either dygnitye or richesse
remaining: for upon them depended the greateste danger, while Commodus
lived. They went therefore unto the Temples to render thanckes unto the GODS,
talking together dyuersely. Some said the Tyrraunte is destroyed: some other
the sword player. Yea many spoke things more detestable.

And such words as fear had till that day repressed in silence, the same
did they now (thrughe license frealy gotten) bluster out. A great part also of
the people ran hastily to the camp, fearinge lest the men of arms would
not willyngly accept Pertinax for Emperor. For they thought that a moderate
Prince was not very gratfull unto the Soldiers, who were accustomed to serve
tyranny, and exercise all violence. Wherefore they ran in diverse plumpes
unto the Camp for to co^pel them to obedience. And when they were there
arrived, Letus, and Electus, with Pertinax, came thither also. And (the me^ of
Arms being called togithers) Letus said thus unto them. Co^modus your Emperor
is dead of an Appoplexie. No other man was the cause of his death then
himself. For when we in vain gave him good and wholesome counsel, he orderinge
himself as you all know he accustomed, was sodeynlye choked with ouermuche
meat and drink so that he perysshed by the end himself sought. For all men
dye not by one kind of death, but unto many men there are diverse causes, and
yet all tend to one end. But touching him, we and the people of Rome have
brought unto you, a man grave in age, moderate in life, and very expert in
warfare, whose valyaunte prowess, you that are aunciente Soldiers, have by
experience known. And the rest have judged (being so many years ruler of the
Cite) not only worthiest honor, but also admiracion and wonder. Wherefore
fortune has not alonely give him as a prudent Prince, but also a most loving
father unto you. Whose soueraignitie in thempyre shall not perticulerly be
most pleasant unto you that presently behold him, but also unto them that
defend the banks of Rivers, and the bounds of the Romayne Empire, as those
that retain in memory the notable acts by him atchiued. We shall not at this
present, win the Barbarouse people unto us by gifts, but being myndefull
of those things they suffered whiles this man was Capytayne, they will be
rather subdued with fear. When Letus had spoken these words, the people
could no longer wythholde them selves. But (whiles the men of arms stood
still in their dompes) they pronounced Pertynax Emperor, Pertynax declared
Emperor.
and calling him their parent, they praised him with most joyful
acclamacyons. The same did the Souldyours alsoo, although not with like
alacrity. But the number of the people myxed among them (being void of
armure and celebratyng the feastfull day) easily compelled the^ to shoute, and
call Pertynax Augustus. Furthewyth (they being sworn in allegyaunce unto him,
and the sacrifice ended) all the people and men of arms crowned with Laurel,
followed him. After he was conveyed in the night (as we before said) into the
Imperyall Palayce by the Souldyours and the people, he was troubled with many
cares. And although he seemed too be of a constante and stout mind, yet did
things present put him in fear, not very much solycyted for his own life,
(for he had at other times contempned greater perils) but through the
recordyng in his mind the sudden mutacion of tyranny, and ponderynge the
nobylytie of many Senators, who he thought would not permyt (after an
Emperor of most noble birth) thempyre to come unto a man of pryuate and
base stock. For all be it his temperate and frugall life were well spoken of,
and that he had gotten in warrelyke affairs great renown, yet was he of
simple lygnage. Wherefore after the day appeared he went too the Senate
house, not suffrynge the fire or any other tokens of dygnytye, too be borne
before him, until the determynacion of the Senate were heard. Whoo as soon
as they saw him received him al by one accord with joyful welcommynges, saluting
him as Augustus and Emperor. But he refusyng the name of Emperor as a thing
odyous, excused his age and desired pardon, saying there were many of the
Senators more worthy thempyre then he. And with that word he took Glabrio by
the hand, commaundynge him to sit in Themperyall Throne. The nobility of
Glabrio.
For this Glabrio was the noblest of the Senators, accomptynge the line of his
genealogy unto Aeneas the son of Venus and Anchises, and now the second time
Co^sull. Who answered Pertynax thus. Truly I, whom of all me^ your self
judge most worthy, do give you place in thempyre, and with me all the Senate
commits unto you thole sovereign authority. Than Pertinax being almost
constrained by the earneste prayer of every Senator, and half as yet in
doubt, ascended the imperial seat, and spoke unto them as follows.

This your consent and benygne accord of bestowinge upon me such ample
benefits, The oracyon of Partynax.
among so great a company of noble men, seeing it is void from all suspicion
of flatterye, and shows manifest argument of benevolence and truth, would
encourage some manne to take upon him the things proffered. Trusting that he
should with ease govern, while he might perceive such gentleness in you. But
in contrary wise, these weightye charges, as they amase me with perception of
this honor, even so do they trouble me with great thought and care. For
first of all in receyuyng of great benefits, it is hard to render the like.
For in the mutual doing of good turns, if he that owes little, restore very
much, the facilyty of reco^pencyng is not so much regarded, as the apparaunce
of a gratfull mind is in hi^ commended. But when any man does first bestow
some great gift upon an other, if he then little deserve it, he seems not so
much to want wherewith he should make recompense, as him self to be void of
wit and most ungrateful. I perceive therefore in my mind how uneasy this
proof is unto me, least that by chance, I show my self unworthy the honor
I have received of you. For the type of dignity consysteth not in the^peryall
seat: but in works which should not abase ye same. And even as much as we
hate things passed, so much do we hope well of things that are to come. And
as the memory of iniuryes is fyred in mind, (for that which hurts is never
forgotten) so do benefytes slide away through the abusyng of them. For truly
lybertye delyteth not a man so much as bondage offendethe. Neither does any
man suppose that he ought to render thanks for using his proper substance
after his own mind: (for of right he chalengith that permyssion unto him
self) but he that is dyspoyled of his goods, will never forget the injury
done unto him. No man reckeneth that to be his own lucre which he gets to
the commune profytte. For those things that be in commune are little regarded
of every manne particulerly. But if that which is proper unto a private manne,
do chaunse wors^ then he lokethe for, then thinks he himself not to be well
dealte wythall. Besides this, they which have accustomed the enormityes and
unmeasurable prodigalitye of Tirauntes, (if a man entende for want of money
to live thryftelye, and in measurable mean) do not so soon attribute it unto
a moderate dyspence, as they do reprove him furthwith of filthy couetyse.
Neither do they esteame any man able to give large gifts, that does abstain
from vyolence and extorcion. But he which dispe^deth his substance well, and
according to his degree, does not only not take away from any man, but also
teaches others to be frugall, and spare that them selves get. Therefore
(right honorable fathers) pondering these things in your minds) endeavor your
selfs together with me, and account the administracion of this Empire to be
commune unto us. For, seeing you shall live in a weal public of good men, and
not under Tyranny, your selves ought to conceive good hope of things, and to
promise the same unto others. When Pertinax had spoken thiese things (having
added unto the Senate a good courage) he was received with joyful shoutes and
very honorabely entertained. And having vysyted the Temples of Jupiter and the
other Gods, when the sacrifyce (according to the aunciente usage) was ended,
he returned into Themperiall Palayce. After it was spredde abroad what he had
either in the Senate house spoken, or unto the people written, all men
reioysed: trustinge that they should have him a gentle and graciouse Prince,
rather a father then an Emperor. For he commanded the me^ of arms, that they
should hurt or oppress none of the people, neither do injury to any way
faring man, and finally he reduced all things to honest behavior and
modesty. The manners and behauior of Pertinax.
When he entered or sat in judgment, he showed a curteyse countenance, and
for that he chiefly represented Marcus, he gave a great delectacion unto the
Elders, and the resydue of the people, he easelye drew to love him, being
delivered from cruel tirannye, and brought into a quiet life. The report
hereof being once far of diuulged, provoked all nations and armies, either
subject or confederate to the Roman people, to give deuyne honors unto him.
Yea if any of the Barbarouse people had forsaken the Romayne subjection, or
styrred any sedicion (through fear of his prowess, which they did remember
he showed in the former wars, and through confydence of his justice, when
they knew that he willingly offended no man, but gave praises unto every man
worthy his merytes, and that he was void of vyolence and crueltye) of their
free wills they yealded them selves unto him. There came besides from all
parts Ambassadors, to gratyfye the people of Rome, that they were governed by
the aucthoritye of Pertynax. But the thing that was most acceptable unto the
greatest part of all men, both openly and privately was that it happened unto
the Romans people to have a m^^este and gentle Emperor. Whereat the men of
arms in the Cite appointed unto ye Emperors Guard, gretely grudged. For being
reduced from extorcions, unto a modeste behauior of life, and reckenyng for
their own shame, that meke and cyuyle governance, as by the which they
perceived their inordinate license to be taken away, they determined no le^ger
to sustain such a governor. Wherefore in the beginnynge they bare themselfes
more stubburne and less obedyent to his commandment. Finally when he had
reigned scarsely two full months, (having then showed perfect proof of his
goodness) and all men being erected into a singular hope) suddenly a
perniciouse hap enuyenge it, utterly destroyed all things. So that his
notable begynninges and enterpryses (which were like greatly to profit all
men) perysshed in the mids of their course. For first of all he adjudged all
land that was untilled and unoccupied, either in Italye or any other place,
and what soever was vacant in the time of Kings, unto the tyllers and laborers
thereof, unto whom also he gave ten years fredome from Taxes, and perpetual
lybertye. Neither would he suffer his own name, to be written in Thempours
possessiones, saying they were not Themperors, but common unto the Romans.
He remytted also all trybutes, the which Tyrauntes had invented to get money
in the Ryuages of Ryuers, in the haue^s of Cities, and by commen ways and by
paths, and restored them to their aunciente lyberties. Yt seamed also that he
would do many other like things. For he had driven out of the City all false
accusers, and commanded them to be punisshed wheresoever they were found,
forseyng that no man should be troubled thrughe wrong accusacion. And therefore
the senate and all other trusted to live in great tranquillytie and blessed
estate of life. For he showed him self so equal unto every man, that he never
brought his Son being a striplyng in years, into the Emperors palayce, but
kept him in a private house. So that he went to schole after his accustomed
usage, nothing unlike pryuate children, and was instructed in all things, as
one of a mean sort. Neither did he brag or show fourth any tyrrannouse or
Imperyall pomp, during the time that Pertinax lived. At this modesty of
manners and life only the Pretoriane Sowldyors repyned, Thinsolencie of the men
at arms of the Emperors guard*
and grudginge at the present condition of things affected their old
sensualitye and lycense, to behave them selves violently and to ryfle all
things. And among their belly ba^kettes, they consulted to destroy Pertinax
as one comborouse unto them, and to set in his place to rule the Romayne
affairs, some other that were wild and wantone, and would give them very
much lybertye.

Wherefore sodeynlie (whiles every man was in quiet) they being mad ran in
great companies with much haste at noonetide unto themperours Palayce, with
their spears extended and their swords naked. And at their thither coming,
the Chamberers of the Palayce (being astonished with this sudden matter unlooked
for, and being few against many, and naked against harnessed men) were not
able to resist them. And therefore every man left his stacion, and ran
dyuerselye hither and thither. Yet a few of themperours chiefest friends,
(having showed unto Pertynax the flockyng together of the Soldiers)
persuaded him to make shyfte for him self by fleinge, and to call upon the
people for aid. But he (although they counseled him profitably) at that
present, thinking it a shameful thing, unworthy themperiall Majesty, and
his former life, to commit his safety unto flighte and corners, determined
to prevent the peril and go furthe among them, trustyng that he should
persuade them what he would, and mitigate their furyous brains. He went out
of his chamber and metyng the raging Soldiers, inquired what was the cause of
this sudden stir, willing them to cease from so filthy a tumult. And being
not ones abashed with the peril, but retaining a grave countenance
conuenyent to themperiall Majesty, nor showing any thing appertaining unto a
suppliaunt, he spoke these words unto them. Truly if ye slay me (O
Souldyours) neither do ye atcheue any notable enterprise, or do me any grief
at all, The words of Pertynax unto the Soldiers.
being of this age and renown. For certainly there is some necessary end of
man's life. But you that are appointed to the charge and custody of your
Prince, and to remove perils from his person, to begin murder your selves,
and to defile your hands with blood, not only Ciuyle, but also of your
Emperor, take heed, I say, least it be presently abominable, and in time to
come dangerous unto your selves. For I have committed no iniuri or offense
against you. If you be sorrowful for the death of Commodus, truly it was not
strange for him to die, being borne a man. But if you think he was slain
by treason, verily it was not my default, being one (as your selves know)
void from all suspycyon. For the things that were then committed, your
selves knew first, so that if any suspicyon rose, it happened in others. As
for the rest, although he be dead, yet will I not suffer you to want any thing
that you will modestly, and mete for your estate without vyolence and extorcyon
desire. By these his words some of them were even then pacified and began to
depart, reuerencyng the holiness and age of the prince: but he was of the other
with an assault slain. Who (after they had committed this wicked deed)
knowing that the people would be doleful for it, went streyghte unto the
Camp, and kept them selves within the fortress, having appointed men of arms
in ye Towers to keep the people from the walls. This end had Pertynax that was
for his life and manners (as we have before said) worthy eternal praise. When
the rumor of this murdre was spread among the people, all places were filled
with tumultes and lamentacyons. The people wandered hither and thither like
mad men uncertain what they should do. They sought for the Aucthours of
the myschiefe, whom they could neither find, nor be avenged on. But
especially the Senate were meruaylouse doleful, reputing it their own
calamitye for yt they wa^ted so good a father, and so meek a Prince, and
fearyd alsoo tyranny, which they knew to be agreeable unto the men of arms.
But when a day or two were passed, all the commynaltye through every man's
perticulyer fear remained in rest. Those that bare any aucthorytye, departed
unto such Manours as they possessed furthest from the City, least that in
choosing a new Gouernoure some greuouse offense should be laid to their
charge. And ye soldiers (knowing the people to be in quiet, and no man
remaining that would revenge the Princes death) kept them selves within
their Fortress. And having set upon the wall one with a very loud voice
they proclaimed the Empire to be sold, saying they would deliver it unto him
that would give most money for it, and would bring him safelye into the
Emperyall Palayce. That Proclamacyon heard, never moved any man of the Senate
that was grave or in aucthorytye neither any manne of the nobylytye, or
fynallye of those that were rich, being few in number, through the tyranny
of Commodus. Neither durst any of them approach unto the wall to purchase with
money so detestable a domynyon. But it was declared unto one Iulyanus (who had
been Consul, The ambicyon of Iulyanus.
and was supposed also to have great abundance of money) at night when he
sat at Supper banquetyng (for he was reckened a man of evil conversation.
Whereupon his wife, his daughter* and a company of Parasytes, persuaded him
that leaving his table he should make have and know what were done And after
in his going they exhorted him to occupy the void Empire, affyrmynge that he
might conuynce all others by gifts, he was perdye so passing rich. Wherefore
when he approached nyghe the walls, he cried with a loud voice that he would
give them what they demanded, saying he had great abundaunce of riches and
Chestes full of goulde and silver. And at the same time one Sulpitianus who
had also been Consul, Sulpityanus.
and gouernoure of the City, and was father in law to Pertynax, cheapened the
Empire: but the men of arms suspected in him his affynytye with Pertynax,
thinking some deceyte to be in it, that he might therebye avenge the death of
Pertynax. Wherefore, having let down ladders, they took Iulyanus up unto the
walls, not being so bold as to open the gates until they were accorded of
paymente of the money. And he being entered the Fortress, first of all
promised that he would restore the honors and Images of Commodus which the
Senate had taken down, and that he would grant unto them the same
license they had under Commodus, and further that he would give unto every
Souldyoure more money, then they either durst desire or hoped to receive,
neither should there be any delay in the payment: For (quod he) it is safely
kept in my house. With which promyses the men of arms being entysed, and
trained with great hope, pronounced Iulyanus their Prince, and gave him the
surname of Commodus. Iulyanus made Emperor by ye Pretoria^ Souldyours.
Then dysplayinge their baners (upon the which they had painted the pyctures of
Iulianus) they concluded to bring him furthe. Wherefore when Sacryfyce (after
the usage) was ended, he went furthe enuyroned with a greater Guard then other
Emperors were accustomed: For having boughte thempyre by vyolence against the
peoples will, and by filthy shame, with good cause, he feared thinsurrectyon of
the Commynaltye. But the Souldyours being armed and compassed on every side
like a cyrcle, that if need required they might fight, took into the mids
of them their Emperor, and lyftynge their shyldes and Targettes over their
heads to be therebye the more safer if any stones were thrown from the
houses, they brought hi^ into the^perours Palayce. None of the people durst
resyste them, neither did they follow the Emperor as they accustomed with
joyful shoutes, but every manne cursed him bytterlye, reprouynge him for that
he had purchased thempyre with money. Then first of all were the dysposicyons
of the Souldyours corrupted, then increased the fylthy and insacyable couetyse
of money, with contempt of themperyall Majesty. For when there was no man
remaining that would revenge the cruel death of the late Prince, neither
any that would wythstande that filthy fact of sale and unhonest
marchaundyse, the same gave occasion unto the men of arms to wax thereafter
more vnreuerente and rebellynge, in so much that auaryce and contempt of the
Prince daily increased even unto death. For Iulyanus having obtained
thempyre, gave him self to ryotte, neglecting the weak publyke, and leadynge
a naughtye voluptuouse life* yea he deceived the trust of the Souldyours being
unable to perform his promyses unto them. For he had not so great substance
as he bragged of, and the common treasure was exhausted by the immoderate
dispe^ces of Commodus. For these causes the men of arms on the one part
detested him. On the other side the people not ignorant thereof despised him.
Wherefore they pursued him as he passed by with reproach, vpbraiding him for
his filthy and unstable pleasures, so that openly in the very Theater (unto
the which a great multitude of men resortethe) they would rebuke Iulianus, Nyger
called to the^pire.
and call Nyger ye Protector of the Romayne Empire and Preside^te of the
Sovereign principality, prayeng him that he would with all speade come unto
the^ and deliver them from those manyfolde injuries. The same Niger had been
Co^sull, and then was governor of all Siria, Syria.
the which was the chiefeste dignitye at that time. Phenices.
For all Phenyces and all the Regyons unto the river of Euphrates were under
his dominion. He was then somwhate stryken in age, Euphrates.
and having been occupied in many weyghty affairs, had obtained the renown
of modestye and righteousness, so that he seamed to follow the life of
Pertynax. By the which he chiefly wanne the favor of the people. For which
respect, they with often clamours called upon him, taunting with reproaches
Iulianus being present, and extollyng with praises and joyful showtes Nyger
that was absente. Whereof when Niger once heard, (trusting that all things
would prosper according to his desire (seeing that Iulianus was of the men of
Arms neglected, as one that had violated his truth and promise, and of the
people contempned as a man not worthy, for that he had purchased his
principalytie) he began to hope for the obtaining of the Empire. And first
he dysmyssed home (some on time some an other) diverse of the Capytaynes,
Tribunes, and other me^ of Arms, who likewise had knowledge of all news that
were brought unto him from Rome. This did he to the intent the rumors might be
spread very broad in the East. For so he supposed to join many unto him,
if he seamed not to enterprise the occupyeng of the Empire by disceite, but to
succor them that desired aid. Wherefore all the people there aboutes came
incontinentlye toward him every man by him self, besechynge him to take the
charge of the common wealth furthwyth upon him. For the nacio^ of ye Sirians
is naturally unstable and prone unto change of things: And they loved Nyger
exceadingly, for that he behaved himself very gentely among them, delytynge
them with plesaunte plays and su^pteouse solempnities. The Sirians are also of
their own nature very desyrouse of such shows. Among whom the Antyochians
(enhabyting a great and famous Cite) do throughoute the hole year either in
the City self or else in the Suburbs, celebrate feasts and plays.
Wherefore in setting furthe shows and solempnytes unto them, he so wanne their
hearts that they fervently loved him. The which when Niger perfectly
perceived, having a certain day commanded the men of arms to be present,
and all the people coming togithers, in a high place for that purpose
erected, he said unto them as ensues. The oracion of Niger.


Peradventure your selves know how gentle my dysposicio^ has been, and how
long I have co^sulted or I went about any weyghtye matter, neither would I
have come furthe to speak unto you at this time if I had been led either by
mine own pryuate counsel or by assured hope, or else with affection
surmountinge trust. But the Romans call me and with intercessions weary me
to stretche my helpyng hand unto the^, and that I should not permyt so
excellent and gloriouse an Empire left by our elders to be now shamefully
destroyed. And as it is a presumtuouse and rash thing to medell in so
weighty affairs without occasion, so if a man deny succor unto the^ that
want and desire it, then is he then in the lasshe of Cowardyse, and Treasone.
Wherefore for this purpose am I come furthe unto you that I might know your
advise what ye judge best to be done, and that I might use you as Counselors
in all this business. If it do prosperouslye comme to pass, the commodytie
thereof shall be comune unto you and me. It is no small riches that solicit
us, but it is the very Romain people, unto whom the Gods have given the
domynion of al things, and the Roman Empire self, as yet wavering, and to
no man certainly establisshed. The counsel which we enter is assured, if we
consider the minds of the suitors, no man being able to resyste us. For they
that come from thence, report that the men of arms the^ selves of whom he
bought thempire, are not very faithful unto him, for yt he has not performed
his promise. Let me hear now your opinions herein. Whiles he spoke these
words, forth with thole army and all the common people saluted him as
Emperor and Augustus. Niger saluted Emperor.
And when he was clothed with Purple and adorned with Imperyall vesture, being
there sodaynlye as of purpose found, with the fire borne before him, they
conuayed him first unto the Temples of Antyoche, and then to his own house.
The which, as it were not now pryuate, they decked with Imperyall signs and
ornaments. With those things Nyger being joyful and perceiving the mind of
the Romans, and benevolence of al other me^ toward him, thought now al his
purpose to be in perfect plyght. When ye brute of this was blown abroad,
incontinently al nacyons that inhabited over against Europe, hasted every man
for him self, to proffer him their assystence. And Ambassadors also from al
parts came to Antioche unto him, Europe.
as unto their lawful prince. The kings also and the rulers dwelling beyond
Euprates and Tygris, Euphrates and Tigrys.
sent to gratifye him, promisyng their aid in all his enterpryses. The which
Ambassadors rewarded with great gifts and thanks he dysmyssed, saying unto
them, he neded not as at that present any aid. For his Empire was well
strengthened, he which he would without bloodshed well govern. His mind being
thus exalted with great hope, he began to be more neglygent in executing yt he
should, deliting him self and ye people of Antioche with pleasures and setting
forth of shows and plays, neither thought he once of going unto Rome, yt
which should first have been done, neither certified he the Illyryan armies
(who should chieflye have been won unto hi^) of these affairs: for he trusted
that when they once knew the matter, they would together with the Romans and
nations of the Orient condiscende unto him. Whiles he thus little regarded his
affairs, the fame thereof was spread among the Pa^noniens, the Illyriens, and
all the other armies abiding on the coasts of Danuby and Rheyn, Danuby and the
Rheyn. Pannonyens. Seuerus
for the defense of the Roman Empire against the Barbariens. Then was
governor of ye Pannoniens (for they were al ruled by one man's authority) one
named Seuerus, of the nation of Affrique, a man vehement and diligente in
furthering his affairs, accustomed to lead a hard and sharp life prompt in
ye invention, and spedy in the execution of things. The which seeing ye Roman
Empire to hang unsteadfast, and as it were opened to pillage, despised the one
Emperor as a sluggyshe cowarde, and the other as of no account. Certain
dreams and Oracles besides augmented his hope, and other diuinacyons of
things to come, the which when they came to effect obtained report of verity:
of yt which him self wrote most part in books of his own life, and published
them openly painted in Tables. But it behooves me not to ouerpasse without
writing his last dream, The dream of Seuerus.
which being of greatest weight, brought most hope unto him. For when it was
first told him yt Pertinax was made Emperor, Seuerus having ended sacrifice,
and being sworn in obedience to the Prince, as soon as he came home was taken
with a dead sleep: In yt which he dreamed that he saw a great and gorgyouse
horse decked with the Emperors sadell, caryinge Pertinax him self through the
City, by the street called Sacra via. But when he came unto thentrye of the
market place (unto the which the people whiles they were in liberty accustomed
to resort in great assemblyes) it seemed unto him that yt the horse overthrew
Pertynax unto ye ground, and offering his back unto Seuerus standing nygh^,
carried him through the mids of the market place, where he was reverenced of
all the people. There remains in the same place unto this day the Image of
the same dream being very great and made of brass. After this sort Seuerus
being extolled in mind, and thinking him self to be solicited unto
thempyre by divine prouydence, determined to assay the minds of the
Soldiers. Wherefore, adjoining first unto him the Capytaynes, Tribunes,
Tribun.
and the chiefest of the men at arms, in talk with them of the Romayne
empire, said it was nygh destroyed, no man remaynyng by whom it might be
valyauntly and prudently governed. Inueighyng also against the Pretorian
Cohortes, Cohorte Pretoryan.
who had defiled their oath of allegyaunce with their Emperors blood, he
said the death of Pertynax ought to be revenged, being nothing ignoraunte
that the memory of Pertinax was fyxed yet in the minds of the Illyryan
armies. For they had by his guidinge under the Emperor Marcus obtained many
vyctoryes against the Germaynes. And being lieuetenau^t of Illiria he showed
many examples of virtue and prowess in war, and exhibited to his companions
much benevolence and modesty with a meek and moderate governance. Wherefore
(worshipping the memory of ye prince) they grievously grudged that so great
crueltye should be done unto him. Seuerus therefore taking unto hi^ this
occasion, led them easily whither he would, faining yt he affected not
thempyre, but sought to revenge the blood of Pertynax. And as the me^ of ye
Regyon are of great and tall bodies prompte and ready to war and murder, so
are they of dull and gross capacity: where by they do not easelye perceive
what a man craftelye speaks or works. Therefore when Seuerus had faithfully
promised them to persecute the murdre of Pertynax, he so wan al their favors,
that he was named Emperor, and received the whole aucthority of the^. And
after he understood the minds of the Pannoniens, immediately he allured unto
him with gifts the rulers of all the nighe nations yt were subject unto the
Romayne Empire. For Seuerus was ye rediest of all men to feign frendshyppe, to
that he passed not to be perjured if neade required, always having one thing
in his mouth, and an other in his stomach. Therefore after he had gotten
credit and favor by letters with all the Illyryans and Rulers of the
Provinces, having gathered together Souldyours from every part, and taken upon
him the surname of Pertynax, the which he supposed would be most acceptable,
not only unto the Illyrians, but also unto all the Roman people, and having
called them all together into the field, he spoke unto them as ensues. The
oracion of Seuerus*
You do evidently show (O soldiers) of what loyalty and Religion you are
toward the Gods by whom ye are sworn and what reverence ye bear unto your
Emperor, when you do so much detest the men of arms of ye City (being
ministers rather of pomp and super fluitie, then of virtue and prowess) for
that they have committed so horrible an offense. And certainly I that am now
entering into so great hope (your selves pardie al know how obedient I have been
unto Princes) desire to atcheue and bring to effect yt shall be acceptable unto
you: neither to suffer the Roman Empire to run into ruin, the which being
governed by our elders with great authority, was reverenced of all men. And
after it fell unto Commodus, although through his youth it began many times
to decay, yet was all the fault thereof shadowed, partly with the princes
nobility and partly with the memory of his good father* Neither did his vices
deserve rather hate then co^passio^, for we imputed not ye things yt were
done, so much unto hi^, as unto ye flattering Parasites and other Counselors
and ministers of vile voluptuousenes, until the^pire came unto ye godly old
man, the memory of who^e virtue and goodness rests yet in your minds, who^
notwithsta^dinge it was so far from their intent to sustain, yt wc
abominable murder they destroyed him. After hi^ has a man (whom I know not)
purchased the domynion of Sea and land. And for that act is hated of the
people. Neither are the men of arms true unto him, because he has deceived
them. And if they would defend him, yet are they not in number or valyaunte
prowess to be compared unto you. Besides that you have been exercysed in
warlike affairs. For you are accustomed to fight with the barbarouse nations,
to suffer al labor, to despise heat and cold, to pass ryuerse frosen over
with yse, to drink water dygged and not springinge out of the yearthe, and to
watch in hunting of wild beasts: fynallye you are furnysshed with all
prouisyons appertayninge unto valiau^tnes, so that it is easy for no man to
withsta^de your strength. For the man of arms is approved by labor, and not
by banqueting and ryotte: with yt which they are so traded, that they can not
sustain your voice, much less your syghte. But if the affairs of Siria
seame terryble unto any man, let the same ponder how weak they are and with
how simple hope they be ruled, that they dare not once come forth or co^sulte
of going unto the Cite, but taking those habitacions in good worth, account
the pleasures eueri day gotten to be the lucre of that unconstant authority.
As for the nation of Sirians is chiefly addicted unto iestes and plays. And
they which enhabite Antioche are thought principallye to favor Niger. For the
other nacyons and Cytes seeing no man worthy the Empire, or that should
modestly and valyauntely govern the common wealth, at the last feigned them
selves to obey him. But if they ones knew that an Emperor were created by the
Illyrian army, and heard therwithall our name, the which is not unknow unto
them (for my self have heretofore had dominion over them) they will not
allege cowardice or slouthe unto us. Neither will they abide your invasions or
prove your valiau^te prowess especially, seeing they are not comparable unto
you, either in talnes of person, warlycke exercises, or fyghting hand to
hand. Wherefore let us with all speade possess the Cite of Rome, the very
seat of thempyre, and then shall we easily bring to pass the residewe,
affyeng our selves in the oracles of the Gods, and in the strength of your
weapons and bodies. When Seuerus had spoken thiese words unto them they
received him with ioyefull shoutes and calling him Augustus and Pertinax
promised him their beneuolente hearts and minds. Seuerus is named Augustus and
Pertinax.
And he thinking it not good to prolonge the time, commanded them with all
celeritee to be armed, proclaimed his voyage toward the Cite, gave unto
every manne vytayle, and other sufficient necessaries for their journey, and
removed with all speade, restinge in no place, nor ones suffering the Soldiers
to stay, until through their great labor they could scarsely fetch
breathe. And him self trauaylinge with the formeste of them, and lodging in a
simple tente, did eat and drink of the same the souldyours did, never
shewinge any pomp, or imperyall wantonness whereby every day he waxed more
acceptable then other. For seeing he was not only partaker, but also authoure
and head of all their travail he became so honorable unto them all, that
they seamed most glad to do any thing he would command. After he had
passed Pannonye, and was come unto the mountains of Italy, preventing so the
fame of his approach that he was in open sight, before his coming was hard
of, a meruaylouse dread invaded the Italyen Cities, when they saw so great
an army. For the inhabitauntes of Italye being of a long space void from
war, did now till their land and lived in peace. For as long as the City
was free, and that the Capitaynes for the wars were elected by the Senate,
the Italyen nations were ever in harness. And having subdued the Grecians and
Barbaryens, gate unto them selves the dominion of Land and Sea. Neither was
there any clymate, or part of the world unto the which the Romans
stretched not their force. But after that Augustus had obtained the Empire,
he released the Italyans from labor, and took from them their weapons, and
retained with him for appoyncted wages only certain mercenarye Souldyours to
defend the Romayne Empire. Then compassed he the bounds of his Empire with
the greatness of Ryuerse and dytches, with high and sharp hills, and with
deserte places. Wherefore when they hard that Seuerus was nighe with so great
an army, being (not without cause) with that unaccustomed thing astonyed,
when they durst neither resyste him, or forbid him passage, they met him
crowned with laurel, and received him into their Cytyes, the gates being
opened. And he abiding no longer in any place then suffyced to do sacryfyce
and speak unto the people, kept on his journey toward Rome. When this was
declared unto Iulianus) he thought himself utterly undone, he had so
oftentimes hard of the power and multitude of the Illyryan army. For he
mystrusted the people of whom he knew himself hated, neither had he great
affiau^ce in his guard, because he had deceived the^. Wherefore having
gathered together a great some of money partly of his own, and partelye of
his fryndes, and what so ever he found either in the temples, or any other
places, he distributed it among the Soldiers, that thereby he might
reconcyle their favor. But they (although they had received many ample
gifts) rendered no thanks, interpreting their duty to be now paid, and not
one benefit bestowed on them. Furthermore, although the friends of Iulyanus
persuaded him to lead furthe an army, and keep the straites of the Alps,
(for this Alps are most high hills, whereof the like are not in this Regyon,
The Alps.
stretched furthe in the manner of a wall, and compassing all Italy, as though
nature for the more felicity of the country had added this one heap, that
it might have a munycion vnpreignable, stretchinge from the Northern unto the
Southern sea, yet durst he not ones go furthe of the Cite: But sent unto the
Soldiers desiring them to arm and exercise them selves, and to cast a
trenche before the City. Him self prepared all apparayle for the war within
the Cite self, especially he endeavored to break the Elephantes (whom he had
before ordained for Pomp and triumph) to suffer sittars one the^: thynking
that the Illirian Soldiers and their horses should be put in fear with the
sight and greatness of those bestes, whose like they had never before seane.
And all the Cite was busied with forging of armure, and making of warlycke
instruments. But whiles the Soldiers of Iulyanus delayed the time in
apparelling them selves to battle, news were brought that Seuerus was arrived
even at hand. He had sent many of his Soldiers privily at sundry times to
Rome, the which in the night entered the City by diverse ways, having covered
their harness with the habit of Pagans. And now was the adversary with in
the Cite, whiles Iulianus dreamed in a mamering uncertain what to do. The
which when the people perceived, eueri man being stricken with fear, and
dreadinge the power of Seuerus they feyned them selves to take his part,
despysenge Iulianus for that he was a cowarde and Nyger for that he was
slouthefull: yet did they greatly wonder that Seuerus was then so nyghe at
hand. Now Iulyanus staggeringe and void of Counsel, having first called
the Senate togithers, sent letters unto Seuerus to conclude a peace between
them taking him as fellow into the Empire with him. But although the Senate
had ordained all thiese things, yet perceauing him to tremble through
despair of his safegarde, they turned wholly unto Seuerus. And two or three
days after, when they hard that Seuerus was even at hand contemnyng
Iulyanus, they assembled in the Senate house by the commandment of the
Consulles: For they have the charge of the Romayne affairs when there is any
doubt of the Empire. And when they had there many times met togythers,
consulted what was needful to be done, whiles Iulyanus yet remained in the
Pallayce lamenting his fortune, and humbly desyryng them, that he might give
over the Empire, and resign all his authority unto Seuerus. But when the
Senate perceived Iulyanus so fearful, his Guard astonyed, and him self
forsaken of all men, they concluded his death, and pronounced Seuerus Emperor.
Then they sent Ambassadors unto him, whereof some were Magistrates, and some
had chiefest rule in the Senate, the which should give unto him all the honors
appertayning to Augustus, and the charge of sleynge Iulianus, was committed
unto one of the Tribunes* A Tribune slew Iulianus.
The same Tribune murdered the feable and miserable old man (which had
purchased unto him with money so wreatched an end) being desolate and
abandoned of all persons and making vncumly lamentacions. The which when
Seuerus heard, purposynge in his mind greater matters he took counsel of
apprehendynge all the men of arms which had slain Pertinax. The which to
bring to pass, he sent letters unto the Tribunes Capytaines and centurio^s
exhorting them with many promises, to persuade the Soldiers of the Cite to be
obedient unto him. And he him self sent commandment; that leuynge their
armure within their camp, they should come furthe cladde like peasyble
persons, as they accustomed to goo in Tryumphes, and to celebrate plays)
swear alleageaunce unto Seuerus, and conceyuing in them selfs a singular hope,
should be ready to follow their new Emperor. The Soldiers beleauynge this
through the perswasyons of the Trybunes, laid their armure aparte, and came
fourth crowned with Laurel in gorgiouse garments. Now when they came unto
the army of Seuerus, he being thereof aduertysed commanded, them to resort
togithers in the fyelde, as though he would gentely welcome them all. And when
they approached the Imperial seat, shouting joyfully togithers, they were all
by a watch word suddenly enclosed. For so had Seuerus appointed it that
when his soldiers saw them attentyfely herkenynge unto their Prince, they
should enuyron them all as if they were enemies and wounding, or strikynge no
man, with a compass enclose them round about, only holdyng fourth their
darts and spears, that the other for fear of wounds should not, being
naked, and few, presume to resyste those that were armed, and many. Unto who^
(when he had thus taken and entangled them as it were in a toil of weapons)
with a high voice and troubled spirit, he spoke as follows. You see that we
have overcome you as well, by advise, and pollecy, The words of Seuerus unto the
Pretoria^ soldiers.
as by strength and number. Ye are taken most easily, and holde^ without great
difficuttie, what shall be done of you that lies in my, power: ye stand now
here presently as prays subject to our Empire. If for your mischeuouse fact
ye seake co^digne punyshme^t, ye shall never find it. You have slain a godly
old man and worthy Emperor who^ your selfs should have preserved and
defended. You have filthely and shamefully, as it were the possession of a
private person, and as filthy usurers, sold ye Roman Empire shineng with
perpetual glory, the which our elders ruled with virtue and renown. And (that
more is) as most timorouse and cowardly dastardes, you durst not ones defend
and succor him, who^ after that sort, your selves erected unto the type of
dignity. For thiese your heinous offenses and horrible wickedness, a thousa^de
torments of death are due unto you, if a man would study for a mete reward
unto your deserts. Wherefore what you are worthy to suffer your selfs
apparau^tly perceive. Nevertheless, I will abstain from sheding of blood, not
folowi^g your hands. But because law, and equity prohibiteth you to guard a
Prince, having violated your oath, and defiled your hands with civil and
Imperial blood, in falsefieng your allegiau^ce and truth, albeit of our
bou^teouse clemecye we pardon you your lives, and yet do I charge my Soldiers,
yt they vngirde you, and after they have dispoiled you from your armure, they
let you go naked, your selfs I co^mau^d to depart far hence And further I
ordeine, swear, and denou^ce, yt if any of you be found hereafter wtin a
hundredth miles of the Cite, he shall lose his life. Inco^tinently after this
sentence pronounced, the Illiria^ Soldiers ran unto the^, and after they had
bereaved from the^ their short skeines decked with gold and silver, (which they
ware for proud pomp and bragging bravery) and taking from the by violence
their purses with their other apparaile and tokens of warriors they dismissed
them so rifeled of al they had. They seeing themselves thus betrayed, and by
crafty disceite so appreheded, took their fortune pacie^tli. For what should
they do being naked against armed, and few against many They departed
therefore bewailyng them selves, and interpreting the release of their lives a
great good turn bestowed upon them. But yet they lamented that they came
furthe unarmed, and so offered them selves to be shamefully taken. Now Seuerus
used an other wyle against them. For (fearing that they being naked and
spoiled, would in a desperacio^ return unto their camp, and fall to harnes)
he sent the stro^geste and most expert of all his Souldyors by other ways
and paths: commaundynge them to enter into the void tents, and ceasing on
the armure there left, to forbid them thentry when they returned. This
punishment therefore had the murderers of Pertinax. Then Seuerus with the rest
of his host apparaled with armure went unto Rome. The Romans were at the
first syghte astonyed, and dreadefull, ponderynge in their minds his
stoutenes and fortune. The Senate and all the people crowned with Laurel
received him (as the first of all men and Emperors) bringer to pass of so
great and weighty a matter without bloudeshedde or busy trouble. All qualyties
besides were meruaylouse in him: specially the sharpnes of his wit, his
sufferaunce of labor, and prompte audacyte of good hope in enterprysynge of
weighty affairs. After the people had received him with ioyouse acclamacions,
and the hole senate welcomed him at the gates of the Cite, he vyseted the
temple of Jupiter, made there his sacrifyce and saluted the other Temples, and
then entered into the imperial palayce. The next day, he came into the Coorte:
where he made an oracio^ with a good countenance, and embrased al men openly
and privily, saying he came unto the City to revenge the death of Pertinax. And
promised to erecte the fundacions of the estate of Senators and nobles of Rome
as long as he were Emperor. That no man should lose his life, or goods,
except he were by judgment condemned: all pykethankes and false promoters
being dyspatched away. And that he would follow Marcus steps in governing the
Empire: having not only the surname he said) of Pertinax, but also his full
mind and intent. By this talk he wan him self much favor. But many of the
ancient men, knowing his accustomed subtylty* told their friends pryuelye,
that he was a deceytfull man, bente unto fraud, and a meat dissembler, caring
for nothing, so that he might obtayn that he thought his own advantage. The
which report of the Elders experyence did afterward verifye. Seuerus then
remained but a few days in the City: but having bestowed on the people many
gifts, and aboundauntlye rewarded the Souldyours: amongst whom he elected
the strongest and valyaunteste into their places (that were erste dyscharged)
for the guard of his person, he furthwyth prepared his journey toward the
Oryent, whiles Niger lay still and gave his mind unto the wantonness of
Antyoche. Thinkyng it best to make haste that (being unlooked for) he might
oppress Nyger vnpuruaied of strength to resyste him. The preparacyo^ of
Seuerus against Niger. Thrace.
Wherefore he commanded the Soldiers to make them selves ready, and after he
had gathered together bands of men from every coaste, mustered all the youth
in Italye, sent for the residue of the Illyryan army remaining in Thrace, and
with no less dylygence gotten a great nauye and filled all the Italyan
galleyes of.iij. orders with Souldyours armed, he brought to gyther with
incredyble celerytie abou^daunce of al necessaries. For he knew well that there
neded a great power against ye nations, enhabytyng ye part of the earth that
is opposyte unto Europe: Europe.
all the which did with one mind follow and favor Nyger. Therefore after
this sort did Seuerus apparayle his army to the war. But the man, being
prouydent and of a forecastyng wit, suspected much the army of England,
who were very mighty, and warrelyke, and of them was ruler one Albynus,
Albinus
a man of the order of Senators, which had been traded in great wealth of
all richesse and pleasures. This man Suerus thought good to win by craft
unto him, least if the same, styrred with his riches, kynred, army and renown
(all prompte prouacatyons to coveting of thempyre) would challenge the
domynyon of all things unto him self: and whiles Seuerus were busyed with the
wars in the Oryente, take possessyon of Rome, not far dystaunte from
England. And therefore he determined to allure unto him with a color of
honor, Albynus being simple, light of credyte, and beleuynge Seuerus, for
that in his letters myssyues he protested all thing by solemn oath.
Wherefore calling him Caesar, and promising him the partycypacyon of his
Empire, he prevented his ambycyon. He sent lettres also unto him full of
gentle commendacyons, whereby he desired him chyefly to take upon him the
charge of thempyre, saying that it neaded such a noble manne, and of such
dyscreate age as he was. Him self (he said) was old and vexed with the gowte,
and his two sons very young. The which Albynus credytynge, accepted
gladlye the honor: being joyful that he obtained his desire without
battle or other trouble. And Seuerus (that al things might seame more
credyble,) sent lettres of like tenor unto the Senate: commaundynge the money
to be coined with the stamp of Albynus pycture, his Image to be erected, and
other honors to be done unto him, wherebye he establysshed the trust of his
benevolence. When he had thus prouydentlye fynysshed this dryfte (being out
of fear of the affairs in England, and having gathered together about him
the Illyryan Legyons and all other things needful) he did set forewarde his
host against Nyger. As for the places where in his Journey he arested, what
Oracyons he made in every City, what meruaylouse wonders appeared, what
Regyons he passed, and fynallye what conflyctes there were, and what numbers on
both sides were slain, the same all Hystoryographers, especyallye the Poets
treating of this matter, and the whole life of Seuerus, do very plenteousely
make mencyon of in their Verses. But I entende to put in writing things
manyfestlye known unto me, done by the space of seuentye years under many
and diverse Princes. And therefore I will touch the chyefeste things done by
Seuerus: without or favor faynynge any thing (as I se they have done
which wrote in that age) or else ouerslyppe unspoken any thing that shall
seame worthy memory.

The eande of the Second book of Herodian.
The Argument of the third book of Herodyan.
THE beginning of the Third book does treat of the batailes between Seuerus
and Niger, and of the preparacion of the same. Then after of the death of
Nyger, of the crueltye of Seuerus which would by Treason have slain Albynus,
whom he had taken into the rule of thempyre. Consequentlye of the overthrow
of Albynus men, and Albynus own death. Of the vyage and expedycyon made by
Seuerus into the Orient, of thambycyon of Plautyanus and his death. After that
the dyscorde between the two brethren Seuerus sons, and of the viage made by
Seuerus with his Sons into England, where he died. And the eande of the
Third book treats of Antoninus, Seuerus eldeste Sons crueltye, and how he
feigned for a while to be agreed with his brother Geta.

The third book of Thistorye of Herodian.
IN the Book preceadyng we have at lenght openid the death of Pertinax, the
murder of Iulianus, with the coming of Seuerus into the City, and his
expedicion against Niger. Who (when he suspected no such matter) hearing that
Seuerus was in full possession of Rome, taken as Emperor by the Senate, and
that the hole ^llyrian army was coming against him by land and Sea,) had his
mind wonderfullye troubled, an^ his courage meruaylousely daunted.
Nevertheless he gave furthwith commandment to the Presydentes, and rulers of
the Provinces, to defend and stop all their passages, havens. and streytes:
And sent to the Kings of Parthia, Parthia Armenia Atrenia.
Armenia, and Atrenia, for aid. But the Armenya^ King answered that he would
take neither part, but only defend his Realm^ ^t the coming of Seuerus.
The Parthian King, ^t him word, that he would command by commi^^on the
nobles of his Realm, to muster and gather their powers togythers: For so was
he accustomed wh^ he should make war, because the Parthia^s ha^ no mercenary
Soldiers, or appointed army. From the Atrenians were sent him for aid
certain ^hers, by the King Barsemius, Barsemius.
the which then ^eigned in that Realm. The rest of his power, he ^uied of
the Sowldyours that were present, and man^ he gathered among the people,
especially of the Antiochiens (who being through the lightness of their age, and
the favor of Niger sturred) did more rashely, then prudentlye, proffer them
selves. Niger then stopped with a mighty municion, and strong wall, the
streites, and broken places of the mountain Taurus: Taurus
thinking that the same rockye and steape Hill, would be an assured strong
defense unto the Orient. For Taurus riseng in great height between Cappadocia,
and Cilicia, does deuyde the nations, Cappadoce Cilicie
enhabitynge the Septentrion, and the Orient. He set also a Garriso^ in
Bizantium, Bizantium.
which was the goodlyest Cite of all Thrace, and at that time flourishing with
strength and richesse. For being set in a narowe gulf of the Sea Propontis,
Thrace.
it received tribute, Propontis.
and fyshe from the water, and possessynge on the other side large and
fruytfull fyeldes, gate lucre by both these Eleme^tes. And therefore Niger
thought it best to strengthen this town, that the ships might be prohibeted
passage though those streyghtes out of Europe into Asye. Asye.
This City was compassed with a strong and mighty wall, builded of four
square stone of Miletum, Miletum
with so small and straight joints, that a man would not judge it of many
pieces, but all of one continual stone. And if a man beheld the ruin at this
present remainyng, he would wonder, either at the art of them which first
builded it, or at the strength of them which destroyed it. After this sort
therefore, did Niger order his affairs, with very ware, (as he supposed) and
circumspecte counsel. Seuerus on the other part, made all the have that might
be, with his army and provision, resting in no place. And hearing that
Byzatium was fortifyed with a garrison of Soldiers, and knowing it also to
be a very strong town, he turned unto Cyzicum. Cyzicu^
When this was declared unto Aemilianus he governor of Asye, unto whom Nyger
had committed the charge and chief rule of the war, he removed unto Cyzicum
also, leadinge with him all the Legions, which either Nyger had sent, or
himself, must red. When it came to strokes, after certain skirmisshes egerly
fought, the victory finally fell to Seuerus: and all the host of Nyger was
slain, and put to slyghte. Whereby the hearts of Oriental enhabytantes were
abated, and the Illyrians very much encoraged. Many there were, that thought
Niger to be in the beginning o^ ^he battle betrayed by Aemilianus. And for
proof of their opinion, some of them said that he enuyed Niger, disdaininge
that he, who a little before was his successor in Syrie, should now not only be
his superior, but also his Soueraygne, and Emperor. Other say that his
children (whom Seuerus finding in Rome, held his custody) persuaded him by
letters to regard their life and safety. For this circumspecte Counsel did
Seuerus put also in ure. Yt was the usage of Commodus, to deteyne with him, the
children of those which had the charge to govern the provinces, as pledges of
their faithful alleagiaunce and loyaltye. And therefore Seuerus, as soon as he
was made Emperor, (whiles Iulyanus yet lived) sent certain into the City to
steal privily his children, lest they should be in any other man's custodye.
And as sone also as he entered in to Rome, he caused to be apprehended all the
children of the Capitaynes, and of all other which bare any commen office in
all the Oryente, and Asye, to the end, that by those Hostages, he might cause
the Chiuetains of Nyger, for the sauegarde of their children, to betraie their
master: or else, if they remained faithful, it might lie in his power, to
avenge his anger against them in sleynge of their children. Now Nygers
Souldyors being dyscomfyted at Cyzycum, fled, every manne as fast as he
could: some escapynge by the Mountains of Armenye, Armenie. Taurus Asye.
Gallatie Bithinia.
and some coveting to pass Tawrus into Asye, and Gallatye, that they might
put them ^^lues in places of municion. Then marched the Army of Seuerus by the
plains of Cizicum, into Bythinia the next region. But when the fame was
spredde, that Seuerus had the vyctorie, a sodeyne sedi^io^, invaded the
Cities there about, not so much through any hatred, or amytye, they bare
unto the ^mperors, as through mortal contencion among^^ them selves.

The same was an old accustomed vice of ye Grecia^s, who (whiles they were at
dyscencion within them selves, and endeavored to destroy every man that
excelled in dignitye, had now consumed all Greece. And being within the^ selves
worn and wasted, were first made Captyues and slaves unto the Macedons, and
after the bondemen and drudges of the Romans. That pestiferouse calamity of
debate and discencion, vexed notable and flourishing Cities in our time. For
immediatlye after the battle at Cizicum in Bythinia, the Nicomedians revolted
unto Seuerus, se^ding him Ambassadors, to promise him they would receive his
army, and submytte them selves unto his governance. On the other side, the
Nycians stirred with rancor and hatred of them, favored Nyger, entertayning
his Soldiers, as well those which were escaped from the fyelde, as them
which he had sent to defend Bythinia. Out of these Cities, the Sowldiers, as
out of their Camps, encountered, and skyrmished togythers: and after a great
battle foughten, Seuerus obtained the upper hand. The Soldiers of Nyger
being from thence also dryue^, fled unto the streaytes of Taurus, and
defended the enclosed municions. But Nyger, (leaving there as great a
Garryson, as he thought needful) went him self unto Antioche, to leuye an
other hooste of men, and more money. In this while the Army of Seuerus
departed out of Bythinia and Galatie, Galatia Cappadocia.
entered into Cappadotia, and began to assault the Bulwarks, and municions
there. Where they were with many sorrows and labors afflicted, the way being
very narowe, and sharp, and they which stood above, throwing stones, and
most fyersly fyghtinge, and by that means few keeping back a great number.
For the passage is wonderful strayte, whereof the one side is fortifyfyed with
a huge and high Rock, and the other is full of waters, falling very swyftely
down from the steape hills. And Nyger had besides strengthened it with a
mighty and strong wall, that thereby, his enemy might on every side be
forbidden entry.

In the mean tym^ whiles these things were in doing in Cappadoci^ the
sedicion of certain Cytyes, began to stir with like dyscord. That is to
wete, the City of Laodicia in Syrya, Laodicia. Syria. Tyrus Phenicia.
Berynthyens.
abhorring the Antiochiens, and the City of Tire in Phenicia, detesting the
Berinthians. The which two Cytyes hearing of Nygers disco^fytur^ took down
all his honors, and Images, and made ioyfu^ acclamacions unto Seuerus, whereof
when Niger, ^yng busye at Antyoche, was certified, albeit he were at other
times of a meek nature, and gentle dyspo^^cyon, yet being justly moved with
their untruth an^ reuolte, he sent unto both the Cities, all the Maurit^^yan
Slyngers that were in his service, and with them a company of archers, whom
he commanded to slay every one they encountered, and to destroy and burn the
Cytyes selves. And truly, the Moors (being a nacyon naturally fierce,
Laodicia and Tirus destroyed.
and cruel, couetyng sl^ughter, sturdy in enterprises, and like me^ desperate
despising all danger of death) did suddenly oppress the Laodicians: and
(having tormented the people ^here with all kind of crueltye, and ransaked
the City) departed from thence unto Tire. The which (after they had despoiled
every man of his substaun^e, and committed much murdre) they wholly burned and
rased to the earth. Whiles these cruel acts were thus executed in Syria, and
whiles Niger was busied in waging and mustering an other army, S^uerus
Soldiers besyeged the munycyon of the mountain Taurus: being very pensyfe,
and wythou^ hope of vyctorye, for that it was by it self mighty and
inpreygnable, and dfended also with the steape and high hill. But when they
were now wearyed, and their enemies resting in safetye, suddenly loo in the
night powered down vehemente shoures, which filled all places with snow and
rain, (as common^e in Cappadocia the winter is very roughe and temp^stuous,
chiefly at the mountain Taurus: Whereby ^ sodayn brook brast forth with a
meruaylous troublesome stream, and being let from his right course (for
the munityon stopped his passage) it waxed more huge and violent, so that when
the wall (nature ouercomminge art) could not sustain so mighty a brunte, the
joints being by little and little loused, and the foundacyons from their places
removed, ye stream made to it self open way. When the garryson, which guarded
the entrye, ones that perceived, dreadyng least they should be by their enemies
enclosed, (no stay or defense to the contrary remaining, as soon as the water
were assuaged) they forsook their stacions, and made shifte for them selves by
flight. Then the Seuerian Souldyours reioysed, and hartened them selves, as
though thymmortall Gods guyded them. And knowing that the place was of their
enemies abandoned, they easelye without resistance passed over Taurus, and
entered into Cilicia. Nyger hearing hereof, having leuyed an huge army, (but
yet not skylfull of warlike travail) made great have toward them by long
iourneyes, a wonderful multitude of men, and almost all the youth of Antyoche,
following him as their general gouernoure, and pryncypall Capytayne, with much
myrthe, but nothing comparable unto the Illyrian Souldidurs, either in
prowess, or knowledge of warfare. In this array they arrived nyghe unto a place
named Sinus Issicus, Issicus Sinus.
in a mighty and large plain, the which being on every side enuyorned with
high mountains in form like a Theater, Theater
had a steep bank, extendynge far alonge by the Sea, as it were a fyelde,
fasshyoned by nature conuenyente to darreigne battle in. Yea the report is,
that in the same place, at a cruel and very bloody battle, Darius was by
Alexander vanquisshed, Darius. Alexander
and taken, (thenhabitau^tes of the Septentrion then preuaylyng against the
nations of thorient. There remains at this day, as a token and witness of the
same victory, the City of Alexandria, Alexandria.
situate upon an high hyl thereby, and a brazen Image of Alexander, by whom the
City is so named. It chanced besides, that not only the metynge of Seuerus
and Nigers armies in that place, The battle between Seuerus and Nyger.
but their fortune was also like. For they remained on both syde^ about
evening tide, ready to the battle. And the passed over the night in hope,
and fear, without re^te or sleep. And at the Son rysynge, the Capytaynes on
either side having encouraged their Soul^yours, ran together with an in
credible stoutenes, as though in that fynall battle, they would end the
^este of their hope and fear (fortune at that season arbytratyng who should be
Emperor of Rome. When they had of long space fyersely foughten, there was so
great slaughter committed, that the ryuers flowing alonge by the plain, did
run into the Sea with greater abundance of blood, the^ of water. Finally the
Oryentalles were overthrown and discomfited, and the Illirians pursued them at
their backs so nyghe, that many of them being wounded, were drenched in the
Sea. The other fled into the high hills nighe at hand, where they were by
ye pursuers slain, and with them a great number of rural people, who came
together out of the next Cities add Vyllages, to behold the battle from
above, as from a sure hold and strong Fortress. But Nyger him self escaped
from the fyelde upon a swyft Courser unto Antyoche, from whence also,
(despayrynge of all good success,) and seeing the people amassed and runnynge
to and fro, lamenting with howlings and tears, the death of their brethren
and chylderne) he furthwyth fled. And being hydden in a certain village of
the same Region, was there found by the horsemen, and beheaded. This end of
life had Niger, The death of Niger
receiving worthy reward for his delays, and protracting of time. A man (as
they say) in other things very moderate and upright. After Niger was slain,
Seuerus inco^tinently did put to death all his friends which either of their
own free wills, or by co^straint, had favored him: only he pardoned the
Soldiers, who through fear of Seuerus wrath, were fled over Tigre, Tigris.
unto the Barba^iens. And in deed to the^ was a great multitude escap^d. Whereby
it came to pass, yt the barbarous nations ^ro^ thence forward, waxed more
valiau^t, and strong in fight against ye Romans, being only expert before
to shote with the bow from their horses, not apparayled in harness, or bold
to fight with spear, and sword, but covered with light, and long
garments, they did most commonly throw their darts, and shoot their
arrows in fleyng away. But after that many of the Romayne Souldyours, and
Artyfycers, came to enhabyte and lead their lives in those Regyons, the
barbarous people learned, not only to wear armure, but also to forge, and
make the same. When Seuerus had fynysshed his affairs in the Oryente,
according to his own mind, he took an ardente desire to make war upon the
Atrenyan king, and to conquer the Realm of Parthia: both the which Nyger
had before assocyated unto him. But yet deferring those wars until an other
time, he began to invent by what means he might assuredly establysh the
Romayne Empire to him self and his children. For, Nyger being dispatched,
there remained no more, saving only Albynus, Albynus.
who he reckened would do little after his mind, or stand him in small
stead, the rumor being already spredde, that he usurped the dignytye, and
name of Caesar, over arrogantlye: and that many of the Senators had written
pryuelye unto him, encouragyng him to return to Rome, whiles Seuerus were
absente and busyed in the Oryent: for all the nobylytye wysshed Albinus
Emperor, because he was descended of noble and famous lygnage, him self
being a young man of great towardnes, and gentle disposycyon. All which
ententes when Seuerus knew, thinking it not good to work with open enmytie,
and manyfeste war, (having none occasyon that might seem honest thereunto)
he determined to cyrcumuente him wtih preuy Treason, and close deceit.
Wherefore he sent with letters of Commyssion, unto Albynus, certain of the
most trustye and faythefull Purseuauntes, which used to carye themperiall
letters: whom he commanded, that having delivered those lettres unto him,
they should say they had other secret matters to declare, so that al other
were commanded to auoidaunce. And then getinge him from his guard, they should
sodeinly murder him. He delivered poison also unto them, wherewith they should)
if it were possible) allure his taster, either of meat, or drink, to
dyspatche him. But Seuerus truth was suspected of Albinus friends. And
therefore they admonyshed him to beware of that false and desloyall person,
full of disceit, and treason. For he was manifestly known to be a perjured,
and untrue man: having by their own childerne, entysed Nigers Capitaynes, to
betray their master: And then, after he had abused their labor, and brought
all his purpose as he would) to pass, sl^we both them and their childerne.
Wherefore his Acts them selves made apparaunte his vnfaythfu^^ and noughty
dysposycion. And for that cause Al^ynus strengthened him self with a greater
and stronger guard then he was accustomed, permitting no messanger sent from
Seuerus to be let in rashely unto him, except he first laid a side his
weapon, and were throughely serched. Now when the purseuau^tes were arrived
from Seuerus, and having openly de^iuered their letters, said that they had
other secret ^^structions, to utter priuelye unto him, Albynus incontinenly
suspecting the matter, caused them to be apprehended: And then by several
examinacions hau^nge found out the truth, and by order perceived the hole
Treason, caused execution out of hand to be done upon the offenders. And
prepared him self against Seuerus, as his apparau^t enemy. The which t^inge
when Seuerus knew, being a man of wrath^full, and cruel nature, he resolved,
to hynde no len^er the despyte and hatred he bare to Albynus. Wherefore he
called the hole army togithers, and made thi^ oracion unto them.

No man ought t^embrayde me of over much lyghtnes, for that I have heretofore
done, The oracion of Seuerus
neither account me false, and ungrateful toward him who^ I reputed for my
frend^. I have performed all things. Yea I have received him into the soeretie
of my dominion, being now most perfectlye establyshed the which thing a man
will scarselye do to his own brother. And that which you have unto me only
delivered, the same have I with him participated. But all thiese our bountefull
benefits, has Albinus most shamefully recompensed, contempnynge our
prowess, forgetting his allegiaunce, and coueytynge with peril, the hole
rule, whereof he might have been partaker without battle, or contencion. He
fears not ye Gods by who^ he has so often sworn. Neither does he
consider, or favor your laborious trauayles, which you have with so great
renown and glory for our sake sustained. And assuredly, him self wanted not
the profits of our successes: Yea had he observed his fidelitee, the gretest
portion had been his. And as a man, if he be author of myschiefe, shall be
accounted unrighteous, so if he revenge not the iniurye received, he shall be
esteamed a cowarde. When we made war against Niger, we had not so just and
lawful causes of anger, because we hated him, not, as a bereuer, and robber of
the^pyre, for the same hanging in the mids, and then wavering in
co^trouersye, either of us affected, and drew unto him self with equal
enclosure. But Albinus, neglecting his loyaulty, allegiau^ce, and oath, after
he has obtained by our large liberalitee, the honors which are only given
to our lawful children, had rather become our noisome enemy, the^ our fre^dely
familiar. Wherefore, as we bewtifyed him with our manyfolde benefytes of
honor, and glory, even so, let us now with force, and strength, convince, and
daunte, his traiterous, and feable heart. As for tharmy of that small Island,
is not able to sustain or abide the brunte of your might. For seeing ye have
your selfs almost alone, by your own valiant prowess, subdued the hole
orient, who would doubt, but at this present through the ioyneng of so great
power (for here is welnye the hole Romayne army) you would not overthrow and
put to flyghte so small a number, who has served under a man being neither
sober, nor valiaunte Captain? for who is I pray you ignoraunte of his
voluptuouse life, more agreeable to Heardes of Swine, the^ to Legio^s of
Soul^iors. Let us therefore valiau^tly set forward against him, with the stoutenes
we have accustomed, affienge ou^ selves in the Gods, (so wickedly by him
co^tempned) as principal guides of our voyage, and myndefull of the
victorious signs by us heretofore erected, the which he has also utterly
despised. When Seuerus had this much spoken, inco^tine^tly thole army prono^ed
Albynus their commune enemy: And having re^^iued Seuerus with joyful
acclamacions, and showed by ^^eyr shoutes their good wills toward him, they
en^med ye man with an inestimable hope added to his ente^^ryse. Wherefore, after
he had liberally distributed among the Soldiers great gifts, he led the^ al
forwa^^es against Albinus: having sent also a crewe of me^ ^^rifle and raze
Biza^tium, Bizantium clean destroyed
which was yet shut after the ^^ceipt of Nigers Soldiers. The which City
being at length by famyne conquered, and defaced, the Theater, ^he hot bathes,
and al other goodly buildenges thereof v^erly destroyed, and it self reduced
into ye form of a vil^ge, was given unto the Perinthia^s, Perinthians.
as Antioche wa^ unto the Laodicia^s. Then he exacted great somes of ^oney, to
repair the Cities, which the Nigria^ Sou^^iors had batered and despoiled. Him
self continued hi^ ^orney wtoute intermissio^, not greatly regarding ye hol^
^aies, or any painful labor. For he was equally pa^^e^t of cold and heat,
travailing often times bareheaded, ^^er ye high and craggy mountains, in the
bitter and sha^^e winter, when the snow fell continually out of ye sky* Whereby
he stirred his Soldiers, as with his own ^a^ple, unto alacrite of mind, and
sufferau^ce of labor ^use travails. For they were not constrained to abide
^^ose pains through any fear, or strait law, and co^mau^^ement, but rather
through a certain emulacio^, and ex^^ple of their Prince. He sent certain also
before to ^^ke the streites of the Alps, and to defend the entr^, and
passages into Italy. Now when Albinus h^rde, that Seuerus made no delay in
the matter, but (...) as eue^ at hand (being before, as it were in a dream, and
passing the time in idle pleasures, he was now stryken with a meruaylouse and
sodeyne fear. Nevertheless he furthewith lau^ched out of Britain unto the
cost of France, right over aneanste it, where on the shore he pytched his
camp, and sent letters unto the Rulers of the next nations, desyring them to
send him money, and victualles, for the aid, and sustenaunce of his army.
They that obeyed his commandment, or request, did most unhappily provide
for them selfs, being after the battle put to death with diverse terryble
torments. And those which set at naught his rule and power (although they
did the same more happily, then prudently) yet escaped they without harm or
damage, when as the chance and fortune of things dyscerned both their
counselles. When the Seuerian power was entered into France, the skyrmyshes
were light and volant at the first, until at length, the great conflict was
given at Lions, a great and rich City. For Albynus remayninge him self
within the City, sent furthe his Soldiers to the bataile. The battle
between Seuerus and Albanus The Englishmen valiau^te warriors
And when ye two armies joined hand to hand, the battle endured a long
space with equal strength on either side, so that the fortune of the victory
depended doubtful. For the Britons were nothing inferior to the Illirians,
either in stowtenes of stomach, or gredines of slaughter. Thus in the first
onset, the frontes of two most valiaunte armies; did to neither side enclyne,
or ones recule. Yea (as many Authors of the same time (who wrote it not for
any perciall ^auoure, but according to the truth have left in memory,) the
whynge of Albynus Army was the better, and of more strenghte, against the
band that Seuerus led: so that he fled, and fell from his horse, and
throwenge away his cote armure, hid him self. But while the Brit^ns
pursued, reioysynge even as perfect Conquerours, sodeynlye, Letus.
appeared Letus one of Seuerus Capitaynes, with a fresh Crewe of men: who was
reproved and ill spoken of by the Souldyours, as though he had of purpose
houered, for to see the chance of the battle, protracted the time, and
detained them from setting forewarde, that he might therebye have raught the
Romayne Empire to him self. For he moved not a foot toward the fyelde,
before he was certyfyed of Seuerus overthrow. Which suspycyon, the hap
afterward ratyfyed. For after al things were ^et in order, and Seuerus was
at hearts ease, although he benefycyally rewarded all his other Capitaynes
with great and rich gifts, yet being myndefull of Letus ^esloyaltie, and
Treason, he put him (as was expedyente) to death. But these things were done
afterward. Then (as we before rehearsed) at Letus arryuall, the Seuerians
recovered perfyte hope, and Seuerus him self was put upon his horse, and gyrte
with a robe of purple. And seeing the Albynians (who thought them selves
vyctoryous vanquysshers) scattered abroad out of order, this fresshe band of
men sodenlie set upon them. And fynallye (after a little ressystence) compelled
them to turn their backs and flee away, whom being overthrown and
dysper^led, the Seuerians pursued, and entered into the City. The number of
them that were on either part slain, is dyuerselye left in memory, as it
pleased the writers of that age. Out of hand than was the Cyt^e of Lions
ransaked, burnt, and destroyed, and the head of Albinus stryken of, The death of
Albinus
and brought to Seuerus. Thus were two notable victoryes obtained, in ye East
and North. So that there is nothing, that a man may compare, unto the
contencyons and factes of Seuerus: if he consider, either the multitude of men,
the r^ysing up of nations, the nu^bre of batayles, or else the length, and
spedy celeryte of iourneyes. In deed, the affairs of Caesar against Pompeius,
Caesar Pompey
(either of them having to his assistence the Romayne Souldyours) were great,
and marvelous: so were those of Au^^stus against Anthonyus, or Pompeius
sons* Augustus Antonius. Silla. Marius.
And so were the batayles both Civil, and Forrey^e, between Silla, and
Marius. But a man shall n^ easily find such an other as this: who dispatche^
away three Emperors already possessed of the domynyon, The noble acts of
Seuerus.
who circumuented with fraud and couine the City army which guarded Rome
self, and the Senate house: who also procured one of the Princes to be
murdered within themperyall Palayce, destroyed an other in the Oryent, (which
obtained the chief government, and was erst by the Romans taken as
Emperor) and finally, brought into his subiectyon the third, which was
endued with the name, honor, and aucthority of Caesar. This end of life had
Albinus, enjoying but a small while his mortal and bloudye dignity. After
whose death Seuerus powered out all the Irous cruelty, and fyerce wrath of his
mind, upon the friends and alies of Albynus. And first having sent his head
unto the City, and commanded that it should be fastened openly upon an high
gybbet, in the latter eande of an Epistle, (wherein he certyfyed the people of
his victory) he wrote this also, that he sent Albynus head unto Rome of
purpose to be looked on, to the^tent, theysholde take example euidente, what
them selves should likewise suffer. Then after he had set in order thaffayres
of Brytayne, divided into.ij. parts thadministracyon of thole I Will, and
appeased all France, according (as he thought) to his own mind, and put to
death all Albynus friends, (whom either free will, or necescitie had joined
unto him) he set forwards immediately toward Rome: leadyng thole army with
him, to thentent he might seem ye more terrible. And having fynisshed his
journey with swyft speed, as he accustomed, being enemy mortal unto Albinus
friends, he entered into the City, where all the people met and received him,
with great reverence, and joyful shoutes. And thole Senate togithers welcomed
him. Notwithstanding, fear had greatly astonished some of them, for they were
sure, yt he would not spare the^, being of his own nature over outrageous, and
the^, having probable occasions of hatred against the^. After he was entered
into the Temple of Jupiter, he there finished ye accustomed rites of sacrifice,
and the^ returned to thimperial palayce. Anon after he distributed liberallye
among the people rich gifts, i^ token of victory, rewarded ye soldiers with
great su^mes of money, and gave the^ many things they never received before.
For first he augmented the substance of their corn, and permitted them to
wear ringes of gold, and every of the^ to keep a woman in his house. Al which
being dysagreable to warlike discipline, seamed theretofore unprofitable to
the^ which were ever pressed and ready to the battle. And he first of all other
altered the austeritie and hardness of their living, the tolerau^ce of
travails, and all their accustomed reverence toward their Capitaynes: having
brought ye Soldiers acquainted with the gredy gaping for money, and the love of
ye City comelines. When he had after this sort, set these affairs in good
order, as him self supposed, he came at length into the Senate house: And
there sittyng in the^perial Throne he began with a cruel oracion, to detecte
the friends of Albynus, showing forth, certain of their privy Epistles which
he had found with Albinus. He reproved some, for that they bestowed many
bou^tiful gifts upon him: And menaced al other, which either favored
thorientalles, or were of familiare acquaintance with Albynus. By these means,
he did without respect, put to death, every notable and prudente Senator, al
other ye bare any rule in the prouynces, or excelled in birth, or riches:
auengyng him self, (as he made semblaunte) upon his enemies, but in dead,
couetousenesse was the only cause, wherwt, he of al other Emperors was most
intached. For as he gave place to no man (were he ever so commendable) in
patience of mind, perseueraunce in labors, and glory of warfare, even so,
being above all measure addicted unto auaryce, he heaped treasure, through
unjust murders, executed upon every tryflyng cause, and sometime without any
at all, enjoying thempyre, rather through force, and fear, then any
benevolence, or good will of the people. Nevertheless, at the first, he would
seem familiare, and affable, in setting out gorgeous shows, and pageauntes of
al sorts, with the sleing of an.C. cruel beasts at a time, the which he had
sent for, out of our own, and Barbarouse Regyons. He gave besides, rich
rewards, and publysshed a sumpteous game, getting from all parts valylyaunte
Champyons, and cunning wrestlers. We saw also in the time of his Reygne,
sundry plays of all sorts, set furthe in all the Theaters, with
supplycatyons, and watches, like the sacryfyces of Ceres: Ceres. Seculer plays.
The same are called Seculer, celebrated (as they report) at the end only of
every third age. And the common Cryers went through all the City, and all
Italye, calling all men to the Plays, which they never saw before, nor
thereafter should se: sygnyfyyng thereby, that the space of time between the
celebracion passed, and that was to come, exceded al thage of a man. Now
Seuerus, after he had soiourned a while at Rome, and partycypated the regymente
of thempyre with his.ii. sons, perceyuyng him self to be famous as yet, but
by one Cyuyle vyctorye obtained against the Romayne power, (for the which
also he had refused to Tryumphe) determined to become notable, with the
overthrow, and standards of the Barbaryens. Wherefore, under color of
revenging him self upon Barsemius king of the Atrenyens, Barsemius. Atremie
Armenie
(who had assysted Nyger) he led his army into thoryent. And there being at
the very point to invade Armenia, he was prevented by the king thereof, who
sent unto him wyllynglye, both pledges and prese^tes, humblye desiring, that
he might enter into frendshyppe, and conclude a peace with him. After the
which done, Seuerus, seeing his purpose in Armenia proceade as him self
wysshed, held on his journey toward the Atrenians. And Agbarus the king of
the Osrohenians, Agbarus. Osrohenians.
came also and yielded him self unto him. And delyuerynge his children as
hostages, amplyfyed the trust of his truth, and loyaltye conceived, by
sendynge to the increase of his army, a great power of Archers. From hence
Seuerus passed over the Realm of Interamna, Interra^na. Albenyans.
and the fyeldes of the Albenyans, and made a rode into Arabye the fertyle,
from whence come all the sweet and odyferous herbs, which we use for
pleasaunt^ vapors, and perfumes. And having there destroyed mamany Cities, and
villages, and wasted the hole country, he entered into Atrenia. There he
besyeged the City of Atras, Atras besyeged.
being builded upon an high Rock, compassed with mighty and strong walls,
and fortifyed with a wonderful puyssaunt garrison of Archers. Wherefore the
Seuerian host, assaulted this City, with all the force they had, and moved to
the walls, Towers, and engyns of all sorts, omytting nothing, that might
avail to the assault, and batterye of the same. On the other side, the
Atrenyans stowtely defended their City, shootinge, and throwing down, arowes,
darts, and stones, wherewith they gretely vexed the Seuerians. They threw
down also, earthe^ vessels filled with certain wynged, venomous little
beasts: The which falling upon the eyes, and faces of the Seuerians, or else
creapynge by little, and little, in at the open parts of their bodies, did
right sharply stynge, and wound them. The Romayne Soldiers besides were
fallen into diseases, being unable, to away with the feruentnes of the air
there because it was to extremely hot, through the continaunce of the Son:
so that by thiese casualties, mamy more of them perished, then by the hands of
their enemies. Wherefore Seuerus perceyuinge them all for wearied, and worn,
the sieage not prospering, and the host receyuinge more damage, and loss,
the^ gain, or profyt, determined, before they utterly peryshed, to lead them
from thence: very sorowefull, that they departed, without atchieuing their
intended enterprise. For being theretofore accustomed to win the victory in
all batayles, they then accounted them selves ouercomen, for that they had not
vanquished. But fortune evermore favorable unto them, so provided, that they
returned not without any thing done: but with more fortunate success, then
they looked for. For the hole army, being shypped in sundry vessels arrived
not (as they first purposed) at the haven of Rome, but through the rage, and
vyolence (...) the waves, were driven to land in the costs of Parthian,
Parthia
not far from the City of Ctesiphon, Ctesipho^
wherein stands the Palayce royal of the Parthenya^ King. Who then living in
rest, and reckening the wars, which Seuerus had with the Atrema^s, nothing
pertinent to his charge, did not in that his idle tranquillity, suspecte, or
think upon any peril, or myshappe, toward himself intended. When the
Seueria army was, (as I said) by vehemency of weather, driven on land, at
the banks of this Royaulme, they began out of hand, to spoil and ryfle all
the Country, driving before them all the heardes of Catel, and flocks of
sheep, they found. And burning many vyllages in their way, they marched by
small iorneyes, to the City self of Ctesipho^, in the which the great
Artabanus then lay. Artabanus.
And there, fyndenge the Barbarouse people unpurveyed of defense, they slew all
that resisted, sacked the City, and carried away as Captives, both women, and
children. The king him self, with a few horsemen, only escaped. His treasure,
ornaments, and householde stuff, the Seuerians, as conquerours, seized upon,
and then returned. Thus Seuerus, more thrughe favorable fortune, then prudent
policye, obtained the Parthian Conquest. After the prosperous atchieuinge
whereof, he sent unto the Senate, and people of Rome, gloriouse Letters, full
of ostentacio^: and Tables, wherein were gorgeously painted, and at length
set out, his mighty batailes, and valiant victories. For the which the
Senate decreed many honors unto him, and gave him the surnames of the nations
by him, before Conquered. In the mean while, after this hap in the oriental
affairs, he returned toward Rome: having his two Sons, (who were then of
ripe age) in his Company. And after he had finished his journey, committed the
rule of ye provinces, unto those which lyked him best, and mustered the
Misians, Misians
and Pannonyens, he finally entered into the City with Triumph. The people
received him with joyful shoutes, Pannoniens.
and all other Ceremonies to the same appertaining, unto whom he granted
certain extraordynary holy days, sacryfyces, and shows. And having given
among them great gifts, him self also solemnyzed sundry plays, for his
victory. After this he remained a long time at Rome, sat oftentimes in
judgment, upon the City controversies, and gave his hole mind to enstructe
his children. But they, being young men, had corrupted their disposicions, with
sensual pleasures of the City, and ouermoche delight in riotting, and
vaulting. The Brethren also fell at varyaunce within them selves, their
debate risynge of childishe contencion, and boyishe brawle, in setting fourth
cockefightes, and quaylefyghtes, and the wrestlynge of little boys. For what
soever they had seen, The debate of Seuerus two Sons.
or heard in the Theater, they ever lyked it diversely, the one not loving,
that the other did: but the thing which was acceptable unto the one,
inco^tinently became odious to the other, their Parasit^, and servants,
egging the^ to discencion, and flatering them, to thente^t, they might allure
their masters to their own noughty will, and appetites. Whereof when Seuerus
heard, he endeavored to reconcyle them, and to correct their corrupted
manners. And then unto Bassianus (who at that time enjoyed thimperiall dignities
and honors, Bassianus
had received the surname of Marcus, being called Seuerus Antoninus, and was
his eldest Son) he gave to wife the daughter of Plautianus, the Lord great
Master of his householde. This Plautianus, being (as it is reported) by birth
of base estate, Plautianus.
was detected, and found gyltye of sedicion, and other notorious crimes, and
therefore punished with vanysheme^t. But he was Seuerus country man, borne in
Aphrique, and as some conjecture, nyghe of kynred unto him, but as other
surmyse, rather grateful unto him in vycyous lyuinge, through the flower, and
bewtye of his youth. Him did Seuerus enhau^se from simple and low degree, unto
wonderful abundaunce of Treasure. And giving unto him the goods of many that
were conde^pned, enriched him above all other: Thinsole^cye of Plauti^nus.
refrainyng only, from the admytting him into the governance of the empire.
The which richesse, and lybertye, he abusing, omytted no kind of cruelty, in
doing. what pleased him: and became more outragyouse, then any Prince
thertofore raygnynge. His daughter (as is said) did Seuerus give for wife unto
his Son. But Antonyne him self was nothing joyful of the same, enforced
thereunto, rather by necessitye, then good will. For to the vttermoste he
detested the maiden, and her father: so that he used neither one bed, nor one
house with her, in such wise abhorrynge her, that he daily menaced, to put her
father and her unto death, as soon as by him self he should possess
thempyre. The which when she had eftsoon reported unto her father, and opened
how greatly she was of her husband disdaigned, she kyndeled the man
maruaylouslye unto wrath. So that Plautianus (perceyuyng on the one side
Seuerus to be decrepite and aged, and many times vexed with dyseases,
especyallye the gowte, and on the other side Antonius to be a fyerse, stout,
and cruel young man, became veary fearful of his threatenynges, and
determined to commyt some notable myschyefe, before him self perysshed. There
were many things, which enflammed him with ardente ambycyon of thempyre. That
is to weete, his abundance of richesse (the like whereof, no pryuate person
at any time theretofore possessed) the obedyence of the Souldyoure, the great
honor he enjoyed among all the Romans, and the ornaments of apparaylle,
wherein he went abroad. For he ware a garmente called Latus Clauus, and had
been twyse Consul. He ware also a sword, and all other tokens of promocyon,
and dygnitie: being wheresoever he went so terrible, that he was not only
vnapproched unto of any man, but also, if any by sudden chance happened to
meet him, they would turn their faces from him. And what way so ever he made
his Iourneye, he had certain Ushers going before him, which commanded
every man to avoid the streets, and no man to be so hardye, as to behold
him, but to turn away their eyes, and look upon the earth. The which when
Seuerus knew, him self took it not patiently: but grudged greatly thereat, so
that he diminisshed much of Plautianus authority, and endeavored to persuade
him, to abate somewhat, at the least wise, of his so insolent arrogance. But
Plautianus being thereof impacient, doubted not to compass by conspiracy, and
Treason, thempyre self: and therefore ymagined this dryft. There was a certain
Tribune named Saturninus, Saturninus.
which chiefly reverenced Plautianus, and albeit all other did so likewise,
yet did he more and more crepe into his favor, by a greater token and
apparaunce of honoring him. This man Plautianus reckened to be his most trusty
and faithful friend, and such, as only would keep secret, and close, his
counsel, and execute, what so ever he should command him. And therefore sent
for him in the euentide, and having removed al other aparte, said these words
unto him. Now is (quod he) the time come, The Treson of Plautianus.
wherein thou must make perfect, thy love, and obeysaunce toward me (of the
which thou haste hytherunto showed euidente proof) and wherein I may
suffycyently recompense thy deserts. The choice is given unto the, whyther
thou wylt eschew my danger, whom thou now see, and become vassalle unto my
power, or ellis out of hand perysh, with the worthy punishment of a stubburne
stomach. Fear thou not the greatness of the enterprise, neither dismay thy
self with the names of the^perors. It is lawful for the, to go alone into the
Chaumbers, where they sleep, and as if you did return to the night watch,
thou may easily without any interruptio^, atcheue what thou desyreste. There
is nothing else wherein thou should longer awayt for my commandment. Go
thy way now into the court as though thou had some priyue and weighty
message of mine to do, and there, as becomes a valiant man, murdre that old
manne and Boy, within either of their Chaumbers. And as thou art partaker of
the danger, even so, after it is eanded, thou shall enjoy part of the
greatest honors. These words albeit they somewhat astonyed the Trybunes
mind, yet did they not utterly confound and expel his counsel. But as a
man of a prompte and ready wit (for he was a Syryan borne, and for the most
part, thenhabytauntes of the Oryent are of exact and sharp judgments)
perceiving the frantyke folly, and mere madness, of Plautianus, and knowing
also what he was able to do, durst not reprehende any thing that was spoken,
least him self should furthewyth be slain. But faynyng that all he had
heard, was acceptable unto him, first he saluted Plautyanus as Emperor,
and then required a lybell of his hand concerning the commandment of the
said murdre. For it was the usage of Tyrauntes, when they had without
lawful judgment, commanded any manne to be put unto death, to give the
charge thereof, written in some little book, least there should no argument,
or proof, remain of the same appoyntmente. With that Plautyanus, blinded with
over much couetyse, delivered unto the Trybune a book, and sent him toward
the murdre, willing him that as soon as he had slain both the Princes,
before the fact were publysshed, he should send for him, to the entente he
might be seen within themperyal Palayce, before any man heard of his
possessyon of thempyre. Upon this couenaunte the Trybune departed from
Plautyanus, and as he was wont, passed freelye through all the Court: where,
ponderynge with him self and perceiving how uneasy it were for one manne to
murdre the two Princes, lyinge in sundry Chambers, he first went to Seuerus
lodgyng, and there wylled certain of his pryuye Chaumber, to help him to the
speech of the Emperor, saying that he brought news, which appertayned to
the Emyerours sauegarde. They made speadye relacyon hereof unto Seuerus, who
furthwyth commanded the Trybune to be let in. And he being entered before the
Emperor said these words. I am come hither (O Emperor, The Treason
disclosed.
quod he) as he that sent me fyrmelye supposes to murdre your person. But
as I my self both wysshe, and will, to be the aucthoure of a great benefyte
and the preseruacyon of your health. Plautyanus lyinge in awayte with Treason
for thempyre, has appointed me to murdre both you, and your Son. And that
not only in words, but in writing alsoo, the Testymonye whereof is this
book. And in deed, I promised him to accomplysshe that he commanded, least if
I rejected it, an other would have taken it in hand. But now I am here
present, to bewraye the matter unto you, least his presumptuouse Trecherye,
should oppress you unawares.

Notwythstandynge, that the Trybune spoke these words with abundance of
tears, yet did not Seuerus at the first credyte it, so much was the memory
of Plautyanus love toward him, fyxed, as yet in his breast: yea, he suspected
all the matter too be contryued of a purpose, thinking that his Son, who
abhorred Plautyanus, and detested his daughter, had Imagyned this craftye
Couyne, and mortal slander against him. Wherefore, having called his Son
unto him, he began to rebuke him, for that he had devised such myschyefe
against his friend, and well wyller. But Antonyne at the first, swear, and
protested, that he was ygnoraunte of all this business, and afterward
encouraged the Trybune (whoo persysted in his tale, and showed furthe the
book) to declare the hole Treason. Than the Trybune (perceiving intoo how
great daungere he was entered, not ygnoraunte how much in favor Plautyanus
was with Seuerus, and knowing precyselye, that if the Treason lay hydden, and
the matter not thoroughly proved, him self should receive extreme and cruel
death,) spoke thus unto them. My Sovereign Lords (quod he) what more ample
argument or perfect proof do you seek hereof? permytte that I may go furthe
of the Court, and by some secret and trusty person certifye Plautianus, that
all his commandment is fulfilled. He be leuyng it, will be here out of hand,
to occupy the Palaice as void. The^ shall it be your parts, to examine, and
try out the truth. And after he had thus much spoken, he chose a faithful,
and trustye person unto him, which should in his name exhort Plautianus, to
make haste and come furthwith to the Coorte, seeing both the Princes were
slain: for it behooved him, before the dead were publyshed among the people,
to be within the Palaice: that thereby, occupyenge the Principal Tower, and
establyshenge thempyre unto him self, all men should maugre their hearts obey
him as one not entringe into thempyre, but as already possessed thereof.
Plautianus crediting this matter, was puffed with a meruailouse presumption and
hope. And putting on him a shyrte of mayle for the sure defense of his body,
about the evening of the same day ascended into his Chariotte, and made
haste toward the Coorte with a few which were present attending upon him,
who thought he had been sent for by the Emperors, about some earnest and
weighty business. And when he was without let of any manne, entered into the
Palayce, the porters being ignoraunte, what the matter mente) the Trybune
met him, saluted him as Emperor by collusyon of purpose imagined, took him
by the hand, and led him into the Chamber, where he feygned that both the
dead Emperors Corpses lay. Now had Seuerus appointed certain of his Guard
to lay hands upon him, as soon as he were commen in. But when Plautianus,
having at that instaunte other fa^syes in his head, was entered into the
Chamber, saw the two Emperors there standing, and perceived him self
apprehended, being with that so great a matter, very sore agaste, he began
humbly to entreat, and desire pardon, affyrminge that all this dryfte was
forged unjustly, of malice against him. The^ Seuerus reproved him, rehersynge
the many told benefits, and honors, he had bestowed on him. And Plautianus
replied again, repetynge the testimonies of his accustomed truth, and good
will toward the emperor: wherewith Seuerus began some what to relente, and
credit the words of Plautianus: until that the shyrte of mayle appeared
through a slyt of his upper garment. Which Antonyne perceiving being a
stern, and fierce young man, and thertofore detesting Plautianus, said. I
would gladli wete (quod he) what answer thou will make unto thiese two
points. Why came thou in the evening, unto themperours unsent for? And what
means this sherte of mayle thou wearest? for who comes in armure to a
Supper or banquette? And having so said, The punysheme^t of Plautianus.
he commanded the Tribune, and those that were present to stabbe him in with
their swords, and daggers, as a manifest Traitor, and open enemy. And they
making no delay in the matter, executed Themperours commandment, slew the
man, and threw his body into the high way, to be spurned at, and skorned of
the people. This just end of life had Plautianus, a man of insatiable
avarice. After this done, Seuerus constituted two Capitaynes over the men of
arms, and him self most commenly soiourned in the Suburbs, or else nyghe
the Sea costs of Campania, sitting in judgment, upon matters of controversy in
the law. And being very diligent in Civil affairs, chiefly coueyted to have
his childerne traded at Rome with decente, and honest manners. For he perceived
that their minds were bente unto plays, and shows, more vehementlye, then
became thestate of Princes. Whereby it would come to pass, that the yo^ge men's
studies, and co^tencions, tending to diverse purposes, their wills also, and
appetites would become dysagreable, when (as it were) certain brondes of
debate, should be kindled between them. But especially Antonyne, after the death
of Plautianus, wexed terrible unto al men. Besides that, he compassed with all
the craft, and ymaginacions, he could devise, how he might destroy the
daughter of Plautyanus, his own wife. But Seuerus sent her with her little
Son, which she had by Antonine, into Sicilia, with as much richesse, as
abundantely suffyced, for her meat, and drink, and other necessaries:
Ensuyng in that point, Augustus, who entreated after the same sort, the Sons
of Antonius, after he was adjudged a Traitor. Seuerus endeavored in all that
he could, to reduce his Sons to love, and concord, and to reconcyle either
to other, admonyshing them, with ancient Histories, and examples, wherein many
calamytes, rise^ thrughe discord of Brethren, were rehearsed. He added thereunto
the Treasure him self had gathered together, all the Temples filled with
money, and the richesse, which increased daily of foreyne Tributes, how the
Soldiers, might through that abundaunce, be retained with ample, and rich
gifts, and how the me^ of arms in the City, were augmented four times, more
the^ they were before, and so great an army, soiorned nyghe the City, that
no forreyn power (if a man considered the self multitude, or the greatness of
their bodies, or else the abundaunce of money) could be found comparable unto
them. But all thiese things, he said, would be of none effect, whiles the
two brethren dysagreed and kept ciuell war within them selves. With
rehersall hereof, and entermedlyng corrections with prayer, he labored, to
repress their insolent courages, and to bring them to an atonement, and
concord. But all was in vain, for they had thrown the brydelles out of their
mouths, being continually enclyned to the worste. And although the yo^ge men,
through the feruencie of their youth, and immoderate license, were sturred too
much already, unto delytes of sundry voluptuouse lusts, yet were there ever
redi at their elbowes, flocks of parasites, which allured them unto diverse,
and contrary disposicions: not only extolling their dissolute vices, but also
inue^ting new pleasures, wherewith the one might be pleased, and the other
offended. Of the which parasites, Seuerus him self, apprehended many, in the
very minystery of their flatterye, and therefore did put them to death. As
the old man was thus in mind molested, with the sensual, and unhonest life,
and delytes of his Sons, he received letters from his lyuetenaunte of
England, whereby he was informed, how the barbarouse people rebelled, and
wasted thole Region with invasions, and Commocions. Commocion and mutine in
England
Wherefore, he neaded a greater puyssaunce of men, to resist, and suppress
them: there wanted the Emperors presence also. Glad was Seuerus hereof: for
being a man of his own nature, greadie of renown, after his vyctories, in
thoriente, and Septententrion, and his surnames by ye same obtained, he
coueyted to make some Conquest, over the Englyshemen. And to lead his Sons,
fourth of the City, that being far from the pleasures thereof, they might
accustom them selfs, to warlike, and sober diet. Wherefore, he proclaimed his
expedicion into Britayne, being very old, and sore troubled with the gout,
but yet of so valiaunte a stomach, as never was any young man. In his journey,
he road most communely in a horse litter, never resting long in any place.
When he had ended his voyage, and passed the Ocean Sea, with as much celeritee
as can be thought, he entered into Brytaine, mustered his Soldiers, having
gathered a wonderful power togithers, and prepared him self to battle. The
Britons, being astonished, and agaste with this so sodeine arrival, of
the emperor, And hearing that so huge, an host was assembled against them, sent
Ambassadors unto him, to purge their misdemeanors, and entreat for peace. But
Seuerus, making delays of purpose, lest he should return to Rome, without any
thing done, and being very desirous of ye Conquest, and Surname of Britain,
dismissed the Ambassadors home again, without any resolute answer, given to
their suite. Him self, with circumspecte industry prepared all things
expediente unto the war. And his chiefest care, was to build bridges over,
and in the marshes, to thentente his Soldiers might stand and fight in
safetye. For many places in Britain, England full of marshes Thocea^.
are full of watery maryshes, through the often flowynge over, of the Ocean
Sea. By those maryshes did the Brytons swymme and skyrmyshe therein with their
enemies, The au^cyente and old manners of Englyshmen.
being covered with water up unto the navel, and not much caring, that men se
the privy parts of their naked bodies. Neither did they know the use of
apparaile, but accustomed to compass their belyes and necks only with Iron,
which they esteemed an ornament, and token of richesse, as other barbarous
people supposed gold. They paynte their bodies, with diverse pyctures, and
fourmes of beasts, and therefore wear no garmente, least the paynting should
be hydden, being a nation very valiaunte, and warlyke, gredye of slaughter,
and content only with a small target, a spear, and a skeyne hanging by
their naked sides, ignoraunte utterly of thuse of shyrtes of mayle, and
helmettes for: they reckened the same cumberous unto them, when they should
swim over the lakes, through whose vapors and heat, the air is there
always mystye and dark. Seuerus omytted nothing undone, that might avail
the Roman Soldiers, and endomage the Britons. And when all things were
prepared, as him self wysshed, he left his younger Son named Geta, Geta.
in a part of the Isle, which was subject unto the Romans, to se to the
judgments of matters in law, and thadminystracyon of Cyuile affairs: unto
whom he appointed as Counselors, certain of his friends, being grave
Personages. And him self took Antonyne in his company against the Brytons.
After the Romayne army was passed the Ryuers, and Bulwarks (which being
builded over aneanst the Brytons, at that time eanded the bounds of the
Romayne Empire) there were foughten many light skyrmysshes, whereof at al
times the Romans were vyctours. But the flyghte ftom them was easy unto the
Barbarous: for they hidd them selves in woods, lakes, and other secret
corners, wherewith they were throughlye acquaynted. The sickness of Seuerus.
All the which being contraryous unto the Romans, caused much delay in the
war. In the mean season, a greuouse disease came upon Seuerus, beyngesore
appaled with age, so that he was constrained to keep his Chamber, and send
Antonine unto the wars, there to execute themperours office. But Antonine,
not regarding any business of the Brytons, endeavored by all the means he
could, to win, and confyrme the hearts of the Souldyours unto him,
deprauynge often times his brother, to thentente they should only obey, and
aid him, to the attaynynge of the Soueraignytye. The long maladye of his
father, and the slow procrastynacyon of his death, caused the young man to be
very pensyfe, and doubtful, so that he labored to persuade his fathers
Physycions, The death of Seuerus.
and mynysters to rydde in any case, with all celerytye possible, the old man
out of the world: until that Seuerus, being rather through thought, then
syckenes, consumed, eanded his life: who was the most famous of all Emperors
in warlyke affairs. For none other had obtained so many vyctoryes, His
victoryes.
and Conquestes, either Cyuyle against his adversaries, or forreyne against
the Barbarous nacyons. Thus deceased he, after he had governed thempyre the
space of.xviii. Seuerus reigned xviii. years.
years, leaving his Sons for his successors in the same: unto whom he
left also so great aboundau^ce of riches, as none of his predecessors had
before him done, and a greater army, then any forreyne power was able to
resyste. When Anthonyne had ones gotten the Supreme aucthorytye, The crueltye
of Antonyne.
he began to destroy every man from the very bed side, as the proverb
says. For he put to death the Phisicians, because they obeyed not his
commandment, in hastyng his fathers death. And slew all his own, and
brothers Nouryces and enstructers, for that they went about to reconcyle
them, leaving through his crueltye, none a live, that was either in dygnyty,
or had reverenced his father. The Chyuetaynes of tharmye, he entyced, to
persuade the Souldyours, to proclayme him only Emperor: imagining daily
manyfolde myschyefes against his brother. But he could not win the Souldyours
good wylles, or assent thereunto. For they remembered that Seuerus brought either
of them up from their infancy, with equal diligence, and them selves had ever
showed like honor and obedyence to them both. Wherefore Antonine, perceiving
that he could not speade of his purpose with tharmye, having taken truce with
the Brytons, granted them peace, and received their hostages, he removed with
great speed toward his Moother and Brother. When the two Brethren met
together, their Moother labored to bring them to agreement, wherein also, many
of the most prudente, and sage of Seuerus friends, and Counsailors, earnestly
travailed. Antonyne thereby (seeing all men repyned his sensualytie) was
enduced, rather of force, then good will, to counterfaite love. After which
done, the two Brethren, gouernynge thempyre with equal honor, and
Soueraignitye, launched out of Brytayne, and sailed with the Relyques of their
father, toward Rome. For when they had burned the body, they carried the
ashes, intermedled with certain pleasant odours, in a box of Alabastre to
Rome, that it might be there enteared, and enclosed among the sacred
monumentes of other Princes. Them selves led thus their army, as
Conqueroures of Brytayne, and passed over Thocean, unto the next coaste of
France. After what sort therefore, Seuerus deceased, and how his Sons
took upon them thempyre, it is in thye present book at length declared.

The end of the third book of Herodyan.
The Argument of the fourth Book of Herodian.
THe fourth Book, speaks of the pomp, that was at the Cononizacion of
Seuerus. The discord, and debate, of the two two Brethren, and the death of
Geta slain by his own Brother Anthonyne, who remained after sole Emperor, and
was very cruel and vnco^stau^t. After that, of the Treason, done by him to the
Alexandriens, and the cause thereof. Of an other Treason done unto Artabanus the
King of Parthia. And how Anthonyne him self was slain by Martialis one of
his Guard, and how Macrinus was made Emperor, who sustained, and held on the
war with Artabanus, and fynallye made peace and concord with him.

The fourth book of Thistorie of Herodian.
THe Acts of Seuerus by ye space of.xviii. years, are in the former book
sufficiently showed. After whose death, the young Emperors his Sons, with
their Moother, returned hastly toward Rome: vsyng in their journey continual
rancor and debate. For they never lodged in one June, or used one table:
suspecting daily, all their mete, and drink, lest either of them preventing
other, should covertly in their services, work his feate with poison. And for
that cause, they made the speadier remouinges: thinking to live more safely
within the City, where they purposed, to deuyde themperial palaice between
them, or else (as they both chieflye wyshed) to lie a sunder, in other the
largest, and beautyfullest houses of the City. When they were entered into
Rome, all the people crowned with Laurel, received, and the Senate welcomed
them. Formoste rode themperours themselfes, clothed in Imperial purple. And
next them followed the Consulles, beringe the vessel with Seuerus relics.
Which vessel, the people, after they had saluted the new Emperors, did
reuerentlye worship. Themperours and Consulles being thus accompanied with
pryncely pomp, carried the same into the Temple, where the divine monumentes,
of Marcus, and other Emperors, are seen. After they had fynyshed the solemn
sacrifyce, and, according to the aunciente usage, celebrated the funeral
Cerimonyes, both the Brethren departed into thimperiall palaice: which they
divided between the^, closed up all back doors, and priuey posternes, and
met together only at the utter gates. They chose besides, either unto him
self a sundry Guard, and never came togithers, unless it were some time for a
little while to be seen of the people. Nevertheless, first of all, they
accomplished the due funeralles, of their Father. For the Romans accustom,
to consecrate with. Immortalityee, such Emperors, as at their death, leave
either Children, or Successors, in thempyre behind them. And those which are
endowed with that honor, they Canonize among the Gods. There is throughout
the City, a certain doleful lamentacion, mixed with feastfull joy. And they
use to enterre the dead Corpse, very sumptuousely, after the common sort of
men. But then, they have an Image, made as like the dead Emperor, as may be.
The same, within the porche, of the Imperial palayce, they lay in a great,
and high bed of Iuorie, covered over with cloth of gold. And truly, the
same Image, looks very pale, like unto a diseased pacient. About the bed on
either side, a great part of the day, do certain persons sit. That is to
weete, on the left side, the Senate, clothed in black garments: And on the
right side, many Matrones, whom either their husbands, or parents
dignitees, do beautify. None of thiese, are seen to were any owches, or chains
of gold. But being cladde, with thin white vesture, they show the
countenance of mourners. And thus do they continewe the space of.vii. days:
dureng the which, every day, themperours Phisicians, ^oo repair unto the
Bed. And, as though they had felt the pacientes pulces, declare that he
waxes more sick then before. Finally, when it seems that he is deceassed,
Certane of the most noble, and worthy young me^, of thorders of knights, and
Senators, do take up the bed, on their shoulders, and carry it through the
street called Sacra via, unto tholde market place, where the Roman
magistrates, are accustomed to render up their offices. There, on both sides,
are certain stages made with steps, upon the which, on the one side, is a
quere of boys, being noble men's Sons, and on the other side, are many
bewtyfull women, singing Himpnes, and balades, in praise of the dead Emperor,
measured with diuerses lamentable verses. When those are fynyshed, the young
men do take up the bed again, and bear it out of the city, into the field
called Campus Martius. Campus Martius
In the broadest part whereof, there is erected a tower four square, with sides
of equal height, builded of great timber, like unto a Tabernacle. The same
within forth, is filled with dry chippers, and Rodes: And on the utter side,
hanged with Arras clothes of gold, and decked with images of Iuorie, and
sundry painted pictures. Within it also, is an other less Tower, but like in
form, with doors and portalles opened. And over yt the.iii. and fourth, with
many other roumes, ascending continually, until they reiche unto the highest,
which is less then all the other. A man may compare this building, unto
Towers, which are set in haue^s, with fire on the Tops, to direct ships,
which sail by night on the seas, into their perfect ports, and sure
stacions. The same are commonly called Phari. Phari.
Now when they have put the bed in the Second Tabernacle, they gather
togythers all kinds of spicerie, and perfumes, with diverse odoriferous fruits,
herbs, and iuyces, the which they throw on heaps, in the Tabernacle. Neither
is there, any nation, City, or person, which excels in honor, or dignity,
but at ye time, will to the uttermost of his powere, honorably celebrate, the
last funeralles, of the emperor. When they have couched a great heap of spices
togithers, and stuffed ye building therewyth, all the Roman knights, do ride
about ye Tower, with a just course, and order to and fro, called of the^
Pirrhichius. Pirrhichius.
Chariottes are also drawn about, wherein many do sit, clothed in purple,
represe^ti^g ye persons, of all noble me^, being Magistrates, and Capitaines,
of Rome. The Ceremonies being thrughly ended, the Successor in thempire, takes
a bra^de of fire in his hand, and fireth therwt the Tabernacle. After who^,
all other yt are present, do throw fire likewise, into the same. And
immediately al ye buildi^g, being filled with those dry sticks, and spices,
begi^neth to burn veheme^tli. Then out of ye highest, and lest Tower, as out
of a high steaple, is let fourth an Egle, the which they believe, does bear
Themperours soul, into heaven. And from thence fourth is that Emperor
worshypped as the other Gods. When these two young men, The dyscorde of ye
two brethren.
had after this sort, consecrated their parent, they returned home: where they
daily exercysed priuye grudges, lying in awayte one for an other, and ymagynyng
al ye means, whereby they might entrappe either other. Fynallye, they omytted
nothing, wherewyth either of them might destroy, and defeat other, and aspire
to thole Monarchye by him self. Besides that, the minds of all the noble men,
and Cytezyns, which had any honorable office, or dygnytye, were severed into
diverse faccyons (either of the brethren, sending their secret letters, to
allure with sundry promyses, many unto their pryuate appetytes. The greater
part leaned unto Geta, Geta better beloved of ye people.
because he showed a great token of goodness, behaved him self modestly in
their companyes, and used honest studyes. For he retained commonly about him,
many that were well learned, and exercysed him self, in wrastelyng, and other
like commendable recreacyons. And with his gentle hauoure toward all men, he
wanne very many unto his frendeshyp, and love, through a certain pryncypal
glory. But Antonyne in contrary wise, Antonine outrageouse and cruel.
behaved him self in all things more cruellye. For being alienat, from the
manners I before rehearsed, he affected, to seem an embracer of warlike life,
and company. And through orderyng all matters irefully, he purchased unto him
self frendshyp, rather through menacyng, and fear, then gentle persuasions,
or good will. Now after their Mother had a long time in vain, endeavored to
reduce the^ into brotherly concord, The partynge of thempire between the two
brethren Propontis.
and unity, it seemed best, to divide the^pyre between the^. Wherefore, having
called together their fathers friends, they agreed of ye same dyuision. So that
all Europe fell unto Antonines lot, and the land over aneans^e it, called Asya,
was appointed unto Geta. Therbi, either of the^, as it were, through a certain
divine providence, should be separated with the Sea of Propontis. And it was
concluded, ye Antonynes army should remain in Bizantiu^, and Getas, in
Chalcedon a City of Bithinia. Biza^tiu^ Chalcedon.
The which Cities, being situate one against ye other, should defend either of
their limittes, and prohibyte the^ both, from invasions. As many Senators as
were of Europe, should remain in Rome, and all the rest attend upon Geta: who
appointed for the Seats royal of his dominion, Antioche, Antioch Alexandrie.
Mauritanians. Numidians.
and Alexandrie, both Cities of greatness, not much inferyor to Rome. Then of
the inhabitau^tes of ye South, leuing the Mauritanians, and Numidians, unto
Antonine, him self took al ye residue, even unto the Oriental costs. Whiles
they debated these matters, al other beholdynge the earth with sorrowful
countenance, their mother Iulia, spoke as ensues.

Ye have found out my sons (quod she) how to divide the land, and Sea betwyxt
you: Iulia the ii. Emperors mother. Her words unto them.
and either of your bounds, ye say, the Pontian sea does separate. But now,
how will ye divide your Mother? or how shall I ^ortunate creature be departed
between you? First slay me, and either of you, bury the part, he shall have,
yt I my self may also, with the Sea, and land, be disseuered between you. When
she had so said, she laid her arms vpo^n their necks, and enbracyng them
both, endeavored in all yt she could, to reconcile the^. Wherefore, being moved
with compassion, they lycenced every man to depart, without any final, or
determinate conclusyo^, and them selves also, returned home. But their ra^cor,
and envy, increased daily. For when any Capitaines, or Magistrates, were
elected, either of the brethren, aided his own friend chiefly. Or when they
sat in judgment, they held ever diverse opinyons, to the intolerable
damage, and loss, of the party, who had ye matter in controuersye. They
omytted besides no kind of secret wyles, and entrappynges, labourynge to
entyse either others Cooks, Butlars, and Cupbearers, to poison their Master.
The which endeavors, when they proceaded not, as either would, for that they
took their meat with great watch, and dyligence, Anthonyne being
impacyente of delay, and prycked wych ambycyon of the hole Empire, determined
either to commytte, or suffer, some notable facynorous fact. And therefore, he
compassed the matter, with strength, and murder. For seeing that his privy
attemptes took none effect, he thought it necessary, setting all hope, and
fear aparte, to fynysshe his begone enterprise out of hand. Wherefore,
sodeynlye breaking open his Brothers Chaumbre door, Geta slain by his Brother
An^yne.
he most cruelly there slew him, upon his Moothers lap, when he thought not of
any such mischief. The which deed, being accomplisshed, he immediately lepte
furthe, and runnynge through all the palayce, cried, that he had with great
dyffycultye, escaped a maruaylouse danger. And therewyth, he commanded the
Souldyours of his Guard, to safeconduyte him furthwyth into the Camp, where he
might abide in more suretye: saying that he should perisshe if he remained
any longer in the Court. And they credytynge his words, and being ignorant
of that was happened within, accompanied him, as he ran runnyng also. This
moved a great tumulte, among the people, whiles the Prince went priuylye in
the night, through the mids of the City. As Soon as he came unto the Camp,
he entered into a little Chapel, wherein, the Signs, and Images of the
host, were worshypped: and there falling prostrate, gave thanks with vows,
as if they had been for his health. When the same was reported to the
Souldyours, whereof some were washing, and some other reposynge them selves,
they ran thither as men amassed, in diverse plumppes. And he, coming furthe
into the mids of them, did not at the first, open the matter throughlye, as
it was committed, but cried that he had escaped a maruaylouse danger, and
Treason, of a malycyouse manne, his enemy, for so he named his brother. And
that with much dyffyculty, after long strife, his adversaries were
vanquysshed. For whiles they both contended, fynallye, he was by the favor of
fortune, left only Emperor. But in this dark and overthwart inueighyng of
these words, he wysshed, rather to have his deed understood, then openly
hard. Then for his safetye obtained, he promised unto every Souldyoure, two
thousand, five hundredth gr^tes, and he allowed them half as much more
vyttayle, as they were accustomed to have before that time. He lycenced them
also, to take them selves, money out of the Temples, and Treasouryes,
lauysshynge out at large, in one day, as much as Seuerus had in xviii.
years, gathered, and of other men's calamytyes and myseryes, heaped
togythers. The Souldyours, being with so great abundance of money entysed,
perceiving thole cyrcumstaunce of the aforesaid murdre, by those that were
fled from the Court, pronounced him sole Emperor, and declared Geta a
Traitor. Antonyne remained the same night in the Temple, and affayinge him
self, in the rewards, wherewith he had won the Souldyours hearts, went
the next day into the Senate house, being enuyroned with all the army, and
more armure and weapons, then were accustomed to guard the Prince, being
entered into the Senate, he made his sacryfyce, and that eanded, he ascended
thimperyall Throne, and made an Oracyon, as follows.

I am not ignorant that every murdre of a man's own kynred, The oracyon of
Antonyne.
as soon as it enters into the ears of others, will seame odyouse, and the
name it self, when it is heard, will add a maruaylous sclau^der. For compassion
follows the unfortunate, and envy pursues the mighty. The vanquisshed is
thought to receive iniurye, and the Conqueroure is supposed to commyt wrong.
But if any man will ponder the matter it self, rather with attentife Counsel,
then any percyal favor toward him that is dead, and exactly consider his
cause and entente, he shall easily find that it is both just and requisyte, to
revenge, rather then to receive iniurye. For the infamye of tymorousenes, does
ensue the calamity of the murdered, but the ouercommer, besides that he is in
safetye, does also bear away the renown of fortytude. Now al other things
the which he intended against me, with poisons, and al other kind of Treason,
it lies in your hands, to wreste out by torments. Therefore perdye, have I
commanded all his servants to be here present, that you may understand the
truth. There be many of them already racked, whose confession ye may
thoroughly hear. Finally, whiles I was with my Moother, he came upon me,
bringing in his company, many armed with weapons. But I knowi^g the matter
before, reue^ged my self on mine enemy. For he neither bare any mind, nor yet
purposed any thing, pertayninge to a brother. And to destroy him, the which
does first ente^de mischief; eue^ as it is rightful, so is it also received in
use. For Romulus him self, Romulus.
the buylder of this City, forbear not his Brother, which deluded his works
of so great importance. I omytte Germanicus the brother of Nero, and Tytus
the brother of Domitian. Marcus the Philosopher, did not suffer ye checkes of
his Son in law. But I, in thauoyding of poison prepared against me, and the
swoorde that henge over my sholders, have slain mine enemy: for that name,
has he, through his deades deserved. Render you thanks unto the Gods, for
that they have preserved one Prince unto you. And let not your minds, be
severed into sundry opinions, but obeyenge your only Emperor, led your
lives hereafter in tra^quillitie. For Jupiter, eue^ as he possesses, the only
Empire, and dominion, among the Gods, so has he appointed, the same unto
one alone, among mortal men. After he had spoken thiese words, with loud
voice, full of ire, and cruel countenance, beholding the friends of Geta,
which trembled, and waxed pale through fear, he returned into the palayce.
Furthewith then, were the alyes, and friends, of Geta, The extreme Cruelty of
Antonine.
put to death, even those, which dwelt in the house, with him, and all his
servants, so that the age of infantes, was not spared. Besides that, the
dead karkasses, were laid in Carts, for a reproach, carried out of the
City, and there thrown on heaps, and burned. Neither suffered he to remain
alive, any one, which was but of little acquayntaunce with Geta. The wrestlars,
Carters, and Stage players, and finallye all kind of thing, that was either
grateful or acceptable, to the eyes, or ears of Geta, were every where
destroyed. And every Senator, that excelled in nobility, dignity, or
riches, was put to death, as his friend upon every small trifle: yea
sometime, without any cause, upon every light accusation. He caused to be slain
also the sister of Commodus, being very aged, and thitherunto of all
Emperous: entertained with great reverence, as it became the daughter of
Marcus: taking for occasion, that she had bewailed unto his moother, the death
of Geta. And with her his own wife the daughter of Plantianus, which before
was sent into Cicilia, and a kynsman of his own named Seuerus, the son of
Pertynax, and Lucilla the suster of Commodus. Finally, he roted out, as it were
from the botom, every one, which remained of Thimperal blood, or in the
Senate, of the nobility. He commanded also, all the rulers; and officers, of
the Provinces, to be slain, as the friends of Geta: so that all the nyghtes,
were spent in murdering, a meruaylous number of men. Yea, he buried quick in
the yearthe, the Vestall virgins, The vestall virgins.
as though they had violated their virginity. Finally, that which never
before was done, he committed. For whiles he was lokynge upon the plays called
Circenses, Circe^ses.
the people of Rome, reprouynge, I know not how, a certain Carter, whom he
attentiflye beheld, he taking it for an obloquie toward himself, furthwyth
commanded the whole army, to run upon the people, and to spoil, and slay
every one, that had spoken against the Carter. And the souldyours, having once
gotten license of rifling, and robbyng when they (which had spoken against the
Carter, could not be dyscerned among the people, (for no man would in that
multitude, confess the truth) as they happened upon any man, either slew
him, or else, taking them all captives, after their ransom paid, did with
great difficulty release them. When these things were finished, The Emperor
styrred with remorse of his evil acts, and detesting the living in the City,
removed from Rome, to set the Soldiers in order, and visyte the provinces.
After he was passed Italye, he went unto the banks of Danowe, the which are
subject to the Romayne Empire. There, either he exercysed his body in
Cartinge, or hunting all kind of wild beasts, or else, sat in judgment:
but that was very sealdome, giving sentence brifely, and answering very
shortly, after he had hard but little of the matter. He there besides, joined
all the Germaynes into his society: so that of them, he elected every most
valyaunte, and goodly of stature, for his companyons in war, and guard of his
person. And oftentimes, layenge aside the Romayne apparaile, he put on the
Germaien garments, and was sundry times seen in their Cassockes, enbrowdred
with gold. He ware besides on his head, a yelowe bushe of here, rounded after
the Germanyen sort. Wherewith the barbarous people being ioyouse, loved him
excedingly. The Romayne Soldiers also reioysed thereat, because he gave unto
them sundry bountiefull gifts. Him self exercysed all the offices, of a
private Soldier. For if there were any trenche to dygge, him self first
dygged, any bridge to be made over a river, any bulwark to be builded, or
any other handye work, or labor, to be taken in hand, him self first
enterprysed the same: contented always with thynne fare, in cups, and dysshes
of wood, The sobriety of Antonine.
eating continually course bredde. For he accustomed, to feade him self with a
Cake of Rye, the which he ground, and baked upon the coals, with his own
hands. Finally, he rejected all wanton pleasures, and used simple things,
appertayninge unto the pooreste common Souldior. Besides that, he had rather be
called Companion, then Prince. And used to travail most commonly on his
feet, as the Souldyors did, seldom ryding on horse, or in chariote, and always
bering his own harneisse. The strength of Antonyne.
Yea many times; he bare on his own shoulders, the Sta^derdes, that were
heuyly laden with pictures of gold, and scarcely light enough, for the
strongest Souldior. For thiese, and oher semblable things, did his army love
him, as a warrelyke personage, and maruayle at him, as a valyau^t Captain.
For it seamed a miracle unto them, that a man of so little stature, was able to
endure so great labors. When he had establyshed some Soldiers at Danowe,
Danuby
and passed into Thrace, which boundeth upon the Macedony^^s, furthwith he
became an other Alexander. For he ^newed the memory of the same king, by all
the me^^es he could deuyse: commaundyng his images to ^e erected, in every
town, and replenysshinge Rom^ self, the Capitole, Capitole
and all the Temples, with the statues of Alexander. We then saw many images
foolyshly wroughte, that bare in one body two faces, of Alexander, and
Antonyne: who went abroad, in the Macedonyen apparayle, wearing a diadem on
his head, and slippers on his feate. He named a chosen company of young men,
the Macedonien Phalanx: commaundinge his Capitaines, to take unto them, the
names of Alexa^ders Chieftaines. And the young me^, which he had sent for out
of Sparta, he called ye Laconike, and Pitanyte Ce^turie. When he had ended
thiese things, and ordered every City, Pitanite
as he might, he made a ve^age unto Pergamus a City of Asia, yt he might use
some of Aes^ulapius Physic. Pergamus.
And when he was there arriue^, after he had re^eated hi^ self with sufficient
sleep, he removed to Troy, Troy.
visited all the old monumentes of the City, and went unto Achilles Toumbe.
And having sumptuously decked the same, Achilles
with flowers, and Garla^des, he began of new to counterfayte Achylles. But as
he wysshed, for some one like unto Patroclus, his dearest lybertine named
Festus, whiles he soiorned at Troy, deceassed: dispatched, as some thought, with
poiso^, yt he might ^e buried as Patroclus was: but as other affirm, extinct
with sickness. Patroclus.
His body, did Antonine command to be brought fourth, and ye place where it
should be burned, to be piled with much wood. And putting the corpse, into ye
mids thereof, and sacrifici^g diverse kinds of beasts, he threw fire into
it, and holding a glass in his hand, drank of the wine therein, making
peticion unto the wyndes.

And being somewhat balde, when he sought for hear, to lay into the fire, it
became a sport, unto all that were present: yet at the last, he notted of
those hears he had. Chiefly among al valiant men, he praised Sylla the
Romain, Sylla. Hannyball.
and Hannyball the Aphricane, whose Image he also erected. After he was
departed from Troy, he passed over all Asye, Bythynye, and the other adjacent
countries. And having set order in his effaires, every where, he went unto
Antyoche, Antyoche.
where he was received very honorably, and tarried a little while. From thence
he removed to Alexandry, clokynge this voyage, with pretense of desire, to see
the City, Alexandrie.
builded by Alexander, and to consulte with the God of that country, whom the
inhabitauntes do greatly worship. Faining these two causes, he commanded first
aulters, for sacrifice to be erected, with all kind of funeral celebration, to
the honor of their God, and the memory of Alexander. When this was declared
unto the Alexandryen multitude, being naturally chaungeable, with every
trifle, they al together, as it were men distracte of their wits, reioysed at
the princes will, and benevolence.

And prepared them selves, to receive him more honorably, then ever they did
any other Emperor. For all kind of musical instruments, met him in his
passage, making a wonderful melodious sown. Besides that, all the gates, and
streets, being replenished with the flauour of spices, and perfumes, they
welcomed him with bonefyres, and strowing of flowers in his way. After his
entry into the City, he first visyted the Temples, and when he had there
offered many sacrifices, and heaped the aulters which frankensence, he went unto
the Tomb of Alexander, where he put of his own robe of purple, his rings
adorned with precious stones, his gyrdle, and all his other goodly ornaments,
and laid the same upon the Tomb. The Alexa^driens beholding al these things,
reioysed wonderfullye, and made fest, both night, and day, throughout the
City, being ignoraunte, what was hid in the Emperors cancarde stomach.

For these things did he, thrughe subtyltye, to thenient, he might slay, all
the multitude togithers. The cause, of his priuey indignacio^, and grudge, was
this. It was reported unto him at Rome, that whiles his father lived, and after
his death, the Alexandrie^s, The occasion of- Antonines hatered against the
Alexa^driens.
had blustred out many opprobriouse words against him. For in dead, they are
of nature, talkatyue people, fashyoned to mock, and scorn, all others,
babelynge against every noble man, and chyefly with quyppes, and tauntes, as
them selfs think, plesaunt, and sweet but those, by who^ they are spoken,
account them very odious; and bitter. For of such scoffs, those, wherwt
vice is reproved, do soonest stir anger. Wherefore when they had spoken many
things against Antonyne, not keeping in silence, the murder of his Brother,
commonly calling his Mother Iocasta, Iocasta.
and scorning him, because that being of so little stature, he would seame to
counterfayte Alexander, and Achilles, which were most valiaunte, and mighty
Capitaynes, they so encensed him, being already of his own nature, yrous,
and bloodthirstye, that he fullye determined, their death, and destruction.
When he had therefore fynished this last rehearsed solempnitie, and feast,
seeing so great a multitude of the next nations, resorting unto the City, he
commanded by proclamacion, that all the Alexandrien youth, should assemble
into a certain fyelde, without the walls: promising, that as he had of the
Macedonyen, and Spartayne young men, even so would he of them, constitute a
square battle, called Phalaux, in the honor, and remembrance, of Alexander.
When they were so assembled, he commanded them, to separate themselfes in
bands, a great space one from an other, that he might elect out of them,
the apteste ages, statures, and personages, for the wars. The young men
creditynge the same, and persuaded with a color of truth, thrughe the great
honor, he had before showed toward their dead Prince, resorted thither in
many co^panyes, bringinge with them, their Pare^tes and Brethren, with ioyouse
acclamacio^s and shoutes. Then Antonine, went about each company, vewing them,
and praisinge this and that, in every one as he liked, until his whole host
had compassed them unawares, and loking for no such thing. And when he
perceived them al to be enclosed with his army, and entangled, as it were with
nets, him self came forth with his guard, and gave a watch word unto the
Soldiers: who furthwith ran upon the people, and slew with meruaylous
slaughter, The murder of the Alexandriens by treason.
the naked, and unarmed youth, and al other that were present. Of the Soldiers,
some were occupied in murdering only, other some buried the dead corpses, in
huge pyttes, and coueringe them with earth again raised a meruaylous high
hill. Many were drawn half dead into ye pittes, and many were buried quick.
There perished besides very many of the Soldiers them selfs. For they, which
had any breath remaining, and not fully lost their natural strength, clipping
the Soldiers, which ran upon them, drew the same also, into the pittes with
them. And there was so great a murdre committed, that with streams of blood,
which ran alonge the playnes, not only the mouth of Nylus, Nilus.
but also the Sea by the City, became red of color. This eanded, Antonyne
affecting the Parthyane surname, and renown of Thoriental conquest, (although
the people were now in perfect peace) invented this craft. He wrate letters
unto Artabanus king of Parthia, and sent unto him Ambassadors, Letters sent
unto Artabanus.
with sundry sumptuous gifts. In those letters he wrate, that he would take to
wife the kings daughter, for yt him self was a prince, and a princes son.
And therefore it besemed not his estate, to become son in law, of any private or
mean person, but rather to mary a Queen, or the daughter of a great and
puisaunt king. He alleged, that the Empires of Rome, and Parthia, being
the.ii. mightiest of the world* should by this affinity join togethers, and
no river disseuerynge them, be of so great strength, that it were impossible,
for any forreyne power, to vaynquishe them. For (quod he) all the Barbarous
nations, which are now subject, unto both these Empires, will easily
continewe in subjection, when every of them, shall have their own rulers and
governors. The Romans (he affyrmed) had an army of footmen, the which
with spears, and in plain battle, excelled all other. And the Parthians had
a great power of horsemen, and expert archers. Wherefore, these things
joined togethers, and agreinge in one, they should (he said) easily retain,
under one Scepter, and Diadem, the Empire of the whole world. The pleasant
spyces, and fine clothe also, which came from them, to the Romans, and the
goodly metal, and all curious wroughte things, which were transported from
the Romans to them again, should not after this mary age be seldom carried,
as it was wont by merchants, but thuse thereof, should be in common to them,
without let or interruption, in one land, and under one governor. After the
Parthian king, had received these letters, he first denied the request,
saying, that a barbarous matrimony became not a Romain. For what concord (quod
he) would be between them, which used not one language, nor one kind of
living, and appayrel? There were (he said) at Rome many Senators daughters,
among whom the Emperor might chose him a wife: as there were in his
dominion, certain called Arsacide. Arsacide.
Neither was there any cause, he thought, why any of them, should be
alyenated from their native country. With this answer, he repulsed the
Emperors suyte.

But Antonyne, never left of sendynge many gifts, and promising by oaths,
his perfect love toward his daughter, until the Barbarous prince beleuynge
his words, promised to give him his daughter to wife. When the fame of this
was spredde, all the Barbarous people prepared themselves to receive the
Romayne Emperor, reioysynge with a certain hope, of contynuall peace
thereafter.

Then Antonine, (having passed without let, or stay, of any man, the Rivers,)
entered into the Parthian Region, and rode thrughe the same, as his own. And in
his way, all the people, celebrated sacryfices burning encense, upon the
decked Aultares, wherewith he feigned him self, to be greatly pleased. After a
long journey, he approached at the last, nyghe the Palaice of Artabanus: Who
met with him, in a certain plain before the City, to receive him, as a new
Brydegrome, and his Son in law. And a great multitude of the Barbarouse
people, crowned with their country flowers, and apparayled in garments,
adorned with gold, and varyable colors, celebrated the same, as a feast, and
solempnytye, daunsynge togithers, by the sound of Pypes, and Tabors. For in
those instruments, they are above measure delyted, especially, when they are
ones well tyipled with wine. But when all the multitude, were assembled
togythers, and having left their horses behind, and laid aside their bows,
and arrows, applied them selfs to banquetynge, and gatheringe together in a
rude plumpe, stood without order, whiles they suspected no harm, but every
man, thrusting forwards, to see the new married man, Suddenly, Antonyne with a
preuy sign, commanded all his men, to slay, and destroy the Barbarouse
people. They, being astonyed with that sodeyne chance, The Parthians
overthrown by disceyte.
turned their backs, and fled from the Romans which pursued, and slew
them. Artabanus him self, being socoured, and set upon a horse, by some of
his Guard, did with great dyfficultye escape. But the residewe of ye Parthians
were every where overthrown, and murdered. For they neither had their horses,
which they most used (they had perdie sent them before to grass) neither
could they flee: for their wide garments, hanging down to their heales,
interrupted their runnynge. They brought not besides their bows, and arowes,
with them, for what neaded that at a wedding? Thus, after a great murder, done
on the Parthiens, and a great bootye of men, and beasts, taken captyues, and
led away, Antonyne departed. And without any resystence, burned the Towns,
and vyllages, geauing license unto his Soldiers, to ransake, and spoil, all
that they would, or could. This mischief, and calamity, did the Parthiens,
unawares, receive. Then Anthonyne, having vyseted the inward parts of Parthia,
and his Soldiers being weryed, with rapyne, and murder, returned into
Mesapotamye. Mesapotamye.
From thence, he sygnified unto the Senate, and people of Rome, that he had
subdued Thoriente, and brought in subjection, all the men of those Regio^s. The
Senate, (albeit they before knew perfectly the hole circumstaunce, (for
Princes affairs, can by no means, contynew long, in hugger mugger) yet
through fear, and flaterye, decreed all honors of victory, unto him. After
this, Antonine soiourned in Mesapotamie, gyuing him self, to Carting, and
hunting of wild bestes. There were two general Capitaines of his army,
Audentius, and Macrinus, of the which the one was aged, rude, Audentius,
Macrinus.
and bluntyshe, but yet, expert in warfare. And the other, always exercysed, in
matters of the law, and therein exactly learned. This man, the Prince used to
taunte, and check openly, as a man nothing valiaunte, or apt to war. For
hearing that he fed very delycately, and rejected those simple, and warlycke
meats, which Antonyne used, and that he ware a gown, and other decente
apparayle, like unto a Cytizen, he reproved him, as a womanly person,
threatnynge oftentimes to kill him. Macrynus being thereof impacient, was
sturred with meruaylouse anger. Thereunto happened this chance: it was perdie
expedient, that Antonine, should ones fynyshe his life. For being of his own
nature, over curiouse, he studied, not only, to know the priuey affairs of
men, but also, to search out, the secrets, of the Gods, and Dyuels. And
through continual fear of Treason, consulted with many oracles, and retained
about him, diverse Magiciens, Astrologiens, and Sothsayers, omytting no
creature, which professed those fantasies, and yllusions. But suspecting them
also, as liars, and Prophets of flattery, he accustomed to write, unto one
Maternianus in the City: Maternianus.
unto whom he had committed, the charge of all his affairs, and him among
all his Frindes, he had chosen, for the trustieste, and pertaker, of all his
secret counselles:) willing him, to send for the best Magiciens, from all
parts, and co^sulte with them, of the end of his life, and whether any man,
went about by treason, to obtain thempyre. Maternianus, (having
acco^plysshed, his Princes commandment (whether the Magiciens told him so,
or else because he hated Macrinus, wrote again unto Antonyne, The Letters of
Maternianus to Antonine.
that Macrinus conspyred Treason against him, and that it was expedyente, to
rydde him out of the way. And these letters sealed with other, as the usage
was, he delivered to Pursenauntes, who were ignorant, of that they had in
hand. The same, (having ended their journey, with accustomed celeritie) came
unto Antonyne, when he prepared him self, to Carteng, and was already ascended
his Chariot. Then delivered they unto him thole Packquet of Lettres, among
the which were they also, that touched Macrinus. But Antonyne, being at that
time fully bente to Carting, commanded Macrinus, that he should open, and
peruse the Letters, and, if there were any matter of importance, in the^
contained, make relacion thereof, unto him again. If not, he should execute, his
own office of Pretorship. For so at other times, he was accustomed, to
command him in semblable causes. Him self then departed, toward his
pastyme. And Macrinus, having unsealed, and severally perused, the Letters,
happened on the same, that mocioned his destruction. Then understanding the
great mischief, that henge over his head, and knowing also Antonynes wrath,
and outragiouse cruelty, specially, when he should have such occasion, he
kept back, the same Lettre, and of the rest, declared the contents, unto
The Emperor. But yet, fearing lest Maternianus, would eftsoon certefye the
Emperor, of the same matter, he determined, to commyt sum act fourthwyth,
rather than in delayeng time, him self should perish. And therefore, thus
concluded. There was a certain Ce^turio^ named Martialis, Martialis.
one of Antonines priuey chamber, accustomed always, to be next attendau^t, on
his person: Whose brother, Antonine had put to death, upon simple accusacio^,
without leful judgment, and used of tentymes, to check Martialis himself,
calling him cowarde, and co^federate of Macrinus. This ma^s sorrow for ye death
of his brother, Macrinus thoroughly perceiving, and knowing also, how he was
sufficiently styrred to malice by his own reproaches, called ye same, as one
already bound, by his manifold benefits, unto him. And persuaded him, yt as
sone, as he could find oportunite, he should slay Antonine. Martialis, being
with his promises allured, and through his own grudge, to the revenge of his
brothers death, already enfla^med, promised to accomplish his mind, when time
convenient should serve. And truly, it chaunsed shortly after. For Antonine,
Carre Mesapotamy.
soiorning at Carre a City of Mesopotamie, visited ye Temple of Diana: yt
which, being nigh unto the City, is there of the inhabitau^tes, had in great
honor, and reuerente. Thither he went, with a few horsemen, leuing the army
behind him: for after he had finyshed his sacrifyce, he purposed, to return
unto yt City again. And in the midde way, being accompanied with one servant,
and having commanded the rest, to stay aside, he went, to do the requisites
of nature. Then Martialis, (which awaited every convenient hour) seeing the
Emperor alone, and all other far of, made haste toward him, as though he
were called for some business, and running upon him unawares, as he was
vntrussing his points, stabbed him in wc a dagger, which he of purpose,
secretly bare in his sleaue. And ye same sliding in between ye short ribs,
Antonyne murdered by Martialis.
gave unto Antonine, being unarmed, a mortal, and deadeli wound, whereof he
forth with died. That done, Martialis lept upon his horse, and bea^g to flee. But
ye Germanie^ horseme, (who^ Antonine entierly loved, and had appointed for the
guard of his person) being then nearer ye place, then ye rest, and saying ye
same murder, Martialis slain
pursued Martialis with maine gallop, and slew him with their darts. when the
residue of the host heard thereof, they ran togethers furthwyth to the
Emperors dead corpse: upon the which Macrinus first of all fell, and feigned,
to lament it exceadynglye. This chance, was dolorouse unto the Soldiers, who
accounted them selves berefte, not only of their Sovereign, but also of
their Companion in arms. Neither did they suspecte Macrinus, for they
supposed, that Martialis had committed the murder, for the revenge of his own
private injuries. Wherefore, every man departed to his own cabban. And
Macrinus, having burned the body of Antonyne, sent the ashes unto his Moother,
to burye. She then soiorned at Antioche, where anon after, (were it of her
own mind, or by any man's compulsion) for the calamities of her children,
Antonies mother slew her self.
she slew her self. This eande of their lives, had Antonyne, and his mother
Iulia, after they had lived, as we before rehearsed, and he reigned six years
alone, without his father, and brother. Antonyne being thus slain, the
Souldyours, uncertain what they might do, abode two days, without a prince,
Antotony reigned alone vi. years.
consultynge, whom they might first elect for Emperor. For they heard,
that Artabanus was coming against them, with a great and mighty army, to
revenge the death of his subjects, which were slain in the time of peace.
Wherefore, they chose first for Emperor, Audentius, a man expert in
warfare, and a polytyke Captain. But he excusing him self, through his age,
refused thempire. Then with one consent, they elected Macrinus, through the
persuasions of the Tribunes (who, as the suspicion after rose, were consenting
to the murder of Antonyne, and pertakers of Macrinus co^spiracie) as I shall at
large hereafter declare. Then Macrinus received Thempire, Macrinus took the
rule of thimpire upon him.
not for any co^fide^ce, he had in the Soldiers, but constrained thereunto,
through necessity, and the present state of their affairs. Whiles these
things were in doing, tidings came unto them, that Artabanus was even at
hand, with a wonderful puysaunce of men, among the which, he had brought
a great number of horsemen, Archers, and men at arms, upon Ca^melles, which
used to fight, with long speres. Macrinus hearing thereof, called all the
army togythers, and made this oracion unto them.

It is not to be meruailed, that you are dolorouse, The oracio^ of Macrinus.
for the death, of such a prince, or (as I may more truly say) such a
companion. But it is the property of wise men, to sustain moderatly, all
mortal calamityes. The memory of him, shall continually be fixed in your
hearts, and by you, left unto you posteritee, with an eternal commendacion,
of the valiant acts, by him atchyued. Besides that, of his love toward you,
and his partakinge of your paynefull trauayles, whiles he lived. But now, the
time, and case requires, that (after his funeralles with due honor
parfourmed) we prepare our selves, to resyste the danger imminent. Ye see the
Barbarouse king at hand, with a wonderful multitude of the oryentalles,
having, as it seameth, just occasion of war. For we first provoked them,
with breche of our promise, and moving war against them, when they were in
quiet tranquyllytie. All the Romayne Empire, and strength, lies in your
valiant prowess, and faithful allegyaunce. We do not now contend, for our
own boudes, and Ryuerse, with a mighty, and puissaunt king: but we must now
fight, for the saufe guard of our own lives, and all ours, seeing he is
comme, to revenge the murder, of his children, kynred, and subjects, (who were
by us slain (as he thinks, contrary to all equity, and truth. Wherefore,
let us now fall to Arms, and (as the Romans are accustomed) observe a
just order, in our batayles. For the Barbarouse multitude, being rude, and
out of order, may happen thereby, to do them selves damage. But your order,
agremente, and knowledge in warrefare, as they defend your saufegarde, even
so, do they work your enemies destruction. I would therefore, that you
should with haulte courage, and hope of victory, so fight, as it becomes
Romans: and as you have continually hitherunto done. So shall ye not only
vanquyshe the Barbarous people, but also, having obtained a famous renowned
glory, add unto the Romans, and all other, a perfect confidence, that the
former Conquest was atchyued, not by fraudulente disceyte, but by notable
valiauntnes, and strength. When he had this much spoken, the Soldiers
perceiving the necessitye present, fell unto arms, and set them selves in
order of battle. At the rysyng of the Son, they saw Artabanus, marchynge
forward with an huge army. And as soon as the Barbarous people had, according
to their usage, worshypped the Son, furthwith, they ran at the Romans, with
a mighty, A sore battle.
and clamorous shoute, shoting from their horses, many arrows, and darts.
But the Romans (having strongely planted their front, distributed the
Maurytanian horsemen, on either side, and received into the mids of their
battle, the Dimilaunces, and light horsemen) resisted valiauntlye the
Barbarous people at the first, the which vexed them grievously, with the
multitude of arrows, and long spears, where with the men at arms that rode
on Camelles, and horses, fought and skirmished. On the other side, the Romans
(as often as they moved forwards) easelye obtained the better. But when they
were oppressed with the Barbarous horsemen, and Camelles, faining to flea, they
planted Caltrops, and other engines of iron, sharp at the one eand in ye ground.
The which being hid under the sand, and seen of no man, were very pernicious,
unto the horsemen, and those that rode upon the Cameles. For, after that they
were fallen, on the same Caltroppes, the horses, and specially the Camels (for
that the same beast has very tender hoofes) became furthwith lame, and
ouerthrewe their riders. The Barbarous people, as long as they sat on their
horses, and Cammelles, fought very fiersly. But when they either alighted, or
were overthrown, they were easelye taken. For then, they durst not abide the
battle. And if they should flea, or pursue their enemies, they were
interrupted, with long and wide garments, retchynge down to their heels.
The battle continued two days, from morning to night. A long battle.
The night severed them, and either army returned into their Camps, as
Conquerours. The third day, they met in the plain, priest, to daraigne
battle. Then the Barbarous people, attempted, as those which were many more
in number, to compass the Romans, and entangle them, as it were, in a net.
But the Romans, seeing the same, joined not together, in a round compass,
but set them selves in a long front, that they might thereby, prohibyte the
compassynge of their enemies. And there was so great a multitude of men, and
beasts, slain, that all the field, A meruaylous overthrow.
was ouerwhealmed with them: and a wonderful number of dead carcases, were
heaped in great heighte, especially of Camelles, the which lay one upon an
other. Whereby, there was not scope enough, for the Souldyours to fight. For
so many carcases were heaped togethers, that they could scarscelye move to
and fro. Wherefore, they retired into their camps. Now Macrinus, knowing
that the Barbarous king fought so vehementlye, for none other cause, but that
he thought, Antonyne to be present, in the battle, sent certain
Ambassadors, unto him with letters (for although the Barbarous people, are
accustomed after a little skyrmyshynge, to were faynte, and werye, and to leave
of their begone enterprise, if at the first bronte, it prospers not,
according to their minds: yet then they persisted, ready to renew the
fight, as soon as they had burned the dead bodies, being ignoraunte, that he
was dead, which had caused this myschiefe, and calamity) in the which
letters, he certyfyed him, that the Emperor was dead, and had received
condign punishemente, for the violatynge of his oath, and promise: And that
the Romans, had delivered the Empire, and governance of all affairs, into
his hands, who was wonderfullye displeased, with the things already done.

Wherefore, he would deliver the captives, and all other spoils, he had taken:
coveting of his enemy, to become his confederat, and friend, and to establishe
truce between them, by oath, and sacrifice. After these letters were redd, and
Artabanus advertised by the Ambassadors, of the death of Antonyne, accomptyng
that he which had broken the peace, was sufficientlye punyshed, and being
content, that the prisoners, should be restored, without more effusion of
blood, and with them all the pray, and botie, he took agreement, and truce
with Macrinus, and returned toward his own palaice. And the Roman
Emperor led his army out of Mesopotamie, and marched to Antioche.

The end of the fourth book.
The Argument of the fyfth book of the Herodian.
THe fifth book recites the causes, for the which Macrinus, lost the favor of
the Soldiers: who chase Bassianus Emperor, and named him Antonyne. The
battles made against Macrinus, the overthrow of him, and his army, with
his death. And thinsolence of Antonyne, after he was Emperor And how he aodpted
his cosyn Alexyanus, otherwise named Alexander, and made him his fellow in the
Empire. And finallye it tells the causes, wherefore, and how, Antony and
Soemis his Moother, were slain.

The fyfte book of the Hystorye of Herodyan.
WE have in the former Book, treated, of the Reign, death, and destruction,
of Anthonine. When Macrinus was come unto Antyoche, he sent letters unto the
Senate, and people of Rome, in this form.

For as much, as your selves perfectlye know, The Letters of Macrimus to the
Senate.
what has been the trade of my life from the beginning, how much my manners
have been bente unto gentleness, and what clemency I have showed toward you, in
that my dygnitie, which dyffered not much from the highest tipe of dominion,
(for The Emperor always commits the custodye of him self, unto the
fidelytie of his Praetor) I think it superfluous, use to many words unto you.
Your selves are not ignorant, yt I allowed not, the things by Anthonine done:
whereby for your sakes, I was often in peril of my life: whiles he, geui^g credit
unto every vniu ste accusation, as a man void of reason, imagined your hole
destruction, he used to check me often times, vpbrayding me openly for my
modest humanytie, and calling me sluggard, and cockney. For being a man
delited with flatery, whosoever ever incensed him to flagitiouse cruelty, or
provoked to malice ye furious se^sualitie, of his fra^ticke brain, or else
sturred with accusacions, his exasperate madness, those he accounted, his most
trusty, secret, and faith full fre^des. But for my part, there has been
nothing more acceptable unto me from the beginning, then discrete modesty. We
have now so finished, this marvelous Parthian war, wherein thole Roman
Empire stood in hasarde, that being nothing inferioure in fight, unto our
adversaries, we have made their mighti king, of an extreme enemy, our faithful
friend: Who brought against us, an innumerable multitude of people. Further,
whiles I am your Prince, ye shall live frealy, without trouble of discencion. So
yt, ye shall have cause, to name my governance, rather a co^federacy of good
me^, the^ an Empire. Neither is there any occasion, why any man should judge me
unworthy to be Emperor, or impute it to any fault of fortune, that being but
a Knight, I have attained the Principal Soueraignite. For of what effect, or
value, I pray you, is yt the nobilyty it self, if it be not co^ioyned with
gentle, and meek clemency? And the gifts of fortune, do bewtifye many
unworthily: but ye virtue of the mind, brings unto every man, using the
same, a peculier glory. And although the nobilyte of birth, and kindred, with
abundau^ce of treasure, is accounted the proper substance, of blessed men, yet
are not ye same in them co^me^ded, as from them selfs issuing, but as
delivered of others. But gentle mekenes, and modest affability, as they be to
be wo^dred at, so do they win much praise, unto the hauer. For what profited
you, the nobilytie of Co^modus, and the succession of Anthonine, after his
father? Certes, such having obtained the^pire, as it were, their just
enheritau^ce, are wont to abuse it, as their private patrimony. But they,
which receive the same at your hands, being as it were, bounden of duty unto
you, endeavor them selfs, to requit your manifold benefits. Further ye
native nobility of Princes, cha^geth often times into pride, despysi^g al
others, as their inferiors. But they, which have obtained ye same, through
proof of modesty, do defend, and order it, as a thing gote^ by labor, and have
al those inreuere^ce, which they had before time. And I for my part, am fully
determined, to do nothing, without your counsel, and aucthority, and to use you,
as sole assistau^tes, and Cou^sayllors in thaffaires of ye co^me^ wealth. And
ye shall al live, at your own pleasures, with the same liberty, (which being
by yo^ge Empers, succeding their pare^tes, taken away from you) both Marcus,
and Pertinar, endeavored, and ente^ded, to restore unto you again. Both the
which, aspired to the^pire, from private estate, and degree. For it is much
better for a ma, to leave unto his posterity, ye beginning of his kynred, by
him self adorned, then to defile with sensual manners, ye nobility unto him
from his predecessors, descended. After this Epistle was red, al thole Senate
with one voice, decreed the honor of Augustus, unto Macrinus. Neither was the
Senate so joyful, with the succession of Macrinus, as the common people were
glad, with the death of Anthonine. For every man (as he excelled in authority,
and riches, so much the more he reckened, yt he had avoided yt sword, which
before he^ge over his shulders. Then were al bribed Promoters, Accusers, and
Servants, which had betrayed their Masters, and Lords, hanged upon
Gibbettes. And al thole City* yea, thole Roman Empire, was cle^sed, of al
false Harlotes, Vacabu^des, and Piketha^kes Of yt which, some were out of hand
put to death, other some punished with banysheme^t. And if any of the^ lay hid,
for fear of good me^ yt were now at rest, ye same she wed some apparau^ce of
liberti, by the space of one year in yt which only Macrinus enjoyed the^pire.
The fault of Macrinus.
For that was his only fault, yt he furthwt dismissed not thole army, and
having sent every man to his own Country, him self cannot immediatli to Rome,
which was very desirous of him, (the people eueri day loking, and calli^g for
him.) But he remained at Antioche, in delicat life, and used a flower pace in
going, the^ he was before accustomed, giving answer rarely, and scarsely, unto
Ambassadors, and other persons, yt came unto him, and the same with so low a
voice, yt none could well understand him. And in yt doing, he endeavored, to
follow Marcus, but to the resydew of his conditions, he did in no point attain.
For he used daily volupteouse diet, taking pleasure in dau^ sing, and
wrastelyng, neglectinge the regimente of thempyre, and wearing Agglets of
Gold, and a Gyrdle adorned with precious stones. The which sumpteouse
apparaile, was nothing grateful unto the Soldiers. For they esteemed it more
congruente, to the Barbarous people, and women, then to their Prince.
Wherefore, in beholding thiese things, they greatly reproved it, and despised
the trade of his life, as a thing more wanton, then became a warlyke person.
And they compared the wanton sensuality of Macrinus, and the wyttie, and
warlyke manners of Antonine. Further, they greatly grudged, that they lay
still in the Camp, far from their native Conutrey, oftentimes wanting their
necessary food, and were not discharged home, after peace made, and truce
taken, whiles he, led his life in wanton pleasures. Wherefore, having thrown,
as it were, the bridle out of their mouths, they spoke every day against
him, seeking some occasion, were it ever so small, to flea him. And so it was
by destenye appointed, that Macrinus, after he had one only year
voluptuousely Reigned, should lose, both his Empire and his life: fortune
having ministered, light, and simple occasyon to the Soldiers, to commytte,
that they had desired. Phenicia Moesa Emesa.
There was a certain Phenycien woman, named Moesa, borne in a City of Phenicia
called Emesa, Suster unto Iulia the wife of Seuerus, and Moother of Anthonine.
Who during the Reign of Seuerus, and Anthonine, and the life of Iulia, had
dwelte in themperours Palayce. The same Moesa, after the death of her Suster,
and murdre of Anthonyne, Macrinus had commanded, to return into her own
Country, with all her substance. And in sothe, she was wonderful rich of
money, as one which of very long time, had been brought up within
thimperiall Treasourie. And being returned home, she there continually
remained, having two daughters: of the which the eldest hight Soemis, and the
yo^ger was named Mammea. Soemis Mammea. Bassianus Alexianus
The eldre had a Son called Bassianus, and the yo^ger had an other named
Alexianus. Both these young me^, were brought up under their Moothers, and
Grandmother. Bassian, was fourtene years old, and Alexianus. x. They were
priests of the Son, which thenhabitauntes of that country, do chiefly
worship: naming it in the Phenicien tongue Heleogabalus. Heleogabalus.
Unto him have they dedicated, a very great Temple, decked, and adorned, with
abundau^ce of Gold, Silver, and preciouse stones. And not only thenhabytantes
them selves, do worship it, but all the noble men also of the next
nations, and the Barbarouse Kings, do every year offer unto it, sumptuouse,
and precyouse gifts. There is no image made after the Romayne, and Grecien
facion, like unto this God. For it is a mighty stone from the botom sharpened,
more, and more unto the top, much like a Pynaple. The color of the stone is
black, which they report to be fallen out of heaven. In the same stone, are
seen very many forms, and colors, which they affirm, to be the shape of the
Son, made by no man's hand. Unto this image was Bassianus sacred priest. And
because he was thelder, him self most commonly executed the office,
apparelled gorgeouslye after the Barbarous manner. For he ware a cote wouen with
gold, having long sleues, and retchynge down to his heels. His legs were
covered from the ha^mes to the toes, with like vesture of gold, and purple.
And he ware on his head, a garland of fresh flowers, shining with colors. He
was then besides in the flower of his youth, and the beautifullest of all young
men, at that time living. And because his beautye, with the proportion of his
body, the flower of his age, and his gorgious decked apparel, were so agreeable
togethers, men compared him, unto the goodly Images of Dionyse. Now whiles
this Bassianus was celebrating the sacrifice, and daunsyng after the Barbarous
manner, men did attentively look upon him: but chiefly the Romayne Soldiers
(either for that they knew him to be of the Imperial blood, or else, because
his floryshynge beautye, allured every man, to cast his eyes toward him)
for the Romayne host lay then nyghe that City: being sent thither, for the
defense of Phenicia, and shortly after departed from thence, as we shall
hereafter declare. As they resorted to the Church daily, through the
pretense of religion, they gladlye beheld the young man. Among them certain
banyshed Romans, familier with Moesa. Whom she perceiving, to wonder at the
beauty of this Striplinge, reported unto the^, that he was the Son of
Antonine, although he were supposed another: doubtful it is, whether she
spoke the truth, or not. For she said, yt whiles she abode in thimperial
palaice, with her suster, Antonine had to do with her.ii. daughters, being then
young and fair. This being once told unto them, and by them told again unto
the residue of their fellows, was furthwith published throughout thole Camp.
It was besides reported, that Mesa had whole heaps of money, which she would
gladlye distribute among the soldiers, if they would restore thempire, unto
her issue. They promised her therefore, (if she would come privily by night into
the Camp) to open the gate, and receive her with her folks in. For the which
promise, the old woman denied them nothing that they did demand: being
content, rather to attempt, or take in hand any danger, the^ to lead a
private, and abject life. Wherefore she departed secretly by night out of ye
city, with her daughters and neuewes, and was conveyed, by the before named
fugitives, into the Camp. And being into the same without interruption
received, Bassianus named Antonine and called unto thempire.
furthewyth all the Souldyours called the young man Antonyne, apparelled him
with purple, and kept him with a sure guard, among them for a while. Then
they brought all the vitayls, and necessaryes, that they could get, in the
next vylages, and fyeldes, with their wives, and children, into the Camp. And
so fortified them selves within the same, that if need required, they might
abide the siege. When these things were reported unto Macrinus, then soiornyng
at Antioche, and a rumor was spread throughout the host, that Antonynes son was
found, and that the suster of Iulia, gave money unto the Soldiers, when all
that was spoken of, or thought to be possible, was holden for true, every man
began to doubt* and revolt from Macrinus: styrred partly there unto, through
the hate they bare unto him, and partelye through the pity, which they had of
the memory of Antonine: but especially encensed, with desire, and hope, of
monei. So yt forth with many fled unto ye new Antonine. But Macrinus,
co^te^pninge thole matter as childish, and using his accustomed alacrity of
mind, abode him self at home, and sent one of his capytains forth, with as
great a power, as seamed sufficient, for the subduing of the rebels. Iulianus.
But when Iulianus (for that was the Capitains name) came thither, and began to
lay siege to the walls, the Soldiers yt were within, showed from their
Towers, and other high places, the young man: criyng with loud voices, that he
was ye Son of Antonine, and lifting up great bags of money, which are the
only bait of treason. And they crediting, that he was Antonines son in dead,
and because they would have it so apeare, esteming also his face, and
liniamentes of body to be very like, struck of Iulianus head, and sent it
unto Macrinus. That eanded, the gates of the fortress were opened, and them
selfs received in. Thus was their power augmented, able, not only to abide a
siege, and repulse an assault, but also, to pytche a field, a great number of
fugitives, daily resorting unto them. When Macrinus heard thereof, he
incontinently marched forwards with thole army, to assault the fortress.
And Antonine led his power futh against him, for that his Soldiers would not
tarry the siege, being able enough to fight in plain battle. Then both the
armies encountered togethers, in the confynes of Phenicia, and Syria.

On the one side, Antonines Soldiers fought more corageously, through fear
of grievous punishment, A conflict.
if they were vanquished. On the other side, tharmie of Macrinus, fought faintly,
among who^ many revolted unto Antonine. The which when Macrinus perceived,
fearinge, lest being forsakinge of his all men, he should be taken prisoner,
and suffer great reproach, whiles his soldiers fought, he threw away his Cote
armor, and other imperial ornaments, and being accompanied with a few of his
meanest soldiers, he fled away. And having shaven his beard, least he should
be known, and clad in a simple garment, and his head, and face, co^tinuallye
covered, he trauayled both night and day, preventing with celeritie, the fame of
his fortune. For as yet his men fought with great prowes, as though Macrines
possessed still the^pire. He so escaped, as we before have declared. In the
mean while, the Souldyours on either side fought valiauntlye. And of Macrinus
side, the men at arms of his guard, named Pretorians, sustained alone the
whole burnte. The pretorian men of arms.
For they were talle, and mighty men, and chosen, and approved warriors. The
rest of the multitude, took Antonynes part. But when they, which a great
while had foughten for Macrinus, could neither see Macrinus him self, nor the
Imperial Diadem, and ornaments, being ignoraunte where he was become,
whether he were slain or else fled, they wyste not what counsel to take.
And although they purposed no longer to fight for him, which appeared, or
could be found no where, yet feared they, to yield them selves, unto their
enemies power, as recreant, and vanquished Subjects. Then Antonyne, knowing by
the Captyues, that Macrinus was fled, sent incontinently, to advertise them,
that they in vain fought for a timorous and fugitive Coward: promising them
on his oath, that he would forgive, and forget, all that was by them done, and
use them from thenceforthe, for the guard of his person. The which, they all
creditynge, ceased furthwith from further fighting. Then Antonyne without
delay, sent certain after Macrinus, who was long before escaped. And being
found in Chalcedon a City of Bythinia, very sore sick, Chalcedo^
and worn through his contynuall trauayll, and hydden in a house of the
Suburbs, The death of Macrinus. Pr^pontis. Bizantium.
had his head there smytten of. It is thought, that he minded to go to Rome,
affyenge him self in the benevolence of the people. But in saylynge toward
Europe, in the narowe Sea of Propontis, nygh unto Bizantium, a contrarious
wind drove him back, as it were of purpose, toward the place, where he
should fynyshe his life. Thus happened it, that Macrinus escaped not, by
fleing away, the hands of his enemies: receiving a vylanouse death, and
entending to late to goo to Rome, when he should in the beginning have done the
same, and having at this his end, both his counsel, and fortune, clean
against him. After this sort, was Macrinus slain, Macrinus and his Son
Diadumenus slain. Anthonine full Emperor.
with his Son Dyadumenus, whom a little before, he had assocyated unto him,
in the^pyre. Now after thole army had pronounced Anthonine for Emperor, when
him self had taken upon him the chief governance of thempyre, and all the
oriental affairs were set in order, as every one most neaded, by the
discretion of his Graundmoother, and other his friends, (for that him self was
very young of age, and unskillful in matters of great importance) soiourning
there but a short space, he caused his removing to be proclaimed, according
to the will of Moesa, which chiefly coueted, and made have, toward
Thimperyall Pallaice of Rome, wherewith, she so long before had been
acquaynted. When the Senate, and people of Rome, hard of thiese things, every
man began to be sorrowful, with the tidinges. But they must of force, and
necessytye, then allow it, seeing he was chosen, by the men of war. And
accusynge within them selves, the necligent mind, and sensual manners, of
Macrinus, they imputed thole defaulte of his overthrow, unto his own slouthe,
and to none other man, as causer thereof. Anthonine being departed out of
Siria, wintred his army at Nicomedia, Nicomedia. Thinsolencye of Antonyne.
the season of the year so constraining him. Then he began to wax insolent
above measure, celebratynge dailye the honor of his Country God, with
superfluouse, and indecent pomp, and daunses. Him self was cladde in wanton,
and luxuriouse apparel, wouen with Purple, and Gold, decked with Ouches, and
Braceletes, Chains, and Kings of Gold, and ware a Crown like unto a
Chaplet, adorned with Gold, and preciouse stones. The form of his habyte,
was, as it were, a mean, between the Phenicien, and Median Apparayle. He
despised the Roman garments, because they were made of wolle, the which was,
as he said, vile, and of no estimacio^. Neither would he any web, but such as
were of Sirian silk, accustomi^g to co^ abroad, with ye sown of fleutes, and
Tabors, as though he should celebrate, ye feast of Bacchus. When Mocsa beheld
these his dossolute manners, she began with hu^blepeticio^ to persuade him, to
were ye Romayne apparaile, least yt if he entered into the City, and Senate
house, in yt strange and Barbarouse vesture, he should offe^de the eyes of the
beholders. Which being unaccustomed unto such wa^tonnes, ceputed it more
seamely for women, then me^. But he, co^tempning the old woman's words,
entending to trust no man, (for he retained none about his person, but such as
were agreeable unto his own sensualitye) and fullye mynding, to use the same
apparayle continually, determined being absent, to make a proof, with what
countenance, and after what sort, the Senate, and people of Rome, would
accept his usage. Wherefore, he sent to Rome, his own picture painted lively
in a table, with the linyamentes, and facyon of apparel, wherein he was wo^t
to sacrifice, unto his God. And therwt the figure of his God also, unto who^ he
was sacred: commau^ding them yt carried it, to set it in ye mids of the Senate
house, in some high place, over ye head of victory: yt when ye Senators were
assembled, they should offer encense and wine. He commanded also, yt all ye
Romayne Magistrates, which used to execute public Sacrifices should before
all their Gods, who^ they used to sacrifice unto, name, and honor, his God
Heleogabalus. Whereby it happened, that when he entered in to the City, ye
Romans beheld no new, or strange syghte, for that they daily before had
seen his picture The^, after he had distributed among ye people bou^tifull
gifts, as al new Emperors are accustomed, he set forth many su^ptuouse
shows, and plays. And builded a large, and gorgeouse Temple, for his God, and
wtin the same, many aulters: upon the which, every morning, Vain sacrifyces.
he sacrificed a.C. Bulls, and a great number of sheep. And heaping upon the
aulters, all kinds of odoriferouse spices, he used to power down, many Cups,
full of ye best old wines, yt could be gote^. So yt they ran down, sundry
streams of wine, mi^gled with blood. About ye aulters, he caused many to dau^se,
with ye sown of diverse instruments, among who^ sundry Phenicie^ women played
upon Ciballes, and Tibrelles. Al ye Senators, and knights beheld the^,
sta^di^g in a round circle, like unto a Theater Thinwardes of beasts, and
sweet smelli^g perfumes, were the^ carried upon men's heads, in dishes of Gold;
not by any base or private person, but by pri^cipal Magistrates, Capitanes of
ye war, and Rulers of ye Proui^ces: who were al clad in long garments, woue^
through out with purple, and ware linne sockes upon their feate, as ye Prophets
accustomed to do in those regio^s. And he thought, yt he did very honorably
entreat those: who^ he made partakers of this sole^pnity. But albeit, he
celebrated daily with dau^ses, and melody, those sacrifices, yet did he put to
death, many noble, and rich me^: being accused unto him, yt they were nothing
pleased, with those vain Ceremonies, and his volupteouse sensuality, but used
daily to speak ill of it. He took to wife, a noble woman of Rome, who^ he named
Augusta. But shortly after forsook her, and depriui^g her, of all Imperial
honor, he commanded her, to lead a private, and simple life. Then fayning him
self to be ravished with love, (that he might seem to do some ma^li act) he
married by force, a vestal virgin, who^ ye laws had bound to be continually
chaste. And comforted with letters, ye Senate, Vestale Virgyns
being sorrowful for ye facinorouse act) sayi^g, yt it was an human syn,
because he was ravished with her love. He affirmed, yt it was dece^t for a
priest, to Maria Nun. For so should ye marriage be more fortunate.
Nevertheless, shortli after, he rejected her also, and married ye third wife
which was thought to be descended of ye blood of Co^modus. Neither did he only
delude mortal matrimoni, but he sought also a wife for his god. For he caused
to be brought into his Chamber, ye image of Pallas, The Image of Pallas.
who^ ye Romans do gretely worship: being secretly hidden, and permitted to be
seen of no man. The same goddess, I say, being from yt time, it was brought
fourth of Troy, unto that day untouched (saving when ye Temple was burned) did
he remove out of her Seat, and joined her in marriage unto his God, wtin
thimper all Pallaice. But soon after, he altered that mind, saying, that it
was unpleasant for his God, to have a warlyke, and armed wife. And therefore
he commanded the image of Urania, Urania.
to be brought unto him. The which was chifly worshipped of ye Carthaginenses,
and al Africque supposed to be erected by Dido the Phenicia^, when she builded
Carthage, Carthage. Astroarche.
wtin the co^pace of an ox hide. This Goddess, the Affricans name Urania. And
the Pheniciens call her Astroarchen, affirming her to be the Moon. Wherefore,
he said, that the Marriage of the Son and the Moon was agreeable. Her Image
therefore, he caused to be brought fourth, and all the Gold, and Silver,
which was in her Temple, he commanded to be given to his God for a dower. And
after it was brought, and set up by the Image of Heleogabalus, he commanded
feastfull days, with banketing, and solempnitie, to be celebrated openly, and
pryuely, throughout thole City, and Italy, for the Marriage of the Gods. He
builded also in the Suburbs, a mighty, and sumptuouse Temple: into yt which,
in the end of Summer, he carried his God. Thynking that he much pleased the
people, with his Enterludes and Comedies, with his open ba^kets, and night
watches. He co^ueied his God, as I said, out of the City, in to ye Suburbs, in
a Chariot adorned with Gold, and preciouse stones, drawn by.vi. goodlye white
horses, of great height, notably decked with Gold, and varietye of harness.
No man rode in that Chariot, but the people ran on every side of it, gasinge
upon the God. And Anthonine him self rode before the Chariot, with his face
backward toward the horse tail, The mere folly, of Anto^yne.
and with beholding ye image, continually as he rode, he so finished this his
fond journey. And least he should fall, or slide unawares, in that his unwise
ridinge, he caused the streets to be thick covered with sa^de, and his Guard
held him on either side, that he might with more safty sit on his horse. The
people ra^ about him with Torches and Cressettes, strowinge of flowers, and
Garla^des, in his way. There accompanied besides this Po^pe, ye images of al
ye Gods, and al other preciouse orname^tes which were in ye Temples, the
tokens of honor, and ye beautifullest household stuff of Thempire, with the men
at arms, and all the Romayn host. When he had brought these things into the
Temple, laid the same there, and finished his sacrifice, he went up into the
high towers, which were of purpose there erected, and out of them, he threw
many things among the people. That is to weete, cups of Silver and Gold,
garments of rich work, and all sorts of lynnen clothe. He distributed
among them also, all kind of tame beasts, except Swyne, from the which
(according to the Phenicien usage) him self abstained. In the catching
whereof, many perished: some being thrust to death in the press, other some
slain with the Souldyours weapons. So that the same festival Pomp, was
turned into a dolorous calamity of many men. Him self besides, was many
times seen cartynge, and leaping. For he would not permit his own
flagitious exercises to be hydden: going often times abroad, with his eyes
painted, his brows made red, and his face (being naturallye beautyful)
deformed, with indecent colors. The which when Mesa perceived, suspectynge
the indignation of the Soldiers, and fearing, that if ought but good came
unto him, her self should be constrained, to return to her private life,
she persuaded the foolish, and rash young man, to adopte into the Empire with
him his kynsman, and her neuewe, being borne of her daughter Mammea. And that
she might the better please him, she said, that he, which executed only the
office of a Priest, and celebrated the sacrifices of the Gods, ought to have
some Substitute, which should govern the Empire, out of care, and trouble.
Now was there no stranger, nor forreyne person, so meet to be elected
thereunto, as his own kynsman. The same was Alerianus, which then was called
Alexander, by his fathers name, changed into the name of the Macedonien king.
For the same king, being of great renown, did Anthonine the Son of Seuerus,
chiefelye eruerence. Which Anthonine, their Graundemother persuaded the
Souldyours, to be the Father of them both: blasyng thereby, the Fornication of
her daughters, that she might thereby cause the Souldyours the better to love
them. Wherefore Alexander was declared Emperor, and created Consul with
Antonyne: Alexander made Emperor.
the Senate determinyng with skorne, and laughter, that which Antonyne
required. That is to say, him self, being but fourtene years old, to be
the Father, and Alexander, which was uneath entered the twelueth year of his
age, to be the Son. After Alexander was pronounced Emperor, Antonyne
endeavored to corrupt him, with his sensual manners, that in singing, and
daunsynge, being partaker of his Priesthode, he should wear the same
apparel, and use the same facions with him. But Mammea the Moother of
Alexander, preserved him from all dishonestye, and filthy life, bryngyng him
up privily under diverse learned men, in litterature, modesty, and good manners:
accustomynge him unto wrastelynge, and other decent exercises, and instructynge
him, in the Greek, and Latin tongue. Whereat Antonine greatly grudged,
repentinge him of his adoption, and participation of the Empire. And therefore,
he expelled out of his Palaice, all those Instructours, of whom some the
excellentest, he put to death, and the other he afflicted with exile, allegyng
against them, foolish, and vain causes, that they corrup^ed his Son, not
suffering him to use lybertye, and daunsynge, but instructinge him, in modest,
and comelye exercises. And he fell into such extreme folly, that he
distributed the chiefest dignityes, in the common wealth, among players of
Commodies, and Enterludes. For he made Liuetenaunt general of the Army, a
certain daunser, which in his youth, had been a common Player upon
Scaffoulds. Another of the same rabel, he appointed governor of the youth, and
another, chief of the order of knyghthode. Unto Carters, Ruffyans, and
disordered Brotheis, he committed the chief charge of the Empire. And unto his
Bond men and Lybertynes, as every of them exceaded another in abomination,
he delivered the rule of the Prouynces. Thereby, all things, which before
were honest, were turned into vile beastlynesse: which caused that all men,
and chiefly the Romayne Souldyours, detested him, as one which fashyoned his
countenance, more wantonlye, then became any honest woman. For he was decked
with chains, and ouches of gold, and apparelled with lascivious clothing,
vncomlye for a man, and daunsed daily in the sight of them all. Wherefore they
bare more beneuolent minds unto Alexander, and had better confidence in that
Child, for that he was modestly brought up. And they all saved him, from ye
treason, and myschiefe of Antonyne. Neither would his Moother Mammea, suffer
him to touch any meat, or drink, that was sent from the other. The child
also used not any of the Imperial, or common Cooks, and Pastelers, but such
as his Moother had chosen for him, which were both trusty and honest. She gave
him money also to distribute priuelye among the Souldyours, which chiefelye
couete the same, that he might by it, as by a sure lynked Chain, draw them
unto him.

When Antonyne perceived that, he invented all the mischief he could against
Alexander, and his Moother. Nevertheless, their common Graundmoother Moesa
avoided all such crueltye. For she was a woman of a stout courage, and had
also of long time soiourned in the Imperial Palayce, with her Suster Seuerus
wife, whereby she was throughlye skylfull of that which Antonyne intended: who
was naturallye full of talk, and without discretion, accustomed to blase
abroad, what soever he minded, or would have done. And then seeing his
enterprise not to proceade, as he wyshed, he determined to deprive the Child
all of Imperyal honors. And therefore, commanded that he should be no longer
saluted as Emperor, neither would he suffer him to go abroad among the
people.

But the Soldiers desired him wonderfullye, disdaynyng that the Empire should
be taken from him. Then Anthonine caused a rumoure to be blown abroad, that
Alexander was dead, to the entente he might thereby perceive, after what
sort, the Souldyours would take the same. But they seeing the child not
appear abroad, and having their hearts persed with those sorowefull tidings,
waxed wonderful wroth, withelde from Antonine his accustomed guard, and
having shut the gates of their Camp, said, they would perforce see
Alexander, within their Temple. Antonyne being thereby smitten with fear, rode
unto the Camp in the Imperial Chariot, being adorned with precious stones,
wherein also sat Alexander. Whom the Soldiers, (after they were both entered
into the Camp, and brought into the Temple thereof) saluted above measure:
following him with joyful acclamations, and utterly as I might say,
contempnyng Antonyne. He being therwyth meruaylouslye chaufed, after he had
lain one night within the Temple, and noted the Souldyours, which had shouted
unto Alexander, commanded them all to be put to death, as authors of
sedicion, and rebellion. They thereat disdaynynge, and abhorrynge before time
Antonyne, whyshyng also to dispatche out of life, that monstrous Emperor and
to help their Companyons, and perceauyng the time to be apt for the deed,
furthwyth slew Antonyne him self, Antonyne and his Mootehr slain.
and his Moother Soemis, who was by chance at that time there present, and with
them, all their Servants, and ministers of vice, that came with them into the
Camp. Then they delivered unto the common people, the bodies of Antonyne, and
Soemis, to be drawn with shame, throughoute the streets of the Cyty. The
people did so, and then threw them into the common synkes, that they might be
carried into Tyber. And the Souldyours, having saluted Alexander for Emperor,
brought him into Themperiall palaice, being very young, and as yet obedient
unto the co^mau^demetes of his grandmother.

Finis.
The Argument of the syxte Book of Herodian.
IN the syxte Book, the Author treats of the bounty and clemency, of
Alexander, and the avarice, of his Moother Mammea. Of the war, made by
Artaxerxes King of Persia, and the occasyon thereof. Against whom Alexander
apparayled a great army, and divided it into three parts. Then ensuen, the
causes wherefore, Alexander lost the love of the Soldiers. Who in the
beginning of the war, against the Germans, chase Maximinus Emperor, which
procured Alexander, with his Moother, and all his friends to be slain.

The syxte book of the History of Herodian.
IT is manifestly, in the former book, declared, what end of life, had
Anthonine theldre. After whom, Alexandre alone possessed the name, and
regimente, of Thempire. But thadministracion of all affairs, and governance
of the weal public, appertained to the women: Alexander and the Empire,
ruled by women.
who endeavored to reduce all things, to their pristina^e seemelynes, and
modesty. For first of all, they elected.xvi. of the order of Senators,
excelling in gravity of manners, and co^tinencie of life, to be assistau^te and
of preuy unto Cou^saill The^peror, with out the consent of which Counsaylours,
there was nothing, either in word, or writi^g, co^fyrmed. Where by this form
of pri^cipality becam grateful unto ye me^ at Arms, and Senate of Rome, for
that it was changed, from most pestiferous Tyranny, unto the ouersyght, and
rule of noble men. Then were the images of the Gods, which Anthonine in his
life time, had removed out of their Seats, restored again into their own
Temples, and places. Then were all those, which Anthonine had rashelye, for
their ^uyll manners, advanced unto high dignities, deposed, and set to their
accustomed life, and occupacion. Then all Ciuyle, and foreyne matters of
judgment, were appointed to thordring of wise, and profou^de learned men, in
the laws: And all warlyke affairs, committed to the rule, of valiaunte
Capitaines, and expert men of war. When Thempyre had been after this sort a
great space governed, Moesa which was ^ery aged, The death of Mo^sa
ended her life. Unto whom, all imperial honors were appointed, and, as the
Romayne usage is, The wisdom of Ma^mea.
she was canonized with immortalitye. After her death, Mammea, perceauing her
self to be leafte alone unto her Sone, endeavored to continewe the same form
of government, which was begone. And seeing that the young man, enjoyed now
alone thole dominion, she feared lest his young age, should walowe in extreme
liberty, and thereby fall into some of his kinsmans vices. Wherefore she
awayted well his person, and all places of the Coorte: not sufferi^g him, to be
approached unto, of any young man, whose life, and manners, were suspected, least
that his good dysposicio^, should be corrupted, through Parasytes, and
Flatterers, which would provoke his mind, and appeti^e, then flourishing, into
wa^ton and naughty affections. She persuaded him, to exercise his body, in
decente recreacions, the better part of the day, and that very often, lest
there should be any space left, for ill thoughts, whiles he might be better
occupied, in apoynting things necessary to be done. There was naturally
besides in Alexander a gentle, and meek disposition, bent unto affabilytie.
The which thing, his age following, made apparaunte. For.xiiii. years, he
governed Thempyre, without effusion of blood, not as much as one man, in
that time, through his procurement, being put to death. And although many,
through greuouse offenses, justly deserved death, yet did he evermore absteyne
from the execution of them. The which thing, a man shall not easily find, in
any Emperor, especially in those which succeaded Marcus. No man can remember,
that (whiles he reigned,) any was without judgment put to death. He
accustomed to reprehende his Moother, and blame her greatly, for that she was
somewhat coueytouse of money, and seemed over gready in heaping of Treasures.
For taking upon her, that she gathered money togythers, to enryche Alexander
withal, yt he might thereby, more abundauntlye bestow gifts upon the
Soldiers, she filled her own Coffers, with the same. The which her
couetyse, blemysshed greatly Themperours honor, that maugre his mind, the
couetouse woman, should catch, and pyll, by couine, and fraud, the
enheritaunce of many me^. She gave to her Son in Marriage, a Maiden descended
of noble blood, whom (notwithstanding that her husband entyerlye loved her)
her self shortly after expelled Thimperiall pallaice, with great obloquy,
and shame. And coueyting her self to be only named Augusta, she enuyed for
that cause the maiden, and became so outragiouse against her, that the maidens
father, (albeit he were in great aucthorise with Alexander) being impacient of
the injury, done unto his daughter, and him, by Mammea, fled into the Camp
for his own safegarde, saying, although he were much bound unto Alexander,
for his manifold benefits, yet he must of force, accuse Mammea, for the
great reproach she had done unto him. But she being there with chaufed,
commanded him to be slain, and yt yo^ge woman his daughter, being thrust out
of ye imperial Pallaice, she exiled into Aphrique. Nevertheless this was done
against ye will of Alexander. For his Moother ruled him above reason, Alexander
to much obedient unto his Moother
and had hi^ always obedient unto her commandments: so yt this one thing may
be reproved in Alexander, yt he used more humility, and reverence, toward
his Mother, then becam him, in obeyeng, and acco^plysshing her commandment,
against his own will. Now when he had after this sort, by the space of
thirtene years, reigned, the which time, he alone enjoyed the Empire, in
tranquillity, without disturbaunce, or complainte, of any person, Sodeinly loo,
there came letters out of Siria, Siria. Mesapotamye.
and Mesopotamia, whereby he was certified, that Artaxerxes King of Persia had
ouercomen the Parthianes and Artabanus their king, which first surnamed hi^
self great, Artaxerxes.
and wax two Crowns, and not only bereft him thorie^tal dominion, but also
his life, subdued the Barbarouse people his neighbors, and made them his
tributaries. That he held not him self within the River of Tigris, Tygris.
but had recovered the ba^ckes thereof, and was entered wtin the bounds of
Roman Empire, inuading, and pylli^g Mesapotamia, and menacing war unto Siria.
That he chalengid all the Site of Land called Asia, Asia. Europe. The Aegian
Sea. Propo^tis
situate over against Europe, which was environed with the Aegia^ Sea, and the
straites of Propontis, as the ancient possession of the Persyans. Because that
from the time of Cirus, Cyrus. Medes.
who first of all translated the kingdom, from the Medes, to the Persians,
until the reign of Darius their last King, (whom Alexander deprived of his
dominion) all thorientall costs, as far as Ionia, Ionia. Caria.
and Caria, were governed by the Persian Rulers, and Capitaines. Wherefore, he
affirmed, yt it was his duty, to see unto the restauracio^ of ye ancient and
whole Empire unto the Persia^s again. When Alexander heard hereof, being
greatly disquieted with those sodeine tidi^ges of battle, (for he had from his
infancy ben traded in quiet tranquillity, and norished with the City pleasures)
and having first co^sulted with his friends, and Counsailours, he concluded, to
se^de Ambassadors into thorie^t, with his letters, which he supposed would
repress the Barbariens hope, and pacify their tumulteouse inuasio^s. The
letters were of this sort directed.

That it behooved Artaxerxes, to hold him self content with his own Bounds,
and Limits of dominion. Not to stir, or cause any more dyscencion, neither
being puffed with vain confydence, and rash hope, attempt any great war.

That every man, ought to quiet him self with his own substance, and that
he should not have such sucesse in his fight, against the Romans, as he
had obtained against his neighbors. He did put him in remembrance besides,
of the victories, which Augustus, Traianus, Lucius, and Seuerus, had gotten
against them. With these letters, Alexander supposed to reduce the Barbarous
king unto peace, and concord, through fear of the menaces in them
contained. But he utterly contempnynge the same, determined (all talk set a
part) to try the matter, with weapon, and fight. And then with more
crueltye, foraged, and spoiled, the whole country of Mesopotamia, and carried
away the Inhabitauntes as a bootye, and assaulted all such Fortresses of the
Romans, as were builded upon the Riuage, to defend the bounds of the
Romayne Empire.

And being a man naturally glorious, and haulty of stomach, he thought to
subdew the whole world, enflamed thereunto with the prosperous sucesse of all
his affairs, ever, without loking for, obtained. Neither were the things of
small importance, which kyndeled his mind, to the coueitynge of a greater
Realm, then his own: taking first upon him, to invade the Parthians, with
war, and to recover the Parthian kingdom.

For many years, after the death of Darius, Darius. Alexander.
from whom, Alexander the Macedonian, bereft his kingdom, the Macedonians
them selves, and those which succeeded Alexander, governed ye regio^s of the
Orient, and Asia, distributed in sundry parts amongs them. But when the
Macedonian power was greatly worn, through sundry battayles, grown by
discention among them selves, Arsaces the Parthian, Arsaces.
is cyted by Hystories, to be the first Persuader of the Parthians, to reuolte
from the Macedonians. And he, by the consent of the Parthians, and other
Barbarous people his neighbors, wearynge on his head the Diadem, obtained the
kingdom, and left the same unto his posteritye, even unto the time of the
king Artabanus, whom Artaxerxes having slain, restored (as it is said) the
kingdom unto the Persians, and brought in subjection, the nygh Barbarous
nations, he did now provoke, the Romayne power to arms.

When relacion was made hereof to Alexander at Rome, he determined no longer to
^eare the insolencye of the Barbarous king, especyallye seeing his
Liuetenauntes, and Captains called him thither. Finallye, with great
grudgynge, and sore against his will, he prepared his expedition into the
Orient. And therefore, general musters were made thoroughout Italye, and the
Provinces, of all such as seamed apt, either in stature of body, or
strength of years. In the same musters, were many muties, and tumultes,
among the Romayne Subjects, reasonynge, what power might be equal, unto so
great a multitude of Barbarous people. And Alexander commanded all the
Pretorian Souldyours, and other men at arms, which were a Rome, to repair
into the fields: where him self veynge ascended into the Tribunal seat,
spoke these words unto them.

I would wyshe (my fellows in arms) to make such an oration unto you, The
oration of Alexander
as should (according to the accustomed wont) unto me the speaker, get love,
and honor, and unto you the hearers, bring joy, and gladness. For seeing we
have now many years lived, in peaceable tranquillity, if ye shall hear of any
new thing lately happened, peradventure ye wylbe a feared of the same, as of a
thing vnluckelye chaunsed. Nevertheless, it becomes valiant and moderat men,
in deed to wish for the best: but yet to suffer, and take in worth, what
soever happens. For as the thing we do with pleasure is sweet, and
delectable, so is that we do with virtue, commendable, and glorious. And as he
which first gives occasion of war, seameth injurious, even so he which
withstandeth wrong, is more confident in his conscience, and conceaueth a
better hope of his quarrel, for that it is ryghteous. Artaxerxes a man of
Persia, having slain his Soueraygne lord Artabanus, and translated his
kingdom unto the Persians, does now enterprise, in contempnynge the Romayne
Majesty, to provoke us to battle: inuadynge at this present, and wasting
our Provinces. I endeavored at the first to reduce him by gentle letters,
from his vnsaeiable gredines, and exhorted him, not to coueyte that was not his
own. But he, being puffed up with Barbarous insolencye, will not hold him
self within his own bounds, but chalengeth us unto Battle. Let us not
therefore tri^le in the thing, or defer the matter. But you which are bear
present, of the ancient sort of Souldyours, cause him to know the manifold
victories, which you have obtained, under the government, and leading of
Seuerus, and my father Antonine. And you which are young men, seek and coueyte
(I say) this praise, and glory: whereby all men may perceive, that you know,
not only, how to live in peace quietlye, and observe it reuerentlye, but also
when need requires, to fight valiauntly. Touching the Barbarous people, as it
is their usage, to pursue vehementlye, all such as at the first flee, and
recule, even so do themselves turn their backs, unto those which manfully
persist in the fight For they look not for any victory in fighting a plain
Battle, but using Inuasyons, and Rodes, account them selves Conquerours, of
all they can get by stelth and robberye. But we, on the contrary part, have
all things decked meet for the wars, wherewyth, we have learned to
overthrow, and vanquyshe them.

When Alexander had spoken these words, the men of arms received him
ioyfullye shoutyng, and showing them selves ready, to go with good wylles
into the war. Then he distributed a great Sum of money among them, and
commau^nded them, to prepare them selves to the journey. Anon after, he made
the like Oration in the Senate house, and appointed the day of his departure.
The which being comme, The departure of Alexander from Rome.
after he had (acccordinge to the ancient usage) fynished his sacrsfice, he
departed (the Senate, and all the Roman people conueyyng him out of Rome:
upon the which he looked back with weeping eyes. Neither was there any of the
common people, which watered not his plants, in the beholdynge of his
departure. For all the multitude was desirous of him, because he was brought
up among them, and had governed thempire, very many years, with much
modestye.

When he was departed, he used dilygent speed in his journey, visited the
Illirian people, and men of war, increased his power every where, and went unto
Antioche. In that City, he prepared all such necessaries, as were expedient
for the wars. And caused his Soldiers to exercise them selves in feats of
arms. Him self provided with much dilygence, weapons and harness for the
same.

It seemed then good unto him, to prove by another Ambassade, whether the
Persian King, would condiscende unto peace, and unity. For being him self
present, he little doubted, either to persuade Artaxerxes, as he would, or at
least wise put him in fear, with menaces. But the barbarous king, dismissed
the Romayne Orators home again, without any thing concluded. And in their
company sent fourtye of the goodlyest men of stature, The Ambassade of
Artaxerxes.
in his army: who were gorgiouslye apparelled, in rich Robes adourned with
gold, rode upon great Coursers, and carried great Bows in their hands,
thinking to abashe the Romans with the syghte of their talnes, and sumptuous
raiment. The effect of their Ambassade was this.

The great King Artaxerxes, commanded the Romans with their Emperor, to
depart out of Syria, and all that part of Asia, which is situate over against
Europe: Ionia. Caria. The Aegeansea. Pontus.
and suffer the Persians, to raygne, and have dominion, as far as Ionia, and
Caria, and all such land as the Aegean Sea, and Pontus do enuiron. When
these fourtye Ambassadors had declared their message, Alexander commanded
them, to be apprehended, took from them al their sumpteous apparail, and sent
them into Phrigia, where he allotted unto the^ certain Vilages, and fields to
till, and enhabit, being satysfied with this punyshmente of exyle, from their
native Country. For he rekened it very cruel, and nothing agreeable to ma^hood,
to put the^ to death, for thexecutynge their Masters commandment, not being
taken in battle.

When thiese things were thus ended, and whiles Alexander was busyed in
preparacion of Bridges to pass over the Ryuers, and to lead the Romayne Army
into the confynes of the Barbariens, there revolted, and fled from him, many
Egiptian Soldiers, and in Siria also, diverse Commocions, began to kyndle
against his gouernemente. But the same were furthewyth appeased, and the
Rebels taken, and put to death. Then Alexander sent certain armies of
Soldiers, into the nigh Regiones, that thereby the invasions of ye Barbarouse
people, might more easylye be restrained. All which things, being thus
set in order, and as great an army leuyed, as he thought, would be equal
of power, unto his enemies Host, The Army of Alexander divided into three
parts. Armenia. Medians Tigris. Euphrates.
he divided them, by his friends counsel, into three sundry armies. Of the
which, one he commanded to march toward the North, through Armenia,
which was reputed frendely unto the Romans, and to invade the borders of the
Medians. An other army he sent toward the North also, commau^ding them, to
pass by those fyeldes of the Barbariens, where Tigris, and Euphrates, are
received, into great Maryshes, and Pooles, and thereby it is uncertain where
they end. The third part, him self promised to lead between both the other
Armies, against the Barbaryens. Thinking by that means to oppress them
suddenly, with diverse inuasyons, when they were unready, and looked for no
such chance. He supposed, also that the Persian power, should through those
diverse encou^tres with the Romans, on every side, be dyspersed abroad,
were more faynte, and enter into battle, without order. For the Barbariens,
use not any mercenarye Souldyours, as the Romans are accustomed, neither
have they any army in pytthed Camp, where they might exercise them selves,
in feats of wars. But the hole multitude of men, yea often times of women
also, do assemble togethers, at the Kings commandment. The which
multitude, after the war fynyshed, are dysmyssed home again, to their
pryuate habytacions, caryenge with them, such bootye of the battle, as
every one of them, for his part, can get by theft. They occupye Bows,
and Horses, not only in battle, (as the Romans are wont) but they are
even from their chyldehoode, brought up togythers, traded with hunting, and
bearing always their quyuers of arowes with them. They never light from
their Horses, whether they fight in Battle, or hunte wild beasts.

But this Polycye of Alexander, albeit at the first, it seamed, without
controuersye, to be the best, yet was it fourthewyth, by fortune, made
destytude of good success. For the army, that was commanded to march by
Armenia, (having with great pain, and diffycultye, (although the summer
season, caused their journey, to be meatelye tolerable (passed the sharp
mountains, and craggye rocks) entered into Media, and there burnte the
vilages, and drove away great bootyes, of one thing, and other.

When relacion hereof, was made to the Persyan King, he came to rescue the
Country, with as great a power, as he could leuye. But he could not drive
away the Romans from thence, for that the same craggye Country, ministered
sure footing, and easy passage, unto the Romayne footmen. And the Barborouse
horsemen, through the stepenes, of the sharp rockye Mountains, had a more
uneasy travail, and laboriouse iorneye. There, was it declared, unto the
Persian King, that an other army of the Romans, was entered, into such
borders of the Parthians, as extended toward the orient. Wherefore, fearing
least the Romans, after they had Conquered the Parthians, would invade
Persia also, he left as great a Garyson behind him, as seamed sufficient,
for the defense of Media, and him self, with thole Army) made speedye haste
into thorientall coasts.

The Romayne Army, marched forward very slowelye, for that no man resysted
them. Thinking, that Alexander with the third part of them, (wherein were
the chyefest men of war) was already entered, into the mids of the
Barbaryens. And therefore they rested them selves: judging, that it was not
best, to make any great haste, seeing they were now in safetye, and knew
the place, wherein they should altogether meet, with their bootye, and
Prisoners.

But Alexander deceived them. Alexander deceived his Army.
For he neither came him self, nor brought any Army forward. Doubtful it
is, whither he so slacked, through fear of putting his life in hasarde, in
defense of Thempyre, or whether his Moother deteyned him at home, through
womanly fearfulness, and over much love of her Son.

For, in dead, she blemysshed, and blunted, all his noble, and valyaunte
courage, in perswadynge him, rather to send other forth to the wars, then
stand him self in battle. The which thing did utterly betraye the
Romayne Army, that was entered into the Barbarous Regyons. For the Persyan
King did meet, and set upon them, vnreadye, and lookynge for no such
chance, with his hole power, and enclosynge them, as it were, in a net, did
utterly dyscomfyte, and overthrow, every person of them, being few in
number, and not able to resyste, so great an Host of their enemies.
Nevertheless, at the first they defended stoutly, with their Targettes, and
weapons, the naked places of their bodies, from the violent shot of arrows:
Accomptynge them selves happily dealte with all, if without any plain
battle, they might safely escape, from damage. But when they had for a little
space, enclosed them selves with their Targettes, and were assaulted like unto
a walled City, The Romans vanquisshed.
and slain on every part, having unto the end valyauntly resysted, they
were murdered down right.

This was a marvelous calamity, unto the Romans, the like whereof, can be in
no age remembered, for they had now lost a great army, worthy, either for
Loyalte, or strength, to be compared, unto any ancient Host, before passed.
But the wyshed success of thiese affairs, enhaunsed the mind of the Persyan
King, with hope of greater enterpryses.

Whereof when Alexander heard (being at that time, very sore sick, either
through pesyuenes of mind, The Army waxed wroth with Alexander
or else thintemperatnes of the air) he took it very greuouslye, and thole
army, waxed wonderful wroth, against Themperoure. For they said, that
their Companyons, were betrayde by him, through his lyenge, and not
performenge of promise. Then Alexander, being impaciente of his disease, and
the heat of the air, (thole army also, vexed with syckenes, and especially
the Illyrians, (who before accustomed unto moist, and could air, and then
feading more largelye) fell through syckenes, into danger of death),
determined to return unto Antyoche: whyther he caused his Soldiers also to
come, very few in number remaining, for that the most part of them, were
peryshed, through the sharpenes of the Winter, and Mountains. The hands,
which were attendaunt upon his person, him self led back unto Antioche,
having lost many of them also. Wherefore, this matter brought much sorrow
unto the army, and great dishonor unto Alexander, Fortune having deceived
him in all places, and turned his intent to none effect. For a meruaylous
number of those.iii. armies (so perdye, had he divided them) were destroyed by
diverse calamities, as syckenes, battle, and cold. When Alexander was come
unto Antioche, he recovered health, refreshed with the temperat air there, and
abundance of water, after the burning heat of Mesopotamia, refreshed also
his Souldyours, co^fortynge their sorrow, with geuynge them money, (which he
rekened to be the pryncipall mean, to win their hearts) renewed his army,
and repaired the same with fresh Souldyours throughout, as though he would
ones more lead them against the Persyans, if they proceaded to be
troublesome, and desisted not from their injuries.

But then was it declared unto him, that the Persyan King, had dysmyssed all
his Souldyours home to their habytacions. For although the Barbaryens, seamed
to be the Superyours in Battle, yet through often, and sundry Batayles,
fought in Media, and Parthia, a great part of them were slain, the rest
which remained, were either empayred with dyseases, or else in Skyrmishes
sore wounded. Neither were the Romans flowlye overcome, but them selves were
many times noisome unto their enemies: being by none other mean vanquished,
then for that they were, fewer in number, entrapped.

For when almost like number, was on both sides slain, the rest of the
Barbariens, not in strength and prowess, but only in multitude, seamed to be
the better, whereof, this is sufficient proof, that the Barbariens, in.iii.
or.iiii. years after, fell not again unto arms. The which when Alexander
understood, he made his abode still at Antioche. And being from thence
forward, more merye, and liberal, and forgettyng the care of the wars, gave
him self to the voluptuous pleasures of the same City. But whiles he thought,
that the Barbarie^s would from thence forth, remain quiet, or at the least
wise, it would be a long time, before they could assemble again their
power, uneasy to bring together, after they were once separated, for that they
were rude, and out of order, and rather a multitude of rural people, then an
army, having only as much vitayle, What ye Persia^s army is.
as every man brings for his present necessity, from his house: unwilling
also, to depart from their wives, children, and habitacio^s, loo, furthwith
came messengers and letters unto him, from the Rulers of Illiria, the which
troubled him wonderfully, and cast him into great thought, and perplexity of
mind. For they signified, that the Germaynes had passed over the Rheyne, The
Germans rebel.
and Danowe, were entered into the bounds of the Roman Empire, assailed the
armies, which defended the banckes, and made their rodes through the Country,
by the Cities, and Vyllages, with a great power of men. And that thereby the
Illiria^s, being a nation borderer, and neighbor unto Italye, stood in great
hassarde and danger, wherefore, it was requisite, that The Emperor should be there
in his own person, and bring all the power he had with him.

These news, struck marvelous fear, into Alexander, and doleful sorrow into
the Illirian Souldyours. For they perceived them selves to be afflicted, with
two miserable calamities, at one instaunte: having first evil success in the
wars, against the Persians, and after, hearing that their friends were slain
at home, by the Germaynes. Wherefore, they greatly grudged against Alexander, as
if by his cowardyse, their former affairs, had been betrayed in Thorient, and
that now he protracted his remove, when as the Northern causes, earnestly
called for him. Now stood Alexander, and his friends, in great doubt of
Italy: the affairs of the Persians and the Germans, being of unlike
danger. For those which inhabit the Orient, are sequestered with great
distaunce of land, and Sea. And thereby do scarselye hear the name of Italy.
But the Illirian nations, dwelling in a small streyte, and possessing very
little ground, The Scituatiatio^ of Illiria
subject to the Romans, do only make seperacion between Italye, and
Germanye. Wherefore, he caused his departure to be proclaimed, against his will,
saving that necessitye constrained him thereunto. And having left behind him,
as many men as seamed sufficient, for the tuition of the Romayne lymittes, and
fortifyed the Cytyes, and Castles, with strong Garrisons, him self departed
spedelye against the Germains, with the residue of his hole army. And having
with speed eanded his iourneye, he pitched his Camp, upon the banckes of the
Rheine, and there made provision, for all necessaryes, belongyng to the war.

First, he made a Bridge of Ships and Galleyes, over the Rheyne, and Danowe,
that the Romans might pass to the other side, by the same. For those two
are counted the greatest Ryuers of the North. Rheine. Danubie.
Of the which, the one passes by the Germaynes, the other, by the Pannonians.
And in the Summer season, they are nauigable, with a large, and deep channel.
In winter so hard ouerfrosen, Pannonye.
that they are ridden upon, as it were a field. For the Ise of the channel is
so strong, and hard, that it not only bears hoofes of horses, and feet
of men, but also, they which come to fetch water there, bring not with the^,
so many Cups, or Pailes, as they do Hatchettes, and Mattockes. And when they
have therewith broken the Ise, they carry the same away, without any vessel, as
it were a stone. Such is the nature of those ryuers.

Alexander did set in Battle, against the Germaynes, many Mauritanians, and
a great power of Archers, which he had brought out of the Orient, some of
them being people called Osrohenians, Osrohemians.
the rest Parthyan fugytyues, whom he had allured with money unto him. For
those Soldiers did most displeasure, and damage unto the Germans. Because
the Mauritanians do shoot their arrows from far, are quycke, nymble, and
swifte to skyppe, to and fro. And being all Archers, can easelye strike, the
bare heads, of the Germaynes, and their great bodies, as it were an appointed
mark, in a Butte. Often times also, they fought in plain battle, hand to
hand, from whence, the Germaynes, often times departed, nothing Inferiors
unto the Romans.

Alexander being with these troubles occupied, concluded to send Orators
unto them, to entreat of peace, in promising them money, and to give the^
whatsoever they neaded, with great abundance of treasure. For the Germaynes,
are chiefelye greadye of money, and often times for the same, do sell their
peace to the Romans. wherefore Alexander endeavored to bye peace of them,
rather then to hasarde the matter, in battle. But the Romayne Souldyours
grudged greatly, that they wasted their time in vain, without occasion of
atchieuyng any thing, whereby they might show their valyaunte courage, whiles
Alexander, gave him self to Cartynge (as they said) and voluptuousnes, when
it was more expedient to revenge them selves, upon the Germaynes, and to
punyshe them, for their presumptuouse audacitye.

There was then in the army, one Maximinus, of a certain Village of Thrace,
and that the obscurest with all, Maximinus had been a shepherd
a man half Barbarous, which in his youth, had been a Shepherde, and after,
his years being increased, for the heyghte of his body, and his mighty
strength, was waged for a horseman. Finallye, Fortune, as it were, leadynge
him by the hand, and going before him, after he had ascended, by all degrees
of offices, in the war, he aspired unto the government of the Army, and
Provinces. This Maximinus therefore, for his expert knowledge in warrefare,
did Alexander ordeyne Governor of the youth, to exercise them, in the feats
of war, and to make them apt, unto fight.

And he omyttynge no dilygence, Maximinus Lord of the Souldyours.
so behaved him self in that office, that he gained favor, of thole army:
not only, instructynge them, in all such things, as were daily to be done,
but excecutyng him self, first of all, the deades with the present use
required. So that, he had them, not only as Scolers, but also Companions of
his prowess, whom he joined unto him with sundry gifts, and all kind of
honor. Wherefore the young men, of whom the greatest part were Pannonians)
being ioyefull of the valeauntnes of Maximinus, did openly speak against
Alexander: saiynge that he was yet under his Moothers aucthorytye, and did all
thing after her commandment, setting forward the wars very slowelye,
and with much cowardice. They repeted often within them selves, the great
myshappe, they had received in thoriente through his delays, and reprehended,
that he had done nothing valeauntly against the Germaynes. Wherefore being prone
of their nature to change of things, grieved with so long contynuaunce of
regiment (whereof they received little lucre) for that all ambition was long
before abolished) and assuredlye trusting that some other Prince which should
attain unto the Soueraignitie, without lokyng for it would bestow some more
gifts, and honor upon them, they concluded to murder Alexander, and
afterward to create Maximinus Emperor being their Companion in arms, and
all other exercyses, and by his skyl in warfarre, most apt for the war
presently in hand. Wherefore having by sundry bands assembled into the field,
when Maximinus came among them to instruct the yo^ge Soldiers, they
clothed him with purple, and saluted him as Emperor. Doubtful it is, wether
he were ignoraunte of the dryfte, or else made pryuie unto the matter before. At
the first he refused it, and rejected the purple. But when he saw the me^ of
arms draw forth their swords, threating to kill him, wishing rather the
danger to come, then the peril present, he took the honor upon him:
protestynge, that although the same fortune, were erste by dreams, and
visions, showed unto him, yet was he now unwillingly enforced by the^ to
receive it, only because he would obey their minds. Then he wylled them, to
appoynte all things as they would them selves, and taking their weapons, in
preventing the rumor of this matter, goo slay Alexander (who was ignorant of
all that was done) that thereby his Soldiers, and the Guard of his person,
being with the sodeyne chance dismayed, should either willingly assent unto
them, or else being unready, and loking for no such hap, should maugre their
heads, be brought in subjection. Then after he had enflamed their good wills
toward him, in dublynge their wages, and promisyng to give them great
rewards, and to pardon all their punyshmentes, he led them all unto
Alexanders Pauylio^, incontine^tly, for that it was not far distant from
thence. When thiese things were declared unto Alexander, he was greatly
dismayed with the noueltye thereof. So that he ran out of his Tent, as a mad man,
weaping, and tre^bling, now calling Maximiuus desloyall, and perjured person,
with reckening of the benefytes, which him self had bestowed upon him: and
then, accusing the young Soldiers, which neglecting their oath, would
enterprice so perniciously, that facinorouse fact. And finally, he offered to
give them what they would desire, and amend such things as were amiss.
Then the Soldiers which apartayned to ye Guard of his person, making joyful
acclamacio^s unto him, promised to defend him, with all their might and power.
When the night was ones passed, and the day began to dawe, certain of the
Soldiers, brought word unto him, that Maximinus was at hand, for that they
might see the duste raised, and hear the noise of a great multitude not far
of. Wherefore Alexander came again into the field, and called togythers his
Soldiers, beseaching them to aid, and defend him, whom them selves had
brought up, and during whose reign, by the space of.xiiii. years, they had
lived without discention. Then having moved them all with compassion, he
willed them to arm them selfs, and stand in order of battle, to resyst
their enemies. But the Soldiers (although they had before promised aid unto
their Prince) did not wtstanding shrincke away, by little, and little. Some of
them required the Captain of the Guard, and other of Alexa^ders friends to be
put to death: alledginge that they were the occasion of this Commocio^. Other
of them accused his Moother, for that she was a coueteous woman: who in
heaping, and hording of money, and through her pynchynge, sparynge, and greedy
keaping, from the Soldiers, had brought Alexander into dysdayne with them
all. Thus stood they talkyng, and moved not as yet. But as soon as tharmy of
Maximinus was in syghte, and after he had encoraged them, to forsake a fylthy
woman, and a weak young man, which lived as yet under his Moothers
commandment, and join them selves unto a strong, and valeaunte man, their
companion in Arms, and exercysed contynually with them, in feats of war,
furthwith, they all togethers reuoulted from Alexander, and with one assente
saluted Maximinus as Emperor. Then Alexander fled back again into his
Pauilion, trembling, and half besides him self, and embrasyng his Moother,
and (as it is reported) blami^g her for that he suffered this calamity, for her
sake, he aboade there, loking for the murderer.

Now Maximinus, after he was created Emperor by thole Army, gave in charge to
the Tribune, Tribun.
and Capitaines, the murderinge of Alexander with his Moother, Alexander and
his Moother with their friends slain.
and all other which should make any resystaunce. They furthwith entering by
vyolence into the Pauilion, slew both Alexander, and his Moother, with his
friends, and every noble man, except a few, which a little before had made
shyfte for them selves by fleeing away, and were hyd in corners. All the
which, being shortly after apprehended, Maximinius did put to death. This end
of life had Alexander, with his Moother, when he had by the space of.xiiii.
years reigned, without any complainte of the Citezins, yea with out any
bloodshead either. For detesting crueltye, and murder he permitted no man to
suffer, without he were by judgment condemned, so much was he addicted to
gentle benevolence. So that if the coueyteous, and greadye Moother, had not
with fylthy couetise defamed her Son, there could nothing have been
wantynge, or wyshed for, in his government of Thempyre.

The Argument of the seventh Book of Herodyan.
THe Beginning of the seventh Book makes mention of Maximinus Crueltye,
which passed over, and made war upon the Germans. And at his return to
Rome, oppressed the people, with grievous exaccions, and committed much
sacrilege, which caused much hurley burley among the people. How the nation
of Aphrique rebelled, and made Gordianus Emperor, who was vanquysshed by
Capellianus, Governor of Mauritania. And after Gordianus death, how the
Senate elected Maximus, and Albinus, and with them young Gordianus. The
audacytie of Gallianus follows, and the myschiefe that ensued thereupon.

The seventh book of the Hystorye of Herodyan.
WE have in the former book, at length declared, after what sort, Alexander
behaved him self, during the.xiiii. years of his raygne. After whose death,
Maximinus, having obtained the Type, and regimente, of the Impyre, altered the
estate of all things, and abused very cruellye, his obtained Power, so that
from a Gentle Gouernemente, he endeavored to change it unto cruel tyranny.
For perceiving him self to be odious unto all men, because he first of all
other, had aspyred unto that Fortune, from a base estate, besides that, being
as well Barbarous of manners, as by nature greadye of bloodshed, he endeavored
chiefelye, to establyshe the Empire unto him, through crueltye, fearyng least
he should be had in contempt of the Senate, and all other Romans, whiles not
his present Fortune, but the obscurenes of his birth, was specially noted in
him. For it was openly known unto all men, that he had been a shepherde in
the Mountains of Thrace, and received among the simple, and base Souldyours
of that region, for the greatness, and strength of his body, and now exalted
unto the Romayne Empire, Fortune (as I might say) leadynge him by the hand.

Wherefore, first of all, he rooted out of the Senate house, all the friends
and Councelours of Alexander, of the which some he dimissed to Rome, The
tyranny of Maximinus.
other some he deprived of their offices, accusynge their former administration
therein. This did he, to the entente he might be alone, in the army, having
no man of the nobilitye nyghe him, but without the reverence of any such, as
in a strong Fortress, exercise his tyranny. Then did he expel out of the
Imperial palaice, all the Servants of Alexander, whom he had by so many years
retained in service, and did put some of them to death, fearing treason,
because he perceived them dolefully to lament the death of Alexander. But his
tyranny was more augmented, thorough the opening of a certain conspiracy
against him, wherein many of the Captains, and the whole Senate, were
confedered.

There was a certain man of the nobility, which had been Consul, named
Magnus. Magnus
The same was accused unto Maximinus, that he had intended treason against him,
and persuaded the Soldiers, to translate the Empire unto him. This counsel
was supposed to be such. Maximinus had made a Bridge over the river, to pass
against the Germayns, having a gredy appetite (after he had gotten thempyre)
unto warlike affairs. For being erected unto Thempyre, through the huge
quantity of his body, his strength, and skill in warfare, he endeavored with
open deades, to confirm ye same opinion of the soldiers, to prove, thereby,
that the fear, cowardice, and sloth of Alexander, in warlyke exercises, was
justly by him condemned. Wherefore, he omitted nothing that appertayned to the
exercise of the men of war. And being him self daily in arms, did
therewith greatly provoke the courage of the Souldyours.

After the aforesaid Bridge was fynyshed, he determined, to pass over into
Germayne. But then it was reported, that Magnus had entised a great number of
Soldiers, who excelled the other in prowes, especially of those, unto who^
the custody of the Bridge was committed, that as soon as Maximinus were passed
unto the other side of the river, they should throw down the bridge, exclude
him from all return, and thereby betray him unto the Germains. For ye depth,
and breadeth of the River was such, that it seamed impossible for him to get
over again, especially, because there was no kind of vessel, on the further
shore. Such was the rumor of this enterprise. But uncertain it is, whether
the same were truly reported, or else forged of a purpose. For it is hard, to
give a resolute Judgment therein, because that without any trial,
answer, or sentence, as many as were only suspected, were put unto
death.

At the same time, there began a great commotion, of the Osrohenian Souldyours
also. For they being very sorrowful for the death of Alexander, and by
hap, meatynge with one of his friends, Quarcinus.
named Quarcinus (who a little before had been dimissed by Maximinus from the
Camp) took him against his will, when he looked for no such matter, elected
him to their Captain, clothed him with Purple, carried the fire before him, and
so adorned with perniciouse honors, exalted him unto the dygnitie of Emperor.

The which man, shortelye after, sleapynge in his Pauilion, was by one of his
own Companions, and (as it is supposed) his friend, trayterouslye murdered.
The same was named Macedonius, Macedonius.
which had been before, Ruler of the Osrohenians, and at that present, was
first Author unto them, of reuoltinge from Maximinus. And, although there
were no cause of grudge between him, and Quarcinus, yet did he thus murder him,
whom him self had first compelled to become Emperor.

Then thinking to show Maximinus some great pleasure, he carried unto him the
head of Quarcinus. But Maximinus, albeit he were glad of that fact, for that
his enemy was rydde out of the way, yet did he put unto extreme death
this Macedonius, (which looked after some great reward, and hoped to receive
great thanks for his travail) because he was Author of the rebellion, and
murderer of one, which him self had induced, maugre his head unto that
mischief, and had been false unto the man, which had most affyaunce in him.

These causes therefore, did exasperate the mind of Maximinus, and kyndled his
furye, being already? of his own nature, over prone unto crueltye.

He was besides, horrible of visage, and of so huge, and mighty stature, that
none of the most valiant Greeks, or most warlyke Barbariens might be
compared unto him.

When these things were thus set in order, he gathered together the whole
Army, passed without fear over the Bridge, and made Battle upon the
Germaynes. There followed him a wonderful number of men, almost all the power
of the Barbariens, and with them very many Mauritanian Slyngers, and
Archers. There followed him besides, the Osrohenians, and Armenians, the one
nation being subject unto the Romans, the other associated in frendshyppe
with them, they were accompanied with as many Parthians, as being hired or
fugityues, from their natyue country, or else taken in the wars, served the
Romans.

This multitude of people, was first leuyed by Alexander, and then augme^ted,
and exercised, by Maximinus. The Slyngers, and Archers, seamed very profitable
in the war against the Germayns, because they could easelye stryke their
enemies unawares, and recule them selves furthewyth, into sure defense.

Maximinus being entered within his enemies land, and finding no man to
resist him (for all the Germans were fled) pylled and foraged the countreye
(the Corn being then ripe) and permitted the Souldyours to burn, and
destroy, all the Vyllages. And in dead, the Towns and houses there, are
very much subject to danger of fire. For among the Germaynes, the
Building with Stone, and Tyle, is very rare and scarce. But with great pieces
of Timber set in the earth, and Joined together in thycke woods, The
Germaynes houses.
they make (as it were) tabernacles. Maximinus then going forwards, in
wasting the Country, sackyng the corn, and distributynge the Cattle, which
was taken among the Souldyours, found not as yet, any of his enemies. For
they had abondoned all the field, plain, Country, and all places, destitute
of trees, and hid them selves covertly in the woods, and marshes, that they
might there fight, and with sodeyne assaults, invade their enemies: because
the thickenesse, and nygh growing together of the trees, seemed to become a
great impediment unto the arrows, and darts, of their enemies. And they
thought, that the depth of their maryshes, and Pooles, would be dau^gerouse
unto the Romans, for that they were ignoraunte of the passages, and Country.
But unto themselves, very easy, and profitable, because they wading daily
through them, up to the knees, perfectly knew, which were the passable
foordes, and which impossible to get over. And truly, the Germans are very
cunning in swymming, as men, which only swymme, and bathe them selves in
Ryuers. In these places therefore, was the battle begone, where first of all
the Romayne Emperor enterprysed the confllycte very valiauntly. For when they
were come unto a great, and broad Maryshe, within the which, the Germans
had retired them selves, the Romans, being afearde to pursue their enemies,
Maximinius first entered upon a great Courser, into the Maryshe (where his
horse fou^dered to ye belie) and slew with great ma^hode, many of the
Barbarous people, which resysted. Wherefore the resydue of tharmye, being
pricked with shame, if they should forsake their Emperor, now fighting for
them, adventured them selves also into the Maryshe. And then were there
slain, many of either part, but so, that there was no Barbarien left a live,
the Romayne Emperor fighting most valyauntlye. Whereby the Maryshe being
filled with dead carcases, and the lake being myngled with blood, caused it
to seame, that this foot Battle was fought with ships upon the water.

This victory, with other his stout, and mighty factes, he not only
sygnifyed unto the Senate, and people of Rome, by letters, but also being
Printed in a great Table, caused it to be publyshed before the Coorte, that the
Romans might not only hear of his valyaunte deades, but also have them
perfectly expressed before their eyes.

The same Table, with the rest of his honors, the Senate afterward pullyd
down, and abolyshed. There were many other skyrmyshes, and batayles foughten,
wherein him self, through his first gyuynge the onsette, and manfull
fighting) gate ever the price, and renown. Then he returned, against the
winter season, into Pannony, with many prisoners, and great bootye of
Catayle. And wynterynge within the City of Syrmium, Sirmiu^.
(which is the greatest City of that Country) he prepared all necessaries,
for his vyage, against the spring time: threatnyng, wholly to subdue all the
Barbarouse nations of the Germaynes, eue^ to the Ocean. The which thing, it
seamed, he would assuredlye bring to pass, such a one was he, in the
affairs of warrefare, and should have obtained a wonderful glory through his
factes, The exaccions of Maximinus.
if he had not been more outragiouse to his own subjects, then to his
enemies. But to what purpose, are the Barbariens slain, if much more murder,
be committed within the City self of Rome, and the nations subject thereunto?
or what avails it to have plentye of Captives, and prays of beasts, if by
his conquestes, and fortune, the Romans them selves, be dyspoyled of all
they have. For, not only free lybertye, but also entysynge, was given, unto
perniciouse promoters, to accuse, and cyrcumuente with fraud, whom they
would. Yea, and to renew (if neade were) faults before done, by men's
Ancestors, some of them unknown, and vnharde of, until that present
instaunt. Neither was there any man detected of any offense, but the same was
furthwyth condemned, and all his goods confyscate. Whereby, a man might
daily see, diverse which before were wonderful rich, and welthye) now
beg their bread: So great was the couetyse of his Tyranny, whiles he
dystrybuted money continually, among the men of war. His ears besides
were open unto all complayntes, so that he had no regard, to any ma^s age, or
dignity.

For many Capytaines of armies, Governors of provinces, with diverse that
had been Counsulles, and for their merits tryumphed, being ones for any
fond trifle, or light cause accused, he caused furthwyth to be apprehended:
and putting them in Chariottes alone, without any Servant attendynge upon
them, compelled them, to come out of the East, and Weste (if the chance so
happened) and out of the Southe also, unto Pannony, where him self soiourned.
And there spoylynge them of all their substance, and entreatynge them with
most shameful sclaunders, he afflycted them with death, or banyshemente. But
as long, as one, or two, suffered thiese domages, and the said calamity
passed not their lynage, the common people, little regarded it. For the adverse
chances of Rich, and welthy men, were not only of the Commons, neglected,
but also many of them, of a froward mind, and perverse will, in despyte of
the Rich men, were very glad with the same their myseryes.

But after that Maximinus, The sacrileges of Maximinus.
had thus brought unto extreme pouertye, the famylies of many noble, and
famous men, reckenynge them of no value, and but tryfles toward the
satysfienge of his outragiouse coueteousnes, he turned his mind unto the
Robberye, and spoylynge, of the common Treasorye.

For what so ever money had been before laid up, for the Common prouysyon of
Corn, or what so ever Riches remained, to be dystributed among the people,
with all such Treasoure as served to the deckynge of the Theaters, and
gorgiouse setting furthe of festyuall Pompes, and plays, the same every
jot, he adjudged to himself.

Besides that, the gifts of all the Temples, the Statues, and honors, of all
the Gods, and famous men, with what so ever publycke work, Ciuyll
ornaments, or matter, which seamed conuenyente to make money of, were put to
the fire. Which thing did chieflye gnawe, and vex the hearts of the people,
and caused, as it were, a common mourning, saying, that without war, or
battle, the City was like to be assaulted, and taken, so that many of the
people auentured to resyste him, and to defend the Temples, wyshynge rather to
be slain before thaultars of the immortal Gods, then to see their Country
destroyed. Rebellio^s and bitter Curses against Maximinus.
And hereby chiefly, did the minds of the Common people, begin to grudge
against him, thrughoute all the Cytyes of Thempyre. Neither were the Soldiers
the^ selves very glad with it, for that their neighbors, and kynsfolke rebuked
them, and imputed to their fault, that Maximinus did thus behave him self.
Thiese enormityes, therefore, being of no small importance, did provoke the
people to hatred, and rebellion. But hitherunto they meddled not, save only
with words, calling upon the Gods, whom Maximinus had offended, for that
there was none durst take upon him, to revenge the cause: until that after
three years eande of his Reygne, upon a light occasyon (as the affairs of
Tyrrauntes, are waueringe, and subject to change) the Affricans, first
enterprysed to fall to Arms, and rebellyon, The Governor of Affriane.
and this was the cause. There was a certain Liuetenaunt in Carthage, who
wanted nothing, that appartayned to extreme furye, and outeragiouse Tyrranny.
The same crepte into his Princes favor, by condepning of men, and extorting of
monei. For Maximinus loved the^ most of al other, who^ he knew to be of his own
sect and faction. So yt, whosoever therefore had the charge of The^perors
treasour, whether they were good me^ (which very sealdome happened) or deposed
from their office, or else feared with the present peril, being skylfull of
his insatiable avarice did (although unwillingly) follow, and accompany ye
rest. This aforenamed Liuetenaunte of Affryca, having violentlye committed,
many great enormities, did also compass, to exact money furthwyth, of
certain noble, and rich young men (whom he had by fraud circumuented with
condempnation) and to depryue the^ of all their Patrimonye, and riches, which
their Ancestors had left them. With which thing, the young men being
incensed, did in dead promise to pay the same, demanding three days
respyte, for the payment.

And in the mean while, conspyrynge togethers, as many as had already
suffered, or feared hereafter to suffer affliction, commanded the young men
their servants, to come from their Vyllages, and Farms, with Clubbes, and
Axes, unto them. They executynge their Masters commandments, came all
together before day light, into the City, hydynge under their Garments,
such weapons, as in that sudden tumulte, they had gotten.

There was assembled, a wonderful great number of men. For in Africa (being
it self greatly replenyshed with people) there were at that time, many
Laborers, and Husband men also. After the day appeared the young men,
commanded their servants to wait near upon them, as though they were some
of the Town people, and not to show their weapons, or begin any violence,
until they saw the men of Arms, or else of the common people, assault
them to revenge the fact, which they would shortly commytte. The Governor
of Affrik slain.
They them selves, hydynge their Daggers in their bosoms, went into the
Liuetenauntes house, faynynge they would speak with him, touching the
payment of the money, and furthwyth sodeynlye there slew him, when he
suspected no such casualtye.

Then his Souldyours, drew furthe their swords, and endeavored to revenge the
murder. But the Husbandemen, and Laborers, ran immediatlye to the byckerynge,
and there stoutly fought for their Masters, and easelye constrained all their
enemies to turn their backs, and flea. When ye enterprise was after this wise
atchiued, ye young me^, having so desperately set upon ye matter, rekened one
only help to remain for them. That is, if they heaped upon this late
committed mischiuous act, a more heinous offense. Wherefore they determined to
associat in the peril unto them, the governor of the Province, and to induce
ye minds of the people, unto rebellion, yt which they knew to be wished for,
of the^ al, through ye hatred of Maximinus, but as yet prohibited from it,
through fear. wherefore, in the deape of the night, they went with all ye
multitude, to the Proconsuls house. The same was Gordianus, who obtained ye
office, when he was.iiii. score years old, and had been governor of many
Prouynces before, and approved in sundry weyghty affairs. And therefore they
thought, that he would, without difficulty, take ye rule of thempyre upon him,
as ye fynall eande of his former dignities, and that he should be a Prince
grateful unto ye Senate, and people of Rome. For that, besides his noblenes of
birth, he had by diverse honors, as by steps, Gordianus chosen Emperor by
the yo^ge me^.
ascended unto the regyment of Thempyre. Now it happened, yt the very same day
that these things were in doing, Gordianus remained within his own house,
having defferred his busynes until another time, and suspended for then the
administration of all things. The young men with their swords being
accompanied with a great number of people, repulsed his Porters, and entered with
force into the house, and found him resting him self upon his Bed, where they
thro^ged about the old man, clothed him with purple, and saluted him with imperial
honors. But he being astonished with the sodayn chance, and supposing it to be a
deceit, wrought of purpose against him, let him self fall to the ground from
his bed, beseching the^, to have co^passio^ upon an old man, which had never
offended the^, and to observe their truth, and allegiaunce, toward their
Prince. Then whiles they thus perseuered, holding their swords in their
hands, and whiles Gordianus, partlye through fear, partly through
ignorance, knew not what the matter meant, or what was the cause of so sudden
fortune, one of the yongmen, which excelled the rest in nobility, and
eloquence, having commanded the^ unto silence, holdyng his sword by the
Hyltes, spoke after this sort.

Of two peryls, of yt which the one is present, The words of one of ye young me
unto Gordia^.
and manifest, the other doubtful, and of uncertain eand, thou must this day chose
one. That is, either to preserve us, and thy self, and conceive as good hope,
as we already have, or else without delay, suffer death by our hands. And if
thou chose the better, the^ are there many occasions of good hope. For thou
shall rid out of the way Maximinus, of all the world abhorred, as a
pestiferous plague, of cruel tyranny, and add unto thy life (which thou
have hitherunto virtuously led) famous glory and renown, obtayninge of the
Senate, and people of Rome eternal honor, and perpetual praise But if thou
reject it, and deny to conspire with us, we will out of hand put the to death:
and our selves also (if neade be) will accompany the in diyng. For we have
enterprised a greater matter, then that we can be safe without desperation. The
minister of tyranny is dead, and has received condign punyshement for his
cruelty, being a little earste, slain with our hands. Wherefore, if thou
will consent with us, and become partaker of our perils, thy self shalt
obtain the Empire. And then the fault, which we have committed, shall be
reputed, more worthy, praise, then punyshemente.

Whiles the young man spoke theyse words, the rest of the multitude, being
impatient of stay, or tariynge (seeing all the Cytyzyns which had heard of
the matter, were assembled, together) with one accord, pronounced Gordianus
Emperor.

Then he (albeit, he had before refused it, Gordianus saluted Emperor.
and excused him self by his age, yet being of nature ambitious and desirous
of glory) did without resistance, take the honor upon him: minding,
rather to enter into the danger to come, then the peril present. Besides that,
he thought not good, to refuse it, seeing his age was come to that perfection,
but (if the case so required) to dye Emperor of Rome.

Wherefore, inco^tinently after this, al Affrique began to rebel, and many
Cytyes, pulled down the honors of Maximinus, and erected Images of Gordyanus.
And him they named of them selves, Affrican. For those which inhabit the
North Cost of Lybya, Libia. Affrikes
are called in the Romayne tongue Aphryques.

Then Gordianus having soiourned.v. days at Tysdrum, Tisdrum
in the which City, all these things were done, and possessynge the name,
and apparel of Emperor, removed unto Carthage, Carthage. The riches and
bygnesse of Carthage. Alexandrie.
that in the same City, being very great, and much frequented, all things
might be ordered, as in Rome. For Carthage, in haboundaunce of richesse,
resort of people, or greatness of compass, geuynge only pre-eminence to
Rome, does contend with Alexandrie in Egypt, for the second place. Thither
followed Gordyanus, all the pryncypall Pomp, with all the Souldyours in those
parties, and the City young men, of tall, and comely stature, like in
similytude unto them at Rome, which guard the Emperors person, with Laurel
rods in their hands, whereby the Princes are discerned from private
persons. There was fire also, according to the usage, carried before him, so
that Carthage, for a small space, did represente the form and Fortune of Rome.

From thence, Gordianus sent many letters, unto every Magystrate of Rome, and
to the noble men of the Senate, among whom there were very many his
friends and alyes.

He wrote besides, unto the whole Senate and people of Rome, sygnifiyng unto
them, the favor of the Affrycans toward him: and therwithall accusing the
crueltye of Maximinus, which he perceived to be detested of al men. Him self
used al gentleness, and affabilitye. For he punyshed with exyle, all untrue
Promoters, and Accusers, and unto them which were vnryghteously therefore
condemned, he gave free lybertye, to defend their own. Yea, he restored
those which tofore were banyshed, to their natyue Countries again, and
promised to give to the Soldiers, more rewards, and to dystribute among
the people more gifts, then any man before him had done. He brought to pass
also, that Vytalian, Vitalianus.
ye Lord great Master of Maximinus householde, a man outragiouse and cruel,
but most dear, and well-beloved of Maximinus, was slain within the City self
of Rome. For suspecting, that that man, in resysting of his enterpryses, would
with fear cause other also to turn from him, he sent the Lyuetenau^t of the
Province, a stout young man, strong of body, of flourysshynge age, and ready
to attempt any peril for his sake, with certain Capitaynes, and diverse
Soldiers in his company: unto whom he delivered letters sealed with two
Seals, by the which Themperours used to sygnifye their priuye Cou^selles, and
affairs. Those he commanded to enter into the City before day light, and
(whiles Vytalian were busyed in his accustomed affairs) to go unto him in to
the Chamber, where he was wont to inquire of the secret things, which
appertayned to the safeguard of his Prince: showing him, that they had secret
letters unto him from Maximinus, and would, all other set a part, commune
with him, of things belonging to the Princes person, in declaring unto him the
Emperors mind. And then, whiles he were occupied in the loking upon the
Seals, they should murder him, with their daggers, hid in their bosoms of
purpose. All which enterprise, was atchyued as he wyshed. For before the
dauning of the day (when as he accustomed to come furthe) they found
Vitalianus almost alone, with a few only standinge about him) because some
were not as yet come unto him, some other, after their salutacio^ done, were
departed before it was day light. Wherefore, finding him at leisure, and a few
standing before the Chamber door, after they had declared those things which
we before spoke of) they were easily let in, and having delivered their letters
whiles he diligently regarded the sygnettes thereof, The death of Vitalianus.
drew out their daggers, and slew him. And then departed out of the Chamber,
with their daggers naked in their hands, every man giving them place, and way
to pass. For they supposed, it had been done by Maxminus commandment, for
that he was wont often times so to do by them, whom a little before, he most
entierly loved. Then they going through the streate, which hight Sacia via,
showed furthe the Epistle of Gordian unto the people, and delivered letters
from him, unto the Counsulles the^ selves, and other Magistrates of Rome,
spreading by rumors abroad, that Maximyne was already slain.

The which thing being ones divulged, immediately all the people ran through the
streates, from one place, to an other, like men dystracte of their right
senses. For as the common people, The vnconsta^cy of the Romayne people.
are in every place, vnconstau^te, and prone to new chaunges, so are the
Roman people, chiefly, more wavering, and unsteadfast, then all other: being
knytte, of a great, and diverse, multitude of strangers.

Then were the Images of Maxymyne, with the rest of his honors, furthwith
pulled down. And the hatred against him, before, through fear hydden, they
did now, after a free liberty gotten, and no man prohibyting them, power, and
spytte out. The Senate also, being often assembled (albeyt they had no
certain report of Maximinus estate, yet coniecturing by the present fortune,
the rumor to be true) did abolyshe all his honors, and pronounced Gordianus,
and his Son, Emperors.

Gordianus and his Son pronounced Emperors.
Immediately after that done, all Promoters, either fled away, or else were
slain, by those, whom they had before offended. The Solliciters, besides of
Maximine, and such as sat in judgment, in the minystring of his Tirranny,
were by the common people, drawn through the streates, and thrown into the
common synkes of the City. In this uproar, there were many innocents slain.
For every leude person entered violentlye into the house of his creditor, or
aduersarye in the law, or of any other, whom upon never so light an occasion
he hated, and there dispoiled him of his goods, and murdered him. Thus under
color of lyberty, and pretense of peace, the very deades of Cyuil war were
committed, so that there was slain with the dinte of a clubbe, Sabinus the
Lyuetenaunte of the City, Sabinus slain.
which endeavored to appease this busye tumulte. Thiese things did the
people. After the Senators had ones entered into this peril, they did,
through fear of Maximine, sollycite in all they could, the Provinces to
rebellyone. Wherefore, there were Ambassadors chosen of the chiefest of the order
of Senators, and Knights, the which were sent unto the governors of the
Princes, with letters, wherein was at length, declared the mind of the Senate,
and people of Rome, which exhorted the said Rulers to have a specyal regard
to their native country, to defendethe Coorte of Rome, and persuade the
nations under them, to continewe in their allegiaunce, toward the Romayne
people, whose dominion over them, and ancient bond of amity with them, was
by their progenitors long agone, ordained. Many of those Governors, received
the Ambassadors very greatly, and enduced the people to reuolte: the which was
easily brought to pass, in so great hatred was Maximinus had with every man.
They therefore, having out of hand slain all such Magistrates among them,
as were of Maximines part) did all together turn unto the Romans. Yet were
there a few Rulers, which either flew the Ambassadors, yt came unto them, or
else sent them under sure custody unto Maximyne, who with most cruel
torments, did put them to death. This was the mind, this was the will, of
the City of Rome. The which hurley burley, being reported unto Maximinus,
although he were sorrowful wythall, yet did he said, that he utterly
contempned it, and the first, and second day, remained quiet, within his
own house, consultinge with his secret friends, about the same matter. And
although the hole army, and people of that Regyon knew, and understood, all
this business, and were prone also to reuolte, sturred with the boldenes, and
noueltye of so great enterpryses, yet did every man hold his peace, taking
upon him to be ignorant of the case so greatly was Maximinus, feared among
the^, that nothing was hidden from him. For he did not only herke unto every
man's words, but also, watch, and prye, upon the gesture of their faces, and
hands. The third day, he caused all the Soldiers, to assemble in a plain
before the City, and there him self sytting in a high throne, rehearsed out
of a book, an oration, his by friends composed, and penned before, thus.

The oracion of Maximinus.
I know verily, that I shall declare unto you, a thing strange, and incredible,
but (as I my self suppose) not worthy so much wonder, as laughter. They are
not the Germaynes, so often vanquysshed, that do move war against you, and
your valiau^tnes, neither the Sarmatyans, Sarmatians.
which daily treat with us for peace The Persya^s also, which ones wasted
Mesapotamia does now wax wise, in quietinge them selves, within their own
houses: Mesapotamye.
being taught, partly with your valiaunte prowes in warrefare, partly with
the enprises, which I have atchiued: wherewith, they became aquaynted, when I
had the governance of the Army, for their passage, over the Ryuers.

But (lest I should deteyne you with a thing more woorthye laughter,) the
Carthaginenses are become mad, and with an unfortunate old man, which doteth
through extremity of age (I doubt whether he were persuaded, or compelled
thereunto) they do, as it were, in a stage interlude, play, and take the
Principalytie upon them. For to what Army do they trust, when as Sergauntes,
and Catchepolles, do supplye the Proconsulles room among them? what
weapons will they bear, Proconsull.
seeing they have none but small spears, to hunte wild beasts withal? And in
stead of warlike exercises, they use dau^sing, and si^ging of Ballades, and
Carroles. Let not ye things which are reported to be done within the City of
Rome. Dismay you (...) that Vitalian is slain, by disceyte, how unstable the
minds of the Romans be, and how prompt their courage is, only to make
shoutes, it is manifest unto you. If these.ii. or.iii. armed men, they thruste
one another forward to the danger, in spurnynge one another: and fleinge
away, every man from his own danger, they neglecte the common peril.

If any man has reported unto you, the things done by the Senate, there is no
cause why you should marvel, that our contineneye scameth over hard, unto
them, and thereby that the agremente of Gordianus manners, with theyrs, and his
voluptuouse life, is by them preferred before us. For among them all,
valiantness, and grave deades, are counted austere, and tyrannous, and all
dissolute life, is esteemed gentle, and pleasant. They fear therefore our
governance, because it is moderate, and laborious, and they rejoice at the
name of Gordian, whose infamye of life is not unknown unto you. Wherefore,
against them, and such as they are, you have to war (O Souldyours) if a man
may, at the least wise, call it war. For my mind gives me, and so may
all other think, that before we approach near unto Italye, the greatest part
of them, will humblye meet us, with Laurel Bows in their hands, and
caryinge their Children with them, fall prostrate at our feet: or else,
being stryken with cowardlye fear, run away, leaving all their goods
behind them for me to take, and distribute among you, that you may enjoy
the same for ever.

When he had thus much spoken, and enterlaced his talk, with many skornefull
reproaches of the whole City, and Senate of Rome (threatenynge them, with the
gesture of his hands, and with terrible countenance, and menacynge them as
though they had been preset) he proclaimed his voyage toward Italy. And then
having given unto the Souldyours much monei, he soiourned there for one dai.
That passed, he entered into his journey, leadynge with him a meruaylous great
army, and all the Roman power. There followed him also a great number of
Germaynes, not to be neglected, whom he had either by force subdued, or else
associated in amity unto him. He carried besides diverse engens and Instruments
of war, with other things which he had prepared before against the
Barbarous nations. Now did he march slowelye because of the wagons, and other
necessaries for the war, which were carried in his company. For seeing that
journey happened sodeynlye unto him, the things expedient for the Souldyours
were not gathered by any man's provision, as it was tofore accustomed, but they
were then hastelye as it came to hand, taken and carried. Wherefore he
determined to send before, the Pannonian bands, in whom he had great
confidence, which also first saluted him for Emperor, and willyngly
attempted all perils for his saufegarde. Theyse he commanded to set
forward, before the rest of the host, and to enter into Italye.

But whiles Maximinus was thus in his journey, his affairs had better success
in Carthage, then he looked for. For there was a certain man named Capellianus,
Capellianus Mauritania. Numidia.
of the order of the Senators, Liuetenau^te of Mauritania, which is subject to
the Romans, and of the^ named Numidia. This nacio^ was fortified with strong
armies of men, which defended it, from the invasions of ye Barbariens their
neighbors, whereby he had about his person, no small band of men at arms.
Between this Capellianus, and Gordyan, there was much discencion, about a
certain controversy in the law. Wherefore, after Gordian had obtained the
name of Emperor, he sent one to succeade Capellianus in his office, and
commanded him to depart from the rule of the Province. But he disdaynyng
thereat, and being true to his Prince (of whom he had received that dignity)
gathered all the power he had together. And after he had exhorted them, to
continewe their truth, and oath of allegiaunce, he removed toward Carthage,
leadynge with him a wonderful great and strong Army, in the which there
were very many men, not only of floryshynge age, but also instructed in
the handelynge of all kinds of weapons, and expert in warrefare, and (through
usage of skyrmyshes with the Barbaryens their neighbors) very prompte,
quycke, and ready to battle, at all times.

When it was declared unto Gordyan, that Capellianus was coming toward
Carthage, both him self, was stryken with a sodeyne trembling fear, and all
the Carthagynensses greatly dismayed, who in a dysordered heap without any
warelyke order (yet having hope of victory) thruste themselves forwards out
of the City, to meet with Capellianus.

The old man Gordian (as some report) as soon as Capellianus approached to the
City, despayring of al good hope, because he perceived Maximine to have a
great power of men then in Africa remaining, hanged him self. But the
Commynaltye, keeping secret his death, did chose his son for their Captain.
Gordianus hanged him self.
So it came to hand stryppes. The Carthagynenses were many more in number, but
yet out of order, and unskillful in the wars, and being effeminated with
bankettes of voluptuousnes, wanted weapons, and all other warrelyke
instruments.

For no man brought out of his house, any other weapon, then either a Dagger, a
Hatchet, or a Hunting staff, or else a Spear hardened in ye fire, as they
could get for ye defense of their bodies. On the contrary part, were Numidians,
notable Slingers, and very connyng horsemen, so that without Bridle, they could
rule their horses with a Rod. Wherefore ye Carthaginenses were easily repulsed,
and constrained to fly. For being unable, to abide the brunt of their enemies,
they threw away their harness, and weapons, The Cattheginenses ouercomen.
and turned their backs altogether in a rude plu^pe, and thrusting through
and treadyng one upon another, there did a greater number peryshe among
them selves, then was slain by their enemies.

And in this thronge, was Gordianus Son slain, and as many as followed him.
Gordianus Son slain in ye thro^ge.
So that for the multitude of those that were dead, they could not discern
the bodies that should be enterred. Neither could the body of the young
Gordian be found. For of so great a number, which fled, there entered but
very few into the City again, who saved themselves, by lurkyng, in dark,
and unknown corners. The rest, remaining in heaps at the gate, and
pressynge forwards, every man to get in first, were by the Numidian
Slyngers, and other armed Souldyours, slain. Which caused a meruailouse
lamentacion, and houlynge of women, and Children, for that they saw before
their own faces, their dearest friends, slain.

There be which report, that as soon as Gordianus (who for his age abode
within his own house) heard that Capellianus was entered into the City,
dispairyng of his safegarde, went into his chamber, as though he would
sleep, and with his Gyrdle which he had about him, hanged him self.

This was the eande of Gordianus, who was fortunate in the former part of his
life, and now ^anded the same, in a symilytude of the Imperyal dygnitye.

Then Capellianus entered into Carthage, and there put unto death, every one of
the noble men, which remained out of the furye of the Battayl. Neither did he
abstain, from the spoylynge of the Temples, and ransackynge all Publyke, and
private Treasures, And going unto other Cities, which had abolyshed the
honors of Maximinus, the chiefest therein he put to death, and the rest he
afflycted with torments: permyttyng the Souldyours, to burn, and rob, the
Vyllages, and Fyeldes therabout, under a pretense of reuengynge Maximinus: but
yet priuelye allurynge the Souldyous hearts unto him self, to the eande, that
if Maximinus sped not well, him self might have the Souldyours good wylles, for
the obtaynynge of the Empire. Such was the estate of the affairs in Africa.
But after yt the death of Gordian was heard of in Rome, a meruaylouse terror
enuaded the Senate, and people of Rome, for that he was lost, in who^, all
their hope, was sytuate. For they knew now perfectly, yt Maximinus would spare
no man being partly of his own mind alyenated from them, and then with an
enemies stomach, and manifest hatred, for just causes, detesting them.
Wherefore, they assembled ofte^tymes togithers, consulting what they might do,
and finally (seeing they had entered into one peril) determined to prepare for
war, and elected two Emperors, which should with equal aucthorite,
govern the common wealth, lest that the Principal dominion, should return
unto Tyranny.

They assembled therefore, I say, not in the Coorte as they were wont before,
but in the Temple of Jupiter Capitolyne, the which being builded in the
highest place of the City, the Romans have in most estimacion. There, the
doors being shute, they sat alone, and having, as it were, God to their
witness of their Counsel, and the beholder of all yt they intended, they
chose forth such as excelled the rest in age, and dignity, to give their
voices of election unto. Out of the which hole number, there were two, named
Maximus, Maximus and Albinus created Emperors.
and Albinus, through the most voices, created Emperors. Of thiese two
Maximus had often been general Captain in the wars, and also ordered
him, self very politiquely, in the governance of the City, whereby he caused
the people to have a very good opinion of his wit, providence, and contine^t
life. And Albinus, being a noble man borne, twice Consul, and having ruled
many provinces, without strife or complaynte, was reputed the meker. Thus were
they made Emperors, by the decree of the Senate, and endewed with all
Thimperyall honors. But whiles these things were in doing in the Capitolle,
the Romain people (uncertain it is, whether through the soliciting of
Gordianus fre^des, or else stirred thereunto, by some perverse rumors) came with
force unto the gates, and filled with multitude of people, ye way which goes
into the Capitol. And there having Clubbes, and Stones in their hands, labored
to interrupte the things that were concluded in the Capytoll, refusing
chiefly Maximus: alleging that he was more severe, then the simple Commons
could well bear wtall. Wherefore, they were most of all offended with him:
cryenge, and threatninge, that they would ^^ea them both, for his sake. For
they required a Prince of Gordianus kynred, that in that famyle, and name,
Thimperiall Dominion might continue. Then Albinus, and Maximus, being guarded
with all the youth of the order of knighthode, and the men of Arms of the
City, wearing swords, attempted to go forth of the Capitole. But they were
driven back, with Clubbes, and Stones, until that through the inue^tione of some
one man, they beguyled the people after this sort.

Gordianus an Infant.
There was a little infa^t, ye Son of Gordianus daughter, which was named after
his Grandefathers name. The same, they commanded certain, whom they sent
forth, to fetch unto them, who findinge him playeng at home, did put him upon
their shoulders, and carried him thrughe the mids of the people, declaringe
that he was Cordianus neuewe, and calling him by name, until they had brought
him into Capitol, the people making joyful acclamacions, and strowing bows
before him. And after that the Senate had pronounced him Emperor, seeing he
could not govern Thempyre, because of his tender infancy, the ire of the
people was assuaged, and they suffered the old Emperors to enter in to
Thimperyall Pallayce. But there happened at that time, a pestyferouse Calamitye
unto the City of Rome, through the rash boldenes of two Senators. For when
as the Senate was assembled, about certain Public affairs, two of Maximinus
Soldiers, which were departed from the Camp, both of mydle age came unto the
Coorte gate, to harken, and spy, what was done, or determined, being without
weapons. And saving only their Iackes, and their Clokes thervpo^, they stods
together, among the rest of the people. But whiles all other stood at the
door, two or three at the most being more desirouse to hear what was said,
then the rest, entered into the Coorte, and passed a little further, then the
Aultare of Victoria. Therwithall, a Senator, which a little before had been
Counsull, named Gallicanus, a Carthaginese borne, Gallicacanus. Mecenas
and an other which had been Praetor, named Mecenas, sodeinly (when they looked
for no such chaun^e, and had their hands still under their Clokes) with their
daggers stabbed the Soldiers to ye hearts. For all the Senate, because of the
late sedicion, Soldiers slain in the Temple.
did wear their weapons, some openly, some pryuely, to defend their bodies
wtall, from the treachery of their enemies. The Soldiers being thus murdered
(when they were not able, so sodeinlye, to defend them selves) lay prostrat
before the Aultare. With which sight, the other being dismayed, through the
murder of their Companio^s, and fearing the flockynge together of the people,
because them selves were without weapons, furthwyth they fled a way.

Then Gallycanus lepte hastily out of the Coorte into the mids of the
people, The Audacitee of Gallicanus.
and there showing his sword, and his hand, stylling with blood, exhorted
them, to pursue, and slay the enemies of the Roman people, and Senate, and
the friends, and Companyons of Maximinus. Wherwt all the people being provoked,
received Gallycan with joyful shoutes, and pursued the Soldiers with stones,
as far as they well might. And the Soldiers, having gotten into their Camp,
a few of the^ being wounded, and hurt, their harnessed them selves, and
defended their Trenche. But Galicanus (seeing he had already set upon such a
myschiefe) raised up a ciuyle, and very perniciouse battle. For after he
had commanded all the Armoryes to be broken up (in the which were kept
weapons, rather of pomp, then of war) wherewyth every man might arm him
self, accordynglye) And having opened the Swordeplayars Halles, caused every
man to arm himself with his own harness. And taking out of the houses, and
shoppes in the City, what so ever weapon was within them, either sword,
spear, dagger, or are, when as furye and anger had made all thing yt came to
hand a weapon, furthwith they went in plumpes, without order, unto the Camp,
and, as if they should assault a City, they besieged the walls, and gates of
the Camp. But the Souldious within, being expert in fyghting, defended them
selves with the battailementes of their walls, and their Targettes, repusyng
the common people, with often shot of arrows, and their long spears.
Finally, when ye people determined to return in to the City, because they
were weried, and the most part of the Sword plaiers sore wounded, being
very near night, the Soldiers, perceiving the rechelesse regard of the
people in departinge (for the Romans thought not, that the Soldiers durst
fight with them, hand to hand, or being so few in number, to enter out of
their fortress, to fight with so great a multitude) sodeinly settinge open
their gates, made a strong, and forcible inuasio^ against that dysordered
heap of people. In that conflicte were all the Sword players slain, and a
great number of the people, thruste to death in the press. Which ones eanded,
the Soldiers returned to their Camp, because it was not far of. Hereupon,
there rose more vehement indignacion among the Senators, and people of Rome.
Wherefore they chose for their Capitaynes, every noble, and valiant man,
throughout all Italye, and leuienge all the youth together, armed them with
such weapons, as in that sodeine tumult, they could get. The chiefest, and
strongest part did Maximus, lead to fight against Maximinus, the rest
remained for the custody, and defense, of the City. In the mean while, there
were daily skyrmysshes, and assaults, at the walls of the fortress, but to
no purpose, nor proffyte, the Souldyours, defending them selves from above, and
driving away shamefullye, the common people, which they struck, and wounded.

Albinus, which remained at home, required the people by Proclamation, to take
truce, and become friends, with the Souldyours, unto whom he promised also
perdone of all they had committed. But he could induce neither party
thereunto. The mischief increasing daily, more and more. For the people
disdayned, that so great a multitude, should be had in contempt of so small a
number. On the other side, the Souldyours grievously grudged, that they should
suffer that of the Romans, which they never looked for of the Barbarous
nations.

Finallye, when the assaults proceaded not, as the people would have it, it
seamed good to their Captains, to turn away, all the Rivers, and waters, which
came by Cundittes into the Camps, that the Souldyours might be afflicted with
want of water, and with thyrste. Wherefore, in making of Trenches and
cuttynge the Cundyt Pypes, they turned away all the streams of water from the
Fortress.

But the Souldyours, perceiving the peril imminent, and stryken with
desperation, opened their gates, and runnyng upon the multitude, which ran
away, pursued them unto the very Gates of the City.

Then the Common people, being Inferior, and not able to sustain this cruel
conflict, gat them into their houses, and from thence, vexed the Souldyours,
who durst not enter into the houses to them unknown. Wherefore, they seeing
the houses, and shoppes shut, cast fire to the doors and porches, which
stood out toward the streate, whereof there are very many in Rome. Whereby
it came to pass, The City of Rome set on fire.
that partlye through the far distaunce of the houses, and partlye through
the timber building, a great part of the City was burned, and many men of
rich substance, sodeynlye became poor: having lost notable possessions,
either welthye, through the revenues thereof, or else of great estimation
through the beauty of the same. Neither was there a small number of men
destroyed. For that their portalles and doors being on fire, they had no way
to escape furthe of the houses. The substance, and goods, of rich men, was
ransacked, the Souldyours geuynge their whole minds to spoil, and robberye,
and neadye Beggars of the City, mynglynge them selves among them.

But the rage of the fire so wandered, that it burned and consumed more houses,
then some great City has in compass of building. During the time that
this calamity was done at Rome, Maximinus, making haste in his iourneye, was
come unto the borders of Italye. And having sacryfyced upon the Aultars,
which were there erected, he continued on his voyage, commaundynge the
Souldyours to keep on their Harness, and march in order of Battle. But
seeing we have made mention already, of the reuolte of Affrike, the Ciuyll
war at Rome, and the acts by Maximinus, with his journey hythereunto, we
will declare the rest hereafter.

The eande of the seventh Book.
The Argument of the eyghte Book of Herodian.
IN the beginnynge of the eight, and last book, is showed, how, and in what
order, Maximinus came unto the Confynes, and bounds of Italye, by the Alps,
as far as the City of Aquileia, where he found resistance. After that is
described the situation of that City, the preparation for the war, the
assaults made by Maximinus army, and the stout resystence of the Aquileyens.
Consequentlye, how Maximinus was slain, and what joy was made therefore. And
how Albinus (which the aucthour in the former book called Balbinus) and
Maximus, after they had a little space, reigned in great tra^quilitie, were
slain by the men at arms. After whom, Gordianus being.xiiii. years of age,
enjoyed the Empire alone.

The eyghte book of the Historye of Herodian.
WE have in the last book recyted, what Maximinus did, after the death of
Gordia^, his iornay into Italy, with the sedicion, and reuolte, of the people,
and Soldiers, within the City self of Rome. When Maximinus was arrived in
the confynes of Italye, he sent certain Scowrers before, to espy, wether
there were any stale, or enbushmentes, lying in the bottom of the Alps, Alps
and the thick woods there: And led the Army, into the plain, commaundynge
the men of Arms, to march forward, in a square order, to the end that a great
part of the fyeldes, might be covered with them. And having brought all
impedimentes, and Carriage, into the mids, him self followed, with the Yeome^
of his Guard, to rescue them, if they were distressed. On either side, the
wings were of me^ of Arms, on Barbed Horses, with Mauritanian, Slyngers,
Archers of the oriental Regio^s, and horsemen of Germanye, whom he had waged,
for thencrease of his aid. And he was accustomed, to set them in the fore
front of the battle, against his enemies, because their should sustain,
and receive the first brunte, being boulde, and strong me^. And (if need so
required, he had rather, those Barbarous, and rude people, were lost, than any
other of his own Soldiers.

After they had passed the plains, observing their due order in marchinge,
they came to a city of Italye, named of the enhabitauntes Eumona. Eumona.
The same is sytuate in a low plain, at the foot of the Alps.

There, the Scourers reported unto Maximinus, that the Town was void, and
forsaken of thenhabitauntes, who were all sledde, the gates of the Temples, and
the houses, consumed with fire, and all thing, which was in the Town, or
field, carried away, or burnte, no food remayninge, either for man, or beast.

Wherewith Maximinus was very glad: for he thought, that other people, would do
semblably, through fear of him. But contrarywyse, the Soldiers murmured, and
grudged, that they should in the very beginning, be vexed with famine. And when
they had passed over the night, some of them, in the open, and common houses,
other some, in the plain fyelde, immediately after the Son rising, they came
unto the Alps.

The gretenes of the Alps
Thiese be wonderful long Hills, compassynge Italy, in manner of a wall, and
so high, that they seame to pearce the clouds, so long also, that they enuiro^
all Italye, touching, on the left hand, the Tirrhenian, and on the right
side, The Tyrrhenia^ and The Ionia^ Seas
the Ionian Seas: being full of broad, and thick forestes, with very narowe
paths, and uneath passable, by reason of the height of the broken Rocks, and
stepenes of the high banckes: having notwithstanding many narowe passages,
made with labor of hand, by the auncience Italions. Wherefore, a marvelous
fear entered into the Souldyours hearts, to pass that way: dreading, yt the
hill top: was already taken by their enemies, and all the straites stopped,
to forbid them passage. Neither did their fear seame fond, to them that
beheld the nature of the place.

After they had passed the Alps, and were descended into their Camp, they
began to rejoice, and ba^quet, together. And Maximinus then conceived a sure
trust, that all his affairs, shall have prosperous success: seeing that the
Italians, trusted not unto the difficulty of the places, wherein, them selves
were wont to lurk, and provide for their safety, and where, they might lie in
wait for their enemies, and fighting from above, easily distress the^. When
they were entered into ye plain, Aquileia
ye Scourers brought word, ye Aquileia the greatest City of Italye, had shut
their gates, and that the Pannonia^ ba^des, which went before, had very
fiercely assailed the walls, yet not withstandyng, their often attempes were
all in vain. Wherefore, being weried, they were constrained to depart, a
great number, of Stones, Spears, and Arowes, having hurt them, from the top
of the walls. Then Maximinus, being very angry with the Pannonians, as though
they had not fought valeantlye enough, made haste thitherwardes: trustinge,
with out any more labor, to win the City.

But Aquileya, as it is a mighty Town, The scituacio^ of Aquileia
was abu^da^tely enhabited of people. And as it were the Mart Town of Italy,
and the territory of Illiria, it did from the main land, ministre, to those
that sailed in the Seas, plenty of all such necessaries, as was brought
thither by the Ryuers, and the land: And from the Sea, unto the main land,
things very necessary for the higher Countries, which through the bytternes
of winter, were nothing fertyll. But chyefely it mynistred wynes, wherewyth
that Regyon abounded, unto the nighe Countries, that had no vine trees at
all. The which caused, that besides the great number of Cytezins, there
repaired unto that City, very many Strangers, and Merchants also. And
Certes, the multitude was at this time much more augmented, by the assembly of
Country people, who having forsaken their own small Droupes, and Vylages,
did trust them selves, unto the greatenes of this City. The old wall,
whereof, was a great part fallen down. For, whiles the Romans floryshed in
Dominion, the Cytyes of Italye, neaded neither wall, nor weapon, living in
quiet tranquilytie, and being assocyated in the Rule of Thempyre with them.
But now, necessitye compellynge them, The preparacion of the Aquilyens for the
defense of their City.
they builded up their walls again, with Towers, Bulwerckes, and Ra^piers:
and having fortyfyed their City within forth, and shut their Gates, stood
all together, both day, and night upon the walls, valeauntely dryuynge
back their enemies.

Their Capitaynes of chiefest power, were two me^ which had been Consulles,
chosen by the Senate, named Crispinus, and Menephilus. Thiese procured with much
diligence, Crispinus Menephilus
all things necessary, to be brought before hand into the City, to the end
their might the longer time sustain the siege. There was in ye Town great
abundaunce of water, through the great number of wells, the River which ran
a long by the walls, and the dyches, between them, and their enemies.

Thiese things being thus ordered within the City, when Maximinus heard, that
they defended their walls stoutly, and had shut their gates against him, he
resolved to send, under color of Ambassade, some which should speak unto
them, and (if it were possible) persuade them, to open the gates of the City
unto him.

He had then in his Army, a certain Magistrate of Aquileia, whose wife,
children, and household, were enclosed within the City. This man therefore,
with a certain Capitaines, he sent as orators unto them: trusting, that the
Citezyns would easily obey his authority. When they approached nighe the
walls, they spoke unto the people on this wise, and said. That their Commune
Emperor commanded them, layenge al arms a part, to observe peace, to receive
him as their friend, and not as their enemy, and to occupye them selves in
prayers, and sacrificeng to their Gods, rather then in desire to murder. To
take compassion of their native Country, shortly (if they persisted in their
obstinacy) like to come to utter ruin, and decay. That they might, if they
would, with on deed, save them selves, and their Country. For they said, that
their good Emperor, would forget, and forgive, all offenses, there before
committed, seeing that it was not their transgression, but the perverse fault
of other men. Such words did the Ambassadors speak under the wall, with so
loud voice, that they might easily be hard, although, not of all the people,
yet of as many, as stood upon the walls, and Towers.

For they did with silence, (...) atte^tiuelye give ear unto that the
Ambassadors spoke. But Crispinus, fearyng, lest through those allurementes,
they would be persuaded, to take peace for war, and open their gates unto
their enemies (as the common people are ever wauerynge and vnconstaunte) ran
from one wall to another, earnestly desiring, and instauntlye besechynge them
to persevere valyauntlye, and resist manfully, and not to violate their faith,
and allegyaunce, toward the Senate, and the people of Rome, nor yet neglecte
the Title, and Fame of Italy, so long time preserved from the invasions of
forreyne enemies, nor give credit, unto a false, perjured, and traiterous
Tyraunte, nor being allured with gentle feigned talk, run headlonge unto
their own manifest destruction. But trust to the fortune of ye war, which
most commonly is so uncertain, that sometimes a great huge host, are of a
small number discomfited: and those, which seame the mightier, are by them
which are compted the weaker, diverse times vanquished. Neither that they
should fear the greatness of his army. For (quod he) they that fight in
another man's quarrel, when they see, that the good hap of the victory
shall depart to another, do but fayntlye endure the Battle: perceiving
them selves only to be pertakers of the peril, and the very profyt of the
victory, to remain unto another man. But they which fight for their
country, besides that they ought to be of better hope (for they contend to
take nothing of others, but to defend their own) are also of a greater
stomach, as those whom no desire of dominion, but every man's own
necessity, compels to fight, because the commodytye of the Victory, is
chyefelye due unto them.

Crispinus speaking those words, now unto every man perticulerlye, and then
to all generallye, being a man of his own disposition honorable, and
floryshynge in the Romayne eloquence, besides that, grateful to every man,
for his meke governance, did easly stablishe the hearts of ye people to
continue in their duty and allegiaunce. Wherefore he commanded the Ambassadors
to depart to Maximinus again, without any thing concluded. It was reported,
that Crispinus was hartened to abide the fortune of ye battle, by the answer
of the Southsayers, Southsayers.
which reported, that the inwards of the beasts, betokened luckye success of
his affairs. And in dead, the Italians used to give much credit to ye
superstition. There were spread abroad besides the Oracles of a certain Idol in
that country, which promised victory. The enhabitauntes there call the same
Idol Beles, Beles.
and do with great reverence worship it, interpretyng him to be Apollo. Whose
Image, certain of Maximinus own Soldiers, affyrmed that they saw in the
air fightyng for the City. Which thing, whether many believed it for a truth,
or whether the Fable pleased the^, to mittigate thereby the infamy of so great
an army (because they were unequal in battle, to so small a number of
Cytezyns, not exercised in the wars (that it might seame they were overcome
rather by ye Gods then men) I am not very certain. But the strau^genes of the
matter, made it seame more credible.

After the Amdassadours were returned without any resolute conclusion, Maximinus
being styrred with much more fury, made greater have then he did before. But when
he came unto the River, which runs xii. miles of from the City, he found
it of a very deep and bread Channel. For in that season of the year, the
Snow (which the long winter before, caused to endure) being molten upon the
next hills, had made so great a floude, that the Army could not pass over
it, by any means. For the Aquileians had broken, and carried away the Bridge,
which was a goodly and sumptuous peace of work, builded by the ancient
Emperors, of square stone, with many small pillars standing one by another
upon the same. Wwherfore when tharmie could pass over, neither by Bridge, nor
vessel (for there was none nigh hand) he stood still in a dumpe, musyng what to
do. But certain Germaynes, being ignorant, with what swyftnes, and violence,
the Ryuers of Italye did run, and supposing that their course was gentle, and
flow over the fields, as the Rivers in their Country (which for that they have
no swift stream, are easlye congeled over with Ise) adventured them selves,
and their horses that were perfect in swimming, into the mids of the
Cha^nell: where, through vyolence of the Stream, they were drowned. After
Maximinus had lain still in Camp, ii. or.iii. days, he cast a deep trenche
about the same, that no enemies should suddenly set upon them, and remained
upon that side of the River, consulting how he might make a Bridge to pass
over. Whiles he so abode very pensife, because there was no timber, nor Boats
with the which joined together, he might make a Bridge, certain Carpenters
declared unto him, that in the Vyllages round about, forsaken of the
Inhabitauntes, there were many round Tubbes and Hoggesheades, wherein the people
were wont to carry wine: the which being round like ships, if they were
bound togethers, in manner of small Boats, would easly carye them over. For
being fastened togethers, covered with Oziars, or Twigges, and well balessed
with earth, they would never be drowned. When yt was finished, ye soldiers
easlye passed over to the other shore. And there, having burned al ye vyllages
which they found abandoned of thin habitau^tes, did cut down all ye vines, and
trees, whereby they greatly defaced ye beauty of ye region. For all the country
seamed to be compassed about, in manner of a Theater, with trees set in due
order, and vynes joined together, lyfted up in height like unto a Scaffold. Al
which being plucked by ye roots, tharmie approached nigh unto ye city.
Nevertheless because they were all weary, The Emperor would not yt they should
furthwt begin ye assault. But having enca^ped, more then an arrows shoot from
the City, divided the^ into hundreds, appointed the order of their marching
like unto a wedge, small before, and broad behind, and limitting to every
Company, a part of the wall, to scale, and batter, he gave them license to
recreate them selves, for one day.

That passed, he began to give the assault, and having moved to the wall, all
sorts of engyns, when no kind of Battery was omitted, there was almost every
day cruel skyrmyshes fought. For the Souldyours environed the walls, as it
were with a toil, or net, and fought with much stoutnes of stomach. And on
the contrary part, the Aquileiens resysted very valiauntlye: who having
shut the doors of their temples, and houses, did all together, with their
wives, and Children, upon the walls, Towers, and Batylmentes, defend their
City. Neither was there any age, which refused to fight for their Country.
Maximinus then pulled down all the Suburbs, and whatsoever building was
without the City, with the timber whereof, he made all kind of engyns, and
instruments, wherewith he might batter the walls, or at least wise, some part
thereof, whereby the army might enter into ye City, and in spoylyng, sackyng,
and defacynge, the same, leave it desolate, and void of habitation. For he
thought it yt would be against his honor, to go unto Rome, before he had
destroyed the City, which first resisted him in Italy.

Wherefore, he rode with his Son, whom he had joined unto him in the Empire,
among the Souldyours, promysyng them many good morowes, and exhorting them,
to stand like men to their tacklynge.

But the Cytezyns of Aquileia, threw down great stones upon them. And having
filled very many Ladels with Brimstone, A sore repulse.
Lyme, and Pitche, as soon as the Souldyours began to scale the walls, they
powered down ye same so save, that it seamed violent showers. When ye Pitche
and baggage, fell upon ye naked parts of ye soldiers bodies, they threw from
the^ their briga^ders, and the rest of their harness, ye iron wexing very
hoate, and their timber engyns being set on fire. Then a man might see the
Soldiers, throw away their own harness. Which thing, having a color, that
they were dispoyled by the vanquisshers) was invented, rather by subtlitie of
art, then force of battle. Whereby it happened, that many of the Soldiers,
either lost their syghte, or else had their faces, and other bare parts of
their bodies, burned. The Aquileye^s threw down also, into their Towers, and
engines of wood, many torche straues, covered with Rosen, and pitch, whose
ends, were sharpened, with heads, like unto arowes: which being kindeled,
and sticked fast into the Timber work, did easily set all on fire. That
notwithstanding, the first days, the fortune was equal on either side. But
anon after, the courage of Maximinus army did aswage, and because their hope
was frustrate, and had deceived the^, they wexed every day more pesife then
other. For those, who they before supposed, would not abyd the brunt first of
their force, they now perceived, not only, not to shrincke, but also, to
resyste valeau^tely. Contrariwyse, the stomachs of the Aquilenses, were
daily, more, and more enhaunsed. And having, through use, obtained, both
thexperte feate of fyghtinge, and therwithall manfull courage, they so despised
the Soldiers, that they mocked them, with iestyng at Maximinus, when he came
nighe unto the walls, and blustering out, many opprobrious tau^tes against
him, and his Sone. Wherewith he being chaufed, when he could not avenge him
self upon his enemies, he put to cruel death, many of his own Capitaines:
alleging, yt they had nor like valeaunte men, and true subjects, done their
full endeavor, in the assaultinge of the City. Whereby it came to pass, that
the Soldiers be came more angry toward him: And his enemies, had him in
more contempt, and derision. It chaunsed besides, that the Aquileyens abou^ded
with plenty of vitayle, and all other necessaries. For what so ever was
expedient, to the sustenaunce of men, and horses, the same was before hand
brought into the City. On the other side, the army languished with penury of
food. And after all the trees were cut down, and the fields wasted, some of
the Soldiers lay in Cabbans, such as they could for haste make, and other some
in the open fields, subject to the heat of the Son, and the weatenes of the
Rain. Neither was there any kind of noryshmente, brought unto them, for
them selves, or their cattle. For all the ways, and passages, were by the
diligence of the Romans, shut up with great walls, and Gates. The Senate
also, had sent certain Senators, with a company of armed persons, chosen
out of all Italye, to defend the Shores, and Havens, giving no man license to
sail. So that all things done at Rome, were kept close, from the ears of
Maximine. All the high ways besides, and Bypathes, were diligently watched,
that no man should pass by them. So it came to pass, that the Army, which
besyeged the Town, was it self also enclosed round about. For they could
neither take Aquileia, nor pass forward toward Rome, through want of
ships, and wagons, which were all before hand taken up by the Romans. The
rumor also thrughe suspicion augmented, that all the Romayne people, were
already in Arms, and that Italy, with all the Illyrian, and Barbarous nations,
which enhabyte the East, and Southe Contreys, had with one consent,
conspyred, to join together, against Maximinus, for the despyte, and grudge,
they bare unto him. Wherefore, the Soldiers fell into despair of good hope,
being afflicted, with scarcetye of all things, and having no water, but such,
as they drew out of ye River, which was defiled with blood, and dead
Carcases. For the Aquileyens, threw into the River, such dead bodies, as they
could not bury. And those which perished with sword, or sickness, in the
Camp, were thrown into the River likewise. Among whom, there were many,
which died by famine, having when they were drowned, some breath remaining.

Whiles the Army aboade thus sorrowful, void of all succoure, sodeinly, when
Maximinus rested in his Pauilion, one day vacant from battle, and all the
Soldiers, were gone to rest them selves, in their Cabans, and Tents, the
men at Arms, which had their Stacions, within the City of Rome, under the
Hill Alban, and therein, their wives, and children, co^sulted, and agreed, to
slay Maximyne: that they might be ones exempt, from that long, and
inexplicable syege of the City, and moving of war against Italy, for the
love of a Tiraunt, who was abhorred of all men.

Wherefore, taking courage unto them, about nonetyde, they went to his
Pauilion, the yeomen of his Guard, co^spiring together with them. And there,
after they had pulled down his Images, they slew him, and his Son, when
they came furthe, The death of Maximinus and his Son.
to speak unto the Soldiers: and with them, the lord great Master of his
house, and all his dearest fre^des. And then threw their bodies forth with
despite, leuyng them, to be devoured of Dogs, and Birds: se^ding only the
two Emperors heads unto Rome. This eande of life, had Maximinus, with his
Son, both receyuinge condign punyshmente, of their ill ordered governance. At
the first tidinges, of the two Princes death, the Army stood still, amassed, and
uncertain what they might do. For it was not equally acceptable unto them
all, especially not unto the Panonians, and Barbarous Thracians, who had
delivered the Empire, unto Maximinus. But when they perceived that the dead
could not be undone, they held them selves contented although unwillingly,
and feigned to rejoice with the rest. Then, layeng a side their weapons, they
went to the walls of Aquileye, like peaceable me^, and there declaring the
death of Maximyne, desired that the Gates might be set open unto them, being
now of their mortal enemies, become their loving friends. But the Capitaynes
of Aquileia, would not permyt it, but showed forth upon the walls, the Images
of Maximus, Albinus, and Gordian, Emperors, crowned with Garlandes of Laurel.
Unto the which Images, them selves first making joyful acclamacions, exorted
the Army also, to acknowledge, and reverence them, whom the Senate, and people
of Rome, had chosen to be Emperors.

For, said they, the other Gordians before passed, are among the Gods. They
did set forth also upon the walls, a market of all necessaries, with great
abundaunce of meat, wine, garments, and all other things, which that rich,
and flourishing City, could minister unto them. That thing, did meruelously
abashe the Soldiers: who perceived, that the Cytezins, had store enough of
vitayll, to abide a far longer seage. And on the other side, them selves,
being afflicted with want of food, should rather have all perysshed, than
conquered that City, abounding with all things expedient for man's relief.
Whiles the Soldiers thus aboade under the walls, and took such things, as
their necessity required, in company of the Citezins, their countenance was
of peace, and friendship, a form of siege, as yet remaining, for that the
Romayne Soldiers, lay about the walls which were enclosed, and shut. In
the mean while, that these things were in doing at Aquileya, ye horse men,
which carried the Emperors heads to Rome, making great haste, with spedy
diligence, were received into every City, and Town, with the gates open, and
the multitude of Citezins, and enhabitauntes, berynge Laurel in their hands.
And then having passed ye Marshes, and Lakes, which are between Altinum,
Altinum. Rauenna Maximus.
and Rauenna, they found Maximus in Rauenna, leuieng, and waging Soldiers
out of the City, and Italy, and calling a great number of Germains unto his
aid, the which were sent him, by the common people of Germany, who^ he before
in his Proconsulship among them, had prudentely governed.

Whiles he was thus mustering his power against Maximine, ye horsemen arrived
there sode^li, bringing with the^ ye Princes heads, and declared ye victory, with
the prosperouse success of their affairs, and ye good will, and co^set, of ye
people, and Army, to ye obedience of those Emperors, who^ ye Senate had elected.
When thiese things were so suddenly with out expectacio^ reported, furthwt, the
people ran unto the Aulters to sacrifice, every man singyng, and reioysynge at
the victory, which without any troublesome busynes, they had obtained.

Then Maximus after the sacryfyce eanded, dismissed, the horsemen to Rome, to
carry thither, the said heads, and declare the whole circumstau^ce, unto the
people. When they were arrived at the City, and having put the heads upon
two Spears, carried the same through ye streates, to be seane of the people,
no tongue can tell, the joy, and mirth was there that day. For there was no
person, either young, or old, but ran unto the Temples, and Aulters.

No man abode within his own house, but ran like mad men, shoutynge, and
reioysynge one with an other, and gatherynge them selves together, in a
circle, as though some manne would make an Oration unto them. Albinus him
self offered an hundredth beasts, and all the Magistrates, reioysed above
measure, as though they had escaped ye axe, which before henge over their
necks. Purseuau^tes, and Posts, were sent besides, with Laurel in their
hands, to bear those news unto all the Provinces.

While this so great joy, and myrthe, continued among the Romans, Maximus
removed from Rauenna, and went unto Aquileia: having passed all the Maryshes, in
the which the River Eridanus, and the nyghe Lakes, does ouerflowe, so that
they run into the Sea, by.vii. arms, and therefore, the nyghe enhabitauntes,
call the same Lake, in their tongue.vii. Seas. Furthwith the Aquileiens opened
their gates, and received Maximus. And very many Cytyes of Italye, sent
their chief Magistrates, as Ambassadors unto him, clothed in white garments,
and crowned with Laurel, bringinge with them, the Images of their Country
Gods, and Crowns of Gold, if there were any, among their chiefest Jewels:
where withal, they gratified Maximus, and strowed bows to him in his passage.
The army which had besieged Aquileia, met him also, in peaceable apparel,
with Laurel in their hands: but not with so true and loving affection, as
with a feigned good will, and reverence, for the time only, applied unto the
present state, of the Prince. Yea, many of them morned priuelye, that he whom
they had chosen was slain: and those which the Senate had created, possessed
the Principalytie.

After Maximus had spente the first, and second day, in offering of sacrifice,
the third day he assembled al ye army, together in the plain, and there
sitting in ye Tribunal seat, made this Oration unto them.

How profitable your penitence, and favor reconciled with the Romayne people,
has been unto you, your selves have by experience throughlye learned, in
acceptyng peace for war, and obseruyng the oath of true warriors, which is
one the most holy, and sacred, mystery of the Roman Empire. Wherefore, you
ought hereafter, to enjoy the same commodity, in gardyng your loyaltye, and
faith, toward the people, and Senate of Rome, and to us your Emperors,
who^, through our nobility, both of birth, and in acts done, as it were by
certain degrees ascended, the Senate, and people of Rome, have elected.
Neither is the possession of principality peculier unto one man, but of old
antiquity, common unto all the Romayn people. For in the City self, is
establyshed the Fortune of Thempyre, and to us with you, is committed the
administration of the same. If you will therefore, retain with you, that order,
and modestye, that becomes you, and give due honor, and reverence, unto your
Princes, ye shall not only obtain unto your selves a blessed life, flowyng,
and aboundyng with all goodness, but also all Nations, and Cytyes, living in
rest, will contynewe in their duetye of allegyaunce. Ye shall live, as your
own hearts desire: every man at home in his own house, not troubled with
wars in forreyne Countries (that being our charge, to see the Barbarous
people, remain in peace, and defend the same) For whiles there are two
Emperors, both the City, and forreyne affairs, shall be administered more
easlye: one of them being always ready, to go whyther necessitye shall call
him. Neither need ye to doubt, that any memory shall remain, of that is
tofore done, either in us (for whatsoever ye did, was by commandment) or in
the Romayne people, or else in any other Nation, which for injury done unto
them, have rebelled. Let all be forgotten, let there be a perfect bond of
constante frendshyppe, and a perpetual faith of love, and modesty.

After Maximus had spoken these words, and promised to distribute much money
among them, he soiourned a little while at Aquil^ia, and then determined to
return to Rome.

Wherefore, having dismis^ed the rest the Army into the Provinces, and their
own Stations, him self returned to Rome, wych the Yeomen of his Guard, (who
having the chyefest charge of the Emperors person, were chosen by Albynus)
and many Germaynes his friends, in whom he had most affyaunce, as in those,
whom before he was Emperor, he had governed. When he entered into the City,
Albinus met him, with young Gordian in his company. The Senate, and all the
people received them with Joyful Cries, and Shoutes, as if they triumphed.

But notwithstanding that the Empire were governed both openly and privily,
with much modest gravity, every man spoke well of it, and all the people were
glad with the Princes, for that they were noble men borne, and worthy
Thempyre, yet the spytful, and crabbed stomachs of the Pretorian Souldyours,
could not well abide, to hear those joyful praises of the people, but grudged,
and murmured against that nobilitye: being sore grieved, that the Princes were
created by the Senate. Their grudge was augmented, by reason of the Germaynes,
whom Maximus retained with him in the City.

For they thought, that the Germaynes would work them myschiefe, if they
attempted any great enterprise.

They feared also treason, lest perhaps they should be put out of service, for
their sakes: being mindful of Seuerus the Emperor, who discharged from their
lyuynges, all the Slears of Pertynax.

Wherefore, one day, when plays were celebrated in the Capitole, and men's
minds addicted unto revels, and pastyme, suddenly the Soldiers did
manifestly show furthe, their long dissimuled rancour. For being enflamed
with yr^, they ran all together, in a frantic mood, unto Themperyall
Palayce: requirynge the two old Emperors to death.

It happened then (as the Devil would have it) that them selves agreed not
very well togethers. But, as the desire to raygne, is insatiable, and the power
of governance indivisible) either of them, coueyted to be the chief Ruler.
For Albinus was stomacked thereunto, with the nobility of his birth, and his
twyse being Consul. And Maximus was encouraged, with his Governance of the
City, and because he was the more skylfull in all affairs. But in dead,
their both dignities of Senators, and their sufficient nobility of birth,
did prycke them both forwards, either to coueyte the sole Regiment, which
was the cause of their own destruction.

For when Maximus, hearing that the Pretorian Souldyours were comme to slay
him, determined to call for the aid of the Germayns, which were in the City,
and seamed able enough, to withstand the Pretorians, Albinus, suspecting some
deceyte to be forged against him (because he knew that the Germaynes favored
Maximus) prohybyted them to be sent for: deniynge, that they were called to
resyste the Pretorians, but only to the intent Maximus might obtain the rule
him self alone.

Whiles they thus contended within them selves, ^oo, sodeynlye with one
assente, the Souldyours were vyolentlye entered into the Palayce, having
beaten down the Porters. There took they both the old men, rent the
garments they had on (being in dead simple, for that they abode within the
doors) and drew them does naked, out of the Palayce, beatynge and skornynge
them, as Emperors chosen out of the order of Senators. And pulling them
by their Beardes, and eye lyddes, sparynge no part of their body, with all the
shame they could deuyse, they carried them through the mids of the City,
unto their Camp: determining, not to murdre them in the Palaice, but rather,
to torment them with a slow kind of death, that they might feale the more
pain.

But when they hard that the Germayns knew the matter, and were therefore
fallen to harness, and coming against them, furthwith, Maximus, and Albinus
slain
they put the two old men to death, after they had most vylaynouslye ordered
them. And having left their bodies, in the mids of the way, they lyfted up
young Gordianus in their Arms (when nothing else was nere hand) and
proclaimed him Emperor. Gordianus sole Emperor.
And then they called often unto the people, saying, that they had slain
with their own hands, those, whom the people rejected at the first: and
chosen Gordian, the nenewe of that Gordian, which the Romayne people, had
compelled to be Emperor.

This young Gordian therefore, they led into their Camp, shut their Gates,
and there abode in quiet. And the Germaynes, hearing that those were slain,
and thrown out, for whom them selves made that have, determined not to fight
for them, which were already dead, but returned to Innes again.

This unworthy, and vylaynouse end of life, had the two grave, and modeste,
old men: exalted to the Type, and Diadem, of the Empire, through the nobilytie
of their birth, and synguler deserts. After whom, Gordian being
almost.xiii. years old, and of all the people proclaimed Prince, took upon
him Thempyre.

The eande of the eyghte, and last Book of Herodian.
The Annotacions in form of a Table after the order of the Alphabete,
contaynynge the exposition of many words, Histories, Fables, sytuacions of
places, and description of Countries, serving to the more easy
understanding of the present Hystorye.
A.
AChilles, was one of the most valyau^t Capitaynes of the Greakes, against
Troy, Sone of Peleus King of Thrace, and Thetis the Daughter of Chiro^, by who^
he was enstructed, in the feats of Arms. He was slain by Paris, the Sone of
Priamus, and Hecuba, at Troy ye Great, in ye Temple of Apollo: into yt which,
he was come, during the truce between the Greeks, and Trojans, under
assurau^ce, to marye Polixena the Daughter of Priamus. In all parts of his
body, he was without danger of wounding, saving in the sole of ye foot. By yt
which, his mother Thetis held him, when she plonged him, for ye same purpose,
wtin Stix, one of thinfernal floodes. In ye same part of his foot, not
plo^ged, did Paris wound him, whereof he died. And was buried in a little hill
called Sigeu^, hard by Troy, where, during the siege, the Greeks, enca^ped. In
the war between the Greeks, and the Troyans, he slew Hector, and Troilus,
the Sons of Priamus, and Hecuba, and Brethren of the saeid Paris. He was in
heighte (as Licophron writes.) vii. cubits.

Adolescencie is the age between Childehood, and m^ns age: that is
between.xiiii. and.xxi. years. Seruius ye Gramarie^, and Varro, has divided
the Ages, in to Infa^cie, Boys age, Adolesce^cie, Youth, and old age, without
any mencio^ of the perfect age of ma^s estate. The which, after the same
division, is contained between youth, and old age. Infancy endures unto
vii. years. Boys age unto.xiiii. complete.

But Seruius Tullius, a King of the Romans, reckened all those which were
under the age of.xvii. years to be Boys, and after.xvii. years, until.xlvi.
to be young men, and them he called old men, which were above.xlvi. years of
age. Beyond that is the age decrepite, uncertain, and doubtful.

Aethiope: look on this word Libye.

Alexander the great, was the Sone of Philyp, king of Macedonye, and Olympias.
In his tender age, he was enstructed in learning. And after that, by ye space
of.x. years, brought up in Philosophy, under Aristotle, the most excellent
Philosopher of all his time. After the death of his Father, coveting to be Lord
of all the world, he apparayled his Army, against Darius the King of Persia:
who with his predecessors, had been the ancient enemies of Greece. Him did
Alexander vanquishe in sundry batayles, and depryued of the Persian Kingdom.
But after he had obtained many notable victories, in the.xxx. year of his age,
he dyed by poison, at Babylon, as Justin writes. Nevertheless, Plutarche
affirms the contrary, say enge that he died of an Ague, very vehement, wherein
was no suspicion of Poison. The Provinces, and Countries, by him Conquered,
did Perdicas, (unto whom at his death without any more words, he delivered
his Ring) distribute among many Governors: who altered their offices of
governance, in to Royaulnes, and made them selves Kings. And so was Thempyre
of Alexander brought into many Kyngedomes. The resydue of his life, ye may
read in Plutarche, and Quintus Curtius.

Alexandrye, whereof Herodian speaks in the third Book, is a City of
Siria, hard by a reflexio^ of the Sea, called Sinus Issicus, wherefore look
upon thiese words, Issicus Sinus. There is an other City called Alexandrye,
in the Region of Troas, where Troy the great stood, as Pliny writes, in
the.xxx. Chapter of his.v. Book.

Anonter City, named Alerandrie, is in Egypt, situate upon the Sea side,
oueraneanste the Isle Pharus, as says Pliny in the.xxxi. Chapter of the same
book. This City is the principal of all Egypt, as London is of England. Into
the which Ptolomeus the king of Egypt, desired to be remitted by the
Romans, as it appears by many Epistles, of Cicero, unto Lentulus, in the
first book of his familiar Epistles. Of this City, does Herodian make
mention in the.iiii. book of his Historye, and of the Treason wrought against
the Citezins thereof, by Antonyne. There is another City named Alexandrie, by
the mountains of Casxij, in the Realm of Sogdia, nygh unto the Bactrians,
which has on the South the mountaigne Cacausus. Another Alexa^drie, builded
likewise by Alexander the great, stands in the Region called Margiana, of a
Ryuers name, which is Margus. The same has on the West side Hircania, on the
East the Bactrians, and on the South, the Realms of Parthia, and Aria. This
City was destroyed by the Barbarous people, and in the same place was a new
builded, by Seleucus the Son of Antiochus, who named it Seleucia, as
records Pliny, in the xvi. Chapyter of his.vi. book. Another city called
Alexandrie, in the Countreye of Carmania in Inde, boundynge upon Persia. Of
these Cities and countries look Ptolomeus and Pliny.

Altinum look this word Aquileia.

Amphitheater, is a place made to behold plays in, the which is in form
round, as if it were builded of.ii. Theaters, and therefore is called
Amphitheater. A Theater is made half in compass, between the ij. corners
whereof, is played that which men behold, called of the Latinystes Scena. The
next place unto it, is called Orchestra, where the Senators and stau^ge
Ambassadors do sit. In the mids of the Theater, are the Seats for Knights,
and that place, is named Canea. Round about the Theater withinfurth are
degrees, and steps, so made, that the higher they ascend, the longer, and
larger they are. Upon the which ye people do sit, as every man can get him
place. Marcus Scaurus (as witnesses Pliny in the.xxxiii. book, the xv. chap.)
for one Play, which endured.xxx. days only, did build a Theater, the
greatest of all other, that were ever made by man's hands. The Scene whereof,
was of three stages, and had.iii.C.lx. Pyllers of marble of Affrique: of the
which, the higher were of one piece, and xxxviii. foot in height. The lower
part of ye Scene was of Marble, and the stage in the mids of Glass, which
never man heard of before. There was besides, for ye more gorgious beautyfyeng
of it.iii.M. Images of Copper, with so much richesse, Tapistrie of gold, and
Tables of ancient and notable pictures, yt it is almost incredible to believe,
as writes Pliny. The greeces whereon men sat in the same, did receive lxxx.M.
persons. Caius Julius Caesar, first of all, builded an Amphitheater, in the
fyelde called Campus Martius: which Augustus pulled down, and in the same
place, made a Tomb.

Antioche, is a part of Siria, boundynge upon the Royalme of Cilicia, as
says Pliny, in the xii. chap. of his fyfth book. In this part, is a City of
the same name, as writes Ptolomeus, in the fourth Table of Asya. This is the
City, to the which Antonyne went, and from thence, to Alexandrie in Egypt.
There is another Antyoche in the country of Assyrya, where Alexander vanquyshed
Darius: the which is next unto Syrya (as witnesses Plinye, in the.xiij.
chapyter of his.vi. book. Among the Isles of the Asyan Sea, Plynye in his.v.
book, the.xxi. Chapyter, says, there is one called Antyoche, which stands
in the Sea of Pamphilia.

Apoplexy, as says Galien in the.v. chapyter of his third book of the
places affected, is a disease, by the which, all a man's synewes, and veins, do
lose their force, of fealynge, and mouynge. This disease comes sodeynlye, and
by the same, a man shall uneaths fetch brethe.

Affryke. The Cosmographers do divide ye Earth into three parts. That is to
wete, Europe, Asie, and Affryke. Europe is separated from Asia, by the River
Tanais and the Lakes called Meotides, within yt which Tanais does fall. And
it is desseuered from Asie, by the Sea Mediterrane, so named, for that it is in
the mids of the earth, or else, because it is enclosed with earth on every
side, saving where he has his issue, between the pyllers of Hercules: whereof,
the one is in Mauritania, the other in Spain. Between the which, Hercules
made way, and passage for the Mediterrane Sea, to join with Thocean. And it
has none other issue, then between those two pyllers. It extends toward
the East, as far as Siria, which is in Asia. Toward the North, unto the
lakes Meotides. On the Southe part, it has always Aphrique, which is
sequestered from Asie, by an arm of ye Sea, called Sinus Arabicus. That is the Red Sea, whereby the children of Israel, passed out of Egypt, into the
Deserts of Arabie. Europe is much North, and so is it West in respect of
Asie. And it is the least of the three parts: containing the Isles of England,
and Scotland, and the next Isles thereunto, Spain, France, Almayne, Italye,
and Greece, with the Isles their neighbors.

Asie conteyneth Asie the less, Lydia, Caria, Bythynia, Galatia, Capadocia,
Armenia, Cilicia, Sarmatia, Assiria, Arabia, Persia, Hircania, Media, Judea,
the two Yndes, and all the other countries, which Ptolome describes in his
twelve Tables. Aphrique which is South, conteyneth, Mauritanya, Numidia, the
country of Carthage (which so long time, held war with the Romans)
Libia, Ethiope, and Egypt. The Sea, called the great Ocean, enuironeth all
these three parts round about.

Aquileia is a City situate in ye tenth part of Italye, after the division,
which Pliny makes thereof, in the xviij. Chapyter of the third book of his
natural Hystorye, saying thus.

Here follows tenth region of Italy, named Venise, adjacent unto the Sea
Hadriatyque. In this Region, there is a River called Silix, coming out of
the Taurisane mountaignes, a Town called Altinum, with a River called
Liquentia, descendyng out of the mountaygnes Opit^rgines, and a Haven of the
same name. A town called Co^cordia with a River, and a Haven named Romatinum.
The great and little Tillauentum. Anassum another town, whereby passes ye
River Varannus. And the Ryuers Alsa, Natison, and Turrus, do pass by Aquileia,
which City is distaunt from the Sea.xij. miles. For the rest, have recourse
to the Text.

Arabie. There are.iij. Arabies. The One called fertile, or happy. Another
called Rockye. And the third, named Desert. All three very nygh togethers, as
says Ptolomee. And they are in Asia, nygh unto the red Sea, through the
which the children of Israel departing out of Egypt passed, and immedyatlye
entered into the Dersertes of Arabie.

Armenie is a Realm of Asia. The less Armenie joins with Capadocia, on the
Weste part. And there is nothing between them, saving the mountaignes. On the
East part, it is joined with Armenie ye great: having no more, but the River
of Euphrates between them.

Toward the Southe, is the mountaygne Taurus: which makes separation of
Armenia and Cilicia. Toward the North, is the Sea Mediterrane, which in the
streyte there, is called Pontus Euxinus. The great Armeny is beyond Euphrates.
And has on the East part the Hircanian Sea, and the mountaygne called Caspius.
On the North above it, the Realms of Colchis, Iberie, and Albanie. And
toward ye South, Mesapotamia, as Ptolome has described it, in ye.iij. Table
of Asia.

Asia. Look on this word Aphrique.

Atreniens, are people of Arabie, as says Pliny in the.xxiiij. chap. of
the.vi. book of his natural historye.

B.
BIthinie is a Royalme of Asia, nigh unto Thrace between whom, and it, there is
nothing, but a streite goulfe of ye Sea. In this Royaulme, are many goodly
Cities, as Chalcedo^, Nicomedia, Apamea, Heraclea, Nicea, and other, as sayen
Plyen, and Ptolomee.

Bizantium, as it appears by the Text, in the beginning of Herodians third
Book, is a City of Thrace, of the which, the scituacion, and commodities,
are sufficiently described in the said Book It is the same, which we at this
day, call Co^sta^tinople.

C.
CCapitol is a Hill in Rome, yt which in old time was called ye Mou^te of
Tarpeyns, wherein when they dygged, to lay the fundacion of Jupiters Temple
(which was there builded four square on every side a hundredth foot in
heighte, in the time of Tarquinius the proud, last King of the Romans)
they found a man's head with the face hole vnperysshed. The Latius call a
head, Caput, whereof ye place is called Capitole. The Mou^te called Tarpeius,
had two little Hills. On the one stood the Temple of Jupiter, and on the other,
the Fortress, or Palaice of Rome, which they called A^x Capitolina.

Cappadoce is a Royaulme of Asie, adiace^t on ye west part to ye Regio^ called
Galatia. And on ye East, to Armenie, thus does Ptolomee describe it in ye
first Table of Asye.

Carry. Look on this word Ionie.

Carre is a City of Mesopotamia, as says the Text, which is renowned, and
spoken of, through the overthrow of Marcus Crassus, who was slain, and his Army
vanquished by the Parthians, nigh unto ye said City, as writes Plutarch in ye
life of Marcus Crasius.

Carting was an vnde^e^t exercise, wherein voluptuouse Emperors gretely
delited. The form thereof, was to ride in a Chariot, and with whipping, cause
the horses which drew ye same, to run very fast to and fro as it liked the^. We
may call it Chariotti^g also: other name have I not for the laten word of it,
which is Aurigatio.

Chalcedon is a City of Bithynia, upon the Sea side, right over aneanst
Thrace, and the City of Constantinople. There is no more between them, as
says the Authoure, but a strait of the Sea, called Bosphorus Thracius, or
Propontius, or Helespontus, which are all one, maki^g seperatio^ of Europe, and
Asie,

Circenses were certain exercises, played, and showed in a place called
Circus, which was compassed round about with a stone wall. In thiese plays
they used to run with horses, and to wrestle. They were called Circenses, as it
were circum enses, yt is to say enuironned on every side with Swords. For in
old time, all the Running, Iusting, Wrestling, and Combats of the Romans
were in places enclosed, on the one side with Rivers, and on the other side
with Swords, Glayus, and Hallebardes, to the end that Cowardes, and Dastardes
should not flea away without danger.

Cohorte Pretor^ane, are such men at Arms, as guard the person of any
Captain, Duke, Consul, King, or Emperor. For this name Praetor, is often
times taken for a King, Emperor, or Consul.

Colossus. The Latins called every great, and huge Image, Collossus. This
Colossus, whereof Herodian speaks in his first Book, was made by a notable
workema^ named Zenodorus, at the commandment of Nero Emperor of Rome. And it
was his Image, being a hundredth and ten foot in heighte. The same Image was
dedicated to the honor of the Son, after that the acts of Nero were
conde^pned, and infringed for his cruel Tirrany, as says Plynie in
ye.xxxiii. book the.vii. Chapter. There was an other Colossus at Rome, which
Domitian caused to be made, standing upon great pillars of Marble.

In the Capitole there was an other Colossus, representinge the Image of
Apollo, which was.xxxi. cubytes of height, tra^sported thither, by Marcus
Lucullus, from a City called Apollonia in the Royalme of Po^tus. Among all
such huge Images, Plinye, in the last cited Book, and Chapter, says yt in
Rhodes, there was the Image of the Sone, passed al other in greatness, made by
Chares of Lidia, disciple unto Lisippus. The same was.lxx. cubits in heighte.
And fell down by a meruailouse erthquake.lvi. years, after it was made. And
although it be broken, yet is it at this present, a thing wonderful to beh^ld.
The Thombe thereof, a man can vnethe fadome. And his singers are as big as
great Images. In ye same city of Rhodes, there are an.C. more Colossi. But not
so bygge as this, although the least of them, were sufficient, to win fame, and
renown to the City. For those, and more descripcio^ of the other, have
recourse to the aforenamed Book, and Chapter of Plynie.

Constantinople. Look on this word Bizantium.

Cyrus, King of Persia, was the Sone of one Cambises, of an obscure family in
Persia, and Mandane the daughter of Astiages King of Media. Who after there
position of his dream (by the which he understood yt his daughters Sone should
be King of all Asye, and that him self should lose his Royalme) caused Cirus,
immediately after he was borne, to be put forth, and left alone in a Forest, to
ye end, he might be devoured of wild beasts. But there a Bitche gave him
suck, and defended him from Beasts, and Birds, until that the Kings
Sheperde found him, carried him home to his wife, and gave her the charge to
nouryshe him. The woman was afterward called Spa^on, because among the
Persyans, a Dog is so named. After that he waxed great, he was called Cyrus,
by the Sheperdes his Companions, known to be Astiages daughters Sone, and
sent into Persia: where he obtained much credit, and aucthority. Finally, he
assembled an Army, to make war upon Astyages, his Grandefather, from whom he
berefte ye Royalme of Media, unto the which the Persians were subject. And by
this means Cyrus became King of Perse, and Media. Before his time the
Persians had no Kings, but were subject unto other Royaulmes. After his
victory against Astiages, he vanquisshed, and took prisoner, Croesus the King
Lidia, which was so rich. But in conclusion him self, was ouercomen, and
slain, by Thomyris Queen of Scithia, when he had reigned.xxx. years. Unto him,
succeeded Cambises, his Sone, as Justin, in his first book me^cioneth. Eusebius
says, that Ca^bises reigned.viii. years. Under Cirus King of Persia, by his
own permissio^, began the reparacio^ of ye Temple of Jerusalem: which
notwtsta^dig was disco^tinued many years after. And at ye last finished the.vi.
year of Darius Reign King likewise of Persya, as witnesses the.vi. and.vii.
Chapiters of Esdras in the Bible, and Sabellyque in the.vii. Book of his
second Enneade. After Cambyses, two Brethern called Magi, usurped ye
kingdom.vii. Months. After who^ Darius reigned.xxxvi. years. And in the
second year of his Reign, Zorobabell, by his permissio^, renewed the
reparacion of the Temple of Jerusalem. This Darius, was not he, yt Alexander
the great vanquished: but that was the.x. king after him, called Darius also.
In whom the Royaulme of Persia took his eande.

Cyzicum is a City of Asye, upon the Sea side, in a Royaulme called Misia the
less, as witnesses Ptolomee in the first Table of Asie. And so says Pliny
in the.xxxii. Chapter of his.vi. Book.

D.
DAnubie, or Danowe. Look on Ister.

Darius look on these words, Alexander, and Cirus.

Dionisus the Elder, was a Tirant of Sicile, and Son of Hermocrates, as says
Sabellique. He was very well learned, as writes Pliny: who prefers none
before him, saui^g Plato in Philosophye, and Philopenus in Poetry, two ye
notablest men of learning in all his time. In ye same year yt the Kingdom of
Athenes ended, and Darius King of Perse dyed, Dionisus lost his Royalme, as
says Sabellique, in the nynthe Book of his first Enneade. Wherein he
agrees not with Eusebius. Dyonisius Son was likewise named Dyonisius the
younger, who was also a Tirante of Sicile, and raygned in a city called
Siracuses: out of the which he was expulsed twyse, ones by Dion: And the
second time by Timoleon, sent against him by the Corynthians. After this
second expulsion, he kept a schole, and taught young children at Corynthe, as
writes Valerius Maximus.

E.
Eridanus is a River of Italye, otherwise called Padus, which comes (as says
Pliny in ye.xvi. chap. the.iij. book of his natural History) out of a
mountaigne called Vesulus. After that, he hides him self in the ground, and
issues out again in the confynes of the Foruibienses. Of all Ryuers there is
none more renowned. The Greeks call it Eridanus. There is no River besides, that
increases greater, within so little space. For it has a merueylous abundaunce
of water, falling into ye Sea Adriaitque. Between the cytyes of Rauenna, and
Altinum, it is very domageable unto the Country. For by the space of.vi.
skore miles (as says Pliny) it does separate it self, into many Rivers,
and Lakes. And because that every River is large, and great, they call the
same seven Seas, as witnesses Herodyan, in his eight book.

Euphrates. Look on this word Syrye.

Europe. Look on this word Aphryque.

G.
Galatians, are those which enhabit the realm of Galatia, which is in Asya,
between Bithinia and Capadocia, as sayen Plinye in the last chap. of his fyfth
book, and Ptolome in ye first Table of Asye. The same Realm is called also
Gallogretia, and the people Gallogreci: because, that when the Gauls came to
the aid, and succor of the king of Bythynie, they held and possessed that
part of the Royalme. Wherefore it is so named, as writes Sabellique.

Gallus a River. Look on theyse words Goddess Pesynuntyne.

Ganymedes was Son of Tros king of Phrigia, who had Issue, Ilus, Assacus, and
Ganimedes. The Fables surmise (which is the most common opinion) ye Jupiter
ravished Ganimedes for his beauty, by an Egle. But Sabellique in the.x. book of
his first Enneade, says, yt Ganymedes the Son of Tros, was ravished by
Tantalus king of Paphlagenie, to abuse him. Whereby there arose great war,
between the two kings. And it is most like, that being very young, he was
injuriously ravished by Tantalus, under ye sign of the Egle, were the
battayles fought upon the land, or Sea. Which has been cause of the invention
of the Fable, that says that the Egle, by ordinance of Jupiter, rauyshed him.

Gaul or France. Caesar in his commentaries says, that Gaul is divided into
three parts, whereof ye Belges held the one, the Celtes another, and the
Aquitans inhabited the third. The Aquitans are separated from the Celtes, by
the River of Garumna. The Celtes are sequestered from the Belges, by the Ryuers
of Marne and Seyn. And the Belges are sundred from the Almaignes by the Rheyn.
In the which division, Gaul Narbonique is not comprised. Ptolomee in his
fourth Table of Europe, and in the chapyters of the same, does deuyde Gaul
into four parts: appoyntynge Gaul Aquitanyque, to extend as far as the
River of Loyre. And from Loyre, to the Ryuers of Seyn, and Marne, is Gaul
named Lugdunensis. And from Seyn, unto Rheyn, Gaul Narbonique extends it
self, unto the Sea Mediterranean, beyond the Alps, and the River Varus, unto
the Pyrrhenyan Mountaignes. Gaul the rounded, or otherwise called Lumberdye,
is in the Lymytes of Italye, and is the same countreye, which is named
Liguria, next unto the Alps, and the Sea. All the other Gaul, or France, is
called Gaul bering bushe. Gaul Narbonique, was before time named Brachata, as
says Pliniie, in the third book, and the fourth chapyter.

Goddess Pesynuntyne, is ye same that Cicero in his books of the laws,
calls the Moother Idea, which is the self same, that the Romans name the
Moother of the Gods, and do greatly reverence.

Liuie in the.ix. book of his second war Punique, says that they found in
the Sybyline books, (which were perused and read over, because of the often
raynynge of stones the same year) that when so ever any stranger, and
forreyne enemy, should move war against Italye, he might be vanquysshed,
and expelled thence, if the Moother Idea were transported to Rome, from a
fyelde of Phrigia named Pesinus. The which to do, the Romans sent five
Ambassadors, with five great ships, called Cynqueremes, to Atalus king of
Asie. Who led them to the place called Pesynus, delivered them the holy stone,
which the inhabitauntes there, called ye Moother of the Gods, and appointed
them to carye it unto Rome. It was received at the Haven of Hostia, by Publius
Scipio, being judged at that time, the worthyest manne in all the City, to do
the same, carried unto Rome, and set in the Temple of Victory, within the
Palayce, the.xiij. day of Apryll, which was celebrated, and solempnyzed with
feasts, and gifts, that the people in great abundance offered unto the
Goddess. Which plays the Romans called Megalesia.

The same Goddess is called Ops, whom they suppose to be ye wife of Saturn,
called Rhea, by the which they understand the earth, that gives affluence
and abundaunce of all thing.

She is otherwise named Cybele, of the name of a Hyl and city, of Phrigia
where her sacrifyces were first instituted. Or she is called Cybele, of
Cimbals, which signifies the Instruments, and Soundes, they used in the
sacryfyces. The Poets sayen, that she road in a Chariot, and had a crown of
Towers: whereby they sygnyfye, that the earth hangs in the air, and the
world tourneth always round about and that the earth has upon it Cytyes,
and Towns, wherein be Towers.

She is called Moother of the Gods, because she engenders all thing. She is
also called Pales, for yt she is ye Goddess of sheperdes, and her feasts are
called Palilia. And she is also surnamed Berecinthia, of a mou^taygne of
Phrigie called Berecynthes. According to the diuersytye of her names, she has
diverse powers, diverse sacryfyces, and diverse ministers.

Under theyse names, Cybele, Berecynthia, Goddess Pesynuntyne, and Moother
Idea, because they came of names of places in Phrigia, from whence this
Goddess was brought to Rome, is no diversity of puyssaunce sygnified.

This Goddess has Priests, and Ministers, called Galli, by the name of a
River, named Gallus in Phrigia. The water whereof, causes them to be mad that
drink it. Those Priests be gelded, who being sturred with madness, noddynge
their heads, up and down, with great noise of small Belles, which they
carried, did prophesye, and tell of things to come, in that madness. They were
otherwise called Corybantes.

I.
ILium is the same City, that we call Troy the great. Ilus son of Tros, in ye
country called Troas did build this ritye Iliu^, so called of his name. And
of the country wherein it stood, it was named Troy, as witnesses Sabellique,
in the fyfth book of his first Enneade. The Country is ioynyng unto Phrigia
on the East, and toward the west it has the Sea Hellespontique, as Ptolomee
has described it, in his first Table of Asie.

Illiria. The Royalme of Illiria, described by Ptolomee in his.v. Table of
Europe, has on ye North Cost, ye.ii. Pannonies: on ye west, ye country called
Istria. Toward the East, it has ye high Misia. And toward ye South, a part
of Macedonia. This Roialme is also named Liburnia, and ye part which exte^deth
toward ye high Misia, is called Dalinatia. At this present, the Illiria^
Regio^ is called Sclauonia. Look Ptolome in ye said.v. cable of Europe. India.
There are.ii. Indes, both in Asia, and joining togithers, whereof the one makes
an end of Asie, toward thorie^t, and is called Inde, beyond the River of
Ganges. On this side the River, is Inde, called Inde on this side Ganges, which
has on the East side, the same River. On the west, the Royalmes of
Paropanisades Arachosia, and Gedrosia. On ye North, ye mountain Imaus. And on
the Southe the Indian Sea, as says Ptolome in the first Chapter of the.x.
Table of Asye.

Iocasta was ye wife of Laius King of Thebes. After whose deceasse, she married
her own Sone Oedipus, unawares. And had by him.ii. children, Etheocles, and
Polinices: who fought togithers, after Dedipus death, for the Royalme of
Thebes. And in ye same co^bate, both ye Brethren slew one an other, as says
Sabellique, in ye.vij. Book of his first Emeade. For this cause, did ye
Alexa^driens, in mocquerie, call Antonines Mother Iocasta: because Antonyne,
for to obtain Thempyre alone, had slain his Brother Geta, as the.ij. Sons of
Iocasta, slew one an other, for the Royalme of Thebes.

Ionie. Plyne in the.v. Book, the.xxix. Chapi. says, that the Country of
Lydia, watered over with the River of Meander, very crooked, and full of
tourninges, both extend above Ionie: having on ye East side Phrigia, on the
North Misia, and on the Southe Caria. The which Country of Lidia, was before
called Meonie. By ye description, yt Ptolomee makes in ye first Table of A^,
Ionie is ye self same Regio^, yt is called Lidye, or Meonye. At the lest wise,
it is a part thereof: bosiding upon the Sea, which for that cause is called
Ionyan. The same Ionian Sea, does extend from the Banks of Ionie, unto the
banks of thysle of Sicile. Plinye in the iiii. book, the.xi. Chap. says,
that the Greeks divided the Ionian Sea, into the Sea of Sicile, and the Sea of
Crete, so called, because of the nigh Isles. Ptolome in the.v. book, the
second Capiter, says, that the Regio^ proprelie called Asia, has on the
North side Bithinia. On the West, a part of Propontis, the Sea Hellespontique,
the Sea Iearia^, and the Sea Myrtoique. On ye East, the Regio^s of Licia,
Pamphilia, and Galatia. And on the Southe, the Sea of the Rhodes. In this
Region, are comprised. Lidia, and Caria, and other small Royalmes. In Lidia is
Ionia, as it is before said. And Ionie is right over aneanst an Isle, called
Icarie: whereof, the Sea there, is named Icaria^. And it is the same, which is
called Ionian. Caria is between Lidie, and the Sea of ye Rhodes. On the West it
has the Sea Icarian, or Myrtoique. And on ye East is Licia, joined to
Pamphilia.

Issicus Sinus, is a reflection, and bendinge of the Sea, which has on the
West, thyste of Cipres. And on the East, Siria, joined unto the Banks of
Siria. And on the North side, is the Country of Cilicia. In ye plain by the
same tourning of the Sea, is the City of Alexa^drie, builded by Alexander ye
great, in memory of ye batail by him won, against Darius King of Persia. In
this place also, was the battle between Seuerus, and Niger.

Ister is a great, and meruaylouse River, otherwise called Danubie, or Danowe:
coming out of a mountain of Almayne, named Arnoba. Beyond the Alps, it
passes by Innumerable Countries. The further it runs, the more it
increases, reteining the name of Danow, until it comes by the Country of
Illiria, now called Sclauonie, where he changes his name, and is called
Ister. And receyuinge his increase, of.lx. Rivers, which fall into him, he
departs from ye earth, and enters into the Sea Pontique, by.vi. great arms,
as says Plynye, in the.iiii. book, the.xi. Chapter, of his History
natural.

L.
LAodicea, is a City of Siria, nighe unto the Sea, and not very far distant
from Antioche: which is also in Siria, but further from the Sea, as witnesses
Ptolomee, in the.iiii. Table of Asye.

Latium, is a part of Italye, in the which standen Rome, Tusculum, Prenes^e,
Ardea, Tibur, and many other Cities, as writes Ptolomee, in the first
Chapter, of the syxte Table of Europe. Those that enhabyte this part of
Italy, are by the Romans called Latini.

Laurentum is a City of Italye, in the same part that is called Latium, nighe
unto Hostia. By Laurentum, there is a forest, sacred unto the Son, as says
Plynye, in the.v. Chapter of his third book.

Liber Pater, in English Free father, is the self same God, that we call
Apollo, as says Macrobius, in his Saturnales, after Aristotle, for diverse
causes: and among other, because that in Thrace, there is a Temple, and
Oratory, dedicated unto Liber: wherein answers, and Prophesyes are rendered.
But in the same Temple, those which ought to Prophecy, do drink wine
excessiuely, as they which render oracles in the City of Clarium, after they
have drunk much water. The Lacedemonyens, in the sacryfyces which they made
to Apollo, ware Garlandes of Iuye, as if they did sacrifyce to Bacchus. The
Boetians, affyrmynge that the Hill Parnassus was sacred unto Apollo, did
always there keep the Oracle of Delphus, and the Caves of Bacchus, dedicated
unto the same GOD. For this cause, in that Hill, were the sacryfyces made unto
Apollo, and Liber Pater.

In this Hill also, where the Bacchanales celebrated, ones in two year: which
showed, that Apollo, Lyber, and Bacchus, were but one GOD. And he was called
Lyber, that is to say Frea, because the Son, which we call Apollo, does
frealy, and without subjection, turn, and compass the world: being
sometimes high, and sometimes low, and keeping his course diverse ways.

Lybie is a Region of Aphrique: And it is expedient to know, that there are.ii.
Libies. For Ptolomee in the.v. Chapitre of his.iiii. Table of Aphrique, sets
one Libye, joined with Egipte, and the Marmarike Region. And says ye Egypt,
and the Marmarike Region, have on the West part, the Royalme of Cirenia:
following the continuation of one Line, which draws by a City called
Darius, that stands upon the Egiptian Sea. And in the.vi. Chapi. of the.iiii.
Table of Aphrique, he sets an other Libye, called Libye the Inner, which
has on the North, the second Mauritanie, Aphrique ye less, and the
Cirenayake Region. On the East, a part of the Marmarike Region, and Ethiope,
which is under Egypt. Toward the South, it has Ethiope ye Inner. And
toward ye west, it has ye west Sea. For more description hereof. look
Ptolome i^ ye forsaid Chap. and tables. Lydie is a Country of Asia, upon the
Egean Sea, between Phrigia, and Caria. This Country has.ii. Rivers of great
same. The one of them, is on the North cost, and called Pactolus, wherein are
found many veins of Gold. And the other is in the South side, and called
Mean^er, which is very eroked, and be^ding in and out. Look Ptolome, in the
first Table of Asye.

M.
MAuritanie. Ptolome in his first Table of Affrike appoints.ii. Mauritanies.
The One whereof, is more West, right over aneanst Spain Betique, and called
Mauritania Triganica. The Other being more nere Thorient, is named Mauritania
Cesariensis, and on the East part joined unto Numidia.

Medes, be the people of the Royaulme called Media. Ptolomee in his.vi. book,
the second Chap. says that this Regio^ has on ye North cost, a part of the
Hircania^ Sea. On the West, ye great Armenie, and Assirie. On On the East
Hircanie, and Parthie. And toward the Southe, it has the region called
Corinthena. Thus is this regio^ described in the.v. table of Asie. Pliny in
the vi. book, the.xxvij. chap. says that Marcus Agrippa said, ye Media,
Parthia, and the country of Pers^e, had on the East the river Indus. On the
West the river Tygris. On the North Taurus, and Cacausus. And on the South the red Sea.

Media. Look on the word Medes.

Mesapotamie, is a royalme of As^e, between the rivers of Euphrates, and
Tigris, as says Pliny, in ye.xii. chap. of the.v. book. And in the.vi. book,
the.xxv. chap. he says, that all the countreye of Mesapotam^e was subject
unto the Affricans. Look more on this word Syrye. Misiens. The high Misie, as
Ptolomee has described it, in the ninth table of Europe, is bou^ding upon
Thrace on the East part. On the South unto a little Royalme named Dardania,
which is above Macedonia. And on North unto the River of Danowe. The low Mis^e
is nygh unto ye falling of Danowe, in the sea called Pontus Euxinus. Look on
this word Propontys. The Misiens are those, which inhabit these.ii. regions.
Pliny in the.xxvi. chap. the third book, called these royalmes Misia. There
are.ij. other in Asie, after the description that Ptolomee makes in the first
Table of Asie. The One called Misia the more, and the other Misia the less both
joining to Phrigia, upon the Hellespontian Sea.

N.
NIcea is a city of Bithynie, as sayen Ptolomee, and Pliny.

Nicomedia is a City nygh unto the Sea, in the Royalme of Bithynye.

Numidia is a country in Affrike, between Mauritanie, and the country of
Carthage, after the description of Ptolome, in the.ii. table of Affryke. This
country was very much renowned, through the virtue of Masinissa who was king
sometime thereof. Thinhabitauntes are called Numidians, or Nomades, because ye
often times they change their habitations, and carry their housholdes from one
place to another in wago^s, as says Pliny in ye third chap. the.v. book of
his natural Hystorye, and Sabellique in the first book of his.v. Enneade.

O.
ORgia be sacrifices, made as well unto the Moother of the Gods, as unto
Bacchus, and other Gods, by the pryestes called Galli, that are mad.

Ocean is the great Sea, that enuironeth al ye earth, and joins him self with
the Mediterrane Sea, between the pyllers of Hercules. The One whereof is in
Mauritania, and called Abilla. And the other in Spain named Calpe. The
Mediterrane Sea, is enclosed with earth on every side: that is to say, on the
right side with Affryke, and on the left side, with Europe and Asie.

P.
PAnuonie. Ptolome in ye.v. table of Europe, does describe.ij. Pannonies,
joining one to another. The One of the^ called the high Pannonie, bou^deth on the
West, upon a royalme of old time called Noricu^, and at this present Bauiers.
The Other called ye low Pannenie, nigh ioyninge unto the higher, stretches to
the river of Danow. Of yt which river, declinyng toward the South, that part
which receaueth the river Saus, does eand the lower Pannonie on the East. And
on the South, drawyng toward ye Hadriatique Sea, are the roialmes of Illiria,
or Sclauonie, and Dalmatio. In these regions, there be.ij. ryuers, Drauus, and
Saus. Drauus, which is the more swyft, comes out of the country of Bauiers.
And Saus which runs more slowely, out of ye Alps Carnicyan, as says
Pliny, in the third book the.xxv. chap. of his natural Hystorye.

Panthers are beasts very cruel, as ye co^iunctio^ of the word does
sufficiently show: which signifies all cruel. The skyns of these beasts are
spotted over, with round white spots. And there is no beast so notably spotted,
as ye Pa^ther, and ye Tigre. These Pa^thers do savor wonderful sweet. And for
their sauoure, other beasts, resort unto the^. But yet they are afeard of ye
Panthers fyerce look. Wherefore ye Panther hides his head, and suffers al ye
rest of his body to be looked on, yt he may the better take his pray of the
other beasts being amassed. There is no great difference between ye Panther,
and the Leopard, saving yt the Panther is more white. And Pliny in his viij.
book, the.xvi. chap. says that he could never find other difference. In the
same chap. he tells a meruaylous tale of a Panther, which remembered the good
turn that a man had before done unto him. In Siri^, and in Affryke there be
many of these beasts.

Parthians. The royalme of Parthia, as Ptolomee describes it, in his.v. Table
of Asie, stretches on the North unto Hircanie, and to ye mou^taignes between
the^. On ye South it has Carmanie On ye East the Ariens. On ye West the Medes.
And this regio^ is environed with hills on al parts. So says Pliny, in the.vi.
book ye.xxv. chap. Who says also, yt the Parthia^s have.xviij. kyngdoms. And
their Provinces are between the red sea, on ye South, and the Hircania^ sea on
ye North.Xi. of the^ be beyond Armenie, and the mou^taignes called Caspij, and
do extend along by the Caspian sea, unto the Se^thians: drawing toward ye
sea. And these realms be called ye high realms. The Other ye low realms. The
Parthia^s, which are not in ye first description, are called Nomades.
Patroclus the friend of Achylles, was in the wars between the Greeks, and the
Troyans, and there slain by Hector the son of Priamus king of Troy.

Perynthiens are a people of Thrace, wherein stands a city called Perinthus,
with in yt which there is a fortress called Bizia, some time belonging to ye
kings of Thrace. In this royalme, there are no Swalowes, for ye offense of
Tereus king of Thrace, as says Pliny, in ye.xi. cap. the.iiij. book of his
natural history. Thoffe^ce was this. His wife named Progne, ye king of Athenes
daughter, had a sister which hight Philomela: whom she greatly desired to see.
And Tereus to please her with all, promised to fetthe her sister. In bringing of
her, he defloured her. And to ye end, she should not disclose it to any person,
he cut out her tongue, shut her up in a secret place, and told Progue yt she
died by ye way. But Philomela wrote with blood in a kerchief all the matter, and
sent it unto Progne her sister. Who being chaufed with ire for ye same, slew a
little child called Itis, which she had by Tereus, and presented it him to
eat. Tereus perceauing yt matter, pursued her. And she fleing away was turned
into a Swalowe, Tereus him self into a Lapwinge, and Itis into a Fesaunte.
Pesynus. Look on these words Goddess Pesinu^tine. Phari. Pharus is an Isle in
the sea of Egypt, wherein stands a city builded by Alexander the great, over
aneanst Alexandrie, which was likewise builded by ye same Alexander. The Isle
Pharus is so nyghe unto Egypt and Alexandrie, that at this day, there is no
more between the^, but a bridge to pass from the one to the other, as says
Pliny, in the.xi. chap. of his third book. In the city of Pharus, Ptolomeus
Philadelphus the king, made a meruaylous high Tower, which is numbered among
the meruayles of the world: upon the which there is always a great burning
light, to show the haven unto them that sail by night on the Seas. And because
that this light is so renowned, many do call all other Towers, which have
fire and light in the^ after that sort, Phari, as our present Author does him
self. Phenices. Look on this word Syrye.

Phrig^e is a country of Asie, which boundeth on the West upon the country
of Troy ye great. And as says Pliny, in the.v. book, the.xxxii. chap. This
country is ioynynge to Galatia on the North. On the Southe it has Lyc^onie,
Pysidie, and Mygdonie. And on ye East it touches the country of Cappadoce.
Ptolome describes this country in the first Table of Asie, and does not alot
unto it so great a compass.

Pitanite is as much to say, as Laconique, or Lacedemonien: because Pytanas
was the father of Thrasibulus the Lacedemonien, who was slain in fyghting
valiauntlye in the war. After his decease, Pytanas showed him self very
grave, and prudent, saying that it was a rare thing to dye so well. Wherefore he
wylled his country men, not to weep for his death, because he dyed
valyauntlye as it became a Lacedemonian. So says Ausonius the Poet in an
Epigrame. There was another Thrasybulus of Athenes, which had a voice very
loud, and bygge, of whom Plutarque speaks in the life of Alcybyades.

Pontus. Look on this word Propontis.

Proconsull. In the time that Posthumus Albus, and Spurius Fulsius, were
Consulles, and war was made against the people called Equi dwelling in Italy,
which war was unfortunate to the Romans, Titus Quintus, was first created
Proconsal, to goo and aid one of the Consulles, which was besieged: to the
end, that the other Consul might remain at Rome, and leuy more me^. And
this Proconsull, had.vi. Sergea^ts goeng before him, with mases. His own
orname^tes were like unto the Consulles. From that time forwards, it was
ordained, that those which had been Consulles one year, should the next year
foloweng be Proconsulles, for to go into the Provinces. And every of them had
his Liuetenaunt, which was called Legatus, to assiste him in his affairs. The
Proconsull had jurisdiction only in the Province given unto him, but that was
not voluntary, as to infranchyse a bondeman. The first day of January yearly,
did ye Romans chose two Counsulles, which during thole year following, had
as much authoritee, as The Emperor. And because they could not be in all
places, when neade required, they sent their Proconsulles into the Provinces,
which had there as great authoritee, as if ye Consulles had been present. This
word Proconsull also sygnifyeth him, which is in stead of the Consul, and
does that, that the Consul should do, as says Fenestella, and Pomponius
Letus, of the Romayne Magistrates.

Prodigiouse tokes, were signs, which often times happened naturally.
Nevertheless they betokened one myshap, or other. Wherefore some do say ye
prodigiouse is deryued of that which ought to be feared, as the so^ge of the
Harpie called Celeno, whereof Virgile speaks. Duch are the singinge of a
Raven, and the meetinge of a weesel, when a man goes forth of his house.
Thiese, and such other like, did men in old time, acco^pte monstruouse, and
signifieng some calamytie to ensue.

Propontis is a part of the Mediterrane Sea, which is divided into diverse
parts. For Pontus is a part of the same Sea, and Propontis is a part of
Po^tus. Pliniein the.iiij. book. ye.xij. Chapter, says yt the first strait
of the Sea, which is between Thrace, and Asie, (where Xerxes made a Bridge to
passover his Army) is called Hellespontus. And that is, a small arm of ye
Sea, very strayte. After yt it is somewhat broad, and then retourneth into a
narowe strayte again. This Sea, yt is the brother part, is called Propo^tis,
and the streite is named Bosphorus Thracius: being in bredthe.v. paces only.
Over this streite, Darius king of Serse, and father of Xerxes, passed his army
upon a Bridge. In exte^ding further toward the North, beyo^de Bosphorus
Thracius, the Sea does enlarge him self wonderfully, and is called Pontus
Euxinus. And after yt it retourneth to a strait again, and is called Bosphorus
Cimmerius, which is thissue of one of the Lakes Meotides, yt is the last part
of ye Mediterrane Sea, toward the North. All thiese Seas above specifyed,
are parts of the Sea Pontus.

Ptolomeus, after he had expelled Antigonus ye Sone of Demetrius, held the
Royalme of Macedonie, as says Sabbelique, in the.viij. book of his.iiij.
Emeade. He feigned him self to be amorouse of his own Sister Arsinde, and that
he desired to have her to wife. But when she had condiscended to the same, he
showed apparauntly, after his receite into the City of Cassandra, that his
purpose was, to bereue his sister of the City, and to slay the children that
she had by Lysymachus her first husband: whom he slew in their Mothers
arms. At the last, he was vanquished by the Gauls, under the leading of
Belgius their Captain, taken prisoner, and beheaded, and his head pitched
upon a polle, to fear the Macedones withal.

Pyrrhichius is a foot, or measure, composed of two short sillables, so
called, by the name of Pirrhus, king of the Royaulme called Epyrus, which is
nyghe unto Thessalie, and beneth Macedonie. For that by him was invented a
kind of daunsynge, called Pyrrichius, as says Plinye in, the.vj. Chap. of
the.vij. Book. The which leaping, or daunsing, was by mouyng, and measure of
two short syllables, whereof Herodian in his fourth Book, makes mention.

R.
Rhenus. Look on this word. The Rheyn.

S.
SArmates are the people, and enhabitauntes of the Regions, Sarmatiques.
Plinye, and Ptolome sayen there are two Sarmaties, one in Europe, an other in
Asie. And both nighe unto the River Tanais which divides Europe, and Asye,
and nyghe unto the Lakes Meotides, whereinto Tanais does fall. Ptolomee in
the.v. Chapter of his.iiij. Book says, that Sarmatie of Europe, exte^deth
toward ye North, as far as the great Ocean, which in that part is called the
Sarmatique Ocean. Toward the West, unto the River named Vistula. Toward the
Southe, unto the mountains Sarmatiques, which make separacio^ of Sarmatie, and
the country of Dace, and the lower Misye. Toward the East, unto a streite
plot of earth, named Isthmus of ye Lake, or River, Bicis. And it has on the
one side, the lakes Meotides, and the River of Tanais. And in the.v. Book,
the.ix. Chapter Ptolomee says that Sarmatie which is in Asie, has on the
North, a Land unknown. On the West it has Sarmatie of Europe, unto the
head, and the River self of Tanais. On the East the Lakes Meotides, unto the
streyte of the Sea, called Cimmerius. On the Southe, it has a part of the
Mediterrane Sea, called Eurinus Pontus, which is very nygh unto ye Lakes
Meotides, and it stretches from thence, unto the River Corax. And from the
River Corax, above the Regions of Colchis, Iberie, and Albanie, unto ye
Hircanien Sea, which is otherwise named the Caspian Sea. And on the East it
has a part of the same Hircanyen Sea, and the River of Rha, until that it
enters into Sarmatye, where Sarmatie stretches unto the Scithians. Plynye, in
the.iiii. book the.xii. Chapter says that the Greeks does call them
Saromates, that we name Sarmates, and that the name of Scithians, passes unto
the Sarmates, and to the Almaynes.

Saturnales were feasts, and sacrifices of Saturn instituted, and ordained
first by Ianus, to the honor of Saturn, who taught him to till the earth.
And after Saturnes decense, he dedycated an aultare, and sacrifices unto him,
which are called Saturnales. The ancient fathers did solempnize thiese feasts
one day only in the year, that is to weete, in December, the xiiij. Calendes of
January. But after yt Ceasar had added.ij. days more unto that month, the
feasts were celebrated, the.xxvi. Cale^des of January. Which caused, that the
common people, being ignorant of those days, did celebrate the feasts many
times in the year. Many Authors do affirm, that in old time, the Paturnales
endured.vij. days, during the which feasts, the Servants, and Bondemen, had
as great authority as their Masters, and had license, to do what lyked them
selves best. So says Macrobius, in the first Book, the.vi. Chap. of his
Saturnales.

Peculer plays were celebrated ones in three ages, which was three hundred
years.

Septentrion. It is certain, as says Aulus Gellius in the second Book,
the.xxij. Chapter of his Attique nyghtes, that the heaven has four Regions.
That is to say the Orient, Occidente, Meridionall, and Septentrio^. The
Meridionall, or South, and Septe^trion, or North, are always remaining in
their own places. And the North, is in that place of the Heaven, which is
right opposite to the South, which is in the mids between the Orient, and
the Occident where the Son never comes. The Orient is very variable. For in
the Somer the Son ryseth in that place, from whence comes the wind Bize,
which is somewhat toward the North. In the myddle, or mean days, the
Son ryseth where the wind Eurus is, And in the shortest days, it ryseth
toward the South, in the same part, yt the wind called Vulturnus, or other
wise Euronotus is. And as there are.iii. risi^ges, eve so are there three
settinges, or descendinges, likewise mentioned, and three winds cumming from
the same three settinges. That is to weete Caurus, named by ye Greeks Argestes,
blowing right against the wind Bize. Fauonius, or Zephirus, against Eurus.
And Africus, named by the Greeks Libs, against Vulturnus. The wind which
comes from the South, because yt the South chau^geth not, is one, and in
Latin called Auster, in Greek Notus, because it is moist. The North part,
by like reason, has one only wind, which blows against Auster. This name
Septetrion, as says Aulus Gellius, in the Chapter last cited, comes of
that, that.vii. stars do make a sign in the heaven in form of a wayne, and
oxen yoked to labor, or else because the iii. next stars, that a man may
se, in the North, nigh one unto an other, do make as it were a triangle, and
this sign is right opposite unto the Southe.

Sirmium is a City of the lower Pannonie toward the high Misye, drawinge to
the East. It is beyond ye River of Danowe, as says Ptolomee in the. xvi.
Chap. of his third book Plynie, in the.xxv. chap. of his third book, says yt
a River called Bacuntius enters into ye River, Paus, nygh unto the City
Sirmiu^.

Syrie, as Ptolome descrybeth it in the.iiii. Table of Asye is separated from
Armenye on the North, by the mou^taigne Taurus. On the South is Arabie: on ye
West stretchyng toward ye Isle of Cypre, is ye Sea of Sirie, which is now
called ye Sea of Phoenicia. And on the East is Mesapotamye, Plynie in ye.v.
book the.xii. Chapter says that Syrie was the greatest of all the
Proui^ces, and therefore had ye name of al Royalmes, which were subject unto it.
For toward Arabi it was called Judea, or Jury Palestine, Phoenice: and more
inward Damascene. In stretchi^g toward ye South, it is called Babilone. And
between ye Rivers of Tigris, and Euphrates, it is named Mesapotamie. Beyond ye
Mou^tain Taurus, it is called Sophene, where Euphrates is divided into.ij.
parts. And beyond Armenie it is called Assyrye. On ye part where it bou^deth
upon Cilicia, it is called Antioche. The part of Syrya, which lies along the
sea coast, are the countries of Idumea, and Judea. And in stretchinge more
higher toward the North, is the country of Phoenice. And after it is more
nere Euphrates, it is called Sirie, as says Pliny, in dividing Sirie more
exquisitely. All the Sea which is nygh this part, is called the Phenician Sea.
The people of Phoenicia, has been meruaylouslye renowned, for that they were
the first Inuenters of letters, of Astrology, and of making shyps, and all
engens of war.

T.
TAurus is a Mountaygne in Asie, meruaylouse huge, and great, as says Pliny,
in the.xxvij. chap. the.v. book, of his natural historye. For he says, that
his beginning is upon the bancke of the Oriental Sea, and passes from thence
by many peoples, and Countries: making separation between them. At his
beginning, which is at the Indian Sea, he has on the right side the North, and
on the left side the Southe, stretchynge toward to ye West, by the mids of
Asie, saving where he encountreth the Sea. After that, he bends toward the
North, and fetches a great compass, on the one side. Then he stretches
toward the Phoenician Sea. On the other side, toward ye Pontian Sea, and on
another part, to the Hircanian Sea. And he goes very nygh unto the Lake
Meotide. And after he has very much bowed, and turned him self, he
joins with the Mountaygnes Riphees, which are in the North. And all the way
as he passes, he has diverse names. For in India, where he begins, he is
named Imaus, after that, Paropanisus, Circius, Chanibades, and many other
names. Where he is most highest, he is called Cacausus, which is above ye
royalmes of Colchis, Iberie, and Albanie. And where he stretches out his
arms, as if he would embrace the Sea, he is named Sarpedo^, Coracesius, and
Cragus. Where he has ports for separation, and passage, albeit the same be
trenched, and naturally opened, yet is it all one Mountaygne. Those ports are
called in one place Armenien, which is Armenie. In another part they are
called Caspien, nighe unto the people called Caspij, who are between Armenie
the great, and the Medes. And they are in another place called the Ports of
Cylycye. And although it has in diverse places diverse names, yet is it in Greek
called by one name, the mou^taygnes Ceranques. Thus says Plinye, in the place
before alleged. Lyuie, and the other Historyens, sayen yt this mountaigne does
appoynte the lymyttes, and bonndes of the Romayne Empire.

Theater. Look on this word Amphitheater.

The Aegean sea, part of the Mediterrane sea, is between Asie, and Macedonie,
and is called Aegean, because that in the same Sea are many Isles, so nygh one
another, that a far of, they seame to be Goats, which the Greeks call Egas,
or because that Aegea Queen of the Amazones was therein drowned, or else for
that Aegeus the father of Theseus, threw him self headlonge into it, as says
Sextus Pompeius.

The Ionian sea. Look on this word Ionie.

The Rhein. Caesar in his commentaryes says, that Gaul Belgique extends on
the East, unto the Rhein. And beyond it, are the Almaygnes, and thereby the
Rhein does deuyde Gaul Belgique, from the Almaygnes. In Gaul Belgique are
comprised the cou^treyes of Lorrayne, Luxenbourg, Guelders, and Flaunders. This
River comes out of the Alps, and falls into the Sea of Flaunders. Before
his entery into the Sea, he makes an Isle, which is the country of Hollande,
nyghe unto the which, is the country of Guelders, bendyng toward the head
of the same River. Beyond it is Luxenbourg, and Lorrayne, which is separated
from Luxenbourg, by ye River of Meselle which comes out of ye mountaygne
Vogesus, and falls into the Rhein. Out of the same mountaygne comes the
Meuse, which runs likewise into the Flemyshe sea. Between the Meuse, and
the River of Sum toward the Sea, is the countreye of Flaunders, which is
separated from France, by the said River of Sum, as it is apparauntlye
described, and fygured, in the new Table adjoined unto the Tables of Ptolomee.

The men at arms Pretorian. Look on these words Cohorte Pretoryan.

The seven Seas. Look on this word Eridanus.

The Tygre. Look on this word Tygris.

The Tirrhenian Sea, is ye low Sea, which exte^deth alonge by Italy nigh unto
the cost of Hoffie. And is so called by the name of Tyrrhenus, son of Atys,
and brother of Lidus, king of Lydie, who came into Italy: and with his people
inhabited that part of Italy, which is upon the low sea, whereby the Region is
also called Tyrrhenie. After, it was called Tuscie, and Hetrurie, as says
Sabellique.

Thrace is Royalme of Europe, in the furthest part thereof, toward the Orient.
The which Realm, has on the North the lower Misie. On the West the higher
Mysie, and a part of Macedonie. On the East, the sea named Propontis, and the
streyte of the sea called Bosphorus Thracius, which makes separation betwne
Europe, and Asie, as says Ptolomee in the.xi. chapter of the nynth Table of
Europe.

Tribune is as much to say, as Master, Governor, or Captain. And it comes
of this word Tribus, for that the people of Rome, was first divided into
parts, which they called Tribus. And the chief Governors and Capitaines of
the men at arms, elected out of those parts, were called Tribuni, as says
Varro treatinge of the Latin tongue says. Vegecius in the.iij. book, and the
vij. chap. of the feats of war. A Tribune of me^ at arms, had the charge of
a band in an army, wherein were as many horsemen as footmen. As of the first
Cohort of a Legion: which Cohorte, was the greatest, the principal, and the
best filled with sage, discret, valiant, and expert warryous. In the same
were.xi.C. footmen, and.C.xxxij. men at arms on horseback.

The Capytayne of this Cohorte, was called the Tribune of the men at arms: who
had under him other Capytaynes, and Centuryons, as well of fotemen, as of
horsemen. The other Cohortes of a Legion, which were nine, lest then the
first, were conducted either by the Trybunes, or by the Prouostes. Budeus in
his commentarye upon the Pandectes, or Digestes, says that we may call a
Trybune of men at arms, a Marshall. Vegecius in the second book, the
twelueth chapyter, says, that the honor of the Trybune of men at arms, was
when the men at arms were honestly, and cleanelye apparelled, well armed, and
their harnes well fourbyshed, and shynynge bryghte, and when they were well
enstructed, and exercised in the feats of war. The aucthorytye and power of
this Magystrate, was for a while so great, that the Trybunes of the men at
arms, had ones the governance, and administration, of the Romayne common
wealth. And there was no Magystrate, or Dygnytye more higher then this. When
there were no Consulles, which was about three score and ten years, after the
kings were expelled out of Rome, the Common weal was ruled five years by
the Trybunes. After the five years were expyred, Consulles were again
created, as says Pomponyus Letus. Diverse times the Trybunes were restored
unto dygnytye again, as says Tytus Liuius, and they had the aucthorytye of
the Consulles.

First they were three, then four, then ten, and then twentye, some time
less, some time more. In Rome there were other Trybunes, which were named
Tribunes of the people, who were created the year, that Aul is Virginus, and
Titus Vetusius Geminius, were Consulles, which was the.xvi. year after the
expulsion of ye kings. At which time the common people, being ouercharged,
and vexed with debtes (after that the Senators and noble men of Rome, had
often times promised to release, and discharge them thereof, and then deceived
them) separated them selves from the Senators. But Menenius Agrippa, one of
the ten Ambassadors sent unto the people, which were assembled in the
field, reduced them by an oracio^ into amitye, created ye Tribunes of ye
people, who were chosen out of the common people them selves. This dignite was
sacred, and inviolable, not subject unto the Consulles, as other officers were.
The Tribunes of the people sat in the Senate house, at the very entry thereof.
And that, that the Consulles decreed, their sometime allowed, and sometime
rejected. And because they vpheld, and mayntained the people, and styrred them
oftentimes against the Senators, and noble men of Rome, there raze many
Ciuyle batayles between them. In the time of the Kings, there were Tribunes
which were Captains of a hundred horsemen, and were called Tribuni Celerum.
There were also other Tribunes which had the Charge of the Receipt, and Custody,
of all Trybute money, and were called Tribuni Aerarij, as much to say, as the
Tribunes of the Tresoure.

Tigris is a River, which has his beginning in the Royalme of Armenie the
great. At the first he runs slowly, and where he begins to be swifte, he
is called Tigris, for so do the Medes call an Arowe. He falls in to a Lake,
called Arethusa, but yet it medleth not with the course of this River, neither do
the fyshe of them both come togithers. But the River passes through, clean
unlike the Lake, either in course, or color. At his meting with the Mountain
Taurus, he hydeth him self wtin the earth, and runs under the Mountain,
and then apeareth again on the other Side. The place is called Zoroanda. And
that it is the same River, which hid him self in the ground, it does
manifestly apeare. For when he comes forth again, he brings any thing with
him, that was cast into him, on the other side the Hill. He passes
afterward, by an other Lake named Thesbidis, and then hides him self in the
earth again. After his next coming furthe, he is divided into two parts,
whereof the one runs into Euphrates, and so into the Persian Sea. This River
makes many tornynges, and res^eryons, and separateth Mesapotannye from
Assirie. Look Pliny, the.vi. Book, the.xxvii. Chap.

Tyrus is a City of Phoenice, upon the same Sea, that Laodicea is. All the
same Sea, is attributed unto the Phoenicians, as it is said in this word Syrie.

V.
VEsta is a Goddess, which was daughter of Saturn, unto who^ the Virgins
vestalles were consecrated. Numa Pompilius did first institute in Rome those
Virgins, nevertheless the same Relygion was so ancient, that it came from the
Troyans, to the Albaynes, and from them to the Romans. Their office, and
profession, was to make sacrifice for the Romayne people, unto ye Goddess
Vesta. And to guard the eternal and inextinguible fire. There were.ij.
Goddesses of this name Vesta. The one was Moether of Saturn, by the which we
understand the earth. The Other was daughter of Saturn, which is the, that they
name the Vyrgyn, by whom we understand the fire, as says Ouide. Understand
nothing by Vesta says he^ but the lively, and burning fire, whereof thou
see no body to be engendered. She is therefore accounted a Virgin, because she
does not engender. The Romans sent as far as Phrigia, for the Image of this
Goddess Vesta, the which was brought, and set in ye Temple of Victory, which
is in the Palaice, unto who^ those vyrgyns were sacred, that had their house
hard by the Temple. And were.xx. in number. Aulus Gellius in the.xij. chap.
the first book of his Attique nights says, yt the high Bishop took that
Vyrgyn which should be sacred, by the hand, called her Amata (because the
first virgyn, instituted by Numa Pompilius, was so named) and did set her into
ye College of the Vestall vyrgyns: where, from thence forward, she was without
emancipation, exempts from her fathers rule, and had power to make her
Testament. If ye will know, of what age, of what parents, and of what stature,
with the quality of her person, and under what words, the high Bishop did
admit a Vestale Vyrgyn into the order, Look Aulus Gellius, in the said
Book and Chapyter.

The end of the Annotations.
Imprynted at London, in Fleet street, by Wyllyam Coplande, at the Sign of the
Rose Garlande.

Cum gratia et priuilegio regali ad imprimendum solum.

Faults eseaped in the Pryntinge.
Fol. Pagina. Linea. Errata. Read. ii. i. xxxiij. Marternus. Maternus. viij.
ii. xxxvij. facyon factyon. xij. ij. in the Margent, dexteritee agylytee. lxvi.
i. xvi. unto Counsayll, Counsel unto. lxxxiiij. i. i. dismay you not, dysmay
you. lxxxvij. ij. x. repusynge, repulsynge. c. i. i. silence, did attentifely.
silence, attentyfely.


