The Government of all estates, wherein is contained the perfect way to an
honest life, gathered out of many learned Authors, a book right profitable for
all estates, but especially for the trayning and bringing up of the younger
sort: written in Latin by that excellent learned man Andreus Hesse, Translated
into English.

IMPRINTED at London by Henry Denham, for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Lumbart streate.

N. B. In praise of this book
WHose steps do train to taste the sweet
and pleasant water spring:
Incumbent at the Muses feet,
to win Minerues ring.
Approach the fountain top and Well,
the pleasant floods to gain:
Of Hellyco^ where Nymphs do dwell,
and wisdom has the reign.
Embrace with joy her darlings all
that yeeldes to thee a crown:
With hand in hand through Pallas hall
to foot it up and down.
Here virtue shines, here silver streams,
here sacred life has place.
Here Phoebus with his glistring beams
appears with golden face.
Here health with wealth, here quiet ease
here joy and friendship grows.
Here medicines turned life to pease,
here truth and honor flows.
Therefore as once before, come nie
Sicilides does call:
And willing of thy company,
bids welcome to them all.
To the Reader.
NOthing is more profitable in this world (gentle Reader) than honest precepts,
good counsels, worthy and godly persuasions, how to flee vice, and follow
virtue, which is the best and chiefest part of all Philosophy, for by this
means common wealths are maintained, the true limmit or direction of life
freque^ted, and all good and godly families governed. This mean the ancient
Senators, or co^scribed fathers of Rome with others in times past have
followed, yea the Heathen Poets and Philosophers, also having tasted of the
same. The scope of their whole works does tend to no other end, but to ye
government of man, how he should use him self in modesty, counselling him
self in temperance, by practice, fortitude, and imitate justice. Also ye holy
Scripture, which is the touchstone of all truth, that excellent Jewel of our
salvation, and the bright Lantern of sincerity, has also taught us the way to
all perfection of life, righteousness, holiness, and sa^ctification. The
principal mean above all others, whereby thou may learn what man is at such
time as he lives in the fear of God, and walks uprightly in his calling. So
all eruditio^ being agreeable unto ye Scriptures, may and ought to be enthraced
as a guide or Rector of man's life unto virtue, as this book which is named the
Government of all estates, because it treats of the trayning and bringing
up of man from his childhoode, or as Terence writes ex Ephoebis ta^quam till
his old age, wherein ye may learn to attain to the perfection of a probe or
honest life. First written in the Latin tongue by ye excellent man Hermannus
Hessus, whereunto is added the institution of a Christian man by Adrianus
Barlandus, and now translated into English, by those who do wish thy
furtherance. Gentle Reader take this in good part, and in so doing thou shall
cause them to think their labors well bestowed, and encourage them to do
greater things to thy godly furtherance and profit: If that as mindful of
Demosthenes thou accept their labor and momentarie practice: Having this
consideration, that as the Philosopher requesting of an old woman the steps
of his passage, and she by the assigning of her finger declared the same,
surrendered with a be^ded knee thanks for her demerits, then they (not yet
requesting so much courtesy) shall be the willinger, moved by this their
industry, to race or ingresse into a sequence enterprise. Thus committing thee
to the tuitio^ of God, I bid thee fare well.

Vale in Christo.
To Babes and Sucklings.
COme forth ye babes, learn now to trade
your lives in living pure:
Behold the path of blissful state,
good chance does you assure.
This little book full tender years
does manifest and show:
How for to break those branches ill
that on such grafts do grow.
It does declare the thing the which
The Philosophers old,
In wrytings grave to judge for best,
by reasons law were bold.
What thing does pass a mean, ye same
is counted worst of all:
What thing is best within a mean,
the same does never fall.
Thus have the wysest counted it,
and we the same suppose:
This does our filthy brutish life,
to all men's eyes disclose.
For none within a mean can keep,
it is a state to base:
We love it well, but that it does
our evil life deface.
It chanced once Diogenes,
in Market place to be:
Where as of men a great frequent
he chanced for to see.
To whom aloude he cried out,
ye men come unto me:
The people then, what that he would,
do run straight way to see.
Supposing that he had some thing
unto them for to say:
The which they him desire forthwith,
to them for to display.
He answered straight I calde not you,
but I for men did call:
And sure I am that not one man,
there is among you all.
And after that, beholding well
a stripling young to give:
Him self unto Philosofie,
thereby to learn to live.
Well done (quod he) thou call those,
to purity of mind:
Whom carnal beauty with her sleights
endeavored has to blind.
Thus may thou see what ancient me
accounted have for best:
And what in goodness of this life,
surmounteth all the rest.
And as he has deserved, so
reward him for his pain:
Judge right, first read, follow likewise
hereby then shall thou gain.
FINIS. J. P.
What an honest life is, whereof it consists, and what profit aryseth
thereof.
The first Chapter.
Seeing therefore man was created into this world, after all things were made,
as lord and ruler of the^ all, Gene. 1.
and appointed as Gods husbandman here in earth, he ought so to direct the
course of his life, yt he may please his Caesar God, that by death being called
into the Heavenly Palace and Court of his Caesar (as kings and princes were
wont to be called, of the human and mortal Caesar's) may give his account of
his good husbandry and government. And least he should not be able to do
this, he ought at al times to live a noble, probable, and a Princely or honest
life. And to lead an honest life is nothing else, than in conditions to differ
from a brute beast, and as much as by nature a man may to live most like
unto God, which consists in nothing else but in virtue, is to fly vice and
follow honesty: for that is the office and end of virtue. And that the
honesty and the life wherewith God is most pleased, does consist by Virtue,
Saint Augustine testifies, sayng: Virtutem esse artem been viuendi, that is,
Virtue to be the art of well living, Mantuanus.
and also Baptista Mantuanus does express with these words what virtue is,
and how great commodities it brings to man.

Virtutis querimonium.
I am dame fortunes Maistresse,
of vice the scourging rod:
My only care and study is,
to bring man safe to God.
He that my doctrines learn will,
they shall persuade him so:
To God and his Imperial seat,
the right way for to go.
I am a sign directing straight,
the middle way to go:
Wherein our ancient fathers steps,
are yet now for to show.
By which they have ascended right,
the heavenly gates of God:
Where in most pleasant smelling fields,
the milky floods have flowde.
Plutarch, Plutarch.
also expresses more plainly, what virtue does teach us, describing her in his
book of the education of children, under the name and title of Philosophy,
saying, that by her it is to be descerned what is honest, what is dishonest,
what is just, and what is unjust, what ought to be embraced, and what ought
utterly to be eschewed, how and after what sort we ought and should behave our
selves toward our Parents, our elders, strangers and pilgrims, our governors
and Magistrates, our friends, our wives, children and families, and that we
should worship GOD, honor our parents, reverence our elders, obey our Princes
laws, give place and submit our selves to our Superiors, and with all our
hearts to love our friends as our selves. Women to bridle the snaffle of
ill concupisence, ever to have care and respect to their childrens education,
not to be in bondage, or consent with their servant, and that which is chief
of all, neither to rejoice to much in prosperity, neither to be to contrist
and sad in adversity, neither to have any voluptuous appetyte or desire at
all. And so to repress coler and ire, that we become not like brutish beasts,
whose nature and disposition is always to be fearce and ungentle, but as men
discrete, whose nature is to be meek, lowly and gentle.

Secondarilie, Tullie.
Tullie in his first book of Offices says, that there be four Well springs and
original fountains of virtue, from which all other discende, and out of
which all honesty proceeds, which be these, Prudence, Justice, Temperaunce,
and fortitude, which four have four several and diverse dispositions and
nature as Macrob. testifies in his book de somnio Scipionis, Macrob. de somnio
Scipionis.
who expresses their qualities in this wise, saying: it belongs to a prudent
man, to know and forecast how to compass each matter and case, neither to
do nor desire ought else, but justice and equity, to contriue his human and
worldly affairs, with a godly and divine mind, to provide and puruey against
damages and dangerous haps, which by casualties might chance or happen.

The point and end of Fortitude is, not to fear loss and detriments, to
fear only wicked and ungodly things, constantly and with pacient sufferance,
to forsake prosperity and adversity. Fortitude is of more price tha^
magnanimity, faith, constancy, fecuritie, magnifisence, patience, and
stablenesse.

The quality of Temperance is not to say after ye deed done, had I wist, in all
affairs to use wit and discretion, and under the rule of reason to bridle ill
concupiscence of the flesh, whose handemaydes are modesty, reverence,
abstinence, chastity, honesty, moderation, frugality, sobriety, and
shamefastness.

The point and property of Justice, is to restore to every man his right and
duty, of who^ co^discend innocence, frie^dship, concord, piety, religion,
neighborly affection, and humanity, Cicero in officiis says, Cicero in
officiis.
that no man should hurt his neighbor, unless he had sustained wrong before.
Secondly, to use common as common, and his own as his own. The true
foundation and root whereof is faith, that is, constancy and truth in words
and deeds. Lactan. lib. 6.
Lactantius in his sixth book says, that there are two offices and duties of
virtue, whereof the first participate with God by Religion, the second with man
by compassion and gentle behavior.

Macrobius
By these virtues says Macrobius, a good man rules him self and his
household, and consequently, the public weal, vprightlye maintayning his
worldely affairs.

The reward of virtuous and honest life.
IF any man be inquisitiue of the office and reward of Virtue and honest
conversation, he must known that there belongs two properties to it. First,
to inryche man with the transitory riches of this world, and after death to
reward him with everlasting salvation which never shall have end. Virgilius.
Whereupon Virgill writes well, saying: there are but few whom upright Jupiter
with a fervent zeal favored, or whom Virtue extolleth to the high heavens,
or else according to Lactantius in his sixth book: Lactan. lib. 6.
It is the property of Virtue to refrain anger, to assuage gredy appetites,
and to bridle carnal desires. Secondly, Virtue makes her scholar and Client,
the true rychest man above all other, in so much that he shall want nothing,
but shall have abundance of every thing. As Plato in Amph. writes thus, Plato
in Amph.
that Virtue leads the way, and shows the pathe to all things perfectly.
And liberty, health, life, substance, parents, and kinsfolks defend and
guard her.

Virtue possesses all things within her self, the virtuous man lacks
nothing, but he has all things at will, who rules by Virtue.

For virtue is not desirous of common praise, neither of that which every man
allows, neither requires she honor, or glory, Sillius.
as the Poet Silius says. Ipsa quide^ virtus sibimet pulcherrima merces.
Virtue is a beautiful reward to it self. Claudius.
Unto whom the Poet Claudius agrees in these verses.

Ipsa quidem virtus precium sibi, solaque, late
Fortunae secura nitet: nec fascibus vllis
Erigitur plansuue petit clarescere vulgi
Nil opis externae cupiens, nil indiga laudis,
Diuitijs animosa suis, immotaque, cunctis
Casibus, ex alta mortalia despicit arce.
Virtutis repulsae nescia sordidae Horatius.

Intaminatis fulget honoribus.
Virtue is great in every wight,
where she does bear the sway:
Not obfuscat, by dimmend light,
but fayrer than the day.
An honor bright, a Castle strong,
and tower of defense:
To tend and preace thy foes among,
to win a recompense.
Therefore endeavor virtuously
this virtue for to hold:
A spark of such royalty,
as passes yellow gold.
Neither does the Lady Virtue desire riches or worldly goods for any reward:
for she far excels them all, and is much more noble and precious than
they, as Horace testifies by this verse. Horatius.
Vilius argentum est auro, virtutibus aurum. Silver is courser mettell than
gold, and gold courser than Virtue.

Macrob. de somnio Scipionis.
Whereupon Macrobius in his book de Somnio Scipionis says, yt a wise man
attributes ye fruit and reward of his virtue to his wisdom: for he is no
right perfect wise man, which only gapeth for ambition and glory. And in the
same place he wylleth, that who so desires to be a perfect virtuous man, he
content his gredy appetite with reward of his knowledge, that is, that he be
content that he knows Virtue, and not to seek the vain glory thereof.

How to lead an honest and virtuous life.
The second Chapter.
Whosoever desires to live an honest and virtuous life, he must observe two
necessary points. First, that he prepare his mind, whereby he may become
worthy of virtue and honesty. Secondlye, that (his mind thus prepared) he
seek and search out, how and by what means he may attain unto Virtue. The
preparation of the mind, must be compassed by three things that is, by a
willing and prompt desire, that his desire be to will that he profit in
virtue, for it is a great help to honesty, to have a desire to become honest:
for there is nothing so difficulte, which may not be comprised by a willing
mind, so is there nothing harder, than to make an unwilling person willing,
whereupon ryseth this Proverb, Stultum est, canes inuitos ducere venatum, It is
a fond thing, to make unwilling hounds hunt, that is, to compel a nilling man
to any kind of labor is in vain, wherefore Cornicus says nothing is so
easy but may be made uneasy, if thou do it with an unlusty mind.
Lactantius in his first book de instit. christianorum, Lactan. lib. 1. de
instit. Christi.
says, that Virtue it self ought to be adored, and not the Image of Virtue.
And it ought not be worshipped with any sacrifyce, oblations, frankincense, or
solemn supplication, but wholly with a volu^tarye and determined mind. And
the mind thus desirous and stirred to seek virtue, must moreover be suffulced
and protected with two other precepts which are patience and abstinence, that
it sustain, suffer, and abide much pain and travail, and withdraw affection
from all things, and especially from things voluptuous.

Who so does feruentlye desire virtue, must be very patie^t and much suffering,
that he abide and bear the burden of adversity, and the pain of his labor
quietly, that he suffer adversity. Virgilius. Aened. 6.
And as Virgil says in his sixth book of Eneidos. Non cedat malis, Give not
place, nor be moved with any missehap or chance: but boldly, manly, and
stoutly, withstand and resist the same. For as Valerius in his sixth book
says: Valerius. lib. 6.
Euernos animos virtus odisse solet. Virtue does contemn and adnihilate the
weak and feeble minds: that is to say, Virtue does hate and envy those
greatly, which be of fearful minds, which dare not enterprise any thing,
and which also use no co^stancy in their doings. Moreover, to prove patience
and abstinence guides and teachers to seek virtue, Horace declares plainly
in these verses following.

Horatius.
Qui studet optatam cursu contingere metam,
Multa tulit, fecitque, puer, sudauit and alsit,
Abstinuit venere and Baccho.
Who so has inclinde him self,
to hit the wished mark:
His childish years have suffered much
and eke compiled much work.
In burning heat, in pinching cold,
his time he has consumde:
From Venus sports and Bacchus cheer
him self he has amoude.
Prudentius also that Christian Poet, Prudentuis.
does declare in these verses following, how that patience must needs be the
way and guide to him that seeks to Virtue.

Omnibus vna comes virtutibus associatur:
Auxiliumque suum fortis patientia miscet.
Nulla anceps luctame^ init, virtute sine ista:
virtus na^ vidua est, qua^ no^ patientia firmat.
Desine grande loqui, fra^git deus o^ne superbu^,
Magna cadu^t, inflata crepa^t, tumefacta promu^tur.
Disce supciliu^ deponere, disce cauere
Ante pedes fouea^, quisquis sublime minaris.
Peruulgati viget nostri sententia Cbristi
Sca^dere celsa humilis et ad ima reddere voraces.
If trauail thine do race and tend
the virtuous steps to gain.
To patience lore thy study bend,
associate thou her train.
Permit a time, forbear for ease,
proud minds to ruin fall:
Let humbleness thy fury pease,
the voice of Christ does call.
Of Abstinence.
ANd many skilful Clarks have approved also Abstinence from petula^cious
desires and voluptuous affections to be very nedeful to ye seker of Virtue,
Cicero nouae rhetor. lib. 4.
as Cicero lib. 4 nouae Rethoricae, says. Qui nihil in vita habet iucundius
vita voluptuaria, cu^ virtute vitam colere non potest. He that in his life
estemeth nor regards nothing more than his volupiuous and wanton life, can
not inhabit with Virtue. And also Valerius Maximus in his fourth book says:
Valerius. Maximus lib. 4.
That City whose Inhabitants are most given to pleasant delights, loses her
Empire and dominion, neither can that City keep or defend her own liberty
and fredome, but contrariwise, that City whose Inhabitours do wholly incline
them selves to labor, does rule and is able to give liberty and fredom to
others. Lactan. lib. 6.
Lactantius also in his sixth book writes, that there be three kinds of
Virtues. Whereof the first is to refrain evil factes and nefarious works: the
second is to tie thy tongue from sclaundering, backbyting and obserious
talking, the third is, to expel all evil, wicked, and malicious cogitations,
thoughts and premeditations from out thy mind. He that follows the first,
is a virtuous man. He that follows the second, is a perfect virtuous man, if
so be that he offend neither by word nor by deed. And he that follows the
third, follows the likeness: for it is above human nature to pass the
cogitation thereof, which should neither be nequitious to be done, or vicious to
be spoken. Therefore he that seeks virtue, must needs use the help of patience
and abstinence. By whose help and aid he may bear and abide adverse, fortune
and great labor quietly, abhor idleness, and embrace sweat and labor.
Hesiodus.
For Hesiodus the Poet says, that the Gods have placed Virtue in the high,
and alte places, yt he which would win her, should seek her with much sweat,
and grievous travel. For which consideration many Philosophers have spent much
more Oil than Wine, have suffered much sweat, and have but little or nothing
at all given them selves to idleness, for idleness debilitateth and weakeneth
virtue, and co^trariwyse, labor vpholdeth and suffices her. And abstenence is
also very necessary, to abstain from vicious living. For Virtue, as Horace
says, Horatius.
is nothing else but a secluder of vice.

And when as thou have thus instructed and prepared thy mind, that is with a
voluntary will, with patience and abstinence, then must thou seek and inquire
of the learned books and monumentes of ye famous Clearkes, which is the way to
afcende unto Virtue and honesty, for they teach and provulgat, and especially
Laertius in his book de vitis Philosophoru^, Laertius de vitis Philoso.
that each doctrine requires three things, which are, nature, instruction, and
use, that is to say, wit, learning, and exercise.

These three are needful to Virtue.
FIrst a sharp wit whetted and not blunt as ye Beotians, Plato.
for Plato says, that none can be perfect wise, that is to say perfect
virtuous, unless he excel in wit and knowledge, and be imbewed, and adorned
with the comely parts of prudence. As many Philosophers as we read there were
in old time, they did all excel in the capacity of wit. Hereupon
Lactantius in his first book says, Lactan. lib. 1.
that there are two kinds of wisdom: whereof the first is to discern which
be false, the second to know which be true. For all understanding and knowledge
consists of a polyshed, that is to say a quick and sharp wit: Lactantius
lib. 2.
Also Lactantius in his second book says, that they do expel and carye
away wisdom from them selves, which without any judgments before had, allow
the inventions of their elders, and are led and co^duced of others, as brute
beasts, wherefore wit is needful and very necessary, both to search virtue,
and also to judge other men's works. Cicero in his Tusculans questions says:
Cicero Questi. Tuscul.
Ingenio nostro innata sunt semina quaedem virtutu^. etc. By our wit, there
be certain seeds of virtue sprung up, which if they might be suffered to
increase, nature her self would bring and conduct us to a blessed life. If
therefore certain seeds of virtue are sprung up by our wit, certain it is,
that the virtues them selves have their original of wit, as from a treasury or
storehouse thereof. And even by wit every man does either seek virtues, or
else does conceive and learn them the better of his teacher. In consideration
whereof, the ancient and grave Philosophers would never at any time receive
any as their scholars, before they had scrupulouslye sought out his wit and
ingene, and if he were dull and not fine witted, they would deny to instruct
him. For Quintilian says. Quintilianus.
Precepts profit the dull wits no more, than tillage the sterill and barren
field, which be it never so well tilled, will never increase or edure any
fruit at al. Yet ought he not to despair whom God has not sent so pregna^t
a wit, but endeuer by continual labor and pains, to slip away at length all
that hardenesse and infertilitie of his wit, Quintil. lib. 1. ca. 1.
as Quintilian says in his first book and first Chapter. One man excels an
other in wit, but so that he can do either more or less. Nevertheless there
is none, but that by his labor and industry, may at length become ingenious.
And though that each man can not excel, yet must he not therefore leave to prove,
for as Horace says: Horatius.
Est quodda^ prodire tenus, si no^ datur vltra. It is somewhat to go as far
as thou can, if thou may go no further, that is to say: he is worthy praise
which makes but a small journey, if that the rudeness of his wit let him
from going forwards. Yet betwixt the witty and vnwitty there is a double
difference. First, the witty of his own accord and with a swift course,
consecuteth and follows virtue, even as a provoked horse to ru^ne his course,
which must be retired with bridle again. And the dull witted is like a horse
which can not be driven to run, without often spurring: so that ye obtuse wit
is to be whetted sharp with paynefull labors. Quintil.
And Quintilian shows here, how Isocrates had two scholars, Ephorus, and
Theopopus, the one witty, who says he lacked a bridle to retire him, the
other dull, who he says lacked spurs to kick him forwards. The second
difference is, how that the noble and pregnant wit continues not noble for a
long space, or else by oblivion forgets that it has learned before. As the
soon ripe Apples are always soon rotten, but the hard Winter Apples do
molifie and ripe more leysurelye, and therefore they endure and continue the
longer: so ye hard and obtuse wit, with continuance of time and exercise, is
made worthy and fit for virtue. For Erasmus says, Erasmus.
that by daily practice wits do molifie.

Of discipline, science, or instruction.
AND when as thus thou have made sharp and whetted thy wit, the^ have thou
need of science or instruction, for neither does nature nor wit suffice
only, unless they be associate with instruction. because that it makes that
perfect, which else by nature is imperfect. Cicero nouae rhetor. lib. 3.
Therefore Cicero in his third book entitled nou^ Rethorica, says: that
science does confirm, stablishe and augment the commodities of nature, and in
the fourth book of the same Rethoricke Cicero says. Ibid. lib. 4
Vt equus indomitus, qua^uis been natura compositus sit, idoneus no^ potest
esse ad eas vtilitates et arts, quae desiderantur ab equo, ita neque homo
indoctus, quamuis ingeniosus, ad virtutem potest peruenire, quoniam non potest
virtus sine doctrina comparari. Even as an untamed horse, although his
proporcion be never so well shapen and co^pact by the art nature, can not be
made fit and apt for the commodities and feats which are desired in a horse:
no more ca^ an unlearned man, be he never so witty, ascend unto Virtue,
because that virtue can not be adopted or obtained without learning. Upon this,
the learned Gentiles erected common schools, first at Athens a City of the
Grecians most excellent and famous, and at that time in many other places, that
in the^, youth might be educated and instructed in knoweledge, and in comelye,
decent and honest manners, which two are but sickerly gotten without
instruction. Therefore Aristippus the Philosopher did compare the unlearned,
rude, and untaught, to a hard stone, of whom a certain old father inquired at
a certain time, what profit or commodity he should do to his son, if he
should bring him up in learning, he answered. Si nihil aliud, saltem in
theatro non sedebit lapis super lapidem, non erit apud doctos tanquam lapis. If
it profits him nothing, yet at least when he sits beholding any theater
and worthy thing one stone sits not on an other, neither shall he be as a
stone dumb without speech, when as he comes in the company of the learned.
The Ethnickes did know that Virtue was to be gotten by instruction. In
consideration whereof, they kept scholemasters or instructers at home, under
whose rule and government their children learned Arts and Virtues. And that
was so religious amongst the Athenia^s, that they ordained a law, that their
children should not be constrained nor coerced to nourishe their aged fathers,
unless their fathers in their youth had committed them to masters to be
instructed and brought up in the knowledge of Virtue. And instruction to
attain Virtue by, is two fold: the one is mute and dombe, the other quick and
liuelye. The mute and dombe is, to be learned by the books and monumentes of
the learned writers, by the reading of which, we are taught without any word
speaking. The other quick and lively instruction, is to be learned at ye
scholemasters, who from their lively mouth, do send and infunde into the
ears of young me^, the precepts of Virtue. Notwithstanding, the lively
instruction excels ye mute. For we read yt therefore many Philosophers
travailed many countries, neither left they any unseen, as Pyhatgoras,
Empedocles, Democritus, and Plato occupied and used nauigatio^ very often, to
obtain thereby that most amiable Lady Virtue, and with their perigrinatio^s
and long iourneys, they sought her out curiously: for they could not be
contented nor satisfied with ye shadowed, and candle dropped study, which they
might have had betwixt two walls, but co^ferred themselves thither where any
worthy thing was to be learned, not books, but perfect and skillful
Philosophers or instructours. There are four kind of books of Authors
princicipally to be read, which be the works of Poets writing honestly, the
painful labors of Historiographers, the wise, discrete and sage sayings of
Philosophers, and the divine sense of sacred scripture. Honest Poets do so
much conduct and lead to an honest life, that the most famous and learned Cities
of the Greeks in time paste, did bring up and educate their children, first
in Poets, affirming Poets only to be wise, sage and severe. In Poets,
children are taught Virtue, as Horace says in his Epistles most truly.
Horatius.


Os purum tenerum, balbumque, Poeta figurat:
Mox etiam pectus preceptis format amicis,
Instruit exemplis, inopem solatur, and egrum.
The tender stutting childishe mouth,
the Poet shapes aright:
And then with friendly precepts does,
the heart and breast adight.
With good examples does he then
instruct the childishe boy:
He comfortes eke the nedy men.
whom sickness does anoy.
Secondly, the worthy Historiographers which declare unto us the famous gestes,
civil manners, and happy fortunes of noble and worthy men, by whose laudable
life we may se the way of well living, and by whose temeritie or unlucky
destiny, we may foresee to live more circumspectly, which is a goodlye thing,
to use others rashness to our temperance, as Diodorus says: Diodorus
It is a fair thing by other men's faults to amend our own maculous life, and
by the example of others to know what is to be desired, and what is to be
eschewed. An History, says Beroaldus, does greatly profit, Beroaldus
after that that is honest, detesting and adnihilating the vicious, extolling
the sincere and godly, suppressing the peruers and wretched. Thirdely, the
books of the mild Philosophers, which declare and inform us of the
documentes and precepts of Virtue, as the ten books of Aristotle entitled his
Ethicke, Ciceros three books of Offices, Lactantius works de deuina institut.
Erasmus of the institution of a Christian Prince, and many mo, which have
lively, virtuously and friendly depainted and set forth the trade of an honest
life. Fourthly and last of all, the books of holy scripture, which declare and
teach, how we should know God, whom to know a creator of all things, and he
to be but one only, is the dear, true and perfect wisdom of man, Lactantius
lib. 2.
as Lactantius writes in his second book.

Poverty ought not to be repugnant to Virtue.
IT is not to be esteemed that many accuse and condemn poverty, whereby they
can less apply the study of Virtue. For as Apuleius says, poverty was in old
time house servant to the Philosophers, neither was any known to ascend to
any dignity, whom poverty had not enutried and brought up, even from their
infa^cy. Poverty in ancient time was conditrix and edificatrix of all Cities,
the governor and guide of al arts, clear of all faults, the liberal
rewarder of all praise, whom all nations have extolled and magnificenced with
all praise and glory. Therefore Apuleius says thus, if any man be oppressed
with poverty, let him imitate Cleantes, a Philosopher, who constrained through
poverty labored by night, drawing water, to the intent that he might provide
for to buy his victual fode in the day, by which means, he might the more
commodiously apply his study: let him therefore labor while time is, that he
may conciliat whereby to live and obtain Virtue, which comes unto the
paynefull laborers hand. Seneca.
Whereupon Seneca says thus. Virtute^ in Templo inuenies, in Foro, in Curia,
per muros stante^, puluerulentam, colorata^, callosas habente^, manus, qui
nihil aliud videtur oste^dere, quam quod etiam laboriosos homines virtus
adiuuat and amplectitur. Thou shall find virtue in the Temple, in the Market
place, in the Court, standing before the walls all dustie, al to be painted
with durte, having hard hands, whereby it is to be perceived, that Virtue does
also love and embrace laborious men.

Whether Virtue can be adopted without learning.
IN case adventure some would say, there be many unlearned men which never at
any time adhibited their minds to study, and yet are reputed and esteemed men
of an honest life and conversation. It is to be answered: even as some ascend
unto Virtue by their singular wit without learning, Cicero de oration.
as Cicero in his book of Orations testifies, saying: I have known many
notable witty men, virtuous, without learning, who have been by nature modest
and grave. And this also do I often ascribe unto Virtue: nature to be of much
more excellencye without learning, than learning without nature. And again,
even the same I contend, when as, eloquence and the ground of learning is
joined with an excellent and noble nature, then do I not know what shall
continue egregious and notorious. This spoke Cicero very prudently.

Of exercise and practice.
YEt beside wit and science, thirdely he must use the help of exercise,
otherwise he studieth friuolously to seek Virtue. Cicero nouae rhetor. lib. 3.
As Cicero testifies in his third book of new Rethoricke. In omni
disciplina infirma est artis praeceptio sine summa assiduitate excitationis,
tu^ vero in memoriis minimum valet doctrina nisi industria and labor, and
dilige^tia comprebetur. In every discipline the precept of Art is feeble and of
no force, unless it be sedulously exercised. And also doctrine preuayleth
nothing in memory, except with great industry, labor and diligence it be
proved. Lactan. lib. 3.
And Lactantius in his third book says, that Arts are therefore learned, not
that they should be only known, but also exercised, and that they should be
used either for the help of man's life, or for pleasure, or else for glory and
worthy fame. Cicero in officiis.
Cicero in his book of Offices says, yt all the praise of virtue consists
not in ye knowledge of Virtue, but in the function thereof, that is, it
avails but little to know what Virtue is, what is honest, and what is vicious,
but to use and exercisce virtue it self.

How that this exercise of the science which thou know or have, had, is the
way to get virtue.
WHo so desires the fruit and commodity of true Virtue and sincere honesty,
out of those.iiij. books, yt is to say, of Poetry, Historiographie,
Philosophy, and holy Scripture, it is necessary he learn the accustomed
manner of Bees in the collectio^ of their honey. The Bees are accustomed when as
they gather honey, to fly about diverse flowers, to taste many flowers, and of
the juice thereof to excerpe and suck somewhat, and then to carye some of the
moisture thereof in to their Hyues, which they lay down and fardel up
together, to compound honey thereof: thus frequenting and doing this often, they
conserve and co^glomerate much honey on heaps in length of time, which is a
sweet fruit of their labors: even so must the desirous to be virtuous,
which also wissheth to come to the state of a man, use a quadruple exercise.

The first exercise is, that he excerpate and annote in a void book, as the
keeper of memory, whatsoever he shall read or be taught, which may be a
furtherance to eloquence and Virtue. For an egregious man must have the use of
them both as Cicero testifies in his first book of his old Rhetoric,
affirming that wisdom without eloquence helps little to the government of
Cities, and eloquence without wisdom does hinder more than profit. Let every
Student therefore, make him two void books, in which he shall write both what
he has heard, and also what he has read: in the one to annote fine sugared
sentences, in other virtuous precepts, like a covetous man, who heapeth up
treasures, for which he has diverse chestes, specially where he puts his
silver, and where he puts his gold, alone. This exercise did Pliny the
co^positor of ye natural History, use and imitate, of whom Pliny his second
uncle writes, that he never read any thing worthy to be noted, but he committed
it to writing. The second exercise is, to conceal such annotations in the
retentiue memory, and that he think to use them often as Macrobius writes in
his sixte book, saying: Macrobius lib. 6.
the best and most profitable way of reading and hearing, is to immitate those
which seem most probable, and to convert the sayings of other to some use of
thine, which thou think most grave, and most to be admyred, which
accustomed manner the pleasant Latins as also ye noble Gretians were wont to
use, which is not only to hear any Author, to learn his words, or to
understand his oration or phrase of speaking, but of his learning and
doctrine, to collect the mellifluous eloquence and right way of living, even as
meat received only in the mouth nothing nourishes the body except it
discende into the stomach, and there concoqued and sodden, in the end
convert to flesh and blood, so neither the lesson that is heard or read,
profits any whit the student, unless it be conferred to some use of talking
and more wisdom. The third exercise is this, to draw every day a line by
example of ye Painter Appelles, who would daily, were he never so sore occupied
about other affairs, depaynt or draw one line at the least. And so does the
covetous man put daily one piece of silver into his treasury, for many littles
make a great, as Hesiodus the Poet says: Hesiodus.
Paruula si tentas super adiecisse pusillis, idque frequenter peragas, magnus
cumulatur aceruus. Which is: If thou add or put little to little, and use it
eftsoon, thereof rises a great heap. And in this exercise it is not to be
labored how much we learn daily, but how well. Therefore Appelles answered an
unskillful Painter who gloried that he had drawn an Image suddenly: I do not
marvel at this, says he, for thou may draw many more such foolish
pictures quickly. Wherefore we ought to follow that witty sentence of Cato, Sat
cito si stat been. Cato:
Inoughe well done is done quickly enough. Whereupon Augustus Caesar used this
adage, Augustus Caesar.
Matura lent. Haste not to much in thy work, but do it wiselye without much
temerity or rashness. For the soft circumspect space profits more, than the
swifte hedlong course without all wit and reason. The fourth and last
exercise, is to report and reuolue at night whatsoever was learned the day
before, which use Cato used as Philel. writes in his book de educa. puero.
And Apuleius writes of a certain people in India, which are called
Gymnosophistae, which know neither to inhabit their land, nor the use of
tillage, neither to bridle horses neither to tame bulls, neither to shere
sheep, yet they adored wisdom greatly. Both ancient masters, as also young
ryping scholars, have nothing in more contempt than the sluggish slothfulness
of ye mind. For when as their table was spread ready for dinner, and before
meat was set thereon, all the young men from diverse places and offices came to
Dine. Then would the master inquire of each of the^ what good he had done
that day from the rising of the sun. Then one would remember how he had set
two at unity and concord. An other would say he had obeyed his parents
commandments: another would say he had found something by practice: and an
other would say he had learned somewhat. And he which could show nothing, was
thrust dinnerlesse out of the doors to work. And so ought every stude^t at
night to practice with him self the property of sheep, whose nature is, that
when toward night they be driven from out the meadows unto the fields, they
do eat and chaw again their meat that they have gathered of all the day
before, and therefore they surrender milk into their pastors. In likewise
ought the enamored with virtue to repeat at night both what he has read, and
also what he has heard, both which be grounded on eloquence, and also which
be godly and virtuous in doctrines. And secondly, that he turn into milk, that
is that he use to seem profitable and honest of living, that others may se
wherein he has profited, even as the sheep show their pasture by their milk,
to have eaten grass, and not to have spent the day idlelie. And also it shall
be very profitable to examine with another, whether he has profited more in
eloquence or in virtue. For whereas he conferreth with others either of the^
proves what he knows, and what he does not know. Whereupon Sueto in his book
of the institutions of Grammarians, says: Sueto.
that in the old time in schools of learning, it was the accustomed manner,
that the scholars should in the fore noone contend the one with the other in
disputations, and in the after noone recite those disputatio^s and arguments by
root.

What comeliness, virtue and honesty each man ought to keep in all ages.
THe life of Virtue or honesty, consists in two things. First, in the
comely or nature of it self. And secondly, in the decent and honest behavior
toward others, as Macrobius testifies, saying: that by Virtue a good man is
made governor and ruler over him self, and consequently over the common
weal. First, it is needful that every man rule him self before he instruct
others, whereupon Thales Milesius a Philosopher, being demanded who were an
vpryghte Prince, he made answer: he that rules him self so, yt it can not be
objected in his teeth.

And how it becomes each man to rule and govern him self by Virtue, must be
consecuted by diligent labor, which shall be declared hereafter.

Who so wit guide and rule him self honestly, must keep six precepts.
OF which the first is, that he learn to hold his peace, that he love silence
better than iangling talk, for taciturnitie and little talk betokens a wise
and prudent man. And contrariwise, over much prattling betokens a fool, who
knows not to hold his peace, Macrobius says: by silence a Plilosopher does
no less divine than by speaking, that is to say, it is no less sign of
wisdom to keep silence, than to speak. Whereof Pythagoras (as writes
Apuleius) called first by te name of a Philosopher, taught his scholars at the
first, only to keep silence. And the first instruction to make a wise
scholar, was to coerce and bridle his tongue, and to repress and keep back
the words within the wall of his teeth. Socrates also being demanded of a
certain man by what means every man might attain unto wisdom: he prescribed
him two ways, ye first was, that he keep close more than he speak, and the
other was, that he learn to speak, which was singularly spoken of him, for it
is manifestlye known by three signs, that silence ought more to be used than
loquacitie. First, by nature man has but one mouth, and two ears, that he
should not speak all that he heard. The second sign is, by the custom of
the ancient Romans, for the Romans were wont to depict the Lady Angerona,
Goddess of silence, having her mouth closed up with wax. And the Egyptians
depainted Harpocrates, God of silence, shutting his mouth with two fingers.
Thirdlye, by the old aunciente Philosophers doctrine and learning, who did
damnifie nothing in a man more than much iangling, saying yt nature gave man
teeth and lips before his tongue, for that consideration, that he might
suppress and bridle it, least he should become a great chatterer. Xenocrat.
And Xenocrates a Philosopher being inquired of, as touching his silence, he
made answer again, that he never repented for not speaking, but that it often
times grieved him that he spoke. The second precepte is, that he learn to
declare and speak that that is decent and comelye to speak, not to tell lying
tales, but in all things to tell the truth: For he that dare tell that which is
feigned, and has not been seen, then is he a liar and a deceytfull person,
Horatius.
as Horace testifies, neither ought any man (as Pliny says) speak that
which may be hurtful to the speaker, Plinius.
neither to utter backebiting words which might diminish an other man's
honor, neither to go whispering, or as one would say, to speak within his
sleeue, but only to pronounce that which is honest, chaste, profitable and
true. And the right virtuous man does keep in secret all other, whereupon Ovid
writes two trim verses saying: Eximia est virtus praestare silentia rebus. Et
contra, grauis est culpa tacenda loqui. Which is in our mother tongue: Silence
is an excellent virtue, far passing and exceeding all things. And
contrariwise it is an intolerable offense to utter those things which ought to
be kept in secret. Therefore in speaking we ought to keep this order and law,
that when we would speak, we first forese, whether it becomes the place, ye
time, and also the persons which be there present. Secondly, that we speak
then when as otherwise with our silence we might hinder our selves or our
friends. Thirdly, that he take heed least he do to much, that is, that in
all things he observe a mean and measure, and that he commit not to often
that which is naught, neither that to little which is good. Terentius in Andria
As Terence says in his Comedy nominated Andria, the first scene. Nam id
arbitror adprime in vita vtile esse, vt ne quid nimis. For I think it very
necessary to the life of man, in all things to keep a mean. For which cause
the learned men describe Virtue to sit in the midst. Est modus in rebus. Sunt
certi denique fines, quos vltra citraque nequit consistere recte. There is a
mean in all things, and each thing has certain limitts beyond which, or on
this side which, Virtue consists not. For Virtue consists in a mean, and
in all excess and superfluity, vice takes up her dwelling place. Wherefore,
in all things a mean is commendable, and excess always vituperable. Hesiodus.
Hereupon the Poet Hesiodus has a pretty saying. Demidiu^ plus toto. That is to
say: A mean is more laudable tha^ superfluity. And it is a common proverb.
Omne nimium vtitur in vitium. Every to much is stark naught. Cleobolus Lindus.
And Cleobolus Lyndus one of the seven wise men of Greece, says: The best in
every thing, is a mean or measure.

The fourth precept is, that every man eschew and slye in him self, that
which he sees filthy and uncomely in an other, remembering the Philosopher
Diogines his sentence, who says. Diogenes.
Si vis bonus and virtute praeditus effici, expelle a te quod in alio despicis.
If thou desire to be an honest and virtuous man, seclude that vice from thy
self, which thou espiest filthy in an other. And Cicero says, he must be a
perfect virtuous man, Cicero.
that will tell his neighbor of his vice, for we can easily and quicklye espy
other men's faults, but our own we will not know. If any descend into his
own bowels, and search his own conscience, and do way and consider with him
self what he is, then will he cease biting his neighbor with his vicious
mind, and first, he will go and purge him self from all his vices and sinful
life, and adorn and trim him self with virtue. Therefore our Savior Jesus
Christ in his Gospel, persuading us to Virtue, does command us, first to cast
the great beam of sin from out our own eyes, and after the little mote in
our neighbors, that we should first cure and heal our selves, and
consequently other.

The fifth precept is, to abide his estate what so ever it be, whether it be
prosperous or adverse, not to joy over much over his fortunate life, least she
suddenly turning her whele, double his sorrow and pensyfnesse: and that he be
not too heavy and sorrowful for his unfortunate life, but to learn of
Socrates, Socrates.
in both his estates to keep one countenance, and one mind. Plato.
Whereupon Plato being asked at a certain time whereby a wise man might be
known, he answered: A wise man though he be contemned, will not be moved,
neither shall his praise or great name make him arrogant or proud. For Virtue
has none acquaintance with pride, because it is a vice, neither does it
admit the familiarity of desperatnes and wrath, because they be also vices.
Wherefore it is a common proverb, Qui homo in aduersis rebus pusilli est animi,
ille nauti est. Which is thus much to say: That man which in adversity is
fainte hearted, is not to be esteemed. Therefore a man ought to do both in
prosperity and in adversity, as a certain Philosopher did, who in
prosperity, would be sad, and saying that after mirth comes sorrow, and
likewise in adversity he would be mirry, saying: that after sorrow came mirth,
for fortune is ever mutable and inconstant, therefore ought we in prosperity to
look for adversity ensuing. As Plaut. in Amph. says, Plaut. in Amphit.
Ita diis visum est, voluptati vt meror comes subsequatur. For so it is the
Gods pleasure, that sorrow should be mirthes waiting maid. And therefore also
ought we to think thus in adversity how that God shall end this misery at his
will and leisure, or as Virgill says. Virgilius.
It shall be sufficient to have thought on those euilles, and not always and
continually to muse and think thereon.

The sixth and last precepte shall be, that he endeavor him self to please
every honest and wise man, for thereof descends great praise and virtue: for
consequently it follows, that who so pleases them, is also either honest, or
else by frequenting their company learneth honesty: for good me^ love none but
good, and the naughty person none but evil. Therefore expedient it is, that he
who will obtain virtue, do apply his industry to please virtuous men, as
Seneca says: we must choose some virtuous man whom we must always follow, yt
we live so, as though he always saw us, and what so ever we do, to do it
so, as though he were present at the doing thereof: for he may easelye live an
honest and virtuous life, who lives after the will and rule of virtuous men,
and does all his things as though they were done before them, even as women
decking and trimming them before a glass, and when they have adorned them
selves finely and neatly, they wander into the market, there to be viewed and
seen.

Concerning the manners and virtues of all ages.
Although that Virtue and honesty do deck and adourne a man, yet
notwithstanding, every age has his condition of honesty, for it is a
proverb. Alia vita, alia dieta, alios mores postulant.

For all conditons are not comely for every age, for some become children, some
youth, some young men, some men, and other some aged men, for with the age the
nature changes, therefore must they also change their manners. For there are
v. ages of men, which be these: infancy, childehoode, youth, man's age, and
old age, which have their conditions particularly them selves.

As concerning infancy.
Infancy is the first age of man after his nativity, and it is so called,
because it can not speak, and therefore he can learn no good manners or virtue,
because he is not yet reasonable, nor has not the use and practice of the
tongue, neither has he any perseverance at all. Therefore must he only live
after the will and pleasure of the Nursse or Mother.

De Pueritia.
PVeritia is the second age, when as the infants do begin to speak, having not
as yet the full use of reason. It may so be, that they be called children of
the Latin word Bua, that is a Childs drink, which they call Bua, uttering
their words first imperfectly, without wisdom, reason, or understanding. And
these the Parents ought to teach, to bring them up in honest manners and
conversation. First with these manners: that they worship and pray unto God
with a willing heart, that they be obedient to their Parents, that they
reverence their elders, that they fly and avoid all play and evil company,
least they be defiled with vices before they attain unto reason, which is ye
most odious thing on earth. Apuleius.
As Apuleius says who would not hate and desdaine that boy whom he sees as
though he were a certain mo^ster, stout, bold and very vicious, being as yet
under age, sooner to be unhappy and nequitions, than strong of body, being but
of tender years, and yet of stubbern malice and hatred? Yet notwithstanding you
can not require perfect wisdom in a child, whilst as yet his childishness
and imbicilitie of wit has dominion and power over him, therefore he plays
with tryfles and gegawes. And for all this, yet must you not favor him over
much, least he incline him to vices, and so remain always filthy and
uncleanly. For whatsoever he learneth once in his youth, that will he use for
ever. Wherefore they ought diligently to be instructed and nusseled up in these
precepts. Phill. li. 8. de educat. liberoru^.
As Phille. writes in his eight book of the bringing up of children, that is,
that they worship God, that they be gentle, obedient and serviceable in words,
conditions and body: And to use a comely cleanly and decent form of apparel,
not to be tale caryars, nor liars, nor beasts of fylthy and wicked conditions,
not lean of body as Asses, neither yet filthy as Hogs in the mire, neither
slouenlyke in their apparel, as beggars or fleshely and lecherous goats,
neither dull witted like a stone or Ass. And as soon as they be once seven
years old, to commit them in custody to scholemasters, for so were the
gentiles wont to do, Phil. lib. 2. de educat. liberoru^.
as Phille. writes in his second book of the bringing up of children.

De Iuuentute.
IVuentus is the next age to Pueritia, Perottus.
although that Perottus says that ye wise counselors do numbers it after
Adolescentia, yet it is before Adolescentia by daily use, which age comes in,
when as the children can new utter their words perfectly and plainly, and are
committed to Scholemasters to be instructed, or else be ready to be given to
their charge. And as Perottus says, Perottus.
it is called Iuuentus, youth, of this word Iuua^do, to help, because it
waxes able and potent to help his parents, for it ca^ dispatch quickly his
fathers will and commandment, and can put his help to many labors, or at
least do his will thereto. And as Quintilian writes in his first book and
third Chapter. Quintilianus. lib. 1. capit. 3.
In this age, parents must beware that they do not to much pamper up their
children, to keep them so tender, that no cold wind may blow over them, for
that soft kind of bringing up does corrupt and debilitate the strength and
force, both of the body, and also of the wit. And what shall this youth do,
which is thus lasciuiouslye brought up? Verily they that be wanto^ly,
petela^tiously and delicatly kept in this age, will look for the same
delicacie all their life after: And when as they can keep this no longer,
either for their sumptuous expenses, or else for lack of Patrimony, then do
they labor by all means, by right or by wrong to taste their sweet lickorouse
and dilicate mouth, then do they fall into such idleness, play, pastimes, and
thefts, and consequently into all kind of wickedness. In this age the
children of Rome were wont to hang their golden ornaments up with a roope upon
the Temple which they ware about their necks from their infancy, as though
they did renounce all childishenesse: And then did they put on a fine white
gown guarded with Purple, in token to leave all childish conditions, and in
example of a better, more pure and honest life, that when they should see the
whiteness of their gowns, they should fly vice, which makes a man look
black, and hated of other, and beholding the brightness of the purple color,
they should endeavor them selves yt their godly and virtuous living should so
shine, whereby it might conciliat praise of all men.

These were the duties of children.
First to worship almighty God, with humble prayers, and a lowly sincere and
an obedient heart, to honor and obey their Parents, to love and fear their
Masters, to give diligent ear to these three: to fly what they forbid, to
execute and do what they command, that they learn the commandments of God,
hear them taught, seek them out where as they be, and faithfully to follow
them. And it may easily be perceived how that a young man must obey these
three, for of these three consists our whole life. Of God we receive our
souls, of our parents our human subta^ce, and of our masters the
instruction of our soul, by which our life differs from brute beasts.
Therefore expedient it is, that we obey them, least we seem ungrateful and
thanklesse.

De Adolescentia.
ADolescentia is the fourth age, which begins from the fourtenth year of
our life, and it is called Adolescentia of this word Adolesco, which
signifies to increase, to grow upward, for then man does increase in body,
in strength, in reason, in vice, and in Virtue: yet are they more prone and
flexible to vice than to Virtue. And then is every man's nature and disposition
first known, unto what he is most inclined: for before yt age it can not be
known through the childishenesse and foolishness of age. But be they once
spro^g up this age, they give their mind to some kind of exercise, Terentius
in Andria
as Terence in his Comedy called Andria says, either to ride horses, or to
keep dogs for hunting, or else to worship, and learn of some notable learned
man. As Horace writes also in his book entitled de art Poetica.

Imberbis Iuuenis tandem custode remoto
Gaudet equis, Canibus, and aprici gramine ca^pi.
Caercus in vitium flecti, monitoribus asper
Vtilium tardus prouisor, prodigus aeris,
Sublimis, cupidusque and amata reli^quere pnix.
When as the beardlesse man,
is past his Masters charge:
To bridle horse is his delight,
to see Dogs run at large.
To hunt the Fox or Hare,
to make a merry sport:
In lusty youth is care,
to live in such a sort.
This age is double, the first beginning from.xiiij. to.xviij. and it is called
youth beardelesse, because at those years young men be without beards. As
Phoebus, Phoebus
otherwise called Apollo stood in ancient time in the Temples of the Gentiles
without a beard. As Vale. Max. writes in his first book de Neglecta
religione, Valerius Maximus lib. 1. de neg. relig.
concerning the story of Dionisius Tyrannus Syracusanus. Then from.xviij.
years their Bearde does begin to grow, and then they be called young men with
beards, growing to man's estate. And this age does precipitate and thrust
down hedlong a young man into al kind of vice, in idleness, pastimes,
disobedience, glotony, luxuriousness, whore hu^ting, pride, prodigality, and
unto al kind of sensuality, consuming and wasting their patrimony
friuolouslye, nothing weighing their hoar hairs to come, as al Comedies do
plainly declare, which entreat nothing of yo^g men, but how they slashe out
their goods on voluptuous pleasures and delicate ba^kets.

How Parents and Masters ought to train up young men to virtue and honesty.
Seeing therefore this age is more ready to vice, than all other ages be, and
does daily more and more give it self hedlong to youthful lusts and
concupiscences, even as a young Colte whom youth tickeleth, therefore ought young
men of this age to be rained either of their parents, or else of their Masters,
even as the wild starting horse is tamed and brydeled of the horse courser,
with pricking spurs. In which thing parents or masters must use four things,
if so be that they will bring them to any good pass, that is to say with
instruction, with monition, with large promise, and last of al, with praise and
threatenings.

Instruction consists of six Precepts.
WHereof the first is, as I said before, that they be taught chiefly and
before all things to worship and pray unto God, who has given essence and
being to all, has fed and preserved al, leaving no heinous crime unpunished,
no virtuous deed unrewarded, giving an everlasting reward to the good, and a
perpetual punishment to the evil, and that without his lawful favor and grace
our mortality is able to comprehend nothing, and without his especial grace,
we are not able to live a moment: And therefore to be careful, least with our
wicked life we offend.

Secondly, not to trust in worldly goods, and specially in the beauty of the
body, for the pulcritude thereof is a very frail and mutale good, Virgilius.
Eglog. 2.
as Virgil says in his second Eglog.

O formose puer nimium ne creed colori,
Alba ligustra cadu^t, vaccinia nigra legu^tur.
O fair sweeete boy
Do thou not joy,
of thy sweet pleasant face:
Trust not to much
That thou art such,
beware in any case.
For Pepper is black
And has a good smacke,
and every man will it bye:
Snow is white
And lies in the dyke,
and most men let it lie.
Neither let it grieve them, if nature have not compou^ded their limbs as well
as she has done others, but let them labor ye they be far bewtiful and
splendent in mind. Francisc. Petrar. li. de aduers. fortuna.
For as Franciscus Petrar. says in his book de aduersa fortuna. Pulchrius est
pulchru^ fieri. The fairest beauty is, a man to make him self bewtifull, that
is: knoweledge and Virtue, which is a far fairer thing, than to be borne
fair and comely of personage. And this commandment was Socrates wont to
teach his scholars, that they should often co^template and behold them selves
in a glass: and seeing themselves fair of body and face, they should also
endeavor too make themselves fair of mind. For the body co^tayning within it a
defiled mind, is a gaye and a goodly Sepulcher, concluding within it a rotten
and a putrified body. Wherefore our Savior Jesus Christ in his holy Gospel,
called the Pharisees, painted Sepulchers, for that they outwardly appeared
religious and honest, and were inwardely ravening Wolves. And Socrates
commanded them also, that seeing the^ selves not well shaped, they should also
seek the bewty of the mind, with knowledge and virtue, which is more noble
and of longer continuance than the shape of the body.

Thirdly, that they put no confidence nor trust in their riches and goods,
neither in their great abundance of money, but yt they trust only to their
science and virtue, hoping in time to become rich and happy men, for the wise
and learned is the true rich man: and worldly riches are but transitory and
quickly lost. For we read of many exceeding rich men, who have in a moment
been most unfortunate, as was Croesus the most rich Prince of the earth, king
of the Lydians. Neither are riches to be esteemed as precious Jewels, Cecero.
li. 4. nouae reth.
for Cicero says in his fourth book nouae Rethor. Si voles diuitias comparare
cum virtute, vix satis idoneae eru^t, vt sint virtutis predissequae sieve
famulae. If thou will compare riches with virtue, they are scarce fyt for to be
her waiting maids or servants: therefore ought young men in their flourishing
wit and ripe age, to prepare a waifaring man or guide to lead them ye way to
old age, which wayfaring man, is virtue and knowledge. For by them, and
through them, the aged man has honor, praise, health, and nourishment: Thales
Milesius.
Whereupon Thales Milesius a Philosopher, being demanded in time past what young
men should learn, he made answer: let them learn those things by which
they may live in their old age, that is to say, virtue and knowledge.

The fourth document and precept is, that they teach them to avoid that which
they see hurtful to another, or yt which they see contaminate or defile
another, and that by other men's damages and misfortunes they learn wisdom,
and that by them they amend and correct their own wicked life to a better. The
vices which corrupt and rust men, are disobedience, lying, tangling talk,
unfaithfulness, dishonestie, carding and dycing, and all such filthy games,
whorehunting, drunkenness, prodigality, idleness, and the company of vicious
persons.

The fifth precept is, that they put before their eyes the example both of good
men, and also of vicious and wicked me^, that they may see the life and death
of them: how the wicked have been rewarded with punishment, and the good men
with praise. In consideration whereof, the old ancient Romans did vestite and
array their young men, in ye prime of their youth, with gowns decent for men, yt
by little and little, they might at the last creep to an honest life. After
that they were led to the open Market place, that they might know and see
the life of me^ to be double, the one vicious, the other virtuous, the vicious
and perverse life to have an evil end and confusion, but the way to the
virtuous life, to be straight and full of brambles and briers, but yet at the
last to be rewarded with a perpetual beneficial good reward Therefore Hercules
being at the state of a young man, choose rather to serve virtue through labor
and pains, knowing that after labor their comes a reward, than to be in
bondage to vice by idleness. Cicero. li. 1. Officioru^.
As Cicero writes of him in his first book of Offices.

Sixthly, that they be still occupied with labor and weariness, and never
suffered to give them selves to idleness, least they fall into all disordered
lusts: For as Ovid says, labor takes away all the desires of the flesh:
Ouidius.
Otia si tollas, periere Cupidinisarcus. If thou drive away idleness, love
shall have no force on thee.

Therefore the old Romans did daily exercise their children in wrestling,
fighting and swimming: therefore ought young men to be exercised with daily
labor, eue^ as horse coursers use to break young horses, ryding them daily from
streate to streate, or in the fields, to use them to ryding to ye spur and
the bridle, who being let still run at large, would be past man's might to
rule.

Of Monition.
SEcondly, Parents and Masters must not only instruct young men, but warn them
also of their faults. If they commit any crime, they ought to be taught to do
better and more vertuouslye. And often times to commen in the presence of them
of honesty, and honest men, that at the length by daily admonition and
warning, they may become ye more honest, for words do move the mind, and
that which a man hears often, it imprinted and enclosed in his heart. And
that they exhorted and admonished to imitate the footesteppes of their Godly
and reverend Parents, of their honest Kinsfolks and Neuewes, as Aeneas in
the.xij. book of Aeneidos does persuade and admonish his son Ascanius, yt of
him his father he should learn virtue: saying.

Disce puer virtutem ex me, verumque laborem,
Fortunam ex alijs, nunc te mea dextera bello.
Defensu^ dabit, and magna inter praemia ducet,
Tu facito, mox cum matura adoleucrit aetas,
Sis memor.
O Child learn virtue here of me,
the root of labor true:
Which shall thee lead to dignity,
that never thou shall rue.
But escape to shore, and swim to land
when other riches fleet:
A perfect guide by thee to stand,
a Lantern to thy feet.
Of large and liberal promise.
THirdely, that they promise them to get great rewards of every man in every
place, and always if in case they seek after Virtue, as Horace says in his
Epistles. Horatius. in epistolis.
I bone, quo virtus tua te ducit, I pede fausto, Grandia laturus meritoru^
praemia. Go happily virtuous man whether so ever thy Virtue shall conduct and
lead thee, in hope to bring home great rewards for thy deserts. Go forwards O
ye young men, whether virtue shall lead you, for great is your reward, for he
has al things plentiously, and to him that seeks virtue there wants
nothing. Plautus.
As Plaut. testifies in Amph. Comaedi.

Of praise and threatenings.
FOurthly and last of all, ascribe praise to young men, if they continue and
prosper in virtue. For praise is a great help, and aid to finish and end
their course that they have determined. Ovid. lib. 5 de tristibus
As Ovid shows in the fifth book, de tristibus.

Denique non paruas animo dat gloria vires,
Et foecunda facit pectora laudis amor.
Finally, glory does encourage and strengthen the mind, and the love and
desire of fame does make men fruitful. For all men as Cicero says, are trained
and inflamed with the fervent desire and hot love of honor and praise.
Quintilan
Quint. also allows the praise of young me^, if they profit in virtue: And
also he co^me^deth threatenings for the^, if that they be sluggish and unwilling
to attain unto virtue and honesty, and not threatenings only, but grievous
and smarting strypes: Cicero lib. 4. nouae rethoricae.
As Cicero testifies in his.iiij. book nouae Rhetor. saying: Qui Adolescentum
peccatis ignoscendum putant oportere, falluntur: propteria quod aetas illa no^
est impedimento bonis studiis. Apti sunt ad bona discenda, non minus qua^ mala.
At hii sapienter faciunt, qui Adolescentes maxim castigant, vt quibus
virtutibus omnem vita^ possint tueri, eas in aetate maturissima sibi comparent.
They that think it good to remitte young men their faults, are deceived: for
so much that age is a furtherance to good and virtuous studies: for they are
apt and prompt no less to learn goodness tha^ vice. But they are most wise,
who do chaste^ young men, that in their rypest age they may get such virtues,
by which they may defend all their life after.

Of the offices and duty of young men.
Young men have diverse offices. First they must choose, prepose and determine
the trade of their living which they will use during their life: as we read
that Hercules did. And as the Romans were accustomed to bring their young men
into the common Market place, apparelled with gowns as men, and there should
they flyng abroad nuttes, with which they had played a great while. They
should reject their former ages youthfulness, and should endeavor to live an
honest man's life. For he that will live amongst men, must not excede the honest
mean of living.

Secondly, Cicero, lib. 1. officiorum.
as Cicero testifies in his first book of Offices. A young man ought to
reverence his elders, and by the good fatherly admonitions and sincere honesty
of the best and most godly of them, to institute and prepose his kind of
living, to bridle him self from lusts, and from all foolish appetites, and
that he exercise with labor, and with patience and sufferance, both of the
body and of the mind, that he may be apt and fit both for the wars and for
Civil affairs. And when as he is disposed to recreate and quicken his sprites
and give him self to some pastime, that he beware of intemperance, but always
use reverence and shamefastness, not to be too prodigal and lascivious, but
reverent, and specially in those things at which he would have his elders and
seniors present. Furthermore, that both in place and in time they think them
selves men, and not beasts, and for that cause their manners to exceed the
manners and conditions of beasts, and that they think them selves young men,
and not children or babes, to play as children: neither that they think them
selves men or fathers, that of them selves they should be wise inoughe, but
that they lack as yet instructions and godly lessons.

Of man's age.
THe fifth age is called man's age, when as a man is grown to his full ripe
age, and that his body is past growth, and his beard buddeth from out his
chinne. And this age is most apt and fit to receive virtue and honesty. For
it is of force both by reason and of the body to embrace virtue. For of the
Latin word (which is attrybuted to this age) that is to say Vir, ye name of
Virtue is deryued: for adding ye syllable, tus, to this word Vir, it is made
Virtus. For Virtue was first nominated of this Latin word Vir for a man,
because that man only is able to receive and learn virtue.

Of the honest life of man.
Man's life ought to be altogether honest and virtuous. For he lives not a
perfect honest life, who uses not all Virtues, though he offend but in some.
Therefore a man ought to be prudent, just, chaste, and strong. He must be
prudent, that he may do each thing prudently, wisely, and warely, he must
remember both what he has spoken, and what he has done, to order those
things that he has presently to do ryghtly, to forcast and provide for time
to come, whatsoever he does, to do it wisely, and always to forsee the end: for
it is a filthy thing, as Cicero says, Cicero
in ye end to say had I wist. And Terence also in Adelphos says: Terentius in
Adelp.
Istud est sapere, no^ quod ante oculos est solum videre, sed que futura sunt
prospicere. It is a wise thing not only to use the time present, but to forse
the things to come. He must be also just, hurting or da^nifying none, but
friendly to all men, to set unity and concord between all men. Moreover he must
be godly and gentle in all his words and deeds, faithful, trusty and constant.
For faith, as Cicero says, is the foundation of justice: he must be also
temperate in all things, using a mean between two extremities: modest, chaste,
moderate, sparing, sober and shamefast.

He must be strong withal, not in the force of the body, but in the operation
of the mind: not fearful and weak minded in the time of trouble, not to be
dashed out of countenance with every mishap or evil fortune, but boldly to go
against it. Let him not be suddenly moved and feared, but be of a strong courage
how soever the matter chance or happen. Yet let him bridle his gredy desire
and wrathful anger above all things, neither desire foolish gawdes as
children, neither let him moved with anger do any thing. Therefore Plato, being
asked what manner of men was stro^gest: he answered, he which can refrain his
own anger.

Finally, a virtuous man ought to observe these two precepts. First, that he
be such a one as he would have him self counted to be. As Cicero says in his
second book of Offices, that Socrates said, Cicero. li. 2. offi.
the way unto glory is short and easy to be adopted, if every man study to be
as he would he should be esteemed. The second precept is, that he take heed
least he lose the name of an honest man, by this precept of Ovid. Omnia si
perdas, famam seruare memento, Ouidius.

Qua semel amissa, postea nullus eris.
Which is in English. If thou leese all things, remember to keep thy name and
honest fame, which, when thou have lost, thou shall be regarded as no body. And
that every man may keep it, let him learn and follow this precept of Horace,
Horatius.
written in his Epistles.

Inter cuncta leges and percontabere doctos,
Qua ratione queas traducere leniter aeuum.
Amongst all things, read and demand the learned clerks, how and by what
means thou may lead thy life peaceably.

Of old age.
THe sixth last age, is old age, to the which age, wisdom and prudencie are
propriate, which old men have gotten and adopted, either by the long course of
their life, either by knowledge or experience. Wherefore their office and duty
is, as Cicero says, in his first book of Offices, Cicero li. 1. offi.
to adiuuate and help young men, their friends, and the public weal, with
good council and wisdom. In consideration whereof, Romulus the first builder
of the City of Rome, elected and chose an hundredth aged persons, as Lyuius
writes, who for their counsel and wisdom, should have the government of
the City. And therefore of this word, Senibus, for aged me^ the Senate was
called, Senatus, which is as much to say, as a collection or company of old
aged me^, yt the old men should he Rectors and Guydes of Cities, and an example
of honesty to young men. In which respect honor and dignity is attributed and
given unto them as to the Image and portiture of wisdom, the doctors and
teachers of honesty and virtue. Furthermore, it is the office and duty of
old men, to fly avarice and covetousness, which reigns in them
plentifully: and also that they eschew al sloth and lasciviousness, weighing
with themselves, what ye gray hairs in their head and the crooked body
postulateth and requires. Truly that they use grave and virtuous manners and
conditions, and remember that they do daily draw nearer and nearer death, and
that their grave is at hand. Their body is bowed down toward the ground,
whereby they may know, that by death they shall immediately enter into earth.
Wherefore they ought to set a side all the pleasures and delights of the
world, and give them selves wholly to look for death, and abide his coming.
Wherefore it were good that they knew this verficle of Horace.

Lusisti satis, edisti satis, atque bibisti, Horatius,

Tempus abire tibi est, ne potum largius aequo
Rideat, and pulset lasciua decentius aetas.
Quae erga alios, deu^ et hoi^es deceat honestas.
Now youthful age has run his race,
an hoarie head we see:
From trifling toys and Bacchus fare
auerted look thou be.
For earth does challenge all her right,
and death does watch her pray:
With stealing steps, even as by night
the thief does us assay.
Whilst time permits for mercy crave
in virtue tend thy race:
Do good for ill, so shall thou have,
in heaven a dwelling place.
Hodie mihi, cras tibi.
Cito pede labitur aetas.
Dum vires annique, sinunt, tolerate laborem,
Iam venict tacito curua senecta pede.
The third Chapter.
IT avails but a little to have the knowledge of virtue and honesty, unless
it be practiced and had in ure. Cicero.
For Cicero in Offic. says: Quod omnis laus virtutis, non in cognitione, sed
in action, consistet. The praise of virtue consists not in knoweledge
thereof, but in the using and function thereof. And in his book de Amicitia,
Lib. de Amicitia.
he says: Tum virtutis praemium and fructus maxim capitur, quum in proximum
quenque confertur. The greatest fruit and profit of virtue, is when it is
employed to the commodity of all thy neighbors. The use of Virtue must be
referred, both toward God, and also toward man, for we were borne in the
obedience, both of God and man: Notwithstanding, we owe one duty toward God,
and another to man.

What our duty is to God wards.
Honesty to God wards, consists in the adoring and worshipping of god.
Lactantius lib. 3.
As Lactant. writes in his third book: Seruiendum est religioni. We must do
reverence to religion, the which, who so does not imitate, prostrateth him
self toward the ground, he follows the life of beasts, and utterly
secludeth all humanity, and courtesy: for in the knoweledging and worshipping
of God, all wisdom and sapience consists only.

Wherefore, if any man will question with him who studieth perfect wisdom, for
what cause he was borne into this world: he will answer him by and by, that
he was borne to worship, honor, and obey the omnipotent and eternal God, who
created us for that cause, that we should serve him as our Lord and creator.

Of our duty toward men.
IMmediately and next after God, we owe a duty and a reverence toward men:
Lactantius
For as Lactantius writes in his book: It is the first office and duty of
justice to be joined with God, secondly with man. And Christ in his sacred
gospel says: Love thy Lord God, and thy neighbor as thy self. Man ought to
be as a God to men, in mercy, in lenity, and piety, aiding the fatigated and
laborious, helping the poor and nedy with food and living, defending the
fatherless and poor widows cause. Secondly, what we owe to every man, I
shall declare hereafter.

Of our duty toward our Country.
THe first and highest place among men, our native Country possesses: to whom
the old ancient Philosophers (as Phille. writes in his fourth book de
educat liberorum) gave the preeminence above parents, Phil. li. 4. de educat.
liberoru^.
in consideration that we were more bound to our country tha^ to our parents:
for which cause, Plato.
Plato said: yt our Country claims part of our birth, for we were born to
profit our Country: for we may profit our country five ways, or with
five kind of people: first, with labor, for the honor and praise of our
Country, to study and endeavor us to be such, and so to remain, as in time to
come, we may be an honor to our country, and that it, by the means of us,
may aggregate and heap up glory to it self for ever.

Secondly, if she be foolish and unlearned, to instruct her with prudencie and
counsel. For it is our duty to teach the ignorant. Thirdly that we provide
and prepare our commodity and profit, that even in the same we may be
thankful to ye land which has borne, nourished and brought us up. Fourthly,
that we defend her either with prudence, or with strength and force, howsoever
the time and necessity shall require. Fifthly, if need require, and that she
can not otherwise be redeemed ans delivered, that we prepare our selves, even to
die in her defense and quarrel, which death is esteemed and reputed most honest.
Hereupon Horace said: Horat.
Dulce, and decorum est, pro patria mori. which thing many men have ventured,
as you may read more plainly in Liuius works.

Our duty toward our parents.
NExt after God and our Country, we ought to reverence and obey our parents,
as we are commanded, both by the sacred and profane scriptures, and them we
must also worship, both with virtue and honesty. We ought to show five points
of honesty toward our parents. First, in fulfilling their will and pleasure
in honest things. Secondly in serving them to the uttermost of our power.
Thirdly, in honoring them, both in words and deeds, not to mutter or murmr
against them. In deed and iesture, to reverence them, bare headed and bended
knees. Fourthly, in adorning us, that is to say, by our profit in virtue and
knowledge, that they may at some times get praise and honor of us in the
presence of other, not to degenerate from them in honest condition and virtuous
living. Fifthly, in nourishing them, if that they be ouerlade^ with poverty or
age, which things beasts do use, and especially the Curlewes who feed
their parents in their old age. Cicero, de Orat.
And Cicero in his book de, Orat. has this saying: Pietas, nihil aliud est,
quam humanitas erga pare^tes, Piety, is nothing else tha^ gentleness to our
parents. Franciscus Phile. de educat. liberoru^.
Franciscus Philel. de educat. liberoru^, writes in his third Chapter of ye
same book concerning the duty of children to their parents, that albeit they
be not able during their life, to render sufficient grateful thanks, yet they
ought to do to the uttermost of their power, what they may, using them most
gently, most courteously, attending on them diligently, favoring their benign
perswasio^s, obeying their easy commandments, to prove and allow their
wills, pleasures and deliberations, either to go or to tarry, either to
spouse at their determinatio^s, as though they were divine and celestial
words and commandments, not to rebel or mutter when as they shall be stirred
with the instigation of collar, patiently to abide their mines and threatenings.
But when as they shall bid or command that which is dishonest or unlawful to
refuse, but gentlely and reverently without cursing or evil speaking.

What chance has befallen them, which have not given ear to their parents
teachings.
THey which have been wicked and froward to their parents, have never
prospered, as old writers do record. Orestes a Gretian, because he slew his
mother Clytemnestra, was tra^sformed into one of the furyes of hell. And Naero
a Romain Prince, because he was a parricide over his mother, was ever after
counted for the most tyrant on earth. In the ancient time within the City of
Rome, the parents slayers were yerked and punished with a most vile death, for
they were included within a sack of leather, with the company of dogs,
serpents, and cocks, and so dimitted headlong into the deapth of the Sea.

Of the duty toward our Scholemasters.
COnsequently after our parents, we owe reverence to scholemasters and
instructors, for they are other parents: for which consideration, the Gentiles
would have scholmasters in the place and rowme of parents. Iuuenal.
As Iuuenall writes in his Satires. For Scholemasters are parents of minds,
for they give the life of ye mind, that is to say, knowledge and virtue, where
as parents give but only the life of ye body. In respect whereof,
scholemasters are to be regarded next after parents, and are worthy of no
less reverence. Phille. li. 4 Cap. 7.
For as Phill. writes in his fourth book and seventh Chapter, it is daily
seen how they flourish in learning, which have obeyed their Scholemasters
documentes. Amongst whom Traianus ye Emperor triumphed, and Caesar commended
and praised of al men in his time for his excellent and singular virtue. And
this man reverenced and adored his master Plutarch, most willingly and
worthily. M. Antonius a Roman, the holiest and most sincere Prince, did erect
golden Images in his house in ye honor of his Scholemasters. Cicero also ye
Prince of eloquence, for that he was esteemed the fynest Latinist in earth, he
celebrated his masters severally, and by name in his egregious works. And as
many as have at any time exceeded in learning and honesty, have worshipped
fervently, loved and worthyly magnified and extolled their instructor by whom
they received those former virtues.

Of those who have dishonored and defamed their instructors and Masters.
SVch as have contemned and vituperated their teachers, have in ye end proved
most dulheaded dolts, and most vile and filthy in conditions. As amongst which,
Naero that cruel tyrant was chief, whom all writers condemn and accuse guilty
of over much wickedness: for he slew his Scholmaster Seneca most cruelly and
most villanously. For in remunerating his stripes that he had suffered of his
master in his youth, instigated incontinently with the furious rage of collar,
and for the currish malice he bare unto virtue, and virtuous men, sent unto
him by a Centurion to elect and choose his death, with diobolicall fury when
as he perceived, desired to be set in a vessel of hot water, and to have
his veins opened, and so to dye, which malecious crime and contempt of his
master, declared the blunt fyled wit of Nuro. Futhermore, Beroal. in orat,
proverb, Beroaldus in orat. proverb.
says, that who so seeks fame by the malidictio^ and backbyting of his
Master, shall become slanderous him self, and shall be expulsed the company
of honest men as a reprobate, he shalll be feared as a Viper, and he shall be a
common hate, as though he had slaundered his parents, for the Master is the
parent and the shape of the mind, whom unless we honor in every place and
among all men, we have condignely deserved to be called flagitious and malepert.

Offices toward our Masters.
WHerefore, we ought to show four kind of duties toward our Masters. First,
to love them as entirely as our parents. Secondly, in all honesty to obey
their commandments. Thirdly, to be grateful and thankful unto them,
during this life.

Fourthly, that we labor with vigila^t study to become as expert in
knoweledge as themselves, or rather more. This is a lawful and and a decent
contention for scholars to contend, either to be equal with his master in
knowledge and science, either else to exceed him. And so, many have grown
more perite and skillful than their Masters: As Beroaldus gloryed that he had
had many Masters, and in the end read lector to them all.

Toward our Kinsfolks and Affinity.
WHat our dewtie is toward our Kinsfolks and Affinity, which are joined
unto us in blood, either by father or mother side, our own reason shall
persuade us sufficiently, that we be unto the^ as unto our selves, to love them
as our selves, for they are nothing else but even as other we. They are parts
and members of our blood, of our stock, and of our progeny, wherefore we take
them for none other, than the proper members of our own body, that whatsoever
we would not have done unto us, that same we should depell from them, no less
to profit them, than our selves, otherwise we should be worthily called
ingrate. Even as he is justly termed a fool which favors one part of his
body more than an other, so he shall merrite the name of a tha^klesse person,
which will not be ready to help his cousin of his own blood, both with aid,
and also with counsel, for the law of nature bids us so to do.

And in the Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ, we are commanded to love our
neighbors as our self. And they are but right neighbors, who be of our
affinity and kindred.

Toward Friends.
FIfthly, we ought to reverence our Friends, which reverence we are taught
sufficiently of the most famous Clearks, and especially of Cicero, in his
book, de amici. For there are six duties to be done to our Friends. First,
demand of our friends nothing which is indecore or dishonest, neither to do
ought for thy fre^des pleasure, but that which shall be decent and lawful. The
second, is to rejoice no less at thy friends prosperity than at thine own.
In adversity to lament his case and fortune, and to revive, consolate, and
comfort him agine, either with counsel or otherwise, to the vttermoste of thy
power, not to forsake them, playing the part as Swallows, Cicero. li. 4 Reth.
who (as Cicero writes in his fourth book of Rhetoric) will be with you
during the Summer, but as soon as they perceive Winter coming, they fly
altogether away into the hotter countries. The third law, is to will and nill
the self same thing with our friends, our studies and delectations to be all
one with theirs. For contrary studies and diverse conditions, interrupt and
burst the bounds and limittes of friendship: As Cicero writes in the same
book. Cicero.
The fourth, is to do nothing more to our friends than we would be done unto.
For Cicero says: Cicero.
Amicus est quasi alter idem. Thy friend is as an other thou, and be one heart
in two bodies, therefore we ought to love them, as our selves, yt we labor with
love to overcome the^, and not to be ouercommend of them, which is the most
filthy thing on earth. Fifthly, frendshippe is to be weighed, (as Cicero
says) not for the hope of gain or lucre, as the common sort use now a days,
that ceassing the profit, they will also forget familiarity: but friendship is
to be looked in ye only love of the heart, and then it shall continue longest:
and then we shall be more redier to give our friend a gift, tha^ to receive one
of him. The sixth and last is, often times to obey our friends. For as Terence
says: Terentius
Obsequum amicos parat. Diligence gets friends. Furthermore, not to cast in
his teeth to whom thou have given thy gift. For as Cicero says, it is an
odious kind of people vpbrayding their duties, which ought to have remembered
to whom he did them, and not who did them. Cicero. li. 2. vet. reth.
And in his second book veteris Rethor. he says: Imprudens est ille qui pro
beneficio non gratiam sed mercedem postulat. He is a fool, who for his
benefit looks not for thanks, but for a reward. But in case we shall at any
time receive a profit at our friends hand, we are commanded by the same Cicero
to imitate the fertile fields, who surrender more unto the sower than they
received. In like manner ought we in frenship, if we be able, to render more
than we received, either else to say we are not of ability to recompense them
with like measure, yet if fortune laughe at any time more amiably, I hope to be
grate and thankful.

Toward Fellows.
THat familiarity of men which we do nuncupate society, is in all points
like amity. For society is nothing else than a friendly familiarity, coniunct
and joined within them selves. And in choosing thy companions and fellows, thou
must first labor to choose them that be honest and of a good name, by whom
thou may learn to amend thy faults. And when as we have gotten such
honest and alowable Mates, we must so behave our selves toward the^, as we may
keep these six precepts. First, that we be to them as to our friends.
Secondly, that we observe these.v. things of which Terence speaks in his
Comedy of Andria, Terentius in Andr.
that is, that we learn and frame our selves to abide and suffer the manners,
rytes, ieastures of our fellows, not to be moved to anger at every word
spoken, but to bear all things patiently and with a merry countenance, and
also that we apply our selves wholly to the honest beckenings and signs of our
fellows. Thirdly, to practice their meditations, to do as they do, if at the
least it be honest, wherefore, it is a common proverb: Viuendum est moribus
praesentium, vel sieve (quod aiunt) capitis no^ esse morosum. We must live after
the fashio^s of others, and not after the fa^cie of our own head. Fourthly,
yt we be adversary to none, but to fly and avoid strife, discord, and
brawlings. In no case to sow discord. Fifthly, that we prefer our selves
before none, and that we esteem not our selves better than the rest, but
equal. Whereupon it is a common saying, among fellows there ought to be no
order but one equal with ye other, and no extolling of one above the other. And
to these little Precepts we may well add two more, of which the first is, not
to byte nor slander thy fellows behind their back. The second is, to reprove
thy fellow, if he offend (but that gently and in a secret place) not before ye
rest, for that is to contempne and despise thy fellow, and not friendly to tell
his fault: for fre^des reprove the faulty secretly, and flatterers ope^nly
before the multitude.

Toward aged men.
THe old gray headed man whom old age has arested, ought also to be
reuere^ced, for he deserves honor for his long life, in which (what with
experience, use and knoweledge) he has learned much prudencie. In
consideration whereof, he ought to be honored as the mansio^ house of
knowledge, as in whom all wisdom is lodged. And there be three things
wherewith aged me^ are to be reverenced. First, Cicero.
as Cicero says in his Offices, that their labors may be diminished for lack
of strength of the body, which by age is abrepted. Secondly, they are to be
reverenced with gentle, chaste and modest words, to be nominate by the friendly
name of Father or Mother, not to oppress them with opprobryes, as nequitie us
knaves, but to say or do nothing before them, but that which shall be both
civil and allowable. Wherevpo^ Ovid in his fifth de Fast. has these pretty
verses.

Magna fuit quondam capitis veuerentia tam
Inque suo praecio ruga senilis erat.
Verba quis auderet coram seen digna rubore
Dicere? censur am longa senecta dabit.
Have some regard and bear in mind,
thine elders to salute.
Acknowledge them as thou do stud,
thy betters constitute.
As sage and grave, in honesty
the perfect Lantern light:
Which thou ought of a certainty
to follow with thy might.
Thirdly, we must follow the^, both in deeds and ieastures, that descend from
honesty, to reverence them humbly with making courtesy modestly, which thing
the old ancient Romans did diligently keep and observe, ordeyning this law,
if any passed by an aged man, not uncovering his head, he should suffer the
punishment of the head.

Toward Women.
WE owe also a reverence to honest and virtuous women, for two causes. First,
because they are our mothers, and our Nursses, and take more pain in bringing
up children, than the father does. Secondly, because that with shamefastness
they worship virtue, which virtue is much esteemed, as we read of many
Matrones amongst the Historiographers. Therefore they ought to be reverenced
with a triple kind of honesty. First, to temper thy tongue, when as thou
come among them from lascivious and wanton talk. For when as they be
shamefast, there ought nothing to be spoken before them, but what shall be
honest and decent. Secondly, to refrain from uncomely ieasture or behavior,
which make the man vicious. All things must be done modestly, for it becomes
us to use such ieasture and manners as the company is. Therefore when as women
are taken for worshippers of shamefastness, it becomes us also to be
shamefast and chaste when as we happen among them. Thirdly, to avoid all
brawling, and fighting amongst them, for they be weak and unable to resist
them which do them wrong, and it shall be but small praise to overcome a woman,
either else to strike her as the saying is.

Toward strangers and peregrines.
THere be also four offices or duties of virtue to be done toward
strangers and peregrines. First, we ought to receive and use them, with a
Godly and a gentle language, that they may know they come to men, and not to
cruel and rigorous beasts. They are not to be scoffed and mocked at, Plautus:
whereupon Plautus writes in his Comedy named Penulus: Seruum hercle te esse
oportet and nequam and malum hominem, peregrinum atque aduenam qui irrideas.
Thou must needs be a slave, and an evil and naughty man, which deridest a
stranger. Secondly, showing them that which they know not in our country,
not to deceive the^, for yt they are ignorant of many things used with us, for
yt brings rather dispraise than praise of our country, for it is an easy
thing to beguile the ignorant. Erasmus de instr. Prin. Chr.
Erasmus writes in his book de instruc. Prin. Christianoru^, that Plato should
sometime have said, that they ought diligenly to respect that strangers take no
more wrong than Citizens, for that they wanting friends should suffer more
wrong. And therefore the Gentiles thought that Jupiter was the revenger of
strangers wrongs, and named Jupiter for yt cause Xontnon.

Thirdly, to show them the way, when as they shall demand it, or be ignorant,
not to show them to take the left hand, when as they should take the right,
for yt is a most wicked fact to bring a stranger out of his way, without our
profit, for it is the property of a thief and a prayseeker to show a
stranger willingly a wrong way, whereby he may trappe him in his snare, and so
murder him. Fourthly, to harbor them and suffer them to dwell with us. For
which cause the Gentiles worshipped hospitality as a holy and sacred thing,
and named Jupiter the God of Hospitality, because it was a godly and a
religious thing to host strangers: And therefore Dido Queen of Carthage as
Virgilius writes in his first book of Eneidos, Virgilil. li. 1. Aenei.
when she received Eneas with ye other Troianes into hospitality, she
inuocated Jupiter in a banquet, as the giver of meat to geastes. And the
ancient Romans received and took many strangers into their City, which in
length of time were made moderators and rulers of the City. Li. de vrb. Liuius.
As Liuius writes in his book de vrbe condita. And Beroal. says, that in
old time peregrines and strangers were more diligent and obedient than
Citizens. And that at Rome strangers were made great Magistrates, counselors,
and Pretors. As in the days of Numa and Tarquinius many peregrines were
Counselors, and they had also a stranger Pretore which expounded ye laws to
the strangers.

Toward our adversaries and enemies.
WE ought also to be virtuous toward our enemies, and to keep four precepts.
Cicero, li. officio.
First, as Cicero bids us in his book of Offices. Etia^ et fides praestita,
seruanda est hostibus, vt nu^o Euquitum lex and cousuetudo est. Promised faith
ought also to be observed with thy enemy, as the law and custom of Knights
requires. Who so ever be taken of any and let go, he being called back again
of the same, ought to come again, otherwise he shall be expulsed the book of
the noble victorious and stout knights. Secondly, if thy adversary or enemy
provoke thee, or wrong thee unjustly, or threaten to fight with thee, thou
ought not by and by revenge and bite again, for that is the property and
nature of brute beasts. But first, endeavor to pacify ye matter gently, with
frendely friends, as Terence writes in Eunuchus. Omnia prius verbis, Terentius
quam armis experiri sapientem decet, nihilque excisa faciendum improuide. A
wise man ought to try al things first with gentle words, before he fight,
neither ought he to do any thing rashely and unadvisedly in the heat of his
fury. Thirdly, if thou be wro^ged, it is better to forgive and remitte that
wrong, than to infer wrong again, for ye most worthy kind of revenging, is
to forgive, and not render like for like. Erasmus de insti. Prin. Chr.
Erasmus in his book, de institut. Princ. christ. says: that it denotes a
weak and faynte hearted man to revenge his wrong. Iuuen. in his.xij. Satire,
says: that none desires more to revenge than a woman. and therefore she shall
be unworthy of a husband. Fourthly, if yt by no means we may depell and shake
off the wrongs of our enemy, unless we do the like to him again, then ought
we to immitate that saying of Virgil in his.xij. book of Eneid. Virg. li. 12.
Aeneidos.
Quo deus and quo dura fortuna sequamur. Let us try it as it pleases God, and
as hard fortune shall lead us. Fortune and virtue are knitte both in one, let
us hardely and boldly resist with weapons as Liuius writes of the Roman
nations: we ought for no other cause to fight, tha^ to live afterward in
peace, and not to seek revenge of our enemies.

Toward our Lords and Masters whom we serve.
WE owe a quadruple reverence toward our Masters whose bread we eat, and
whom we serve. First, we ought to be prompt and ready in all things, to obey
their precepts and co^maundeme^ts, not to go about our business creaping like
a Snayle, to use no sluggishnesse, take no grefe nor slack our Masters
commandment. Secondly, we ought to be faithful and trusty to them, without
deceit, fraud, or guile, not to flatter them before their face, and to speak
evil of them behind their back. Thirdly, we ought to aduau^tage and profit
them, in foreseeing and avoiding their discommoditie, more to regard and seek
their commodity and benefit than our own, sooner to dispatch our Masters
business than our own. And if we shall see our master sustain any loss or
hindera^ce we ought to avoid ye same. Fourthly, we must be mute at two times.
First, we must not chatte again when our master speaks, yea and though we
sometimes are better, neither must we also be altogether dombe: whereupon
Plaut. in his comedy of the glorious soldier, says: Plautus.
Oportet seruum plus scire quam loqui: It behooves a servant to know more than
he speaks. Secondly, he ought to keep close his Masters secrets from other
men, and not gaggle them abroad. For taciturnitie greatly commends a servant.

Toward a Magistrate.
WE owe moreover a triple duty to magistrates and hye Rulers. First, we ought
obediently to obey their laws and ordinances: not to be interrupters of the
law, but fulfillers of the sme, for laws be nothing more tha^ precepts and
documents of well and righteous living: neither to repugne nor make
insurrection against them is a happy thing, for the fly gets nothing by
biting ye Elephant, neither does it advantage the Scarbet to seek the Eagle.
Secondly, we ought not to slander the^, neither by word, nor by deed: for he
speaks not safely nor yet writes not surely, which speaks or writes
against those which have power and authority to bind and condemn him.
Neither is it a decent thing, to sting or hurt them whose study and labor is
night and day to preserve, defend, and virtuously to moderate the common weal.
Thirdly, if they shall require any trybute, ye ought gently to give them, for
by that means Regions and Cities are defended, maintained, and vpholded,
otherwise the flourishing flower would sone fade away and wither. Liuius. lib.
2.
For as Liuius writes in his second book: De Vrbe condita. Si coetera
corporis membra stomacho cibum no^ suppeditarent, simul cum ipso fame perire^t.
If the other members and parts of the body should not help the stomach with
meat, they should together perish with the stomach for hunger. So likewise
unless Citizens and Inhabitants of the City help the Princes and Magistrates
of the same with faculties and money, they shall together be overcome and slain
with their Prince.

What is decent at all times and places.
The fourth Chapter.
IN the usage of honesty, and none otherwise of virtue place and time are much
to be regarded: of the which two respects except reason in the pre-eminence of
Principality, bear sway, nothing, (or at the least) very little, shall the
knowledge of virtue, or practicing of the same profit at all. For the sacred
Theologians, interpreters of the divine Scriptures, make mention that sins
and heinous offenses are by place and time, aggrauate; and also eased by the
same. To the limits of these two, or as it were borders adjoining honesty or
virtue, specially be adiected. For in diverse places, diverse and strange things
are to be frequented, as decent, fit, and lawful. Which if they be not to
any known, or very few immitate, although they have been students in the
schole of Virtue, yet as vicious persons shall they be imputed, if by ignorance
how, in time, and place, to behave themselves do bleare their drousie eyes.
Therefore Macrobius. lib. 7. Saturn. says: Nothing is more nigh unto wisdom,
than to fit our communication in convenient place or time. Also Pytacus
Mytil. commanded time to be acknowledged, that whatsoever we did practice to
finish, first, we should see the opportunity of time, for he esteemed or
supposed that to be the best in any matter. And hereupon Terence said. Terentius
I came in season which is the chiefest point of all. But how a man may
according to the proverb, be Omnium horarum homo, these words following will
openly manifest and declare.

What manner of the honesty at banketting is required.
PLaces and times are diverse wherein men co^uent, assemble or talk, but
especially ye place or time of banketting, if so be that at the least any geast
appointed be there present. For it is no less hurt than damage to all men, to
pamper the belly, or to live immoderately, as a man might say at ye feast of
dronken Bacchus, as one of his typpled Prelates.

Six honest or virtuous precepts, worthy at Meals to be imitated and observed.
THe first observation as Macrobius says lib. 7. Macrobius.
Saturnalium) is to esteem, ponder, or think by the geastes as they be,
meaning of what substance, what dignity or authority. The second (as the same
Macrobius relates,) is for every man, to see when place is fit, or
convenient, not to talk or commen of Philosophy, at times prepared, with
sustinance to refresh the body. Therefore Socrates at a certain time, Socrates.
being demanded at a banquet, that he would manifest something by
communication, answered: I know not those things which present time and place
requires, and the same which I am not ignorant in, are not decent as now to
be uttered, supposing that those grave questions whereof the Philosophers
reason in ye schole, be not fit at bankets, as banketting dishes to be served.

Thirdely, they are called for strife or contention rather, yea, it sooner
aryseth, by quaffing or canuassing, of the pots, than any otherwise at all.
Fourthly, let there be a mean observed in eating or drinking, according to
these two precepts, yt is to say: let thy meat be taken without gluttony, and
thy drink without ebrietle. Fifthly, Plautus
these seven precepts of Plautus comoed. Militis gloriosi. Every man must
imitate. Let him be, no cauiller, a profitable geast, no tatler, obstinent from
all discomoditie, a speaker at due time, a keeper of quiet, till another declare
his fa^tasie, a small interrupter of men's talk, no busy demaunder of
questions. Sixthly, let him not be an opener or blaser abroad of things,
spoken, heard, seen, or done. Therefore Horace in his sixth Epistle, calling a
greast Foronatum, promises that he would take charge, that there should be
none at the banquet, yt would declare any thing without the Threshald of the
door. And Beroaldus, declares, that it was ye custom of certain Gentiles,
their appointed geast entering their house, to show to them their Threshald,
saying: without this is there nothing, meaning, take heed how you utter those
things abroad, which you hear at the table: wherefore also in our time this is
ye fashion, to have Roses painted above or over the table, yt under them our
communications at repast, might be kept, and not scattered any other where.

How to behave our selves in honest sober company.
IT is no small cunning, nay rather a great and egregious wisdom, to know
how profitably to behave our selves among men, yt by our familiarity we may
please others, and so to retain our mutual friends. Which things to bring to
pass we had need of.vij. especial documents First, let us acustom our selves
to bear and suffer the manners, words, and deeds of men, and not by and by to
sound the dogs letter. R. as though we would byte (if to us any damage they
infer) but as witting nothing of the same, let us seem to wink. For to be
snapping and snarring, or at the least, angry at a small offense, is the point
or manifest token of a weak man, not able to bridle his own nature. Secondly,
let us subscribe to their arbytrement and sentence, yt our willing and nilling
might be unto us with them, that is to say, to consent to that which they do
require, and eschew those things which are not good, but rather lurk as
mischievous baytes, to enta^gle the unwary. Thirdly, to be obedient to their
advice, works and indeuouring, as diligent Students of that discipline or
learning, which they imitate. For where the pestiferous discention of works
has a resting place, there in a short moment, the shrill convict is song.
Fourthly, let us not hate unworthily any man, in proferring of strife or
injury, either by mocking words, or wicked communicatio^. Fifthly, let us
presume before no man, though we be their betters, of more ability in
substance or treasure. Let us not hinder them, for as much considering we would
not take it in good part, to be hindered our selves. Sixthly, we must be easily
entreated, and readily gyrded, that where soever time or place require, we may
show ge^tlenesse to other. For, Terentius
Obsequiu^ parit amicos, intermissu^ inimicos peperit semper. The other manners
and rytes, daily use and experience which is the mistress of things does teach.

In mutual or friendly communication, praeceptiunculae.
IN the frendely talk or communication of men, there are eight precepts or
rules of virtue, as necessary to be imitated. Not to trouble other men's
communicatio^, but to refrain thy tongue from speech, and have a regard to the
conclusion of their words. And hereupon arose the common proverb. Two may sing
but not be understand: for the talk of the one hinders the speech of the
other, that it can not be fully percieued. To take away no man's honor, either
absent or present: for there is no theft greater, no robbery worser, than the
taking away of a man's fame. Nothing has he to use after life and death but
fame, which once being fleted, Ovid.
as Ovid says, afterward he is nothing (yt is) of no estimation or effect. We
ought to have a regard what we speak of any man, least some being present at
our talk, receive damage thereby, especially our friends or familliar
acquaintance. We may utter nothing, whether it be a fond tale or wise talk,
having before our eyes, yt it may as well hinder as profit. Let every man
therefore take heed how to reason of any new matters, or trifles, least he be
counted (as you may term him) the loder of long tongue Mill. For he that as a
new vpstart medleth in every man's case, is judged a trifling marcha^t,
fighting under the ensign of the lying army. Make not inquisition upon other
men's secrets, for two causes. The first is, because it stands ill with
those oftentimes whose secrets are known. The second, insomuch that the
demau^ders or question askers, be judged betrayers or (secrets once known)
bewraiers of the same, whereby ye foresaid might sustain a marvelous
detrime^t. Whether a man be sober or dronken, as witnesses Horatius, Horatius.
let him keep his own counsel, for uttering his inward thoughts, he is
judged worser than a thief. For secrets often times perform a confession of
those things which be proloyned by latrones or evil disposed persons, none
will speak things but either understood or known, except he be a backbyter,
or some false tatling Sycophant.

Whilst we be in talking with an honest name, how to behave our selves.
ERasmus in his book entitled Colloquia says. As often as any man speaks
unto thee, to whom thou owe honor or reverence, frame thy self to the right
state of thy body, with cap in hand, thy countenace indifferent, neither sadly
nor fleringly, but keeping the mean of modesty, thine eyes chaste, always
fixed upon him to whom thou speak, thy feet close together, thy hands not
busy, but always quiet, not wavering with tattering feet, nor trifling with
thy fingers, neither biting thy lips, scratching thy head, or picking thine
ears. Also let thy garments comely adorn thy body, that thy reverence, thy
countinance, thy behavior and apparelling of thy body might declare a notable
modesty and chaste disposition of thy mind.

In walking abroad with others: a certain note or onseruation.
IF it happen, or chance that we walk abroad or soiourne with any man, it is
necessary and convenient that we be decked as it were with nine manners. First,
clement in communication, gentle or easy to be spoken with: for Plautus says,
that a pleasant co^panio^, by the way is as it were a Chariot, easing the
weariness of our journey. If we be in dignity inferior, we must go on the
left side, or else behind, and not cheek by cheek, except that good leave
or license be permitted. Likewise we must not use an over swift pase, but a
decent and temperate festination, Cicero in Officiis.
as Cicero in Officiis wills us. In going of a journey, or from place to
place, let us not commaculate our wayfaring companion, but let us so
moderate our feet and foot steps, that we sprinkle not ye other with mudde or
dirty baggage. Let us speak with a low voice, and not with a bosting tongue.
Let us honor whom we meet by the way, in giving the^ the upper hand, and by
other means whereby reverence is exhibited, saluting obuied persons, for it is
a gentle, a laudable and Godly point. Cato.
Therefore Cato once said: Saluta libenter. Salute every man willingly. For
salutatio^ is none other thing, than to wish health, or good success to any
man. Also let us put off our Cappes, and uncover our heads, which is a
manifest sign of humbling our selves, and acknoweledging that we be inferiors
to the foresaid, which Christ commanded us, to appear, I mean humble and
not lusty in mind and heart.

How to behave our selves in a prosperous strate or time.
TIme also requires his comeliness or good usage, for either by time we
offend more or less. Time is double, either that is to say, merry or
prosperous, else heavy, sorrowful, or unfortunate. Time, if it be lucky, or
blessed, a quadruple comlynesse is to be observed. First of all not to boast to
high, and rejoice whilst fortune laugheth at our success, which was wont to
be done among the common people as Iuuenal alleges. Nescia men's hominum rebus
modum seruare secundis. exhorting that the ignorant mind of men not knowing
what would happen hereafter, should observe a merry mean in their prosperity.

Secondly, not to mock and despise him before us, as though we were happier
than he who fortune frowneth against. For this boasting and glorying in mind,
is that which is most odious in ye sight of God. Thirdly, to fear and always
be careful, least fortune lowringly should be mutable or changed with us. For
she is more vnco^stant than the wind, and is said to stand on a turning
wheel, so that she can not persist in one state. Therefore in times past a
certain Philosopher waxed very sorrowful in his richest state, knowing yt
after prosperity, adversity should arise. In this miserable estate he
rejoiced, surely persuading him self, that after showers, fair weather should
ensue, and after his pensiveness great joy and mirth should follow.
Fourthly, giving thanks unto God for his great benevolence bestowed on us, that
we may not be unthankful, but by our humility stir him up to increase us
the more: Let us not forget God, for the felicity of fortune, as rich me^ were
wont. and daily I fear me do, but let us remember him, pray unto him with
thankful minds, that he might multiply and more prosper the friendly
countenance of fortune, which he has bestowed upon us, or else end the same
by any indifferent mean.

In the time of adversity.
But if that time be ouercast with clouds and sorrowful, let us be armed or
munited with six precepts. First of all, let us never discomfort our mind,
as though hereafter we might not be more fortunate or happy, but let us hope
with a valiant mind for better chance, and comfort our selves with this
saying of Virgil, Virgil.
Dabit Deus his quoque finem. God will finishe these our troubles and
calamities. Secondly, let us seek counsel to remedy this infelicitie, either
by our own wit, or else by the prudent advise of others. Thirdly, let us be
mindful, of God, humbly making our Orison unto him, and not curssing his
deity for the misery which we suffer, but that he would vouchsafe that
trouble not long to continue, and bestow his grace upon us, to our salvation,
that we may take in good part any cross which he shall lay upon us. Fourthly,
we ought to rejoice, rather than to be sorry, that the same adversity has
light upon us, by the which at the hands of god, we may deserve, to have
reward and be delivered from our sins. Fifthly, we must uphold, or as it
were underprop our mind with a good hope, as if we suffered justly punishment
for our offenses, saying with the Poet Ovid.

Quae venit ex merito, poena ferenda venit.
Ouidius.
Quae venit indigne spoena dolonda venit.
That punishment that justly comes,
is not to repented:
But that unworthily does hap,
is much to be lamented.
Sixthly we must consider our selves to be me^, fighting under ye ensign of
fortitude, and therefore a great shame to be feared with every shadow of
adversity.

In serving and obeying others.
IN performing obeysa^ce, it behooves us to be wise and sage, that our service
might be acceptable unto those, on whom it is bestowed, least our diligence and
trauail be laughed to scorn: for there are six notes to be observed. We must
provide, that our service be profitable, unto whom it is offered. For he that
gives hurtful obeisance exhibiteth no friendship but rather destruction, let
it be done in due season or time: Erasmus.
for as Erasmus testifies, benefits out of season are the less to be
regarded. And likewise hereunto is ye common proverb replied. Chare co^stat
praecibus quod emitur. That benefit is dear, which is bought with the penny.
Defer not to fynish therefore good turns requested, and especially already
promised. For tardinesse or delation of time, makes friendship unthankful.
Therefore, willingly, if thou have business in hand speedily to pleasure, who^
thou cou^test a friend, finish the same with all celeritie, least thou be
constrained, as in times past the Ass was, to drink unwillingly: or according
to the proverb, trifle, gasing at the man in the Moon to no effect at all.
The business of our friend ought to be done, as faithfully as our own, for
herein the bright beams of friendship is declared. For Offices are esteemed
like as the will of the performer, and the thanks of a former benefit
perishes, except it be renewed with an other.

The office or duty of a Magistrate.
IF we bear the pre-eminence of a Magistrate, and dominate over others, as
rulers and governors of them; it is necessary that especially we abound in
four several points of wisdom. Let us behave our selves, as we would every
man should behold us: let us be wyser than the rest over whom we bear sway.
For it is a filthy thing to be a superior in honor, and not in wisdom. By
the excellency of the Magistrates authority, let us not with presu^ptuous
minds despise other, playing Millitem illu^ Terentianu^. But let us follow
this saying of Cicero, Cicero.
the higher we be, the lower to submit our selves, loking to ye commodity of
others more than to our own: for a Magistrate is a common person, not a
private. Let us not hurt the innocent nor favor the offender, but in
punishment let there be a mean, according to the fault, Cicero.
as Cicero says. Let the rulers be like unto ye laws which proceed with
equity and justice, to punish the mal^factors. Let us have a regard to punish
these ten vices from our commonweals, perfidia, peculatus, auaritia, inuidia,
ambitio, obtrectatio, periuriu^, indilige^tia, iniuria, and scelus, Plautus.
as Plautus commands in Per. Comoe. Let us think that many other things do
become us, than those over whom we bear sway, and that our faults be sooner
spyed tha^ the faults of our subjects, as learned Poets in times past have song.

Ouidius in Conso. ad Liuiam.
Non eadem vulgusque decent and lumina reru^,
Est quod praecipuum debeas ista domus.
Ad cocilos auresque trabis, tua facta notamus
Ned vamissa potest, Principis ere tegi.
Claudianus.
Hoc te praeterea crebro sermon monebo,
Vt te totius medio telluris is in orb,
Viuere cognoscas, cunctis tua, gentibus esse
Facta palam, nec posse dari, regalibus vsquam
Secretum vitijs, nam lux altissima fati,
Occultum nil esse sinit, latebrasque per omneis
Intrat, and abstrusos explorat fama recessus.
The chairie charge of Consulship
each wight does well behold:
Like as the Caruers workmanship,
adornd with fulgent gold.
And therefore had the Magistrate
need for to rule his land:
The fectiue branch to dissecate,
with equal sword in hand.
The subjects eyes on him do blase
they listen in his talk:
In this respect he need always
uprightly for to walk.
For openly his fastes are known
no lurking place they find:
His geffes through vapored airs are blowe^
the Commons be not blind.
How virtue or honesty being adopted ought to be used, that it never might
fleet again.
The fifth Chapter.
THat virtue and honesty once being known and obtained, might not depart, and
we thereby led astray, three precepts following are to be graue^ in our breast,
or insculped in our minds, that as a key or anchor, they might retain to us
virtue, stablish honesty, and ratify good manners. First of all, we must take
heed of all things, which oppress or keep down probitie, we must flee all
the inticements of vices, all pleasures and wicked diliciousnesse, as riot and
idleness. Hereupon Hermo Bar. said: He that will imitate virtue, must fly the
belly God and the Harlot Venus. Secondly, we must think upon nothing, neither
do any thing but that which is honest or nighe unto virtue, only let honest
things be exercised and put in practice. In a good matter or thing let all our
work be, all our labor, and all our thought. So at the last shall it come to
pass, that we may be accustomed with virtue, no less than if it were graffed
in us, hating vice as a Dog or a pestilent Serpent. Virgil.
Herevpo^ Virgil spoke saying: it is a great thing to be from our infancy
accustomed with virtue. Nothing is of more effect, than daily use. Thirdly,
peradventure a man would say, who can endeavor to meditate honest causes
continually, but sometime he must play Dormiter Homerus, considering that no man
is wise at every season. Therefore this third precept is to be embraced with
hand and foot, with tooth and nail, that is to say, to banquet, or
communicate with honest men, not seperating by seduction our selves from their
company, as Cicero writes that he never departed from Mutius Scoeuola an old
man. For it is a marvelous thing to be spoken how much the domestical or
quotidian familiarity of men avail in manets, that almost it changes and
inuerteth, nay, altogether varieth the nature of man: Therefore the Psalmist
David writes: David
Cu^ bono bonus eris, and cum malo peruerteris. With the good thou shall wax
good, and with the wicked thou shall learn wickedness. Therefore we shall be
honest and so continue, as long as we be co^uersant with good persons, and live
in such a Godly order.

FINIS.
How a man may attain to the chief points of Christianity, or deduction of
a Christian life.
Of what manner the institution of the first age ought to be.
THe part of a Father, is to bring his child into the schole, (the time of
infancy being past, and grown to the full perfection of seven years) to
proceed and go forward in learning, if he covet to have him good, being flesh
of his own body, and not a wanton, as the common parents do now a days
nossell their children up. Therefore in time teach him modesty, pamper him not
up with trifling toys, but keep him under with the rod of correction, that
he may frame his life according to the prescribed rule of the sincere verity
or word of God. Let him be punished if he offend: let him be praised, if he
behave him self well and honestly: with threatening and strypes, let him be
feared from vices: by exhortations, let him be progged to virtue: yea, and let
the patron have a greater regard, to the manners of education of his child
than the respect of his own bodily health: Let him commit him to teachers,
grave, sage and witty, learned, quiet and virtuous, where he might taste of the
pleasant fruit of learning, and sweet lyquours of the Latin speech: Let him
bestow his time on those studeis, which instruct the mind with precepts and
docume^ts. Among the which is Philosophy. This Nursse alone makes a better
nature of a good, a chaste nature of a wicked, and easier to be entreated. Let a
Christian accustom him self, and learn that God must first be honored as
the well spring from whom all good things have their issue: let him learn to
obey reason, and follow her in all the conversation of his life, as his chief
captain and governor in word and deed. Let him covet or do nothing, but
that which is honest and right. Let him also bridle his cogitations, the
secrets whereof god the judge of all hearts will peruse.

God to be gratified of good men, and to punish the wicked.
Do thou think that righteousness is acceptable in ye sight of God, and
do thou worship him as the Lord and maker of heaven and earth, do thou
praise his name day and night: that thereby thou might demerite the sight of
him, by good and just works? Doubt nothing, but as he is able, so he can, and
will gratify thee. For what is so agreeable unto him, as beneficence? and
again, what is more alienate or strange, tha^ unthankfulness? Therefore
least any should accuse him as unthankful, which live godly, he bestows his
grace on them, as he lets his anger drop upon wicked persons, adulterers,
whooremongers, robbers and manslaughterers. And when he sees that there is no
end of sinning, he aryseth at the last, to take punishment of the rebellious
people, and blotteth out the wicked or hurtful.

Certain anger righteous, profitable and necessary.
IF the servants, children, or disciples, learners I mean, whom we have under
government, offend, we are angry reform them, we cry upon them to amend, we
bridle them with correction, to make them good. This anger is no sin: for
that which is wicked, does much displease a good man, and whom lewdness does
grieve, he is much moved, if he see any offend. Therefore the father ryseth up
to avenge. The master commands rods to be in a readiness, not that he
minds to hurt, but that he might practice discipline, correct euiil manners,
and suppress to much lycentiousnes. God uses this just displeasure to subdue
men and sinners, rewarding their wicked estate.

The refraining of anger on sins, to be vicious.
THey are greatly to be reprehended which delay their displeasure from the
wickedness of their underlings, and oftener than needs pardon their faults. By
such like whether they be fathers, whether they be rulers or masters, the life
of the offender is lost, by whose lenity out of season, or time, unbridled
youthful age is nourished, and they themselves which have so small a regard,
minister a great biued heap of grief. Here therefore we must not refrain from
anger, but also if it be thrown down, we have occasion to stir it up again.

That we must give an account of our time spent.
LEt every man make an account of those things which he has received, which he
has expe^ced, because many an idle word has escaped him. Whatsoever we hear
of others, we ought to let it fly as it were by the gates of our ears. For
there be certain precepts or rules of the tongue to be marked, so that the
words which we utter, first come into the entry of ye mind, before the mouth
devulgate the same. Our stomach must after such a rate be pacified, that no
opprobrious or wicked thing shoot out thereof. And if any thing be inwardly
sprung up, by and by it is our part, by earnest study, and serious toil to
pluck up the same by the roots.

Certain necessaries to be prepared in the travailing toward the life to come.
AS they which trauail into a far country, a little before they go thither,
prepare or scracth together convenient things for their journey, least they
should perish through hunger by the way, so ought we to provide in the
peregrinatio^ of this life, we must lay up the treasure of good works, of
righteousness, of humility, of continency, and of all other virtues, ye at
what time, day or hour, God shall call us, to travail to the heavenly
Paradise our Country, we might be found ready.

In this life we must wash away the filthiness of our sins.
MY Christian brother, wash away thy sin by confession. For he that refuses
in this time to pourge him self from his iniquity, afterward he shall not
find consolation at the hand of God. For after death who shall confess the
Lord? Here we must make a bickerment, here we must strive, least in ye paying
day of the laborers hyre, we be counted as unprofitable servants, and so
secluded the face of the Lord.

We must flee.
IF thou exercise or practice virtue, other men seeing the same, they will not
only praise thee, but glorify God which is in heaven. When they shall do so,
the^ thy store shall increase, and God shall grant unto thee thy hearts desire,
because that by thy good works, he is praised of them. Therefore study
always, that thou be not an occasion of offending to any person. Paul said.
Si cibus offenderit fratrem meum, nunquam in aeternum carnem comedam. If meat
should offend my brother, I would never eat any.

The works of learning, or teaching must be joined with deeds.
NO man ought to be contented in him self. For God will also, that we edify
others, not by teaching only, but in life, in manners and conversation. Men
covet rather examples than words, they do not so greatly mark the things that
we speak, as the things we do. Good sayings or instructions in ye schools do
not so profit, as those things hurt, which wickedly we do. He yt affirms
words (...) nay blessed are we, swimming only in that port, free from
tribulation, void of care and possessing an everlasting rest, which Christ him
self foreshewed to come, saying: A me discite, quia mitis su^ and humilis
cord, and inuenietis requiem animabus vestris. Learn of me because I am
gentle and humble in heart, and you shall find rest to your souls.

How they should do, that are not able to fast.
Can thou not fast? Deal more liberally to ye poor, be feruenter in prayers
to god, show thy self more ready to hear the divine mysteries and holy
sermons or exhortations. Have thou an enemy? do thy diligence to be
reconciled. See yt thou remove from thy mind all hatred or gredy desire of
aue^gment, embracing gentleness or lenity. To this end fasting is appointed,
that the lasciviousness of the flesh being refrayned, we might speedily run
as it were to fulfill the commandment of Christ.

What mischief Gluttony causes.
COuetest thou to have thy health? it behooves thee then to flee sumptuous
tables, and to much gluttony. For hereof aryseth the Gout, the headeache, and
the superfluity of pestilent humors. Intemperance, and to much swilling of
wine, breadeth innumerable kinds of diseases

The goodness that aryseth of confession.
Have thou desfloured a virgin? have thou committed adultery or any such like?
Hasten to the confession of thy sin. Go to the Physician, that he may look
upon thy soul, and heal thy grievous diseases. Here receive remedies: speak
to thy self alone. Say, why have thou offended? For the confession of those
things wherewith we have grievously offended God, abolisheth our offenses.
Attend unto the Prophet, saying. Dic tu prior iniquitates tuas, vt
iustificeris. Show thou first thine iniquities, that thou may be justified.

The regard of the soul, not to have so much tending to, as the body.
THe charge of the soul is light and easy, for we spend nothing that it might
have her health. On the contrary part, if the body be sick, what cost do we
bestow? now upon Physicians, now upon other things, which we consume or waste
more tha^ need requires. The soul has none of these, unto the which, ye
reading of the Scriptures, is as meat, clothing, succor, or alms. For the
ornaments wherewith we deck our bodies, be not daily prayers, confession of
sins with tears, but pompous excess in clothing, and such like vanity of
the world. Early in the morning we apparel us, we wash our face, least any
specke should cleave on ye same. If all this be done for the preservation of
the body, with how great a regard, ought the soul to be washed, that we might
offer it loving, and beautiful unto the Lord.

Who is worthy to be called a man.
NOt he which shows a fair countenance, his nosetrilles, his eye lids, and
the other members of his body, that is given unto virtue, flying vices, and
obeying the commandments of the Lord, him may thou call a man. The word
of God depriueth a sinner, by ye name of man, than the which offender nothing
is more miserable.

Giving of thanks to be much profitable to our life.
NOthing can be more acceptable unto god, than daily giving of thanks, for so
many benefits, which his gentleness has bestowed on mankind. The voice of
the Apostle is: be thankful, be not those benefits common to thee which he
has bestowed upon all men? Therefore gratify his name. For the remembrance of
ye benefits of Christ, is a good scholemistres to show us how we ought to
frame our life. For she does not suffer us to fall into sluggishnesse, and
imitate ye wicked-mans practice. By this reason man differs from the brute
beast, yt is, to praise, celebrate, and glorify the Lord, the only maker,
creator and fashioner of al things. Great are ye gifts which he has bestowed
upon us. He has given us body and soul, sheep and oxen, with all the Cattle
of the field. Prophets has he sent which might instruct us, and correct man's
wickedness. Finally, every kind of mortal creature waxing worsse and worsse,
wickedness being spread abroad, and that which is most odious, the worshipping
of Idolles, he took compassion upon mankind, and sent his only begotten
son into ye earth, to take upon him man's nature, and appear to the
justification of sinners. Let us therefore think day and night upon the great
benefits of God, bestowed on us, yelding perpetual thanks unto him for the
same.

Ebrietie is wicked.
Drunkenness blyndeth man's senses and understanding, drowneth his mind, and
forces the foresaid creature to lie dead, as a trunck or block, unto whom
God has made al things subject. In the mean season he is mocked of all men,
as well his wife, his children, as the rest of his household. His friends
supposing this a dissehonour, draw themselves aside. They that be wicked
persons, or his enemies rejoice, laugh him to scorn, and curse him, term
him hog or swine, or such like beastly name, disdayning him, and working him
all the injury they may.

A sempeternall name is not gotten in great buildings.
With how great a desire now a days, do our Senators, Magistrates,
Governors of the City. Lords, Bishops, and such like, build gorgious
houses, like unto the Palaces of Kings. If thou ask them, why they bestow
so great cost, why they lay out such abundance of treasure? this is their
answer. That they might leave behind the^ to their successors, some memorial
sign or toke^, that the passers by might say, This house he builded. This
cunning, or workemanshippe was made of his cost. O folishnesse, O cares of men,
how great vanity is there in substance? By this counsel, by this judgment,
they building after such sort, purchase themselves no praise, as they suppose,
but rather a great dishonor. For these words are bruted of the^, being yet
alive, as after their disceasse. To build this house, these Gates, that
covetous man, that rauener, that deuourer or spoyler of the comfortless
wydowes, has taken charge. Do they get a name by this means? or do they
wrappe themselves in eternal reproach? Judge ye. If this be their only care,
I will show them an other way how to possess the same. They must study to
bestow upon the poor that treasure or substance which was prepared to ye
building of vaste places. By this benignity, by this compassion, they shall
get unto them a se^piternal praise, and being delivered from the grievous
burden of their sins, possess with God, in the glory of his kingdom, a
crown of pure gold, never fading or tra^sitorie, but for ever perpetual.

Ambition is a dangerous thing.
THou which followest Christ, and take him for thy master, covet not the
highest place, but be mindful of the saying of S. Paul, Honor alius alium
praecedentes, date operam, vt in omnibus humiliemini. One of you excelling an
other in honor, take heed that you be humble in all points. For the word of
God says. Qui seipsum humiliat, exaltabitur. He that humbles himself shall
be exalted. I will never call him humble, that exhibiteth honor to his elders
by birth, or equal at the least with him self. That is a true humility or
perfect modesty, in giving place to the^ which be our inferiors. He is true
wise, that thinks himself least and last of all. For good works which we
have done by this way only shall bring unto us profit, or commodity.

How much harm ensues of Ryottousnesse.
Will thou do things worthy of heaven? have no respect unto mundaine
affairs, have no regard unto the tra^sitorious glory of this life. See thou
other occupied in excess of apparel? have thou a regard unto thy soul, how
to deck and set it forth with virtues. Laugh ryottousnesse to scorn: Flee
gluttony and superfluousnesse in banketting. As the singer chaunteth his
notes, so must not thou cry for delicious dinners, but imitate frugalitie. For
of superfluity, what profit or commodity aryseth? Peradventure, thou iudgest
it commodious, to devour much, to swill in wine till thy belly do stretch, but
to a good person to much drink is hurtful. It can not be spoken how much
mischief hereby happens, both to the body and soul, as diseases, adultery,
whordo^, theft, robbery, and murder. Has the Lord endued thee with abundance
of treasure? distribute it to ye poor. Go thou abroad apparelled with
sylke? Iuuencus. Nemo potest dominis aeque seruire duobus.
Have thou thy fingers circundited with gold? In the heavens it can not be,
that a man should take charge of the soul, regarding the pleasure and
apparelling of the body so much.

The agreement of the man and the wife, to be very commodious.
THere riches, there great gain, redoundeth or does multiply, where the
agreement is of the man and his wife, yea, such be the blessedst of all other,
though their substance be but small, for they receive the true pleasure and
live in the greatest tranquillity of the mind. Therefore by this figure
Zelotypia, the fruits of concord being taken away by other wickedness,
although they possessed ye riches of Croesus, they were ye most miserable of
all other creatures. There should arise daily new tumults, brawlings,
suspitio^s, domestical and internal wars, much bitterness, no pleasure. For
this consideration I would that they which be joined in the bond of Matrimony,
and as it were chained in the same, should think yt nothing ought to be
preferred before concord, being ye root of all goodness, and so to do all
things, that peace and tranquillity might be in one house, remaining under
one roufe, and taking rest in one bed. This goodness shall follow that
peace, that in Matrimony good children, and followers of Virtue shall be
borne. Also the servants and universal family, shall study to imitate
religion, godliness, and modesty. It shall come so to pass, that by concord
of two, the prosperity of many things follows on every side.

Imitation to hospitality.
IF a certain abject simple. or poor creature, come unto thee and ask
lodging, receive him, and if thou have wherewith to refresh him, set meat
before him. This hospitality or intertainment of thy poor brother, shall
vantage thee a double gain. If thou be not so welthie yt thou art able, or at
the least will not, drive him not away as a hard hearted Sarasin, desiring
ought at thy hands, considering he does not constrain thee by violence, but
prays, besecheth, and obtesteth ye same. Have thou whereby thou may succor
the innocent, and assistest not him, neither give ought? How will thou
answer, before the face of the heavenly Judge? by what means will thou
defend thy self? Thou feedest daintily, thou consumest more daily than need
does require, what damage proferest thou her? how much gain suffer thou to
slide away, and fall from thy hands? Gold being hurded up in Towers, wastes
away with the rust, and is carried away with thieves, when in the mean seasons
thy next neighbor perishes for hunger. Do thou abound in riches, and use
them alone, neither communicatest to the nedy, and yet think to escape the
danger of dampnation? Easier shall it be for a Cammell, to creep through the
eye of a needle, than a rich man to enter into ye tabernacle of the Lord. Thy
nighe and dear brother walks abroad, shaded with the cloak of misery, and
thou sit at home with thy banketting dishes, not having any regard to his
extreme necessity, or if he desire but a small alms, thou can not spare
him a crust of bread to ease his hunger. He sits naked in the cold, being
pinched with many a sharp storm, when thou art clothed with rich array, and
passest by him without all pity or compassion.

Can any man associated with wicked persons be good?
Loath alone walked the right way, Gene. 19.
dwelling amongst the wicked multitude of ye Sodomites. Therefore yet their
sentence is not true which say, that it can not come to pass that they should
be good, which live in towns, and among the company or often assemble of men,
but such as live in the wilderness and solitary places. Neither do we speak
this to the end we would condemn solitary living, for it is evident or
plain, that many lived holily in the wilderness, but we declare to such as
be willing to spend their time honestly, that the common custom of men can
hinder nothing at all. To a slow and negligent person, what avails living by
him self: for neither place, but the mind and manners do good. I would that as
Loath was, so you should exceed one another in virtue, yt as glistering
sparcks, in the midst of a City shining, you might draw the rest unto you.

The virtues of those which dyed long since, to be profitable to us of this
present state.
LEt this always be the desire of a Christian man, let all his endeavoring
tend hereunto, that in living well, he might leave a perpetual memory of his
praise, and no vain glory (as ye Poets did in the art of versifying) behind
him, but that he passing from hence, his successors may have his diligent
conversation of life, as a monument and looking glass, daily to behold. A
good righteous and chaste man, has not only a respect, seeing the body which
he carries about, is brickle and mortal, to live in this world, but study how
to profit by examples of virtue, those after his discease, that be willing to
live in ye same rate. That every man therefore might know and understand, how
much ye good works of others and like examples might kindle us to do well, if
we be willing to follow continency and chastity, we will bring to your mind
a notable example of Joseph the Israelite, which being a young man of an
excellent shape or making, as ever nature framed, had a marvelous constancy
of chaste living before his eyes, who in this slipperie time of brickle age,
would not marvel to see the like: Joseph being made Prefect over Putiphar his
masters household, being a proper young man, his Mistres burnt vehemently in
lust after him, and when she spyed her time, caught him by the cloak as he
passed by, exhorting him to this horrible fact, and wickedness with her, but
he leaving his cloak behind him, fled from her presence. etc. O notable
spectacle to all the whole world. The simple Lamb fell into the hands of the
gredie and reuenous Lion, yet escaping without hurt.

By the great love we bear to god, charity to arise toward our neighbor.
Jacob served for Rachell seven years, counting them for a few days,
because he loved her. Hear this O you ignorant Christian, and most unthankful
toward God. This righteous man that he might obtain this virgin, disdayned not
to suffer all the bitter troubles of a shepeherdes life, to lie on ye ground,
to feed with misery, despising rain, wind, cold and snow. How will thou
then excuse thy self, which love not God the giver of all good gifts, with
a like fervent zeal? which requires none other thing of thee, than that thou
love him with all thy heart. Which thing if thou do, being mindful of the
word of our lord, thou will never despise thy brother. Math. 23.
He that bestows any thing on the least of these, bestows it on me. Thus
bestowing thy alms with a liberal mind upon the poor, and as it were laying
it in ye hand of the Lord, he will restore it unto thee with a double advantage.

That alms to be bell, whereunto other virtues he adjoined.
Will thou profit thy self? give of thy substance to the nedy. Suppress all
the affections of the flesh, root out of thy mind, the inticeme^ts of
concupiscence, as evil cogitation, anger, hatred, in whose stead let virtues
succeed.

Many offend by anger and lust, because they know not the ends of good and
evil
AS God has given diverse senses to man's body, to the use of life very
necessary: so likewise are there attributed various effections to ye soul. Of
the which reason or way of man's conversation does depend, containing also a
certain lust prescribed by the word of God, to beget children. The affection
of anger is given to bridle offenses. But what a grief is it to see how many
being ignorant of the fines of good and evil, used the wicked lust of their
flesh to punish virgins at wicked metings or asse^blies. They use their anger,
to hurt those whom they hate. Herevpo^ daily it aryseth, that we run to
great wickedness, and thereby likewise ensues strife between men, fight and
contention.

The manners and conversation of many to be changed in time.
WE se many, daily in age to repent, that of sinners, they be made righteous,
of wicked, good, of dishonest, honest. I have seen many extorcioners in youth,
Dycers (I will not say worsse) which afterward were worthy of praise.

God is pacified in no other thing, so much as in the amending of our manners.
THe amendment of our behavior, appeaseth ye heavenly power being displeased
with our wickedness, and not Frankincense, not sacrifices, not precious or
costly gifts, which we see subject to corruption. Will thou make the anger of
God transitory, not long enduring? Cease from doing ill. Therefore God does
punish those things which we do in this present life, so that we might have
leisure to repent.

God is to be loved and feared.
LEt us love God as a father, let us worship him as a Lord, let us give honor
to him as a benefactor, and let us fear him as replenished with severity. We
can not be Godly, if we do not love God, the nourisher or tender father of our
soul. Neither ca^ he be despised without danger, unto whom the Creator of all
things, and Lord over al men, true and eternal power remains. He is a father
as ye which has ministered a birth or beginning to us, to see the light which
we enjoy. He is God, whose gentleness aydeth the usage of mankind. He alone
nourishes us, he alone feeds us. And therefore this to be his house in which
we dwell, and we to be his family, we cannot once deny.

Faith is nothing without good works. Ex Chrisostomo.
THou art learned, thou despisest life. What profits life? Again, thou
carest for life. For life thou bostest in faith, neither truly can thou so
be saved. He that hears and does the same, him we liken to a wise man.

We must have a regard to our brethren.
IT is the duty of every man, to lead as it were by the hand unto virtue our
brother, wa^dring through the pronenesse of sin. God him self for this cause
taking upon him our flesh, entered into the world. He suffered and did many
things being a child. To conclude, he took death upon his shoulders, that he
might redeem mankind from sin, being guilty of damnation. By the which
example we must remember to further our neighbor or brother, considering he is
a member of us. I pray you is not our brother delivered out of the chaps of the
Devil, which by any man's sound doctrine, is reduced into the path of
virtue, and does that which is right, and being rich, bestows much upon the
poor? Great, great is his reward, yt by continual admonition and teaching,
brings the slothful apt unto vice, into the right way.

What manner of Wife is to be sought.
WHat time as the unquenchable thirst, and greadie desire of covetousness, was
but of small force, if a young honest man coueted a wife, there was no questioning
of much substance, no reasoning of riches, small demanding of land, and
scarce any question propounded of ye beautifulness of her person, but how
honest she was and civil, which should marry the foresaid young man. But now
a days, we demand how rich is she, what heritage does she look for,
according to the saying of Horace. Horat.
We seek even to the very apparel of her back, as for her manners that is no
matter, that is last. A proud Damasell, a wicked Maid, if she be riches if she
have coin, or if she be landed, makes up our mouth.

Why god should the day of death to be uncertain unto us.
FOr this cause god would that man should be ignor at of the time of his fate,
that he might by a continual study of virtues, he prepared to watch. He
says: Vigilate, quia nescitis diem neque horam. Watch, because ye know not
the time and hour. etc. But men do quite contrary. He commanded them to
watch, and they sleep down right, not practicing any goodness at al.
Therefore they slumber in virtue, and watch in vice. What kind of men is this?
How many do we see daily to bold in wickedness, and slow or tardie in
goodness. They die, they fade away, as well the young Lambs skin as the old
sheep. Death is indifferent, death spares none: yet notwithstanding are we
led by this unto virtue, neither do we so prepare our selves to despise this
present estate, and covet the estate to come.

We must have a regard to our children.
YOu Parents, teach your children co^tinencie. For the custom of doing evil
after that it has once taken root, and is of any force, by ye the trauace of
time, it can not be won by any admonition. Then youth being led as it were
into captivity, rusheth whyther so ever the wicked spirit calls it, and
follows the same, willing nothing but pernicious destruction, or obeys it,
only having respect of present pleasure, unmindful of the torments to come,
according to the proverb. Sweet meat must have sower sause. Therefore yoke
your children in time, least they be punished for their sins. It is best to
resist euilles always assaying us. The medicine is to late prepared, when the
wound is to much festured. You that have children, take heed, that they be
virtuously brought up. You Masters also and others, which nourter youth, be it
to your charge, and think it a great profit or utility, to instruct them to
live godly. Teach the^ to flee sin, exhort the^ to virtuous exercise.

To hourd up treasure is a dangerous thing.
THou covetous rich man, to leave much behind thee, thou hourdest up daily,
thou byest ground, thou buildest, thou pluckest down, thou choppest and
chaungest four cornerd stones for round. And that thou may finish all this
thy gredie desire, thou pillest and pullest from other, thou defraudest other,
and make ye workman labor in vain. If any ask thee, why thou do thus,
straight ways thou make an answer, for thy childrens behouf. O blindness,
O madness, do thou not see these riches to be left as an occasion for thy
children to live wickedly? If this age be prone by it self unto lust, to
riottousnesse and other vices, how much the more then by abundance of wealth
does it run hedlong unto the Devil? Have thou never seen fire, as soon as it
has found out a breach, to issue out with stronger flames? So also youth is
kindled or stirred up to sin, by riches the provocation of all evils.

Who be poor and who be rich to God.
IF thou never stirrest, or stryuest to attain righteousness, thou art pore,
although a thousand of thy barnes were filled with grain. He is only rich
unto God, that is endued with virtue. Will thou be acceptable unto him?
Perform goodness and innocence. Will thou be excellent? Sow the seed of
mercifulness. Will thou be perfect? Fulfill all the degrees of virtue, that
is, abstain from wicked works, evil words, and the cogitation of pestilent
things.

What man is healthful truly.
IF thine eyes, thy head, thy feet, thy side, and thy other members, be in
good taking, the common people judge thee in health. But the Philosopher says
nothing less. If thou be angry, if thou be puffed up with pride, if thou be
subject unto lust, if thou burn in concupiscence, or if thou be covetous. He
will say that thou art sound, if thou bend not thine eyes upon other men's
goods. For an envious person waxes lean or repyneth at an other man's
prosperity. If thou gase not upon riches, if thou lust not after an other man's
wife, if thou desire or covet nothing at all, then is there Men's sana in
corpore sano. But thou must also be humble, pityfull, beneficious, gentle, and
having a perpetual peace in thy mind. He that leads his life in this race
according to the saying of the Philosopher, he is healthful, and in every
member perfect.

The works of mercy.
THat man is merciful in deed, which redeemeth the captives from their
enemies, that visits ye poor, that cherishes the nedie, and suffers them
not to lie unburied, which die in the streates: A pitiful person takes away
by violence those that be oppressed of the mighty, opening his door to them
that want lodging, and defends the cause of the widows and fatherless: He
that does these works, offers unto God a true and acceptable sacrifice.

The comfort of Repentance.
REpe thy house immaculate, clear thy breast from every spotte, that it may be
the Temple of the Lord, which is not decked with the comeliness of gold or
Iuorie, but with ye brightness of faith and chastity. I hear what thou
say very well. But I say it is a hard thing for a man to live without
spotte or blemish. Therefore, I counsel thee to flee unto Repentance, which
possesses not the least place among virtues. For this is her correction, that
if by chance thou offend in word or deed, by and by repent, confess thou
have offended, and desire of God pardon for thy sins, which he will not deny
for his unspeakable mercy, except thou persevere still in thine offense, and
return as the Dog does again to his vomit. Great is the comfort of
Repentance. It heals our wounds, and our sins, this hope, this port of
salvation have we.

Where, and what Godliness is.
BOdlynesse dwells in his breast which knows not dissentio^, which agrees
with his neighbor, which is a friend unto enemies, which loves all men as his
own brethren, which knows how to bridle his anger, and appease all ye fury
of his mind, by a quiet mean.

All wickednesses which are done, spring of these three affections, anger,
desire, and lust.
ANger is to be cohibited, desire to be kept under, and lust to be subdued, so
shall thou flee vice. For all things almost which we unjustly and wickedly
commit, flow and proceed from these three affections. All the strife of men
shall be drowned, if the vyole^ce of anger be suppressed. Thou shall see no man
tangled in deceites or ready to mischief. If we keep under gredinesse or
desire, no man need be afraid by land or by Sea to be robbed or spoiled of
his substance. If every man endeavor to cohibit lust, both young and old, men
and women, shall for ever possess holiness.

Sepulture not to be greatly regarded.
WHo would not greatly disalow those that prodigaly wast their Patrimonies,
about superfluous things, building for themselves Sepulchers of Marble stone?
It seems unto me truly, that they bury their goods in the earth. Neither do
such works bring any memorial sign or eternity of their name which
peradventure is sought. For either one Earthquake may scatter it abroad, either
fire by chance consume it, or hostile vyolence ouerwhelme the same. But if
none of these chance, verily continuance of time shall bring it to naught.
Deservedly therefore a man may reprehe^d those that have so fond a care or
regard. Call not him a wretch that departs in a strange land in the
wilderness, in an obscure place or corner, yea what if I said not in his bed,
but that died in his sins. Is he a laughing stock, that dyed far from his
kin, neither at his departure was any friend present? Not so, though he
lacked the honor of burial. For by the same he suffered no damage. The
sepulchers of many Prophets and Apostles be not known of in the world. Be
sorrowful, lament and weep, if thy friend die, not yet wyped from his
iniquity. For the death of sinners is the worst. Rejoice if he left the world
being pure and clean from all his offenses. For precious in the sight of ye
lord is the death of his saints. For they pass into a better life, where they
shall receive the rewards of their labors.

Modesty, that fair virtue, to be acceptable unto God.
Will thou imitate the modesty of the Ancient fathers? Look thou be not
presumptuous, nor high minded: but with modesty give place unto other, and
covet to be counted an inferior, neither use thy self as an adversary unto
those which proffer thee injury. Thou being afflicted by reproach, seem not
cruel, although he be more spightfull that have slaundered thee. Let
gentleness and lenity appease thy wrath. By these virtues thou attaynest,
being delivered from all bitterness, pleasant quiet rest.

Such as our talk is, such our sports and bankets ought to be.
IN all things which thou say or do, it behooves thee to have thy mind
free from all thoughts, neither must you be moved by any lust or fear least a
sparcke of gredinesse flouthfulnesse or ignominy appear in your
communication. Likewise, so use thy pastime and pleasure, that all petulancy
and filthy talk be far off. We must obey the precepts, by the which we are
commanded, that we should neither rejoice at fond or rybauld communication.
All the acts of Venerie are condemned without wedlock.

An exhortation to mercifulness, mixed with chyding.
MAny of us have money at home, superfluous and idle, lying by us. No
Evangelical reading, not Hieremie, not Augustine, no lucubrations of so many
holy Fathers writing of the contempt of such things, can bring us to this
point, to destribute some small part of the same to our neighbor, laboring
with hunger, and waxing stiff with cold. O hard, O stony hearts, with what
eyes shall we behold ye presence of the almighty Judge, whose commandment
we have neglected? God does not command that we should cast away our riches,
but use the same. And when we have satisfied our use, then to have a respect
unto ye poor. The merciful God has not bestowed riches upon us, yt they
might be kept in our Chestes, and Coffers, nay rather there moulde, but that by
our abundance the needinesse of other might be eased, and thoroughly refreshed.
This man wastes much riches upon diverse and dainty bankettes: this man
lassheth out substance on gorgious apparel, and this man wastes his
treasure at the Table of gluttons, when in the mean season one sick brother
stands knocking at the gate, and can not be heard, requiring none of all this
superfluity, but wherewith to sustain his feeble nature, whereby he might live,
and not through want of food, suffer detriment or perish. How shall we, that
be not moved with the prayers and tears of our fraternal calamity, look to
be excused at the hands of God.

The glory of men is not purchased, only of good works.
Will thou attain to good works? Se thou do not any thing for the favor of
men, but that the same eye might praise thee which never sleeps. For if thou
covet to be praised of me^, thou make thy self unworthy to be extolled of
the Lord. Both hurts, both are pernicious in good work, if any man have a
respect to humain glory, and thinks loftily of him self. What other I pray
thee shall thou be called then a miserable Miser. This only pernicious
affection made ye Publican worsse than ye Pharisie. What so ever therefore good
works thou do, always have ye saying of Christ to his Disciples in thy
mind. When you have done all that ever you can, say we are unprofitable
servants.

The covetous man is chidden.
WHether do thou rage (O covetous man) in hounding up or gathering of
treasure. What greediness leads thee forward, that thou art never satisfied
but art counted none other than a dronken person. For as the more Wine they
drink, the more they gulge in, and the more dryer they be: so thou being
subject to the tyranny of avarice, never have any stint at all. Cressit amor
nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia cressit: says the Poet. The covetous desire of
money, increases as much as the money it self. The more riches we have, the
gredier we be. I ask thee but this one question. What vtility gettest thou
hereby, if thou might obtain ye whole world, being sure to suffer the
detriment of the soul, which covetousness blinds, and daily fills with
all kind of mischief?

What God requires in repentance.
GOD asks nothing of us sinners, but that we be quiet from sin. He calls
for no account of that which is paste, if he see any spark of Repentance. For
this is he which daily cries: I will not the death of a sinner, but that he
turn from his wickedness and live. This is he which says, in the midst of
thy talk will I say: Behold I am present. (O merciful God) see we be not so
greedy of our own salvation, as he would ye we should be saved. One thing he
requires, to confess our sins, and being confessed, to abstain from the
same.

What manners are to be observed in the Church.
WE must remember in the temple of the Lord, to restrain from blasphemous
words, unprofitable trifles, gigling and daliance, especially, when the
Minister practices his divine office. They which abstain not from these
things, offend more grievous tha^ those which the lord scourged out of ye
Temple. For they sin grievously which are occupied in the house of the
Lord, none other way, than in a place convenient to sport or play. I will not
speak what wickedness the lewdness of men dare commit in most sacred
places.

The prayer of the sinner continuing in his offenses to be unfruitful.
OUr own sins are the occasion that we be not heard praying unto God.
Because we do wickedly, and daily provoke the lord unto anger, he will not be
entreated. For we pray in vain, if we do not depart from our sins: We
cease not to be righteous, or do any other thing which is contrary to the
word of God. We make our supplications unto him, and yet we swell with hatred
against our neighbor. We would be loved of God, and yet we disdain that man
which he has made to his own similitude or likeness, and which he has
redeemed with his precious blood. Every offense shall be remitted, if we love
him that hates us. Then may we preseht our gifts before the Altar. God will
not hear us, except he see that charity grafted which ought to be in every
man. That prayer is also abject from him, which tends not only to please ye
lord, whether we desire the health of the body or any other necessary things,
always we must ask to this end, that we may speedely having obtained favor,
serve our only savior.

Sluggishnesse is naught.
Let your sleep be no longer than nature requires: For by continual
sluggishnesse, the time of doing well is lost, and we are made more apter unto
vice: Therefore it was well spoken of Cato.

Plus vigila semper, Cato.
nec somno deditus esto
Na^ diuturna quies, vitijs alime^ta ministrat.
Seek not more sluggish for to be
than nature does require:
For sleeping much as we do see,
to vices does aspire.
None will judge, those worthy of ye name of a man which spend their time in
sleeping exercise, and being at last awaked, with their hands unwashed, call
for their breakefast, and then their dinner, when they have scarce sleeped out
the last meals sustenance. Therefore, we must watch, pray, study and labor
with tooth and nail, least we enter into temptation, from the which, Lord be
our defender.

What manner of man he ought to be, that preaches Jesus to the people.
YOu that cry unto the people in the Church of god, take diligent heed, that
your works be agreeable to your doctrine. For he that does as he says, shall
be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. Will thou reprove other men's
offenses, so that other may not find the like in thee: Teach thou
humility? be gentle thy self. Do thou exhort unto patience? let no anger
remain in thee. Hate thou whordom and adultery? keep chastity. Teach
thou righteousness? Inueighest you against vices? see thou do no wickedness,
covet not a worldely praise, boast not of thy wit, but give God the praise,
in whom, and by whom we have purchased so great a wisdom.

Detraction or backebyting is to be eschewed.
WHen any be abse^t, thou must either hold thy peace or speak friendly behind
their back. For by the inte^perance of the tongue, it is evident that most
part of contentions arise. If a good name be better than great riches, he
sins grievously that detracteth undeservedly the same. A backebyter of men is
an abomination. David hates them when he says: I persecuted him that
slaundered his neighbor. If thou happen on such a man's company, bow not
thine ear to his talk, but turn away thy face, that thou may learn good,
and become a true laborer in the Vineyarde of the Lord, unto the which God for
his Sons sake Jesus, that pure and unspotted Lamb, the Redemer of al
mankind, now and ever vouchsafe to lead us. Amen.

FINIS. N. Boorman.
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold
at his shop in Lumbart streate.


