A IOVRNALL, OR Brief report of the late service in Britaigne, by the Prince
de Dombes General of the French Kings Army in those parts, assisted with her
Majesty's forces at this present there, under the conduct of Sir John Norreis:
advertised by letters from the said Prince to the Kings Ambassador here
resident with her Majesty, and confirmed by like aduertisements from others,
employed in that service.

Published, to answer the slanderous bruites raised of late by some evil
affected to that and other good actions, undertaken against the enemy of Gods
true Religion.

fleur-de-lis

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop right over
against the great South-doore of Paul's. 1591.

AFter the winning of the Town of Guingcamp, the purpose of the Prince was, to
have assailed the Town of Morlaix, to the end to have reduced the said Town,
and the rest of Basse-Britagne to the Kings obedience: howbeit understanding
that the D. of Mercoeur was removed from Pontiuy, where he joined with 4000.
Spaniards, under the leading of Don Iuan de Lagula and was marching toward
Morlaix, by the way of Corlay: the Prince therevppon discovering the forces of
the said Duke, which were of seven hundred horse, four thousand Spaniards,
and two thousand Harquebusiers French: considered how dangerous it might be to
engage his Army before a town, until he were Master of the field, the enemy
being of more strength then he, and in a country of advantage, and where he
might be assisted with a multitude of peisants, long before armed and resolved
for the enemy.

Upon these difficulties, the Prince made stay about the Town of Guingcamp,
as well to amend the fortifications, as to repair the breach made by his Canon,
(the better to assure the Town from the enemy) as to attend the bringing of
two Canons, and two Culuerings, drawn from Breast to Lagnon, with certain
powder, bullets, and other munition, conuayed out of England to Pinpaoul, to
the end that the same being in place of assurance, the enemy might not take
occasion to drive the Prince from his other enterprises.

The seventh of June, the D. de Mercoeur arrived at Corlay, within three
leagues of Guingcamp, a castle pretending to hold for the king, but in the
possession of Madame de Guymenay, whose brother, Monsieur de Boydolphin is
Lieutenant to the D. de Mercoeur, so that it seemed the party was made before
hand, for that the next day after they did arrive, the castle rendered without
seeing the Canon, and the Captain remained with the enemy: and from that place
the Duke sent to the Prince a Trompeter about certain prisoners of ours, taken
at Corlay, who signified to the said Prince that he had in charge from the D.
to entreat him to appoint some day and place of battle: whereunto the Prince made
answer, that it was the most acceptable news that could be brought unto him,
and a thing which he had often sought and desired, and whereunto at this time,
he hoped to enforce the said Duke to whom he would not return answer by the
mouth of a Trompeter, which might be disaduowed, but by a writing signed with
his own hand, which was accordingly performed as follows.

The Prince de Dombes Governor for the King in Daulphine, and General of his
army in the Province of Britaigne.
Upon a message delivered to the said Prince by a Trompeter sent to him from
the Duke of Mercoeur, for other causes, by the which he was solicited to
assign and make choice of some day and place of battle, desired by the Duke:
he considering how speeches of that nature delivered by a Trompeter, might be
disadvowed, and desiring as ever sithence his first coming into that Country,
that some like occasion might be offered whereby the miseries and calamites of
the same might have an end, which he had made appear by effects, thought meet
for the better advancing of so good a work, by this writing signed with his
hand, and sent by a Trompeter of his own, to signify to the said D. de
Mercoeur, that the thing he most desired, was to come to the issue of so happy
a day, and therefore would yield to him the choice of the day and place for that
encounter, so that the place of meeting might be capable to receive the two
armies in order of Battle, and to avoid the delays that might grow by want
of resolution herein, he thought the Lawne of Menay very fit for this
purpose, concluding, that if this honorable resolution should chance to be
differred upon any alteration whatsoever on either part: he the said Prince
does protest before God and the world, that the honor and reputation of him
that shall herein make default, shall incur the stain and prejudice that shall
grow thereof.

Dated at the Camp before Guingcamp, the seventh of June. 1591.

The 8. of June the Duke of Mercoeur removed from Corlay to Saint Gilles, two
small leagues distant from Chasteau-Laudran: The same day also the Prince
departed from Guingcamp, about three of the clock in the morning, and lodged
that night at Chasteau-Laudran, where his own Trumpeter with the Trumpeter of
the Duke de Mercoeur met him, and delivered an answer from the said Duke
signed with his hand, the contents whereof follow.

The Duke de Mercoeur and of Penthieure Peer of France, Prince of the Holy
Empire, Lord of Martigues and Governor of Britain.

Having perused the writing of the Prince de Dombes, sent, upon the challenge
of battle, delivered by his trumpeter: even as he has many times sought the
occasion, and desiring nothing more, then by a battle to free this Province
from the miseries wherewith it has bin overwhelmed, by the repair of the said
Prince into the same, and to withstand the apparent ruin thereof like to
ensue, by the domination of an heretical king, with the overthrow of our holy
Catholic religion: for the desire he has to see the issue of so happy a day,
and because the day and place is referred to his election, is resolved to be
ready with his army on Thorseday next at ten of the clock in the morning, in
the fittest place for such an action between Corlay and Guingcamp, and to come
onward the best part of the way: which ought not to be refused or diferred in
seeking of any place more remote or unfit with out dishonor: the said Duke
protesting before God (from whom as fighting in his cause he hops of
victory) that he never had other intent, and that if the said Prince shall
either refuse or diferre this offer, he shall show to the world, that his
actions are not answerable to his bragges, and shall thereby blemish his honor
and reputation.

Dated at the Camp at Corlay the 8. of June 1591.

Hereunto the Prince for many good resons, gave such reply as the Duke might
perceive, he would not contend with him only in terms, but to give him
all the provocation that possible he might to come to hands returned him this
answer.

The Prince de Dombes Governor of Daulphine, Lieutenant General for the King
in his army in Britaigne.

Having seen the answer of Duke Mercoeur of the eight of this month signed
with his hand, upon the offer made of the day and place of battle to be given,
says, he was sent into this province to chastise and punish those that are
traitorously rebelled against the King, of whom the said Duke being chief,
does manifest how he shunneth and fears the presence of the said Prince, and
the pain and punishment of his rebellion: and in regard of the lewd
imputations given by his answer to the King, and to the said Prince, he says
he lies, and shall lie as often as he shall so say.

At the Camp at Chasteau-Laudran the ninth of June. 1591.
This Cartel was sent by a trumpeter, and delivered to the Duke in the presence
of many of the principal men of his army.


THe Duke greatly moved with this Cartell, did openly by a solemn oath vow,
within 3. days to offer battle to the Prince, and on the 9. of June being
wensday, dislodged, and that day encamped at Quelenec a Village about a league
and a half from Chasteau-Laudran, situate at the foot of a high hill, which
by deep hedges, ditches and enclosures, confronted a little heath of two miles
compass, to which Heath upon the discovery of the approach of the enemy by our
army, the Prince mounteth on horseback, and goes to discern and make choice
of the place for the battle between the ennemy and him, and finds about
three quarters of a league of the Village aforesaid, a large plain or Heath,
skirted in the side of the ennemie with a Coppice, a little hill, and the ground
raised with ditches of great advantage for the enemy, who by three large
passages might without any difficulty, enter into the said Heath.

The tenth day of June, the ennemy, within one quarter of a league of the
Heath, shows his whole army in order of battle upon the top of a hill: the
Prince on the other side put his troops in ordonance within the Heath,
disposing the same by the advice of Sir John Norreis into three Battallions,
whereof the infanterie English made two, and the Lancekneights the third. This
day was spent with some light skirmishes, entertained by our men, and followed
even to the maine of the enemies army.

The 11. of June being Friday, the enemy drew his army to the foot of the hill,
and placed his artillery upon the side of the Heath, in a place of such
advantage, as it commanded in the nature of a Cauallier all the whole Heath,
where he possessed the ground near about him, and bordred all the hedges with
shot: and by the time that this was performed our army was marched into the
Heath in order of battle, and presently sent out two hundred footmen to
view the countenance of the ennemy, who aduauncing themselves, charged the
ennemy, drove them to their strengths, put them from their hedges and
Barricades, and slew diverse of them. Upon the retrait of these two hundred
men, the Duke put forth five hundred French, and three hundred Spaniardes to
repossesse the places, whom he followed with the great of his arm. Which
perceived by the Prince, remaining on the Heath with Monsieur de la Hunauldaye
commanding the auantgard, and having his regiment of horse in battle on the
right hand of the white Cornet, and General Norreis (who in this action gave
good proof of his wisdom and valor) Monsieur de Pogny, de Pruneaux, de
Monmartin, and de Bastenay, order was given for the putting forth of three
hundred footmen, commanded by Captain Anthony Wingfield Sergeant mayor, and
captain Morton, and the English horse lead by Captain Anthony Sherley, and
the skirmish hotely prosecuted, the enemy let slip a great number of shot
under the defense of the hedges, thinking to lodge them on the left hand, and
to have taken some two or three houses, and a small wood upon the edge of the
Heath. The Prince commanded to be drawn out of the Battallion of the
Lancekneights one hundred men, shot and pikes, and one hundred and fifty
shot French, lead by the Baron de Molac, backed with forty light horse,
conducted by Monsieur de la Tremblaye, appointed to force the enemy from the
place they had taken.

This direction was valiantly prosecuted by ours, but specially by the English,
so as the enemies horse and footmen which were in the plain were forced to
fly, many slain, and the rest driven to save them selves within their
Artillery, where the whole strength of Spaniardes, with the rest of their
army was placed. There was taken in this charge Monsieur de Guebrian Colonel
of the footmen of the ennemy by Monsieur de la Tremblay, and slain Don
Roderigo, chief Mareschall of the Spaniards, a Spanish Captain, and to the
number of two hundred French, and three score Spaniards.

This resolute charge so amazed the army of the enemy, that our men were
suffered within ten paces of their Cannon to disarme the dead, lead away
prisoners, and retired at their ease, the enemy never proffering to follow.

In this charge Captain Anthony Sherley gave such an example to the French
horse, as was admired and much commended in all the army, and the commanders on
foot performed their parts with no less valor and reputation, namely, the
Sergeant Mayor, Captain Dolphin, and Lieutenant Long, who behaved himself
most valiantly, and received in his body five harquebuz shot: but all such as
by Gods help within few days he will be able to return again into the
field.

The residue of the day wherein this charge was given, was spent in slight
skirmishes and canonades.

The twelfth of June, the enemy made a very great show to come forth to the
battle, but at the last, sent out some number of shot to the skirmish,
against whom captain Anthony Sherley with fifteen horse and a few foot, made
head, and put them speedily to their heels, pursuing them to their Barricades,
where his horse was shot in the head, and Master Kempe a Gentleman of that
Cornet slain, and Master Charles Blunt his horse killed under him with the
Canon, and himself somewhat wounded.

The thirteenth of June, the ennemy also offered some light skirmishes, but
would not abide any charge either of horse or foot.

On Monday the 14. of June we expected the battle, as undertaken by Don Iuan
de Lagula General of the Spaniards, in the honor of S. John whose day it was
with them, but nothing was done: and that day seemed to end their choler, for
that the Duke did prepare the same night to dislodge, withdrawing his Cannons
from the place where they were planted, and the day following repassed the hill
where he first appeared, and from thence retired to Quelenec, where yet he
remains.

The Prince hereuppon after he had continued his army on the Heath, from Friday
the eleauenth of June, till the fifteenth of the same, always in a readiness to
have given battle (the weather having bin for the most part exceeding wet)
withdrew his artillery, dislodged his army, and returned every troop to the
several quarters, where they had before lodged, expecting the intention of the
enemy, thereby to advise of the means to attempt upon him.

The two armies continued encamped the one near to the other by the space of
six days, in all which time the enemy never durst presume to draw his army
into the Heath, nor make choice of ground for battle, notwithstanding the
bravery of his challenge.

On Wednesday the sixteenth day of June, Monsieur de la Noue with the troop of
the Conte Montgomery being an hundred Curates, and the Conte de Combourg came
unto Chasteau-Laudran, whose arrival gives hope of good success in the
Kings affairs, to the ruin and confusion of his enemies.

The Prince de Dombes in a particular Letter of the twentieth of June, sent to
the Kings Ambassador here resident with her Majesty gives this testimony of
the valor of our General and Nation.
I Send this brief discourse of the late action, wherewith you may acquaint
her Majesty, protesting truly unto you, that I observe daily more and more
the valor and worth of General Norreis, who has so worthily carried
himself in all these actions, that he has won great honor and reputation
here, and so have all the Captains and Soldiers of that Nation under his
conduct: and if the Spaniardes had had courage and valor like to these English
troops which it has pleased her Majesty to send unto us, we had made an end
of the miseries of this Province, by the happy issue of a battle.


And Monsieur de la Noue in a Letter of the 21. of June to the said
Ambassador, yields his opinion of the actions, and of the General and our
Nation in these terms:

THe enemy was retired two leagues from our Army before my arrival, and is
sithence gone further off: believe me there was made a brave attempt upon him,
as General Norreis can best signify unto you, who was present at all that was
offered. Our determination is still to draw the^ to Battle, which can not at
al times at our choice be effected, as well by reason of the qualtiy of the
Country, as that the Duke of Mercoeur will commit nothing to hazard. Without
the succor sent hither by the Queen of England, Brittaigne had been greatly
in danger, (I mean so much thereof as is possessed by the King) who in that
respect is greatly bound unto her Majesty. It is a very fair and gallant
troop of men, and are commanded by a most brave Captain General Norreis, a
man very tractable, and with whom we are well fitted in disposition.


FINIS.


