EUROPA

SOME YEARS TRAVELS INTO AFRICA and ASIA the Great.

Especially Describing the Famous Empires of PERSIA and INDUSTANT.

As also Diverse other Kingdoms in the Oriental INDIES, and I'les Adjacent

By Tho: Herbert. Esquire

LONDON Printed by R Br. for Jacob Blome and Richard Bishop. 1638

W. M. sculp:
PAR MER.

Herbert coat of arms Pawb in Arver. PAR TERRE.

SOME YEARS TRAVELS INTO DIVERSE PARTS OF ASIA and AFRIQUE.

Describing especially the two famous Empires, the Persian, and great Mogull:
weaved with the History of these later Times

As also, many rich and spacious Kingdoms in the Oriental INDIA, and other
parts of ASIA; Together with the adjacent Isles.

Severally relating the Religion, Language, Qualities, Customs, Habit,
Descent, Fashions, and other Observations touching them.

With a revivall of the first Discoverer of AMERICA.

Revised and Enlarged by the Author.

Segnius irritant Animos demissa per Aures
Quam quae sunt Oculis Subjecta fidelibus, and Quae
Ipse sibi praebet Spectator.
Horat. SHALL LABOR FOR THOU
PEACE PLENTY



LONDON, Printed by R. Bip. for Jacob Blome and Richard Bishop. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomery: Baron
Herbert of Caerdiff' and Sherland; Lord Parr and Ross' of Kendall; Lord
Fitzhugh, Marmyon, and Saint Quintin: Lord Chamberlain of his MAJESTY'S most
honorable Household, Lord Lieftenant of Kent, Wiltes, etc. Lord Warden of the
Stanneries in Corn-Wales and Devon: Knight of the most noble Order of the
Garter: and one of his MAJESTY'S most honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
HAving past the Pikes, I take new courage to come on again. One blow more and
I have done. Ten to one it lights on my own pate: but if my head stand free,
my hand shall not be guilty of more Intrusion: No more pressure to the Press:
the Crowd is too strong already: and I will get out by Head and Shoulders
rather than fail.

Your Lordships word may pass for me: and I dare not break it. Greatness has
a great stroke over Men, but Goodness a greater; Men choosing to obey for
Love, rather than Fear. In both, you have a strong Interest, and in both sorts
of Men they have taken Possession, and like Twyns grow up together: Quam been
convenient! And may their residence be as immovable as your Constancy to Good:
yea may the Title of plain Dealing and honest Man be the worst Reproach,
Malice or double Dealing can fix upon your Name and Memory, who have gained
much honor and ease too in Court and Country, by that excellent Dialect and
general Belief.

The Dedication like a fair Frontispice to a mean House, or a beautiful
Sign to an ill Lodging, has tempted Travelers to look in and make some stay:
But I fear to have used my Readers, as my Host the Guests, that set a mark on
the Door, to pass by, and call in no more. It Is my fear only; which being
begot of Modesty, may serve to invite the best and most ingenious Company.

To please all is my Desire; but my Choice a few: taking the bigger Number to
be the lesser in Virtue, and swollen only with a timpany of Wind and Water.

The Boat is in your Lordships hand, which steares as you direct it. Yours is
the greatest Interest: you are our Chief: yours is the leading Judgment: do
but approve, the Mark is hit, and you make many Followers; Which is the Request
of

Your Lordships humblest Servant Tho. Herbert

To his virtuous Kinsman THO. HERBERT Esquire.
WHat! is it the Love thou bear the Southern Clyme?
Or Care to instruct us? That the second time
Thou ingagest Fame. Or is it thy Love to pay,
Thanks to mild censures? or thy Friends to obey?
Or to Enlarge? or deck thy Maiden lines?
Like to a Nurse whose eyes on The Infant shines.
Which of them all? or all it be: It Is well*
Who threats good will imparts a part of hell.
CHAPTER HERBERT.

Nobili suo amico THO. HERBERTO armigero
APpulit Eois Herbertus sospes ab Oris,
Vicit and immensi mill pericla Maris.
Non tulit hinc secum piper, aurum, balsama, gemmos,
Costum, aloen, myrrham, cinnama, thura, crocum.
Rettulit hic Mores Hominumque Viator, and Vrbes,
Regna, habitus, lingvas, praelia, jura, deos.
Divite ne post hac quaeras e Perside gazas,
Anglia nunc Anglis Persia tota domi est.
AR. IONSTONUS Med. Reg.

Descriptio decoris reciproci, inter Arborem Nobilem seu Familiam de Herbert;
and Authorem vere ramum ejusdem arboris seu Familiae.
NIl tantum decorat ramum quam nobilis arbor,
Florentem ramum sic Decus Arbor habet.
MAR. BELWOOD Dr. Med.

Amico suo nobilissimo THO. HERBERTO armigero.
VRbes quod varias solers vidisset Ulysses
Et Mores hominum, clarus honor fuit.
Sola inter Phrygiam licet errans Hesperiamque
Littora lustrasset per duo lustra Maris.
Tuspatia ut saperes immensa emensus es Orbis
Herberte inque Salo gnaviter inque Solo.
Comperta unde tibi nova multa and mira Brittannis
Candidus impertis veridicusque tuis.
Fallacem hoc Ithacum superasque peritia rerum
Quod tua candori sit fideique comes.
WALT. O-QVIN Armig.

To the Reader.
HEre thou at greater Ease than he
May behold what he did see;
Thou participates his gains,
But he alone reserves the pains.
He traded not with luker sotted.
He went for knowledge and he got it.
Then thank the Author: thanks is light,
Who has presented to thy sight,
Seas, Lands, Men, Beasts, Fishes, and Birds,
The rarest that the World affoords.
THO. Lord FAYRFAX Baron of Cameron.

TRAVELS BEGUN Anno 1626. DESCRIBING DIVERSE parts of Africa, and Asia the
Great; but principally the two famous Monarchies, the Mogull and Persian. THE
FIRST BOOK.
ALL things are the more, The Induction.
most things the better for Addition. In honor and wealth no fault is found
with increase; full meals and full pleasures too; brim-full have no guard upon
them. The fuller the better: If the husbandry bestowed upon this Book has
improved the soil, since you viewed it last, the Lyme was yours and charge of
bringing; the spreading only belongs to me as your day-labourer.

To improve on your encouragement, is for your credit, my delight; both our
benefits. The gale you late so favorably lent me spread my affection, and
again lancht me into another Ocean. And, Turpe mihi abire domo, vacuumque
redire est.

I know my new Relations must endure the touch; yea, and the handling too. So
should all Books: But in this Age it fares with Books as with French toys,
fair to the eyes, well coverd with your empty Gallants, who take the people
with the outside bravery; Give me good Lynings.

My mind is like my habit, plain; and my expressions (I hope so) too. If my
new thoughts have added to your bottom, I know you will unwinde gently for
fear of ravelling, and tie a knot where the thread breaks. But if I have made
no Topographic mistakes, I fear no other deviations.

The first (the fruits of youth and haste) came abortive into your hands; and
failed not of respective welcome. Yet in so cold, so nipping a Zone, more
clothing may be accepted of, and which I have woven with some toil, but very
willingly, hoping it may discover more maturity. I formerly obeyed my friends,
who thought the first too short; this then may prove the happier, since I have
labored to give them a ready acknowledgement. Let my errors therefore reflect
on them, and impale me in your favor, for peradventure I may give boldness to
your Factors, to fetch exotique rarities in a new division of the world, and in
assuring their Barques to bring you home, what may prove worthy your sight and
money. But this lucky gale will suffer no longer complement.

The relation of our Sea-voyage, is first enjoined me.

1626.
Upon Good Friday, we took ship at Dover, having six great and well-man'd ships
along with us. In few hours coasting close by the I Will of Wight (called so from
Gwydh a British word signifying, seen at distance; Vectis in Pliny, Vecta in
Eutropius;) where, a sudden and violent gust assaulted us; which, after an
hours rage, spent it self, and blew us the third day (double solemnized by
being the feasts of Mother and Son) upon the Lizards point or lands end of
England, the utmost promontory of Cornwall; and from whence, to the extremest
cape of Afrique, we compute our longitude, and not from the Azores the first
Meridian.

The wind blew fair, so as the seven and twentieth day we entered the Spanish
Ocean, the coast of Biscay neighboring us. Ere long, we descried seven tall
ships, whom reputing enemies, we bore up to speak with, but they proved
friends, Hollanders out of the Levant, who drunk our healths as they past, by a
roaring Culverin; and we vomited out a like echo of thunder, plowing up the
liquid Seas in merrinesse, till the nine and twentieth day made us the sport of
Danger, dancing upon the raging billows, Aeolus from his iron whistle
blustering melancholy tunes, a good while heaven and sea seeming undivided. To
which Tune Horace, Od. 3. lib. 1.

Illi robur et aes triplex
circa pectus erat, qui fragilem truci
Commisit pelago ratem --
Primus; nec timuit praecipitem Africum
Decertantem Aquilonibus,
nec tristes hyadas, nec rabiem Noti.
A heart of brass that man had sure,
Who in a Barque durst first endure
The raging waves, not valuing life
Midst fierce South-west and North winds strife.
The Hyads (who clouds seldom want)
Nor blustering South his sprite could dant.
Violence has no permanence; in thirty hours, the quarrel 'twixt wind and sea
was ended, and joy in a serene sky reanimated us, so as we ended March in
chase of a Turkish Pirat, whom with top-gallant top-sailes we pursued 6 hours,
but (to our grief) he out-sailed us. The first of April we cut our passage
into the vast Atlantic Ocean, by Arabs called Magribana, as says Marmolius,
Atlantic Ocean.
(named from Atlas Maurus, (brother to the star-gazer Prometheus) from whom two
famous Mounts, one in Mauritania, the other in Lybia, are denominate.) Long we
had not been in these seas, but another Barbarian Sally man of War came up to
us, sculking all night in hope to board the first he saw divided; at day break
we found the villain, who, loath to parlee in fire and shot, fled amain and
left us; who swum so well, that the third of April at Titans first blush we got
sight of Porto Santo, a holy Port, (called Cerne in Ptolomy) commanded by the
superstitious Spaniard, and of Madaera (or I Will of Wood) from the Canaries 300
miles; the first, discovered by Perestrellus, anno 1419. 5398 undiscovered;
given him upon condition he would people it, which he found difficult, the
Conies in such numbers resisting and undermining him. The other the same year
by Gonzalvo Zarco from encouragement of Henry, son to King John the first, of
Portugal. The holy Port has five and twenty miles compass, notable in Wheat,
Ry, Rice, Oxen, Sheep, Bores, Conies. Sanguis Draconum, Fruits, Flowers, and
Grapes, at 8 leagues distance thus respecting us.

Porto Sancto


The sixth of April we had 27 degrees and a half, at that instant descrying
the Isles Canariae, of old, fortunate in name though not in quality,
undiscovered till the year 1328 accidentally by one Machan (or Marcham) an
English man, from whose relation Jews de Cerdezo two year after sailed
thither, and by consent of his King, Pedro of Arragon, had liberty of conquest
and benefit; but long enjoyed neither, John 2. the Castilian King, Anno 1405
extruding him: From whom also, Ventacurtius a French man snatches them, but by
John de Betancour a well-descended Gentleman, kinsman to Bracamonte the French
Admiral, is dispossessed, Anno 1417 shipping 10000 volunteers, by whose valor
and constancy he subdued five of the Isles, La Palma, La Gomera, Lanzarota,
Ferro, and Forteventura, an achievement honorable, yet such vexation possessed
the ambitious Gaul that Canarie masterd him, as made him entertain death with
an useless complement; his Nephew Menaldus left heir to what he had got, and
(has added) his misfortunes; Myndus a haughty Bishop incensing the Castilian
King, by whose greatness Menaldus is forced thence, glad of some composition
paid him by Don Barba the Bishops kinsman. But see variety! Barba repents the
purchase, and for small profit assigns his Title to Don Fernando Perazzo,
whose brain taking like infection, grows weary of his toil, and for other
employment parts with his claim to the Prince of Castile, from whom 'twas
torn by Don Henrico Infant of Spain, to this day constant to Spanish
servitude.

These Isles (perhaps the same Ptolomy and Mela call Deorum currus) are from the
Morocco or Lybian continent 20 leagues, from Spain 200. six commonly numbered (
Cadamastus, ten; three by speculation) by old Authors, Ptolomy, Pliny, Strabo,
and others, Canaria, Capraria, Nivaria, Iunonia, Ombrian (or Pluvialia,)
Aprosita (or fracta lancea) and, as Martian adds, Casperia (or Fortunata.) At
this day thus; Canaria, La-palma, Teneriffa, Lancaerota, Hierro, La Gomera, and
Forteventura. A word of what they were and are. They knew no God, but Nature,
were ignorant of the use of fire, shaved with flint stones, gave their children
to be nursed by Goats, cultured the earth with horns of Oxen, abhominated the
slaughter of beasts. -- For how can they be good
Who dare each day imbrue their hands in blood.
Like beasts used women in common. No meum tuum. Lust and carelessness so
vailing them, that little difference was 'twixt them and their cattle. Sylva
domus erat, cibus --
herba, cubilia frondes.
The Woods their dwelling was, the herbs their Diet,
And on the leaves and boughs they slept in quiet.
Some glimmering they had of superstition: having always two Kings, one alive,
one dead. The dead they wash and erect him in a Cave, a staff in one hand, a
payle of milk and wine set by him, to support and help him in his Travel.

At this day are Spanish Christians. The Inquisition affrighting honest men to
come among 'em. Grand Canarie is the residence of the Inquisitor, whither all
the other Isles repair for Justice and other business. Canarie has 120 miles
circumference, full of many good things, Goats, Beeves, Asses, Hoggs, Barley,
Rye, Rice, variety of Flowers, Grapes, and other excellent fruits. The I Will as I
took it, thus seems at 8 leagues distance.

Grand Canaria.


Teneriffa, in multitude of Inhabitants compares with great Canary. Exceeds it
in Grapes, yielding yearly eight and twenty thousand Butts of Sack, outbraves
all the earth for supereminence. Her high peak Teyda towering so loftily into
the air, as seems not only to penetrate the middle Region, but in a sort to
peep into heaven it self, from whence Laerius metaphorically calls it Atlas
and Olympus. It Is accounted 15 miles high, and seen (in fair weather)
six-score (some say 300) English miles distant, and serves as an excellent
Pharoe, exceeding those at Cayro on the otherside of Nylus. The shape I thus
present, badly formed.

Teneriffa:


Teneriffa is 20 leagues from Grand Canaria. Hyerro or Ferrum gave it self
very high, and bears from grand Canary South and by West; which I Will (as be the
rest) such time as Phoebus is to us vernall, grows insufferable scortching.
Famous in one tree (it has but one) which (like the miraculous rock in the
Desert) affoords sweet water to all The Inhabitants, by a heavenly moisture
distilling constantly to the peoples benefit. Hear Sylvester.

In the I Will of Iron (one of those same seven
Whereto our Elders, happy name have given)
The savage people never drink the streams
Of Wells and Rivers, as in other Realms.
Their drink is in the Air! their gushing spring,
A weeping Tree out of it self does wring.
A Tree whose tender bearded root being spread
In dryest sand, his sweating leaf does shed.
A most sweet liquor; and (like as the Vine
Untimely cut, weeps (at her wound) the Wine
In pearled tears,) incessantly distills
A royal stream, which all their Cesterns fills
Throughout the Island; for all hither by,
And all their vessels, cannot draw it dry!
Of these Isles, Lancaerota was taken by that English Leonidas the Earl of
Cumberland, anno 1596. and Teneriffa 4 years after by the Dutch; the first
pillaged, the other burnt; since when, both are better fortified.

The ninth of April we crossed the Tropic of Cancer, Tropic. Cancri.
of like distance from the Equator, the utmost limit of the temperate Zone is
from the Pole, called Cancer from Apollo's Crablike retrogradation, moving back
in June from that sign in the Zodiac: The 12 day, we had the wind high and
large, so that in two days sail we made the Sun our Zenith or vertical
point, his declination at that instant 14. degrees North; where note; that only
then, when we are Nadyr to the Sun, we have no shadow; as also, whereas to
all in the temperate Zone, in the Suns Meridian their shadows cast North,
having past the Zenith, the shade or umbra becomes contrary.

An Observation forcing wonder in the Sunne-burnt Arabs upon their descent into
Thessaly, As Lucan notes.

Ignotum vobis (Arabes,) venistis in Orbem
Vmbras mirati Nemorum non ire sinistras:
An unknown world (Arabians) you invade!
Wondering to see the Groves yield right hand shade.
And because we have nilnisi pontus et Aer to observe upon, let us theorize a
little upon the Mathematiques. The Inhabitants within this Zone (the torrid) we
are now in, are called Amphiscij, in respect they cast their shadows both
ways according as the Sun is in declination, and Ascij or shadowlesse, when
Sol-is Zenith, from which point when it fleets either North or South the shadow
ever darts contrarily, as falls out when ever the gnomon or coelated body is
interposed. The periscij have their shadow circulating, their meridionall
shadows having no existence from the vertice, but oblique and extended to the
plain of the terrestrial Horizon, glomerating the gnomon or body opacous;
these sort of people freezing within the polar circles (of like distance from
the pole, the Tropicks are from the Aequinoctiall) the pole being their vertex,
and Equator (90 degrees) their direct Horizon. The Heteroscij are such as live
in the temperate Zone, whose shadows at noone day turn but one way. And this
the Mathematics teach us, that the Heteroscij comprehend 41 parellells, the
Amphiscij seven, the Periscij (those in the frozen Zone) half the year. With
these, go others as they stand comparatively, the Periaeci, Antoeci,
Antichthones. The first being such as dwell in two opposite points of a like
circle, one from the other a semicircle or 180 degrees, so they be numbered
after lesser parellells. The Antoeci are also opposite, but vary neither in
Meridian nor aequidistance from the Horizon, respecting either Hemisphere.

The Antipodes are such as be feet to feet, a precise straight line passing
through the Center from one side to another: differing from the Periaeci by
degrees of a smaller circle, whence we observe, that such as be to us Periaeci,
be Antoeci to our Antichthones, each inverted to other in a perfect contrary.
Nor doubt we that there be, Antipodes, (the veil of stupid ignorance being
rent away) the sphericity of the world, and that every place in the earth (tho
opposite) is habitable, now so well known as nothing seems more familiar.
Notwithstanding, it was not so of old, when Boniface Bishop of Mentz (a Clerk
well learned in that blockish age) was excommunicated by Pope Zachary, Anno
745. for maintaining such a paradox, yea was sentenced to be burnt for a
heretic except he had re canted: the holy Father bringing in Saint Augustine
against it in his 16. book de civit. Dei, Qui Antipodas esse fabulantur, etc.
nullo modo credendum est: and Lactantius another great Scholar deriding it in
his third book of Institutions. Very strange, such famous men to be so ill
read in Chorography: especially, since such a tenet was proved before them by
many: by Euclyde, by Cicero in his 4. lib. de Academ. question. by Tyberianus
who records an old letter beginning, Superi inferis, Salutem, by Strabo, and of
all others most ingeniously by Lucretius, lib. 1.

Illi cum videant Solemn, nos sydera noctis
Cernere, and alternis nobiscum tempora coeli
Dividere, and noctes pariles agitare diebus:
Sed vanus stolidis haec omnia parturit error.
When they see Sun, we see the lamps of night,
And with alternall courses times do change,
Dividing equal dark with equal light:
But error vain in fools makes these seem strange.
To return: in changing so many parellels, the weather increast from warm to
raging hot, the Sun flaming all day, insomuch that Calentures begun to vex
us. A sailer either by accident or infection falling from the shrowds into the
merciless waves aggravating our extremity, increased by a violent gust and
storm of wind and rain which in 6 degrees suddenly affrighted us, the squiffe
(fastened to the upper deck) in less than two hours being filled with nasty
rain, ending in thunder and flash, mingling terribly, Tornathos.
a great while the Tornado troubling us, a weather so incertaine and variable
as is admirable; now blowing fresh and fair, and forthwith storming
outragiously, in one hours space the wind veering about every point of the
compass:

The winds from East, West, North, and South advance
Their force, and urge the furious waves to dance.
Vna Eurusque Notusque ruunt, Zephirusque malign
flumine, tum Boreas. --
The infectious raines most damnifying the poor sailors, who must be upon the
decks to hand in their sails, abiding the brunt, and (which is worse) commonly
get forthwith into their beds (or hamackoes) resting their tired bodies in wet
nasty clothes, thereby breeding many furious and mortal diseases, as burning
Fevers, Calentures, Fluxes, Aches, Scurvy, and the like; which doubtless, did
they moderate their bibbing strong waters, and shift their filthy apparel,
might be prevented: Other unlucky accidents happen in these seas to vex them,
as when (in most becalmings) they swim in the bearing Ocean, the greedy Tuberon
or Shark armed with a double row of venomous teeth pursues them, directed by a
little Rhombus, Musculus or pilot-fish that scuds to and fro to bring
intelligence, His body is right fair, though seeming small,
And fitly him by name of Guide they call.
Musculus est parvus visu, sed corpore pulchro,
Hinc piscem vero ductorem nomine dicunt.
the Shark for his kindness, suffering it to suck when it pleases. Many have
been devoured by this ravenous Dogge-fish, more have suffered in their
members, whose shape (mistaken in the posture by the Ingraver) is thus
resembled.

a Sharke fish


By this, under 13. degrees we are parrellel with Sierra Leon a Cape land upon
the Lybian shore, by old Geographers improperly called Deorum currus, Frons
Africae, Tagazza and Zanguebai in Thevet and Marmolius: strengthened by a Castle
built by the Spaniard, famoused for refreshing our English Neptune, Drake, at
his return from circumnavigating the body of the whole Earth: and that thence
to Bab-mandel, (the entrance into the red Sea) Africa is no where broader.

The Inhabitants here along the Guinea coast, Bynnin, Cape Palmas, Lopez
Gonzalvo, etc. know no God, nor are willing to be instructed by Nature. Scire
nihil, jucundissimum. Howbeit, the devil (who will not want his ceremony) has
infused demonomy and prodigious idolatry into their hearts, enough to relish
the devils pallat and agrandize their own tortures, when he gets power to
fry their souls, as the raging Sun has scorcht their bodies.

A Ship of ours coasting along and landing for discovery, was so admired at by
the Salvages, as if they never had seen men nor Ship before. Two of our men
adventured the shore, (some hostages kept in the boat till they returned) and
are welcomed by thousands of those naked black skind Aethiopians, who were so
far from injury, that they loaded them with Flowers, Fruits, Toddy and what
they judged acceptable: after immeasurable admirations returning them safe
aboard all contented.

Cape Verd.
April the 18. we had 15. degrees, and ere morn were in height of Cape Verd
in 14. degr. so named by Florian Hesperion cornu and Surrentium in Pliny,
Lybiae promontorium in Strabo, of old called Arsinarium, at this day by the
Negroes Mandangan, Hacdar by the Alfarabes. Discovered by Dio Fernandezo, or
Antonio di Nolle a Genoan, Hesperidae.
Anno 1445. at the charge of King Alphonsus 5. Famoused especially in the
Hesperian Garden, enricht with Golden Apples, robbed by Alcides in despite of
that hundred-headed Dragon, engendered by Typhon on Echydna. 'Twas a Greek
fable: who surpast for lies. The moral this. The garden was a spacious, green
and pleasant Field; the apples of gold, good sheep worth gold (such sheep and
fleece as Jason had) the error partly arising from the word (...), admitting a
double construction, sheep and apple. The Dragon, no other than a meare or
flux of the Sea, in form or nature of a Dragon or Serpent invironing it,
swelling in 100 arms or sluices: which Hercules (to enrich Spain) passed over
and exported. The three fair daughters of Hesperus, were three honest Islands
in the West, adjoining this garden; their names Aeglae, Arethusa, and
Hesperthusa; now new named, Mayo, Sal, and Bonavista: three other neighboring
them, the Atlantiades, which we have no leisure now to treat of, the magnifique
Fabric of Anthaeus calling us away to look upon, but alas we find nothing
extant save memory; a palace doubtless brave and capacious, the Lord of it
being no mean nor little man: he grew 70. cubits high (a dozen ordinary men's
proportion) a proper man, and an excellent log for Hercules to smite at: yet
(the Greeks persuade us) his sword could not conquer, nor was he overcome when
by prodigious force Jove's son threw him thrice upon the ground, the Earth his
mother still reanimating him; till being perceived, he strangled or choakt him
in the helpless Air.

Extreme heat
April 21. Aeolus was a sleep, one breath of Air not comforting us, the Sun
over-topping us and darting out such fiery beams that the Air inflamed, the
Seas seemed to burn, our Ship sulphurous, no decks, no awnings nor invention
possible able to refresh us, so that for 7 days (70. are better endured in a
zone more temperate) we sweat and broyle, unable to sleep, rest, eat or drink
without much faintness; in this space our Ship making no way (no current is
felt in the vast Ocean) till the fifth day the billows began to roll and the
Air troubled, traveling with an abortive cloud, which suddenly fell down in
form of an inverted Piramid, wonderful and dangerous. A cloud (as I
apprehend) exhaled by the Sun (a powerful Magnet) not agitated by the wind,
and missing the retentive property in the lowest region, distills not in sweet
drops, but diffudes or falls hideously the whole cloud together, so impetuously
into the Ocean, Spouts of rain.
that many great ships (as if a thousand milstones or cataracts had fallen)
have been dashed and sunk past all recovery; and what is little less
formidable, the stinking rain is no sooner in the Sea, but (as a fearful
farewell) a whirlewind circles with such violence as helps the cloud to lash the
murmuring Seas so furiously that oftimes the waves or surges rebound top
gallant height, as if it meant to retaliate the Air in another region: God be
praised, we mist the rage of rain, the gust somewhat affrighted us; but it
contraried Seneca's Philosophy. Finis alterius mali, gradus est futuri: a
pleasant Breese first, increasing into a happy gale, cooled the Air and posted
us out of those exuberances of nature: so that on May day we crossed under the
Aequinoctiall, Equator.
a circle imagined to divide the world into two equals, from either Pole
ninety degrees, and where we lost sight of the Sydus salutare, the Pole-starre,
of a third magnitude, fixed in the tip of the little Bears tail: the Sun at
this time was in the 19. degree of Taurus; in Artick declination 17. degrees,
31. minutes.

May 6. We had some thunder and lightning or corpo sanctos, such as seem good
Omens to the superstitious Portugalls; and at night, past by Santo croix, the
holy cross, every hour expecting the Monzoon, Monzoons.
an anniversary wind that blows one way six months, and the other half year
the contrary way constantly; which if Seamen neglect they lose their happy
passage into India.

But how preposterous the year and wind proved elsewhere I know not,
doubtless it is the Emblem of inconstancy, experience taught it us; so long
time proving our Antagonist that our passage to the Cape of good Hope became
six weeks longer than we looked for, forced to run into much more longitude
than we desired.

May 8. We had 8. degr. 10. minutes Antartick latitude, the Monomotapan on the
one side, the Brasilian coast on the other siding us to the west. The Afrique
shore runs on in diverse names, Congo in 6. degr. Angola in 9. Manicongo,
Loanga, Monomotapa, Benomotapa, and Caffaria, full of wretched black skinned
wretches; rich in earth, but miserable in demonomy: the discovery is given to
many men (the first not agreed upon), to Petrus Cavillanius, to Iacobus Canus,
Bartolmeo de Dyos, Vasco de Gama, and such as John 2 King of Portugal employed
about it, Anno 1497. or thereabouts. Let one character serve them all: they
look like chimney sweepers; are of no profession, except rapine, and villainy
makes one. Demonis omnia plena. Mokisses or deformed Idols are indeered
amongst them, the red Dragon usurping worship in a Dragons shape, a Goat, an
Owl, a Batt, a Snake, a Cat, a Dog, or what the witches (acheronta movebunt)
urge them to, and to adore in an infernal posture; gaping, whooping,
grovelling, soyling their hellish carcasses with juice of herbs, ryce, roots,
fruits, or what the old impostor infatuates them with; the female sex each new
Moon defying pale faced Cynthia by turning up their bummes, imagining her the
cause of their distempers. A Dog is of An Inhabitant of Angola.
such value here, that 20. salvage men have been made the price of one: their
coin, are beads of glass, shells, stones or trash: they marry not: they bury
thus; the dead are washed, painted, apparrel'd, and laid to sleep in a neat and
spacious dormitory, his Armolets, Bracelets, and voluntary shackles accompany
him, they circle the grave with mimmick gestures and ejaculations, concluding
by the sacrifice of a lusty Goat, and so go satisfied. In Longa and the
Anzigui (whence Nilus draws his origin, even from Zayre a lake near the
mountains of the Moon) the people (if Gonsalvo Soza say true) are devils
incarnate; not satisfied with natures treasures, as gold, precious stones,
strength, and the like; the destruction of men and women neighboring them,
better contenting them, whose dead carcasses they devour with a vultures
appetite; whom if they miss, they serve their friends (so they mis-call them)
such scurvy sauce, butchering them, thinking they excuse all in a complement,
that they knew no rarer way to express true love than in making (not two
souls) two bodies one in an inseparable union: yea, some (worn by age, or
worme-eaten by the pox) proffer themselves to the shambles, and accordingly are
joynted and set to sell upon the stalls. Iuvenal had notice of them.

The slaughter of a man does not suffice
These caniballs we see, but breasts, arms, eyes,
Like dainty meat they eat.
Aspicimus populos, quorum non sufficit itae
Occidisse aliquem; sed pectora, brachia, vultum
Crediderint genus esse cibi.
Nothing commendable in them but their Archery, in which they excel; shooting
a dozen shafts ere the first touch ground; their Amazonian neighbors forcing
their care and diligence. The only ornament they have, is slashing and cutting
their skin and faces; the Sun and Moon are man and wife, the Stars their
children, in their religion; the devil is their Oracle.

May 24. We had 19 degrees and a half, from whence to the thirtieth degr. the
wind was large and prosperous, nothing in that great distance observable, save
that on the 26 day, our Admiral the Mary (in which one Hall commanded) early
discryed a sail, which he made after with his barge, long boat, and 80. men;
at two leagues distance they perceived her a Carrack of 1500 Tun, who durst not
adventure her hulk against our shot, and therefore made all sails draw and
that night escaped; tho to grapple her, our fleet divided all night, but saw
her not till the 27. day, and but saw her, her velocity so much excelled ours;
till the 7. of June she again deluded us, after two hours chase as a
phantasma vanishing toward God.

Upon May day we crossed the line, and last of May the Tropic of Capricorn,
Tropicus. Capricorni.
the utmost limit of Apollo's progress toward the Antartick; and 53 days we
swet within the burning Zone ere we past under both the Tropiques. The first of
June, our observation was in 24 degrees 42 minutes South latitude, Iunij. 1.
the Sun then in 23. degrees, 8l. North, in the 20. degree of Gemini. In
which height, we had many sudden and violent gusts and storms, contrary to our
desires, unable thereby to direct our course, being driven to Lee-ward 100
leagues upon the coast of Brazeel, to 25. degr. latitude and 27. of longitude
from the Lizard. Howbeit, post multos sequitur una serena dies, for on the 13.
day, in the first watch, our long looked for Favonius blew sweetly upon us.

-- The West wind (most men know)
From the vast sea is ever felt to blow.
-- Semper lenis aura Favoni
Spirat ab Oceano. --
At which time, some Boobyes, weary of flight, made our Ship their perch, an
animal so simple as suffers any to take her without fear, as if a stupid
sense made her careless of danger, which to sympathize I have as simply for
your sport depicted.

A Boobie


It Is not long, since I told you how favorably Aeolus entertained us, but his
other adjunct is inconstancy; for, veering into another quarter, he began to
puff and bluster, yea so furiously, that Neptune sweld with rage in such
impatience, that the Tritons (Mariners) grew aghast, not without reason, the
Cape land thought (not near enough, and yet) too near us: for four days and
nights not daring to bear any sail, but lay ahull, driving whither the storm
compelled us, all that while the sea surges so sublime and impetuous, that we
were tossed up into the Air, and forth with thrown down as into an Abisse,
sometimes dancing upon the liquid ridge of a dreadful wave, and anon inveloped
with many others all seeming to swallow us, heaven and sea roaring and
commixing in an undivided manner; yet the Lord be praised (having Sea room and
good tite Ships) his providence saved us; in 16 days more, meeting together
joyfully at the Cape of good hope: and I confess ingeniously, not till then
did I feel that Ironic Satyr of Iuvenal biting us.

I, nunc and ventis animam commit, doloso
Confisus ligno; Digitis a morte remotus
Quattuor, aut septem; si sit latissimataeda.
Go, now and to the winds thy life commit,
Trust the smooth wood four or seven fingers set
From death, the broadest heart of Pine admit.
June 24. We raised the Pole Antartick six and thirty degrees, our longitude
from the Meridian of the Lyzard five and twenty degrees, wanting three to the
Cape; variation three degrees; our course E. S. E. the Suns declination, two
and twenty degrees, twenty six minutes, and as many seconds North, in the 17.
degree of Gemini. The same time mid-summer in England, and mid-winter with us
in those South clymats. The 7. of July, betimes we descried land and tho
threescore miles distant (from its height) seemed very nigh us, proving the
place we aimed at, that famous promontory (now no longer Tormentozo, but) of
good Hope. Howbeit, we could not fly upon the wings of desire, the wind
withstanding our have, whereby we let fall our Anchor (14 leagues short of the
Bay of Soldania) and went a shore upon a little I Will (3 miles round) corruptly
called Cony I Will, from the Welsh Cain-yne or white I Will, where we killed many
Conies (or Cats rather) great and rammish, bad and waterish, commended for
dainty meat by hungry Sailers, Ie junus raro stomachus vulgaria temnit: It also
superabounds with Seals (piscis marinus) as big as Lions, and though doggedly
visaged, can out bark them, yea bellow like Bulls, and from such as not till
then see any, may challenge wonder. They turn to oil, and give their skins
for buffe coats, soft and serviceable. Here are also birds called Pen-gwins
(white-head in Welsh) like Pigmies walking upright, their sins or wings
hanging very orderly down like sleeves, a creature, fish and flesh,
participating sea and shore, feeding in the one, breeding in the other; easy
to be caught on land (but that their undermining the sandy ground for
habitacles makes the passage bad,) at sea, diving like a Duck, swift as a
Dolphin; fat, but oily; some dare eat them, curiosity may invite a taste, but
to make a meal on, unsapory and offensive: to which May Game of nature I may
inculcate that, made on her acquaintance.

Divide her, I desire but neck and breast,
They savor well: the Cook may eat the rest.
Tota quidem ponatur anas; sed pectore tantum
and cervice sapit; caetera read coquo.
For whose further satisfaction the Idaea I present you, not drawn by Phydias.

A Pen-gwin


Pen-gwin I Will is 6 or 7 leagues from the continent, which when we got afterne
we grew becalmed, land-lockt in a sort, and were sported all the way (till we
dropped anchor) by Whales, the Seas Leviathan, who after their manner thundered
our welcome into Aethiopia, fuzzing or spouting part of the briny Ocean in
wantonness out of their oily pipes bored by nature a top their prodigious
shoulders, like so many floating Islands concomitating us.

The 1. of July we anchored with safety in the Soldania Bay, 12 leagues short
of the utmost Cape: a Road worthily called good Hope, by King John 2. of
Portugal rejecting that of Tempestuous first imposed by Gama; in that if any
attain hither, their Indian voyage is half done, and the other part less
solitary, so many excellent Islands entertaining them.

The Soldania Bay is of a semi-lunary form; large and safe; high, 5 or 6 miles
from the sea; toward the shore, low and fruitful. Where we pitch our Tents,
is a small stream of Chrystallin water, exceeding sweet, trickling from a
mighty mountain 4 miles from the Sea; and in a perpendicular eleven thousand
eight hundred and sixty foot; from its resemblance, commonly called the Table;
the ascent uneasy, but most pleasant at the top, discerning thence 100 miles
into the Ocean, and looking S. S. W. we see the Cape or extreme point of
Africa 12 leagues off, whose character in the inhabitants seems long since to
be drawn in this same distich.

Extremique hominum maris ad vadasalsa seorsim
Degimus: ac nobiscum nemo negocia miscet.
By salt seas limited, the Worlds end we
Inhabit, none with us to trade agree.
And from this Table, or from Herberts mount (a Piramid adjoining, like the
Sugar loaf, another hill so named) we see Cape Falso S. and by E. ten leagues;
either of these great Promontories are divided by a Bay, but inconvenient to
ride in: the distance of each Cape is 10 miles from North to South; either side
environed with mountains so lofty as seem to penetrate the middle region with
their aspiring foreheads, where they find sufficient moisture to cool their
ambition: another river called Iaquelina, streams upon the N. side of the
road, half a league from our Tents (under King James his mount we usually
pitch them) broader than our rio dulce: but by a low course and too long
sporting with the briny Ocean it tastes brackish and insalubrious; it is
foordable without boat or Elephant, and gives variety of Shellfish, as
Tortoises, Limpits, Mussels, Cockels, Crabs, Rock-fish, and Mullets, Crafish,
Thornback, Gudgeon, Eeeles, etc. The Earth abounds with roots, herbs and grass
aromatique, redolent and beneficial: such as I took notice of, I may dare to
name; Agrimony, Mynt, Calamint, Betony, Plantain, Ribwort, Spinach, Sorell,
Scabious, Holy Thistle, and (of which beware) Coliquintida: all the year long,
nature roabing the fruitful earth with her choicest Tapistry, Flora seeming to
dress her self with artlesse Garlands; Alcinoe and Tempe serving as Emblems
to this Elysium. Quamvis enim montosa appareat, and collibus multis distincta,
interim tamen multis vallibus, silvis, pratisque decorata est, gramina and
flores suavissime olentes, magna copia producit. Cervosque and faeras and
leones multo numero nutrit, quae omnia visu and aspectu long jucundissime
existunt: preterea, limpidissimis fontibus scatet quamplurimis, qui non sine
gratissimo susurro, de montibus altis prorumpentes, fluminibus sese passim
insinuant, and cum eis postmodum in mare exonerantur.

The Mountains, without doubt, abound with Marquisate and all rich Mineralls,
which for want of search are yet undilucidated: the chief refreshment we get
here is water, bunch-backt Buffolos and Sheep, not of Iasons race; these in
leiw of wool, have hair parti-colored, long legged, lean bodied, not caused
by want of pasture, rather from too high feeding, or from restless moving with
their tripping Masters. But, the land exuberates in many other Animalls. Lions,
(which usually steal Beef out of the water when Ships are here, fire or a
lighted match only scaring the^) Dromidaries, Antilopes, Apes, Baboons,
(venerious ones) Zebrae, Wolves, Foxes, Iackalls, Dogs, Cats, and others; and
in birds, as Estriches, Vultures, Cranes, and Pass flemingoes, whose feathers
(equallizing the birds of Paradise) are rich crimson and pure white so amiably
commixed, that above others it enticed my pains to present it you, which shall
terminate our curiosity touching the earth, and commence an Anatomy lecture of
the most savage (of all savage) inhabitants.

Pasche-Flemingo.


The Cape of good Hope elevates the Antartick-Pole four and thirty degrees 3
minutes; has longitude from the Meridian of the Lyzard 28 degrees, and Westerly
variation, one degree, and about forty minutes: distant from England about 6600
miles English; (or 2200 leagues, which at Sea we usually reckon by) from Saint
Helena S.E. 600 leagues; from Iava major 1850 leagues; from Surat 1800. This
land is the furthest part of the old known world, god Terminus here especially
triumphing. Afrique in holy writ is called (from Cham) Chamesia: Lybia by the
Greeks: Besecath by the Indians: by Leo, Iphrychia: by Thevet, Alkebulan: by
Pliny, Atlantia and Aetheria. Aphrica and Aethiopia in their Etimon are not
discrepant: the first from (...) and (...), without cold: the other from (...)
and (...) to scorch the face: but some would have the one from Afer son of
Abram and Getura: the other from Aethiops son of ( Cham or) Vulcan. That it
is part of Aethiopia, we must prove against inconsiderat Laudinus who will not
be persuaded, any part so named, exceeds the Tropicks. Aethiopia is (therefore)
either superior, from 6 degrees North to the Ne plus ultra, comprising
Mauritania, Lybia, Guiney, Cape Verd, etc. or inferior, from thence stretching
South to this promontory by Zanzibar, Monomotapa, Manicongo, Angola, Caffaria,
etc. by Homer also, divided into two extra et intra, allowing it the better
half of Africa, terminated (says he) on East, West, and South by the Ocean;
Aethiopes, Aetherij and Macrobij qui Africum ad Australe mare habitant. Herod.
lib. 3. admitting which, it must needs transcend the Tropicks: the most
Authentic of Poets is of this opinion. Od. 13.

The utmost sort of people (known to man)
Is the divided Ethiopian.
Extremos homin um Aethiopes, geminisque
diremptos partibus.
Let us then examine the discoverer.

Ptolomy nor Pliny knew it not; that report of Herodotus gayning little credit,
who labors to persuade us in his fourth book, how Pharao Necho (after his
loss of 1200000 men employed to make the red and mid-land Sea as one)
encouraged the Phoenicians (then, proud of their Art in Navigation) to surround
Afrique, which to please him but more for glory, they undertook, and in three
years effected. But sure, so excellent an adventure (if it had been so) could
not have escaped the busy pens of the Egyptians and Greeks, who for want of
true matter, invented a thousand Fables. The first threfore we can honor (as
says Osorius) is, Vasco de Gama or Bartolo de Dios, Lusitanians, anno 1497.
from Adam 5467. by importunity of that excellent Prince, John 2. coasting
hither and so into the Orient.

The Country is rich and fruitful in her womb, but owned by an accursed
Progeny of Cham, who differ in nothing from bruit beasts save form; a people
by some called (metonimically) Caffarrs or Atheists; Anarchy confounds order,
no Prince of power or policy awing them: each Canton commanded by a Captain,
not chosen by voice but as force urges it. Captain Fitz-Herbert some years
since ceremoniously devoted the Title to our King, in a memorial new naming
two little rising Mounts 'twixt the Sea and Sugar loaf, King James and Prince
Charles their Mounts, (our now dread Sovereign;) Give we an exact Idaea of the
Inhabitants.

The People described.
Their color is ugly black, are strongly limbd, desperate, crafty, and
injurious. Their heads are long; their hair, woolly and crispt, no apparel in
any place showing more variety. Some shave one side and leave the other long
and curled. Another cuts all away, a little tuft atop, excepted; a third
(thinking his invention best) shaves here and there, the bald scull appearing
in many places; and othersome, (not unlike Occasion) shave away all save a lock
before, of no use, save ornament. Such as have tufts, or hair, plait brass
buttons, spurre-rowells, pieces of pewter, or what else the mirthfull Sayler
exchange for Beef, Mutton, Woodsorrell, Oestrich egge-shells, little
Tortoises, etc. their ears are long, made longer by ponderous Bables they hang
there, some using links of brass, of iron, others have glasse-beads, chains,
blew stones, bullets, or Oyster-shells. And such as cannot reach to such
jewels (rather than be without) have singles of Dear, beaks of birds, Dogs
or Cats stones, Egg-shells, or the like: their noses are flat, crushed so in
their infancy; great lips, description cannot make them greater; quick crafty
eyes; and about their necks (in imitation of the Dutch Commandores chains)
have guts and raw-puddings, serving both for food and complement, eating and
speaking both together. Yet of late they have got hoopes of iron, and long
links of brass, grass wreathes, or greasy thongs of stinking leather. Their
arms are laden with voluntary shackles of iron, Jvory, rusty brass, or musty
copper. The rest of their bodies are naked, save that a thong or girdle of raw
leather circles them, a square piece (like the back of a Glove) is fastened to
it, serving to cover their pudenda. But I cannot commend their modesty, the
women (upon receipt of any thing) returning her gratitude by discovering her
shame, a courtesy taught them by some ill-bred Boore, our men I hope have more
civility. The grand Seigniors among them have better clothing; a nasty untand
hide or skin of a Lion, Leopard, Calfe, Baboon, or Sheep (the hair inverted)
is as a roabe put about their shoulders reaching to their waste, thighs and
legs never covered, their feet fastened to a broad piece of leather, tied by a
little strap, resembling the Roman crepidula, not always worn; their hands
for the most part hold them, not that they fear to wear them out, but that
their feet may have their liberty to steal, which with their toes they can do
most daintily, all the while looking you in the face as if they knew not how to
deceive any. Most of the men are Semi-Eunuchs, one stone ever being taken away
by the Nurse, either to dististinguish them from ordinary men, or that
Mistress Venus allure them not from Pallas. The women also excise themselves,
not from a Notion of religion but as an ornament: Both sex, hideously cut, and
gash, and pink in sundry works, their brows, nose, cheeks, arms, breast, back,
belly, thighs and legs in Acherontick order: in a word, are so deformed,
that if they had studied to become antic, they might be praised for invention.

Antrae lares, dumeta thoros, caenacula rupes; They have no houses, Caves and
holes they delight to dwell in, or Lions dens, unfurnished, but perfumed I
warrant you, a whole Tribe commonly keeping together, equally villainous,
coupling without distinction, the name of wife or brother unknown among these
incestuous Troglodites: feeding, sleeping, speaking all together without order
or law; in the night sleeping round a fire, a Centinell regarding the Lions
their adversaries, 'twixt whom is such hate and stratagems, Vivitur ex rapto
that one eat other, the Lion suddenly tearing some of them, and they other
times trayning the Lions over covered pits, which catches them, and so
retaliating; slaying and eating them to day, who perhaps were Sepulchers to
their friends or parents the day before. Other times they dawb and rub their
skin with grease and coal, and so indent it, drying them in the Sun, by
that trick becoming Monsters to all civil eyes that look them upon.

By what I have said, you may imagine their pallats are not very delicate.
Solinus calls the tawny Africans, Agriophagi (or Panther and Lyon-eaters) we
now call them Icthio and Anthropophagi, a degree more barbarous than the Lions,
of whom it is said, Mortuorum cadavera non gustant; quod vivit, corripiunt et ex
comedunt. But these Savages eat men alive or dead, as in both kinds many poor
men have lamentably made experience of. Which when they fail of, dead Whales,
Seals, Pengwins, grease or raw Puddings diet them. Safety is scarce among
themselves, for when the frost of old age benums their vigor, unapting them to
provide their own food, they either eat them, or leave them destitute of
defense upon some Mountain, pitied by none, where famine kills them, or the
ravening Lions.

With these, no violent death nor 'stroying rage
Of Lust, is half so dreadful as old age.
Non praematuri cineres, nec funus acerbum
Luxuriae, sed morte magis metuenda senectus,
The less to be admired at, for where God is not known, what villainy is
unwarrantable. Aristotle a Heathen (I remember) could make it a maxim. 1 lib.
de coelo. Omnes homines Notionem Deorum habent, etc. And another. Vniversum
genus humanum ubique Terrarum colit Deum verum vel falsum. Which is believed by
most men, and I dare not oppose it. Notwithstanding, though I made all signs,
and tried each way possible to discover some spark of devotion, of the
knowledge of God, heaven, hell, or imortality; I could not find any thing that
way, no place of worship, no day of rest, no order in Nature, no shame, no
truth, no ceremony in births, or burials, mere brutishness and stupidnesse
wholly shadowing them.

The women give suck, the Vberous dugg stretched over her naked shoulder: the
shape of which Soldanias with a landscape of the Table and other Mounts, lo
here presented.

A man and woman at the Cape of good Hope


Their language is apishly sounded (with whom it is thought they mix
unnaturally) the idiom very hard to be counterfeited, some words I gathered
from one of the gravest of them, which (being voyced like the Irish) if I give
it hardly to be pronounced, you may excuse me, in that Pliny confesses in the
Proem of his 5 lib. Not. histor. That their names and Towns were ineffable, or
not to be distinguished. These be Anonimi and so more barbarous. Their
Arithmatick exceeds not ten. Istwee 1. Istum 2. Istgwunny 3. Hacky 4. Croe 5.
Istgunny 6. Chowhawgh 7. Kishow 8. Cusho 9. and Gheshy 10. A knife droaf, a
quill guasaco, a hatt twubba, a nose tweam, a sword dushingro, a book bueem, a
ship chikunny, water chtammey, brass hadderchereef, a skin gwummey, a bracelet
whohoop, eggshells sun, seals harkash, a woman traqueosh, bread bara, give me
quoy, the yard gwammey, stones wchraef, womb wchieep, paps semigwe, geniter
Istcoom, etc.

To draw to an end, (lest Mindus gates be opened) many beasts we got here for
refreshment, such and the good sallads and baths quickly recuring above 300 of
our men (till their landing) nigh dead of the scurvie. Anno 1600 Sir James
Lancaster had 1000 Sheep and 50 Oxen for Trifles. We had no want, and might
have had more but for a trick the Hollanders put upon our Nation; riding here
with our Colors out, and killing some of the people when they had got their
ends, that at our arrival we might be the baselier used; they train their
cattle to such obedience, as with a Call or Whistle (impossible to be
counterfeited) a great Heard will follow them like dogs, and being sold, with
a like Call will as readily run after them, to the purchasers costly mirth
and admiration; a deceit so long so unjustly acted, that now (to prevent them)
our men upon delivery of each beast, either kill it quickly, or fasten their
horns with cords to stakes placed here of purpose: and to say truly, by the
friendship and good dealing our men use to them (Nomen amicitiae barbara corda
movet) our esteem among them is more gracious than of Portugal, Dane, or
Flemmin.

Their Art in War is guided by disorder, their weapon no other than a Javelin
headed with iron, and directed by some feathers, which they take off and on at
pleasure; some quarrels happend (by some men's indiscretion) twixt us and them,
and I know a dozen Muskets will chase 1000, at every discharge falling down
as thunderstruck. Yet let me advise our Men to avoid needless bravadoes, and
not contemn them from their indefensive nakedness, or by a supercilious
conceit of their own weapons and field practices. Exempla docent. Almeyda the
bravest Captain the Portugals ever had, after many glorious achievements in
Asia and Africa, thought invincible, and returning home anno 1510 out of India:
He, eleven Captains and many other gallant men, upon a small affront putting
some of the Savages to death (who grew desperate in revenge) were set upon by
these naked Barbarians, and slain every one of them. Qui (says Osorius)
cumper medias flammas, per pilas innumerabiles, per tela, per gladios, sine
ulla formidinis significatione ruentes, maximum terrorem hostibus intulissent
et insignes victorias contra innumerabiles inimicos adepti fuissent, tunc a
paucis hominibus inermibus atque nudis interfecti et spoliati fuerunt. And as
simple as they seem, they are witty enough in craft, revenge, and villainy. I
will end all in a succinct character Salvian libro de vero judicio has made of
all the Africans. Omnes quippe gentes habent sicut peculiaria mala, ita etiam
quaedam bona; in Afris pene omnibus insunt omnia mala: inhumani, impuri,
ebriosi, falsissimi, fraudulentissimi, cupidissimi, perfidissimi, and obscaenis
libidinum omnium impuritati and blasphaemiis addictissimi, etc.

The 19. of July we weighed anchor from the Cape of Good Hope, Our parting from
the Cape.
bending our course toward Madagascar; the wind was favorable till such time
as Cape Falso was doubled, for then being off to Sea we perceived a storm
intended us, happy in sight of a small black bird, long wingd (in-justly by
Seamen called the devils bird) an Antimilago never seen but against stormy
weather; doubtless it is a warning from God rather, as be the Pantado birds
(like Iayes in colors) who about these remote seas are ever flying and give
Seamen an infallible encouragement (when neither sounding nor observation from
Sun, Moon nor Planets for many days are had) they are upon this coast,
these birds and Sargasses or Trumbaes (eradicated by storms) being never seen
in such quantity in any other part of the universe, upon these for 50. leagues
into the sea seldom failing our intelligence. The three and twentieth of July
the wind got up, inraging the restless Ocean; one surging wave (I well
remember) striking us so pat upon our broad side, as forced our Ship in
despite of her helm (then close by the Lee) to turn about above 5 points in
the compass, the noise not inferior to a Cannon; insomuch, our Captain cried
out we had struck upon a rock, but his error quickly appeared (after so great a
thunder) the wave flashing upon our decks so much salt water as soundly washed
us all; the storm continuing till the eight and twentieth day, when veering
into a milder quarter (our course E. N. E.) it grew calm and moderate.

And now that the Seas are peaceable, the Air calm, the Sky serene; let us
look about for some I Will or other, that; (if possible) which Venetus (perhaps
from an Optic glass upon a Tarrase beyond Tartary) descried in this sea and
about this place; where we find none resembling; but he not only assures an
I Will, but saw a bird there (his multiplying glass deceived him) so big as a
Ship, and so strong as in her tallons can easily gripe and trusse up an
Elephant: I will not paraphrase, take his phantasma in his own expansion, Nam
falsa est veris affinia multa locutus. In quadam Insula versus Meridiem prope
Madagascar, certo Anni tempore apparet mirabilis species Avis, quae Ruc
appellatur. Aquilae quidem habens effigiem, sed immensae magnitudinis:
plerasque alarm pennas habet, in longitudine continentes duodecim passus,
spissitudinem vero ejus proportionem tenere longitudinis, and totum Avis corpus
pennis proportione respondet. Est etiam tantae fortitudinis, ut sola sine
aliquo adminiculo Elephantem capeat and in sublime sustollit, atque iterum ad
terram cadere sinat quo carnibus ejus vesci posset. A bird worthy of Gesners
knowledge, and which we will rank with those Gryffins that guard the Ophyrian
Mounts of gold against the Arimaspi (who from wincking when they shoot are said
to be Monoculi) not seldom from their Scythie holes attempting the conquest of
Mammon enclosed in the Rhyphean hills, as Tostatus ex Rabano, Aeschilus,
Dionysius and Herodotus would persuade us: rejecting which, let us rest a while
upon Madagascar the Empress of all the Islands in the Universe.

MADAGASCAR, so called by the Natives; by Ptolomy, Menuthyas; by M. Paulus
Venetus, Magaster; by Thevetus, Albagra; by Marcator, Do Cerne; (both
unwisely:) by Tristan d' Acuna the Portuguise (who discovered it Anno Dom.
1508.) Saint Lawrence; that day he first veiwed it: howbeit I find great
difference in Spanish writers about the first that landed here. Some saying
that Emanuel Telezo de Menezes anchored here two year before d' Acuna: and
Osorius in his 4. lib. de vitae Emanuelis reg. port. fo. 140. says, that
Fernando Suario and Roderigo Frierio, two Mariners in two Ships returning from
India to Lisbon, Anno 1506. accidentally fell upon this I Will, and suffered from
the treachery of the savage inhabitants, and that in honor of Lawrence son of
Almeida the Admiral and Commander of all the Forts in India, from his name
named it; but in his 5. book fol. 162. that D' Acuna named it. Let us now a
shore; our observation may prove more consequentious.

Madagascar (that name sounds best) is questionless the greatest Island in the
world: accounting its extent from Cape Roma in the South, to point Saint
Sebastian, from 16 to six and twenty degrees; the North end, parralelling Cuama
in Quiloa (a famous part of the Africa continent:) and to the South, the great
River of Magnice in 26 degrees in length; a thousand English miles (some report
1200.) in breadth, in some part 230. Osorius numbers 400. and a hundred where
it is narrowest, full of Towns, People, Mineralls, Beasts, Wood, Water, and
what is requirable.

map of southeastern Africa

Such Marittim towns and ports as be known to us are these: Roma, Augustine,
Antabosta, St. Iacobo, Matatana, Angoda, Ferendo, Fermoso, Anton-gill and
Iungomar; the 2. last almost opposite: Augustine (under the South Tropic) (and
Anton-gill (upon the East side) afford best anchoring: the first, we usually
ride in passing to Surat, the other home bound is best; as Sir James Lancaster
Anno 1600. made proof of, in 8. fadom water, in the bottom of the Bay (a
small I Will behind them to sea) ozie ground, the place good for victualling, air
quick and healthful. Howbeit, the Dutch, at this place 2. months formerly
(through distempers) lost 200. men, of agues and fluxes: the variation at
Augustine Bay is 16. degrees.

The whole I Will is Tetrarchicall, 4. several Kings swaying their Ebony Scepters
in each Toparchy; jealous each of one another greatness. The Sea towns are
infected with Mahometisme; the Mediterran, are eclipsed in black Idolatry:
Nature has given them laws, murder being punished by death, adultery with
public shame, and theft with banishment. Fishing delights them more than
tillage: Thetis is better accounted of then Ceres: yet I rather think, their
ignorance in agriculture so disposes it. The people are generally strong,
courageous, and proper; the male sort, from their infancy practicing the rude
postures of Mars, cover their naked bodies with long and massy Targets, their
right hand brandishing a long neat pike or lance of Ebony, barb'd with iron,
kept as bright as silver, and which they know how to use and jaculate as
excellently as any people in the Universe: they are black, at no time shading
their bodies from the parching Sun, rather delight to rub and anoint all
over with grease and tallow, proud to see their flesh shine, the stinck never
offending them: their hair is black, and long, and curled; the length is an
especial ornament; a few leaves plaited about their waists, elsewhere naked;
their ears are bored and wide enough; pincking and cutting the flesh, is here
also in fashion: whiles the better sex seek prey abroad, the women (therein,
like themselves) keep constant home and spin: bigamy is tolerated; they affect
copulation very early, the youth scarce knowing 12. the maiden 10. years in
the world the name Virginity. They are delighted with sports and novelties;
hunting, hawking, fishing, (of which, the I Will affoords variety) and dancing, in
Maeanders winding, beating and clapping their breasts and hands, their feet
spurning the yielding fands, forcing the spectators further of; during which,
the women with savage harmony, modulate with hands and eyes, observing an exact
measure, equal if not exceed the men in their more laborious treadings.

They know not letters, Arts are burdensome to idle savages, they complete that
jeere of Sophocles, Nihil scire, nil jucundius: howbeit, necessity has taught
them some parts of the rudiments of Arithmetic; the number 10. limits their
invention, Isso, 1. Tone, 2. Tello, 3. Effad, 4. Fruto, 5. Woubla, 6. Sidda, 7.
Fonlo, 8. Malo, 9. Nel, 10. The earth is rich in myneralls and merquisate,
Gold, Silver, (and as Edoard Lopezo) Iron and Copper: but, by hearing the
cruelty and avarice of the Portugal, prohibit the use and digging it,
contenting themselves rather with useful herbs and grain (of which they have
great store) than by the Magique of gold and pearl to allure the hearts of
greedy men; a vice, the Portugal is more branded with than any other Nation.

Nec Babylonis opes, Lydae, nec pondera gazae,
Indorumque dapes, Saerumque Arabumque potentes
Divitias, mallim cum paupertate pudica
Intemerata mori, quam famam impendere vitae.
Not Croesus wealth, nor Babels vast command,
India, Arabia nor of Saeres land
Can speak me rich or happy; if with them
I throw away my more price worthy fame.
But, if you will buy any thing the I Will affoords (I think the I Will it self) you
must furnish you with Agats, Helitropians, Jasper, and (which they value more
than all the Dyamonds and pearls in India) with long red Cornelian beads, of
which they are so proud, that the owner be it King or subject is often dethroned,
spoiled for it, one string able to put them all in a cumbustion: bracelets,
copper chains, bells and babies are valuable also here, and for which, (or one
bead of cornelion) you shall have in exchange, Sheep (big tail'd like those in
Syria and Persia) Beeves and Buffoles, big-bond, fat, and Camel-backt: Camells,
Antilopes, red Dear, Leopards, Pards, Goats, Milk, Hens, Eggs, Wheat, Barley,
Rice and Cuscus, with what fruit yon like; Orenges, Lemons, Lymes, Pomcitrons,
Plantans, Sugercanes, Ginger, Toddy, Cocoes, etc. Nor are the Lyzards, Camelion
and Salamanders to be lost in oblivion. The Camelion (the hyeroglyphic of a
dissembler) take thus from Alciat.

She always gapes, she eats the slender Air,
Changing her looks, she varies colors rare.
Even so the Flatterer applauding feeds,
Clawing his Princes most opprobrious deeds.
Semper hiat, semper tenuem qua vescitur Auram,
Et mutat faciem, varios sumitque colores.
Sic and adulator populari vescitur Aura,
Et solum Mores imitatur principis atros.
The Salamander, is in shape not much unlike; extreme cold by nature, from
whence (like Ice) she can long time endure the fire, yea (if little) extinguish
flames: The Salamander, endures fire without danger.
Seu Salamandra potens Nullisque ob noxia flammis.
commonly obscuring themselves in moist and umbragious places, seen against
storms, their teeth and tongues are mortally venomous, the other parts eaten
without hurt.

If ere the Salamander hap to bite thee,
Thy coffin and thy winding sheet invite thee.
Si mordu t'a une Arissade,
Pren's ton linceul e la flassade
We have said enough: let my vale-dictum now be this; the Land mournes to see
it self so trod upon by a people, strangers to God and virtue: concealing such
useful treasures, and making unusefull so many ports, obscured far beyond
her meriting; seated so advantagiously for traffic with all the world, both
the Indies possible to be awed by her; and vicinating those golden countries of
Mozambiq', Quiloa, Soffala, Mombassa, Magadoxa and other parts of Aegisimba;
proffering also many petty Islands under her, as those of Cumrho, Primero,
Mascarenas, Castle I Will, Moritius, Dygarrois, and Englands Forest, environing
and in a sort defending her upon occasions.

Nine leagues from Madagascar (in a North-East course) we had welnigh (for want
of heed) run upon the sholes of Iudaea; sands memorably dangerous, since
Annius a French man with all his Navy here perished; our variation at this time
being 13 degrees, 18 minutes in longitude from the Cape, Whence we steered N.
E. and by E. aiming at Mohelia. By the way, one of our men took a Shark (a man
eating fish, and who seldom miss the hook, out of too much greediness) 9
foot she was in length and a half by the rule, I speak it in this respect, we
found in her paunch five and fifty young ones, every fish a Geometrical foot
in length, (100 of our Ship saw it) all which, go out and in at pleasure: that
night, we sailed merrily by the Mascarenas, a Charybdis in 21 degrees, var. 13
and 17 minutes, where suspecting no danger, the wind favoring us, we were at
ten at night thrown (by an insensible current) upon the shoalds of
Mozambique, and sounding (where we thought we had a 1000 fadome) the plummet
or lead found bare eight fadome: the wind was high, sea rough, and Cinthya
clouded; it stood our Captain upon to give speedy notice (that night we bore
the light in our maine top) by echo of 2. roaring Culverings warning our Fleet,
guided by our Lantern to tack about, loring our top-sailes, and hovering till
day light might help us by discovery: at our second sounding we had 14
fathoms, 12.15. and 14. after that; then 22 24.33.35. and 40. fadoms by which
we saw, the Lord in mercy had (as by a thread) directed our course from out
these flats of death, and where (if his providence, which let us ever magnify,
had not prevented it) in half an hours sail further we had been cast away
most miserably: -- Cave fis ibi tu sorbente charybdi,
Nam neque Neptunus posset tibi far salutem.
From us, learn to avoid that deadly sand,
Where Neptune cannot lend a helping hand.
John de Novo, Primero and other dangerous Isles on every side invironing us: we
had here 17 degr. 37 min. lat. 20 degr. 20 min. long. cape var. 13 degr. 52.
min. the current sets S. W. At day break we were close by the Peninsule
Mozambique (part of Quiloa) inhabited by Negroes; abundant in Gold, Silver, and
Ambergreece; at small distance, that part we saw appeared thus unto us:
Mozambique.
which we scarce lost sight of, when an Armado of Dolphins assaulted us; and
such we saulted as we could entice to taste our hooks or fissgiggs: a fish (it
merits your patience) from its swiftness metonymically surnamed the Prince and
Arrow of the Sea: celebrated by many learned pens, by many Epethites;
Philanthropoi, foraffecting men; Mono-gamoi, for their turtle constancy;
generated of sperme, nourisht like man, embrace, join, and go great 10 months.
In faciem versi dulces celebrant hymenaeos Dolphines, similes hominis
complexique haerent: a careful husband oves his gravid associate, detesting
incest, abhorring bigamy, tenderly affecting their parents, who when 300 years
old, they feed and defend against other hungry fishes; and when dead (to avoid
the Sharks and like marine Tyants) carry it ashoare and there (if Aristotle,
Aelyan, and Pliny err not) inhume him and bedew his sepulcher: they were glad
of our company many hundred miles concomitating and frisking about us.

Vndique dant saltus, multaque aspergine rorant
Emerguntque itetum, redeuntque sub aequora rursus
Inque chori ludunt speciem, lascivaque jactant
Corpora; and acceptum patulis mare maribus efflant.
On every side they leap and dew their fyn,
Advance from Sea and bathe again therein
In sport, and measured dances, nimbly fling
Themselves, whilst seas do from their nostrils spring.
Six leagues North-East from the last land, we discried another I Will, full of
Palmeto trees; the current here set us 20 leagues forward in 24 hours, the
latitude of this I Will 16 degrees and a half, longitude 21 degrees and 28 min.
thus shaped.

Castle Island


The 7 of September we discried land, it proved Meortey one of the Isles of
Chumro, seated at the North end of Madagascar. It rises very high to the East
as we sailed by it, mounts in a piramid and views far into the Ocean. Its
latitude is 12 degr. 56 min. South, and longitude 23 degr. 59 min. in this
shape profering it self unto my Table book.

Meottys I Will


These Isles, (called the Isles of Cumro) be 5: either because Chumro (or
Cumr-yne the Welshmens I Will) is greater, than the rest, or that it was first
discovered: named Cumro, Meottis, Ioanna, Mohelia and Gazidia: by others thus;
St. John di Castro, Spirito Sancto, Sancto Christofero, Anguzezia, and Mayotto:
each of them excellent for refreshing passengers, abounding with delicate fruit
and such cattle as are had at easy prices: none of them are above a hundred
miles about yet very populous and full of natures blessings. Chumro is the
highest and best land, but branded with the most subtle and bloody Savages:
Ioanna has courteous people, and such as readily help strangers in necessity:
It lately obeyed a Queen rectrix much commended for sagacity, but now submits
to a King, who tho tyrannical yet better so (as Tacitus protests) than be
anarchicall; to these Isles we sent our boats ashoare (intending to ride at
Mohelia) and returned with Oxen and Buffolls, Goats, and variety of Fruits, all
which were very heartily wellcomed. And tho our Randezvous be now in sight,
suffer me (whiles in memory) to tell you of a fish or 2 which in these seas
were obvious. The Sea Tortoise is not much differing from those at land, her
house or shell is only flatter; Sea Tortoyse
by overturning them they are easily taken, disabled then to sinck or help
themselves: some we took, for pastime more than food, they taste waterish and
enforce fluxes; they superabound in eggs, in those we took every one having
near 2000, pale and round, but never made hard though extremely boiled: some
eat them and the flesh (or fish as you please to call it), but by the
Leviticall law it was forbidden; and tho our religion consists not in
ceremonies (ending in the prototipe, our Savior) yet except famine or novelty
so invite me, with such cates my pallat craves not to be refreshed. The
Mannatee is good meat, and from their using the shore have a fleshie taste,
resembling in show and eating, Veale; Mannaty a strange fish.
the intralls differing little from a Cow, and from whom in respect of its
phisnomy, some new name her: her face is like a Buffolos, her eyes small and
round, hard gums in stead of teeth: the stone generated in the head is most
valuable, sovereign against choler adust, the stone chollick and dissentery,
so it be beat small, infused in wine and drunk fasting: the body of this fish
is commonly 3 yards long and one broad, slow in swimming, wanting fins, in
their place aided with 2 paps which are not only suckles but stilts to creep a
shore upon such time shes grazes; where shes sleep long, sucking the cool
Air, unable (contrary to other watery inhabitants) to be half an hour under
water: are famoused (like Lizards) for their love to man, whose face they
delight to look upon, and in weakness have refreshed them; tho most unhappy to
our Captain Andrew Evans, who by striking one at the Moritius with his
harping-iron, and leaping into the sea to make short work with his steletto,
was so crushed, that he dyed shortly after, as I speak in our description of St.
Helena, were we intombed him.

The Carvel.
The Carvell is a mere sea foam, every where floating upon the surface of the
Ocean, of a globous form, like so many lines throwing abroad her strings,
which she can spread at pleasure, angling for small fishes which she captivates
at leisure: a sea spider she may be called, for when she sees her webb too weak,
she can blow an infectious breath, foming death, or such a sting as if she had
borrowed it from the Scorpion.

We are now ready to cast Anchor, hopeful of fresh refreshment. September the
eleventh, we rode in five and twenty fadoms, the ensuing morn wafting nearer
shore, dropping it again in seventeene fathoms, at the West side of Mohelia,
a bow shot from a small scattered village of straw, unworthy a name, yet called
Meriangwy, governed by a Sha-bander, Alicusary by name, a black big-bon'd
knave, savage in show, but sly and crafty in courtesy and bartring.

Mohelyae pars Insulae.


Mohelia elevates the Pole Antartick twelve degrees, fifteen minutes; has
longitude from the Meridian of the Cape of good Hope, four and twenty degrees,
and variation of the Compass 16 degrees, 20 minutes; is about threescore miles
in circuit: from Cumroh South East 14 leagues, and from Ioannae East and by
South about 10: the Marittim places rising gently, the inland woody and
mountanous; a little village here and there scattered; the houses are of reeds
and straw, fitted to the heat of such a torrid climate. Moella some pronounce
it, Molala others, and worst of all one Best (thinking the derivation would
carry it) Mal-Ilha or bad I Will, an incongruity, that from his ill judgment, so
sweet and useful a place should be defamed.

From Madagascar it is removed about 50 leagues, from Quiloa in the Africa
continent sixty; the Inhabitants are a mixture of Gentiles and Mahomitans: the
Portugal has preached Christ, but have few Proselites; some fragments of their
language take thus in their own idiom. A King, Sultan; Bracelets, Arembo; a
Hen, Coquo; an Ox, Gumbey; Coco-nuts, Sejavoye; Plantains, Figo; a Goat, Buze;
an Orange, Tudah; Lemon, Demon; Water, Mage; Paper, Cartassa; a Needle,
Sinzano, etc. a mish-mash of Arabic and Portuguise.

A Mohelian.


The people are cole black, have great heads, big lips, are flat nosed, sharp
chind, huge limbd, affecting Adams garb, a few Plantaine leaves girding their
wastes, vailing their modest parts; cut and pinckt in several works, upon their
duretto skins, face, arms, and thighs, striving to exceed each other for
variety: The Meccan zealists have here a few poor built Mosques, straw and
wood without, matted and neat within, admitting no entrance with shoes on; the
other sort of men are doubtless magical: I thus imagine it; another Gentleman
and I, one evening got us under a Tree to avoid the storm, at that time
thundering and raining excessively. A Negro stood by all the while trembling,
now and then lifting up his hands and eyes, muttering his black Art to some
hobgoblin, and (when we least suspected it) skips out, and in a limphatic
rapture drew a long knife which he brandisht about his head 7 or 8 times, and
after so many spells put it up again; he then kisses the humid earth 3 times
and rises merrily: upon a sudden, the sky cleared and no more noise affrighted
us.

Two Kings of late commanded them, Phancomall and Synal-beg; the one a Native,
the other an Arabian; both made great by their wives, the only daughters of the
late King Sultan Sheriph Booboocharee, and Queen Nannan-galla, both of them
alive in less than 20 years passed. The two Kings (envious of one another
greatness) live at defiance, and often times the poor Savages pay dearly for
eithers ambition; the two sisters (whom Nature has united) burn in jealousy,
and exasperate their Lords, so as (it is thought) one of them will down the
stream ere long, if the proverb say right; that Non been cum focijs
Regna Venusque manent.
Love and Scepters ill agree,
To admit Society.


Tobacco is of great account here; not strong (as our men love) but weak and
leafie; sucked out of long canes called hubble-bubbles; sneezing-powder is not
more frequent with the Irish, than chawing Arec, (by Arab and Indians called
Tauffet and Suparee) is with these Savages: the Arecca (resembling the Nutmeg,
the Tree the Toddy) is not used alone, they add to it Betele, which like the
Jvie leaf involves the Arec and combured oyster-shells, a chalky substance,
good in operative property, as coloring their white teeth to a pure crimson;
it also sweetens the breath, kills worms, giddies the brain, dries rheumes,
helps Venus, and begets an appetite. If I err, blame the Interpreter I had
there; I profess no Physic. The I Will inricht us with many good things;
Buffolls, Goats, Turtles, Hens, huge Batts, Camelions, Rice, Pease, Cuscus,
Honey, Oysters, Breams, Cavalloes, and store of other fish; also with Toddy,
Cocos, Plantains, Orenges, Lemons, Lymes, Pomcitrons; Ananas, Cowcumbers,
Tamarind, and Sugar canes; Mother of pearl and good pearl too if it were
dived for; an I Will so verdant all the year (each day a gentle breese and shower
bedewing the earth, and lenifying the flaming Sun) attired in Flora's Summer
livery, yea roabed with Natures best Arras; so pleasant, so refresht with
silver purling streams, so shaded, as may parallel the proud Paradise of
Alcinoe.

Of fruits we will select but three, such as may merit our acceptance.

The Plantain fruit.
The Plantaine (for taste and odor second to none in Mohelia) is a fruit so
good and veiled with so broad a leaf that Goropius (if he be worht believing)
persuades us, Adam offended in eating it, and with these leaves made his
transgression manifest; and that also, which was brought Moses out of the Holy
Land: by the Arabians it is called Musa-mawm, Pican by the Indians: they hang
in great clusters, their shape is long and round, not unlike a Soffage; the
rind peels off, the fruit is gold-yellow, relisht like a Windsor Pear; good
for urine, but bad for fluxes, cold crude stomachs, and dissenteries.

The Coco (an excellent fruit) is covered with a thick rynd; both together,
Coco.
equal in bigness to a Cabbage: the shell is like the skull of man, or rather
a Deaths head; eyes, nose and mouth, being easily discerned; intus vita!
within, we find better than the outside promised; a quart of Ambrosie,
colored like new white Wine, but far more aromatic tasted; the meat or
kernel cleaves to the shell, and is not easily parted; above an inch thick,
better relisht than our Philberts, and enough to satiate the appetite of two
reasonable men. It has other excellencies, The Tree (which is straight and
lofty, not branching save at the very top, where it spreads in beautifying
plumes, the Nuts like pendants or pearls adorning them) is good for timber, or
Canooes, Masts, Anchors: the leaves for Tents or thatching; the rynd for
Sails, Mattresses, Cables and Linen; the shell for furniture; the meat for
victualling: rare blessings! I will give thee them contracted in that excellent
Poem of my Cosen Herbert, late Cambridge Orator.

-- The Indian Nut alone
Is clothing, meat and trencher, drink and kan,
Boat, Cable, Sail, Mast, Needle, all in one.
The Toddy Tree is not unlike the Date or Palmeto, Toddy.
the Wine is got by pearcing and putting a Iar or Pitcher under, that the
liquor may distill into it, at the very top it has a pith or marrow, which
being boiled is like a Colli-flower, but the taking that part is as if another
Tree should be eradicated, the soul therein consisting; these (as the Dates)
thrive not nor fructify, except the flowring male and female be united. The
Toddy is like Whay in color, in taste and quality like Rhenish wine, at first
draught uncouthly relisht, but every draught tastes better and better, and will
easily inebriate; a little makes men merry; too much makes them mad; extreme
is mortal: in the morning it is laxative; in the eve costive; at midnight
dangerous. Of this or the Coco, Herodotus and Pliny write thus: Ex quibus,
panem, mel, vinum, acetum and vestitum conficiunt. To end, these are bought
without much charges; thirty Orenges or Lemons for a sheet of paper: for two
sheets ten Coco Nuts: an Ox for a ryall of eight: a Goat for six pence. They
have no Ships, nor Boats, save such as are hewed out of one stump or tree,
capable to receive three Fishermen in fair weather; and if they sink, their
swimming helps them: but though of no use with us, yet for rarity sake I give
thee the shape better to be imagined.

a Canoe


The 15 of September we had farewell to Mohelia, by benefit of a fair gale
that filled all our sails, plowing up the yielding Ocean. The long billows made
us dance apace, but without dread; the whistler with his iron Pipe encouraging
the Mariners; who made so good use of this advantage, that in four days we
found our selves but four degrees from the Aequinoctiall; that night the 19 of
September, White-Sea.
the Sea was for 10 leagues as white as snow, not froathy or by agitation of
wind, but in calmest weather (as many say) is here still the same, from whence
caused is not now to be disputed. Next day we made the Sun our Zenith: in
this Latitude opposing that rich part of Afrique we call Soffala and Mombassa
(in three degrees 50 min. South:) Magadoxa (in 3 degrees:) Zanzibar, Pata, and
Brava, terminating one another, till with Bernagasso (the Port to the great
Neguz or Priest John) the red Sea limits Africa from Asia.

Antartic Stars.
The three and twentieth day we once more sailed under the Equator and again
bad farewell to those late useful Antartique constellations: the Crosiers
(four stars like a cross, of a second magnitude 17 degrees 30 min. from the
Pole) Noah's Dove, Polophilax and others: the two Bears now rising in our
Horizon again, and at eight degrees North, the wind grew weary of too much
constancy, veering into E.N.E, so that the Monzoon affronted us, and we could
lie no nearer than South-East; at which time many of your company died,
imputing the cause of their Calentures, Fluxes, Aches, Scurvie, Fevers, and
the like, to the sulphurous heat there, stinking water, rotten meat, and
worm-eaten Biskets (in the Torrid Zone, no man's care can better it, but in the
temperate they all recover and become sweet and nourishing again) But rather I
believe, their over-eating themselves at Mohelia, where they farcinated their
crude stomachs with unsalted flesh, and gulped down too much Toddy, caused it;
here our Admiral threw overboard five and thirty dead men: the Hopewell,
eleven; the Star, five: every ship lost some, too many if God had pleased.
But of most note were Harvey Keynell, an expert Masters Mate in the Star,
Captain Goodall, all good, if skill in Navigation, humanity, courage, and
piety may have it: at whose putting into the Sea (a spacious grave) a volley of
one and twenty great Gunns awaked the watery Citizens to safeguard such a
Treasure, heaven it self at that instant weeping so abundantly, that I never
saw a sadder rain and of less continuance. The Master of our ship was removed
into the Vice Admiral, and Captain Malim out of the Hopewell into ours, who
also died shortly after, a Seaman as wise and valiant as any other: most
memorable in that never to be forgot policy he used in the Levant Seas after
a brave fight to save his men and ship from fury of Algier Pirates: for whom we
may fitly apply that of the Prince of Poets.

Facta Ducie vivunt, operosaque gloria rerum haec manet.
-- The Heroic deeds of all
Brave men, are written in Fames glorious roll.
The wind added to our affliction: the boisterous waves breaking against our
broad side, patient in all those checks, close haled, cutting her way slowly,
and almost forced upon Socotora, an I Will as we go into the Red Sea; where we
will stay you a while, the Sea is so dangerous. Socotora or Succaba (
Dioscorida, Socotora.
of old I judge, called also Topazo from precious Topaz stones had here, as
Pliny in his sixth book has it: by Turks called Katukomar, by Persians Caebar,
by the Spaniard Acebar and Aceur;) is in 13 degrees latitude North: a little
I Will it is, yet for pleasant sight and choice of good things no way despicable;
one part rising into wholesome hills, other parts falling into fruitful dales;
all places garnisht with spreading trees, sweet grass, fragrant flowers, and
rich corn, Olives, Aloes, Sempervivum, Sanguis draconum, Coquos, Dates,
Pistachoes, Orenges, Pomgranats, Pome-citrons, Melons, Sugar canes, Limons; and
of fish, foul, and flesh no where penurious: the civit Catts also are here
obtained. These and the people were of late made slaves by Emir-ben-said King
(or Viceroy rather, the Turk commanding him) of Fartack, in which Aden is
builded; but expulst by d' Cugua anno 1507. who made the Snakee (the Prince)
fly to Caeshem, and hiss at harmless distance: the Portugal freeing the
miserable Christians, by whose help he raised a Castle, planted a Colony, but
by Albuquerque was cashiered five years after, the Merchandise proving not
equivolent to their charges.

The Inhabitants are true black, the Sun twice every year darting his fiery
rays perpendicular amongst them; by profession they are Christians; converted
the third year after our Saviors passion, by the Ethiopian Eunuch some say;
some say by St. Thomas the Apostle of the Orient: their Churches are built in
form of the Cross, like ours: kept sweet and neat, without seats and images:
they have a Patriarch, whom they reverence; and other of the Clergy to whom
they duly pay Tithes; their Feasts and Fasts like ours; the seniority are much
regarded, humility commanded and commended; second Marriages are not allowed,
except they had no children, use the cross in Baptism, the other Sacrament in
both kinds, and being dead, lament not, but involve them in clean linen, and
so bury them that they look toward Jerusalem.

Aden (now, so near us) seems to invite a small relation; It has 12 degrees
35 min. North, var. West. 19 degrees: Madaena of old, Adana in Calistus, Adedi
and Achanis in Eupolemus: opposed to Azana, in the Arabian shore, but snatched
anno 1458. from the Arabs by the Turks, a ragged obscure sort of Locusts till
then, then swarming and mounting toward Trepizond.

The road or Bay is none of the safest, in the change flowing eight foot water;
a S.E. and N.W. Moon makes a full sea there; from Bab-mandel 18 leagues; from
Moha (old Beronice or Moco rather, a Town in Arabia Petrea after Ptol.) two
and thirty. Aden is seated low, sulphuriously shaded by a high barren
Mountain; whose brazen front scorching the miserable Town, yields a perfect
character of Turkish baseness. It is a Peninsule, and a good way (to get
breath) thrusts it self into the blushing Sea; big in circuit, but has not
many houses, nor those curious; their outsides discovering a discontented
slavery, the inside shows poverty and wretchedness. A Castle it has set near
the sea, not to be entered but by a long narrow dissected path or trench; the
Castle is very strong and lofty, strengthened by so many rampires and bulwarks,
stored with so many roaring Cannons, as if Mars dwelt there, or that it kept a
Mammon of treasure, having in truth nothing but iron bullets, armor, and
miserable raggamuffians to defend it: the red Sea (on whose bancks it is seated)
borrowes not the name from color, rather from sand, which on the shore and
from the bottom has (when Apollo visits the Antipodes) a ruddy reflection:
shall I tell you the several names it has; some say it is called red, from
Erethreus son of Perseus and Andromida, a Prince (in the worlds adolescency)
much regarded, from whose name (as the Aegean and Icarian) the Sea was named;
and by the Septuagint from (...) so translated: other some, from Edom ( Idumea
a part of the Desert Arabia, confining it) the Sea of Edom; the Hebrews call
it Zuph or Saph, or Mare Algosum, from Sea weeds or Sargassoes here abounding:
Some Mare Elanixicum from Aelana a neighboring Port and Town: and others the
Gulf of Mecca and Arabia; fictitious Thevet calls it Zocoroph, Bohar Colzun
the Arabs, Zahara some, and others Brachia: a Sea most memorable for the
miraculous passage Almighty God gave Moses and the Israelites near the Sues,
of old Arsinoe: and for Solomon's fleet at Ezion Geber (or Moha) thence setting
out for the gold of Ophyr. To return, when the Portugalls had got Socotora,
and a hundred other places in India and Araby, Albuquerque their Golias by much
ado anno 1520 took Aden, boasting that he was then sole Emperor of India, Qua
victa (says Osorius) putabat Indiae Imperium fore sempiternum: Humanum est
errare, or else Albuquerk might be blemished; for, in few years they not only
lost this, but many other Forts of greater consequence in India.

October 18 we had the wind pretty fair. Our observation that day being 17
degrees, our longitude 19 from Mohelia; the wind less'ned, and weather grew
flaming hot; no Stove or Sudatory exceeding it: it made us very faint, yet
having past through as bad, it seemed less torment to us. But Mahomet the
Persian Merchant (whose father Hodgee Suare died in London the year before)
could hold out no longer, a Fever drawing him through the path of death;
Mahomet converted.
a happy man, if (throwing away the rags of Mawmetry) he roab'd his soul
with true faith in Christ; they say he called upon him, twice happy man, if
unfaignedly: At his putting into the Sea, the Captain honored his funeral with
the sky rending clamor of four Culverin shot, leaving his carcass to the
mercy of the Sea and Fish, a sure treasury till the resurrection.

The six and twentieth of October we found we were got North from the
Aequinoctiall 19 degrees 40 minutes and longitude from Mohelia 20 degrees, our
stearage at that time South East, the Sea pacifique, the wind moderate, but
heat offensive: where also we had such shoales of flying fishies as darkened the
glorious Sun by their interposing multitude; a fish most excellent depiction
of a flying fish in its eyes, which flame like a rolling Dyamond; the body is
equal to a well fed Herring, big enough for those complementall wings (or
fins) Nature has provided it to avoid the swift chase of Sea Tyrants, Sharks,
Albicores, Dolphins, Bonetaes and such as feed upon small fishes; but alas! a
Scilla in Charibdin: no sooner taking the advantage of her wings (imitating a
bird 200 paces, a dozen yards high from the face of the Ocean, so long as she
keeps moisture) when an Armado of starved birds and hawks as readily prey upon
them; by this, becoming the most miserable of all creatures, blessed with 2
shifts but neither availeable, in the water not so full of bravery as upon the
wing, yet that becomes the only gin and cause of her destruction.

The seventeenth of November, to our comfort we descried ( terra ter ex optata)
the coast of India; in fifteen degrees latitude, and 32 of longitude (the ill
weather having driven us to Lee-ward many leagues) that very place where Goa (
Barigaza of old) is seated; the bravest, best defended City in the Orient; the
Magazeen, refuge, seat of Justice, of the insolent and gold-thirsty Portugal.
The City is not visible to such as Navigate in the Ocean, being built three
hours journey within the land, in Tilsoare, an I Will of 30 miles circuit,
surrounded by a river streaming from the mighty mountain Bellaguate. Goa, is
compast with a strong and beautiful wall, proud in her aspiring Turrets,
dreadful in many sorts of tormenting Cannons: her strength and beauty begun
from the Decan Emperors, Zabaym and Idalcan, Goa.
from whom anno 1509 Albuquerque conquered it, but agrandiz'd from the
Lusitanian; the great Buzzar (or Market) is in center of the Town, richly
built, pleasant and capacious. The other streets are (after the Indian mode)
narrow and nasty; the buildings in general, are spacious and comely; dark
within, tarrassed and suitable to the seasons: it is watered with a delicious
stream, which (by benevolence of the air) refreshes the fields, forcing Flora
to dismantle; the gardens be also filled with variety of sweet and eye-pleasing
flowers: the whole I Will abounds with grass, corn, groves, cattle, fruits, and
such sense ravishing delights a reasonable man can require: above 20 little
Towns are seen in this 30 miles compass. In Goa is nothing more observable
than the fortifications, the Viceroy and Archbishops Palaces, and the
Churches: Field pieces here are numbered above 300; the Palaces are strong, of
good stone, furnished within with rich Arras and painting: the Churches of best
rank are, that dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mother of God, (in which, is
kept the bones and skull of Saint Thomas the Apostle, holy Relics brought 50
years ago from Meliapore by Emanuel Frias at command of John, successor to
Emanuel, Kings of Portugal.) St. Paul's, St. Dominie, St. Katherine, St.
Savior, and others; in which, are pressed down the bones of restless
Albuquerque, buried in the year 1516; of d' Acugnia, of Don Francisco, and
that late canonized Chyna St. Francis Shyvier the Navarrean Jesuit, who died
anno 1552. 4 December, aged 55, and rubricated by Pope Gregory 15. 12 March
1622, when many more were Sainted.

We hasted hence toward Swally, judging the worst past, the Indian shore all
our way in view us, and the sea every where 20 leagues from land anchorable:
But, sure all peace comes from above, and man's heart abounds with vanity; for
upon a sudden, the element grew dreadful, the wind to rore, the sea sublime
and wrathful, for three days space raging incessantly with such fury, that we
verily believed a Tuffon or Herocane was begun, a Tempest of 30 days
continuance, so terrible that houses and trees are like dust before it, many
great ships having been blown a shore and shattered; once in nine years it
uses to thunder among them, presaged by birds, and beasts who three or four
days before it bluster, cry out and run under ground for shelter, as if an
overture of all the world were ensuing: But praised be God we were deceived,
we mist a Tuffon, but not a second disadventure, this storm forcing a Mallabar
Junck, a Pirat in view of us; our Ordnance could not reach them, though the
longest Saker we had vomited the fire of defiance at them, whereby we were
forced (in way of honor) to chase her with Barges manned with fifty
Musketeers: But, Vela damus, quamvis remige Navis eat. We made too much haste
in boarding her, being entertained with such store of Fireworks and Granados,
a volley of cruel shafts; in a word, we were opposed with so much desperate
courage that after small hurt to them, we retreated with shame, the better
half slain, hurt, and scalded, our ships all the while being made an
unwilling Theater of this Affront, the wind forbidding them to retaliate.

The 22 of November the wind abated, and we found ground at forty fadomes,
many Snakes swimming about our ships, which (with the waters changing color)
assured us we were near the shore (the last storm had puzzled us) and soon
after we discerned land in 19 degrees 35 minutes latitude, and 29 in longitude,
which by its towering height we knew to be Dabul, and then St. John de vacas, a
Town subject to the Portugal, at the South end especially mounting in an
ambitious piramid of Natures work, named Saint Valentin's peake, the land
continuing high from thence to Gundavee, a hill six leagues short of Swalley
road, a round hillock and bay of importance unto Mariners.

St. John.


The seven and twentieth day of November, we haled an Indian piscadoro abord
us, never was Antic better habited; he told us of many enemies, but we were
fearelesse; after long toil tiding up with stream anchors, every sixth hour
weighing and dropping, in short time we got to Choul, and then against Daman, a
lovely town lorded by the Portugalls, and conspicuous to passengers; at the
North end it has a Castle large, strong and daring; the material is good white
chalky stone, flanckt with Ordnance and mounted high to play at advantage; At
the South end we perceived a fair Church, with white battlements a top, the
houses of like stone, strong and beautiful, 3 other Temples affoording joy and
pleasure to the heart and eye. The nine and twentieth day we got near the
bar at Swalley, and there cast Anchor, because we perceived 13 sail of
great ships, and knew not whether they were friends or enemies: the last day of
November we adventured over the Bar, 'twixt two boas, in 4 fadome water, a
hundred paces asunder, set there to manifest the passage, either side without
being very dangerous: the Ships at Anchor proved our friends, 6 English, and 7
Dutch, the most of them 1000 Tun: those of our Nation were good men of War.
The Palsgrave, Exchange, the William, the Blessing, etc. each of which (to do
them right) feasted our Lord Ambassadors with hearty welcome: we rode in 5
fadome (others in 9) twixt the sholds and continent.

The same day we came to an Anchor in Swalley road, Nogdi-Ally-beg the Persian
Ambassador (Sir Robert Sherley's Antagonist) dyed; having desperately poisoned
himself; for 4 days, eating only Ophium: the Mary (where he dyed) gave him
eleven great Ordnance, whose thundering Echoes solemnized his carrying ashoare:
his son Ebrahim-chan got him conveyed to Surrat (10 miles thence) where
they intombed him, not a stones cast from Tom Coryats grave, known but by two
poor stones, Tom. Coryats grave.
there resting till the resurrection.

Doubtless, Nogdibeg had a guilty conscience, he had very basely misbehav'd
himself in England, and feared the extreme rigor of Abbas a just (but too
severe) Master, at no time to be jested with in money matters or reputation;
so as neither his past good service, alliance at Court, skill in arms, nor
brave aspect, could animate his defense, assured of most horrid torture: Other
men's sufferings upon less cause made his seem more unpardonable: in the year
1612. a Persian Ambassador at Constantinople (for assenting to such Articles
'twixt his Master and the Grand Seignior, as seemed advantageous to him, but
odious to the Persian Monarck) was upon his return, beheaded at Cazbyn by
command of his enraged Master: the conditions were indeed dishonorable, That
the Prince of Persia should arrogate no other Title but Bashaw of Tauris: that
the Persian should pay tribute for Gheylan, yearly 400 bal's of silk: that the
Cadi of Tauris should be of the Turks Election, etc. which Abbas kicked back
to Achmat with great indignation. Tamascoolibeg also came into his mind, who
dyed miserably (tho once second in Persia) upon spleen ill grounded by the
King; and of Turkish barbarism, not a few exemplaries. Ebrahim Bassa, Cycala,
Synon Bassa and Nassuf, each of them in their times sitting at the Stern,
guiding as they listed the Turkish greatness, yet ere death called for them,
they were called for, by precipitating ends, such as made the remembrance of
their passed glory, relish the sowrer and more deformed: and Nogdibeg, (as we
heard the King protest) if he had not prevented it, should first have been
hackt in pieces, and then in the open market place burnt with dogs turds, a
perfume not fetched from Arabia, a stain indeleble, branding with shame all his
posterity. Return we to the road again.

Swalley road is from the Equator 20 degrees, and six and fifty min. North:
Swally road.
westerly variation 16. degrees and a half: longit. from Mohelia 28 degr. at a
low ebb it resembles an I Will, beyond the sands Goga is easily discovered. The
first of December, with some Pe-unes (or black foot-boyes who can pratle some
English) we rode to Surat, our Chariot drawn by 2 Buffolls who by practice are
nimble in their trot and well managed; we past through Swalley Town, Batty
(famous for good Toddy) Damkee, to Surat. Surat is the chief factory of the
East India Merchants, the station of their President; at that time one Master
Wyld was in that office, a modest, understanding Gentleman, to whose kind
respect I owe acknowledgement, and in whose house (the English house) we had
tidings of Sultan Curroon's Coronation at Agra, Anno 1627. whose history we
will prosecute, after we have viewed the Town, which may well challenge a
particular description.

SVRRAT, (perhaps so called by the Surae, whom Pliny places here,) is that old
Muziris named by Ptol. if my judgment deceive me not: nor am I ignorant, Choul
and Onor are imagined it by Molelius and Ramusius; a Town at this day great,
famous, rich, and populous: nor air nor soil agree with strangers; the one
inflamed by the torridnesse of the Zone, the other sandy and sulphurous; the
Artick Pole is here elevated one and twenty degrees, three min. subject in June
to become Nadyr to the burning Sun, thence to September the clouds showring
continually an insalubrious moisture, the wind and thunder so commixing, that
no place in the world seems more unhealthy, all the other 8 months either
parching or freezing. Surat is accounted the third best Town in the Gujurat
Kingdom, Amadavad and Cambaya excelling her; from the first removed four from
the other two good days journey, all now adding luster to the Moguls rich
replendent Diadem. Whether Gusurat comply with the Greekidiom (...), or from
Gezurat in Arabic an I Will, I question not; a Province it is so useful to the
Mogull, that his annual tribute out of this one shire amounts (as Merchants
say) to 150 Tun of gold. Surat is at this day not very strong, neither in
site nor Ordnance; a 100. year ago Antonio Siverio a Portuguise with 200 men
entered it, sacked and burnt it; a 1000 would now find it a hard enterprise. It
was after that subjected to Ecbar Anno Dom. 1566. of the Hegira 946. by valor
of Chan Azem, whose care defeated the confederacy of Mirza-chan, Hussan, Mirza
Mahomet, Chan Goga and other conspirators. Surat is now in a quiet government,
watered with a sweet river named Tappee (or Tindy) as broad as the Thames at
Windsor which arising out of the Decan Mountains, glides through Brampore (220
miles distant thence) and in many Maeanders runs by Surat, and after 20 miles
playing to and fro, a league from Swalley road wanders into the Indian Ocean.
It Is circled with a mud-wall, a Castle of stone is strongly built at the
South-West side, the river washing it; planted with great Ordnance and other
shot; awed by a Garrison, who make dainty to admit a stranger to see their
fortifications or parapets; The West opens into the Buzzar through a fair gate
of stone, where toll-gatherers are ever ready to search and exact sound tribute
for the great Mogull their Master: the Medon is of no great beauty, nor do the
shops give splendour; the crafty Banuyan desiring rather to be rich indeed then
so accounted. The houses are indifferently beautiful; some are of carved wood,
others of bricks dried in the Sun, the English and Dutch houses at the North
end excelling the other for space and furniture; the Suburbs also have 3
posterns, pointing out 3 several ways; one to Variaw and to Cambaya; a second
to Brampore; the third to Nansary ten course thence, whence the road is to
Gundavee, to Balsac, and to Daman upon the Ocean. The Town affoords no
Monuments, no Mosques worth the taking notice of: the English garden without
the Town has pretty walks, sweet flowers and a water-worke, but scarce
commendable: Only adjoining Nancery gate, I saw a Tanck or Magazen of water, a
brave work and worthy the noting: It is of good free stone, circling in above
100 sides and angles; eight and twenty Else twixt every angle, in compass very
near a thousand paces. It diminishes its largnesse gradatim by 16 degrees or
steps toward the bottom, of most use to receive a great quantity of rain
water, to quench the flagrant thirst of the Sunne-burnt Indians: the river by
this, seems somewhat unwholesome, if good neither for drink nor navigation,
what serves it for, save to mundifie the idolatrous Banuyan and superstitious
Mahometans: the Bannyans are the greater number here, but the Moors command
them: they have a native language of their own, but the Persian tongue is
understood by most, and is most courtly. The Indian Mahometans, are a crafty,
cowardly sort of people, (most of the great men being either Rashbootes or
Persians) yet love to go armed all day with sword and buckler, bow, arrows,
and daggers, as if they stood in danger of some enemies: their habit is a
quilted coat of Calico, tied under the left arm, a small shash upon their
head, large stockings and sometimes sandalls: in an ordinary garb are thus
resembled.

A man and woman of Industant.


The other sort of people are Merchants, Bramin's, Gentiles, and Persae. With
whom in order I will tempt your patience; this first remembered, that when any
Ships ride at Swalley (from September to March commonly) the Bannians all along
the sea side pitch Booths or Tents and straw Houses in great numbers, where
they sell Callicoes, Chena-satten, Purcellan ware, Scrutores or Cabbinets of
mother of Pearl, of Ebony, of Ivory, Agats, Turquoises, Heliotropes,
Cornelians, Rice, Sugar, Plantans, Arack, etc. Also there is constantly many
little boys or pe-unes, who are ready for 4 pice a day (2 pence of our money)
to serve you, either to interpret, to run, go arrands or the like: they will
not eat nor drink with a Christian, nor out of the same leaf we drink our
Toddy: the Bannyan and other Indian Females are seldom visible, their jealous
husbands mew them up in darkness. Here are Elephants and Horses, but 'twixt
Swalley and Surat Oxen do most labor. The most current Coins here and through
India, are Pice, Mammoodees, Roopees and Dynaes; Mogulls coignes.
the Pice are heavy round pieces of brass, 30 of them make our shilling; the
Mammoody and Roopee are good silver, round, thick, and (after the Saracenic
sort who hate Images in Coin) covered with Arabic letters, naming the King
and Mahomet; a Mammoody is our shilling, a Roopee two shillings and three
pence, the Dina is gold worth thirty shillings; but Spanish Rialls, Pistolets,
and Persian Larrees, Abassees and English gold (each piece in Persia going for
26 shillings) go here also. And again, as I have been told by Merchants, a
hundred thousand Roopees make one Leck, a hundred Lack make on Crou, ten Crou
(or Carrors) one Areb: again, in silver 14 Roopees make a Mass, 1150 Mass
make a hundred Tolls; ten Tolls of silver value one of gold: in brass,
thirty Tacks or Pice make one Roopee in weights; the Batman is 82 pound
English, but fifty five of their pounds, the Mawnd is as much; Howbeit, as in
Persia, the Mawnd Shaw and Tabriz differ, and as our Troy and Haverdepois are
not the same; so in all parts of the world where wealth and traffic is, are
such distinguishments: in a word, the Bannyans (as crafty the proverb goes, as
the devil) by a moderate outside and excess in superstition, make many well
minded simple men lose themselves, when by a heedlesse stupid admiration of
their sincere hypocrisy they entangle themselves by crediting their sugared
words in way of trade or complement, baits pleasingly swallowed when we
contemplate their temperance.

The Bannyans (or Vanyans) are tawny of complexion, fair spoken, crafty, and
above measure superstitious; they let their hair grow long, their head is
covered with a small wreath or shash for the most part white; their habit, a
long coat or vest of white quilted Callico of the Dalmatick sort; their shoes
are variable in color and fashion; some checkerd and ingraled in elegant
order, wrought to each man's ingenious fancy; with out latchets, sharp and
turning up at the toe, thin sol'd, high heeld, surrounded with steel, fast and
durable: The women are whiter than the men, yet want the sanguine mixture to
adorn them, which they supply by Art, there being found the best vermilion:
they wear their hair long and disheveled; part obscured by a fine thin Lawne,
by whose transparency it seems more lovely; their ears, noses, arms, and
legs, are laden with many voluntary rings and fetters of Brass, Gold and
Ivory; their behavior is silently modest, but full gorged with libidinous
fantasies and distempers. Marriage is so honored, that they contract at 7
commonly, and at 10 years old are often parents: but if an infant die ere he
be married, the parents of him that dyed procure some virgin or other (to whom
they give some Dynaes of Gold in lieu of Ioyncture) to be his bedfellow one
night, to avoid the reproachful proverb, he dyed unmarried.

An Indyan Merchant or Bannyan:


Poligamy is odious among them, in which respect they cease not to villifie
Mahomitans as people of an impure soul, and stuffed with turpitude; yea, in this
they parallel the Antic Romans, who (as Tacitus, Marcellin, and Tertullian
tell us) so hated Digamy (both in enjoying two wives at one time, and being
twice married) as no Holocaust was ever offered, no holy fire looked unto by
such, nor such as issued from such parents. Their Funerals are of the old
stamp (recorded by Curtius) sacring the corpse to ashes in a holy fire,
compounded of all sorts of costly woods and Aromatic spices: the wife also (in
expectation to enjoy her husband amongst incomparable pleasures) invelops her
dainty body with the merciless flames, for which kindness she obtaines a
living memory. Their Priests are called Bramyni or Brachmani; such as in old
times from their quality, were named Gymno-sophi, as Porphirius the great
Platonist in his 4. lib. de abstinen. ab esu carnium, dictates concerning them,
and thus: If by descent he continued constant to his study and contemplation,
he then attained great Aestimation, and the title Brachman: if he sought this
degree by election, he was seven years (says Bardesanes of Babylon) styled
Calanus and Samanaeus, and then by that other Nomenclation; of all sorts of
Philosophers these were held most excellent, and contemplative. Tertullian calls
them gloriae animalia, Apollonius says, they were and were not earthly; their
thoughts so transcendent, as if they were ravished by the sweetness of that
harmony the rolling Orbs in an exact diapazan send forth in their forced
Motion. Their imagination flew beyond nature, beleiving that this Fabric of
the inferior world was created of nothing, and made sphericall, yet subject to
dissolution; that it had an efficient cause, it being unable to form it self,
and that that cause is the commander of nature. Our birth to be no other, then
a quick conception, perfected by death, which is the true Nativity of the
soul, and entrance to immortality. A Tenent however oppugned by the Stoics,
yet by these Bramyns from the Tradition of the Phoenix, observation of corn,
and the like, was so maintained that from hence arose that magnanimity of
Calanus the Bramyn, who to enjoy it burnt himself in sight of Alexander. But,
how they have (by overture of their wits and country,) forgot these and broacht
new opinions, more fantastic and rediculous. I shall gleane a little out of
that their mass of confusion, and dedicate it to your attent patience.

Religion of the Bannyans.
The Bannyan religion at this day, is of these Tenants. That the whole frame or
body of the world had a beginning, created by a God of immense power, eternal
and provident: that after he had made man, to associate him created woman to
simpathize in similitude of body, and disposition. These be named Pourous and
Parcouty, a coople so innnocent, and contented, that they had no ill thoughts,
but fed only upon herbs and fruits, not touching ought had blood or life in it.
From this chaste couple sprung two couple of boys, the Embleams of the four
complexions, Brammon, Cuttery, Shuddery, and Wise. Of different constitutions.
Bramon melancholy, Cuttery chollerick, Shudddery phlegmatic; and Wise sanguin:
Each affecting his several calling. The first a Priest, the second a Warrior,
the third a Merchant, the last a Pesant.

Brammon the Priest (from whom the Brahman have their title, and not from
Abraham and Keturah, as Postellus thinks) was commanded (says their Shaster
or book of laws) to travel East to find a wife; it being revealed to him,
that God had formed four women for him and his brethren, on whom to propagate;
(for the reason they had no sisters to generate upon, was, because so pure and
holy a race as they, should not descend from filthy Incest.) After long and
tedious pilgrimage and much prayer, he espies his long looked for Virgin,
clothed with naked innocence, her face yellow like gold, her hair and eyes
black, of a complete stature, who without much courting he won and married:
this Lady Savatree proved the mother of a holy generation. Cuttery was sent
west to find his mate, his sword in's hand, habited after his nature, all the
while fretting for want of resistance, and that his patience was so long trod
upon: at length, he espies a far off one coming toward him, aequally
inflamed with impatience; without much complement, they forthwith assailed each
other, with such fury, and so much bravery, that the first days fight the
victory was not to be decided; next day, they renew their courage, giving and
receiving wounds insensibly, till in conclusion Cuttery grapled, and seized
Toddicastree by the tresses of her hair, but instead of subjecting her, is (by
the fresh out breaking of her beauty) captivated; yet after submission and
repentance for his rage against such an earthly Angel, she is reconciled, and
from them the West swarmed with a generation of Radiaes and Soldiers. Shuddery
the third son of Pourous and Parcouty, travel North in equal hope to find
his Mistress; far he went and many strange adventures passed through and saw,
witness that rock of Diamonds he alight on, many of which (as any other
Merchant would have done) he carried along with him, enamoured of their luster
and sparkling excellencies: till at last he also met Visagundah, whom he soon
woone, being of a tractable sweet nature and condition, (as be all the Bannyan
daughters descended from her) and of her begot so many sons, that the North
quickly became pregnant and inhabited. Now come we to Wise (the simplest of Sir
Pourous sons) a man of much plain honesty and comportment. Southward goes
he, having strange intelligence that his female was thereabouts, whom (after
he had passed seven Seas (the breadth and way is concealed in the Shaster) and
built him a fair Mansion, whither Iejunogundah (his future wife) came to
admire so rare a structure; he saw her, and not knowing how to court her, is
overcome with Loves passion; but long time is rejected and thought basely of,
till (by divine providence) she is mollified and made to yield, upon
condition, he should build many Pagods or Idols for Gods worship, and adore
pictures under green Trees and under Arbours, which to this day, his posterity
observe ceremoniously. Thus from these two the South was filled with mechanic
men, and such as practice tillage and husbandry.

When these four young men had spent some years in those contrary quarters of
the world, whither Fate had directed them. All four becam equally mindful of
their first home, desirous to visit their aged parents, not only to propagate
there also, and furnish that Meditallium of the earth, but also to recount
their memorable fortunes and adventures. After much circumstance and toil they
arrived at the place from whence they came, each of them attended by a troop
of their own younglins: it is in vain to decipher the joy and mutual embraces
twixt them and their aged Parents, revived by this good hap from the benumming
Frost of old age; as also the reciprocal kindness and love amongst the 4
Travelers, a dull sense may easily comprehend, it was without all mixture of
disco^tent or malady. Notwithstanding, to show, no summum bonum can be had in
this life, in process of time (the issue of these four multiplying) the world
began to lose her virgin purity and candor; discord, pride, and rapine mingling
amongst them, whereby all brotherly love was laid aside, and no appearance now
but of violence and voluptuousness: Bramon grows idle and careless in his
devotion. Cuttery becomes insolent and aspiring, regarding neither the
venerable advice and admonition of his Parents, nor the dignity of Bramon his
elder brother. Shuddery also invents deceit, not regarding justice nor equity,
but delights in cheating his other brethren. Wise also grows unthrift in a
good conscience, banishing his innate honesty to entertain riot: For which,
his cruel brother Cuttery domineeres and makes an Ass of him, imposing such
taxes and burdens on that silly Countryman, that Wise is now the object of
casheered riot, and the abject of his Lordly brother; who also picks a quarrel
with Shuddery, and admits not of any reconciliation, till the poor Merchant
had satisfied his Avarice with half his store; so that such hate and fear
grew amongst 'em, that all their Designs are involved in a dark Chaos of
confusion. But though deceit, riot, and tyranny sway a while, an all-seeing
Majesty sits above, who in his own time retaliates in the extremity of
justice. And so it now happened: for upon a sudden, when they were most busied in
their villainy and least dream of account, God roab's himself with clouds and
flashes terror, whereat the seas multiply their noise, and swell so
formidably, that they threaten an universal deluge and destruction: In the
interim the amazed people are confounded with such horrible cracks of thunder,
and such thick flashes of flame and lightning, that the entrails of the earth
seemed to gasp and quake with terror and fear: which done, in a moment the
sea breaks ore her bounds, and sweepes away in eternal darkness and silence
all creatures on the earth, purging away that nasty smell of their late
wickedness and pollution.

But God who delights in Mercy, and grieves at any man's confusion, repents him
of his severity, and resolves again to furnish the earth with a new generation
of men repleat with more purity, mercy and perfection. To which end he
descends, and upon a very high mountain called Meropurbatee commands Bremaw to
rise up, who (though till then not created) obeyed and worshipped his Maker. In
like sort at two other calls, came up Vistney and Kuddery, who performed equal
obeisance. Bremaw (to avoid sloth) has power to create all other creatures.
Vistney has order given to preserve them; and Ruddery has strength to massacre
and be Gods executioner by way of death, plague, famine, diseases, war, or
the like. And according to this appointment, these three new created Lords
perform and regard their particular affairs, to each of them a set period of
time being allotted to live on earth. Bremaw at the end of the second Age in a
fiery chariot was elevated. Vistney stays double his time and then departs,
leaving the issue to Ruddery, (at the end of three times so long commorance) to
destroy the world, and to translate the souls of good men into a garden of
most ravishing delights and glory. But ere this were accomplished, It is fit to
acquaint you that how Bremaw came to furnish the earth with more Inhabitants.
The Shaster or their Cabalisticall Thalmud tells us, that as Bremaw was
ruminating how to act it, suddenly he fell into a trance, and upon recovery
felt his body troubled beyond measure, purporting some immediate chance or
alteration. Nor did his thoughts deceive him; for lo, forthwith his body begun
to swell, yea so great anguish to afflict him, that in all points it resembled
a woman's travail, and indeed it had Analogy, in that his bowels began to
extend more and more and his dolor to increase, till (after much toil) the
second swellings found vent, broke, and delivered their burden, two fair
Twins, one of each sex whom he needed not to give suck unto, in that by like
miracle they immediately grew up to a perfect stature, furnished with language,
and many symptoms of education; Bremaw the Parent named them Manaw and
Ceteroupa, whom after he had blessed, he sent East to the great mountain
Mounder purvool, where strait way Mistress Ceteroupa brought forth three
sons and so many daughters: The Boys she called, Priauretta, Outanapautha,
and Soomeraut. The Girls Cammah, Sounerettaw, and Sumboo: The eldest son and
daughter went West to a huge mountain Segund. The two seconds North, to
Bipola: The two last of each sex to Suparr, where they so generated, that they
quickly peopled each their quarter. Which done, God perceiving the hearts of
men inclined to vice and all sorts of vileness, to give them directions how to
live virtuously and avoid temptation, he left heaven a while and alighted on
the high Mount Meropurbatee, whither he called Bremaw, to whom he spoke many
things out of a dusky dark cloud or mist, now and than flashing some glimpses
of his Majesty, acquainting him why he destroyed the first world, their sins
provoking him, and how desirous he was, never to do so again: and to that end
delivered Bremaw a Book (the Shaster by name) filled with excellent stories,
divided into three Tracts, dedicated to the three great Casts or Tribes: the
first containing Moral precepts: the second, the ceremonies of their Worship:
the third, a division of them into three, with peculiar notes and instructions
to each Cast or Tribe.

Their Moral law (read and taught them by Bremaw out of the Shaster) has eight
commandments.

1. Thou shall not kill nor destroy any living creature, for thou and it are
both my creatures.

2. Thou shall not sin in any of thy five senses: thy eyes not beholding
vanity: thy ears to be stopped in hearing evil: thy tongue not to utter any
filthiness: thy pallat hating wine, flesh, and all other vive things: thy
hands abhorring things defiled.

3. Thou shall duly perform the set times of devotion, praying, washing,
elevating, prostrating, etc.

4. Thou shall not lie nor dissemble.

5. Thou shall not be hard hearted, but helpful to others.

6. Thou shall not oppress nor tyrannize.

7. Thou shall observe certain Festivalls and fasting days:

8. Thou shall not steal.

These eight precepts are sub-divided into four: each of the four old Casts
retaining them. Bramon and Shuddery,. i.e. the Braminy and Bannyan are tied to
most severe and strict observance in the decorum of their worship. Cuttery and
Wise. i.e. the Justice and Labourer agree in theirs. From whence the Priest and
Merchants (appropriating the first and second to themselves) are more
superstitious, than the two other Casts of Soldiers and Mechanics, who assume
a great liberty in meats and wine. Notwithstanding, all of them believe the
Metempsychosis of Pythagoras, whose conceits we will parallel by and by with
these Bannyans. In this place drawing your judgment to a remembrance of what
is already related: wherein, we may perceive the delusion Satan charms them
with, whose custom it has ever been to erect to himself worship and Idolatry
in some things (to make 'em more authentical) cohering with the Story of our
Bible, and in imitation of the Jews: and that this Cabala or Shaster of the
Bannyans is a depraved Story of the Bible, either obtained by some Jews, such
time as Solomon traded to Ophyr (near these parts) or from the father of lies,
who peradventure did dictate it for his servants. For in the Shaster, speaking
of the Creation of the world out of a Chaos, and forming of Pourous and
Parcoutee successively: who is so blind that sees not the making of Adam and
Eve: the other of the Creation (delivered by Moses) shadowed in it: the
universal deluge and destruction of mankind pointing out that of Noah? By
Bremaws receiving the Law from God (in a dark cloud and lightning) upon the
high Mount Meropurbatee, it is doubtless from Moses his being on Mount Syna in
Arabya, where was given the Decalogue for the Israelites instruction. And in
Bremaws departure from earth to heaven, is meant the translation of Elias.

The Bannyans are commanded (as in most hot Countries in all other Pagan
Religious is observed) to wash often. First, dawbing their naked bodies with
dirt and mud (the Embleam of sin) then, diving three times in the water,
their faces to the East, shaking a few grains of Rice as a Thanksgiving to
that element for purging them: A threefold ducking and tripartite thread is
hung at three holes in a stone about the neck, the Rice fixed in their forehead
each morn in an unguent of red paint, is a Symbol of Baptism: Their turning
to the East, in memory of the judgment and creation, and to adore the Sun and
Moon, in that they take them to be Gods eyes, full of purity, heat and
nurture. But this their attending the blushing Sun at his arising, the
elevation of their hands, murmurs, plashing the water in Magic order, diving,
writhing and acting other promiscuous foperies, hear them condemned by a
neighbor of theirs Job, Job 31, 26.7, 8.
that patient Edomite. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon
walking in brightness, and my heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth
has kissed my hand: this also were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge,
for I should thereby have denied the God which is above. And by the Psalmist,
Psalm. 44 41.
If we have forgotten the Name of our God, and holden up our hands to any
strange god, shall not God (who knows the secrets of the heart) search it out?

But above all, their horrid Idolatry to Pagods (or Images of deformed devils)
is most observable: Placed in Chapels most commonly built under the Bannyan
Trees (or that which Linschot called Arbor de Rays or tree of roots, Sir Wall.
Ral. improperly Ficus Indicus) a tree of such repute amongst 'em, that they
hold it impiety to abuse it, either in breaking a branch or otherwise, but
contrarily adorn it with Streamers of silk and ribbons of all colors. The
Pagods are of sundry sorts and resemblances, in such shape as Satan visibly
appears unto them: ugly faced, long black hair, gogl'd eyes, wide mouth, a
forked beard, horns and stradling, misshapen and horrible, after the old filthy
form of Pan and Priapus.

Under these holy Trees they sit and actuate their Idolatrous devotion: there
they pay their Tithes and Offerings, there receive the sacred unction and
sprinklings of sundry colored powders: there they perform their ceremonies,
which they denotate by the wooden sound of a little Bell: there they repeat
their Orizons, make Processions, ring their Bells, sing and perform many
mysteries; yea, so numerous grew their Idol Temples, that (till the Mussulmen
mixed among them) each Village had its several Pagods, and many to this day are
standing. The chief in Industan is at Variaw near Surrat, at Nigracut where
the Dewry is seel'd and paved with gold, yearly visited by 1000 Bannyans, who
in way of devotion cut out part of their tongues as a holy sacrifice, and
whereby to speak the Sibboleth better ever after: at Bannaras upon Ganges, at
Ecbarpore, at Iallamexa, Elabass, Sibah, and many other places. Other parts of
their Religion consists in invocating holy men famoused for many virtues. In
Wars (the Cutterys or Radieas only) call upon Bemohem: the rich upon
Mycasser; the poor upon Syer: the laborers upon Gunner: the married, upon
Hurmount, etc. Moreover, they effect Pilgrimages to rivers, especially Gonga
(Ganges) more venerable then any other, in that they say Bremaw frequented it,
and that it has (at Siba where it springs out of a rock) a head in form of a
Cow their beloved Idol: wherein they Wash often, and thereby suppose themselves
purified from sin (and dirt:) and in requital enrich her womb with Gold and
Jewels, hoping to thrive the better, especially when they die to have their
mouths madefied with a drop of that water of the terrestrial Paradise.

In Baptism, the Priests children and Merchants (that is to say Bramins and
Bannyans) anoint with Oil, and cleanse by water. The other prophaner sort, the
men of war and manifactures have only water, with the point of a pen opposed
to their forehead, as wishing that God will write good things there, to which
the company say Amen. Their Marriages (as I have said) are at seven years old,
and if any die unmarried, they conclude him in limbo: so that often times they
marry them, when dead, before they be buried: the Marriage ceremonies are not
many nor frivolous; the Boy riding about the Town attended with all the little
ones that can ride, roab'd with Jewels, Scarfes, etc. one day. And the Maiden
Bride the next with a like train of dainty virgins no less richly attired,
the Bride and her Husband known from the rest by their Crowns and Coronets,
celebrated by many Kettle Drums, Trumpets, Pageants, and the like; the Bride
has no money Portion, they hold it contemptible: only some Jewels and Dinaes
of gold, such as they that day are attired with. I dare not say those Dinaes
are those (...) or Marriage gifts mentioned by Homer 9 Ilyad, Suydas, etc. The
Wedding is thus, a fire is interposed, intimating the purity and heat of their
affections: a silken string circles both their bodies as the Hyerogliphic or
bond of Wedlock; then a linen cloth is put betwixt them, in token that till
then they were unknown to one another in nakedness. This done, the Bramyn
blesses them, prays that she may prove as gentle and fruitful as a Cow, the
cloth is torn away, the string untyed, and they are one another ever after.
Also they never marry out of their own Casts or Tribe: as Bramins the
daughters of Bramyns: Cutterys, the daughters of Cutterys: Shudderys Shudderys;
and Wyses not only so, but also compere in their own Trades: as Taylers, the
daughters of Taylers: Barbers, Barbers daughters etc.

In sickness they call upon Marrawn (an Epithet of God) expressing mercy. If
they perceive he is going the way of all flesh, then they expand his hand, and
moysten it with holy water, the water of Ganges: when he is dead they wash the
carcass and carry it silently to the water side, where they utter two or three
words to that element, then burn his body in sweet wood or spices, which as
earth mixes with the corpse, and throwing the ashes into the River, they think
they have given every Element his peculiar due, and so depart home well
satisfied forthwith. The Priests present his son the roll of his deceased
forefathers, and bid him fulfill the ceremonial law of deploring for ten
days, neither using his wife, laughing, eating Opium nor Betele, putting on no
clean clothes nor oil on's head, but that day month for that year ever
after make a feast, and pay a complementall visit to that River, that drunk his
Fathers ashes. Often times the wife (to express her love) incenerates her self
at that time her Husbands body was incendiated. They affect no second
marriages, the Raieaes and Wyses excepted. Now the reason why they burn their
dead, is either in imitation of those recorded by the Prophet Amos 6.10. or in
way of pity and piety, lest the enemy should offer it villainy; or if buried,
it would stink (an improper thing in a Bannyan) and so putrify the grass and
make Kine unhealthy: besides, out of their carcasses would issue worms, who
would starve when the dead body was consumed, a sin unpardonable.

The Braminy or Priests (to speak in common) are of 82 Casts or Tribes, the
Vertaes are of higher note and fewer: their habit is a girdle of an Antilops
skin tied about their middle, a thong of the same hide from the neck to the
left arm, and elsewhere naked; some of them wear a threefold thread from the
right shoulder to the left arm as a badge of their profession and in memory of
the 3 sons of the second creation.

The Cutteries are more profane; men of war, shedders of blood,
flesh-eaters, and libidinous; they are for the greater part called Rajas or
Kings; have six and thirty Casts among themselves, from some of which none of
them but is descended: of these, are the Tribes of Dodepuchaes, some Chawah,
some Solenkees, some Vaggelaes, and some Paramors; of long times owners of
Indostant, till Aladin, a patan, King of Delly, wrested Guzzarat from them, and
since then, most is taken away by the issue of Tamerlange: at this day they
call themselves Rashpootes (or sons of Kings) and live lawless to the
Moors, the chief of which at this day are Rana Radgee Mardout, Radga
Surmul-gee, Raia Berumshaw, Mahobet-chan, Radia Barmulgee, Radgea Ramnagar,
Radgea Iooh', Iessingh, Tzettersing, and Mansuigh, etc.

The Shudderyes or Bannyans are Merchants, and (contrary to their name, which
significs harmless) are the most crafty people throughout India. Full of
phlegmatic fear and superstition: they are indeed very merciful, grieving to
see other people so hard-hearted to feed upon fish, flesh, Raddish, and such
things as have life or any resemblance. They will not kill a Louse, Flea, or
Kakaroch, or the like for 1000 pound; but contrariwise buy their liberty of
such Sailors as of necessity must crush them: yea, they have Hospitalls for
old, lame, sick, or starved creatures, birds, beasts, Cats, Rats, or the like,
and have no worse men to oversee them than the Pushelans, the greatest and best
respected sorts of Brammins of all Casts whatsoever: they are of Pythagora's
doctrinating, not only in believing the Metempsychosis of the soul of each man
into a beast: as for example, the soul of a drunkard and Epicure into a Swine,
the lustful and incestuous into Goats and Dogs; the dissemblers into Apes,
Crocodiles, and Foxes: the lazy into Bears, the wrathful into Tigers, the
proud into Lions, the blood thirsty into Wolves, Ounces, Snakes; the perjured
into Toads, and the like: but the souls of good men, abstemious, pitiful and
courteous, into Kine, Buffalaes, Sheep, Storks, Doves, Turtles, etc. An
opinion memoriz'd by Ovid 15 Metamor.

Heu quantum scelus est in viscere viscera condi,
Congestoque Avidum pinguescere corpore corpus,
Alteriusque animantem animantis vivere leto,
Parcite (vaticinor) cognatas caedenefanda,
Exturbare Animas, nec sanguine sanguis alatur.
Flesh fed with flesh; oh what impiety,
Thy greedy corpse with corpse to fat thereby,
One living thing to live by others death:
Oh spare! I warn you, to disturb the breath,
Of kinsmen by fool-slaughter; for your blood,
With others blood to feed is no ways good.
The last Sect or Cast of Gentiles are the Wises, a name albeit derived from
Wise the youngest son of Pourous and Parcootee, yet in their tongue properly
signifying a laboring man: these be of two sorts, the Wise and Coolee; the
first agreeing with the Bannyan in abstinence, the other not forbearing to eat
any manducable creature; the purer sort are subdevided into 36 Casts or
Families.

The conclusion is, that all these 4 Casts in time grew so impious and
unthankful, that God commanded Ruddery to command a blast of wind to sweep
away this wretched generation, which accordingly he did; that tempest raging so
violently that the mountains and rocks were hurled to and fro like dust or
tennis-balls, the seas out of their course, yea Ganges out of her holy
channel, wherein all (save a few honest men and women left to replenish)
perished; this was the second confusion. Soon after, God gave them a King,
propagate from the seed of the Bramyns called Ducerat, who begat Ram, a King so
famous for piety and high attempts, that to this day his name is exceedingly
honored, so that when they say Ram Rame, it is as if they should say, all good
betide you.

But to show the imbecility of man's nature, his weak condition and frailty: in
process of time the world again grew abominable and treacherous: so that
Ruddery commands the earth to open and swallow down quick those ungodly
wretches; a few excepted, who the third time peopled the earth with humane
inhabitants, and then (as Bremaw had formerly) Vistney the mediator of mercy
ascended into heaven, leaving cruel Ruddery to over rule this age of Iron, at
the end of which he also shall be rapt into paradise: these 4 ages they call
Curtain, Duauper, Tetrajoo and Kolee.

Touching the last Judgment, they hold it shall be more dreadful than the
other; the Moon to look blood red, the Sun to shed his light like purling
brimstone, an universal flashing of fire, with loudest thundering; then a
flammy redness will orespread the heavens, and the 4 Elements (of which the
world consists) shall maintain a dreadful fight so long, so fiercely one
against another, that at last all shall be revolved into a dark confusion: the
souls of such as were good men, Ruddery will transport to heaven, the wicked
perish; but the bodies of both rise no more, being too incredulous of the
resurrection.

Now albeit these people in a continued series of wilfulness and ignorance
believe that their Shaster or Cabala was immediately from God, yet that it is
wholly grounded upon tradition, and parched out of many Histories, Jewish and
Gentilisme, I have already showed what is in imitation of the holy Scripture
and from the rule and practice of other Nations: and we may add, that their
burning the dead, is borrowed from the 6 of Amos 10. their marriage after death
from Cerinthus and Marcyon, old heretics who used to baptize after death in
case they were not pre-baptiz'd; the thread tripartite hung about their neck is
a misterious denotation of the Trinity; rice and painting in their forehead is
not only as a symbol of Baptism, but in imitation of the Star Rempham fixed
in the brow of the Idol Moloch, or of Iul. Caesar, who had one in his forehead
as an emblem of immortality. And also, let us see in how many things they
concur with the rules of Pythagoras (to this day famous among them). These
Bramins or Bannyans in their schools and other places affect silence: for 5
years are not suffered to speak in the Schools; understand one another by
dumb signs in most things; adore toward the Sun; honor Angels; observe a
Monday Sabbath; abstain from second marriages, (some from the first) affect
white garments, loath coughing, spitting and the like, forbear swearing and
blasphemy, shun pleasures, drink water, believe the transmigration of men's
souls into beasts, offer inanimate sacrifices, deny the bodies resurrection,
hate to touch a pot or cup with their mouth, but rather power the liquor in at
a good distance, reverence Elders, eat nor drink with men of other religions,
use washings much, touch no unclean thing and many other, in nothing differing
with the Pithagoreans, as may be gathered out of Josephus, Suydas, Philo,
Laertius and other writers.

Having tired out your patience with this Sect; for variety sake, turn we to
another sort of Gentiles in Surrat and Guzzurat the Persees, a people descended
out of Persia, banished hither (to avoid Mahomitry and circumcision) upon the
death of valiant Iezdgird the Persian King, Anno Dom. 635. or thereabouts;
whose life and doctrine (as it is gathered from the Daroo or Priests of this
sect by Master Lord a worthy Minister, for some years resident in the Factory
of Surat) I will epitomize, that we may move (after this repose) onward in our
travailes.

Religion of the Persaes.
Into India I say these Persees came, (such time as Omar the second Chaliph
after Mabumet had subjected Persia) in 5 Iuncks from Iasquez sailing to Surrat,
where after some treaty with the Raieas and Bannyans they got entertainment and
leave to exercise their own religion. A religion deduced from the reign of
Gustaph King of Persia Anno Mundi 3500, and before our Saviors Incarnation 500
years, written in their Zundavastaw (or law Book) in this manner.

Such time as Gustasp (the 14 King of Persia from Kuyomarraz, by some, thought
Naah) swayed the Imperial Scepter of that famous Monarchy: It chanced that
Espintaman and Dodoo two poor people, man and wife, Chynaes by nation, lived
long together in a good report, but without Fortunes blessings, in estate or
children: howbeit, at Dodooes earnest request, a son was given her who in his
conception promised (by some rare and fearful dreams the mother hatched)
great matters, not only to the astonishment of his simple parents but amazement
of the China King, who (out of jealousy and disposition to credit any report)
sought to prevent all events by killing or poisoning him: but (to show a
superior power swayes us and never misses to accomplish its designs tho by man
never so much oppugned) nothing could do him harm; for fearing his parents
ruin, and to ease the King of his fears, they all consent to give China a
farewell, and seek a securer abode in a region more remote, and where they
might more freely meditate.

Far they traveled, saw many rare things, past over many great rivers on
foot, for Zertoost (so was this young prophet named) turned them by a trick
that he had into solid Ice, and after thawed them at his pleasure and many rare
adventures found, (all which are to be left out, in that religion is the mark
we shoot at) not staying long in any place till they arrived in Persia, where
they rested and intended to settle: Zertoost (as all good men use to do) spent
most of his time in meditation; and on a time especially, observing the
disorder of men's living, sorrow overcame him, and a desire to reform them
totally possessed him: but finding the place he was in not solitary enough or
fit for revelations, away he goes, not resting till he came into a dark valley,
surrounded and obscured by two lofty mountains, there he ingeminates his
silent murmures, with dejected eyes, erected hands, and knees bended, when lo,
a glorious Angel, whose face was more coruscant than the Sun, salutes him
thus, Hayle, Zertoost, a man of God, what would thou? he strait answers; The
presence of God, to receive his will, to instruct my nation: his prayer is
granted, his body purged; his eyes sealed; till being past the Element of fire
and higher orbs, he is presented before the supreme Majesty, arrayed with such
refulgent glory, that (till he had Angels eyes put into his head) he could not
gaze on such a daz'ling excellency: there, he received his laws (no place but
heaven will serve to fetch Philosophy, as Laertius writes of Socrates) uttered
by the Almighty (whose words were incompast with flames of fire:) such laws,
such secrets, as some of them are not fit to be promulgated. Being upon his
departure, he desires of God, that he might live so long as the world endured,
that in that protract he might the easier make all people on the earth embrace
his doctrine: God pitties his simplicity and in a mirror shows him the
alteration of times, the villainy of Lucifer, the misery of man, and many other
rarities such as quite altered his first desires; so that, when he had
worshipped, he takes his Zundavastaw or Book in 's left hand, and some
celestial Fire in 's right, and by Bahaman Vmshauspan the foresaid Angel (who
cleft the Air with his golden wings) is set down in that same valley where
the spirit found him.

Zertoost (by this time a man of great experience) arms himself against all
disasters and temptations, and bidding his Hermitage farewell, travells
homeward, to publish his law and joy his too long afflicted parents: Satan (who
all this while looked asquint at Zertoosts determinations) intends to seduce
him, and after a short excuse for his rude intrusion, protests himself his
unfeigned friend, assuring him the Angel had deluded him; that God hated his
novell endeavors; that if he had loved him, he had not so soon so willingly
parted with him, that his denying him to live till the day of doom, argued
Gods neglect of him; that his travail to reclaim the world was in vain, men's
minds so doated upon freedom and vanity; that his book was stuffed with lies,
and in publishing it great shame and peril should betide him: that his fire,
was a merciless Element, rediculous and of small use in those hot regions. And
in conclusion, if he would reject these and depend on him, he would furnish
him with all delights, honors and pleasures possible, give him power to do
strange things, whereby he should be worshipped for a God, which if he
refused he was a fool and unworthy his charity.

Zertoost soon saw that tempter was no better nor worse than Lucifer: he bad
him avoid, and call to mind to his addition of terror, how by his ambitious
impiety he had lost heaven, and how mere malice made him desirous to draw all
other into like damnation: he also told him how that book he so scoft at
should condemn him, that fire torture him and all such black mouthed liars and
detracters as himself; whereat the Fiend was horribly affrighted and left him:
the devil is no sooner gone, but on goes Zertoost and at length arrived where
he found his parents who (you doubt not of) received him gladly; to whom he
imparted his passed fortunes and intended occasions. Dodoo his mother (that
good old woman) imagines it a sin unpardonable, that so excellent a young
prophet (as she thought her son) should be longer concealed from the world;
yea grew so transported, that she thought all men wicked blockheads that could
not find it out without her babbling it: but seeing them dull, to them she goes
and without longer circumstance tells them the whole story of her sons
conception, her dreams, his piety, his enthusiasticks, revelations, visions,
the excellency of his book, his authority to command all men to believe and
obey his laws and ordinances. The people admire and blazon it, so that in
short time Gustasp the Persian King had notice of it, who desiring to see the
man and know the truth, sends for him, is so well sati^fied and instructed,
that he forthwith wavered in his own religion, judging Zertoosts better and
more plausible; insomuch, as his own Priest became dejected, and invented all
ways possible to reclaim him; and to effect it, bribes Zertoosts servants to
convey under his bed the bones of dead men and dead dogs carcasses, things most
hateful to the Persians, possessing the King that this stranger was a banished
man, a man of a most impure conversation, witness the stuffing of the bed he
slept upon: the King is brought to view that nasty deceit, abominates him, and
for his reward shuts him in a loathsome dungeon, but this misery of his endured
not long; for the King, having a horse of great account deadly ill, proposes
great rewards to any could recover him; many desired it, but none durst
undertake it, fearing the penalty, till Zertoost heard it who administers a
potion and recovers him: an act so acceptable to Gustasp that he receives the
poor prophet into grace again, whereby he had the way to discover the Kings
priests knavery and to illustrate his own integrity; yea, a means whereby to
publish his own doctrine, and by some miracles intermixed to have it credited.

It chanced that the King (either stimulated by his Churchmen, or judging
Zertoost able to do any thing) calls for him, professing his propensity to be
of his religion, and which he and all his would entertain, upon condition
Zertoost would grant him 4 things: the first, that he might never die; the
second, that he might ascend heaven and come down again without hurt as
often as he listed; the third, that he might know what God had done, did, and
intended; the fourth, that his body might be invulnerable.

Zertoost is somewhat thunderstruck with these demands: But perceiving it
otherwise impossible to have his Dogmataes believed, he tells the King, that
for one man to have all those properties was to make him a God, more than a
man; that the King should choose any one for himself, and the other 3 things
be given any other three men he pleased to nominate: it is accepted, and Gustasp
makes the second his choice, that he might ascend and descend at pleasure; to
know the secrets of heaven was granted the Kings Churchman, the better thereby
to govern; to live for ever, is conferred upon Pischiton (the Kings eldest
son) who they say lives yet upon Damoan's high mountain guarded by 30
immortal men, to forbid all others the entrance, lest by footing that holy
ground they should also live for ever; and to be free in battle or otherwise
from hurt or torment was granted to Espandiar the Kings youngest son; after
which the Zundavastaw is opened, the new broacht doctrine read and generally
accepted on.

It has a tripartit division; the first treates of judicial Astrology, called
Astoodeger, and is committed to the care of such as they call Iesopps or Sages:
The second speaks of natural Philosophy or Physic, and is studied by the
Hackeams or Physicians: The last is a compound of religion, named (from the
Inventor) Zertoost, and kept by the Daroos or Predicants: each of these three
contain seven chapters: A little only of their religion.

The Zertoost is also of three parts; pointing at 3 sorts of men; the Laymen,
Clergy, and Archbishop; to every of them it directs an increase of
commandments; to the first sort 5, to the second 11, to the third 13; the
compendium of which we will only manifest.

The Behedins or Laymens 5 precepts be these.

1. To cherish modesty and shame fastness: a virtue deterring all sorts of
ugly vices and concupiscence, as pride, revenge, theft, adultery, drunkenness,
and perfidy. The 2, to cherish fear. 3. To use premeditation in what they are
to do; that if bad, reject it; if good, to act it. 4. Each days first object
to be a memento of Gods love to urge our gratitude. 5. To pray daily to the
Sun, and nightly to the Moon, as the only 2 great lamps and witnesses, and
most opposite to the devil who delights in darkness.

The 11, given the Herboods, Daroos or Priests to practice, are these (the
other also of the Behedin they observe). 1. To be constant in that form of
worship set down precisely in the Zundevastaw. 2. Not to covet what belongs to
any other man. 3. To abhor lies. 4. Not to be worldly minded. 5. To learn
the Zundavastaw by rote. 6. To keep himself free from all manner of pollution.
7. To forgive all sorts of injuries. 8. To teach the Laity how to pray and
convene in adoration. 9. To license Matrimony. 10. To be frequent at Church.
11. Upon pain of fire eternal, to believe in no other law, neither to add
nor to diminish it.

3. The Distoore or Pope (never but one at once) has 13, and as he percedes
the rest in dignity, so is his life most strict and observable; he performs
not only his own but the two former Tables also. 1. He must never so much as
touch any profane thing or person, no not the Laymen or Daeroos of his own
belief, without washing or purifying. 2. He must do every thing having
relation to himself with his own hands, as planting, sowing, cooking, etc. 3.
That he duly receive his Tith or the Tenth of what the Layety are possessers
of. 4. That he avoid pomp and vainglory, but rather with his great income
do acts of charity. 5. That his house so conjoyne the Church, as he may be
there often and go and come without being much seen or taken notice of. 6. That
his washings be more frequent than others, his food purer, and that he refrain
his wives company during her pollution. 7. That he not only be perfect in the
Zertoost (a capite ad calcem) as is the Herbood, but also be of greatest
knowledge in the other parts, as Judicial and Natural Philosophy. 8. That his
diet be very moderate. 9. That he fear none but God. 10. That he tell every
man (how great soever) of his offenses. 11. That he distinguish twixt good and
counterfeit visions or fancies, and give right judgment. 12 That whenever
God reveals or communicates his goodness or glory to him in nightly visions,
he admire his mercy and keep them secret. 13. That the Pyree or holy fires
(that which Zertoost brought from heaven) be ever kindled, yea never
extinguish, till fire destroy the world: And that he pray (to and) over it.
This is the true contents of the Zundavast which holy Zertoost brought from
heaven. Declare we now their Feasts, Fasts, Weddings and Burialls.

They are tolerated all sorts of meat; but (in obedience to the Mahomitan and
Bannyan amongst whom they live) refrain Beef and Hog flesh: they seldom feed
together, lest they might participate one another impurity: each has his own
cap; and if any of his own Cast chance to use it, he washes it three times,
and forbeares it a good while after: they observe six solemn Festivalls
annually; the first called Meduserum, kept the 15 of Fere or February; 2.
Petusahan, on the 26 of Sheruar or April; 3. Yatrum, on the 26 of Mahar or
May; 4. Medearum, on the 16 of Deh or August, 5. Homespetamadum, on the 30 of
Spindamud or October; 6. Medusan, on the 11 of Adebese or December; all of them
in memory of the Creation and monthly benefits. After each of these Feasts
they eat but one small meal a day for five days after, and whensoe're that
lay men eat any flesh, they bring part to their Eggaree or Temple to pacify
the Lord, in that for their sustenance the lives of those good creatures are
annihilated. Now concerning the Fire they adore, it is in memory of that Zertoost
brought from heaven, wherein they memorize the vestalls, or rather in an apish
imitation of the Jewish law (the devil as near as may be, desiring to
counterfeit the Law of God) in the 6. of Levit. 13. where it is commanded that
the fire (that came from heaven) should be ever burning upon the Altar and
never go out. In Persia they had many Pyree of this vestall fire, most of
which were destroyed by Heraclius the Roman Emperor in his Wars with
Kozchoes (at that time Mahomet serving in his Army.) Some to this day are
remaining, having the Idolatrous Fire from 1000 years unextinguished. In Indya
also these banished Persee have their Eggarees or Temples, one of which is at
Nuncery (not far from Surratt) whose Fire has continued without fomenting
this 200 years: where note that this their God-fire is not composed of common
combustibles, as wood, straw, coals, slates, etc. nor blown by any bellows,
breath of man, wafting, or like profane things; No, it is compounded of sparks
flying from a hot burning tempered steel, and kindled either by lightning from
heaven, by an ignis fatuus, the beams from a burning glass, or such like;
for, but such only is proper for that their Antisbeheraun or Idol fire.

But if it chance the fire have need of cherishing, the Distoore and other
Laymen (at 12 foot distance) surround the holy Diety and after some gestures,
the Priests adds fuel and returning to the other people, altogether worship
it, beseeching it, that they may not only give it due reverence, but also
honor solemnly all other things that resemble it; as Sun, Moon, Stars, and
common fire, which also they so divinely estimate, that they hold it a most
ungodly part to spet in it, throw water into it, or put it to any vile or
unnecessary employment; but reverence wood and such things as it receives life
and vigor from.

The Baptism of these Heathen Idolaters is of this nature: so soon as it is
borne, the Daroo is called upon, who delays not, but being instructed in the
precise time of his Nativity, calculates his fortunes: the Daroo invents the
name, the mother imposes it: this done, they all together haste to the Eggaree
or Temple, where the Priest puts a little pure water into the barque of a holy
tree the name is Holme, the place it grows in, Yezd, a City in Persia not
far from Spahawn, where at this day are many of this religion, who upon the
mountain Albors, have a Pyree wherein is a Fire-god, which has never been
extinguished (they say from Gustasps time, contempory with Abraham) a tree,
Zertoost blessed and in this more memorable, that it never admits of any
shadow: the water out of this holy rind is powered upon the Infant, and a prayer
made that it may be cleansed from all impurity: at seven years age it is
confirmed by the Daroo, and made to say his prayers over the fire (but with a
cloth fastened about his head, which covers his mouth and nostrils lest his
sinful breath might taint the holy Fire,) drinks a little water, chaw's a
Pomgranat leaf, washes in a Tanck, clothes his naked body with a fine
Shuddero or linen reaching to his wast, ties a zone or girdle of Cushee or
Camells hair about his loins, woven with Inkle of the Herboods making (which
he wears ever after) and after a short prayer, that he may never prove an
Apostate or profane wretch, but continue a Fire-worshipper; eating no man's
meat, nor drinking no man's drink but his own; he is then blessed and held a
Persee most warrantable.

Their Marriages in brief are thus: distinguished into five orders. 1. Shaulan,
or a marrying of two young children agreed on by each parents, but unknown to
the children; the virtue being, that if either die they go to heaven. 2.
Chockerson, a second marriage. 3. Codesherahasan, when the woman is her own
chooser. 4. Ecksan, when a dead body (not being married before) is married. 5.
Ceterson, when having no sons, he adopts his daughters son, etc. the Coremony
this: at midnight the Daroo or Priest enters the house, (they wed not in
Churches) finds the two parties (to be married) upon a bed together; opposite
to each other stands two Churchmen with Ryce in their hands (the Emblem of
fruitfulness:) then first, one laying his forefinger on the Brides forehead,
he asks if she be willing to take that man to be her Husband, who saying yea:
the like rite and question is by the other Priest done to the man; the
Bridegroom makes a promise to infeoff her in a certain number of Dynaes: she
replies, she and all she has is his; the Priests then scatter the Ryce upon
their heads and pray, that they may multiply as Ryce; the woman's parents give
the Dowry, and eight days are spent in joviality and complement.

Their Funerals are these: They put the dead body into a winding sheet, all
the way his kindred beat themselves but in great silence till they come within
50 or 100 paces of the burial place: where the Herbood or Priest meets them
(observing ten foot distance) attired in a yellow scarf and a thin Turbant:
the Necesselars or bearers carry the corpse upon an iron Beer (wood is
forbidden, in that it is sacred to the fire) to a little Shed or Furnace, where
(so soon as some mistique Antiques are acted) they hoyse it up to the top of a
round stone building, twelve foot high and 80 in circuit: the entrance is only
at the N. E. side, where through a small grate or hole they conveigh the
carcass into a common Monument, the good men into one, the bad into another;
it is flat above, wholly open, plaistered with smooth white loame, hard and smooth
like that of Paris; in the midst thereof is a hole descending to the bottom,
made to let in the putrefaction issuing from the melted bodies, which are
there-upon laid naked in two rows, exposed to the Suns flaming rage, and
merciless appetite of ravening Vultures, who commonly are fed by these
carcases, tearing the raw flesh asunder, and deforming it in an ugly sort; so
that the abominable stink of those unburied bodies (in some places 300) is so
loathsome and strong, that (did not a desire to see strange sights allure a
Traveller) they would prove worse seen than spoken of; Nor do the Persees
delight that any stranger should go op to view them.

The Burial place of the Persees in India.


The History of the great Mogull.
LEt us now into Industan, and by the best helps and enquiries we can make,
weave the variable History of the great Mogulls; their pedigree; their descent
from Tartary: their several conquests and success in Indya; with other most
remarkable occurrents happening there, these last 50 years: also the description
of such Cities, Provinces, and Forts as either enrich or support that glorious
Empire: the knowing which may peradventure (I doubt it not) find gracious
acceptance amongst the more ingenuous, who know that man is the compendium of
the world, and admirable in his Designs, which yet are crossed by the awful
finger of God, when men intend that which thwarts his providence. Nor can you
lend your ears to any nobler part of the Universe, which for spatiousnesse,
abundance of fair Towns, numberless Inhabitants, infinite treasure, mines,
food and all sorts of Merchandises, exceeds all Kings and Potentates in the
Mohammedan world: his vast (but well compacted) Monarchy, extending East and
West to the Bengalan Gulf and Indian Ocean. The South to the Decan and
Mallabar; North and North West to the Maurenahar Tartar, and Persian: 2600
miles some ways, 5000 in cicuit: in which he has 38 large Provinces; rich and
containing the rest are Gujurat (where we now are,) Malva, Pengab, Bengala, and
part of Decanee, ( Ariacae in Ptol.) together comprehending 30 large Cities,
3000 walled Towns, and such Castles as for Natural defenses seem impregnable;
his yearly revenue is ordinarily accounted 50 crow of roopees; each crow is a
hundred leck, a leck is a hundred thousand roopees, a roopee is 2 s. 3 pence,
sometimes 2 s. six pence. Howbeit, out of this prodigious rent, goes yearly
many great payments: to his Leiftenants of Provinces, and Vmbraves of Towns
and Forts; having also in continual pay three hundred thousand Horse, and 2000
Elephants, fed with Donna or Poulse boiled with Butter and unrefined Sugar; to
these only, his Fiscall or Treasurer yearly giving out above forty millions
of crowns; his continual wars are no less chargeable.

The pedigree of these Mogulls is thus upon their own seals blazoned. 1.
Aben-Emyr-Temir-Saheb-Queran (i.e. Tamberlane, great Prince of the four
quarters of the world:) 2. Aben-Miram-Sha: 3. Aben Mirza Sultan Mohummed: 4.
Aben Sultan Abusaid: 5. Aben mirza-Emir-sha: 6. Aben Baber-potshaugh: 7. Aben
Homayon potshaw: 8, Aben Ecbar, called also Abdul fetta ghelaladyn Mahumed
Achbar: 9. Shaw Selim or Aben Almozapher Nordin Iangheer potshaugh Gazi: 10.
Sultan Curroon or Shaw Iehan, now called Sultan potshaugh Bedin Mohumet.

They have a larger genealogy; from Cingis-chan a Prince of Tartary (whom some
have feigned) son of Babur, son of Portan, of Philcan, of Phonama, of
Bizanbeg, of Shaw-dub-chan, of Tomincan, of Bubacan, son of Buzamer all of
them brave men as story warrants us.

Cingis-chan (as Haithon and others say, his contemporaries) was at first by
profession a Vulcan or Blacksmith, by condition a good honest simple man: but
the influence of heaven new molded him, in little time in stead of his hammer,
putting into his hands the Globe and Scepter: his ambitious thoughts begun from
the frequent encouragements a man in white Armor (mounted upon a white
phantasma) gave him, promising his help, and stimulating his courage, tells
the vision to some chief hoords or cantons, who give credit to his destiny and
make him their general; he shows quickly how his gross metal was refined
by a better fire, with a troop of Mogli (one of the 7 hoords) marching South
subduing as far as mount Belgian, part of Imaus, at this day called Nigrakott,
and Copizat by the Indians; there the sea stopped his carriere, but he prostrates
himself and 9 times over fumbles out his prayers: the effect follows; the
hill clove asunder, the sea parts in two and yields them 9 foot safe passage:
but being upon the continent he hammers out his way with rusty iron, doing such
mavelous feats of Arms as to a good faith seems wonderful. I shall as
briefly as may be trace his posterity to Tamberlane: for from his grand-sonnes,
we must borrow our maine history.

Cingis-chan King of the South-East Tartar after some victories against the
Russe, and Tartarrs, dyed at Ketoa kotan, A.M. 1596. A.D 1228. Heg. 608.
An. 1228. of the Hegira 608. having divided amongst his 4 sons what was his by
birth or conquest. To Tusha-chan he gave the provinces royal of D'hast,
Kapecha, Rhoz' and Abulgharr; to Chagatay-cawn, Maurenahar, Aygor and Chorazan;
to Ogg, part of Bactria and Caucasus; to Tuli-chan, his Jewels and Treasure.
Tusha or Tuxichan dyed two years after his father; Kagathay dyed in the year
1242, both of them without issue; whereby, their Seigniories descended upon
Ogg', or Ogtay-chawn, who in all his affairs at home and abroad really proved
himself the son of Cingis-chan; compelling all the Persian Monarchy as far
as Babylon to acknowledge him their sovereign, but in the year 1252 was
conquered by death, followed the fate of his predecessors, commended his
Monarchy to his infant son Gayuc-chan, and him to be ordered by the care and
providence of Minchonna his wife, but in the third year, impartial death called
him also away, and gave Manchu-cawn son to Tuli-cawn (youngest Tetrarch)
advantage to claim the sovereignty of all, by right of surviving succession.

This young Prince (by such an accident mounted to the Imperial greatness)
perceives the eyes of all about him inflamed with envy, and threatening his
expulsion, enraged by the villainy of some that whisperd out his guilt in the
last infants death: so that (albeit he was armd with integrity and a just
Title) he contracts for his defense with some confining potentates, and gave
them the honor and command of several provinces of his Empire upon condition
they would hold of him in chief, and be ready upon all occasions to defend
him; To Rablay-cawn he gave Ketoachotan and the royal City Cambaleck: to
Vlakuc-cawn (his brother,) Persia, Chusistan, and Cherman: and to Chun-cawn,
Gaznehen: but ere he had occasion to try the malice and inconstancy of his men
or chance of war, death summond him away, Anno 1260 but not before he had
nominated Vlacuk-cawn for Emperor; who proved of another spirit, his best
delight being to dance in Armor to Bellonaes Trumpe, and to defend his own in
despite of all his adversaries by his own virtue, without secundary props or
other allyances: he first quiets his domestic broils composing peace at home,
then magnifies his excellencies in foreign parts, in circling and adding to
the luster of his dyadem, Babylon, a great part of Arabia, and in Syria, Aleppo
and Damascus; all which, during his life he kept in subjection and loyalty, and
ruled with much magnificence, to the year 1270. when, (by the extremity of his
disease finding death at hand) he calls his 3 sons before him, exhorts them
to unity, divides his lands among them, dies, and at Meragah 15 farsangs from
Tauris was solemnly buried. Habkay-cawn the eldest, had the provinces of
Hyerac, Mozendram, and Korazan; (comprehending Medya, Parthya, Hyrcania,
Bactria, and Sogdiana.) To Hya-Shawmet, Aro and Adarbayon (part of Armenia and
Iberia comprizing Salmas, Coy, Nazivan, Maraga and Merent, Cities of quality.)
To Tawdon-cawn the Seigniories of Dyarbec and Rabaion (or Mesopotamia, part of
Syria and what was made fruitful by Euphrates and Tygris.) And to his sons by
another venture, Nicador-oglan and Targahe-cawn, he gave money portions.
Habkay-cawn, that year dyed at Hamadan in Persia, and made protector to his
son, Nycador-Oglan, A.M. 5245. A.D. 1275. A. Heg. 655.
who so long and with such delight represented the young King, that by a
divellish art and ambition he sent him to an untimely grave, and establishes
himself by name of Hameth-cawn, but all his reign is so pursued by divine
vengeance, that in the year 1275 he dies mad and is buried at Cashan: in his
place, came the right heir (from banishment) Argon-cawn, who by the people is
joyfully welcomed, and at his Coronation assumes the name Tangador-habkay
zedda, son to Habkay-cawn. This man swayed the Scepter 5 years with much
tyranny, not only massacring Nycadors sons and alliances, but amongst the
Innocent bathed his sword in blood, so that he became hateful to his own,
and stimulated the Parthian to revenge, by whom in a battle he is overcome,
and by Argon-chan upbraided with his cruelty, yea to compensate the like
measure, is cruelly tormented, his belly ripped open, and his guts given to the
dogs. To Tangador (the inveterate Enemy of all Christians) succeeds his
brother Giviatoc-chan, who in the fourth year of his reign perished by
Balduc-chan his Uncle, who also after five years rule died issue-lesse. Badu
son of Targahe youngest son to Vlacuk-chan, by assent of all that Nation
succeeding in the throne of greatness, whose affections he answered with so
much respect, clemency, and care, that never any before him was more beloved
and honored: howbeit, when he openly professed himself to be a Christian, the
peoples regard drew back, and many treasons (fomented by Satan) were hatched
against him, so that at last he was slain (or rather martyred) by Gazun-chan,
Cozen to Tangador, who had small cause to brag of his treachery, or time to
surfeit of his glory; for, by the permissive hand of God, in Cazbyn, when he
lest suspected treason, he is wounded to death by his own houshold-servants
Anno 1305, and of the Hegira 685, and lay long time unburied.

His brother Aliaptu Abuzayd (or Mahumet ben Argon) by many attempts and shows
of valor purchased the restless Diadem: to whom, followed Hoharo-mirza, or
Abusaid Bahador-chan anno 1337, who consumed his life in venerous exercises: so
that for want of issue, the Kingdom became a Theater of many troubles, no
less than 30 at one time contending for the Sovereignty: whereby the
distressed people were compelled to look for help from home: And none more safe
to trust to, than the Lord of Samerchand, Tamberlayne, much famoused for his
justice and victories, against the Sarmatique Tartar, Praecopense, and
Chynaeses. Him they invocate by many presents of their love, and a letter
filled with hideous complaints, describing their miseries, the confusion of
their Kingdom, and insufferable pride of the thirty competitors. The Scythic
Emperor promises his best aid, and with fifty thousand horse forthwith enters
Persia, without doing any hurt, save against the Tyrants, all whom he
persecuted with such fury, that in three months (by the industry of the
Inhabitants) they are all taken and made to quaffe their farewell in the bitter
cup of tormenting Death: for which, the people urged Tamberlayne to accept the
Diadem, and to establish it by all means possible in his posterity. But after
seven and twenty years most honorable and succesfull government (in that time
captivating the great Turk Bajazet, whom he brought away in an iron Cage,
subduing all Asia; yea, in eight years conquering more Kingdoms and Provinces
than the Romans did in eight hundred:) this Monarch of the Asiatique world is
subjected by imperious Death, and intombed anno 1405, of the Heg. 785. at Anzar
in Cathayo: leaving his sons and grand children to inherit his victories:
Ioon-gwyr, Hameth-cheque, Myramsha, and Mirza-sharock, by some called Soutochio
and Letrochio; of which, Ioon gwir died (three years before his father,) in
Palestine, leaving two sons Mamet Sultan, and Pyr-Mahomet; which Pir Mahomet
was by his Grandsire placed in Gaznehen and Industan, where he ruled till Pir
Ally slew him villanously. Hameth Chec was slain in Laurestan, some say in his
fathers last combat with Bajazet. Myramsha, the third son, was slain in
battle anno 1480 by Chara-Issuff the Turkoman in Aderbayon (but left issue
Sultan Mahumed from whom the great Mogul is descended:) and Mirza-Sharoc the
youngest of Tamerlans sons (surviving the other) held most parts of the
Empire, till dying in the year 1447, he left Aberdayon (or part of Media) to
Mirza Ioonsha son of Kara-Issuf the Turk new entered Persia. Whiles Miramsha's
issue preserve the splendor and magnificence of the Tartarian Emperor.
Myramsha (by some called Allan-Chan) left issue (as is said) Mahumet, called
Aben Mirza Sultan Mahomet, who died anno 1453, leaving to his son Barchan (at
his Coronation new named Mirza Sultan Abuzaed) many rich and spacious
Provinces, as Badashon, Gaznehen, Cabul, Sistan, Kerman, Chorazan, and Khoemuz:
all which were not sufficient by bribe not force to secure him against the
incensed Persian, who having endured much affliction for trial of conquest, at
last, Ioonsha with Acen Ally his son, grand son to Kara Issuff were beaten
down, and Vsan Cassan (called also Acembeg) Lord of the White Sheep,
governed. Under this Vsan Cassan (an Arminian) the people fall upon Sultan
Abusaid, and in a pitched field vanquish him and eighty thousand men, himself
slain, three hundred Elephants taken, and all his Countries ransacked: yet by
reason of many discords amongst the Persians, they revived and set Abusaids
son upon the Throne by name of Aben Mirza hameth cheque, whose four and
twenty years were spent in sweet ease and plenty. At's death his Empire
descends anno 1493 upon his brothers son Babur Mirza, named upon the addition
of his greatness, Aben Babur Padshaw; entitled prince of Maurenahar, Balke
and Samerchand; but, in the seventh year of his reign is expeld his Kingdom
by practice and conspiracy of Sha-Mahumed (called also Sha beg chan) who laid
claim to the Crown, pretending he was son and true heir of
Aben-Mirza-hameth-cheque late Emperor, being (as he said) by craft stolen
from his Nurse, and conveyed amongst the Ouzbeag Tartars, whence (for some
offense he had made) he fled with his lawless troops, enters Indya and
attempts the conquest; where after he had tyrannized long time, A.M. 5502.
A.D. 1532. A. Heg 912.
was in the year 1532, of the Mohammedan account 912, sore against his will,
compelled to trot the knotty path of inevitable destiny, leaving no issue; so
that the Crown descended by right of Inheritance upon the eldest son of Aben
Babur, Homayon by name, who suffered no small affliction by the malice and
envy of Mirza Kameron his younger brother, that confederated with Tzeerchan,
and by long practice forced him into Persia, where he was royally entertained,
and after three months stay sent with great and royal succors back again.

This also is remarkable (the story of it is painted in Lohor palace) that king
Badur thirsting after the conquest of Indya, disguises himself and thirty
Noble men in his company in the habit of Kalenders or Friars, as if they were
upon a Rummery or pilgrimage. The better by this craft to epsy their
advantage: but being in Delly (the greatest City of the Potan King) could not
so behave themselves but that Tzecander the King discovered them, who pardoned
them upon condition they would swear never to attempt the conquest during
either of their lives. But when both were dead, Homayon ( Baburs son) entered
and dispossessed Abram and Shec-Sha-Selym Secanders sons) of the Diadem.
Howbeit, Tzeerchan a brave Bengalan Prince, fights against this new come
Tartar, and foiles his Army near Ganges forcing him into Persia, where he
married the Kings sister, and with her and Byram chan, and two hundred horse
and returns, is reseated in Delly, and acknowledged King.

Homayon (son of Babur great-grand-son of Termir-Lan or Tamberlain) being
re-invested with the Imperial Title and Diadem of Indostan by means of Tamas
the Persian King, and returned triumphant by the overthrow of Tzeer-chawn the
intruding King of Patan, who anno dom. 1550. and of the Hegira or Mahomitan
account 960. died disconsolate. Homayon, I say after he had committed his
eldest son Abdul Fetta Gelaladin Mahomet (a while after surnamed Eckbar) to the
trust and care of Beyranghano chawn, (a discreet and valiant man) being in
Delly, having one evening chawed too much sense confounding Opium, hasting to
his Orisons, upon the watchword from a high Tower, suddenly he slipped down
forty steps or degrees, which so bruised him, that after three days torment he
deceased, leaving Achbar his son inheritor to his Greatness and miseries. A.M.
5522. A.D. 1552. A. Hcy. 932
This happened in the year of our Lord God 1552. from which time, to this year
out of our own and Belgic fragments congested by de Laet, I think it partly
convenient with our other passages and observations of Indya to present these,
which to the observant may prove acceptable.

Ecbar, having by help of Beyrangano-Kawn, and Chawn-Channa his son, dispeld
some clouds caused by Abdal-Chawn, was with solemnity crowned King or great
Mogul in Delly; after which, he bent his whole endeavors to enlarge his
Territories and make known, that he was verily the great grand son of
victorious Teymerlan. In the first, taking full revenge of Hemow, who had
formerly chased Turdichan, but three months after by mischance of war coming
under command of Badur chawn, his head is cut off and elevated in Delly, and
that Province for some time quieted: then, by Ally Cooclinchan he subdues Doab
(by some called Sanbal a Province surrounded by Ieminy and Ganges, fruitful
and well peopled:) at that time Beyramgano-chan (otherwise called Byramchan the
Persian) aging fast and tired with the fopperies of this world, having well
discharged the trust reposed by his old Master, and finding Ecbar wary and
valiant to regard the dignity of his Empire, obtaines leave to spend the
residue of his time at Mahomets Sepulcher, in contemplation: but (in his
Roomery in the way to Medina) at Pathang in Cambaya is wounded to death by an
obscure slave of his, whose father he had formerly slain, so that by Abdal
Radgee his son (not fourteen years old) and much sad company this great
Captain is brought back to Agray, and there buried: Ecbar laments his death
though thought an Agent, but nothing can recover him: he labors to forget it,
and spends some time in building the Castle at Agra, formerly of mud, but by
him pulled down and so altered, that it scarce admits comparison through all
Asia: it is of durable stone, polisht and so spacious that it comprehends three
miles circular, is built upon the pleasant banks of Shemeny, circled with a
strong stone wall, moated, and to be entered by many draw Bridges; has four
brave gates, many bulwarks and counterscarps to defend it.

Agray (from Surat East seven hundred and seventy miles) the Navel of Agra^
the Moguls territories, and Empress of Indya, has 28 degr. 37 min. North
latit. is watered by Ieminy ( Iomanes in Pliny, and Hynamanes in Poliaenus his
8 lib. Semiramidis) which from Delly glides hither, and commixing with Ganges,
flows into the Bengalan Sea. Agra was of old called Nagra, and ere that,
Dionysia; whence some say 'twas founded by Bacchus: but I believe it not;
partly, in that Fettipore till of late (no longer than fifty years ago) bore
away the fame for beauty and grandeur, and in that Bacchus (says S. Augustine)
was contemporary with Moses in the year from Adam 2515: rather from the river
Agranis, which hence streams into Ganges, as Arrian lib. de Indicis has it. The
shape is semilunary, like London: the streets long and narrow, and nasty; of
seven miles continuance: in part it is walled about, the ditch the remainder,
which too often smells infectiously. From Agra to Lahore (through a delicate shade
of trees) are five hundred miles. To Brampore one thousand; to Asmeer two
hundred; to Surat seven hundred and seventy.

Radgee Rana the most potent and noble Prince of Indya, at this time lost his
strong and stately Castle Chyttor, by treason of Zimet Padsha his substitute,
not content therewith, till he had made many inroades into Gujurat in contempt
of the Moguls forces. Echar is glad of the occasion, hasting with fifty
thousand horse to be revenged. Some months he spent in besieging it, but so
fruitlesly, that he attempts the conquest by stratagem, undermining the Fort,
and to the admiration and terror of the besieged, blows it up with powder,
causing such a breach as himself and twenty thousand men immediately entered
pel-mel with such haste and fury, that Zimet the rebel perceiving treaty of no
value, gathering in one his Family, consumed himself and them in flames, to
prevent the tortures provided for him by Ecbar, and Mardout his enraged Master.
In this sort this famous Fort is taken, which Aladin by twelve years siege
could do no hurt to. A victory so great and valuable, that Eckbar causes it be
expressed in sculpture, and for a Trophy placed in Agra as a wonder. He had no
time to surfeit of this victory, receiving letters from Rajea Bagwander Viceroy
of Lahore, that Mirza Mamet Hagee his brother with thirty thousand horse out of
Kabul, had attempted to prey upon Lahore: Ecbar delays no time, but with his
Army presents himself so suddenly to the Enemy, that without any resistance
or stay Mahomet flies away, leaving his men and camp to the rage of Ecbars
company.

This occasion drew the King to view all advantageous places of defense, which
he both bettered by his care, and gave them in charge to such he trusted. He
also takes a survay of Pang-Ob, out of which he is called by letters from his
mother in Agra, assuring him of the rebellion of Badur-kawn Ally-Kooli-Kawn and
Zemaen, sent that spring against the Patanians, whom in Doab they put to
flight, at Sambel also, and at Lachnoun got a greater victory, and three weeks
after, at Ioonpore utterly defeated them, subduing to the Mogul all such
Provinces as lie ingirt 'twixt Ganges and Tsatsa, conquests of so great note,
that they grew efflated beyond measure, conceiting all Indostan under like
hazard, and which they resolved to make trial of. But the reward and destiny
due to Traitors overtakes them: for Ecbar by swift marches long before the
Rebels expected him pitches on the East of Ieminy (the river at Agra) which
wounded the adverse part with such amazement, that forfeiting the memory of
their passed victories, they begin a shameful flight; Ecbar greedily pursues
them, beating down the silly men immeasurably, and after long pursuit, the
heads are taken: Allyculi-cawn is trodden under foot by the enraged horses, and
Badur-cawn (by Ecbars command and in his sight) strangled: this done, Ganganna
is sent to Ioonpore against Mirza Sulyman and the King retreats to Agra, where,
he fancies a pilgrimage to Asmeer a hundred and thirty course or two hundred
English miles distant thence, by invocation of Mandee a reverent Hodgee or
disciple of Mahomet, by his favor to obtain some issue masculine; after much
foot toil (at every miles end a fair stone being pitched to rest upon, as yet
remaining) he gets thither, where bare foot very devoutly he entreats dead
Mondee for children: this Prophet is intombed in a rich and stately monument,
graced with 3 fair Courts, each paved with singular good stone, the Fabric
(after the Persian mode) polisht and pargetted in Mosaic order. Asmeer, is
under 25 degr. 15 min. North lat. seated upon a high impregnable mount, the
greater part of the City being below, Asmeer.
fairly built, of small value in resistance, yet moated and wald about with
solid stone; not much distant is Godah, once, the habitacle and seat of the
valiant Rashboot: the country is champaigne and very fruitfully, in many places
affoording the ruins of much antique magnificence, time and war made desolate
and obscured: these, Ecbar coupled to the rest of his spacious Empire. Ecbar by
this has made an end of his oblations, and in his return visits a holy Derwis,
Siet Selym by name, who took it for so great a favor, that out of his
delphick notions, he foretold the Mogul how ere long he should be father of
three gallant men children; it proved so, in which regard, his first borne
(from the Dervys) is called Selym; after, Sha Selym: the other two, Chan Morad
or Amurath, and D'haen-sha or Danyell: a prophecy so grateful to Ecbar the
Mogul, that there he consecrates a brave and magnifique Mosque, walls the old
town Tzickerin or Sycary, and from this holy occasion new names it Fettipore
i.e. a place of pleasure; yea grew so affected to it, that he added a palace
for himself and a Buzzar, Fettipore
scarce out-beautified by any other in the Orient, and had made it the
Metropolis had the river affected him, by whose unwholsomnesse he forsook it,
from whence ruin and neglect have moatheaten her, at this day prostrate and
become the object of danger and misery; it is from Agra eighteen miles English.

Whiles things were in this sort digesting, news comes to King Ecbar (then in
Fettipore) that a great rebellion was begun in Gujurat by Ebrahim Hossen,
Mirza-cawn, Mahomet Hossen and Ioon-cawn, who had most audaciously forraged as
far as Baroch and were marching to Amadavad, hoping with his troops of
Thieves and Coolyes to make a prey of that Imperial City.

Amadavad, undoubtedly seems to me, Amadavad.
to be that City Amacastis in Ptol Amadavastis in Arrhian. Howbeit, some say it
has denomination from King Hamet who in the year of Mahomet 375 made it large
and beautiful: the pole Articke is there elevated 23 degrees 18 minutes: it is
at this present the Megapolis of Cambaya or Guzurat, watered by a sweet river
and circled by a beautiful strong stone wall of six miles compass, well and
orderly advanced with many pretty Towers and a dozen Posterns: out of which few
pass or repasse without a Pass, fearing treason from Prince Badur, who in our
times with a hundred thousand horse ransackt Cambaya thirty seven courses
hence, and daily threatens this fair City. The streets are many, pretty large
and comely; most shops redundant with Aromatic gummes, perfumes and spices;
silks, cotton, callicoes, and choice of Indian and China rarities, owned and
sold by the abstemious, fair spoken, crafty Bannians, who here surpass for
number the other Inhabitants: of most note is the Buzzar, rich and uniforme;
the Castle is strong, large, moated; and the receiving place of the Cambayan
Governor: the houses in general are of Sunne-burnt bricks, low, large and
tarrassed: adjoining, is seen the momument of a certain pedagogue, so deerly
beloved by Sha-Reer the King, that by a stately Mausoleum he strove to make him
seem immortal: both building and pavement are of well polishtmarble. It has 3
Courts of great beauty and respect, one of them fastidious in four hundred
porphirian pillars framed in Corinthiack architecture: conjoyning, is a Tanck
of refreshing water, compassed with cloisters adorned with spacious windows,
most of which, give the observer a delicate horizon: at Sesques also (one
hours riding thence) are seen the Dormitories of many Cambayan Potentates,
lodged in a brave and princely Temple, much resorted to by the Idolatrous
Vannyans: and two miles nearer the City, behold the gardens and palace of
Chawn Chonna son to the great Byramchan the Persian; an Indian Ombrave, by
whose valor of late years the last of the Cambayan Kings in that very place
by loss of his life, gave conquest to this warrior, and dominion to Ecbar the
Mogull his Master. But return we to Ecbar; who no sooner received intelligence
of Hossens rebellion, but with incredible haste, winged with fury, he gets
thither (each twenty four hours posting seventy, in seven days four hundred
courses) and gives those rebels battle at Titans first uprising, and with
their noise and clamor so terrifies them, that after small resistance their
whole Army is disordered, many slain, and by a fresh supply of twelve thousand
Horse led by Chan Goga an expert soldier, after some skirmish they are chased,
and in flight Ebrahim Hossen and Mirza-cawn slain, Mohomet Hossen taken
prisoner and beheaded; and by this advantage not only Amadavar recovered and is
fortified, but Surat also conquered and most of Guzurat made subject to Ecbars
diadem: this done, he returns Crowned with Triumph, and begins the Castle in
Agray, built of such good stone, made so large and vast, that she may deserve
the Title of princess of Asia: twelve years scarce finished it, tho twelve
hundred at some time were employed about it: he expended fifty thousand crow of
Tacks* (a crow is a hundred lack, The Castle of Agra built.
each lack a hundred thousand) thirty, sometime twenty tack make one roopee; a
roopee is two shillings three pence, so that accounting but twenty tack to a
roopee, the total he disbursed, amounts to two millions and five hundred
thousand roopees: at Fettipore, at that time also he spent about the wall and
palace a millions and five hundred thousand roopees, in all, four million: at
Tzekander likewise, three course (or five miles from Agra as we go to Labor)
the Mousoleum of the great Mogulls, begun by Ecbar, augmented by Iangheer his
son, and yet scarce finished, having already consumed fourteen millions of
roopees in that wonder of India. It would require an exact description, in
little thus. The place is Scander, a place where the greatest of Kings made his
ne plus. Ecbar the most magnifique of Tamberlans race is here buried: it is a
Mausoleum of four large squares, each about three hundred paces; the material
is free stone, polisht, at each Angle a small Tower of parti-colored marble;
ten foot higher is another tarrasse, on every side beautified with three
Towers; the third gallery has two on each side; the fourth, one; the fifth,
half; and a small square gallery mounting to a royal pyree; within, is the
mummy of Ecbar bedded in a coffin of pure gold, the whole structure is built in
midst a spacious and curious garden, surrounded with a wall of red stone, and
in that a brave rail mounted by six stairs, which discovers a little garden,
but exquisitely beautiful and odorifferous. Whiles these vast buildings were
erecting, Ganganna prosecutes Mirza Sulyman, who (whether of grief or age is
doubted) dyed suddenly, commending the success to Skander his son, in short
time made away by rascal conspirators, in's place Douwett, Bazat-cawn son, a
man both effeminate and hated, so that now occasion gave it self richly for
Ecbar to linck Bengala to his Crown Imperial: he apprehends it, and with a
brave army of fifty thousand horse and six hundred Elephants marches against
the Pathan and is past Ganges ere Sha-Douwet has notice of his coming, which
when he is assured of, sends Radgee B'han with 20000 horse to encounter them:
twixt Ziotsa and Moheb-Alli-poor they affront one another, and for three hours
skirmish gallantly, but Ecbar at length has the mastery and courageously
pursues them to Pathan, where King Douwet had fortified. Ecbar by no means
could commove them to battle, nor in 3 months siege enter the City, for Patan
is both great and well fortified, yet in the fourth he forces it, giving it as
a prey to his men, who used all sort of hostill violence, the unlucky King
buried in drink, all that time senseless of any loss, till too late to repent
it, is convaied away in a boat, at three days end made headless, and sent to
Ecbar, as a Simbol of their love and his vanity: the King having thus
fortunately proceeded in Bengala, goes back to Fettipore, where whiles he
oversees his buildings, is mindful to increase and bring to maturity his
Empire which then was but in adolescency, and to that end by the valor and
vigilance of Rustan-cawn and Zadoc-cawn the strong Castle Rhantipore is taken
from the Radgees who of many hundred years had lorded it; after which, the
Castle Rota or Roughtaz in Berar in Bengala (some think Oreophanta of old) by
a merry slight or stratagem: this Castle for many ages has acknowledged the
Radgee her Governor, her building both from Art and Nature excellent and
impregnable: Rotas.
it is seated upon a perpendicular hill, the ascent cut oblique out of the firm
rock for three miles continuance, the rest round about, precipitious; the top
is a plain of eight miles every way, the circuit twenty four, healthy,
wealthy, and abounding in all good things necessary, as water, corn, fruits,
wood, and sixteen villages included by the Castle wall, which gives the
defense twofold wonderful; in a word, not any Fort or Castle in Asia (or it
may be in the universe) is more delightful or of greater strength and safety.

This, the great Mogull looks upon with a lustful eye, imeasurably thirsting
after it, but knows neither by bribe nor valor how to compass it; policy
must actuate, and tho he comprehends no way, yet ceases not to torture his
invention, till his bombast is spent and the enterprise undertaken by
Mohebally-cawn a wise and daring Captain, who having leave, without
acquainting Ecbar or any other with his fantasies, proceeds with four hundred
young men, armd with cryzes, and his Seraglio in two hundred doolaes or cajuaes
as if he were upon a Journey into Bengala: and in this order passing on, when
he came within view of the Castle, he shows a Rajea his concubines and bribes
him to procure leave of the Lord above, that in regard of his haste he might
with safety leave there his Seralio till his return, which he would take as a
real favor and study to remunerate: the message is delivered, the Radgee (who
loved women well) entertains the motion, and Ally-cawn imparting the secret to
a prudent Eunuch, disroabs the women; and with their apparel clothes himself
and the four hundred youths, commanding the women in masculine attire to
continue the Journey to Orixa, the Eunuchs, twelve in number, with bows and
arrows guard the Selaglio and by the Radgees command are entered (but like
Synons horse into wretched Troy:) for, Ally-cawn (giving the word) the Doolaes
are dismounted, and out of which, the warlike Amazons. In the first place they
kill the porters of the Castle gate, then with incredible speed and courage
assail the astonished Inhabitants, whom they take prisoners, and in the end the
Radgee himself, who (to prevent excuse) they send to Erebus: thus is this
Castle won, which (but by stratagem) was not to be taken by all the hostile
force of India. Ecbar hears it with incredible delight, and joys the more in
his belief, when he viewes that mass of treasure sent him thence by Ally-cawn
to confirm the conquest. After which the invincible Castle Ieloore is by
Gidney-cawn an Apostat Mohammedan betrayed to the Mogull tho to his own brothers
confusion. Ieloor taken.
The fame thereof afflicts many Princes of the Rajeas, each of them laboring
to conserve their own against this overspreading Tartar: some, courageously
defy his greatness, of which rank is Roop Mathii, a Lady both fair and
valiant; her face was fitter to subdue Mars then any Javelin, yet she confides
more in her lance than in her beauty; so that, cheering up her obedient
troops, very bravely she spoils the Mogulls dominions, but in the midst of
her boast and hopes she is affronted by Adam-cawn, a hard-hearted warrior,
who with his regiment so furiously opposed her, that most of her Pattans were
slain, and her self (tho she might have lived) to prevent shame and
inchastity, by poison gave over being: Masoffer-cawn also this year 1588, of
the Hegira 968 conspires against Ecbar, in Guzurat: first he strangles Gotobdas
Mamet-cawn the Kings Viceroy in Amadabat and some Ombraves, and then seizes
upon all the Forts and advantageous places for the bettering his villainous
rebellion; but by Abdall Radgee ( Beirangana-cawns son) is vanquished, and
fearing to obtain pardon destroyed himself as did the late named Amazon. The
report of whose death was no sooner bruited, but the fame also of Mirza Mahomet
Hackim (brother to Ecbar) his death, occasions Ecbar to assure himself of
Cabul, which during Hackims life was impossible; but using with all kind
respect his wives and children, yea giving Chabec-cawn, Hametbeg and Mamet
Maxuen-cawn his best Vmbraves large wages and command in Mesulipatan, Orixa and
other places; at the same time Zebbar-cawn (late President of Kabul and ovated
for his victory that year against Maxuen-cawn, Bama-cawn and other rebels in
Bengala) is made Viceroy of that Province, and Radzia Thormiel called to
Fettipore, such time as Radgee Ramgiend Lord of Bando (a Province adjoining to
Agra, redundant only in sand and stones) by persuasion of Radgee Bhyrmiel
presents himself to Ecbar at Fettipore, and inrolls his country as a member
of the Mogulls Seigniory, by whose example many other petty Gentile Kings came
and submitted unto Ecbar, and yearly (as a symbol of their love and
acknowledgement of subjection) present him their daughters to be his
concubines; to the Mogull a grateful tribute: and for their better
satisfaction to court them in, at Praije (an 110 course from Agra, Chrysoborca
in Pliny;) advances a triumphant palace upon a promontory, where Ieminy
empties her self into Ganges; the material is hard stone, framed and pollisht
with great beauty, and calls it Elabasse; in nothing more observable, Elabass
builded.
then a deep dark cave, in which are preserved (as holy relics) diverse
deformed Pagotha's, rediculously supposed Babba Adam, Mamma Evah, Seth, Enosh
and Methuselah, whom they affirm were created and lived here; and to whom
(from all parts of India) resort innumerable Bannyans for benediction: first
purifying themselves in Ganges (reputed holy, and no doubt excellent, for we
find that a pint of Ganges water weighes less by an ounce then any other
water) and shaving off all hair as unclean excrements, and without them
meritorious: the whole, is surrounded with a triple wall; the first, of
quadrated red stones and highest; the inmost of white, retaining an Obeliske
fifty cubits high, and as many under ground to make it durable; fixed there it
may be by proud Alexander. In this (which many Potan Kings formerly in vain
attempted by reason of the rivers) the King spent a myriad and two hundred
thousand of roopees. Here also they show a holy Tree, which many Potan Kings
have sought to eradicate and destroy, but never could prevail in it. Near
Elabasse also is worth our seeing the stately Tomb which Iangheer built for
his first wife ( Raja Mamisenghs sister) who poisoned her self upon the report
of her son Sultan Gushroes rebellion.

The Mogulls affairs succeeding thus fortunately, no clouds, no tumults
appearing, Ecbar broaches new Chymeraes, and fancies the entire conquest of
Purop, Patan, Chormandel, yea of all Bengala to the South; and to stretch his
Empire North as far as Tartary: to further which, he hears, that Abdul-cawn,
son and heir to Skander-chan King of Maurenahar (part of Tartary) was
coming to Fettipore to visit him; he prevents the most part of his journey,
and meets him at Lahore; where, he was with much ceremony entertained, but
after small stay departed home again. News being brought King Achbar that
Mirsa Sharoph in Badaxan had been miserably abused by the Ouzbeg Tattars; the
King resolves their punishment: but as more considerable, bends toward Orixa
that he might at once lord it over Ganges. At Atteck he orders his Army: to
Radjea Byrmiel he gave one part, to Iehan-cawn another, to himself the third:
Byrmiel leads the Van', and outstripping the Army falls furiously upon the
Patanians, who by the encouragement of Zel-Ally receive them with no less
fury, but answer blow for blow, so long, so bravely, that Byrmiel is beaten
down with most part of his inconsiderate Army; Ecbar by such as fled hears
the tragedy, and inflamed with desire of conquest and revenge, hastens upon
them, and with such order and force, that Zel-Ally and Turkoft are discomfited,
fifteen thousand slain, and Bengala subjected: the conquest of Kandahor is
next recorded, for hearing of a great variance twixt the two Princes Hussan and
Rustan, (sons of Mirza Beyram the Kandahor Governor) and the Persian: he
consederates with the two young men, and sends Chabeec-cawn with five thousand
horse, who at midnight are let in by the two brethren, and the City made a
vassal of Ecbars greatness: but in short time Abas the Persian King reducted
it from the Indian. Ecbars Ambition grows endless, so he can overcome he
cares not how, nor where he conquers: for, hearing of the old King of
Maurenahars death, he covets to become his successor. First, to epsy their
strength and win black hearted fauters to his intentions, he sends,
Tzedder-cawn and Hackeem-cawn to work it, who under pretense of comforting
Abdul-cawn play their parts, and at the years end return well doctrinated:
the great Mogull reserves the practice for himself, but perceiving Cassimeer
interposing and not under him, sends Ally Mirza in Ambassie to Iustoff-cawn (a
fearful King) that if he would with his son forthwith come to Lahore and
do homage to him, he should re-accept his seniory and his best power at all
times to defend him: if he would refer it to the chance of war, he would
dethrone, and make him a perpetual slave, and his son a stranger. The
Casmirian King, affrighted at it, goes instantly to Ecbar and confirms his
vassalage; but Iacob-cawn his son, not able any longer to dissemble, flies
home, and is so followed by such as loved him, that he expells the Indians out
of the City and is acknowledged King; but his Halcyon days are of small
continuance; for Ecbar storms, and accilerates Ally Mirza and Cassem-cawn with
thirty thousand horse to fetter him; they chase him; not daring upon equal
terms to combat it, he flies to the high Mountains of Bimbery, but
Cassem-cawn, directed by some natives, so hotly pursue, that they are Lords of
those hills, whence Jacob hasts to Sirhenakar, but there also they beleaguer
him, whose strength in men nor walls were sufficient to repel the enemy, but
in despite of both, is taken and manacled, yea, made to bend under the iron
yoke of slavish bondage.

Cassimer is part of that part of Asia, of old called Sogdian. The North Pole
is there raised 41 degrees. nine min. from Agra three hundred; from Surat, three
thousand English miles distant: the Province in general is mountainous barren,
cold and windy. Her Metropolis Shyrenaker is three miles in compass, watered
by Behat, a river, which from Caucasus after many glomerating dances increases
Indus: nothing more observable than a lake (eight leagues thence) fifteen miles
about, in center is a pretty Isle, bearing a fair and pleasant Palace, out of
which is seen variety of sports, fishing, hawking, rowing, etc.

This done, restless Ecbar (a while deferring the conquest of Bactria) aims
at Tutta and all Indus; knowing how odious Mirza Iehan by reason of his
tyranny was to his inferiors, he sends Ganganna with twelve thousand men, and
by Boat sailing down Ravee into Indus, ere long they arrive at Tatta, which
for six months held out, but in the seventh the Tyrant yields it up, and is
upon conditions entertained friendly, and by this all Synde to Loore Bander
upon the Ocean, acknowledge Ecbar King of the Mogulls their head and Sovereign.

Tutta or Tatta (till now, Tutta.
commanded by the Rashboot) East from Ieselmeer, and West from Buckor, is one
of the most celebrated Marts of Indya: from Lahore thirty days journey, but by
Indus in less attained. Upon the Ocean she has Loure-Bander, three easy
days travel thence, observable in this, that such ships as ride at anchor
there, are not so gnawed and spoiled with worms, as at Swalley, Chaul, Dabul,
Daman, Goah, and other places.

About this time Nezamshaw the old King of Decan, A.D. 1593. A.H. 973.
paid Nature her utmost Tribute, and Melec Amber his son is stated in his
royal Throne and dignity: Ecbar is sick till he attempt the conquest; to do
which he resolves neither cost nor toil should hinder it; the enterprise more
hopeful, for that a woman was rectrix of the Marches. Ganganna is chosen
General, who with instructions and thirty thousand horse, from Lohore hasts to
Brampore, where Radgee Alychan the Governor conjoynes five thousand more, and
after some months preparation set forward toward Decan. Tziend Bieby,
daughter to the last King, hears of the Mogulls approach, and to resist them
fortifies Amdanagar, obtaining also some Forces from the Kings of Visiapore and
Golcunda, in all forty thousand horse, which she commends to her Martial
Eunuch Godgee Shuhel, who stays for them upon the Confines, first combatting
with Ally Chawn, Mirza Gassem, and half the Army; the Pagans enter pel-mel,
without order, guided only by bravery and desire of conquest, on both sides
were many slain: now one then the other part growing victorious; so long, so
courageously, with such emulation and fury the battle continued, that when
Apollo (weary of so much bloodshed) had hid his golden tramells in Thetys
bosom, they ceased not but by Cynthia's pale candor renewed the fight with such
alacrity, that of many years never was battle fought bravelier, in eighteen
hours none knowing who were more victorious; till such time as Phoebus
sparkling his flagrant beams again in that Horizon, Changanna falls in with
his Regiment, so fresh, so violent, that after three hours skirmish the Decans
turn back, leaving their heroic Captain Godgee slain in the field. The
Mogulls follow the chase fifteen miles, but the Princess Baby charges them
with fresh troops, causing them retreat to Brampore till a second season.
Ecbar, the great Mogull has notice of their success, and to accilerate another
trial, entreats Sha Morad his beloved son to levy fifteen thousand horse,
and from Brampore with the other Forces to spoil or conquer those meridionall
Provinces: merrily the youthful Prince advances thitherward, but during his
stay in Brampore grew so excessively venerious and drunken, that his radical
vigor became spent, his lungs consumed, Sudde^ death of Prince Morad.
and death the period of his consumption. His sudden farewell struck the Army
with such amazement, that many Vmbraves (to avoid the suspicious fury of his
Father) fled, nor caring to inhume the carcass: Ecbar hears it, swears they
had poisoned him, and vows requital: his Chancellor (the Princes
Schoolmaster) Abdul Fazel is sent, and (finding the dead Prince his own
consumer) assembles Ganganna, Iustoffchan, Tzadok-Mamet-Chan, Mirza Tzarok, and
such Vmbraves as were at hand, affords them comfort, and revokes such as had
fled, satisfies Ecbar whose was the fault, undertakes the Princes charge (after
he had sent his carcass to Delly there to be buried) and in small time
subdues the Provinces of Chandys or Sanda, Berar, and many other wealthy
places: by letters he acquaints the King, and desires him to forsake Lohore a
while (having spent twelve Winters and Summers there) and come to Agra, hoping
in small time to subject Decan. Gulcunda (by the Persians called Hydrahan)
Visiapore and other parts of India to his Empire. Ecbar, A.D. 1595. A. Heg. 975
orders his son Selym to chastise with fifteen thousand horse, Radjea Rana
Mardout, successor to King Porus, and of all the Radgees most powerful and
excellent, his rebellion excepted: Tzebber Chan follows him with five thousand
horse, Sha-Cooligan Mharem with three thousand; Radgee Shagenat with three
thousand; and other Vmbraves and Mancebdars with other Forces, which digested,
the great Mogull, for Agray leaves Lahore the better to receive intelligences.

Lahore.
LAHORE, (a City both vast and famous) is competitor for the Title of
Metropolis with Agray; but for circuit and bravery much more excellent: the
pole Artick is there advanced 32 degrees 15 minutes: the air for eight months
pure and restorative; the streets graceful and paved; most are cleansed and
refreshed by the river Ravee, which from the Cassmyrian or Caspiryan mountains
streams most pleasantly to this City, and after a stately flux of three
thousand English miles, deep enough for Juncks of threescore Tun, by Tutta
flows into Indus, and with her near Diul at 23 degrees 15 minutes lodges in
the Ocean. In Lahore are many things observable; Palaces, Mosques, Hummums or
Sudatories, Tancks, Gardens, etc. The Castle is large, strong, uniforme,
pleasant, and bravely seated; of stone, white, hard, and polished; armed with
twelve Posterns, three of which respect the Town, the rest the Country:
within, a Palace sweet and lovely, entered by two gates and Courts; the last
pointing out two ways; one, to the Kings Durbar and Iarneo (where he daily
shows himself unto his people) the other to the Devon-Kawn or great Hall
(where every eve from eight to eleven he discourses with his Vmbraves:) On the
wall are pictured sundry stories and pastimes. viz. Iangheer (otherwise called
Sha Selym) croslegd upon a rich carpet, under a stately Throne or State, his
sons Perwees on the right hand with Curroon and Tymoret, his brothers, D'
han-Shaw, and Sha Morad; about him Emirza Sheriff, Can Asoms elder brother, of
such wealth and pride, that having above a hundred Concubines, he clad them
daily, and each night tearing them off, buried them in the ground where they
rotted, Mirza Rustan (once King of Candahor,) Can Channa, Rajea Manisengh, Can
Asam, Asaph Chan, and Radgee Iugonath (at whose death, his wives, sister,
Nephew, and seven other friends burnt themselves with him for complement sake
in the fire:) And on the left hand, Rajea Bousing fly-skarer, Rajea Randas
sword bearer, Mocrib-Chan Parasite, Radjea Rodorow rebel, Radgees Ransingh,
Mansingh, Bersingh, and Bossou, etc. In another Goozelchan (and near the
former) is painted the Mogull, under a state croslegd: upon the doors the
Images of the Crucifix, and of the blessed virgin Mother. In another, the Kings
Progenitors, of whom, Babur, and thirty Nobles in the habit of Pilgrim
Kalenders, etc. The Province wherein Lahore is seated is called Pangab, or
rather from the Persian word Panch-ob or five waters, watered with Ravee,
Behat, Ob-Chan, Wihy, and Synde or Sindar (increased by Paddar and Damiadee,)
by Ptolomy and old Hydrographers, called Acesines, Cophys, Hidaspes, Zaradras,
and Rhuadeb or Hispalis. In a word, no Province of Indya out-vyes it for
pleasure, and riches, nor any part of the East for a continued shade of Ashy
trees from hence to Agra five hundred miles distance, whose spreading growth
and verdure lenifie the scorching flames of Titans motion, each eight miles a
fair and convenient Saray or Lodge built for Travelers to repose in: To our
story:

Ecbar, now at Agra, resolves in person to prosecute the wars in Decan. Anno
1597. of the Heg. 977, he sets out toward Brampore, but (contrary to his
expectation) so soon as he had past the river Nerebede, he perceives
Badursha, a courageous Radgee to fortify Hasser a strong Castle against him:
the Mogul likes not to leave so violent an Enemy behind him, but resolves to
take it by force or famine. Hasser, is three Castles in one, Hasser.
Chotzan and Commerghar, the last, mounted high, and so defended by Nature as
is made impregnable: to force it is impossible, therefore Ecbar resolves to
famish them, and half a year to that end he sits before it, which the Radgee
within, seeing, repents his folly, and upon request to have life and goods
(granted him) resignes, and follows the Camp or Leskar which goes on joyfully,
till such time as news is brought, how Sha-Selym and Tzebhaer-Cawn with the
residue aforementioned, going against Radgea Rana Mardout, in Assmeer, The Prince
rebels.
Tzebhaer dies (of poison some thought) which alters the Princes progress, for
he forthwith seizes upon Tzebhaers treasure (amounting to a crow or ten lack of
roopes) and therewith purchases the mercenary affection of so many soldiers,
that, to Agra he returns resolved to thrust his Father out of his Throne and
Empire. Ecbar, is so amated with this unlucky rebellion, that what with fear
of his sons popularity, and what to leave Decan unconquered, his heart
palpetates, he droopes and becomes hateful to his own imaginations; till
Abdul Gazel rouses him, and by infusing wholesome encouragement, not only
revives, but exasperates his revenge to an immediate action: whereupon, turning
his back of Amnadagar, with half his Army, (his son Sha D'haen, Abdul Fezel,
Chan-Channa, Badur-Shaw, and other Vmbraves prosecuting Decan) he speeds
toward Agra, whither Shaw-Selym got before him in hope to ransack his
treasury, but missing his aim, marches back by Rehen and Annewar, and at
twelve days end came to El-Habasse, having already subjected Bahaer, Syaupore,
Chalpy, Lacknoo, Mekpore, Chera, Gastanpore, Ghanoots, Chersam, Berage, and
other Towns and Provinces: in all, putting Captains of his own choosing. The
King, now at Agra is sensible of his sons conspiracy, and wishes all were
well again; his letters first attempt it, discovering the shame and danger he
was in, the curse of Mahomet, and deprivation of birthright, promising pardon,
with such persuasions, of small force with Shaw-Selym, who doting upon his
own exorbitancies, derides the Messenger, and ere long ore-runnes the Empire
to Bengala, hoping (but in vain) the Viceroy there, Radgee Mansing would side
with him.

In this interim, his other son, Prince D'haen or D'haenyel with his Vmbraves
and Army enter Decan, and come first to Gandetzin a Castle, in the site
favored by Nature, and by Art of man made impregnable. Herein, the distressed
Lady with all her Nobles and force had pent themselves, stored with victuals
for two years siege, and provided of all sorts of warlique instruments.
Notwithstanding all which (the dice of War and Fate so ordering it) in the
seventh month they forced it, depriving many of their lives, all of their
wealth and liberty. Madam Bebey only, rather than suffer any indignity, chose
to give her self (by poison) the period of misery. But her Magazein of gold
and silver came to the Conqueror, who giving that in charge to Abdul Gazel and
Chanchanna, the Castle he trusted to Godgee Byckmirz, and without opposall
reconquering the Counties Berar and Gandes, receiving some acknowledgement from
the faint-hearted Kings of Gulcunda and Visiapore, laden with triumph and joy
he returns to Brampore most victorious.

Brampore.
BRAMPORE, (or Barampur,) Baramatis in Ptolomy; or Bracman-pore as my notion
prompts me; of old and at this day a Seminary of Bramans, Iogues, Calans or
Gimnosophs, whose Academy (about this place) is recorded by Porphyrius and
Ptolomy; is in Artick elevation twenty eight degr. three min. From Surat, East,
two hundred and twenty miles: from Asmer four hundred and twenty: from Agray
one thousand; the Province is, Chandish or Sanda, where watered by Tapee or
Tynde (the river Surat) it becomes fruitful and pleasant; elsewhere, barren,
unwholesome, scortching, sandy and pernicious: the City is low and in an
unhealthy plain: very spacious, but by Bannyans most inhabited: the streets
are many and narrow; the houses not high and but meanly beautiful; the North
East end it has a Castle (upon the flood) large and defensive; in the river, an
artificial Elephant to skilfully shaped, that by the Bannyans it is adored, and
by others admired: in times past, here resided the Decan Kings, but by the
Mogul now beaten from it. Chan-Channa's gardens, and water devises called
Loll-baut two courses thence, are worthy a Travelers commendation.

Ecbar is no sooner possessed how fortunately his son Danyel proceeds
Southward, but Godgee Iehan presents him a penetentiall letter from Sha Selim
his rebellious son in the contrary quarter. After a little stay, he returns
with the Mogulls answer, wherein was his assured pardon, so he would dismiss
his Army and ask forgiveness. His ungratious son, returns this deriding
reply, that having an Army of seventy thousand horse and many brave men at
arms, to most of which he had given moneys and command; upon condition he
would ratify it, and in no sort imagine them rebels or conspirators, he was
ready to obey; if not, he would take his own courses. Ecbar resends him a tart
message; and Selim to demonstate his neglect and boldness, posts to Elabasse,
where he commands all sorts of Coin, of gold, silver, and brass to be stamp't
with his own name and motto; yea, to vex the old man more, affrights Anarkala
his fathers wife whom he surnamed Pomegranad, and sent him of his new stamped
money; a crime so strange, so audaciously odious, that the enraged Father curses
him, vows reward, and with speed acquaints his Chancellor Abdul Fazel with
it, who first moderates his Masters passion, and then with all convenient haste
(accompanied with three hundred horse) follows the post to do some service,
but Sha Shelim, (having intelligence how all this passed) desirous to
anticipate so sure an enemy, he writes to Radgee Bersingh (Lord of Soor) through
whose country he needs must pass, promising him a gratuity and the command
of five thousand horse so he would lay in wait for Abdul and send him his
head: the Radgee promises his best performance, and with a thousand horse and
three thousand foot, lurks near Gwaler, and such time poor Abdul Fazel
(suspectlesse of any villainy) passes by, Radgee falls upon him, and
notwithstanding the great advantage he had, for three hours the fight was
hotly continued, but ore-pressing them with men and troops in the end, his
company were most part slain, and Abdul himself (after twelve deep wounds)
taken and beheaded; Selim receives it joyfully, but Ecbar, who loved him deerly
becomes so passionate and sorrowful, that for three days he conceald himself
and would not a long time after be comforted: but (like waves) see another
horror afflicting him, news of his other son, Sha Danyel, killed in the same
City, of the same disease, Morad was formerly; hereat, he afflicts his
decaying body immeasurably, cries and sighs, and vows upon Chanchanna,
revenge for not better regarding him, who comes to purge himself, but for some
time is not admitted to Ecbars presence, till by mediation of others; and so
returns to Decan, with an augmentation of power and dignity. But the sorrow
he suffers in his rebellious son cooles his courage and inflames his
passion: some way he must tread to bring home or destroy him by persuasion or
war; but fears both: his son is so hardened and safegarded, somewhat he
must do; and therefore first (as a King) he rides against him with thirty
thousand horse, but by his mothers death is recalled; whose body when he had
most sumptuously interred in Delly in King Homayon her husbands Sepulcher, he
resolves to proceed against Sha Selym, but his mind alters; he fears his
sonne's singular courage and way in fight; and (as a Father) tries once more,
what persuasion can operate; he dictates a pathetique letter mixed of love and
anger, reproving, persuading, diswading, promising pardon, and puts him in mind
he was or should be at least his joy and comfort, he had no mo sons nor grand
children; Myrad Zedda (once the Princes Tutor or Schoolmaster) carries it, who
so forceably penetrates the yielding conceits and nature of Sha Selym, that,
forthwith taking Perwees his little son along) he leaves Halabassa, passes
Semena, and after two days more (the Wizard allowing the day fortunate) with
all his Umbraves he arrives in Agray, and by Mortoza-Kawn is brought to Ecbars
presence, then in the Guzel-Chan; who blushing to eye him so, leads him into
the Mahael (or private lodging) where (forgetting his promise) remembering the
dances Selym had led him, into such a rage that rapt him, that, The Prince
submits.
after he had flasht terror into his heart, by the sparkling fury of his eyes,
and thunder struck him, with a storm of mighty words, with his fist he struck
him so hard so often upon the mouth, that Selym throwing himself down, requests
his Father at once to punish him, shows him his breast, the sword and hand
ready to it. But Ecbar by this surfeiting of choler intends no such sacrifice,
but commanding him to arise, derides him and terms him Ass and Fool, that
commanding seventy thousand able men, would so doltishly forsake them to trust
the sugared and deceitful promises of a reconciled Enemy. That said, he brings
him forth again, and sends him back to prison, giving all the Vmbraves his
associates like welcome, Radgee Batso excepted, who (wiser than the rest)
escaped. By this imprisonment, Sha Selym contrary to his custom abstaines
four and twenty hours from Opium, which next day Ecbar himself gave him; and
the third day by intercession of his Ladies and Concubines, is freed and sent
to his own home, where he behaved himself very orderly, in princely sort each
day visiting Ecbar, till by some old men's malicious surmises, he is restrained
again and the Mogull exasperated. But the folly of his unnatural and ill
grounded rancour is not destinate against that object, the jealousy of his
brain throwing it upon Mirza Gashaw (the Viceroy of Tutta's son) for
speaking one word, by Ecbar ill taken and interpreted. No recantation will
satisfy, his life must pay it, the Kings Physician is commanded to prepare two
Pills of like shape but contrary operation, Gashaw is trusted with them, and
brings them Ecbar, The great Mogul poisons himself.
who (imagining by a private mark he knew the right one) bids Gasha swallow
one and himself the other. Gasha ignorant of any deceit by chance devoures the
best, and Ecbar is poisoned; too soon, too late the miserable Mogul perceives
his mischance, repents his choler, and (for shame concealing the cause) after
fourteen days violent torment and trialls to expel the poison, yields up
his ghost; and having victoriously reigned five and twenty years, in the 73
year of his age is by all his Umbraves with all possible state and solemnity
in Tzekander three course from Agra in a new begun Monument, buried: and Sha
Selym (though a while resisted by Radgee Mansingh and Chan Asem, who in vain
endeavored to make his son Cushroo Mogull, Sha-Selym crowned great Mogull.
nominated by Ecbar as they alleged) with such ceremony as was requisite is
crowned by name of Iangheer, King. In the year of our Lord God 1604. and of
Mahomet 984.

We are now to present you upon the Asiatique stage, various Scaenes composed
of a miscelany of subjects, excellent and remarkable.

A.D. 1604. A.H. 984.
Iangheer (so now we call him) by mediation of Morteza Chan, Cooly Mametchan
and others, receives Sultan Coshroe (or Gushrow) his late competitor (and
son) into favor: and (to begin his greatness in the good will of his
people) receives Cham Asem and Radgee into grace again. But Cushrooe (struck
by his own guilt) suspects his pardon counterfeit, and entreats by letter
Hussanbeg* (Viceroy of Cabul) his old friend, to meet him near Fettypore with
some Forces, that by his love and care he might fly away, assured if he stayed
long at Court, of death or blinding: by his Zantell the letter is speedily
delivered him, who as readily obeyes the disconsolate Prince with three
thousand horse posting to Achbar-pore (from Agra four and twenty courses)
whither the Prince (escaping in the twy-light from Court) comes, followed by
five hundred young Gallants, and altogether hasten toward Lahore. Iangheer has
immediate notice of his sons flight, and resenting how dangerous it might
prove, charges Godgee Melec Allybeg, Captain of the Guard, with such force as
was about him to pursue Cushroo and bring him back, for which he should want no
acknowledgement. The Cutwall, with three hundred horse, rides after him, and
Mortaza-Chan with fifteen hundred horse, all night posts after Godgee; yea
after both, Iangheer himself (persuaded to it by Mirza Vmbrave) with fifty
Elephants and eight thousand men: so that the poor Prince was every way
pursued, yet such was the haste Hassanbeg made before them, that none of the
three came near him by fifteen courses, (yea though all the way they spoiled
the Villages, and made havoc of all they could prey upon) and in the ninth day
attained Lahore; but intending to enter the Castle, are kept out by Ebrahim
Chan the Governor (premonisht of the Princes flight) and which was worse, by
Sayet Chan (three course from the City, and in his way to Bange the place of
his government, making as if he would join with him, upon the river is
imprisoned; but by bribe escaping returns to Hussan; and receiving there a
gilded bait) brought by Zalaladen Hassen, that the King passing by all
offenses, had assigned him the Provinces of Cabul and Banasoed; with which
seeming not contented, desires the addition of Zerhynd, all being but to dally
and allure his stay till Iangheer came to catch him. Yet, the Prince is not so
simple, but that he discovers his Fathers subtilties, so that after three
weeks vain attempt to sack the Castle, he forsakes the City, and with twenty
thousand horse moves back again, with a full determination to bid Iangheer
battle. It happened, that he pitched one night, where Mortosa-Kawn with six
hundred horse (hearing of Gushrooes coming) was ambushed; without any parlee,
Mortosa falls upon him, but such was the premeditated care Hussan had of the
place and fight, that in two hours space their Enemies were shrewdly beaten,
and Sha-Chelyal the Captain slain; so that had not Godgee Meleck with the
Kings standard entered, proclaiming with great outcries that the great Mogull
was at hand, the Kings side had wholly perished: but of such terror was the
Kings approach (past Sultanpore) that Abdul Rajea the Princes Ensigne-bearer
most basely threw it away and fled; and by his dastardly example all the Army,
most of them being by the rustic time-serving people chaste and knocked down,
and all the baggage seized on. The King in memory of this deliverance and
victory erects there, at Tziekerry i.e. a place of hunting, a stately Castle,
and new names the place (which I have formerly described) Fettipore, that is, a
Paradise. Fettipore, if the water had bin good, Fettipore.
by this time had triumphed over all the Cities in Indya: it is walled about,
and to the N.N.W. discovers a lake or fish pond five miles over. The N.E. has a
fair Buzzar five hundred paces long, and well paved, built on all sides with
pleasant Mansions: at one end is the Moguls house, and a Mohol most excellently
framed: the other side is glorious in a Mosque ascended by thirty steps barred
with a brave gate, in all so observable, that it is scarce equaled throughout
Indya: the top is full of Piramyds, the court within six times bigger than the
Royal Exchange in London, singularly paved with free stone, the Isles are large
and paved, the columns of one stone high and beautiful, and affronting this
gate is a most sumptuous Monument, covered with paint and Oyster pearl shells,
proud in the Calendar there buried. The miserable Prince (accompanied with
Hassenbeg, Abdul-Radgee, and Chan Badashaw) scarce looks behind him till they
attain Lahore, where Radgee stays; but Sultan Gushroo with Badasha cross the
Ravee, and labor to arrive with safety at Rantas a Castle inexpugnable: but
bad fortune follows them; for, passing the river Tzenob, by the treacherous
watermen they are brought into the power of Cassem-chawns sons (then
besieging the Castle) who without delay and mercy speedily convay them to
Iangheer, by that time past Latir a flood seven days travel thence. The King
overjoyed with this good hap, returns to Lahore, and by the way puts to death
many Vmbraves the Princes followers. The Prince was committed to the custody of
Zemanaebeg (called after, Mahobet-chan, i. e. beloved Lord;) Hassenbeg,
Bedasha, and Abdul Radgee are first publicly disgraced, and then imprisoned.

Whether some Noblemen reputed Iangheer tyrannical, or that they thought
Gushroo had better title to the Empire, or that mere envy caused it, is
uncertain; but one of these so wrought, that one night some prime men of
quality watching the Prince, agreed upon a conspiracy to take away the Mogulls
life upon the high mountains as he passed to Cabul, and to place Gushroo in
his room; the Traitors were Mirza Cherieff (brother of Assaph chan) Mirza
Mouradyn his Cozen, Mirza Petulla, Mirza Shaffenbeg, Hollabeg, and
Murdoph-chan. Iangheer suspecting no treachery passes on, but by good fortune
is so attended, that they could by no means effect their villainy. In the
interim, Ethaman Doulet the Treasurer is accused by one of his slaves to have
converted to his own use, and for th'incouragement of Traitors, 500000 roopees
out of the Mogulls Treasury; that, and the news of Cheer Affenchan (Ethaman
Doulets son in law) his treacherous murder of Cotopdy Mamet-chan Goga
(Liefetenant of Bengala near Radgee Mahal, (albeit Affenchann the Turk
therefore was also slain by Gessadine and Kisswer-Chawn, brother and son to
the Liefetenant, his Mother and Wife most basely abused) yet these reflected so
much upon Doulet, that he is not only put from his place, but also his estate
confiscated and himself in Dianet-Chans house, to his own great grief and
the astonishment of all Industan, imprisoned.

But greater was Iangheers fear and choler, when by the open and resolute
defiance of Godgee Vehes he is acquainted with the late named conspiracy, by
men of power, such as he never injured, and as had relation to be near him in
all occasions; he is much confounded at it, but by Myrza Vmbraves advice,
throws off all abject fear, and without more dispute or delay commands them
all to execution, only Ethaman Danlet at the request of his Keeper is pardoned
(upon promise of 200000 roopees to the King and him for his life) but led back
to prison most disgracefully. After which, he returns (from Cabul) unto
Lahore, and in the way remembering the danger he had escaped, and that Gushroo
his son was partly causer, he commands his sons eyes by juice of Aeck to be
forsetted, but the poison is more merciful, leaving one eye a little
illuminated. Chan Asem also ( Gushroo's Father in law) is clad in loathsome
rags and brought into the Guzelchan, where every Vmbrave is commanded to spet
in his beard and face, is then fetterd, manacled, and led to prison, where two
full years he remained, till by mediation of his wives he is delivered.

This year anno 1609 Currown and other of his friends prevailed with the King
that (to make his way the easier to the Crown) his kinsmen Sha-Selims brothers
sons might be Christened: which accordingly was done in Agra and not without
solemnity. The Jesuits named them Philippo, Carlo, and Henrico: most men
thought them undone, but God knows they were bettered. That year also they
baptized another Grandson of Ecbars by name of Don Edoard. This year 1019. and
of our account 1609. Mirza Ombrave became apoplectique, and made incapable of
his office: T'zalam-chan also in Cotopdy's place is made Viceroy of Bengala,
and commanded to send up as prisoners, Affen-chans family; which he did
accordingly. In the way, the young Widow Meher-Metzia ( Daulets daughter and
sister to Asseph-chan) was affronted by a Wizard who told her many stories of
her ensuing greatness, which after happened: for they were no sooner arrived at
Agray (whither Iangheer was also come) but are most kindly welcomed by Rockya
Sultanna the mother Queen: and, one day being led into the Mahal with her
little Girl, Iangheer accidentally lifts up her veil, and discovers so rare
and forceable a beauty, that thenceforward she is the sum of all he
contemplates: he studies now how to advance Doulet her dejected Father, the
better to ingratiate himself into the affection of his fair Goddess; he
forgets his state, and privately each eve passes by boat to Ethaman Doulets
house, and all night consumes himself and precious time in wanton looks and
amorous dalliances: but to enjoy her everlastingly, at length commands Godzee
Abdul Hossen to request Dawlets good will in his daughter, for he meant to
marry her; Hossen admires it, and lays before him the indignity he offers so
great a Majesty; but Iangheer (now Cupids slave) is deaf and blind; in choler
bids him go, or stay eternally. He speeds away and uses small persuasions: for
Ethaman Dawlet (by this miracle rapt from his discontented Orb) after some
profession of his baseness, condiscends: and Meher Metsya is forthwith
espoused with all solemnity, her name changed into Noursha begem (or Nor-mahal)
i.e. light or glory of the Court, her Father is advanced above all other
Umbraves, her brother Assaph-chan and most of her generation with th'addition
of honors, wealth, or command exceedingly graced and established: and in this
sunshine of happiness and content Iangheer spends some years without
regarding ought save Cupids Currantoes.

Anno 1610. of the Hegira 990. and the sixth year of his reign, A.M. 5580
A.D. 1610 A. Heg. 990
Sultan Sherryar the Prince (under tutorship of Mortesa-chan) is sent Viceroy
to Guzurat. Chan-Iehan to Brampore; and Mahobet-chan with an Army against
Radgee Rana, or Rabanna of Mandou, at that instant time rebellious: the Country
also of Radjea Cottz (a branch of Bengala) was that year subjected under the
Imperial Crown of Industan, by Tzalamchan a wary Captain: during which,
Mahobet-chan (by that time in Ranaes Provinces) goes on victoriously, and
forces many Holds and Castles from those indomitable Indyans, but (by envy of
some at Court) is called home in the best of his endeavors, and Abdul-chan
made General of his Company: this alteration did not much alter the estate of
the Army, for he prosecutes Rana with no less have and fury, in conclusion
urging him to a set battle at Siss-meer, where he got the better, chasing
Radgee to Oudepore and Pormandell, killing many of his men, enriching
themselves with abundance of spoil and Captives, and after much toil and some
loss, sacked Syavend ( Rana's strongest Castle) till then judged impregnable;
wherein they had store of warlike provision, A.M. 5580. A.D. 1610. A. Heg. 990.
and many valuable pagods or devils, which for above 1000 years had stood
there superstitiously adored; these the Mahometans burnt, and in place of them,
reared a stupendous Mosque or Fabrique of Idolatry. Abdul-Cawn so fortunatly
ordered the war against Rana, that Iangheer the great Mogull sends him thanks,
and desires him to live a while in Gusarat, by all possible means not only to
curb, but extirpate that rascal race of Coolyes and Bielsgrates that so
unjustly and theevishly robbed the Caffilaes and lived upon honest passengers: he
fails not in that command, for with fifteen thousand horse he searches and
pursues them in all places where he knew they lurked, and after many petty
encounters took Eder their retreating place (70 course from Amadavad) yea fell
upon them such time as they were all united, and put them to flight, slew half
their company together with Lael-Cooly their General, whose head he sent to
Amadabat, and commanded (as a memorial of his victory, and to the terror of
all such Rebels) that it should be set upon a pinnacle.

Cawn-Iehan (during these broiles) waiting all occasions of conquest in Decan,
by discord and envy of some Umbraves in the Army, finds his success worse and
worse against Melec Amber. He knows no remedy without acquainting the Mogull,
and entreating one of his sons to come thither, by whose greatness the Army
might be better ordered. After some consideration, he sends Sultan Perwees and
Radjea Ramdas who from Brampore sends Chan Iehan, Radgee Ramdas, and Mansingh
with an Army to Ballagate, where they send defiance to Melec, and ere long
expect him: but Iangheer fearing the forces of Decan speeds Chan Asem with
four thousand men more, and removes his Lescar to Asmeer, a place convenient
for hunting: Chan Asem is no sooner come to Brampore, but entreats Ganganna
(Lieutenant of Khoor) to join with him, and so hastens toward Bellaguate,
then in all 100000 men, 600 Elephants, and 12000 Camells, yea of such fame,
grew this expedition, that ere they departed Cuncam they were 600000. With
these huge Troops, Abdul-chan penetrates into the heart of Decan: no resistance
is made by men in field, Towns, or Cittadells, so that in Beder, Aurdenagar,
Gentfro and as far as Kerchy (the seat Royal) they marched victoriously;
burning, spoiling, and imprisoning; Villages, Temples, and Inhabitants not to
be counted. The Decan King (struck with fear and astonished at their numbers)
flies too and fro, nor resting any where, till he came to Daultabat, (ten miles
from Kerky) a Castle reputed impregnable. Some small skirmishes and ambuscadoes
fell upon the Indyans, but to small purpose, so that Melec Amber consults by
some deceitful policy to do, what by force he dared not adventure at,
(albeit Mamet Lary and Wackhyl Adel-chun were new come to aid him with above 20
thousand horse, and some expert infantery) he writes connterfeit letters,
directed from some Radgees about Iangheers Court, containing a private
certainty of the Mogulls death, and of Curroons advancement; these he gives in
charge to a crafty Bannyan, who circling as if he came from Agray, is
imprisoned as a spy, his letters read, and with their lying contents so
astonished, that without more consultation (giving credit to them) they divide
the Army, quit all such places where they had placed Garrisons, and with
confused haste speed home, each Captain to his own command and place of
residence; Sultan Perwees to Brampore, Abdulchan to Surrat, and Chan Asem
toward Agra, giving Amber easy re-admittance to al his Towns and Castles;
which otherwise, without long war, much hazard and vast expense would hardly
have bin recovered. But so soon as Iangheer had intelligence of that their
levity, he rages, and is half mad with anger, threatening them all with
punishment, and commanding Mahobet Chan to go Governor to Brampore: and such
was the incredible haste and good luck he had and used, he subjects Berar, and
devastates the Decan Empire unto Kerky returning triumphant and satiate for
Melecks treachery: by which, Iangheer is partly pacified, but more, when (by
Curroons entreaty, having first by many battles and pursuits tired him) Rana
Radjea presents himself, his son, and many gifts, amongst which an Elephant
valued at 100000 roopees, submitting all he had, by Iangheer to be disposed of,
who embraces him with all affection, and offers his son his daughter, and
returns him the government of Pormandel, Oodepore, and other places; but soon
after, (whether for grief he had submitted, or some other cause) he died, and
with much ceremony amongst his noble progenitors, is buried. Rana Radgea dies.


Iangheer, having consumed eighteen months in ease and pleasure at Mandou,
departs, and comes to Amadavad, where he discharged Abdul-chan, and ordaines
him Viceroy of Calpi and Khoor: and after 12 months pastime and luxury there,
returns to Agray: Anno 994. and of our account 1614. That year, Chabeeg,
Governor of Chandahar was displac't (by reason of his age) and Badar-chan
there placed. Tzediat-chan also is sent to succeed Tzalam-chawn in Bengala, but
at that time Ozman-chan a Patanian with a mighty Army besieging Daeck (the
Metropolis:) he and Ethaman-chawn with fifteen thousand men give Ozman
battle, which is bravely fought on both sides; but by reason of a mad
Elephant, on which Ozman sat, Tzediat-chan is unhorst and maimed, yea the
Mogulls Forces discomfited: but by strange chance, a wounded man seeing Osman
pass by, transfixes him, and by that the Patanians give back and at length
fly, the Mogulls not only recovering Daeck, but piercing into the Gentiles
Country, captivated his wife and children, forraging at pleasure, and making
all his wealth (which was great, and sent to Agray) a joyful testimony of
their valor. That year the Mogull journeyed to Lahore.

Abdul-chawn, after seven weeks trial arrives at Calpi where and of Koor he
was to receive the government: he straightway executes his Commission, in small
time quieting and destroying those swarms of rebellious Rashbotes till then
there abounding; levelling their most defensive places with the ground; making
sale of so many of the Inhabitants as paid the charges of the war, amounting
to 200000 roopees and upwards. Chan Asem also about this time goes Ambassador
from Iangheer to Abbas the Persian. Chan-Asem goes Ambassador to Persia.
Not any in man's memory went more richly furnished with Presents, or more
bravely attended. He presented the King (then at Spahawn) twelve chests of
choice linen, and two with Shashes woven with gold and silver, many daggers
whose hafts were richly set with stones of value, esteemed at 70000 roopees.
And for his own port and travel had an addition out of the Mogulls Exchequer
of sixty thousand roopees more, the better to represent the Majesty of so great
an Emperor. Abbas entertaines the Ambassador triumphantly, and wearies him with
invitations, shows, sports, and pastimes: and at his departure makes five
hundred Coselbashes, Aliculicawn, Rustan-beg and other Noblemen to attend him
two days Journey toward Candahar, recommending his well-wishes to the Mogul
in a present of five hundred swift and excellent Coursers, twenty Mules of
great assize and beauty, five hundred Asses, one hundred and fifty Dromidaries,
(or rather Cooselbash Camels) eighteen chests or Sandoughs full of delicate
carpets and bezars; 20 Camels load of Shyraz wine, and eight of conserved
Dates, pistachoes, etc: all which were with much affection received by
Iangheer, who that year journeyed to participate the pleasures of Cassimere,
having first transferd Mahobet-chan from Brampore to Kabul and Banges.

KABUL by Ptolomy in his 6 Book and 18 chapter called Chabura (on the North
confined by Caucasus, on the East with Cassmeer and Kakar) is now subject to
the Mogul, but formerly to the Tartar and Persian: the name from the Siriaque
signifies sterill, and agrees with the nature of the country, which is cold and
windy; not over fruitful, save where the Nylob fattens her; a river (by
Ptolomy called Choa) which hence arising, streams South into Indus, and is one
of those five, which with her wander into the sea. The City Cabul, is from
Lahore twelve good days journey, hilly and dangerous; the people most part
Bannians; the houses are low and strong; in nothing more observable than the
Serrays or common Inns, and two well fortified Castles; in one of which was
Babur borne, and swayed; from whom in three descents Iangheer is descended.

Sultan Cushroo (upon his Fathers remove to Cassmeer) is taken from the custody
of Assaph cawn and given to Cawn-Iehan to look unto. Cheq'-Cassem is also made
Leifetenant of Bengala in his brother Tzalam-cawns steed. Cherram-cawn (
Tzalam-cawns son) hearing of his Uncles coming (who ever hated him;) from
Daeck travels toward Agra with all his Fathers wealth to give up an account to
the Mogul; but in the way, near Radgee-Mahal, Cassem-cawn meets him, takes
violently away his best Elephants and some other things of value, which being
by his Nephew to the full related, Cassem is immediately displaced, disgrased,
and Ebrahim-cawn (Queen Normalls cosen) estated in his place; meeting at
Radgee-Com with Cassem-cawn (who with all his goods and people were packing
away) Ebrahim demands restitution of the Elephants he took from Cheram-cawn,
but Cassem is so enraged at these successive indignities, that after some foul
words they fall to blows, and in the skirmish Cassem finding his party
weakest, retyres to his Haram, murders his miserable concubynes, flies away,
and leaves Ebrahym possessor of all his treasure; who by assent of some
Umbraves, and most of the vulgar sort, is admitted Governor; after which he
falls upon Moeckham (the rebel) defeats him and his braving forces, killing
some and selling others, yea inriches himself with so much spoil, and
arrogates so much glory, that Iangheer (in token of thanks) sends him a horse,
a battle-axe, and a dagger; and as an augmentation of honor from Ebrahym,
changes his name into Pherooz-Iehan-cawn. The same season Martasa cawn was sent
by the King to beseige Changra (a Castle so fenced by Art and Nature, as made
many judge it invincible, and the rather, for contemning the best the Kings of
Delly of many times could do against it,) notwithstanding all which, Martasa
(after much danger of ambushments in that thick Wood, seventy miles broad, and
trouble in passing his men over high and fearful rocks) lay eight months
before it, and then in despite of their best defense entered it, and subjected
it to the Mogul; though he lived not three months after to meditate his
victory. Which, when Iangheer heard, with a mixture of joy and sorrow, he
leaves Cassemeer and removes to Lahore, where Sultan Cushrooe (the true idea of
misery) is by persuasion of the Queen and Assaph-cawn taken from Cawn-Iehan,
and put to Curroon to be his keeper. At that time, Iangheer affected his son
Curroon beyond measure, imagining no honor too much, no command too great for
so brave a Prince, so hopeful a warrior; so that (little knowing what would
follow) he gives him the charge of forty thousand horse, and attended by
Godjea-Abdul-Hussan and other great Umbraves hastens him to the conquest of
Decan: and to spoil the Kingdoms of Gulcunda and Visiapore, for omitting
their annual Tribute of three pound weight of Diamonds.

This year 1619 of Maho. 1029 Abdul-Azies-cawn succeeds Bador-cawn the Ouzbeg
in his command of Candahar; Cawn-Iehan is made Leifetenant of Mult'an and
Buchor; Sultan Perwees of Pathan: and Radgee Bertsingh Bondela, and Abdul-cawn,
Governors of Kalpi, are commanded to raise some forces and follow Sultan
Curroon into Decan.

Sultan Currowne (by this time having leavied his forces, A.D. 1619. A. Heg. 999
and made all ready for his enterprise upon Decan) first commands all men to
entitle him Sha-Iehan, or King of Hearts; then, with his whole Army in goodly
equipage, travels to Brampore the Rendezvous, and whither Abdul-cawn and Radgee
Bertzingh (according to command) come and wait upon him, with Thedder-cawn his
Cosen, and many other Rashpootes of quality. Curroon (for by that name we can
best remember him) swelling beyond measure to see himself General of so brave
an Army, dallyes not, but with all speed gives order to Abdul cawn, Lala-Ragee
Bertzingh, Abdul-Hassen, and many other Umbraves, to begin the War with
Melec-Amber: and that he and the residue would follow them; Mirza Mackey and
Shadour-cawn march to Gulcunda against Cotobel Melec; and Ma'met Tacky to
Visiapore against Adel-cawn, either to receive by force or fair means the
accustomed tribute due to the Dyadem of Iudustant. Abdul-cawn in the first
place to effect his Commission, Bellagate.
passes on without any let to Bellagate (a fastidious mountain twixt Cunca and
Decan, and for ought I know, may be Hippocura in Ptolomy) Curroon bringing up
the other part of the Army at fifteen miles distance, to succor the Van on
all occasions: the King of Decan at all advantages seeks to intercept them,
opponing in many petty skirmishes; but Abdul-cawn (formerly acquainted with his
rodomontadoes) passes on, burning and spoiling what they met withal; not
resting till they came to Kerki (the Kings best house) which they levelled with
the ground, enriching themselves with store of prey and treasure, Kerki.
reducing Berar and Chandys into subjection, and forcing composition from all
the Country as far as Amnadagar, and Tribute from the Kings of Gulcunda and
Visiapore;

Iangheer is over joyed with so much good Fortune; and (to relish it the
better) solaces himself in his son Perwees Gardens beyond the river. Ethaman
Dowlet (Queen Normals Father) dyed at that time; his great estate is by the
King given to his daughter and Assaph-cawn, but his Office is conferred upon
Godgee Abdul Hossen. Curroon also (who sat as Emperor in his own ambition)
with a greedy eye respects the Diadem; but perceives his imprisoned Brother
interposing in the way: but such is the violence and magic of pride and
tyranny, that it runs on not caring how, though masqued with never so much
deformity: he feignes himself sick; (his disease is horrible) nothing can
recover him save his eldest Brothers death; Ganganna is of his infernal
council, who applauds his humor, and promises his recovery; he presently
acquaints some Mancebdars in the exployt, of all which rascal troop Reza (or
Rajea Bandor) a very villain, is quickest of apprehension and least scrupulous;
Curroon (as if he knew nothing) is conveyed out of Brampore to better his
health; whiles that incarnate Devil at an unseasonable hour in the night
knocks at Goushroo's chamber, A.D. 1620. A. heg. 1000.
who (as awakened out of a fearful dream) starts up and demands his errant;
the villain replies, he came from the Mogul his Father, with order for his
delivery. The miserable Prince (affrighted with his Ravens voice, and
suspecting treason) desires him to stay till the morn: the villain (without
further parlee, perceiving no entrance by entreaty) breaks open his door,
grapples with the amazed Prince, gets him down and strangles him: that done,
he lays him in his bed, locks the door, and trots away as if the Prince dyed
of some imposthume, and he had done nothing. Curroon has quick news of his
Brothers death, and inwardly rejoices; but ere Sunrise, his afflicted wife (
Cawn Azems daughter) goes to visit him; where finding him speechless, and (by
his contus'd face) murdered; never did poor wretch shed more tears, or show
more passion; by tearing her fair hair, deforming her sweet face so fiercely,
so amazedly, that her Father and all his family hear her, and see it to their
grief and admiration. But when they see the cause also, they wonder not, none
of them forbearing to express their sorrow after several modes, without
moderation. All Brampore rings of this Treason, suspects the author, and curses
him; but Curroon, (clothed with deceit) comes thither, falls upon the corpse,
and expresses so much sorrow, that many durst have sworn that he was innocent.
After two days ceremony, they bury him, and Curroon writes his Father word of
his brothers sudden death (concealing the occasion.) Iangheer weeps, and
afterward grows mad with rage, suspecting some violence; but not knowing upon
the sudden how to discover it, he feeds upon melancholy and discontent, writes
back a letter of reproof and threats to Curroon and his Umbraves, swearing
revenge when they least suspected it; commands the body to be digd up, and
brought with solemn state to Elabasse, where he interres him in his Mothers
monument; sends for Chan Asem and his afflicted daughter, comforts them, and
takes them for his constant companions; to Sultan Bullochy or B'lochy his
grandson (son to Prince Gushrooe) he intailes the Imperial Crown, gives him
the command of ten thousand horse, and by Chan Asem his Grandsire (of the blood
royal of Tartary) to be educated.

Curroon, by his Fathers love to Sultan Bullochy, perceives himself
disregarded, and thenceforth (not caring to please him) flies out into
rebellion. And Abdul-chan (winding his aims) without leave taking, forsakes
the Army and packs to Kalpi to his government, but by the Mogull (who was still
desirous to continue the Decan wars) is rebuked and made to return. Yet ere
long he is revoked, for at that time Abbas King of Persia with 30000 men
besieges Kandahor, pretending it a member of his Empire. The City was defended
by Azief-chan, a Captain of great valor and honesty, who for sixteen days
kept it in despite of the Persian, but perceiving his Company too weak if
they entered, he writes to Iangheer, desiring speedy assistance.

Iangheer is nearly touched with his distress, and promises him immediate
succor; so that, posting to Lahore, he convocates his Vmbraves for advice and
help, and first, commands Chan Iehan (then Liefetenant of Multhan, adjoining
Kandahar) with such force as he had in readiness to haste thither, the Enemy
in the interim attempting day and night the entrance, whiles Iangheer the great
Mogull, ruminates whom to make his General; at last, by his own assent and
choice of all his Vmbraves, he fixes upon Abdul-chan, by that, by Curroons
leave again returned. This famous Captain readily accepts the charge, speeds
to Lahore, and is embraced with such sudden joy by the Mogull, that he
presently contracts his fair grand daughter ( D'haen Shaws child) to
Mirza-chawn, Abdul-chawns eldest son, and so with fifteen thousand choice
Cavalry, and one hundred Elephants, (five thousand of which he himself
brought with him) makes haste to give battle to the victorious Persian. But
ere he could attain thither, Iangheer (having notice that the Persians were
too strong to be beaten, and had vowed the conquest) by letters commands
Azief-chan to surrender it unto the Enemy, but he, doubting they were
counterfeit, holds out, till by a Mine, a great part of the wall is blown up,
and Abbas is entering; which when Azieph-chan saw, he mediates their yielding
it up, upon condition they might depart safely with their baggage. Abbas (who
only aimed at the City) condiscends, has it given him, wherein he places
Ally-Koli-cawn and returns to Spahawn, whiles Assuph and Abdul-chan easily go
back to Lahore, where with welcome, by Iangheer they are entertained.

CANDAHOR has Artick elevation four and thirty degrees, Candahor.
and longitude from the first Meridian 98 degrees. The Province (South) is
reasonable fruitful, and redundant in all good things, yet by reason of so
many Carravans passing, and repassing from Lahore to Persia, all sort of
provision is very dear, and the passage (in regard of many rascal troops of
Puttans, Agwans and Coolyes, which like the inhospitable Arabs prey upon all
Caffilaes) chargeable and dangerous. The City is not very spacious, but
strong; made defensive by many helps of nature and industry; to the South and
East it is surrounded with an advantageous wall, to the West and North with
high and precipitious mountains. The Suburbs also (tho not well defended) are
large, adding to the City, beauty and wealth; nothing wanting save good water,
which there and all the way to Spahawn is brackish, and the earth for most part
barren and uncomfortable.

Iangheer, by the crafty persuasion of Assaph-chawn, sends him with peremptory
command to the Castle-keeper of Agra, that without delay he should transfer
the treasure thence to Lahore, where he then was (and resol'd to be of long
time) abiding. It was a message of much wonder to Ethamat-chan, considering the
strength where it was kept, his own honesty, the danger of convaying so great
a mass of gold and silver, a journey so long, so chargeable, and dangerous.
These and many other persuasions he used to Assaph kawn, but in vain, had
they been trebled. So that on the one side, haste, threats, and the Mogulls
command is urged; on the other, delay, disswasions, and diverting Iangheers
meaning to another sense is objected on either part so violently, that from
words, blows became their uncivil moderatours. But in that exercise
Assaph-chan (for all his greatness) found himself weakest, finding the
Eunuchs Guard so strong, and Ethabar-chan Provost of Agray to second him: so
that, he craves their pardon, and after some toil, by many dissimulations at
length wins them to his purpose. But, whiles the Eunuchs are preparing for the
journey, this deceitful man with all speed posts away a swift Zantell (or
Footman) to his son in law Curroon (then upon the confines of Decan) advising
his speed, and to ambush 'twixt Agra and Delly for his Fathers Treasure. The
Prince (composed of courage and ambition) receives the letter with much joy,
Curroon prepares to rob his Fathers Exchequer.
and without any check of conscience or respect of loyalty, immediately commands
all his Vmbraves out of such Provinces his Father had assigned him, even from
Brampore to Surrat, and all Gambaya to Amadabat; the Governors of Surrat,
Baroch, Iaunbasser, Medapore, and of the marittim coast, Goga, Diul, Nagsary,
Mangerelpore, and Onnepore; as also out of Mandow, Gandersee, Oudepore, Baraer,
Amnadagar, etc. in a rebellion and enterprise so infamous and full of peril,
desirous to engage all his Lieutenants, to bring them under like hatred, and in
some sort to oblige their dependence upon his acts and fortunes: and so, with a
brave and sturdy Army of 70000 horse, he sets on toward Mandoa, if he intended
a contrary Progress: Mandow.
Mandow (threescore courses from Brampore) is a Town both ancient and famous;
seated on the side of a lofty precipitious hill, and ambitious in a Castle
strong and stately, imcompast with a defensive wall of five miles (the whole
had fifteen mile circuit) but the City later built, is of less assise yet
fresher beauty, whether we behold the Temples, (in one of which are entombed
four Kings) Palaces, or Fortresses; especially that Tower elevated one
hundred and seventy steps, supported by massy pillars, and adorned with gates
and windows very observable, and built by Chan Iehan who in it is buried: This
City was lately owned by the Kings of Delly, till such time as Homayon the
Mogull rapt it from Sheck Sha Selym King of Delly, at his return from Persia,
whither Selym had forced him. From Baroch it is distant 150 English miles.
Curroon after two days rest in Taxapore hasts away with such velocity, that
his Army (ignorant of his intent) thought he was mad, every day posting above
forty miles, so that in thirteen days with all his troops he attained
Fettipore from Brampore near 500 miles; yea ere Ethabar-chan knew of his being
in the Country: but as it fell out, he made more haste, than good speed; for,
long he could not lurck with such a company, without the knowledge of
Ethamat-cawn the careful Treasurer; who (as if all the Enemies in the world
were approaching) unloads the Camels of their precious burdens, convaies it in
again, fortifies the Castle, and sends quickly to Iangheer of his sons
traiterous intention, who is astonished above measure, and presently sends every
way for assistance, to Sultan Perwees out of Pathan, to Chan-Iehan out of
Multhan, and for Mahobet-chan out of Kabull; whiles Curroon (perceiving he was
discovered) with his whole Army divided amongst several Captains, Ganganna,
Rustan-chan, Radgee Bickermanse, Mirza-Darab, Sayet-chan, Mahomet Tackjeck,
Tsossally, etc. show themselves in front of Agray, making a bravado, as if the
conquest were easy and no way doubled of. But the two Eunuchs keep close in
their defended Sconces, whiles Radgee Bickermanse at Curroons entreaty, begins
the churlish play, followed by Byrambeg, Rustanchan, Wazir-chan and Darab,
whose onset tho it was full of gallant force and fury, yet Ethabar-Chan,
desirous to sacrifice his best endeavors to express his loyalty retaliates
such entertainment, that after three hours trial, having lost five hundred
men, without any prevailing they retreat, well beaten and ashamed; so that
(converting their power upon a more hopeful way) they draw back and fall a
rifling the houses of such Vmbraves as were likely to have booty. Byrambeg
begins with the house of Mirza Abdull, Chan Azems son, but finds such hot and
unexpected welcome that he was forced out, not without amazement. Howbeit,
Radgee Bickermanse entered with better fortune Assaph-chans (which in this
tumult found no exception) out of which they drew twenty leck of roopees;
Rustan-chan out of Lascar-chans 16 leck, and Darab from Nouradyn Cooly's, ten;
In all, about threescore leck of roopees, after which base theft, (as if they
had done wonders) with great triumph they returned to Fettipore.

Curroon, after three weeks stay about Fettipore; finding it impossible by
force or subtilty to obtain the treasure, and no more prey in those parts,
resolves to march back and give his Father battle, whom he heard (from
Assaph-chawn) was coming. To which end, after double allowance to each
soldier, and protestations of his kind remembrances, he retreats toward
Delly, in five days attaining Pherrybaud ten course from Delly, at such time
as Iangheer with his Army pitched three course from the Town, and seven from
Curroons trenches.

Very early next morn, Curroon (longing to graspe the Diadem) commands Radgee
Byckermanse to begin the fight with eight thousand horse, against whom,
Iangheer the great Mogull opposes Mahobet-chan, Abdul-Chan, Ethabar chan,
Assaph-cawn, Godgee Abdel Hussan, Zadoc-chan, Immirza Mamet, Radgee Bertsingh,
Tzeer-chan, Seberdeest-chan, and other principal Vmbraves; by advice of
Mahobet-chan dividing the whole Army into three. One part to himself and
Radgee Bertsingh, a second to Sultan Sheryar his youngest son and
Mahomet-chan, the third to Abdul-chan and Zadoc-chawn: to all whom he used
many persuasions to fight bravely and with discretion, as against exquisite
warriors, most of which had been in many conflicts; yet such was the justice
of the cause, and each man's particular interest, that he knew they needed no
exasperating. Then to each Commander (as they were entering combat) he sent some
small token of his zeal, as remembrances of his love and engagements upon his
victory of great preferment: Zaber-deest-chan in the first place (carrying
Abdulchan his Masters present) by mischance falls among five hundred light
horse of Curroons and perishes. Bickermanse with his large troop of horse,
charges Bertsingh and the Moguls quarter so furiously, that many parted with
their lives to express their loyalty. Whiles Ganganna and Curroon enter
pelmell against Mahobet-cawn, and Rustan-cawn with T'sossally upon Abdul-cawn,
all which were Captains of such valor and experience, and the armies on
either side so irritate for honor and benefit, that for three hours the
battle continued with rage, each part fighting so bravely, that no advantage
could be discovered, till victory at last inclines to Curroon, when Radjea
Byckermanse after a terrible slaughter of the Moguls squadron, in despite of
his guard, enters sternly (did in blood) Iangheers royal Tent, and arrested
him as his prisoner, but he had scarcely meditated the greatness and
excellency of his prize, when grim death directs the battle axe of a Mancebdar
then in presence, Radjea Bickermanse slain,
which fell so sore, so sure, that down he fell, with a curse breathing out
his unwilling soul, and such terror into the hearts of his followers, that
without any remembrance of their conquest, they all fled, and gave the Moguls
part fresh advantage to reinforce the victory.

Curroon amazedly perceives upon the sudden his overthrow, and by and by has
the reason of it. He does all he can to alter their cowardice; he persuades,
threats, opposes, and cries aloud that he was living, yea a hundred Captains
as good as Byckermanse were in the Army: but in vain, for such was their
preposterous fear and disorder, that he sees it impossible to revoke them: so
that (vollying one a thousand curses, expressing all symptoms of rage and
frenzy) he rides to and fro, not knowing whither he had better here put a
period (by his death) to all future misfortune, or to fly and hope for better
afterward: at last, by Ganganna's advice he hasts away, but leaves his men and
treasure to the mercy of his enemies, and after long and swift flight with few
of his friends, attaines the desolate and high Mountains of Mewat, in whose
solitary rocks he ruminates his misery and the justice of God upon his high
rebellion.

Sultan Perwees with a glad heart meets his victorious Father at Balzol; after
which the Seralios are freed, and the Castle gates opened, as fearlesse of any
more opposall. And now, the old Mogul cheeres up his late drooping spirits, and
solaces himself with Noormal, the light of his eyes, and the best object of
his devotion: his delight and jocundities gave a fair occasion to Assaph-cawn,
and Ganganna, to mediate a reconciliation for Curroon; and which the old man
also inclined to; so that; from Asmeer, letters of peace and pardon are
dispacht unto the rebellious Prince; who reads them with no small joy, and
prepares for his submission: with Ganganna, Abdul cawn, Darab cawn, Beyram beg,
and other Umbraves of quality, he descends the Mountains of Mewat, and
through Bassawer, Hambyer and Lael-sod (unable to forbear piltring all the
way) at last he came to Azmeer, Curroon it pardoned, but rebels afresh.
where he throws himself at's Fathers feet, and upon his repentance and oath
never more to fly out, is pardoned: but his submission (as by the sequel)
appeared counterfeit, and upon this occasion.

So soon as Rajea Bickermanse was slain, Curroon in his place made Abdul-cawn
Governor of Gusurat, Amadavad and Cambaya. Abdul-cawn, though glad of so high
preferment delays his journey; both in regard of his desire to see Curroon
freed from his troubles, and to enjoy the command and gain he every day got in
Curroons depredations: and obteyning leave to stay a while, he sends his Eunuch
Baffadur-cawn as his deputy to represent his person, and to prepare things the
better against his coming. The Eunuch in good equipage travels thither-ward,
and by the inhabitants of Amadabat is received with much state and ceremony;
but, beholding himself mounted so high, incircled with such rays of Majesty,
and roabed with so much honor, his former vassalage is forgotten, and his
genius so transcendently efflated with pride and ambition, that he beholds his
equals with disdain and anger, his inferiors with a squint and supercilious
eye of scorn and tyranny: yet, such as knew his feathers were but borrowed,
and that his glory was but the reflect of him he counterfeited, gave him
occasion to understand himself, by affronts, neglect and undervaluing him;
especially Nadab-Tsaffi-chan the Moguls Chancellor, who by entreaty and threats
sought to reform him, but by such means more exasperated; so that after many
base and contumelious usages, he is forced (to save his life) out of the City,
but so enraged, that he vows requital: he hasts to Nazar-cawn Viceroy of
Patan and Baban-cawn of Chapperbenniz, whom by his complaints (and affront
offered as he pretended to the Mogul their Master) he inflames with fury; by
this advantage also perceiving a way to defy Curroon their inveterate
adversary: for hearing the Eunuch had not above five hundred horse, they
presently prepare, and advance to Amadavad with a thousand horse and five
Elephants, and (by leave of some that hated the Eunuch) enter the Cicy, and
commit what villainy they please, force the Castle, and imprison Baffador-cawn
the Eunuch, with his branded associates Mirza Madary, Motzab-cawn and
Mamet-Hassen the Cambayan Podestate, whom they disgrace, and depart at
pleasure, leaving the City satisfied, and the Country full of amazement. But
ere long, Curroon has notice of it, and (finding it a plot to dishonor him)
swells with rage, thunders out his discontent, and straight way breaks out into
rebellion. But Abdul-cawn scoffs at this accident, as unworthy Curroons
impatience and his trouble, their Antagonists being but three, one of them a
pallid Lawyer; the other two, Merchants of small wealth or reputation.

Yet knowing satisfaction would not be had without a combat, and that
Saffi-cawn might not too long feed upon their misery, he convocates all his
Umbraves, Amet-cawn, (Governor of Brodera) T'zalibeg, Rustan Bador,
Mamet-hossen, Mercon-beg, Zerdzie-cawn, Matzael-cawn and others; to each of
whom he relates the Princes dishonor and his own grief, not that he feared
such mean enemies, but that herein he saw the fire of more wrath and discord
a kindling; which by the constancy and valor of these his friends he doubted
not to extinguish. They hear him, understand, and profess their loyalty: yea
unanimously with seven thousand choice horse make haste to chastise Saffi-chan
and his associates: fourteen hundred thousand roopees are disburst by
Abdul-cawn, to increase his army with ten thousand infantery; so that now he
makes sure to punish, yea to extirpate the very memory of his enemies: indeed,
many swell themselves with empty conceits and fancies, and by a foolish
admiration of their own power and bravery, judge all attempts, though chargd
with never so much danger, inferior to their worth and fortune; but tne event
oftentimes discovers their shallow imaginations, and makes them ridiculous. We
see it so in this Abdul-cawn, a man of great power, credit, and experience; yet
at this time so whirld, yea so efflated with pride and scorn, that (by too
much security and contempt of those he was to grapple with) he prepares his
own ruin. From Mandou with his Army, in five days he comes to Brodera, and
hasts thence to Wasset, judging all Gujurat affrighted at his coming; but
Saffi-cawn and his were nothing troubled at it; no, although Sultan-Bullochy
and Cawn-Azem were then at Tseroy a good way distant, nor that he wanted (the
nerves of war) money, and the people were (though his was the Moguls cause)
neutrall and indifferent; but rather, inspired with new courage and policy,
throws off all apparition of fear, and (to add somewhat to his treasury and
pay) forrages such Towns as refused to contribute, forces the Exchequer, and
spoils that rich and glorious throne or state, Sultan Curroon had lately set
up in Amadavad, as an addition and monument of his glory; with this and his
other helps he entertaines an Army of twenty thousand horse, five hundred
Musketeers, thirty Elephants for war; and (by Proclamation, that all his
provision was in defense of Iangheers prerogatives) above twenty Umbraves of
quality, Mirza Cassen, Immirza Mockym, Radgea Callicawn, Radgee Doola,
Commel-cawn, Gokeldas, Phereez-cawn, Tzedchan, Tzed Jacob etc. associate him,
to Kanckry, where he incampt, and thence to Assempore; where hearing of
Abdul-cawns coming, he arose and came to Boubentalow, six course from
Amadavad; where in a valiant posture, he attended the coming of his enemies.

Abdul-cawn at Anamogery receives intelligence of their incamping; in scornful
sort he tells the messenger he was coming, and upon his own company looks so
merrily that they all condemned him of too much confidence, but (loath he
should perceive any want of valor in them) they equal his haste, and
courageously march to Nyriaed, and so to Momodabad, but six course from the
Enemy: there, Abdul-cawn by assent of his other Vmbraves command Motzab-cawn to
prison, and shackles him; (upon some intelligence passing twixt him and
Saffin-cawn his enemy) and next day with his son Godgee Sultan upon an
Elephant are sent to Mando to receive their trial. The ensuing morn he moves
toward Kavise and there hearing how strong the Enemy was (his opinion somewhat
altered) he travels to Baroch thinking to assail them in the rear, but in
vain, for they discovered him; so that next day he resolved to encounter them
in a maine battle, and accordingly at that time divides his Army into three;
one, to Amet-cawn and Tzalibeg; another to Tzardi-cawn, Maxatbeg and
Mamet-Cooly; and the last to himself: and in this equipage, the whole Camp
removed to Zietelpore and Phettibeg; where Nahar-cawn, his five sons, and two
sons in law, Karamamet-cawn and Kamamet-cawn, with three thousand horse,
begin the fight, and charge so hotly upon Abdul-cawns troops, that they made
them retire and lose their ground of advantage; besides, they played so fiercely
on them with their Muskets, that they disordered Abdul-cawns best cavalry, and
by wounding their best Elephant, forced him to turn and execute his wrath upon
his own company.

Curroons chief Captain sees the peril, and knows no way for prevention,
save by a challenge to a single combat with Nahar-cawn that was so valiant. The
old man is so full of heat and fury that he accepts it, and with his Lance
carreers so bravely, that Abdul-cawn smarts in the Arm; but the old man
wounded in the head had perished, had not his sons then made proof of their
utmost valor and obedience: howbeit by this expression; three of them wel-nigh
sacrificed their lives, not sorry if they had terminated in so happy an
occasion; but Kamamet was slain, and the residue so discouraged, that but for
Delawer-cawn (who reanimated them) they had fled and left Abdul victorious.

Whiles these were bandying for glory in the field of Mars, Tzed-cawn and
T'zed-Iacup give a brave charge upon Tzalibeg and Amet-cawn; where after
mutual giving and receiving blows Tzalibeg descends first a degree of misery
by being unhorst by his adversaries Elephant, and by Tzed-cawn forced to a
deadly dormitorie. Amet-cawn (also adventring further than discretion
warranted) is taken by Radjea Doola and beheaded: so is Tzalibeg, and both,
sent to Saffinchan as a real trophy and testimonial of their victory. The
death of these great men so afflicted the whole Army, (that throwing away all
hopes of conquest) each man fled which way his fancy directed him,
Tzaitsi-chan Governor of Brodera excepted, who thought it too great a blemish
to his honor to turn tail, having five hundred horse and three Elephants as
yet lusty and courageous; but what could his opppsition do? when Saffin-cawn in
person with his victorious troops affronted him; to contend were madness, and
therefore upon entreaty, yields, and has fair quarter gives him; but his
example could work but little with Ma'met-Cooly his son, for he (imagining
his Father had done cowardly) with forty horse and one Elephant flies to
Abdul-cawn, who received little joy in such an untimely expression, being
burdened with sorrow and disgrace, but bids him (do as he did) fly, to avoid
the swift rage and pursuit of the Enemy. In the flight, Motsaib-cawn is brought
back to Saffin-cawn, and Abdul-cawn (by unexpected onsets of the Coolies and
highway roagues, as also by intolerable tempests, amazed, beaten, and
discouraged) hastens to Baroch; next day to Surrat; and after eight days
refreshment, and some fresh company, to Brampore; to attend Curroons command,
and make provision for reparation of his honor, never till then so notoriously
blemished.

BAROCH (where the pole septentrionall is elevated twenty one degrees fifty
five min.) is a City of good note in the Gusarat Province: Baroch.
distant from Surrat (by Cosumbay and Periaw) four and thirty english miles,
from Cambaya fifty four, from Amadavad a hundred twenty four, from Brampore
two hundred and eleven or there abouts. It is seated in a beneficial soil,
watered by Narvar (or Nardabah) a sweet and delightful river, which, from the
Decan mountains commixing with the Tappee, flows through Brampore hither, and
at Hansot (a Village eight course lower) separates, and makes a pretty Isle:
and (a small hours travel thence) in two streams four miles asunder,
incorporates with the briny (...) Baroch is visible (by reason of her high
standing) a good way distant; built upon the best advantages of Nature and Art:
both, so excellently contending, as makes it at first view seem impregnable:
she is well peopled, and with such as extract great wealth by land and water:
the buildings are generally submisse and low, especially those below the
mountain. In quondam times her royalties were more spacious, as soveranizing
over many Towns of quality a great way removed: as Medapore seventy miles
thence; Radgee-pore or Brodera eighty; Iownbasser thirty, etc. each of which
now enjoy peculiar Podestates: howbeit (as Merchants tell us) the Mogul has
received hereout as annual tax or tribute, one Million two hundred and
threescore thousand mammoodees (or shillings in our money:) 'twixt Baroch and
Amadavad is intombed Polly-Medinae a Mohumitan Saint, excessively reputed of by
the superstitious people; who in way of meritorious pilgrimage flock thither,
laden with chains or stones, and locking up their mouths from speaking
vanity, by such penance to obtain children, health, wealth, or what they lust
after. But to our story.

A.D. 1622. A.H. 1002.
Iangheer, during these offenssive broils, resides at Fettipore, and hears of
Abdul-cawns presumption and Curroons new rebellions; he sleeps unquietly, and
can take no rest, till both of them receive due punishment: he calls Sultan
Perwees his son, acquaints him with his affliction, gives him order to levy
some forces, wherewith to persecute his traitorous Brother, and those outlawed
Umbraves that attended him.

Curroon rebels and is beaten.
Perwees (entreating Mahobet-chan to accompany him) with 50000 horse, moves
against Curroon: by the way, he imprisons Mirza-chan, Abdul-chans son (but
lately to Iangheers grandchild married) and by order is sent manacled to
Ethabarchan, in Agra castle to be confined: whiles Abdul Azief-chan (by
Abdulchans deceit brought to Curroons party) escapes, submitts to the Mogul,
and is pardoned. Curroon has notice of the approach of his enemies, so that
from Azmeer he hasts to Mandow to augment his Army, with a settled determination
to bid them battle. Perwees follows him, and pitches ten English miles from
his brothers camp; and next morning drawing out his men assayles him, who at
the first shock (by mishap of Rustan chan and Berkendaschan) falls back and
lets the enemy possess his trenches: in a word, Perwees has the day and
Curroon flies to Brampore his old receptacle. Ganganna noting Curroons
sadness, makes it an advantage of his treachery; he persuades the Prince to
send him to mediate a peace with Perwees, with an intent to deliver him into
his hands (having precontracted with Beyrambeg and Darab-chawn, to seize him,
who to that end had ambushed near the river Nardebah 20000 horse;) but Abdul
chan disswades Curroon, assuring him of Ganganna's villainy, Ganganna escapes,
the conspiracy comes to light, and Beyrambeg with his associate is laden with
irons, placed on an Elephant and with some selected troops, leaves Brampore
and flies into Decan, where by Melec Ambar (glad of such confusion) he is
welcomed, and seated in Nassier-Throm, where he dictates patience; his
Elephants and men are sent to Daultabat till he recalled them.

Sultan Perwees and Mahobet-chan enter Brampore, and here whither Curroon was
traveled. They give Iangheer notice of their good fortune, and he celebrates
it with no less joy, than as if he had triumphed over a dangerous enemy. But
behold, this fair Sunshine of content is inveloped with an unexpected cloud
of storm and danger. I'hen Thouz an Ouzbeg Tartar (of long time watching some
fit occasion to forage the Moguls Territories, by Curroons unquietness spies
it,) with thirty thousand horse overruns Chabul, perpetrating all sorts of
spoil and mischefe. Iangheer, exclaimes and rages violently, but so soon as
he had given vent to this his swelling passion, he sends post to Zaed-cawn
(son to Mahobet-cawn) Viceroy of Bange, to retaliate him: this young Gallant
delays not, but with twenty thousand horse interposes 'twixt the City and
Tartarr, gives him so furious a charge, that Ihen Thouz is afraid to suffer it,
by base flight leaving his honor, half his men, and store of wealth to
Zaed-cawn, and by his joviall troops to be rifled: after which, they enter
Tartary, and as far as Gassany, burn, spoil, and make havoc of what they
meet with, returning with great wealth and many Elephants to Kabul, where with
all acclamations of joy they are welcomed, and by Iangheer so accepted of, that
he sends Zaed-cawn many thanks, and adds to his former troops 5000 as an
augmentation of more honor and benefit.

This cloud once over-blowne, the Horizon appears more glorious, and Iangheer
contemplates in what part to enjoy with his beloved Noor-mahall most pleasure.
Cassimeer at length gets the pre-eminence: It abounds with variety of choice
sports, but the progress was long and remote from most places whence in those
active times he was to receive intelligences; howbeit, delight swaied him
against all objections, giving Curroon (by that distance) so fair an
advantage, that with all speed (sending his Umbraves word to follow him) he
forsakes Decan, and through Gulcunda and Orixa, speeds into Bangala, yea with
four thousand horse, and three hundred Elephants passes the solitary deserts
and so suddenly presents his forces before Dehaka, that Abrahim-cawn, governing
that Province (blasted with amazement) flies away first to Bannaras, then to
Meslipatan, and knows not where to rest securely: whiles Curroon smiles at it,
and without stay or let, commands his treasure; with money and fair words so
bewitching most of the Umbraves of that fruitful Country, that they immediately
came to do him service with horse, money, and armory.

Overjoyed with such good hap, this daring Prince breaks into Purop, flashing
(as to the other) such terror into the eyes and heart of Makolidischan the
Governor, that without any show of manhood or policy he posts to Elabass to
acquaint Rustan the Captain with his danger, by whom (in stead of thanks) he
is soundly rated, and for his cowardice imprisoned.

Curroon hears of it: but so long as he continues prosperous, he regards no
man's misery, but rather by such, increases his activity; passing his Army over
Ganges, he aims at Kerry not doubting of the conquest; but by the way at
Radgee Mahal is with such fury assaulted by Ebraim-chan (by this time
reincouraged, and here ambuscadoed with six thousand horse) that little wanted
of foiling him, had not Abdul-chan (behind with best part of his Army) hastily
brought up his troop, and by 3 hours skirmish recovered him, after three
thousand were slain of Curroons party, and four thousand of Ebrahims, who
also lost his life by his too great avarice amongst his men, and out of too
much appetite to regaine his honor so lately blemished. Curroone rubricates
this in the Calendar of his greatest dangers and deliverances: it teaches him
to travel with more care and vigilancie, but disswades not from the
prosecuting his unjust designs, spoiling and robbing all that wealthy
Province, and entering as Conqueror Tanda and all Gouro, Banaras, Chatighan,
and all such Towns in Orixa and Bengala as resisted him; preying upon their
gold and jewels, acting many unchastities, and forcing their oaths and hostages
to become his subjects: thence to Pathan, whither Radgee Vslem with five
thousand horse and twenty thousand foot came to serve him.

Perwees hears of Curroons extravagancies, and intends to curb him: he commits
Brampore to Rustan-chan and Laskar-kawn; and with 50000 horse aims with long
toil at Elebasse, and entering Lala Bersinghs territories, Lala meets him with
7000 horse, and gives him a Present of 3 leck of roopees.

Iangheer lest he should surfeit of delight, at Cassmeer entertaines the news
of his son Curroons fresh outbreaking, as also of Ebrahims death and sad
discomfiture: but fearing his vagrant son might grow too potent (if too long
suffered in his exorbitancies) he rowses himself, and forthwith commands Chan
Iehan out of Molthan and Buckarr to raise some Companies and to hasten into
Gousurat, with the tribute of those Provinces to advance a brave Army, and
join with Perwees against the Rebels: Chan-Iehan being come to Fettipore, he
there loyters, and as long at Agra wraps himself in idleness, forgetful of
the Mogulls command, the Princes need, and his own honor; yet, Rustan,
Captain of Elabas, shows himself of better temper; for having imprisoned
Mokolidaschan for his fear, he thenceforth labors to fortify his Castle with
men, money, and provision: which when Curroon heard, he alters his intent, and
draws his forces against Rantas (a strong defenced Castle) which by Syet
Monbark is yielded upon small treaty: he also assaults Tzinner, which tho a
while well kept by Hastibeg, is in the end delivered: after this, Abdulchan
forces Iangheer-Coolighan Captain of Bonarce to Elabas, and Wazer-Chan to
Ioonpore and other Towns, whereout they drew abundance of treasure; and
hearing of his brothers approach with Mahobet-chan (to forfet prevention) he
entreats Abdulchan, Radgee Rhiem, and Byram-chan to try their fortune against
Elabasse, by Rustan-chan so strongly defended: they obey him, and with all
haste besiege it, and next day assault it with utmost fury, but by Rustan are
as bravely beat off and forced to retreat with shame and danger. In that action
the seed of so much emulation and spleen kindled twixt Abdul and Radgee Rhiem
as was not quenched in long time, and without both destructions. Sultan Perwees
and Mahobet-chan hasten (if posssible) to be at Elabas ere the rebels rose
from before it: they pass Backery and Municpore, but Abdul-chan hyes thence
over Ganges and at Bonarce (or Banaras) join with Curroons army.

Ghan-Ganna imprisoned.
Ganganna (banckrupt in credit with Curroon and Abdul-chan,) had not been long
in Perwees army, but by Mohobet-chans command, for some unworthy plots is
imprisoned; which a servant of his ( M'hia Fehiem by name) took so impatiently,
that he consorts with 500 men and ambushes twixt their passage to Kalpin and
Lala's country, by force attempting his Lords delivery: his good will was much
and good, but the success bad and bitter; for Mahobet-chan fearelesse of such
a scarecrow, in small space slew him and his rash society. Ganganna thenceforth
is more strickly looked to, his estate confiscated, his wife and son and family
are upon Elephants sent slaves to Agra; whiles Perwees, Mahobet, and the Army
arrive at Elabas; where by valiant and faithful Rustan-chan they are welcomd
and lodged in the castle with much pomp and joyful entertainment.

Mahobet-chawn is impatient of stay till he could come to grapple with
Curroones Army, who by that time had assembled a great company, allured by the
magic of his gold and tempting language, to run a bold hazard with him to
the gates of Death. near Thonec 15 miles from Banaras they pitch their camps
in view of one another, either side resolved with the utmost of valor and
policy to purchase victory. Ganges (that great, rich, and deified river, which
say the Bannyans issues out of a rock at Siba formed like a Cowes head) a
whiles forbad them, restrayning eithers fury, save what volleyed from the
roaring guns to eithers prejudice. Beyrambeg began the play with 4000 horse and
forraged toward Elabas but is by Mamet Shawma met upon Shawezi's bancks where
his men were discomfited, himself slain and his head severed. Mahobet-chan
interprets this as a good Omen to the battle; inflamd with courage, he draws
out his troops, but knows not how (without apparent peril) to pass his men
over Ganges, till by a Native he is directed to a safe ford, where he got over
luckily: he gives his company some encouragement, and delays not to affront
Curroon to his face. Curroon willing rather to lose life than swallow such an
indignity, orders his camp and desires Radgee Rhiem with his Elephants to
answer him; this courageous Captain most gladly undertakes it and gives
Mahobet so hot a charge, yea with his warlick Elephants so disordred him, that
had Abdul-chan or Derra-chan seconded him (as was appointed) Curroon had easily
obtaind a glorious victory; but they swelling with envy against this brave man,
ever since their attempt of Elabas, not only betray his hopes by hovering back,
but are overjoyed when they behold Mahobet-chans company recovered, and Radgees
Elephants wounded and madded with rage to execute their wrath upon their
owners, Radgee Rhiem slain.
and in the end Radgee (after as much proof of courage and skill as could be
in man) slain, and his whole squadron confounded: in this miserable sort,
perished one of the ablest men of India, and Abdul-chan most basely guilty of
his death: revenge pursues him; for finding it high time to give over looking
on, and do something, he sees Perwees entering with Radgee Zissing, Radgee
Ziand, Radgee Bertzing and their Army. Curroon also falls on, doing what lay in
the power of man, the battle now pelmel enduring for five hours with a great
deal of martial skill and bravery. Curroon is hurt in the arm. Perwees
(though upon his Elephant) is by Derrhachan wounded in the side, and but for
the excellency of his mayle had there dyed. In the end, the Kings Army grew
victorious by the unresistable fury Mahobet a fresh affords them, the rebels
pusillanimously opposing that new torrent of destruction, gaze a while, and
then remembering the injustice of their side grow pale with fear, so as in the
end they turn tail and fly amayne, resolving not in haste to undertake such
an occasion. Curroon is not able to alter it, his old accursed fate pursues
him; and therefore (striking the ground with his lance) he leaves the battle,
escapes away, and with 4000 horse of such as loved him, he flies to the
inexpugnable Castle of Rantas, yielded by Monbark, and wherein he had placed
Radgee Gholam one of the murderers of Prince Gushrooe; leaving the residue of
his Army to sip the bitter cup of death, the glory of a great and famous
overthrow to his brother and Mahobet-chan, and the spoil of his camp to
Radges-Bertsingh, who from out of it brought of gold, silver, precious gemmes,
Elephants, Camels, horses, and slaves of both sexes great abundance.

Sultan Curroon in his strong Castle and at such a distance, has time to
ruminate upon his miseries, and with a discontented mind sees how insensibly he
precipitates his hopes, at that instant fixed in the center of affliction: and
as an aggravation to his melancholy, hears of Mahobet-chans re-approach
toward him. He thereupon disparks his Seralio, and flies thence to Potan with
Assaph-chawns daughter only in his company (who had lately brought him a dainty
gyrle) and by a Zantel or Post dispatches letters to Darab-chan (then in
Bengala) to levy some forces and meet him at Radgee-Mahal, where he expected
him.

Mahobet-Chan, Prince Perwees, and captived Ganna pursue Curroon, scarce
resting day or night till they came to Rantas, where hearing which way he
took, they chase him to Patan, but there also they miss of him, having sure
tidings of his flight to Radgee Mahal. At Patan they breath awhile, and hearing
of Darabs obsequiousness to Currown, they get his aged Father Ganganna by
letters to dehort him, and to promise him requital so he would join with
them: Darab (incensed by Mahobet-chans severity to his father, and supposing
his persuasions forced and counterfeit) most unluckily denies, and goes on to
levy men to support the rebellion. Prince Perwees proclaymes him Traitor, and
allots 4000 roopes to him would bring him to his camp alive or dead. The
tyme-serving greedy Multitude (knowing Currown was fled) not only bring
Darab-chan but his children and kinseman Morad, son to Sha Nabarkhan, all
whose heads are struck off and sent to Perwees, and by Mahobet-chans command
presented to Ganganna, by that a wretched Father, and thence (as a Trophy of
their care and terror of others) unto Agra on poles to be elevated. The report
of this untoward massacre is soon known to Curroone, so that he bids farewell
to Mahal, and flies to Medenpoore, and thence to Odjea; but is quested after by
Mahobet to Medenpoore, where, missing him, he stays for Prince Perwees, and
sends Baker chan and 8000 horse in the pursuit after him. At this Oudee or
Oujea (a city in Bengala and felicitated by Ganges) are many Antic Monuments,
Oudee.
especially memorable is the pretty old castle Ranichand built by a Bannyan
Pagod of that name about 994500 years ago after their account, from which to
this the Bannyans have repaired to offer here and to wash away their sins in
Ganges, each of which is recorded by name by the laborious Bramyns who
acquiantes this Pagod with their good progressions and charitable offerings.

A.D. 1623 A.H. 1003
During these domestique broils, Melec Amber (perceiving the season
advantageous to recover what he had lost,) advances with 50000 men, and so
unexpectedly chardges Laskar-chan, Mirza Mametsheir, and Ebrahim Hossen, that
they had no warning for defense, but are compelled to give up their Forts and
suffer the Decan to re-enter, what was his own by law of Nations; 15000
Indians were slain, and as many were expelld the country; the 3 Umbraves also
are sent prisoners to Daultebad to attend the pleasure of their conqueror.
Bacherchan having commission to persecute Curroon, procrastinates not, but in
few weeks attaines OF djea; where the Prince (though he had 5000 horse and 300
Elephants) dared not abide him battle, possessed with fear and so terrified
with precedent dangers, that he flies into Gulcundah, Curroon flies into
Gulcunda.
contrary to Bacherchans expectation who desired battle. The King of Gulcunda
receives him with counterfeit welcome, and attends him (where he passes) with
12000 horse, pretending to safeguard him; but Curroon saw it was rather to
secure his Dyamond mines, (at that time open) too prevalent a bait for his
needy Army. Melec Amber with less suspicion and more subtilty (heartily glad
of his rebellion, thereby debelitating the Mogul, and securing his own
Monarchy) sends an Ambassador to Curroon, well attended, with letters of much
affection, and plenty of money and other necessaries; with an invitation into
Decan, where at all assayes he should command his service. Curroon rejoices in
this sunshine of happiness, and accepts his motion: but after three months
commorance in that country, weary of idleness, he projects the recovery of his
old Eparchy of Brampore, and so without longer advice bids Amber farewell, and
with ten thousand horse divided amongst Abdulchan, Mahumet Tackhieck and
Iacup-chan, shows himself before Brampore, but is forbid entrance by Radgee
Rustan set there by Sultan Perwees; which so inrages Curroon, that after he had
breathed out a thousand fruitless curses and threats, he assalts the walls with
incredible haste and violence, but is also so churlishly compensated by valiant
Rustan, that with great loss he retreats to Chan-channaes curious gardens
there to ruminate: howbeit, Abdul-chan is so transported with flame, that he
mounts again and advances with his Standard; yet in the meridian of his hopes
is dejected by valiant Rustang' and forced to fill the ditch with carcasses of
his too forward followers. Mahomet Tackieck at twilight tryes his desteny, and
chardges so furiously and so close, that in despite he mounts the wall, and is
so bravely backed by his own regiment, that in small time he takes the
principal cittadell or fortress, and on many parts of the wall florisht his
colors in sign of victory, and as a call to Abdulchan to to second him; but
Abdul (poisoned with envy to see a Merchants son possessor of so much glory,)
forbeares to succor him, so that this heroic Captain (too far engaged) is
assailed by Rustan Atset-chan and fresh troops so long, and with such
egernesse, that all his company are cut in pieces, and Mahomet struck
dangerously in his eye, yea (after as much proof of dexterity and valor as
was possible) is taken and imprisoned. In this base sort (the second time) has
Abdul-chan forfetted Curroon the victory, yet keeps the knowledge in his own
breast, and goes unpunished: whiles Sultan Perwees and Mahobet-chan continue
their quest, and receiving notice of the siege of Brampore, they have thither,
with chan Alen, Radjea Stertsing, and a great Army of Rashpoots; but Curroon
(premonished) seeing no good likely to be done, arises and falls toward
Bellaguate, in the way attempting vainly Hasser; but missing it, redelivers
Rantas also into his enemies hands, and once more visits Melec Amber at Rerki
in Decan clothed in his old sad habit of misfortune.

Hasser, (five courses from Brampore as you pass to Agray, the strongest, and
in all advantages the best defended Castle through Chandis) is built upon the
top of a most high and precipitious Mountain, walled by Nature, and capable to
feed and lodge forty thousand horse: within, are springs of wholesome water, by
virtue whereof the people are infinitely enriched; the earth also is excellently
fruitful in herbs and corn and what else is requirable for defense or
pleasure: upon all sides are mounted great Ordinance of brass, about six
hundred, here placed by the last King of Gusurat: but one discommodity is
commixed, making all the other delights relish unseasonably; Worms ingendring
in the legs and thighs of such as drink the water; but lately noted; and
which only gave Ecbar conquest of this Castle, otherwise inexpugnable.

Iangheer the great Mogul rejoices at the several victories his son Perwees
and Mahobet-cawn are crowned with: and to express how well he took it,
observing the valor and loyalty of Ganna-zied-cawn, (lately made Viceroy of
Kabul) calls him to Court, expresses his good will in variety of complements,
and more then so, adds five thousand horse to his command, and under seal
makes him Governor of Bengala, of all the Provinces of Indostan most famous,
rich, and populous: Bengala, is a Province in India, spacious, noble, and
fruitful; peopled with Mahometans and Idolaters, addict to Mars and
Merchandise: reasonable in shape and color: well clothed, extremely lustful;
jealous, crafty, and suspicious: the ground is redundant in good Towns,
Castles, fruits, flowers, corn, etc. mellowed by Ganges, which in two great
branches flows through her, and 200 miles asunder, at 23 degrees, commixes with
the Ocean.

Normal and Assaph-cawn cast a squint eye upon Ganna-zied-cawns, new glory,
wishing fit occasion to eclipse it; and only for that he was son to Mahobet; no
other reason caused it: they are no trewands in the school of mischief, and
in the first place, to plot more mischievously, and affront Mahobet (whose
miseries are now broaching) they get the old Mogul to command Mahobet without
delay, to send Ganganna the Captain, unto Agra, Meza-Arebdestoa-cawn (one of
Normals creatures) delivers the message, and Mahobet (loath to show any example
of disobedience, though he knew langheer abused, and this a mere plot of his
confusion) lets him go, who forth with begins to chatter and spit his utmost
malice against Mahobet, exhibiting many false complaints, and incensing as much
as possible the old Mogul against his innocent Champion: that he had most
unjustly put to death his son and others of his kindred, out of malice; yea,
after he had voluntarily left Curroon to serve in the Kings Army. These
accusations wrought somewhat in the credulous jealousy and weakness of the
old Mogul; but more, when from the seeds of haste and distrust sown by Ganna in
the heart of Perwee, by his letter he entreats his Father to call Mahobet, a
detractor of his glory, and ambtious to ingulph the Monarchy. This so confirms
the Mogul, that without more dispute or memory of his former services, he
believes Gangannas reports no longer malicious, but presently condemns him of
pride and ingratitude, gives his command to Cawn Iehan, and commands him home
to receive his deservings. Frau de perit virtus, Mahobet admires the villainy of
Ganganna, and Noormall; and thinks (by the purity of his own conscience) it
is impossible his Master should really believe such imputations; till
remembering his dotage upon Normal and her inveterate spleen, he grants it; but
resolves to take another course till time might delucidate his innocence; and
therefore as his love and duty bound him, he goes to Prince Perwees to bid
farewell; but when he perceived him so strangely altered, so coy and stately,
it welnigh struck him dead with sorrow and amazement (an excellent sympathy and
union, till Ganganna dissolved it, having been till then betwixt 'em:) so that
with a sad heart, and tormented eyes, he leaves the Camp, but carries along
with him the hearts and courages of all the Army. From Brampore he goes; many
guess, but none (no not himself) knows whither his fortune led him: at
length by advice of his best friends (that assured him if he went to Court,
he should at least be branded with the name of Traitor) he travels to his
Castle of Rantampore, resolving to purge his honor by letter and proof to
Iangheer, and to safeguard himself from the spite of Normal and all his enemies.

The discord of Peiwees, Mahobet, and Normal, sounds sweetly in Curroons ears;
hoping by the confusion of them all, to ground steadfastly his own ambitious
practices: and perceiving his old Father so taken with fantasmes and
apparitions of love, he resolves to practice deceit, and in the Moguls
weakness to fix the strength of his conspiracies: he presents him by Godgee
Iehan (a crafty man, and Tutor to his two sons) a letter neatly pend, but
dictating nothing save hypocrisy and submission: he knew also the greedy
appetite of his Father after gold and rarities, and therefore adds a pishcash
of rare coignes, a hundred choice Elephants, and some portraits he borrowed
from the Portugals. They are all well taken; his sons respected, and word is
sent him from Assaph-cawn of hopes to re-ingraft him. In the mean time,
Madoffer-cawn at Lahore receives the government or Provostship of Agra, from
Cassem-cawns pride, who was placed there upon his marriage which Movissan-begem
sister to the Queen, but is so impatiently digested by that ambitious woman,
that she ceast not till she had got him re-established.

Six years past, viz. 1618. and of the Heg. 998. I told you, how Iangheer at
request of Assaph-cawn took his eldest son Gushroo from Anna-Rha-Radia and Chan
Iehan, delivering him to Curroon, who finding him a stumbling block to the
Imperial Crown, by Radgee Bandor gets him removed: at that same time were
committed to that Fratricide, Sha Hossen and Ethymor (sons to D' haen Shaw
his brother who died of drink at Brampore) whom because he saw towardly, and
apt to revenge their Fathers untimely death, he was desirous to send them in
that bloody bath, to sudden destruction; but he durst not perpetrate such
apparent butchery, perceaving all men's eyes and expectations after them, and
the death of their Father and Uncle, not a little murmured at: so that he had
no other way to prevent their power and anticipate their claim unto the
Empire, but by getting them instructed in the faith of our blessed Savior
Christ, and to be baptized; by that trick out of the Alchoran, making them
incapable of so great an earthly Monarchy, but heirs of a better; for, virtus
locum habet inter astra. After this, he ever led them with him to keep them the
strictlier, till such time as he was vanquished at Elabas by Rustan-cawn: for
then Ethamore escapes to Perwees, and thence to Labor where his Uncle
entertaines him gladly, and marries him to B'har Bannoo Begem his daughter: and
at Curroons next flight from Brampore, Hussen also flies to Radgee Rustang, and
thence to his brother, where he lived safely and more honored.

Mahobet-cawn at his Castle at Rantampore (practizing to digest his affronts
with patience) receives a peremptory command from Iangheer ( Normal I might
say) to yield up his house to the Queen, A.M. 5595. A.D. 1625. A.H. 1005.
who had given the keeping of it to Bacher-cawn his enemy, and that he should
pack into Orixa to his son the Lieftenant there. The message is so tart and
sent to one (then whom none more) impatient of injuries, that he returns his
Master the Mogul this reply, he was ready (as a thousand times formerly) to
spend his life and goods to do him service, but would never stoop to the lure
of his inveterate enemies; he was ready to account the reason, but upon
condition he might be free from the tallons of his rammage foes, whom he saw
ready to prey upon him: with this answer the Post returns, with news also,
that Abdul-cawn (either weary of such vagaries, or that he saw the wind of
Curroons good fortune averse, or doubting his former envy might undo him) for
some of these, Abdul cawn leaves Curroons party.
or all, flies from Curroon, and by Cown Iehan at Brampore with Perwees is
joyfully welcomed.

Iangheer wonders at Mahobet-cawns presumption, but Mahobet no less admires
his ingratitude. But after much persuasion of his kindred and friends about
him, he assumes fresh courage, and attended by five thousand voluntary
Rashboots, issues from his Castle, and through Rassanwer journeyes to Lahore,
resolving to make his own defense to Iangheer, then removing to Kabul, or die
in doing it. The Queen and Assaph-cawn have notice of his intent, but fearing
his force, and that (if he had any private discourse with Iangheer) he would
re-ingratiate himself, they make the Mogull set to his seal to what they had
indicted, the command being that Mahobet should come in person, attended only
with some few of his choice friends to clear his infamy: but he smells their
craft, and in his place, sends his son in law to make his excuse, and to
treat upon surer terms than if he had gone in person: with a willing heart
this young Gallant undertakes it, and at his first entrance into the Lescar
(without ever seeing the Mogul) he is made to dismount his Elephant by the
Queens order, is disroabed of his bravery, and clad in nasty rags; is after
that most miserably chabuck't, or beat upon the soles of his feet with canes or
rattans, bare-headed (the greatest shame possible) set backward upon a carrion
Jade, with kettle-Drums led through the Army, and made a scoff to all that
rascal multitude; overjoyed, they had this good occasion to manifest their
hate upon the Idea of Mahobet-cawn and to delight the Empress.

Mahobet-cawn is quickly certified of his sons disgrace, and that Iangheer knew
it not; he questions not who, the whole Country blaming Normall and Ganganna
for such barbarism: in it, he sees their hate and his own misery, if he had
harkened to their oaths for safety to come weakly accompanied: and now (more
than ever, discovering the Queens ambition to advance her son, and
Assaph-cawn, Curroon, guarding themselves with a constant Army of thirty
thousand horse, violently seazing the Moguls treasure, and in all affairs
abusing his authority and greatness, with other indignities apparent to all
the Empire) he incourages himself, not regarding the hateful epethite they
branded him with in their Proclamation; his innocence to Iangheer and zeal to
Bullochy (next heir undoubted to the Crown) re-animating him; so that after
he had sent his old Master the Mogul a short, but pithy Apology of his
contempt, and portrayed the villainy they offered his son; he surveighs his
Army, gives strict command to offer no violence to Iangheer or his Tent, and
with twenty thousand valiant Rashboots passes on to find out Normalls Army and
the Lescar, at that time consisting of above 50000 men: by accident part at
that instant went by, led by Eradet-cawn; and the residue passed the river
Phat, conducted by Godgee Abdul Hussan, in hope to find Mahobets Army
unprepared, but in vain; for that experienced warrior knew he should want no
stratagems to destroy him, and therefore slept the Lions sleep, with the eyes
of prevention always open; and now finding the advantage his, gives the word
unto his Camp, and with an undaunted heart charges Eradet first, and circles
his troops with such speed and order, that in less than two hours (ere Abdul
Hussan got over all his men) he not only disordered, but slew above six
thousand men, filling the residue with such fear, that each fled for his own
safety; but unluckily; the flood without mercy swollowed most of them, both
dangers equally so confounding them, that with ghastly looks and loud outcries,
such as escaped made known the horror of their conflict; so that the other
part of Normalls Army stood still; till by Assaph-cawn, Abdul Hussen, and other
Umbraves, they are cheered up, and prepare to encounter the rebels, who with
Mahobet their General were come in front, and with victory in their foreheads
(regarding neither their greatness nor multitude) rush courageously on their
adversaries, for five hours giving and receiving blows, each side equally
heated with rage, and inflamed with desire of conquest. The Queens Army were
fresh and excellently fitted, but by the overthrow of Eradet their companion
not a little amazed; Mahobets men, though come from far, yet of a more
warlike constitution, and led by a second Mars, were hopeful of mighty gain
and glory; so that in the end, Normalls side gave back, well beaten, and unable
any longer to abide the heavy strokes of their Iron adversaries; Assaph-cawn
flies up and down like a distracted man; upbraiding, entreating, and using all
means possible to re-incourage them; but fear had slain them, the Rashboots
swords had flasht too much terror amongst them to revive again; so that with a
sad heart, upon his Arabian Courser he flies away, with Mirza Abontila his
son, to a Castle not far distant thence, but by accident are espied and
chased by Mirsa Byrewer ( Mahobets third son) and are forced out, and
shackled in silver fetters, are also brought to Attack and there kept, whiles
Mahobet-cawn and his Army galloping in the Air of good fortune beat down the
Queens forces, at that time more willing to die than fight; so that without
more let, they proclaim themselves Lords of India, and prey upon infinite
riches of all sorts in the Lescar now scattered and triumphed over. The old
Mogul (not scared with Belloma brazen noise and clangot) was found sleeping,
yea luld in Morpheus golden bed, till by Mahobet-cawn he is awaked and assured
of his welfare; upon a stately Elephant they conveyed him to Attack, leaving
slain behind him twelve thousand men, and many Umbraves of note, Mirza Cassem,
Radgee Doola Abdul-Gallec, Abdul Samet, Mirchan, Godgee Shawarchan and others:
and taken prisoners, Iangheer, Queen Normall, Assaph-cawn, Mirza Abontila his
son, Sultan Bullochy, Sultan Sheriar, Sha Ethimore, Sha Hossen, Eradet-cawn
Mokendaschan, Mocrib-cawn, and Molena Mahomet; all which, to the amazement of
the world, are led prisoners to Kabull to expect the pleasure of their
conqueror. Now, is Mahobet-cawn elevated upon the majestic chariot of command
and glory: yet resolves in no sort to derogate from the splendour of his Master,
his only aim being to clear his honor from scandal, and to retaliate his
enemies what in his friends he had formerly suffered. Normall (now clouded
with shame and misery) is brought forth, and by the monster multitude exclaimed
on; so that by assent of Mahobet and many other Umbraves she is censured to be
beheaded. Not till then did she perceive the thorny path she had too long
walked in, nor meditated upon the mutability of Fortune, nor till then could
she frame her ambitious heart to fear or servitude. But seeing no remedy, she
arms her self with patience, and craves a farewell of her Lord, to whom after
much ado she is admitted, where she prostrates her self clothed in so much
sorrow and repentance, that Iangheer melts into compassion, and entreats
Mahobet for her freedom. The request seems grievous unto Mahobet, but loath
in any thing to discontent him, or show disloyalty, he condiscends, Normall is
pardoned and set at liberty, and becomes more enraged by this his lenity and
complement: the residue of the royal prisoners are used with all respect and
nobleness; Eradet, and Molena Mahomet excepted, who by too much rigor are
enraged and Molena died, Zadoc-cawn sped best, for before the fight (upon some
occasion iarring with his brother Assph-cawn,) he fled to Mahobet, and is for
his service made Viceroy of Lahore, and Cassem-cawn (by mediation of
Moweza-begem his wife, sister to the Queen) restored to his government of
Agray, and Madaffor-cawn displaced; so that now, Mahobet swayes Indus'tan, till
by vicissitude of time he decays, and all things are redacted to better order
and existence.

Curroon, is at this time in Decan lurking till he might epsy some good
advantage to recover his lost fame, and once more shake off the dishonorable
Title of a Rebellious exile: but when news is brought him from Assaph-cawn, of
the almost incredible change the Empire had, and with what a dismal veil it
was then inveloped, his Father and Fatherinlaw being in such base subjection,
Sultan Bulloch and Prince Daniels sons imprisoned, and his own two sons
with Godghee Iehan their governor brought also to Mahobet tyme-serving
Madoffer-chan to abide his mercy. He disputes not what Mahobet meant, but what
had happened; so that, exasperated with a thousand fancies, he gives Melec Amber
many thanks, and with Radgee Rhyem's son and 12000 horse he passes (under
leave) Rana's territories, and at last comes to Asmeer, intending suddenly to
surprise Agra, and proclayme himself King: but his design by Radgees sudden
death is prevented, half his company forsaking him; whereat, doubting some
treachery in the Asmerians (into such hate his robbing and other disorders had
brought him) and that Mahobet-chan had sent some force against him, and Sultan
Perwees also had ambusht for him, he makes haste to Tatta, hoping upon conquest
thereof to command the river Indus and Cambaya; at his incamping before it, the
Captain Xeriph-Melec sends him word, he had order to keep him out, and that if
he attempted it, he should receive the entertainment of an enemy. He sends him
word back again, he was son unto his King; Melec confesses it, and a rebel;
Curroon regreets him, he came to defy Mahobet-chan and to bring deliverance to
his father; Melec answers, rather by all their confusions to graspe the Dyadem.
Curroon sees his fickle standing and deplores his folly, but by Derra-chan is
encouraged; after which he assaults the City in great bravery, but is beat
off; and next day returning with more rage, Melec forsakes the fort, issues
upon them, kills Derra-chan and 300 men, and forces Curroon (to his old shift)
to fly to Delly; but finding no welcome there, hasts with his chaffed troops
to Baker (twixt Lahore and the sea) to breath a while.

DELLY is the name of a City and Province of late belonging to the Potan Kings;
but at this day is under the Imperial crown of Industant: the city now in
being, is ancient, large and pretty beautiful; such appearing in that variety
of antic Monuments and Tombs of above 20 Kings and great ones there inhumed;
admired by Travelers, and adored by infinite troops of superstitious Indians.
Not a little famous also in that Piramyd three miles distant (in old Delly,
where lies buried King Homayon grandfather to Iangheer) by frame and
inscription speaking Alexander; at what time (as now) Delly was the Mausoleum
of many Potentates: new Delly is wald about, but with small security; is watered
by part of Ieminy, over which we enter upon a twelfve archt bridge, which from
a little spring in these mountains drills to Agra, and after a great increase
(in many meanders) at Prage flows into Ganges, and with her, runs in two
mouths 200 miles asunder, into the Bengalan gulf at 22 degrees of North
latitude.

Melec Amber, so soon as Curroon was parted, (to get affection from Perwees
also) gives liberty without treaty or ransom to Laskar-chan, Ebrehem-Hossen
and Mirza Manout-sher, and with a convoy leaves them at Brampore. The same
month Mahobet-chan received 26 leck of roopees from Channazeid-chan his son
viceroy of Bengala, which he extracted as annual rent out of Pattana,
Soughtar, Banaras, Sonargan, and Chatigan, rich and well peopled Cities upon
Ganges; as also out of Sondiva (an isle 20 leagues from Catigan) than which is
none more fruitful in India. Iangheer also removing from Chabull to Lahore, by
Nomalls persuasion condescends to the slaughter of such Rashboots as Mahobet
had mixed with his own guard; and after that to destroy Mahobet, ere he
received any supply of men from his kinsmen Chan-Alem and Radgee-Rustang then
coming toward him: and for her part, to second him and leave nothing undone
or unattempted that might conduce to the execution of such great designs, she
empties all her husbands coffers, and hyres men from all places to serve her;
so that Ouripargan Viceroy of Bassowere brings her 5000 horse, Godgee-Tzera
3000, Madoffer-chan 12000, and of her own 19000 more: hoping also that
Faedi-chan (fled from the battle of Atteck into the deserts of Thombel to
Radgee Ghomanoo) would associate her: but he was so afraid of Mahobets fierce
encounters, that he would no more of them; but went to Perwees at Brampore, to
whom (by a commendatory letter from Rajea-Bertzingh) he is welcome.
Mahobet-chan (ignorant of Iangheers confederacy) has notice of the Queens
project and forces, and is not amated; but with a constant bravery goes on to
fight with her. In the way (at his Masters request) he uses Assaph-chan and his
son with more respect than formerly. Normall also hastens toward him, having
sent her son Sheryar to Labor with 8000 horse to secure that Imperial city
against Mahobet. In his passage, by great good hap he chances upon Sultan
Bullochy and the two christened Princes, whom he rescued; and got so privately
and with such haste into Lahore, that without resistance most of the Rashboots
were cut off, and the castle manned with the Queens Army. Iangheer also, rowsed
out of his long sleep plays his part; for being come to Rheed within 8 miles
of Normall and her Army, (and having at all times the freedom of hunting,
hanking, and such like pastime, he makes it his advantage) escapes, and is
joyfully welcomed by the Queen, who (crying out Mombarick) impales him in her
arms, and cries for joy; then, gives present order to march on to assail the
Traitors.

Mahobet-chan (like all other motions, when at highest, descend) quickly knows
of Iangheers flight, and is not so grieved at his being gone, as in the manner,
intending never to withhold him longer than he fancied: yet the revolt of 5000
of his men did not a little trouble him: howbeit, perceiving his enemies were
approaching, and that it was no fit time to dwell upon circumstances, he
apparrells himself in a rich and tried coat of mayle, and with his shield and
spear spurs up in view of the Moguls Lescar; where, by all signs he perceives
the Mogulls affection estranged; he sighs at it, and returns, orders his
army, and after a short Oration goes on in front to begin the combat. Ere the
Battle began, Balant-chan affronts him with a peremptory Message from the
King, to this effect; that if he desired to be thought loyal, he should
express it by releasing Assaph-chan and the other Umbraves whom he kept
imprisoned; by whose mediation he might peradventure obtain pardon for such
his high rebellion: Mahobet-chan knows it was Normalls device, yet loath in any
thing to distate the King, sends him a protest of his zeal and loyalty, and
that so soon as he came to the river Behed, his desires should be accomplished:
so, he arises, and at the place presigned, calls for Assaph-chan and his son;
shows him he had power to confound him, but his virtue swayed him to another
end; which said, he not only pulls away his marks of servitude, but vests him
with rich and princely roabes, mounts him upon his best courser, girds him with
a precious blade, and with a convoy of eight hundred horse presents him to
Court, his farewell only poynting to remember him. Iangheer receives him with
tears of love, but Normall with supercilious looks and words of disdain,
upbraiding him with cowardice that durst not attend her time or depend upon her
power to force him from a rebel she both scornd and hated. Assaph-chan laments
her lunacy, but is afraid to contrary her; yet both in good will and private
discourse at any time with the King, he speaks well of Mahobet and labors his
reconciliation.

The affairs of Industant subject to this variety, possesses all men's minds
with astonishment. Whiles Iangheer and his beloved Amazon with the Lescar pass
on to Lahore to advise with Sheriar, and to reduce all Majesty (too long
divellicated) to the proper station: But what pleasure can the contemplation of
her reviving glory afford her, so long as Mahobet her mortal Enemy lives
unpunished? she knows not why she is entitled sole Empress of best parts
of Asia, Commandresse of so much men and treasure, so long as Mahobet an
obscure Rashboote dares eclipse her splendour, and travel too and fro
unresisted, guarded with such applause and popularity: she ruminates a
thousand several sorts of revenge, but by too much choice knows not which to
fasten on: the surest and most honorable is by war, and thereupon calls
Amet-chan, ( Brahim-chans cozen) Zeffer-chan, Nouradin-Cooly, Anna Rha Radia,
Emyrchan, Mircomyr, Immirza Rustan, and other Nobles, desiring them to hasten
Mahobets destruction, an employment wherein they should find a grateful
remuneration. Each man promises his best endeavor, and with fifteen thousand
horse go jointly on to attempt it: in the first place (hearing of some
treasure his son Zaedchan had sent him out of Bengala) they ambush near
Cheban-Chebaed (a Castle of strength) and break out upon the Rashboots that
then were no more but eight hundred valiant men, who sold their money at a
dear rate, two thousand of Normalls men giving their lives for it and for her
ambition; but by their multitude were at last defeated, and most of them
slaughtered; leaving 26 lack or 2600000 rupees to their avarice, which was
brought to Lahore, and there some part given for salary, the rest was coffered.

Ganganna, ( Chan-Channa some men call him, by this time recovered) by bribery
and great braggs is made General of Normalls Forces. Mahobet-chan is not
troubled at it; but the revolt of his wild son Byrewer afflicts him sadly.
This young Gallant had no sooner triumphed over Assaph-can, whom he delivered
to his Father (as is spoken of) but with three thousand horse (his Father had
made him Coronell of) he is entreated to assail Radgea Tzettersingh at Nornon
his Enemy; but not regarding his Fathers instruction, turns another way by
Bengor to force his Fathers Castle of Rantipore, but in vain, for Motzaibchan
the Captain suspecting him, fools him with fair words, and breaks his
forces; and Beyrewer flying thence, is by Ray Ruttang at Bondy taken and
imprisoned.

Iangheer finding his thoughts free, and refresht by many new delights his
youthful Queen each day invented for his recreation, forgets the rebellion of
Curroon, and his late adversity; yea, gives his lascivious mind full scope, and
involves himself with the effeminate roabes of sloth and wantonness: but in
the plenitude of those his joys, the glory of his estate grows cloudy, and
his motion whirles into a malignant Orb, by the disconsolate News he
receives from Brampore of his beloved sons death. His eyes grow dim, his
heart turns leady, and all conceits of pleasure relish unsavourie when the
departure of Perwees objects it self, and those hopes and comforts he had in
him, seem fantastical. Goushroo and Sha Daniel are dead; Perwees is now no
more: Sha Ethimore and Hussen his grand children made Christians: Bullochy is a
child: Sheriare a fool, and Curroon the very eyesore of his conceptions; a
rebel, wild, proud, greedy, treacherous, and deceitful: himself was old,
and at his death the Empire subject to innovation or domestic consumption: in
these and such like dolorous cogitations Iangheer spends the weary minutes of
his life, till death ultima poena (as they call it) summons him in few months
after to the resignation of his life and Empire: Whiles Maehobet Chawn chawes
the afflicting news also of Prince Perwees his death. 'Twixt whom (forgetting
Gangannas treachery) was most exact friendship and sympathy. He sees (in him)
the privation of all his joys, the hopes he had in his suceession annihilated,
and the ambition of Normall and Assaph Cawn (suspected to have poisoned him)
ingendring to a monstrous height; so that bidding farewell to the world and all
other society and employments, he contracts himself to privacie and solitude,
Mahobet-cawn turns Eremite.
feeding upon contemplation of what had past, and the lubricity of terrestrial
pleasures, vainglory, and other vanities: he forsakes his strong and
delightful Castle Rantampore, and through Zialor comes to Radgee Zirmol, and
under license fixes at Zirmol where he anchorites.

But Curroones air swells with Chymaeraes, now more than ever affecting the
Empire, none but children interposing him: he knew his Fathers affection was
easily recovered, and Assaph Kawn his restless projector careful to state him
in the chair of Majesty: so that, armed with confidence and accompanied with
forty Elephants and fifteen hundred horsemen he leaves Baker, Chytor, Tutta;
and through Tesel, Chobager, and Ecclisser, comes to Masser Thormet in Decan,
where Melec receives him with all joy, and adds to his troops four thousand
horse with promise of forty thousand more to assist him upon any good occasion.

CHYTOR (in midway 'twixt Brampore and Adsmeer) is yet a City, justly
clayming precedencie for antiquity amongst all the Cities of Indya. It was
formerly called Taxila, and that Metropolis whence King Porus issued against
great Alexander; Ranna Radgee Mardoot lineally descended from him, of late
years and (till by entreaty of Sultan Curroon Anno 1614. he came to Agra, and
in slight sort did some obeisance) here soveraignizing and in Oodipore, The
City is at this day but meanly beautiful, three miles in compass, not a
third part of what was formerly. Time and war have furrowed her, not only
disroabing her of her bravery in buildings where men inhabited, but in huge
Temples of Idolatry, the ruins of above a hundred (once lofty in fastidious
Turrets) to this day remaining, of stone; strong, good, white, and well
polisht, rare and observable; now inhabited by Storks, Owls, Batts, and like
birds, of whom the superstitious people have no small esteem and veneration:
the North pole is elevated in that place twenty five degrees. This Province is
bounded by Cambaya on the South, by Chandys on the North; by Berar East, and on
the West the Ocean: return we to our History.

Ganganna, Gannaoa dies.
self conceited by his late honor and employment against Mahobet-cawn (whom
he verily thought had left the society of men for fear of him, resolves to
ferret him, but) in the midst of his bravadoes and hopes is arrested by grim
death, and his carcass conveyed to Delly, to be intombed amongst his great
Ancestors. At that time, Iacont-cawn an Umbrave of great wealth, honor and
experience, commanding eight thousand horse to serve Curroon, by many affronts
without cause put upon him by Mirzaladin Melecks son, is inflamed with rage,
and flies to Chan Iehan General of Prince Perwee's Army at Brampore, who
receives him with joy, and by his exaspiration, with four hundred Elephants
and forty thousand horse make haste to Bellagate (the widow and child of
Sultan Perwees being committed to the care of Lescarcawn,) where they use all
extremities of war, spoiling, burning, and captiviting all they had a mind;
to and by rare chance, Abdul cawn disgraced.
intercepting some letters from Godgee Hessary, they discover Abdul-cawn (whom
some call Abdulla-cawn) (the weathercock of those times) his intent, to turn
from the Kings party and retvtue to Curroon: he is convicted, his estate
confiscate, his honor reverst, himself manacled, called the darling of
inconstancy, and upon an Elephant in disgraceful sort from the Army sent to
Brampore, where by Lascar-cawn he is imprisoned. This done, they enter Decan
with all speed, and pierce most fortunatly into the midst of Melecks Kingdom,
doing what they pleased without opposition; so that after six weeks hostility,
they return laden with abundance of wealth, and over-joyed with their easy
victory. But (when they thought themselves most sure) Melec presents himself
in an advantageous place with eighty thousand men, incircling them on the one
side, and the stupendous hills on the other, so that surrounded with
amazement, and clad with black rags of discontent, they incamp; not daring to
hazard the fight, or by stratagem break out to hazard their deliverance; but in
that miserable sort are locked up, the Decan at on time offending them, till by
famine finding no pleasure in their riches (where no meat on sure terms was
to be purchased) they were constrained to parle and submit, assured only of
their lives, stripped out of all their wealth and bravery, returning with more
shame than they had honor formerly.

Iangheer the great Mogull, has advertisement of this variable success, but
knows not how to alter it; nor cares he much, the death of Perwees so
possesses him: yet, Normall ceases not to pursue her revenge against Mahobet;
and finding him so hard to be dealt withal, begins will Channa-zeid-cawn his
valiant son, whom sheere calls home and places Mocrib-cawn in his command,
over five thousand horse and twelve thousand men; but he had small joy of his
greatness, for in less than three weeks being there, by accident (sailing over
Ganges) the boat is over-turned, he drowned, and Fedi-cawn is made Viceroy of
Bengala and Malacca after him: during which Iangheer being at Lahore, an
Ambassador Ziet Borka by name, arrives with presents and commends from the King
of Maurenahar (or Manauwer) accompanied with the only Oracle and wonder of his
time Hodgee-Abdulradgee (brother to Chojea Callaun) admired by all, and
resorted to by many sorts of Tartars from Bochar, Tuza, Balck, Samerchand,
Gaznahen, and other parts, none of which came empty-handed, so that in small
time this Monck was comparable in riches with most Potentates of Asia. He is
brought into Lahore with incredible joy and admiration, all the Umbraves of the
Court ( Assaph-cawn excepted) attending him, and was no sooner lodged, but is
presented from the Queen with a goblet of pure gold, massy and of curious
work, with so many Jewels as out-valued a lac of roupees. These he accepts most
cheerfully, and scorning to be behind in courtesy, returns her and her Lord,
five hundred Dromidaries, swift and beautiful, a thousand horses of an
excellent good shape and breed; some porcellan and other Chyna rarities: the
Ambassador also presents the Mogull a double of such, 2000 horses, a thousand
Dromidares, some sword blades, and other gifts of value, so great, that the
report went, never any Ambassador came so richly furnished, was better
entertained, or went away more satisfied: Never let any Ambassador think
himself welcome to any Asiatick Prince, that brings nothing for a present,
save complement, for not any Native dare petition, either the Mogull, or any of
his great ones, without a present.

Yet is not Normall suited with content, so long as Mahobet made frustrate her
vows to have him ruined: her power seems small, her endeavors idle, seeing
(as she thought) his ease was in contempt of her; so that her thoughts project,
her dreams fancy several ways for his destruction: it gladded her in part
to see his son Zeid-cawn out of employment, and at Court (by such as adored
her) scorned and confronted, howbeit, by Assaphs mean Iangheer affects him;
yea Normall (had not the overflowing hate she bore his Father hindered her) had
doubtless become amorous, and made him in Cupids Court, Iangheers competitor;
but spite ore swayes her, and revenge predominates; she calls Amir^han,
Nouradri Cooly, and Hemyr beg her minions, to whom she discovers her desires,
and entreats their diligence: they obey, and promise their care and
faithfulness, and with fifteen thousand horse advance to fight with him
(whiles Normall and the King journey to Cassimeer) his ne plus ultra: and
Assaph-cawn (mindful of Mahobets kindness to him, loath so brave a man should
perish for the lust and malice of a woman, and especially by his advantage to
draw him to Curroon) by a swift: and trusty messenger, sends him a gracious
letter discovering his sisters wrath and resolution, and sollicits young Rana
Radgee to further him.

The Queens Army persecute poor Mahobet, who upon receipt of Assaph cawns
letter, after some passion forsakes his cell in Zirmol, flies to Gessimeer, and
thence to Radgee Rana who ever loved him. The Army has notice of his flight,
they dare not enter Ranas country without leave, and therefore send post to
Queen Normahall, who dictates a letter to Rana, mixed with entreaties and
threats, makes Iangheer sign it, and after long and swift running is delivered
him; Radgee Ranna at first contemnes her bravadoes, but upon better
consideration promises his good will, but thus; he persuades Mahobet-cawn in no
sort to think him either fearful or traitorous, that (if he pleased) he would
do his best in his defense against all the power and rage of India, yet, so his
judgment were of any force, (and to indeare Assaph-chawn,) he would persuade
him (since his Enemies were so powerful and implacable) to have unto Curroon,
where he should not only be entirely welcomed, but agrandize his honor so
suddenly, that his name would flash terror into the hearts of his most potent
adversaries. Mahobet-chan, loath to trespass upon his patience, and by the
circumstances of his speech, judging him fearful of that army, tells him he
intended not to be any cause of loss or fear to him, or any other in the
universe; and so mounts to be gone; but Rana will not him go, till he promise
him a delivery of a packet he had entitled to Curroon. After long persuasion
he accords, and with 500 Rashboots, and one thousand other men led by
Wazir-chan he flies into Decan, where at Guyneer upon the limits of Nisamsha's
kingdom he finds Curroon; but so afraid of his sudden coming, that he
instantly armd his men for oppostion: yet when he saw the case otherwise, and
had read his packet, after some amazement he embraces him with unspeakable
joy, firmes a perpetual friendship and gives him command of that castle and
his other forces. All India admire at this agreement, and Normall (too late)
repents her folly.

-- The mind often in remorse
May wish the thing undone Rage did enforce.
-- Qui non mederabitur irae
Infectum volet esse dolor quod suaserit et men's,
Iangheer also blames her incosiderate wrath, and grows so afflicted at it,
that in a deep Melancholy he forsakes his pleasures at Cassimeer and removes
toward Lahore; but upon the high Mountains of Bymberrie falls sick, and the
three days end, after three and twenty years reign, (to the astonishment of
the Leskar, Normals endless sorrow, and grief of the whole Empire) he dies
(suspected of poison) the twelft of October or Ardabehish, in the year of our
account 1627 and of the Hegira 1007: Iangheer dies.
nominating upon his deathbed his grandsonne Bulloch (son of Sultan Gushroo,
his eldest son) his successor: he also swears all the Umbraves to see him
crowned: and that Curroon should have no portion nor favor save what he might
merit by submission: and accordingly (conveighing the old Moguls dead body to
Lahore, where preparing for his funeral they carry it to Tzecander three
course from Agray and intomb him in King Eckbars Monument) at Delly they crown
Sultan Bullochy (aged thirteen years) their King, with all royal accustomed
state and ceremony: and unanimously cry out alowd, Padshaw Salamant i. e. God
save the King.

Normall in Iangheers end fears the beginning of a world of miseries in her
self and progeny; but being of an active spirit and not easily distracted, she
instantly conceives and swells with the ambition of that Empire: her pregnancy
is bettered by her having the whole Treasure in her hands, also animated in
that Bulloch was too young to nourish opposition, his Council careless, and
Curroon a huge ways absent thence: so that taking occasion by the forehead,
she arms her self with confidence and a pretended Title, and resolves to mount
her son Sheriar to the supreme ascent of Majesty, or in the attempt to set
all India on fire and consume her self as a sacrifice in so great an action. In
this humor she hires 15000 horse, and sends in post haste to her son in
Iengapore to levy as many more; that done, she thinks to strangle her brother
and Bullochy at that time coming toward her. But they assured of her bad
meaning, leave Chotelen, and with 30000 horse post to Lahore to apprehend
Sheryar whom they heard was baffled by Godgee Abdul-Hassen (once his
stipendiary) and then encamped only with 4000 horse: but in the way (to
prevent Normalls speed after them) they block up the narrow passage upon the
mountains through which her Army must needs pass; so that, ere the Queen
could come to join with simple Cheryar; Assaph-chan, Eradet-chan and other
Umbraves with the young Mogul in their company come to Lahore, where they find
Sheryars Army (by the expense of 90000 lac of roopees) trebled. They delay not,
but with extremity of rage assail him and in two hours (by villainy of
Amir-chan and Sheirgodgee his chief Captains, who betrayed him) get the
victory; forcing him into the castle, which for two days kept safe, but in the
third was by treason entered, his men slain, his treasure taken, and to make
him incapable of future ambition has his eyes put out, Sultan Bullochy not
suffering him to be killed. That done, they again proclayme Bulloch Emperor of
Industant, and Lord of the Moguls; and send Eradet with 20000 horse against the
Virago Queen; who (hearing how ill her son had sped and doubting treason in
her Army,) lets fall the Majesty of her spirit, sighs at the perfidy of her
brother, grieves she slew him not when she had him in her power, complaynes of
her own wickedness in continuing so long enraged against Mahobet-chan,
deplores her abusing his valiant son, and with a dejected eye, beholding the
sudden eclipse of her glory, and the inconstancy of her Friends, she wraps all
up in dismissing her guard, and disroabed of her bravery, submits to Bulloch's
mercy; who comforts her, gives her his oath of safety, and during his reign
affords her all respect and freedom.

But long this good Prince injoyes not his soverainty: for, Assaph-chan seeing
all as he desired, speeds away a sure post with letters to Curroon, who made
such haste, that in 14 days he run 2500 of our miles, to Daita, (8 course
from Necanpore and from Brodera or Radjepore 120 to the East.) in Decan, there
finding him overjoyed with such good news, and sending his excuse to
Melec-Amber the Decan King, hasts on with Mahobet-chan, Zulpheckar-chan, and
7000 other rashboots, and mancibdars through Guzurat to Amadavad, where by
Saffin-chan he is welcomed: there he slept not long, for making Agra the
object of his race, he bids farewell to Saffin-chan, and with a greater troop
(feeding them with great promises when he had the crown) in three weeks
travel comes to Agra, where he claymes the Imperial Title, and is by his own
favorites proclaimed King, by name of Pot Shaw-Iehan: then giving notice to his
Father in law Azaph-chan how far and with what success he had traveled, as
also, that so long as Sultan Bulloch was living his own greatness was but
counterfeit; Assaph-chan, flesht in former homicides, and not caring how, so he
could fix the Dyadem on Curroon at that time tottering, he makes Radgee Bandor
of his counsel, who forthwith without examination of right or wrong posts to
Lahore, and with Assaph-chans keys, enters the hummum or Bath where the
innocent Princes were, and with a horrid speed and infernal cruelty strangles
them all, to lead Curroon through such a bloody path unto the crown.

In this miserable sort, A.M. 5598 A. D. 1628 A. H. 1008
dyed young Bulloch but three months Emperor of Industant or great Mogul; in
that massacre accompanying him, Sultan Sheryar, Sha-Ethimore and Sha-Hossen
(the baptized sons of Prince Daniel) two sons of Sultan Perwees, two sons
of Sultan Morad or Amurath; all whose carcasses were without any respect buried
in a garden in Lahore near the entrayls of Iangheer: but their heads (as an
assurance of their death) sent to Curroon, to glut his eyes (by so horrid a
Spectacle) with infernal ambition.

The murder of the royal blood of Industand being known to Chan-Iehan,
Zied-chan-and other Umbraves, they are orechardged with amazement and fear:
they see Assaph-chan guilty, but want power to question him, especially (by
inquisition) hearing it was Curroons commandment* they heap up a thousand
maledictions on their heads and crave vengeance from above to recompense them.
Curroon peceives the Empire storming at him, but his incantations quickly
quiets them. And now after much toil (having through the Ocean of inconstancy
arrived at the port of greatness and ease as he thought) he gives order for
his solemn coronation: which accordingly by a general assembly of the great
Umbraves, and Nobles of his Empire is performed; by second proclamation
assuming the Name of Sultan-Sha-Bedyn-Mahumet. Then he orders the affairs of
his Monarchy, placing and displacing at his pleasure; the Seraglio of his
father is shut up: Normall and her three daughters are confined stricktly;
Assaph-chan is made second in the Empire; and next him Mahobet-chan; Abdul-chan
is released; Channa-ziedchan is made viceroy of Bengala again. Ambassadors
from Persia, Arabia, Tartaria, and Decan come and joy him in his greatness.
Diverse Radgees, as Radgee-kessing from Nagor, Chan-Azem from Azimeer, the
puissant Radgees Mainsingh, Tzettersingh, and Ghessingh, from Fettipore with
50000 horse move with great and solemn state to Agray; whither after (six
weeks) came Assaph-chan, Zadoch-chan, Eradet-chan, Rustan-chan, Saffin-chan and
Mirgomley: to all whom he gave thanks for there several Favors, remitting and
putting in oblivion all offenses and insults during his rebellion. After which,
he proclaymes a Iubile celebrated by all men there, with all sports and
delights possible!

Thus has Curroon (through a sea of blood) attained the highest port and
dignity of the eastern world, surrounded with delights, and guarded by a power
(in his conceiving) unresistable; but these sins he makes nothing of, have
apparently in these our times drawn down the heavy Judgments of God almighty:
both, in taking his beloved wife away the week of his inauguration, since when
he has made his daughter (by that dead Lady) his wife; incest of so high a
nature that that year his whole Empire was so wounded with Gods arrows of
plague, pestilence and Famine, this thousand years before never so terrible.
1634 1014
The sword also seems to threaten him, the Persians having snatched from him
Kermaen and Candahar; the Tartar Kabull; Sheuph-Almuck indangers Tutta and
Lourebander; Radgee Ioogh with his Coolyes trouble Brampore, and two
counterfeit Bullochyes have sown the seed of an universal rebellion. The
event of all is in the hands of God, who in Infidells hates sins of blood,
incest and dissembling: we will close this story with a caveat from a heathen,
but of more reason and temperance.

-- Quid? ille qui Mundum quatit
Vibrans corusca fulmen Aetneum mann
Stator Deorum? credis hoc posse effeci
Intor videntes omnia, ut lateas?
What? that great Jupiter the world that shakes
When Aetna's thunderbolts in hands he takes?
Think thou from him who all the world does see
In lurking holes concealed close to be?
To end all, at our being in his country he came within two days journey of
Surrat; and in a ceremonial way, the English merchants ships thundered out his
health by 200 great shot, which he most thankfully accepted of: It Is high time
now to renew our Travail.

Diu.
Adjoining this and in the Cambayan Territory, is Diu, or Dew: (in former times
called Delta, (from a resemblance of that in Egypt) Patala, Patalena, and
Hidespa, as Arrhian, Pliny and Strabo have it: seated at th'entrance into the
gulf, in the latitude of 22 degrees 18 minutes North; from Ormus South, sixty
leagues; and from Cape Comry two hundred: a stream or arm issuing from Indus
so incompasses her, that she becomes a peninsule; the Haven before the Town is
so land-lockt, so good for anchorage, that at Swalley, Chaul, Danda-Rajapuree,
and other Havens is no better riding, either for the ground or Fort, that so
well safeguards them. Nearchus (great Alexanders Admiral) from this place
begun his Voyage and sailed to Ormus, where he repaired his weather-beaten
Navy. The Town it self is both large and hospitable; yet by reason of the
Portugals pride and cruelty, Christians are less beloved here then in other
places: 'twas of good Trade, affording Opium, Assa-foetida, Puchio, Cotton,
Indico, Mirabolans, Sugar, Arack, Agats, Cornelians, Diaspries, Calcedons,
Hematists, Pearl, and Elephants teeth; but since Surat and Cambaya (her next
neighbors) have drawn the English and Dutch thither, her Traffic and other
allurements are contemned: what she best boasts of, is the Castle, built (after
long fight and bloodshed) by Albuquerque the famous Portugal Anno 1515, of
their account 895: by whose cost and care it was so advanced, that it compares
at this day with any other Sea Town in the Orient. Nor could it ever have
succceded had not false protestations, bribes, threats, and other devices
drawn belief into the Pagans, that their desire to have so many Castles and
Marittim Forts, was only to defend themselves, in parts where they were
altogether strangers: but it appeared afterward, that avarice, rapine,
Tyranny, and lust allured them, as Osorius their Bishop in vita Emanuelis 11
libro. fol 347. speaks concerning them, Etsi Lusitani imprimis arces cupiebant
ad se defendendas; postea tamen visum est, speciem faederis and amicitae,
dominationem quaeri and Tyrannidem agitari, etc. Which caused such turmoyles,
that in no other part of India they found so long, such strong resistance:
partly by their own valor, but chiefly by help of Mirhocem, and his
Mamalukes, Campson Gaurus the then great Sultan of Egypt sent thither to quell
their insolences; Notwithstanding, by the ruin of that Sultan (not long
after, by Selim the first, 1516.) the Portugals by little and little grew
victorious; though to obtain it, Laurensius-Almeida (son to their Viceroy)
the most excellent of all their Captains at that time perished.

The river Indus is by Pliny called Sandus, Sinthus by Arrhian, and now called
Sinde not far distant hence, at 23 degrees. 15 min. lat. some observe 24 degrees. 40
min. and West var. 16 degrees 30 min. commixes in two ostiums ( Thevet
foolishly names seven) with the Ocean; after three thousand miles flux from
the Casmirian (or as Mela in his third book the Paropamisian) mountains; in
her descent receiving growth from many great and famous rivers, which from
other hills derive their origin, mellow Indya, and at last incorporate with
that famous flood from whose name the most noble part of the universe is named:
the rivers are Behat, Ravee, Damiadee, Ob-chan, Wihy, etc. of old times, named
Hidaspes, Acesinis, Cophis, Adris, Ob-itarmas, Coas, Suastes, Melzidas,
Hirotas, Zaradas, Hispalis, etc.

On the other side the gulf, Muskat.
in Arabia the happy is seated Muscat (or Mascat) not far from Cape Rozelgate
(formerly called Ziagrum and Corodamum) and almost Nadyr to the crabbed Topic:
I dare not conclude that this was that old Raamah (from Raama son of Chush
son of Cham) by Ptolomy Rhaguma, and Rhegma celebred by Ezekiel 27.22. The
Merchants of Sheba (a City in Arabia whence came the Queen (and not from
Aethiopia, Chush being misinterpreted) to visit Solomon: and Raamah were thy
Merchants (meaning Tire) etc. howbeit it is certain, it has been much more
populous, and famous then at this present; though now she begins (since Ormuz
was lost) to revive her glory; being the best Port, Haven, and defense for
Frigots, Juncks, and other Vessels of War and Trade belonging to the
Portugalls: who first conquered it and the I Will Anno Dom. 1507. and after it
other adjacent Towns; as Calajate, Curiate, Soar, Orfaza, and diverse places
till then under the Ormousian Empire: at that time Zeifadin was King (in
nonage) ruled by Atar a spiteful Eunuch; whose deceit was so apparent, as not
only made this Town to blush in flames, but had welnigh ruined his Masters
Empire. Torus (the King brother) then commanded here, with Mamadee the Kings
son, undone by poison given him from Nordino the second Officer: after which,
it was betrayed to the Turks by Jack a Portugal; but after some cost, and
toil recovered: yet next year (by bribery) the Tunks re-entred; and wherein,
Peribeg the Basha plants a Colony, and goes homeward: but, ere he got thither
hears of its revolt and the slaughter of his silly Garrison; the News so
amazing him, that he goes to Mecha and turns religious: but by command of
Solomon the great Turk is forced thence; and (for a reward of his fifty years
good service) is beheaded, and his estate forfeited. It now obeyes the
Portugalls: the Town is seated in a Plain, yet armed or propt with two rising
advantageous mountains; a ditch and parapet drawn from one hill to the other
so inviron her, that she seems inaccessible: the Castle is large and
defensive, filled with men, and stored with great Ordnance: little else is
worthy of our observation.

The seventeenth of December we took ship in the William for Gombroon in
Persia: the Exchange, the Heart, and other brave ships went along with us, and
above three hundred slaves whom the Persians bought in India; Trop. Cancri.
Persees, Ientews (gentiles) Bannaras and others. The eightenth day we crossed
the Tropic, and next day elevated the North pole twenty four degrees odd
minutes, the gulf in this place straightened, the shores of Carmania and Arabia
in this form appearing to us.

The Persian Gulf.


Arabia (denominated from Arabus son of Apollo and Madam Babilonia) at this
day is more obscured than in ancient times, such time as it was the seminary of
famous men: worthily in those days called happy, Panchaya and Eudaemonia. No
part bred better Physicians, Mathematicians, and Philosophers. Galen,
Hipocrates, Avicen, Algazales, Albumazar, Abubeer, Alfarabius,
Mahomet-ben-Isaac, ben Abdilla, Siet Iooh, ben Cazem, ben sid' Ally and others,
here borne or educated: the Arabic so enchanted men that it is a common
hyperbole amongst them, the Saints in Heaven and Paradize speak it. In it the
holy Decalogue was given; in it was hatched the delusive Alcaron: if gums
aromatic, succulent fruits, fragrant flowers and such like delicacies can
captivate thee, say then, Arabia is the Phoenix of the East, with Danaeus the
epitome of delight, and with Saint Augustine that it is Paradize.

It Is tripartite; Deserta, Petrosa; and Felix. Deserta is also called humilis,
profunda and aspera; by Servius, Lucian and Aristides. Petrosa, Inferior by
Strabo, Nabothaea by Ptolomy, and Barrha by Castoldus, Rathal Alhaga by them
habitants, and by Zieglerus Bengacalla. Foelix varies also in nomenclation, by
Pliny, Sabaea; and Mamotta by Solinus; Ajaman and Giaman by ben Ally. In the
first is Kedar often named by the Psalmist. In the second, the mounts Horeb and
Sinai, as also Iathrip and Mecca places of account among the Sarracens. The
Happy called now Mamotta, is unhappy in Medina Telnabi, but joyed in Jobs
birthplace, and Saba, by Ptolomy, Save; and now named Samiseashac, and many
other Towns noteworthy. Adedi, Neopolis, Phocidis Abissa, Teredon, Areopolis,
Zebitum, Acadra, Iathrib, Alata, Mocha, Eziongeber. Acyna, Munichiates, Ambe,
and others converted at this day into other names; as Aden, Zieth, Zidim,
Iemina-bahrim, Huguer, Medina, Zarvall, Oran, Danchally, Muskat, Imbum, Zama,
Moffa, Lazzach, Gubelcama, Balsora, Massad or Mosqued-Ally, Cuface, Damarchana,
Barag, Eltarch and many more now under the Ajamites or Saracins; but in old
times distinguished into these Provinces, the Sabaei (whence, Guilandinus says
the Queen came to hear Solomoms wisdom, and the three Magi) the Panchaia,
Alapeni, Moabiti and Caedari (bordering the desert) Aorzi, Nabathea ( Nabaths
birthplace, eldest son to Ismael) Atramitae, Massabathae, Canclaei, Stabaei,
etc. enough to disturb our memories. And I cannot but note, how that the Hebrew
( Chaldy, Arabic and Siriack drilling from the Hebrew) Greek nor Latin, in
their times epedimic, are now no where spoken, save by derivative: and that the
heathen gods, Jove, Saturn, Marz, Apollo, Juno, Diana, Venus, and thirty
thousand more, once idolatriz'd all the earth over, are now no where invocated:
all oracles ceast at the passion of our Savior. We will leave Arabia, and
pass by without smelling or tasting her magic delicacies, and rest satisfied
in a word or two of her present tongue, and how the months differ in several
dialects.

Arabic. English. Persian. Malle Salt Namack Sammach Fish Mohee Moihee Water
Obb Narr Fire Attash Hattop Wood Yzom Degang Hens Moorgh Sallet Oil
Rogan-cherough Sammon Butter Rogan Bedda Eggs Tough-morgh San a Dish Shecky or
paola Cobbeer Great Buzzurck Sackeer Little Cowcheck Annestre I buy it Man
mechorre Vntan aphe have you Dare suma Beet a House Connah English. Greek.
Hebrew. Arabic. Siriack. Aegyptick. Turkish. Aethiop. Persian. September
Maimacterion Tizri or Ethanim Muharram Eylooll Toph Ramazan Turh Farwardin-maw
October Puanepsion Bull or Marchisuan Sawphor Teshrin-owl Paophy Schewal Paap
Ardabehish November Anthesterion Chysleu Rabbioul-owl' Teshrin-auchor Achir
Silhcade Hatur Chodad-maw December Poseideon Tebeth or Tevet Rabbioul-auchor
Kanoon-owl Cojac Scilhydze Cohia Tyr-maw January Gamelion Sebeth or Sevet
Yowmadul-owl' Kanoon-auchor Tibhi Mucharren Tubah Mordad-maw February
Elaphebolion Adar or Veadar Yowmadul-auchor Siubat Machir Sepher Amschyr
Sharyr-maw March Moonuchion Nisan or Abib Radiab Adarr Phamenoth Rabuil-oul
Parmahath Mihe-maw April Thargelion Jarr or Zyn Sabaan Nisan Pharmuthy
Rabuil-auchir Parmuda Aban-maw May Skirrophorion Syvan Ramulan Ejarr Pachon
Gemaziel-oul Pashnes Adur-maw June Hecatombayon Tamuz Schowl Itaziran Paynhi
Gemaziel-auchir Peuni Dei-maw July Matageitnion Abb Heidull-kaida Tamuz Epiphi
Rbezib Epip Bahmen August Boedromion Elull Heidull-hazia Abb Mesorhi Saban
Musrhi Asphendermaed

Leave we Arabia and cross the Gulf, called the Babylonian sea by Plutarch in
the life Lucullus, and Yowmachama by the Syrians: by some Mesendin; called also
by the Persians Deriob Farsistan, and by Arabians Bohar el Naharim, by Turks
Elcatiph. But beware by Sir Robert Sherlyes example of Cape Guader ( Dendrobosa
in old times) not far from Goadell, in five and twenty degrees, and where the
Compass varies 17 degrees 15 minutes. An infamous port and inhabited by a
perfidious people. Under pretext of amity they allured Sherley and his Lady
ashoare A. 1613; where but for a Hodgee that understood their drift, and
honestly revealed it, they had been murdered with Newport their Captain; and
merely to play the thieves with them. Come we then to Iasques, (or rather
Iezdquis, Iezquird son of Shapore King of Carmania dying here: Pliny seems
to call it Cassandra) a Town upon the Gulf in five and twenty degrees, eight
and fifty min. lat. in Carmania seated ( Cherman now called, confind by Macron
South, and North by Persia,) South from Ormus forty leagues. A place fortefied
by the Portugal, who built a strong castle here, planted it with seventeene
cannon, o^ cannon pedro, two culverins, two demiculverins, four brass sakers,
and a thousand muskets: unable altogether, to resist the English, who in
dispight of their utmost bravery (to revenge the death of Captain Shilling,
slain the year before) took it the second of February 1622, but unwisely by
our men given to the Persian, who now keep it; and by shooting of so many
pieces as they see ships, give an Alarm to Ormus, and they to Gombroon, loath
to be intrapt by too much confidence.

In this channel we begun the Ormuzian strait; Ormus is as it were the
umbelick of the gulf, flowing from Balsorack to cape Rozelgate; next morn we
came in view of Kishmy a pettite castle not far from Iasques; Kishmy.
where also they give warning how many ships, or friggats they see danceing
upon the gulf; and next night of Larac, Larac.
another small Isle upon the Arabian shore, four leagues from Ormus Island.

ORMVS is at this day a miserable forlorn city and I Will; although but a douzen
years ago the only brave place in all the Orient. Est solitudo magna
megalopolis. If all the world were made into a ring
Ormus the gem and grace thereof should bring.
Si Tarrarum Orbis (quaqua patet) Annulus esset.
Illius Ormusium gemma decusque foret.
An I Will (though none more wretched) yet not unknown unto Antiquity by name of
Organa and Geru as Varrerius has it; of Necrokin and Zamrhi to the Tattars; of
Ormusia in Josephus libr. I. de Iud: of Harmozia in Arrian; of Armuzia in
Pliny; of Armuza in Ptol. of Vorocta in Niger; of Ogyris in Thevet: and seems
by Pliny, Curtius, and Rufus out of Dionysius, to be the burial place of that
famous Prince Erethreus, from whose name the Redsea was denominate. Ogyris
looks into the sea, from whence
Carmania, and the place of residence
Where princely Erethreus lived; whose fate
This Tomb conteins in mountains desolate.
Ogyris inde salo premit caput, aspera rupes
Carmanidis, qua se pelagi procul invehit undis,
Regis Ereth rei tellus; hic nota sepulchro
Tenditur, and nudis juga tantum canibus horret.
Named Ormus by means of Shaw-Mahomet an Arabian Dinast, who An. Dom. 700 for
more safety crossed over from Kostac in Mogestan ( Margastana of old) to Iasques;
a place hateful to Mirza Bahadin the fourteenth King after him, that for most
quiet removed An. D. 1312 of the Heg. 692 to this I Will and from that Harmuz
(part of Maceta) twelve leagues from Kostack where his predecessors dwelt, so
named it. From which time to this it was ever disturbed: first by Ioonsha the
Persian King slain by Vsan Cassan, who for pearls broke through Lar and
forced Melec Nazomadin into Arabia, and again recoverd by Mirza-codbadin 5
years after, viz. An. 1488; but long slept not so, for An. 1507 Alfonsus
Albuquerq the Portuguise (after much ado) subjected it to Emanuel his Master,
suffering Zedfadin to enjoy the Title, and a pension of fifteen hundred
crowns, but all command to himself, himself de facto King; and lastly by
Emangoly-chan the Archduke of Shyraz, by help of the English it was taken An.
1622, and by them delapidat and depopulated. Let us view it as it was and is.

The Altitude of the pole here, is 27 degrees: and though it be without the
torrid zone, yet what by the sulphur of the earth, and oblique reflex of the
burning Sun, for four months (from May to September) no place in the world is
more hot or scalding; it is the custom here to sleep in beds of rain water,
which is not very cool neither, all day naked: the City had a fair Bazzar,
many Churches, and Frieries, brave Magazeens, stately houses, and as gallant a
castle as any other in Orient; the castle is yet in good strength and repair;
the rest, levelled with the ground; of which I cannot say, Nunc seges ubi Troja
fuit, the soil being incapable of corn or other grain: at that end against
Dozar (and the great Bannyan tree in the continent) the City was built; where
the sea is so narrow that a Cannon may easily spit over: the whole I Will exceeds
not fifteen miles compass: it is the most barren ground in the world, neither
tree nor spring of good water could we find in it. It has salt, silver shining
sand, and mineralls of sulphur; has nothing else worth the looking on: And yet
from the advantageous standing, the laborious Portugal made it the staple and
glory of the world; secured indeed by many natural props, on all sides
commanding Isles and towns to furnish her: Larac ( Azgillia of old) Kishmy (by
some called Quexome or Broict) Keys or Queys I Will, Angen, Andreve (or de los
pasharos) Kargh, Baharem ( Icara in Pliny) Dozaro, Iasques, and Kostack in
Margastan (now Mogestan) vicinating them. So as to the eye of man no place
could be more offensive and defensive, garrisons of Portugalls ever lying in
these Islands; and yet, when the God of Nature had decreed a ruin, it could not
be withstood, but was in some regard miraculously effected, and at such a time
as they least suspected it.

But to do her all the favor I can: let us remember such Princes as have
honored her: Sha-Mahomet is the first I find, who in the 80 year of the Heg:
Of Christ 700, left his seat at Aman in Arabia, and sat down at Calciat upon
the shore, but disliking it, removed to Costac in Mogestan (six and twenty
leagues from Iasques) and there built a city which he called Ormuz, and from
whence part of Arabia took name; to him succceded Soliman, to him Izachan, to
who Mahobet 2, Shawran-shaw, (who bequeathed the crown to his Nephew)
Emer-sha-bedin-Molong, whose daughter and heir married Seyfadin Aben-Ezer
son to Ally-shaw Lord of Keys Island: the crown (they wanting issue) then came
to Sha-Bedin Mahomet his cozen: to whom followed Rocnadin Mamut, Hamets son,
who dying An. Dom. 1278 left the rule to his Infant son, Seidfadin-Nocerat,
who was slain by his brother Morad or Masad eleaven years after, and he
forced to fly into Kermaen by his brothers servant Mir Bahadin: Mir Bahadin
Ayaz or Ben-Seyfin Ben-Cabadin is forced to fly, unable to resist the Turks
Morad brought against him, so with many of his friends (such as hated the
Tyrant) removed to Kishny, but not liking the place, rises thence and sits down
at this I Will Gerun (or wood) where he built, fortified (and from the others
name) namd it Ormuz; in the year 1312, of the Heg. 692 and to him a man of
noble extraction, Emir-Azadin-gurdan-shaw; to him his son
Mabare-zadin-babron-sha, a brave Prince, but fell by the axe of treachery,
Mir-sha-Bedin-Issuff stroke him with; who also fell by the late Princes
youngest brother, Mirza-Codbadin was he called, infortunately banished by his
cozen Melec-Nozamedin, at whose death Cobadin returned and swayd the Ormousian
Scepter, and at his death left all to Paca-Turansha a victorious Prince yet by
death An. 1488 conquered; to him Mozad-sha Bedin, to him Salger-sha, to him
Shawez, and to him Safadin or Zedfadin 2, subdued by Albuquerq, An. 1507 and by
him cruelly strangled: Nordino, Codjeature, and De lam-sha attempted the
soverainty, but Mahomet the right heir was crowned King; he dying, his son
Seyd-Mahomet-sha was called King, who Anno 1622 was subdued by the English and
Persians, and at this day lives a prisoner at Shyraz. The Persian now is
sovereign.

The particular Acts and passages in taking this famous City, is thus (for
some men's better satisfaction) remembered.

At command of Shaw Abbas the Persian Monarch, Emangoly-chawn (chief Lord and
Governor of those Territories that conjoyne the gulf of Persia) descends with
nine thousand men, at such a time as he was confident to meet the English
Fleet, resolved to further them in revenge of those many tyrannies they had
endured by the braving Portugal: The Conditions betwixt them, under hand and
seal were these: 1. The Castle of Ormus (in case it were won) with all the
Ordnance and Ammunition to accrue to the English. 2. The Persians were to build
another Castle in the I Will at their own cost, when and where they pleased. 3.
The spoil to be equally divided. 4. The Christian prisoners to be disposed of
by the English; the Pagans by the Persians. 5. The Persians to allow for half
the charges of victuals, wages, shot, powder, etc. 6. And the English to be
custom free in Bander-gum-broon for ever. The Captains of best note in the
Pagan Army under the Duke of Shyraz, were Alliculybeg, Pollotbeg, Shakulibeg,
Shareearee, Mahomet Sultan and Alybeg King of the Port: these with the rest of
their Army encamped before Bander-gom-broon: and two days after viz. the
twentieth of January 1622. with small difficulty became Masters of the Port.
Upon which the Duke and the English Captains, Weddall, Blyth, and Woodcock
agreed upon an immediate battery, and instantly played upon the Castle with a
dozen pieces of Cannon for five hours, but gave them small hopes of sudden
conquest: yet that neither pusillanimity nor doubt might be seen amongst them,
the ninth of February the English transported three thousand Persians in two
Frigots lately taken, and two hundred Persian Boats good for little other
service: these, so soon as they were landed, having formerly made Sconces or
Trenches for their men, and Bulwarks for the great Ordnance to play on, very
furiously they made toward Ormus thinking to meet no great opposall; but the
Portugalls though they let them land and pass quietly into the Town, with
equal resolution stopped the current of their fury, at first encounter from
their barracadoes defended with shot and pike, slaying above three hundred,
and with their Ordnance beat them back with more haste and amazedness than
their approach had courage: in this disorder a Flancker by mischance was blown
up, but the war continued: little hurt accruing to either party, till the 24
of February, on which day the English advanced toward the Castle, (under which
was riding the Portugal Armado) and in despite of the Castle and best defense
their Fleet could make, being then but five Gallyons and twenty Frigots, set
fire on the Saint Pedro of one thousand five hundred Tun, and Admiral of their
Armado: which mischance, the rest of the Spanish Fleet with no small sorrow
apprehended, and finding no repair, to prevent more mischief and danger, cut
the Cables, and in that flaming posture let her drive whither wind and tide
commanded her: the English saw her too hot to meddle with, and knew she could
enrich the adventurer with no other booty, but Bellonaes furniture, so down
she went toward Larack, in the way a rabble of Arabians and Persians boorded
her, and like Iackhalls with hunger starved fury and avarice tore her asunder:
that rapine, being no less base and outrageous than the fire which two hours
had assaulted her: March 17. 1627.
the seaventeenth of March the Persians (to dispatch and show they were not
idle) gave fire to a Mine stuffed with forty barrells of powder, which blew up a
great part of the wall, through which breach the enraged Portugalls immediately
sallyed and maintained the fight above one hour against the amazed Persian,
who had drawn out a main Battalion, but when the Trumpets sounded, Acha
recovered sense and magnanimity, going on so courageously, that the most slow
and hindmost discovered plainly a full scorn of death, and powerful desire of
honorable execution: for nine hours this conflict continued with great fury,
so that in fine the defendants were forced to retreat, advised to it as well by
policy as need: for, the heated Persian supposing themselves victors, with
great bravery begun to mount and enter the City in many quarters, at which the
Portugalls were very joyful, throwing on them such and so many Grenades and
burning fireballs, powder-pots, and scalding Lead, that the assailants in
despite of their vows and bravadoes were forced to retreat, and could not
prevent a thousand of their men from perishing: which misery, when Shaculibeg
at full had viewed, courageously followed by two hundred men, he past through
the fury of those affrighting fires and took one of their Flanckers, but could
not hold above half an hour, they were so outragiously fried and tormented
with shewers of flames of Lead and Sulphur, and in descending were beaten off
by fifty Haydalgoes, who for three hours affronted them, repelled them, and
retired crowned with conquest. This entertainment so cooled their bravery, that
for five days they did nothing but contemplate the valor and dexterity of
their adversaries. But, the three and twentieth day assumed more hopes, when
they beheld the fight betwixt the English and them; our Cannon from the shore,
playing so hotly and battring their fortifications so soundly, that at length
making the ships their object (after a great mutilation of shrowds and masts)
they sunk the Vice and rear Admiral of Ru-Fryero's Fleet: by that, utterly
losing their late hopes and ostentation of marine command and excellency.
March 28 necessity humble them (plague, famine, and fluxes raging in the City)
so as five days after, two wel-bred Gentlemen, well attended, with great
gravity mounted in a fair equipage to the Enemies Camp; they were usherd in by
some Coozelbashes of Shaculybegs Regiment, and after small complement, begun to
treat of peace, and that there might be a cessation of Arms, which favor if
the Duke would grant, they were ready to acknowledge it, and for retribution to
present him two hundred thousand Tomayns in hand, with good assurance of an
annual tribute of 140000 Ryalls, (which as afterward they confessed was
spoken in hypocrisy) the Captain dismisses them, and appoints next day for
answer, acquaints the General, who (wanting money) accepts their motion of
peace, so they would depose five hundred thousand (amounting with us almost to
two millions of pounds) and pay yearly to the King of Persia hundred thousand:
the Portugalls returned him an answer, they were in no such distress, to buy
any favor so dishonourably, and that greediness so overwhelmed them, they
assured, a fifth part of that proportion should never buy their ablest benefits.
After that, they mediated a reconciliation twixt the English and them, putting
them in mind, how they were Christians, and by many reciprocal favors of old
(when John of Gant invaded them) and later times by allyances, prevalent enough
to beget good will in noble spirits. If they had injured them, they were now
sorry, and ready to satisfy in any punishment of pain or purse, their Kings
were at that instant good friends, and how could such hostility be defended or
answered by law of Nations or Religion. These and the like were sent them, but
whether the behavior of the Fidalgo displeased our Sea men, or that they
understood them not, or saw themselves so far engaged, that with reputation
they could not desist, or that it was uttered with a feigned humility, or the
like, I know not; the Messenger departed not well satisfied. And two days
after, saw apparently signs of confusion and revenge: a hideous noise of
hellish thunder amazing them, caused by the English their blowing up two
several Mines, which gave open prospect into the City; but the hearts of the
assaylants durst not travel with their sight, all their senses the last time
were so confounded and disabled: so that very poorly they only became
spectators, and gave new courage to the dying Portugal: all of them half
dead, with fluxes, thirst, (the three pits in the City exhausted) famine or
pestilence. The fourteenth day, a ship full of Moors from Kishmee, arrived at
Ormus to help the Portugalls; perceiving themselves intercepted, they returned
back, thinking to land at some better quarter: the Persian General, swore they
should receive no damage by his Army, to which when they foolishly gave
belief to, fourscore of their heads were forthwith struck off, and the rest
inchayned.

The Ormuzians languishing thus long under so many sorts of afflictions, every
hour hoped for delivery from Ru-Friero, but he failed them. The seventeenth
day another breach was made by giving fire to sixty barrels of powder, through
which the Moors entered in huge swarms, but were beat back by eighteen
Gentlemen without the Bulwark; howbeit, next day they re-entred and possessed
it. The eighteenth of April, two famisht renegadoes stole thence into the Camp
of their Adversaries, and being brought before the Duke, confessed the
willingness of their departure, told him their expectation of supplies,
together with their present miseries; assuring him, they could not endure long,
death raging more furiously within the City, than the greatest forces they
could oppose them with. At that report, the reanimated Persian again beseiges
her, intending the next breach to enter pellmell amongst them: which when the
Portugal saw, and no safety any way appearing; the three and twentieth day
(knowing no faith in the Mahomitans) they yielded the Castle, and their
treasure unto the English; only craving of them that they might receive their
lives, and be conveyed safely to Muskat in Arabia: the English assent, and very
nobly transported three thousand of them, and intended like favor to the rest;
but the envious Persian suddenly intercepted above three hundred Arabs half
Christians, and Portugals: whom without parley or any sign of pity, contrary
to their oath and honor, they beheaded; and sent their heads to Gombroon for a
Trophae, and as an assured signal of their conquest and blameworthy fury. After
this, by unanime assent, the Magazeens of armor, victuals and treasure were
sealed up with the signets of both Nations: the interim was employed in
massacring of more than half dead men, violating women, polluting Temples, and
defacing very brave and gallant houses; during which, an unworthie English man
(contrary to the order) breaks into a forbidden Monastery stuffed with riches,
and in his return is discried by the rattling of his burdensome sacrilege; at
which the Persians fly to the Duke, and by consent break asunder every thing
was valuable, (the English all that time dreaming of no such accident) bus when
it was known, much discourse intervened on both sides, but the Pagans accounted
words but air, and seeing their designs accomplished, made the fury and anger
of the English mere provocatives of scorn and laughter: the Enlish had no
more than twenty thousand pounds paid them for their service. The brass
Ordnance in the Castle and Rampires were divided, some say they were three
hundred, others as many more: Howbeit, our men say there were only fifty three
great brass pieces mounted, four brass cannon, six brass demicannon,
sixteen cannon pedroes of brass, and one of iron, 9 culverin of brass, two
demiculverin of brass, three of iron, ten brass bases, seven brass bastels,
some basilisks of 22 foot long, and nintie two brass pieces unmounted; which I
the rather name, in that the Portugalls brag they had small defense, and few
Ordnance; with either of which if they had been furnished, Ormus had never
been triumphed over. Those belonging to the Persian were transported to other
Cittadells, to Gombroon, Larr, Shyraz, Hispahan, and Babylon. The King of
Ormus, Seid Mahumet shaw, was made prisoner to the Persian, and at this day is
at Shyraz under an allowance of five marks a day; his other pension (during
his prosperity paid him by the Portugalls) amounted yearly to a hundred and
forty thousand ryalls. The Town at this day is wholly ruinous, the Castle
excepted, which aspect keeps her former beauty, strength, and greatness, and
is owned by the Persian.

As for the common Mariners, they found enough to throw away; by that little
they got, showing their luxury, nothing but Alea, vina, Venus, in the
ascendant of their devotion. Captain Woodcocks luck was best and worst; by rare
chance he lighted upon a Frigot that was stealing away, laden with Pearls and
inestimable treasure, above a Million of royalls for his part only; but what
joy had he in that fading pelf? pure clay is gold, who then so mad to make the
earth his Idol? Whether poor (too rich) Woodcock minded more his tempting
Mammon than the stearage of his ship, who can tell? but many felt by sad
experience that the Whale his ship sunck close by Swally bar, the name
neither of bird nor fish availing against the arrow of death, the merciless
elements yielding them no comfort: such catastrophes have ambition and too much
greediness. For, but for too much pride (the Portugal upon all occasions
braving the English) Ormus had stood; and but for too much avarice, who knows
but the Whale might have swam still in the Ocean of security.

Proeda faeras acies cinxit discordibus armis,
Hinc cruor, hinc caedes, mors propiorque venit.
Praeda vago jussit geminare pericula ponto,
Bellica cum dubiis rostra dedit ratibus.
Prey guirts feirce Armies often with irefull swords.
Hence blood, hence slaughter, hasty death affords.
Prey doubles danger in the inconstant deep,
Whiles warlick beaks danger-fraught ships do keep.
FINIS LIBRI PRIMI.
THE SECOND BOOK.
THE tenth of January, Sir Robert Sherley at our Ambassadors request, entered
Gumbrown to acquaint the Sultan with his arrival, and to demand such
entertainment and necessaries as befitted his excellency and Travail to the
Persian Court, though no less distant than the Caspian sea. It did not relish
right to the covetous Sultan; but upon sight of his Phirman or letter of
Command, he dissembled his humor, protesting he was transported with joy that
so happy an occasion was happened, as well to express himself an obedient slave
to Shaw-Abbas, as that the Town should be honored by so noble a stranger;
sorry only he was so ill fitted to show his humanity, his Lordships so sudden
landing preventing the pomp he aimed him. Sir Robert Sherley returned his
complement and forthwith invited my Lord Ambassador ashoare, who as readily
accepted it. At his issuing from the ship, Captain Brown (whom I name to
honor him) thundered out his farewell by a hundred great Shot, whose Echoes
not only made Gombroon to tremble, but seemed to rend the higher regions with
their bellowings. Wrapped in smoke and flame, we landed safely, tho Neptune made
us dance upon his liquid billows and with his salt breath seasoned the
Epicinia or intended Triumphs. At his landing the Cannons from the Castle and
Cittadell vomited out their fiery choler, ten times roaring out their wrathful
clamours, to our delight and terror of the Pagans, who of all noyses most hate
artificial Thunder. The Sultan and Shawbander handed him out of his Bardge,
and mounted him upon a stately Arabian Courser; the stirrops were of pure gold,
the saddle (a Morocco sort) was most richly imbrodered with silver. All his
followers had also such as pleased them. In this equipage, attended by his own
gentlemen, some sea Captains, the English Agent Master Burt and two hundred
Coozell-bashawes, we moved slowly toward the Sultans Palace, all the way
passing through a rank, or file of Archers and Musketeers on either side
doubled, and being alighted, usherd him into his Apollo; where upon rich
carpets was placed a neat and costly Banquet, store of Shyraz Wine, and choice
Violls from the ships; all which, with his protestations of welcome, (
Hoshomody Suffowardy still dropping out of his mouth) gave us undoubted
knowledge that either he was a grand hypocrite, or extremely fearful a
complaint should be made to the great Duke of Shyraz against him of his past
neglect; all which we gave a favorable interpretation unto: let us now into
and about the town, to see if ought will present it self a welcome object.

GVMBROVVN (or Gomroon as some pronounce it) is by most Persians (...) called
Bander or the Port Town: seated upon the gulf, in the Carmanian desert (part
whereof is now called Larr) or in Kermoen as the Persians call it; albeit my
fancy prompts me, that it is rather in Chusistan, Shushan being so small a way
removed from it. Some (but I commend them not) write it Gamrou, others Gomrow,
and other-some Cummeroon. The Artique pole mounts here to seven and twenty
degrees and nine minutes. A Town it is of no Antiquity, rising daily out of
the ruins of late glorious (now most wretched) Ormus, an hours journey thence.

I was told, that it had not twelve houses twelfve years ago; at this day
increased to a thousand: but how can I credit it, since one Newbery our
countryman entitles it a Town at his being here, which was in the year 1581.
Yet old it cannot be, since all agree the Portugals first founded it; after
Ormous doubtless, and where the Castle was begun but in Anno 1513 by
Albuquerq' the Portugal. Gumbroon is from Ormus nine english miles: it also
viewes Arabia about sixteen leagues west, for there the Gulf is narrowest. It
was forced from the Portugal in the year 1612 by Ally-Reec the Shyrazian, and
is now completely governed by the Persian. It is in compass about two miles,
the earth is sandy, without gardens, springs, or grass: from March to October
so hot, as the Natives fly away to Larr and other Towns where Date trees
shadow them against the ever burning Sun, and ground or sand that scalds like
hottest embers: a great Mountain (reckned twenty miles distant, but by its
height seems not eight) anticipates the cool North Wind, which to other parts
breaths sweetly and refreshes them. The houses are of Sunne-dried bricks, thick
and sollid; within, are without much furniture; without simple to look upon.
The windows are large and trellised, made to open when any Favonius murmurs
among them. The tops are tarrassed, made both to walk and sleep upon, so
Carpets be spread to soften them. In the Summer season when few ships ride here,
they sleep in troughs or beds filled with water. The Buzzar is very ordinary: it is
covered atop to keep out the searching beams of the scortching Sun; where
under is sold Wine, Arack, Sherbet, Thlummery, and many other things to the eye
and belly necessary. The entrance into the Sultans house, is at the East side
of the Market place. His, the Shabanders, English, and Duch (distinguished by
their Flags or Ensigns, displayed by Aeolus atop their houses) are all are
worth the entering in or my noting: of best note, are two Castles, at the North
and South ends of the Town, spacious and defensive; adorned with good
Battlements and Platformes to play their useless Cannons on. Fourscore brass
Pieces are planted here, and are part of those they got from Ormus Anno 1622;
two hundred more being sent up to Larr, Spahawn and Babylon) of small terror,
if no better Gunners exercise them. Whiles ships ride here, Gumbroon is a
garrison four hundred horse and foot attend their General; but dare not fight
against the Son, all summer billeting where they can find food and shelter.
In winter you may find here, Merchants of sundry Nations; English, Ducth,
Persians, Indians, Arabs, Armenians, Turks, Jews, and others. The most common
commodities here, are belly food; Wine, Rack, Sherbet, Rosewater, Sugar,
Almonds, Dates, Pomgranats, Figs, Currants, Orenges, Lemmons, Pomecitrons,
Mirabolans, Apples, Pears, Quinces, and Flowers, in great variety. As also,
Goats, Hens, eggs (two year old,) Ryce, etc. most of which are sold by the
crafty, fair spoken Bannyans, who swarm through all parts of Asia. They will
readily trade or prattle with Christian, Turk, Jew, or Gentile, but have no
good fellowship, for they hate to eat or drink with any save of their own
casts and religion; rice, plaintains, and some fruits they eat, drink water or
sherbet (which is fair water, rosewater, sugar and juice of Lemons put
together): but for flesh, eggs, or such roots, as raddish and the like,
resembling blood or wine, not one bitt would they eat, though you would give
the poorest knave amongst them, a thousand pound; they are troubled with
Pythagoras dreams, doubting thereby they might eat up the souls of their
friends or parents; which transmigration of souls Tibullus elegantly thus
detects to his Mistress.

Quin etiam mea tunc Tumulus cum texerit ossa
Seu matura dies sato properat mihi mortem
Longa manet seu vita, tamen mutata figura,
Seu me fingit equum rigidos percurrere campos
Doctum, seu cardi pecoris sing loria Taurus,
Sive ego per liquidum volucris vehar era pennis.
In quemcunque hominem me longa receperit aetas,
Inceptis de te subtexam carmina chartis.
When (furthermore) the grave my bones shall hide,
Or ripened days to swift foot death shall glide,
Or lengthned life remains, in shape exchangde
Making me horse, well managed to range
The fields, or Bull the glory of the heard
Or through the liquid Air I fly a Bird.
Into what man soere long time me makes,
These works begun of thee, fresh verses takes.
Some Sudatories (called here Hummums,) some Mosques, some Synagogues and
Sanhedrins are here; but those so obscure, that the eye can scarce direct us to
them. Most remarkable is the great Banayan Tree, a league East from the Town,
and opposite to Ormus Castle: a Tree (or rather twenty Trees, the boughs
rooting and springing up a whole aker together rounded within and shaded in
form of a Theater, two hundred and nine paces about as I measured and wherein,
or under, may ambush very secretly three hundred horse: some call it the arched
Fig tree, some Arbor de Rays, (a tree of Roots) others de Goa: namd by us the
Bannyan Tree, from their adorning and adoring it with ribbons and streamers of
varicoloured Taffata, a goodly Diety! such a one as Pliny observd long since in
his Travayles amongst 'em. Haec fuere Numinum Templa, priscoque ritu, etiam
nunc simplicia rura Deo praecellentem Arborem dicant. Here under also, they
have a temple, supported on one side by the body of the tree, unseen to such as
are without the branches; in which (for I adventured in) are three of the most
deformed Pagods or Idols imaginable; invocated by the Bannyan in memorial of
Cuttery, shuddery, and Wise, their three deified predecessors; kept by an old
doting Braminy, who for above threescore years in this irreligious place has
most wickedly sacrifizd his soul to Beelzebub; for many years he had all the
Pagods offerings, part being the virginity of the Brides (at ten years
commonly) which since he cannot actuate, he is not ashamed (as I was told) to
contract with Travelers, who in an infernal disguise reap the unripe and
unholy Holocausts.

The Inhabitants (I exclude strange Merchants) are Olive-coloured, white only
in their teeth: their apparel is a shash above, a Shuddero or linen about
their waists, and elsewhere naked. They cut their skin, A Persian Man and
Woman near the Gulf.
and burn round circles in their flesh, to symbolize their pride and love, sir
reverence; Cupid has not fire enough, but they must help him! Pomponius Mela
long since thus anatomized them; Carmani sunt sine vest, fruge, and pecore,
sedibus piscium se cute velant, vescuntur carne, etc. The female sex are wrapped
in white (not from innocence;) some go naked upwards; most valuable in their
ears and noses, which are the richest parts about them, each ear being
garnisht with a dozen silver Rings, and their fingers with such like gingadoes,
some which are looking-glasses to admire themselves (rare beauties) in; their
arms and legs are laden with voluntary shackles of brass and Ivory: in
their noses they put their most precious Jewels; brouches of gold, set with
Garnats, Emralds, Turquoises, and like stones of value: and with it, other
round Rings headed with ragged pearl, such as with their intolerable
impudence makes me say, they are the most nasty, pocky Whores you shall find in
any place, and who very fitly comply with Ovids remedy of love.

To concomitate those carrion women, take notice of those troops of Jackalls,
which here more than any other where rally themselves, not only each night
committing burglary in the Town, but commonly they tear the dead out of their
graves, and with a vulture appetite devour their carcasses; all the while
ululating and in offensive noises barking and ecchoing out their sacrilege.
We made good sport to hunt them with dogs and swords, but they are too many
to be banished, too unruly to be conquered. I take them for those the Romans
called Crocutae, the Greeks Alopecidae, or Lyciscae ( Multum latrante Lycisca)
and are either an unnatural mixture of a Bitch and Fox, or dogs from Europe;
by diversity of air and soil varying in specie from what they were formerly;
observed in other things; the Indian Ounces, what be they but extract from Cats
of Europe? Spanish dogs, in new Spain, in the second litter do they not
become Wolves? good Melons being also transplanted into a base and barren
ground, turn quickly to ordinary Cowcumbers.

Fourteen days are past since we entered Gombroon; the place has no such
Magic to persuade us to inhabit here. Our end is travel, why stay we then?
sure, we were stayed three days by the Sultans superstition, who upon casting
the Dice, if the chance proved right, would let us go; if wrong, nigro carbone
notatus. The four and twentieth day the Die was right, and we were mounted;
our little Carravan consisted of twelve horse and 29 Camells: the English Agent
and other of our own, and some Dutch Merchants attended our Ambassador a
league out of the Town; where, the Sultan met us, who (well pleased with the
Piscash or Present our Ambassador had given him) paid us all a hundred Sallams
and Tesselams: that is, God speed you well, God keep you. And lifting up his
eyes to heaven, his hands to his breast, and bending almost unto his stirrup,
once more bad farewell and so returned. His men and he all the way back played
at Giochi di Canni, darting at one another very dexterously. We heard the King
was solacing at the Caspian Sea, whither now we are traveling. Till then let
us keep an Ephemerides or day-journey. The first night (from Gumbroon) we
rode to Bandally, sixteen English miles (and most part along the gulf) or to
compute it in the Persian tongue, five farsangs and a half; a farsang ( Pliny
calls it a parasang which contains thirty stades or four Italian miles) is
three of ours, or a Dutch league; in names only different. At Band Ally we
found a neat Carravans-raw or Inn, the Turks call them Imareths, the Indians
Sarrays; built by men's charity, to give all civil passengers a resting place
gratis; to keep them from the injury of thieves, beasts, weather, etc: for,
through all Asia we find no other receptories, nor provision save what we carry
along, and Kitchen utensils to dress it in; also we have our water usually in
Tancks or Storehouses, some made long, some round, paved below; above, archt
and plaistered; filled by the beneficial raynes (springs are rarely found)
which albeit the clouds seldom here distill their happy moisture, they
sometimes break, and then in churlish sort diffude to some purpose; for,
falling in Cattaracts they quickly fill their gaping Jarrs and Cesterns. Next
night we got to Gacheen, five farsangs further; the third night to Cowrestan,
seven; next, to Tanghy-Dolon ( i. e. a narrow way) praiseworthy in her Lodge
or Carravans-raw, but especially in the sweet Crystallin water we found there.
It issues from a mighty mountain three miles East thence, and in an Aquae-duct
sports wantonly to this Tanck, whose over plus is received (by another Pipe
laid in an artificial way cut marvellously through the bottom of an adjoining
rockie hill) into a large Pond; which, richly mellowes all the Valley
(resembling Tempe) and Town called Dolon, surrounded with studpendious hills on
every side, so perpendicular, as with few men may be made impregnable; a
solitary place it is, but exceeding pleasant; when from the hill tops we
dazell our sights in view of that sandy, stony, sterill Desert. That days
journey was four farsangs.

Our next days travel was to Whormoot, eleven farsangs (thirty three miles)
where we found a black pavillion; in it three old Arabians; who, out of their
Alcoran ingeminated a doleful requiem to their Brothers carcass, over which
they sat; their looks were clouded with pathetick sadness; their cheeks
bedewed with briny tears, intending (after the Jewish mode, Septem ad luctum)
to solemnise his farewell seven days, singing, sighing, weeping.

-- In tears we find content,
For, grief would break our hearts without a vent.
Est quaedam flere voluptas,
Expletur lachrimis, egeriturque Dolor!
Nigh Whormoot are Duzgun, Laztan-De, and other Towns, where is got the best
Assa-Faetida through all the Orient: the tree is like our brier in height, the
leaves resemble Fig leaves, the root the Radish: the virtue had need be much,
it stincks so odiously. But, though the savor be so base, the sapor is so
excellent, that no meat, no sauce, no vessel pleases the Guzurats pallat, save
what relishes of it. Next night we got to Our-mangell, five: and next day to
Larr; two miles short of which old City, the Cawzy, Calantar and other of the
prime Citizens welcomed us with wine and other adjuncts of complement. We had
not rode half a mile further, when, lo an antic Persian out of a Poetic
rapture, clamored out a song of welcome: the Epilog was resounded upon kettle
Drums, Timbrells, and Barbarrous Jingle-jangling instruments; a homely Venus
attired like a Bacchanell, attended by many other morisdancers, begun to caper
and frisk their best lavoltoes; every limb strove to exceed each other, the
Bells, brass Cimbals, kettle music and whistles, storming such a Phrygick
discord, that to consort we might squeak'out.

Their rustic pipes did jarre,
with notes that horrid are.
Barbaraque horribili stridebat tibia cantu.
For Bacchus then seemed alive again: glass bottles emptied of wine clashing
one against another, the roaring of 200 Mules and Asses, and continual
shooting and whooping of above two thousand Plebeians all the way, so amazed
us; that we thought, never any civil strangers were bombasted with such a
Triumph; the noise that Vulcan and all his Cyclops make, were not comparable to
these Mymallonians. But his quoque finem, we got with much ado to our
lodging, infinitely wearied; for my own part, I was somewhat deaf three days
after.

LARR, is a City and Province in Persia; on the North limited with Parc or
Pharsistan; on the East with Carmoan or Carmania; has the Persian gulf to the
South; and to the West, Chusistan or Susiana; a region a thousand miles in
circuit: barren and flaming hot, full of sand, stones, a few Date trees, Mines,
and sulphur.

The City Lar is in the navell of Larestan, and raises the North pole seven and
twenty degrees and forty minutes; some have more, twenty eight degrees and
thirty minutes, in longitude from the cape Meridian ninty degrees: a very old
City it is; if called Laodicaea by Antiochus, as Pinetus thinks, (in Phrygia
and Coelosyria were Towns of the same name in Ptolomy) Procopolis by another
Greek; Corrha after that, and now Lar (or Laar as some pronounce it) a name
given her four hundred years ago by Laarge-beg, son of Phiroe, and
grandsonne to Pilaes, after whom ruled Gorgion Melec (of whom their Cabala
feigns wonders) to whom followed eighteen Kings, of whom Ebrahim-cawn was last,
subjected ( Anno hegirae 985. of ours 1605) by a stratagem Emangoli-cawn Duke
of Shyraz overthrew him by, to satiate the hungry ambition of Abbas his Master,
and (which is rare considering the great poverty of his Country) for the Kings
part loaded away with treasure seven hundred Cammells. The captived King
Ebrahim had his life and a noble pension promised him, he enjoyed them but
awhile, an unexpected sword of death betraying his hopes, without which the
Dyadem sat not right upon the head of Shaw-Abbas the sovereign,

Nine days we staid in Larr; a shame it were, if in so long time we had noted
nothing. Lar is from Gumbroon seven small days riding; from Shyraz fourteen,
from Babylon twenty: a very poor Town it is, as being parcht with the
scalding Sun, defaced by rage of war, and thrown down by many fearful
Earthquakes. Anno Domini 1400, it shook terribly, and made five hundred houses
prostrate to its Tyranny. Anno 1593. of their account 973. she boasted of five
thousand houses; but see how vain: is the pride of man: that very year, the
earth sweld with such a dreadful tympany, that in venting it self, it made
all Larr to quake; and in fine, would not be suppressed, but by the weight of
three thousand houses turned topsi-turvie, quashing to death three thousand men
in their destruction. The old Castle also on the East side of the Town (it
owes its foundation to Georgean Melec) though built atop a solid rock, groand
in a like affrighting downfall: and to me it seemed strange, a City so
strongly, so surely founded, should be so subject to such unnatural
commotions. Whither it be (as Democritus dreamt) from the gaping Sun-torne
earth quaffing in too greedily too much water, and (like a glutted drunkard)
overcharging her caverns, vomits it up in a forcible and discontented motion;
or whether (as Aristotle teaches) from vapors engendered in the bowels of the
earth, and loath to be imprisoned in a wrong orb, rends its passage by a
viperous horrid motion: or whether from subterranean fires, the air inflamed
upon sulphur, or such exuberances of nature, I dare not conclude, but leave
such theories to those that study Meteors. Let us therefore see what Larr now
is.

Larr, the Metropolis of this Province, is not wald about; in that, Art is
needless, the lofty rocks on East and North so naturally defend her: besides,
a brave Castle at the North quarter (mounted upon an imperious hill) not only
threatens an enemy, but awes the Town in a frownig posture: the ascent is
narrow and steep: the Castle of good stone: the walls are furnished with useful
battlements: whereon are mounted twelve brass cannon pedroes, and two
basilisks (the spoils of Ormus:) within the Castle wall are raisd a hundred
houses, stored with men, most part soldatts, who have there a gallant Armory
able to furnish with Lance, Bow, and Gun, three thousand men: it is a fort
without, of a stately frame: within, is no less commendable: the Buzzar is
also a gallant fabric; the material is good chalkie stone; long, strong, and
beautiful: a quadrant I cannot call it, the sides are so unequal: it is covered
atop, archt, and (in piazza sort) a kind of Burse; wherein each shop shows
ware of several qualities: the Alley from North to South, is 170 of my paces;
from East to West, a hundred and sixty; the ovall in center is about a hundred
and ninty: a building (to speak of the Asiaticks) in some hundreds of miles,
scarce to be parrelled. Near this Buzzar are coined the Larrees, a famous sort
of money, shaped like a long Date stone, the Kings name stamped upon pure
silver, in our money valuing ten pence.

The Mosques here be not many; one especial Mosque (or Deer) it has, round
(either shadowing out Aeternity, or from a pattern of the Alcaba the holy
Temple in Mecca, whose shape they say Abraham had from heaven) in some part
varnisht with Arabic letters, and painted knots, garnisht in other parts with
Mosaic fancies: it is low, and without glass windows, wodden trellizes
(excellently cut after their invention) supplying them: the entrance is through
a brazen gate, near which is hung a Mirror whether to admire their tallow
faces in, or internal deformities, I know not: some lamps it also has, for use
and ornament: some Prophets rest their bones here, take one for all.
Emeer-Ally-zedday-ameer, a long-namd-long-bon'd (if his grave be right) long
since rotten Prophet; the older Prophet, the fresher profit; zeal and charity
often times worship antiquity: but how can I credit them that he was a Mohammedan;
they say (if that will not please, they swear) he died a thousand five
hundred years ago, six hundred years before Mahomet, and yet a Mussulman:
their faith admits no questions nor answers, or if it did, we will not trouble
it: For I see variety of good fruit close by, to which I have a better
appetite; here are the fairest Dates (Dactills in Latin from their finger like
shape) Orenges, Lemons, and Pomcitrons you find in Persia; if those will not
please, you buy here at easy rates, Goats, Hens, Rice, Rach, and Aquavitae:
but for their water (we dressed our meat with it, the people drink it) they call
it Ob-baroon which in the language of Persia signifies rainwater: but with
far more reason I may call it Aqua-Mortis; death seeming to bubble in it. A
base qualified water it is; whether that their Tancks or Magazeens are ill
made, or nastily kept, and by that the water is corrupted; or whether the rain
of it self is insalubrious and loathsome I cannot tell; but both it may be
makes it so bad as it is; so unsapory, so ill to the gust, as worse water for
taste, and especially for property can scarce be relished: as little of it came
in my belly as could be borrowed from extremity of thirst; and I suppose I had
good reason to forbear it: for, it causes Catarrhs, breeds sore eyes,
ulcerates the guts, and which is more terrible than the raest, it ingenders
small long worms in the legs of such as use to drink it; and, which sort of
vermin is not more loathsome to look upon, than painful to the itching disease
of them that breed 'em; by no potion, no unguent, to be remedied: they have no
other way to destroy them, save by rolling them about a pin or peg, not unlike
the treble of a Theorbo; the most danger being this, that if in the screwing
the worm chance to break, it makes them very doleful Music, for it endangers
the leg, apt to gangreen and (but by lancing) hardly curable. The water is the
natural cause of this strange malady: and seems to me to bring the venom
from the region where it is generated; for, commonly the clouds here at Larr are
undigested (as in the Tornadoes I have formerly spoken of) and unagitated by
the wind; Nor do the clouds distill their rain in drops as is usual in colder
regions, but in whole and violent irruptions; dangerous both in the fall, and
no less hurtful in the using.

The Inhabitants are most part naked and merit as naked a relation: they are a
mixture of Jews and Mahomitans: both of them, a swarthy deformed generation:
for generally in this City they are blear-eyd, rotten toothed, and mangy legd:
the violent heat and poisonous waters causes it: the habit of the greater part
of them is only a wreath of Callico tied about their heads; their mid-parts are
circled with a Zone of vari-colored plad, and have Sandalls upon their feet,
elsewhere being naked: some indeed have shashes of silk and gold, tulipanted
about their heads; they roab themselves in coats or Cabays of Satin, and
especially enrich their fingers with rings of silver set with Turqueises or
Cornelians, and in which they affect to have engraven their own name, or some
selected posie out of the Alcoran: upon their thumb they commonly wear a ring
of horn which makes the arrows go off strong and easily: their crooked swords
also afford them no small delight, the blades being exceeding good, the hilts
no less valuable; for they are of gold: In this City should be a river and
that not a small one, if our Geographick Maps were true; but they err
egregiously, for here not only is no river, but also none else is to be found
in a hundred miles travel, go which way you will: for both by inquiring of
many Persians and our own experience in further travel, I could neither hear
of nor see any nearer us than Tabb, famous in her separating Susiana from
Carmania; and from Larr, westward about 5 small days journey hence: or that
other of Cyre, over which we rode twixt Shyraz and old Persepolis: some small
brooks we rode over; but rivers no man must dare to call them, since none of
them in breadth or depth exceed 3 foot.

West of Larr is Iaarown, twenty farsangs (or threescorce English miles)
thence: it is a Town consisting of a thousand Jewish families: some make it
their rode to Shyraz, but the way is extreme stony and mountainous, bad for
horsemen, worse for ill-shod Camells. These Jews (or Jehuds as the Persians
call them) are a remnant of those four Tribes, Salmanassar son to Tyglath
Pilezer the Assyrian King forced from Samaria Anno Mundi 3220. placing them in
Hala, Hara and Ghabor (by the river Gozan) Cities of the Medes: the Town (I do
but imagine so) is named from Iaarim a memorable Town in Canaan: they have
some Sinagogues, but no high Priests; the Mosaicall Law they have wonderfully
corrupted: they are to this day a hardharted subtle people; very cowardly,
rich, but odious to all other religions: most remarkable, is a precious liquor
or Mummy growing here, Mumnaky-koobas they call it, a liquor which none dare
take, for all is carefully looked to for the King. It distills (in June only)
from the top of those stupendous Mountains, every year about five ounces: a
moist redolent gum it is, sovereign against all sorts of poison; and (if we
may believe them) a Catholicon for all wounds and most diseases: when other
Princes send this King presents of gold, pearl, or other costly devices; he
sends them back, a little of this Balsome, as a full remuneration. These
Mountains are famosed in story; After Alexander had preyed and sacrificed in
Susa (betrayed by Abulites a time-serving Satrapa) he led his wanton Army
toward Persepolis; his nearest passage was over these hills of Iaarown (in
those days called Pilae Persidis and Susaidae) where to his amazement, he was so
beaten by Ariobarzanes a Martialist and his small company, that (contrary to
the pace and honor of the worlds Monarch) he was constrained to retreat apace,
and shamefully to avoid that thundering storm of stones and arrows.

The eleventh of February we left Larr, Codges-Obdruzy the Governor furnished
us (to Shyraz) with Mules, very poor ones; the Asses they returned upon: no
matter. Mules are Emblems of sobriety; our Harbinger (or Mammandore in Persian)
was an honest Cozelbash, and would be sure, (hopeful of some reward, and
because his part lay therein) at every place where we made our Manzeel or rest,
to provide us good lodging, and such meat as the country would afford us: by
virtue of his authority domineering over the wretched Rusticks more than
pleased us; he would proffer them a little money for what he liked; if they
refused to take it, he took it then by force, and Alla Soldado paid them in big
words and bastinadoes: in miserable slavery the pesants live; a soldiers life
is here the most honorable and safest. The first night we pitched our Tents not
far from Larr, but were stopped next day by an immoderate flood of rain, that
made the earth so slippery, as our Cammells glib-hoofes could not foot it; the
rain falls seldom here, but when it comes, they both feel and hear it: some
times it raises such a Deluge as sweeps men and houses away; six years ago (in
this place) a Caravan of two thousand Camels perished by the fury of it. The
foureteenth day we rode to Deachow (or Techoo) which signifies a Town under a
hill; where we see many pretty Tombs, not any without his gravestone and an
Arabic memorial. The Alcoran commands that none be buried in Cities, for
fear the noisome Carcasses infect the living, but in a Gemitery nigh the most
public highway; that by viewing the Sepulchers of the dead (the Romans did
the like, the Egyptians had them in their banqueting houses) they might
contemplate their mortality. A mile from this Town we viewed threescore black
Pavillions; black without; within full of female beauties: the Persians call
them Vloches; the Arabs, Kabilai; the Turq'stans and Armenians, Taiphae; the
Tartars, Hoords; the Ancients, Nomades; of whom the Poet thus: Nulla domus,
plaustris habitant, migrare per Arva
Mos, atque errantes circumvectare Penates.
Their Carts their houses are, their sole delight
To wander with their house-Gods day and night.
I cannot choose but wander a little if I keep such company.

Virtue, the Trophy of a refined ambition, is purchased by embracing the
excellent and wholesome Notions of an humble soul, of a well-tempered spirit,
whose heavenly radiance respects no other object with delight save virtue, from
which pure stream flows Moderation, to whose excellency (next to spiritual
sacrifice) we may safely devote our best endeavors. So apt to every immodest
Act, is man's corrupt disposition, that to enjoy sensuality he conceits virtue
(though never so gorgeously arrayed) foul and deformed: till moderation force
him to a strict account, and discover how much he erred, in preferring
intemperance before the transcendent qualities of a virtuous life: and from
whence, when we contemplate the contented life and poverty of these Vloches,
needs must we condemn our selves of loathsome riot. For, how free from
unseasonable care, pale Envy, affrighting Tumult, and nasty surfeit do these
enjoy themselves; happy Conquerors! how mutually do they accord, how joyfully
satiate Nature, in what is requirable. Hear Lucan praising them.

-- O prodiga rerum
Luxuries! nunquam parvo contenta paratu.
Discite quam parvo liceat producere vitam
Et quantum Natura petat? --
Non Auto Mirrhaque bibunt, sed gurgite puro
Vita redit; satis est populis fluviusque Ceresque.
Base luxury! wherein so much is spent.
Learn with how little, Nature is content.
In Gold and Mirrh, these drink not, but are best
In health, when bread and water is their feast.
To return; so soon as Phoebus had run thrice fifteen degrees in our
Hemisphere, we mounted our melancholy Mules, and made our next Manzeel at
Berry. Nothing was observable in the way, save a huge thick wall, of great
length and height, cut by infinite toil out of the sollid rock, to safeguard
the Larians from the Shyrazians, Larr in that place terminating.

Berry is a small Village; it promises much at distance, but when there,
deludes the expectation: yet is it famous through the Persian Territories, both
from the prerogatives an ancient learned Syet endued it with, confirmed by all
succeeding Princes; and from an Arabic School, distinguished into classes, of
the civil Law, Astrology, Physic, and such as leads to Mecca: commendable in
their Pythagorean silence, learning to discourse by wincks, nods, and such dumb
notions; for babbling is in all Arabic Schools wonderously hated: they also
observe two rules especially, obedience, and moving the body too and fro in
reading: adjoining this School, is a Deer or Mosquit, a venerable place,
chiefly by being a Dormitory to their greatest Doctor Emawm-zeddey-a meer-a
maddy-Ally, a Prophets son, and allied to holy Ally; in this grave enjoying
(say they) eight hundred years rest; a great antiquity. His Tomb is raised
four foot from the pavement, is eight foot long, covered with a white fine
linen cloth; the Tomb-stones are carved and painted with knots and poesies of
Arabic; near him are fixed two Lances to memorize his quondam profession, and
some Ensigns not of ordinary invention: Upon his Coffin lie a set of goodly
Beads, to help his devout memory, and which to this day retain their Masters
virtue of working miracles. Atop the Chapel is a globe (or steel mirror)
pendant, wherein these Linx-eyed people view the deformity of their sins.
They also showed us a square stone pierced and hung near the wall, a rare
stone, a relic most notorious! the Prophet used to burden the backs of
impenitent sinners with it, telling them their impiety made it seem heavy, a
weight so ponderous as made them take the right path to be quit of it. A little
pot comes next to our description, holding a sovereign unguent made eight
hundred years since, often used, and never exhausted: and is not only good to
help sore eyes, but a Panacea against all diseases; to crown all, his book
(no Alfurcan of devotion) is laid upon his carcass; any body is suffered to
see it a far off, but to touch it is counted a presumption, the impure breath
of man peradventure infecting it: in storms and crosses they find remedy with
only naming it: the Church is neatly matted, a Mosque of so much holiness,
that none must enter with boots or shoes on: such as want issues (I mean not
in their legs) health, wealth, friends, or the like, upon their offering shall
have satisfaction. The Oracle (the Priest) never cheats them. Sed non ego
credulus illis: and with that I bid Berry farewell.

Next night we got to Bannarow. The last Town feasted us with Traditions,
this with good cheer, music, three kettle drums, and six dumb Muskets. The
ruins of an ancient Castle (demolisht lately by the Persian) shows its ribs,
through which the cool air blows, seldom failing from the top of that
stupendous Mountain: one side of the Castle wall is anatomized to the Town,
the other to the stony Desert. Next night we lay in Goyeme, bragging in a
thousand rotten houses. After we had reposed an hour, a Hocus-pocus affronted
us, and performed rare tricks of Activity. I remember some of them. He trod
upon two slicing hooked Semiters with his bare feet, then laid his naked back
upon them, suffering a heavy Anvill to be laid on his belly, and two men to
hammer out four horshooes on it very forceably. That trick ended, he thrust
his arms and thighs through with many Arrows and Lances; then, by mere
strength of his block-head he lift up a yard from the ground a great stone,
weighing six hundred pound, and (as if he had done nothing) knit his hair to
an old Goats head, and with a scornful pull tore it asunder, at that crying
out Allough-whoddaw i.e. God help him; the standers by with a loud yell,
applauded him: we gave him particular thanks, and told him he was a pretty
fellow. But what was he? to speak of Marius (one of the thirty Tyrants) who
with one of his fingers could overthrow a loaded Wayne: or of Polydamas, who
with one hand would hold a wild Bull by his hinder leg, and in despite of his
best force stop him, as Cael. Rhod. and Treb. Pollio have it. But in remembering
these, I had almost forgot to tell you, that in Goyeom, is fairly intombed one
Melec Mahomet, famous for fomenting the authority of his Master Mahomet, when
the Saracens begun to canvasse it.

Next night we lost one another by a careless associating, and had a miserable
lodging in that vast and barren wilderness: affording no grass, no trees, no
water, but stones and sand in great abundance, Ostriches, Storks, and Pellicans
her sole Inhabitants. I believe the earth has worn Flora's livery; but, by the
parching rage of War, or continued heat of the flaming Sun becomes thus
miserably desert, or rather from the just wrath of Almighty God, who (as King
David sings) makes a fruitful land barren, for the ungodliness of them that
dwell therein. Next day we quested in search of our Carravan, and with much
trouble recovered it: that night also pitching in the Desert, were welcomed by
such a sudden storm of rain, thunder, and lightning, as made our cheer more
wretched, imprisoning us also in our Tents. Next day, we had the weather
comfortable, the sight of a few Date and Mastick tree, refreshing us; confuting
Coriats conceit, that Mastick is found no where but in Syo. By the way we took
notice of an od-devis'd Tomb (it inhum'd a harmless Shepherd) hung to and fro
with threads tripartite (it may be, shadowing out the Trinity) each thread
beautified with party-colored wool, at each end a Puppet to protect it, some
Cypresses were added to condecorate and to revive the old Idol ceremony.

-- Stant manibus Arae
Caetuleis maestae vittis, atraque Cupresso.
-- Altars their ghosts to please
Trimmed with blew fillets and sad Cypresses.
The next (the two and twenty of February) by the way we had some sport in
dislodging a wild Bore, but neither shot nor dogs reaching him we made
Cut-bobbo our manzeil; Mohack our next (in which are buried Mahomet, Hodge,
Izmael, and Ally, four great Mussulmannish Doctors, intombd here 400 years
ago, resorted to with no small reverence.) Next day to Coughton, to Vnghea
next, thence to Moyechaw, next day to Pully-pot-shaw (leaving Bobbaw-hodgee on
our left hand) next night pitching a farsangh short of Shiraz; where we
expected a ceremonious entrance: but seeing none came out to meet us, our
Ambassador (who was ever jealous of his honor) sent his Mammandar to the
Governor, (the great Duke was hauking fifty miles thence, of purpose absent,)
to demand fresh horses and a befitting welcome. The Daraguad in person came to
dissemble, first excusing his Lord the Duke, who would go near to kill him for
not acquainting him with this excellent Advantage to manifest his integrity
unto our Nation, in comparison of whom all other in the world were odious. In a
word (perceiving our haste) he humby beseecht his Lordship to practice but
three days patience, till the great Duke might honor his entrance, and
display his radiance; a favor of a double reflex, in that it would infinitely
content their Governor, and accumulate an incomparable splendour and triumph to
his entrance, closing his hypocrisy with an if not, he was then pressed to usher
his Lordship to his lodging. The Ambassador easily descryed him to be a Synon,
sent merely to betray his credulity: so as perceiving no remedy, the twilight
helping his silent passage ( Apollo had already drencht his fiery tramels in
maddame Thetis lapp, Cynthia also looked pale, as displeasd with so much
knavery) we joggd leasurely on upon our Portugal Trumpetters, who (so soon as
they winded the smoke and air of this excellent City,) spared the Persians a
labor in their brass pans, hoboyes and such Phrygick Music, sometimes
braying out, at other times ecchoing to one another in their Mymallonian
Cornets, as if some Orgies to Liber Pater had been solemnizing: in so much as
many ran out of doors, others fired their flambeauxes to know the cause and
glut their wonder. After long circling we arrivd at Shock-Ally-Begs Palace
(the Dukes substitute) where our Lord was wearied with a prolix Apology, and
then made to taste a Banquet of dainties. After which they convoyd us to
Ally-chan, a neat house at the East end of the City, belonging to the King,
incompast with as brave Gardens and as spacious as most in Asia. And now the
vexation is past, why do we make it an indignity, as if Nocturnall entries had
not equal luster with the day; the Artificial light we had (for ought you
know) might eclipse the splendour of the starry firmament. Holofernes chose the
night to make a triumphant entrance into Damas. Proud Antiochus took the same
time into Jerusalem, Augustulus into Rome, and haughty Sapores, into this very
City. Let us now triffle no longer, but view the City.

SHERAZZ (so they pronounce it) the pleasantest of Asiatique Cities, is removed
from the Equator nine and twenty degrees, forty minutes, and in longitude 88
degrees. By Ben Jonas (500 years ago) called Syaphaz, by Corn. de Iudaeis Sitas
and Sivas, by Osorius Xiraz, by Raleigh Siras, by Stephanus Cyrecbatha, by
Coelius Ciropolis, a frivolous conceit, since all old Topographers place it and
the river Cyrus in Hyrcania in the latitude of thirty nine degrees and a half:
and of longitude eighty three degrees, five and forty minutes. And of that name
is one in Media as Ptol. in Sogdiana one near Iaxartes as Quintus Curtius, in
India one, as Aelianus, a river also so called in Armenia as Pliny notes, but
none, in Persia a Ciropolis. This name Sheraz (as I conjecture) is a derivative
from Sheer (milk in the Persian language) or Sherab a grape, no part of the
orient showing better or richer wine; from like reason, that Aleppo takes name
from Halip milk, (and not from Alepius Leiftenant to Julian as some dream of)
many other Towns in Persia denominating themselves from what they are abundant
in, as Whormoote (a Town of Dates.) Deachow (a hilly Town) De-gardow (a
walnut Town,) Baze-bakow, Periscow, Cutbobbaw etc. or from Syrases the incolae
of old, as Poliaenus has it in his 8 lib. de Semiramide. Or if greek Synonymaes
would carry it, I might borrow the name from (...) catena; or more properly
(...) per aestum. But affectation is discommendable.

For albeit she be raised from the ruins of Persepolis, that does not
stygmatize her with an upstart name, two thousand years being past since it
was burned. I may therefore reject the peoples Cronicle, alluding her first
founder to be Iamshed fifth King of Persia, after whom ruld Chedorlaomer, not
long from Noah. Boterus may be taxed also, quando Syras erat Syras, tunc Cayrus
erat ejus pagus, an Adage never used by the inhabitants. Ancient no doubt she
is, her name in history confirming it, Rocnaduddaule (Son of Sha-Hussan Son
of Abbaz Viez Lord of Bagdet, Kermoen, Laristan and Shyraz (so it is then named)
being here buried Anno Dom. 980. of the Hegira 360. And questionless she has
been much greater than at this present. Vlughbeg (a learned Geographer and
Nephew to Tamberlang) gives her in his time fifteen miles compass, Contarenus
fifteen, and eighty thousand houses. Barbarus eightscore years ago, gives
her twenty; Teishera after him, six and thirty miles circuit; Skikard upon
Tarich a like vast circumference: John of Persia in his time numbered her
Inhabitants eighty thousand, Ben-Ally thee hundred thousand: we may not
gainsay their reports, because no inquiry can disprove them; let us therefore
rest contented in her present description, which I shall present you (God
willing) without error.

Shiraz is distant from Ormus, one hundred and eight farsangs or three hundred
and four and twenty miles English. From Larr one hundred eighty six miles,
from Babylon three hundred, from Spahawn two hundred two and twenty, from the
Caspian sea six hundred, from Cazbyn four hundred and eighty six, from
Periscow four hundred and forty, from Candahor three hundred and sixty, from
Yezd two hundred and ninteeen, from Faza sixty miles English. The Ancient
dwellers hereabouts are named Artiatae, Tapiri, Cartii, and Orebatii. Masqued
in Pare, Fure, Fares, and Farsistan.

Shyraz, at this day is the second City for magnificence in the Monarchy of
Persia; watered by Bindamyr (or Bradamyr) a sweet river that draws her descent
from the Tapirian Mountains, and after two hundred miles circling in many
wanton meanders, commixing with Choaspes (now Tab) and Vlay, with them not
far from Valdac (old Shushan) lose themselves in the Gulf and promiscuously
thence into the vast Indian Ocean.

It shows some walls built by Vsan Cassan, but seems to scorn a limited
bondage. It stretches from South-east to North-west, three miles; and not much
less the other way; the compass nine miles or there abouts: is pleasantly
seated in the North-west end of a spacious plain, twenty miles long, and six
broad; circumvolved with stupendous hills, under one of which this Town is
placed. Defended by Nature, inricht by trade, by Art made lovely; the
Vineyards, Gardens, Cypresses, Sudatories, and Temples, ravish the eye and
smell, in every part sweet and delightful.

Here Art magic was first hatched. Here Nimrod (after Babells confusion) lived
and was buried. Here Cyrus (the most excellent of heathen Princes) was borne,
and (all but his head) intombed. Here the great Macedonian glutted his Ambition
and Bacchisme. Here the first Sybilla sung our Saviors incarnation. Hence the
Magi are thought to have set forth toward Bethleem, and here a series of two
hundred Kings have swayd their Scepters.

The houses here are of Sun-burnt-bricks, hard and durable: not very lofty;
flat and tarrassed above, Belconies and the windows curiously and largely
trellized: within, spread with rich carpets; little other furniture other where
is noted. Sultan Shock-Allybegs house (where the first night we were banqueted)
is inferior to few; his dining room was high and round and spacious. The
archt roof and side walls imbost with gold, and wrought into Imagery; so
shadowed, that it was hard to judge whether imbost, inscult, or painted. The
windows were of painted glass, the floor spread with curious Carpets. None
are without their gardens, forests rather of high Chenaers and Cypresses.

Fifteen Mosques profess their bravery, round (after the holy Alkaba in Mecca)
til'd without, and pargetted with azure stones resembling Turquoises; lined
within, with pure black polisht Marble; the tops dignified by many double
gilded crescents or spires which gallantly reverberate Apollo's yellow flames
in a rich and delightful splendour. Two are especially note-worthy in their
Antic steeples and Mosaic curiosity. The one is square, fifty foot high in
the body, leaded in some part, covered with gold and blue; the walls varnisht
and wrought with knots and poesies, vast and unfurnisht (or unfinisht) within;
above, spiring in two columns or pillars of wood round, cut and garnisht with
great bravery, very near as high as Paul's in London. The (other) rather
resembling a royal Carvans-raw) is quadrangular; the superficies of Arabique
invention, imbost with gold, flagd with porphyre, painted with azure, garnished
in many od mazes, and made resplendent at some solemnities by a thousand Lamps
and Torches.

The other Mosques are not so excellent, nor yet so base as not to invite the
busy eye, regarding novelties. What they want in Architecture, they supply in
relics, venerably accounted of for intombing the rotten carcasses of some
Alcorannish Doctors, whose hypocrisy have got such repute with those
superstitious Idiots, that their Priests are fat, their Tombs inricht by
superfluity of Zeal, no cost, no pains thought enough to manifest the
integrity of (impious) devotion. Some sepulchers are framd of Marble, pure and
shining. Others of wood, cut into Antique carving, others express the painters
Art, and others the Sculpters skill in brass, in plate and costly metal.
Where Art is defective, Nature (out of the treasures of darkness) has
dignified them. In one place, Shaw-meer-Ally-Hamzy a prophetique Mahomitan
rests his bones, seven hundred years since ferried by Charon into Acheron for
doting upon his deceitful Alcaron. Threescore paces long I found the Mosque
he is buried in, and in breadth just so many. In another, sleeps
Sandant-Emyr-amahow contemporary with Mahomet, and equally holy; with many more,
who are like to sleep till the Trumpet raise them. Upon many of these Mosques
the Storks have pyld their nests. A bird (as of the Egyptians, so) of these
people, divinely estemated.

The famous Stork which builds in the Air
Fosters her naked young with tender care*
And by that love, their duty does engage
When need requires to help her feeble Age.
Nor fail her hopes; for when she cannot stir,
The pious brood both feed and carry her.
Aerio insignis pietate Ciconia nido
Investes pullos pignora grata fovet.
Taliaque expectat sibi mutua munera reddi
Auxilio hoc quoties matter egebat anus.
Nec pia spem soboles fallit; nam fessa parentum
Corpora, fert humeris, praestat and ore cibos,
The gardens here are many, and those both large and beautiful. Many of them
(as I paced) are eight hundred paces long, and four hundred broad: Hony-shaw
(the Kings) challendges superiority ore all the rest, being square and every
way two thousand paces. All of them be safeguarded with walls, fourteen foot
high, four foot thick, and of exceeding good work: they rather resemble groves
or wildernesses than gardens; but by that name (the Persian word is Bawt) are
called; abounding in lofty pyramidall Cypresses, broad-spreading Chenawrs,
tough Elm, straight Ash, knotty Pines, fragrant Masticks, Kingly Oaks, sweet
Mittles, useful Maple; and in fruit trees also, as Grapes, Pomgranads,
Pomecitrons, Orenges, Lemmons, Pistachoes, Apples, Pears, Peaches, Chestnuts,
Cherries, Quinces, Walnuts, Apricocks, Plums, Almonds, Figgs, few Dates, and
Mellons of both sorts, and Flowers rare to the eye, sweet to the smell, and
useful in physic: the earth is dry and green, the air salubrious and
healthy, and such as may make good Tibullus his Fancies of Elysium.

Hic choreae cantusque vigent passimque vagantes
Dulce sonant tenui gut^ere carmen aves.
Fert casiam non culta seges, totosque per agros
Floret odoratis terra benigna rosis.
Here songs and dances have esteem, and small
Sweet-chirping birds with music comfort all.
Th'unculturd ground sweet shrubs does freely bring,
Sense-sweetning roses without Art do spring.
I confine my commendations to a league, the residue being steril, mountainous
and unable to make Alexander an Epicure, (the wine excepted, which is famoused
all ore the orient). Nothing so much troubles her as want of water, yet some it
has, and might have more, were the Cittisens somewhat more industrious; a
gallant river ( Cirus of old) for two were so named) streaming sweetly not
fifteen miles thence, in the way to old Persepolis.

At the Nowrouz or spring, the Gardens are opened for all to walk in. The women
for fourteen days have liberty to walk, and when loose (like birds
infranschisd) lose themselves in a labyrinth of wanton sports. The men also,
some riding, some sitting, some walking, are all in one tune, for drinking,
singing, playing, till the bottles prove empty, songs spent, and strings break,
or that Morpheus lay his Caduceus over them. In all my life I never saw people
more jocund, and less quarelsome. Hic noctem ludo ducunt, and pocula laeti
Confundunt cerebris, somno vinoque sepultis.
They revell all the night, and drink the round,
Till wine and sleep their giddy brains confound.
Somewhat of Emangoly-cawn, the great Duke and his Banquet.

This brave man is a Georgian by descent, a Muslulman by profession, a
Time-server for preferment: is one of those four Tetrarchs, that under Abbas
rule the Empire: his Territories reach every way welnigh six hundred miles, and
afford him the Titles of Arck-Duke of Shyraz, Sultan of Larr and Iaarown, Lord
of Ormus, Maqueroon, Kermoen, Chusistan, Sigestan and Farsistan, Prince of the
gulf of Persia, and Isles there; the great Beglerbeg, commander of twelve
Sultans, fifty thousand horse, slave to Shaw-Abbas, protector of Musselmen,
flower of courtesy, second in glory, Nutmeg of comfort, and Rose of delight.

He is of a miraculous descent for nobleness (as honor goes in these parts)
his father and grandfather being Dukes before him; and which is no less
admirable, is priviledg'd from degradation by oath from Abbas: upon this
occasion: Aliculican his father was victorious in many pitched battles against
Turk and Tartar, adding no small luster to Mahomet Codobandaes Diadem: most
memorably, when (by command of Amurath) the saucy Basha of Rhyvan with fifteen
hundred muskets breathed defiance against Morad the Chielfall governor in
Armenia, for daring to side with Ismael in that famous overthrow they gave the
insolent Turks, Anno 1514 in the Calderan plains. Morad thus suddenly
assaulted, sends a timorous excuse, which rather inrages the Bassa, implacable
till Morad had glutted his greedy appetite with burnisht gold, two thousand
pound commanding him thence to Nassivan (old Artaxata) by that time hungry
again. Alicolichan ( Shaw Mahomets Lieftenant in Georgia) rates Morad, and
vows to make the Turk to eat cold Iron, meat the Basha cared not for, but by
Ally-culicans fierce charge with a gallant troop of six thousand horse, made
him return his bribe, and fly as if the Devil had been in his guts, without
more prating over Anti Taurus (called Mezis Taur) scarce thinking himself safe
in any place, whiles the valiant Georgian extracted a treble sum from Morad
for his levity, returning a triumphant victor to the Court, recompensed with
the Sheraz Dukedom and his son after him, who has proved no less fortunate
in Sha Abbas his field-services, having quieted Georgia, subdued Larr, part of
Arabia, Diarbec, and Ormus. All which it seems is now forgotten, the young
Sha-Soffy first cutting off his sons head the young Beglerbeg, and when the
great Duke was singing to himself, Tutum me copia fecit. Anno 1632, had such
another trick served him, his greatness pressing him to destruction. But
though he be dead, his banquet and respect to us must not be forgotten,
Ingrato homine terra pejus nil creat; says Ausonius.

At our being here, he had absented himself of purpose: and albeit Sir Robert
Sherley took the pains to ride to him, and tell him his error, he answered;
It was no dishonor for any man (his Master excepted) to stay his leisure: but
if our Lord Ambassador had had his guard and other furniture, we had gone away
without his License. After six days attendance his Greatness was pleased to
visit Sheraz, followed by two thousand horse, and most unmanerly took his ease
two days after, without any respect or note taking of the Ambassador. At
length, he sent a gentleman to bid him come and visit him, returning with this
answer, he was weary having come a great journey, and that his business was
to see his Master, he knew not him. The Duke storms to be so slighted, but
durst not affront him, (knowing the King had commanded his whole Kingdom to
honor and bid him heartily welcome) so after some pause, sent word he meant
next day to visit him; but faild in his promise, his son the Beglerbeg
(eighteen year old) being sent to excuse him. Next day, our Ambassador sent
word by Shoc-Ally-beg to the Dukes son, his visit should be retaliated.
Emangoly-cawn is angry no more respect was had of him, wondering what kind of
people we were, since his own in a sort adored him. But see how subtly they
intrapt him; for he was no sooner alighted at the Dukes Palace, but by
Shoc-Ally-beg is welcomed, and by him ushered (our Lord knew not whither) into
a long gallery, rich in beauties, plate, carpets, and other furniture, where
(like a Statua) the Duke himself at the very end sat crosse-legd, not moving
one jot till the Ambassador was at him; when (as if he had been afrighted) he
skipt up, and bad him welcome; vouchsafeing also (upon knowledge that we were
gentlemen) to embrace us, and provide us a banquet. So after two hours
merriment departed, invited to return next day to a more solemn welcome. Next
day being come, we were ushered by a Sultan thorw two great courts into a rich
and stately banqueting house, a large open room, supported with twenty richly
gilded pillars, the roof imbost with flaming gold, the ground spread with
rich carpets of silk and gold, a state at one end of crimson satin, thick
imbroydered with pearls and gold, under which he was to in-throne himself;
one side most excellently depicted his Ormus Trophyes; no cost, no Art left out
to do it to the life; their incamping upon the shore, their assaults,
scaladoes, and entrance; the massacre of the Ormousians, some beheaded, some
cheyn'd, some their heads serving for girdles: as also the English ships and
sea skirmishes, without whose help it never had been gained, and the like so
well painted.

Velutsi, revera pugnent feriant vitentque
Moventes, Arma V^ri. --
-- As seemed indeed
Men armd to fight, ward, strike, till each man bleed.
And when the green and crimson scaenes of silk were drawn, from this
Apollo, we looked into a great square court, which at this occasion was round
beset with the prime men of the City: and into another court, where I think I
told five hundred Plebeyans, invited to illustrate the Dukes magnificence.

Before the proud Duke meant to display his radiance: my Lord Ambassador was
seated on the left side of the state (you may note if you please, that all Asia
over, the left hand as the sword hand, is most honorable) upon the other side
sat the discontented Prince of Tartary; at my Lords left hand was seated the
Beglerbeg, and next him the captive King of Ormus. Next to the Tartar Prince
sat Threbis-cawn a disconsolate Prince of Georgia, a brave warrior, a constant
Christian: opposite to the state Sir Robert seated himself: and with us were
placed the two Princes of Ormus, and some Sultans. The rest of the great
banqueting room was filled with men of especial note, Sultans; rich Merchants,
and Cooselbashaes: young Ganimeds arrayed in cloth of gold, went up and down
with flagons of pure gold to power out wine to such as noded for it: upon the
carpets were spread fine colored pintado Table clothes, forty else long; broad
thin pancakes six one upon another served for trenchers, near which were
scattered wodden spoons, whose handles were almost a yard long; the spoone it
self so thick, so wide, as required a right spacious mouth for entertainment:
The feast begins: it was compounded of a hundred sorts of pelo and candid dried
meats; as also of Dates, Pears, and Peaches curiously conserved, such I took
best notice of (I mean as pleased me best) were Iaacks, Myrabolans, Duroyens,
Pistachoes, Almonds, Apricocks, Quinces, Cherries, and the rest I leave to the
confectioner to inquire after. It seems we are so infatuated with our banquet
and wine, that the Duke is not taken notice of, pray pardon: he is not yet
come, that when our bellies are full, our eyes may have the better leisure to
surveigh his greatness. The feast being ended, the vulgar multitude strove to
rend the sky with Yough Ally-Whoddaw-Bashat, i.e. Ally and God be thanked: the
Echo was as a watchword to the ambitious Duke that he might enter: his way
was made by thirty gallant young gentlemen vested in crimson satin; their
Tulipants were of silk and silver wreathed about with cheynes of gold, of
Pearl, of Rubies, Turquoises, and Emeralds: all of them were girded with rich
swords and imbroydered scabards; they had Hawks upon their fists, each hood
valuing a hundred pound. To these succeeded their Lord, the Archduke of
Sheraz: his coat was of blew satin richly imbroydered with silver, upon which
he wore a Vest or Roab of great length, so glorious to the eye, so thick
powdered with Oriental glittering Gemms, as made the ground of it invisible,
the price invaluable: his Turbant was of pure fine silk and gold, be studded
wi^h pearl and Carbuncles; his scabbard was set all over with Rubies, Pearls,
and Emralds; his Sandalls resembled the bespangled Firmament. To this Idol,
all the people of his religion sacrifiz'd a hundred Sizaedaes, and Tessalems,
bowing and knocking their cocks-combs against the ground: Sir Robert Sherley
also sizaedaed very formally, and in a cup of pure gold drunk his Graces
health, and then put it in his pocket; paying him home with this complement;
That after so mean a person as himself had breathed in it, it was impiety to
offer it him: the Duke accepts it as good coin, and perceiving our Ambassador
very sad, darted him a smile, drunk his Masters health, bad him and his
heartily welcome, and so went in again: our Lord Ambassador also scarce well
pleased at the Dukes proud carriage, dissembled it; and after reciprocal
Sallams or bendings (none but a few Coselbashaws attending him to his horse)
departed:

Well may this grand Duke buy his renown at those high rates, his rents being
bruited so great, so wonderful: he has (say Merchants) four hundred thousand
Tomans a year (a Toman is five marks sterling) but out of this he pays wages
yearly to fifty thousand horsemen: his plate and jewels is valued at three
hundred thousand pounds, some say three Millions, and is pretty well descried
by that New-yeeres gift he sent the King (upon Meloembeg the Fiscalls
prompting) three years since: viz: fifty great flagons of pure gold, seventy
two of refined silver: in Larrees four hundred sixty five thousand floryns:
the whole, loading three hundred and fifty cozel-bash Camels, a valuable
present: and for which the King (as a Symbol of his gratitude) remunerates the
Duke with fifty gallant Arabian Coursers, six change of rich garments, a sword,
and (of more value than the rest) the assurance of his health and dignity.

This Duke here and in other Seralios (or Harams, as the Persians term them)
has above three hundred Concubines; Mawmetry commending it: there is no other
way in these Pagan countries to distinguish one man's greatness from another,
save by exceeding in their females: he hunts elsewhere, other sports serving
as a provocation to base venery: nor do they refrain more manly exercises;
chasing the Lion, hunting the Tygre, dislodging the Bore, unkennelling the
Iackall, and the like; at which solemn sports he besets whole countries with
above twenty thousand men, who serve to rouse all kind of savage game, and when
the whole heard are in battelled upon some spacious Mountain, impales it with
a huge Toil of wyre and cord stak't with wood (six hundred Cammels load) and
so either dart them from without the rail, or venture in, and (by drawing a
cross line) single what beast they please to fight with.

Two days after the great feast, the Duke with a gallant train of thirty
Sultans and Cooselbashaws came galloping to Ally-cawn, (so is the house named
we lodged at;) and albeit he endeavored to assault us with a sudden visit, yet
such was the excellent foresight and vivacity of our Ambassador, attending all
occasions of advantage; that at his alighting, he found a choice shade for his
recreation, chambers neatly furnished, from his Balcony looking into a most
fragrant and pleasant garden, where the Paphyan cipresses, and other rare trees
in their aparel, repeld the gilded rays of wanton Phaeton: here the facetious
Duke incampt and all his company; resolved to encounter the utmost fury of his
own strong wine, and our English chymick waters: three hours the fight
continued hot, charging one another with equal valor; many stout bottles and
flagons were emptied and buried, but by strange stratagem revived afresh,
thundering so fierce a storm in the Dukes brains, that he sell back and had
undone himself, had not my Lord Ambassador by great chance upheld and horst
him: the rest perceiving their General so strangely vanquished, sound a
retreat, and study how to untwist their brains from out that magic labyrinth:
Mr. Stodart of Caernarvan, a bold Britton, and Mr. Emery played Boots: Next day
the Duke made his excuse, and returned his thanks in a Present of twelve brave
horses, with bridles and saddles suting them; by which it seems all of them
were pleased and the Ambassador (who without such an entertainment had never
pleased them, though infinitely contrary to his temper) was crowned with the
applause of a noble, discreet, liberal, and well fashoned Gentleman. After
many other ceremonies of welcome (in which time, piscashes and gifts were not
left out) we had leave to set on toward the Court; I call it leave, the Duke
was so unwilling to part with us: we were bravely mounted, furnished with fresh
Cammells and Asinegoes, able to endure the brunt of travel.

Six and twenty days we consumed in Sheraz, forced to so long commorance by
the merry Duke; and on Lady day in Lent, departed thence for Spahawn the
Persian Metropolis. But I cannot ride far, till I celebrate my vale-dictum in
this Charistery.

Why should our wits dispute where Eden stood?
If in the Earth, or Air, or if the Flood
Did spoil the Surface; thus we fell from thence!
And too much knowledge lost the residence.
Yet if that place remain: for us to guess
By outward attributes of happiness,
Why should thy Plains (Shyrazz) give place to those
Where fruitful Nyle and Ganges overflowes?
Thy curious prospect, lodges, soil, the rich
Variety of pleasures that bewitch
Each gazing eye, would make the looker on
Think Paradise had no destruction,
Or else replanted there. The swelling grape
In dangling clusters tempts another rape
To taste the relish, as the Apple did,
And some would touch thy fruit although forbid.
Thy Towers, Baths, Gardens, Temples, make thee seem
Like Memphis, Troy, Thebes, or Jerusalem.
Thy Natives (Natures Modells) to compose
Inferior Beauty by the looks of those.
Farewell sweet place; for as from thee I went,
My thoughts did run on Adams banishment.
But ere we go further, suffer me to trouble you with such Monarchs as have
ruled Persia, I will only give you later Kings, such as had their seat royal
in Sheraz, begun 700 years ago, and but lately ended: The first, is Abuzvez
Deilamshaw (injuriously supposed a fisherman, from his use of Navigation, as
was Tamberlan a shepherd from the Tartarrs vagrancy:) this ( Deylamshaw
surnamed Boia (or Moheia rather, from fish a calumny) had three sons; Ally,
Hushan, Achmet. Ally sirnm'd Abenhassen had no issue: his father and he were
both buried in Sheraz An. Dom. 940, heg. 320. Hussan by death of his elder
brother, was Lord of Parc, Hery, Hierac, and Corasan; Acmet had Kerman and
Macron. To Hussan succeeded a stranger Zedday-Mohee by name, brought in by
Mustapha the Babylonian Calyph; to whom succeeded Eyna-duddaule that had no
issue. So Rocnadaul ( Hussans son) got possession of his fathers seigniories,
and dyed Anno Domini 980. heg. 360. dividing first his crown lands amongst his
three sons; Sherfa-daule, Shamsdaules, and Bahao-daules. The eldest had
Shyraztan, Larestan and Kerman: the second, Hierac and Diarbec: the youngest
had Gerioom and Taburstan, Sherfadaule dyed issules Anno Dom. 990. heg. 370.
the second brother inherited; but the envy of traitors gave him small joy, for
he was buried not long after his Coronation; whereby the seigniory came to
Bahao-daules the youngest son of King Rocknadaule. Bahaodaule governed twelve
years very succesfully, and at's death commanded his eldest son Sultandaule to
succeed him: this Prince was trained up in field exercises from his cradle, and
by his valor much enlarged his Empire, yet could not defend himself from
Hocem Masharafdaule his restless brother, till by agreement the Kingdom was
divided: to Sultandaule, Farsistan, and Aywaz: to Hocen, Hyerakeyn. At that
time Gelal^daul their brother was invested with the Caliph-ship of Bagdat Anno
Domini 1021. heg. 401. and Sultan-daul at last dies, and is Anno Domini 1025.
buried in Shyraz with great solemnity. Abdul-cawn his son ruled after him:
but perceives the Crown to totter, yea, to fall off by the unnatural
practices of Syarfuddaul (called also Abul-favar) his traitorous Uncle; forced
thereby to fly to Gelaladaul his other Uncle the late made Kaliph, who is glad
of this occasion, having long looked with a squint eye of ambition upon his
Nephews Diadem: but dissembing it, with a brave Army he descends from Bagdat,
and with ease dethrones Abul-favar, but mounts himself into the throne to
Abdul-cawns amazement, who to save his life flies into Arabia: whiles Mahomet
Gaznehy from Hindostant falls upon Ayrac and Shervan, but is repeld most
shamefully into Sablestan, Parc at that instant being miserably trod under-foot
by the Turquemen and Deylamans: ere long Abul-favor gets so highly into the
Calyphs favor that he is confirmed in his former title, but in the way death
cut off his claim, leaving Abdul-cawn the banished Prince his right, who upon
this fair advantage returns, and is joyfully welcomed: but surfeiting of too
much joy, he lived not long after it; for, commending his body to the earth,
he gave the royalty to Aben-melec-Rahim his son, who dyed Anno Domini 1054.
heg. 434. without issue, and in whom (after a race of fifteen Kings) took end
the Moheyan pedigree.

To him succeeded Abumansor, who pretended himself true son of Gelaladaul
the Caliph: he took to wife Danta daughter of Toshalbeg, and dyed (after five
years greatness) in Kermoen, and lies buried at Hurkawn not far from
Iasquis: he had five sons by that Lady, Abumansorphulad-sotun,
Chozroe-pheruz, Abu-becr, Abuzeddai, and Aboally-kay-kozrao. Abumansor enlarged
Shyraz, and did his best to make it strong and beautiful; but whiles he busied
his fancy at home, he looks not abroad, such time his ambitious brother
Cosroe-pheruz gripes him, and takes unjust possession of his Territories: but
revenge pursues him, for being invited to Bagdat to see his sick grandsire
Toshalbeg; for his cruelty to his brother, he is put into a loathsome prison,
where famine and stench made an end of him. But this could not terrify
Abuzedday the fourth brother from intruding into Abumansors right: albeit, his
injured brother had escaped and gathered a resolute Army, who so stoutly stood
his friends that Zedday is slain and his associates banished. It seems
Abumansor was borne to an iron destiny, unable at his second return, to
safeguard himself from Fazele his Liefetenant, that unawares detrudes him into
a deadly prison, adorning his rascal brows with his Masters Diadem: Aboally
will none of that, he takes a happy advantage, and pulls it from Fazel's brows
and crowns him with one (better becoming Traitors) of flaming iron. Aboally
after he had soveraniz'd seven years, is arrested by grim death Anno Domini
1100. heg. 480. and for want of issue the Scepter falls to Mahummed Abutalip
Togrulbeg, son of Michael, son of Salgucius, son of Didacus, a Turqueman.

In the Salgucian family it continued till Mahummed Abul-casen dyed Anno Domini
1220. heg. 600. without any issue. A race of Tattarrs followed: led by
Cingis-cawn Lord of Ketoa-kotan, Maurenahar, and Gaznehen. (
Almostansor-bila-Mansor then sitting Caliph of Mecca and Bagdat.) To
Cingis-cawn (who dyed Anno Domini 1228. heg. 608.) followed Tuki-cawn, and
Chagatay-cawn; from Chagatay-cawn descended Tamberlan, whose issue now rule
Hindustant. After the Tartars, the Turks a fresh planted here, led by
Chara-Mohummed An. Dom. 1415. Heg. 795. a Karakula guspan or black sheep as
they call themselves, banished Anno Dom. 1470. Heg. 850. by Acen-beg (called
also Vsan-cassan) an Armenian Christian, whose grandson Alvan was the last
white sheep, or Acorlu-guspan shorn mortally by Izmael-Sophy his ambitious
kinsman An. 1504. Heg. 884. This Izmael was great Grandfather to Abbas now
Persian King, of the Ben-Ally or Sophian Genealogy.

Let us now (what pace you please) to Perse-polis, not much out of the road:
but were it a thousand times further, it merits our pains to view it; being
indeed the only bravo Antique-Monument (not in Persia alone) but through all
the Orient.

PERSEPOLIS, (first called Elamis from Elam son of Sem son of Noah) was
built (enlarged rather) by Sosarmus a Median Dynast, third from Arbaces that
put a period (by death of Sardanapalus) to the Assyrian Monarchy, begun by
Belus ( Nymrod and Jupiter) and in a glorious succession of one and forty
Emperors commanding the world, till Arbaces subjected Babylon. By Cambyses
(son to Cyrus the magnificent) it was most beautified, and from him to Darius
Codomanus continued Empress of Asia two hundred and thirty years in a line of
thirteen Monarchs, till Alexander by conquest of all Asia made prostrate also
this glorious City, betrayed by Teredates, and demolisht by vehement
persuasion of Thais an Athenian harlot, who (in revenge of Xerxe's expedition
into Greece) never gave over exasperating the giddy Macedonian, till she saw
it flaming; an act so unworthy Alexander as he sought to quench it with his
tears. A City so excellent, that Quintus Curtius and Diodorus Siculus entitle
it the richest and most lovely City under the Sun. A high and stately Tower
it had, circled with a triple Wall: sixteen cubits high the first, adorned
with battlements; the second was two and thirty; the third of threescore cubits
high, of delicate polisht Marble, entered by many gates of burnisht brass. To
the East rose amiably a hill of four Akers, in which (in stately Mausoleums)
were intombed the Monarchs of the world. Many rare and admirable buildings it
had, amongst which, the glorious Temple of Diana (mother to that at Ephesus) by
Josephus report was at that time the most exquisite for Art and material in the
world. The stones were of richest Marble and Porphire, the roof of refined
gold. A bayt Antiochus the avaritious Atheist long had nibled at, but could not
swallow it, as he had done Jerusalems, whence sacrilegiously he ravished ten
tun of gold. The Palace royal here, was cut out of the marble rock, above
two miles about; the roof and casements were of Gold, Silver, Amber, and
Ivory. The State within, was of gold and oriental glittering gems, in one
room an artificial Vine (presented by Pythius) the stalk pure gold, the
clusters of pearls and carbuncles; his bolster was valued at five thousand
Talents of gold, his footstool worth three thousand; such, as (after the
unruly Greeks had pillaged three days) gave the Macedonian Victor for his
part, 120000 Talents, or 72 millions of crowns, a mass of gold: yet very
possible, if it be true old Histories report ( Herodotus is one) how that at
that time, the Monarchs of Persia (besides the Tribute of other Kingdoms) had
yearly out of Indya three hundred and threescore Talents of gold. Easily then
might the Greek load away (as story says) three thousand Mules, with two and
thirty millions and 750000 pounds in coin, though in that adolescency of the
world, one would wonder so much treasure was found. But we may believe it,
since sacred writ tells us that in Solomon's reign, in Jerusalem gold and
silver was as common as stones. Also Xenophon, that when Cyrus descended into
Asia the less, he brought back no less than 125 millions of pounds. But why
stand we gaping at these prodigious sums. Pauper enim non est, cui rerum
suppetit usus. These sparkling Diamonds, what are they but Mammons eyes; this
Chaos of gold, but refined clay. What Magic then to make Idolaters. For my
part (by Gods help) I intend rather to admire the Anatomy of this glorious
ruin, which Don Garzia de Silva Figuroa (Ambassador Anno 1619 to Abbas from
Philip the third) calls it the only Monument of the world, without Imposture;
yea far exceeding (says he) all other miracles in the world, we can either
hear or see at this day. Miserable in my poor description.

The ribs or ruins of Persepolis are at this day called Chil-Manor or
Chehel-Manor ( i.e. forty Towers) in the idiom of Persia: and might more
properly have said Hashtot-Manor, or eighty Towers, for so many are easily told
two yards out of the ground; and if from so many pillars as are perfect and
lofty, then may they say Nouzda-Manor or nineteen Towers, at this day no more
standing, one excepted at the East below, above a bow shot thence. The whole
Basis is cu^ by incredible toil, out of the solid marble rock, twice the
compass of Wyndsor Castle, ascended by fourscore and fifteen easy stairs,
dissected from the durable black Marble, so broad that a dozen horse may go
abreast: the perpendicular is two and twenty Geometric feet, and where the
stairs are not, the rock is precipitious. Near the highest step, is the
entrance into the Palace; the breadth is visible, in despite of flame and
weather: on one side the gate stands a monstrous great Elephant, on the other a
Rhinoceros; the distance is about twenty foot, the portraicts are out of the
shining Marble, ten yards high either of them, fixed and perpetual: a few paces
thence, are of like work, bulk and matter two gallant Towers, and (to finish
the Porters Lodge) near them is an other ruin, a Pegasus an invention of the
Sculptor to illustrate his Art: and being past this portall, the Apollo opens,
a fair even ground, deplorable in many ruins, a hundred white Marble pillars,
whole and broken dignifying this once most excellent structure. Upon many of
these white Marble pillars the Storks have builded them their nests, where the
rage of wind and weather is more offensive to them than any dread they have of
the people who inhabit near them: in all unseasonable stormy or cold weather
they forsake the Region and fly where the Sun can comfort them: the Persians
have many superstitious stories concerning 'em, and suppose them (as elsewhere
I have noted) the Emblems of piety and gratitude. The Pillars which are at this
day standing, (but seem to groan under the tyranny of Time) are twixt
fifteen and twenty cubits high, and rise beautifully in forty squares or
concave parallels; every square has three full inches; whereby the circuit may
be gathered: most excellent is the matter, most elegant the work, and no less
commendable, the order and shape how they are placed: in posture, in show, to
this day admirable; but when they stood in luster and perfection, were
elsewhere scarce imitable. From the ordinary standing, we easily enjoyed a
most delightful prospect: but in the summity or advantage a brave Horizon of
thirty miles unlimitted Plains every way gave it self to this Emperial
Palace, as seeming to submit it self in a happy lowliness.

Ruins of Persaepolis.


In part of this great room (not far from the portall) in a mirror of
polisht marble, we noted above a dozen lines of strange characters, very fair
and apparent to the eye, but so mystical, so odly framed, as no Hierogliphick,
no other deep conceit can be more difficultly fancied, more adverse to the
intellect. These consisting of Figures, obelisk, triangular, and pyramidall,
yet in such Simmetry and order as cannot well be called barbarous. Some
resemblance, I thought some words had of the Antic Greek, shadowing out
Ahashuerus Theos. And though it have small concordance with the Hebrew, Greek,
or Latin letter, yet questionless to the Inventer it was well known; and
peradventure may conceal some excellent matter, though to this day wrapped up in
the dim leafes of envious obscurity.

Adjoining this, is another square room, from angle to angle ninety paces, in
circuit three hundred and threescore paces: beautified with eight doors, four
of them are six paces broad; the other four, three a piece: all eight
severally composd of seven great polisht Marbles fixed one upon another; each of
those stones are four yards logn, five quarters high, most excellently
engraven with Images of Lions, Gryffins, Tigres, and Bulls: and in other places
(for the walls are durable) Battles, Hecatombs, Triumphs, Olympic games, and
the like, in very rare Sculpture and proportion. Above each door is engraven
the Idea of a Majestique Monarch; his roabe is long, a Tiara or Mithra on his
head, his hair very long and curled; in one hand he holds a Globe, in the
other his Scepter, a garb and session never used by Persian Princes. The silly
inhabitants (who made no account of it till of late) name him, Iamshet, and
Aaron, and Sampson, and Solomon, a wonder they leave out Rustan their Hercules,
and as easy for invention. A third chamber conjoynes the last we spoke of,
this (if they lie not that told us so) was a Gynecie or Nursery; it has four
unequal angles, two sides are sixty; the other two, seventy of my largest
paces. From that we issued into a fourth room, two sides are twenty, the other
two, thirty paces. The walls are very eminent in this chamber, of black shining
Marble, in many places so bright and jetty, as we could easily view our reflex,
no steel mirror comparing with it. In most parts the walls are cut into
Gygantive Images, illustrated with Gold, to this day permanent. Somewhat
further, over heaps of stones of valewable portraictures, we mount toward the
most lofty part of this Palace, where we saw the resemblances of a devout
King, adoring his three Dietyes, the Sun, the Fire, a Serpent, all which are
cut upon the perpendicular Mountain. The other side of this high hill is a
precipice, down which is no descending. But whether this Fabric was Ionick,
Dorick, or Corinthiack, in the perfection, I cannot determine, the ruins
forbid a positive judgment. But such at this day it is, that a ready Lymmer in
three months space can hardly (to do it well) depict out all her excellencies.
Pity it is, it is not done, the barbarous people every day defacing it and
cleaving it asunder for grave-stones and benches to sit upon. Five miles West
from Chehel-manor is also a gallant Monument, a Giant cut into a monstrous
proportion, whom the illiterate Persians say was Rustan, and from him called
Nocta-Rustan. I rather judge it the Image of great Alexander, who had a desire,
that after ages might think him more than a man, and his men more than
Monsters, as appeared in his conceit to make many Armors, bigg enough for three
men, and scatter them in India that the people might not dare to rebel, lest
those Poliphems came to lash them.

Near Chilmanor is Mardash (corruptly by the Spaniard called Margatean) a Town
of two hundred houses, the people so superstitious that such houses as we came
in they perfumd and ayr'd (some were happily fired) for that we were not
Mussulmen. From this place to Sheraz are ten farsangs; interposd by some craggy
hills and a pleasant river ( Rhogomana of old) over which is a bridge, the best
till then we saw in Persia. This river is by Quintus Curtius lib. 5. and Strabo
lib. 15. named Araxis ( Cho-Araxes is a fitter name) streaming (says he)
twenty furlongs from Persepolis. Another of that name, so often mentioned by
Ptol. Mela, Plutarch, and Lucan, is in Armenia, and indeed divides it from
Medya, at this day called Arash) and very famous.

After two days stay in view of old Persepolis, the eight and twentieth day we
took horse, and that night rid four and twenty miles to a Town called Moy own;
in midway twixt which two Towns, we noted a high impregnable mount, at whose
top, stood desperately a Castle so fortified by Nature and industry, as may be
thought impregnable. A late rebellious Sultan (weary of slavery) manned it
against his Prince victorious Abbas, who (to terrify others by his example)
came in person to chastise him. But such was the precipitious height where the
Castle stood, and the narrow entrance so bravely defended, that in six months
siege he could see no sign of victory. Loath he is to leave it so, and what
stratagem to take, cannot imagine. A great reward he promises to any would
effect it. Valor is invalidable. Art Magique perpetrates it. An old wizard
covetous of so much money promises the Devils best, and accordingly, by his
infernal spells so possessed with threats and phantasmaes the wretched Sultan,
that upon the witches assurance of pardon he descends, the block rewards him.
But Abbas acknowledges the Inchanter had merited his price and grudgingly gave
it him. The foolish man so doates upon his gold, that he sees not danger. The
King repents the loss of it, and knows no way to recover it but by sending
him to Satan without his head, the reason of his Justice was for his Sorcery. A
quality at other times he commended deeply, but now abhorred it: a pretty
policy. To return.

Moyown, is delightfully seated; enricht with sweet water, excellent Wine, much
wood, and Natures Carpets. It properly belongs to the highly reverenced Prophet
Izmael, whose tomb Emoom-Izmael is here seen, by liberality of many Kings, and
great men not a little honored: toward its maintenance (and the Priests) the
Town gives yearly twelve thousand mawnd-shaw of Rice, and four thousand of
Barley. Next night we lodgd (slept I cannot say) in O-jone, a village of thirty
Families, all of them Prophets or Prophets children. We ever found least
profit, where Prophets dwelt, no wine nor grapes allowd to grow amongst them;
not that wine is bad, but out of a Tradition they have, that it is the blood of
those Giants that warred against the Gods. Next day we rode over most craggy,
steep, and terrible high hills, and at night made Tartang our Manzeil; a small
Town, only famous in a high Sepulcher, clothd with violet colored velvet,
under which is buried a great Uncle of the Kings. Next night to Assepose,
notable only in an old mud Castle, sometimes a garrison; in and about which,
are forty thousand Georgians and Sarcasshes, by profession Christians; by
quality, Captives; a people much honoring Saint George the Cappadocian Bishop
their converter. They differ from Mahomitans (not in habit, but) in their gray
eyes and long white hair ( Albani ab albo crine) after the mode of Antic
Gallants, recorded by Pliny and Lucian, tissued with fillets of gold or silver.
If any of these turn Mahomitan, they are preferred beyond vulgar merit. Poor
souls, hearing that we were Christians, they flockt about us, yea wept to see
us. Not much distant hence, is Thymar, memorable if Byzar err not, in a brave
and Ancient Monument, by some Hebrew characters supposd the buryall place of
Bathsheba, Mother of King Solomon: it is called Musqued-Zulzimen, i.e. Solomon's
Chapel; a place if truly so, worthy the seeing. Next night we lay in
Whoomgesh, next in Cuzcuzat, next day to Bazeba-chow, and next to Degardow,
eight leagues from which place, (and nearer Tezdycaus) we rode over a steep
Mountain of black shining Marble, (and where are Quarries of Serpentine and
Porphyre, if the earth were looked into) the descent was so percipicious, that
but by ragged steps and those not a little dangerous, was no riding down:
howbeit down we got, and that night rode to Gumbazellello (famous in a
Carvans-raw and the best wheat bread in Persia;) next night to Yezdecawz a
Town built in the bottom of a valley, sunck down in mid a great plain,
whereby it is scarce to be found, did not a Castle point it out, raisd by
Yezdgyrd a Persian King above the Town, and where is a very stately
Carravans-raw, the best from thence to Bander on the Gulf of Persia. Next day
(through De-Moxalbeg) we got to Amno-baut (by some called Boyall) a village of
thirty families, all of them a postat Georgians, inclosd, to exclude their
shame, by a high, strong, round wall raisd with battlements, resembling a
Castle; commanded by Daut (or David) Chawn (brother to the Duke of Sheraz) an
Apostate, for which he was made an Eparch, and honored with three silly
temporary Tittles, bought with loss of an eternal Crown of happiness: he
has here a pretty Carvan-sraw and Summer houses for his own delight, wherein
are five neat rooms curiously painted in Imagery and imbost with gold; his
Gardens are also sweet and prettily contrivd into grotts, mazes, vollieres, and
the like, equal to that of Aladeul' at Caramit for his Assassinates; but nasty
and deformed if compard with Paradize: from Amno-baut we rode next day to
Commeshaw, a Town boasting in a thousand houses and much Antiquity. It may be
either that same Town which Pliny called Parodana, or that Ore-batys in Ptolomy:
Sir Robert Sherley was once her Governor, under that wicked parricide
Constandel chawn; but it seems they bore small love to either of their
memories, neither vouchsafing to bid us welcome (as most Towns did we hitherto
past through, although I have omitted to speak their ceremonies) nor a lodging,
a base respect to so noble a passenger. At this place Persia is limited, and
where Ayrac (or Parthya) takes her beginning: Chiraef, Gardon-achow, Nowbengan,
Kazeron, Pherushabad, Estacher, Nabandioem, are reckned Towns in Farsistan, I
have but named them. But that you may the better go along with us; and
especially in that the latest Maps of Persia are so erroneous, both in rivers,
the situation of places, and their true names (for to say truly, none of them
have five right names;) I have therefore inserted this of the Persian Empire;
in which, neither the position of Places are false, nor names of Towns
fictitious or borrowed:

map of Persian empire THE PERSIAN Empire


Next day we got to Moyeor; agrandiz'd by a thousand families; but none of
their houses compare with their dove-houses for neat and curious outsides: they
have some excuse for it; some of them are descended (not from Columba Noae but)
from those holy Pigeons, who fed at Mahomets ear and advanced his reputation
not a little, persuading the simple people they brought him news from some
(bad) Angels, concerning their happiness. Next night we were usherd to
Spawhawnet by a servant of Meloyembegs the Kings Fiscall who entreated the
Ambassadors to repose a day or two there, till Spahawn had fitted it self for
a solemn intertainment: where whiles we repose we may remember, that most of
those Manzeils we have past from Chehelmanor to his place, are twixt twenty and
thirty miles asunder. The whole distance is somewhat above two hundred miles,
as I computed them.

The tenth of April we set out from Spahawnet a village six miles South from
Spahawn: when we had gone a farsang (three miles,) we were stayed by the way to
taste a banquet in a spacious garden of the Kings, whither the English Agent
and such other Christian Merchants as were in Spahawn came out to attend our
Lord Ambassador: a mile nearer the City, the Vizier, the Sultan of Spahawn,
Meloyembeg and Hodge-nazar the Armenian Prince with four thousand horse and
innumerable foot, came to bid us a happy entrance: the fields two miles from
the town were replenisht with vulgar men, women and childen; the Bannyans like
caterpillars swarmd about us; all together, in a volley of thundering
acclamations cried out Hoshomody, Suffowardy, the better sort Hoshgaldom i.e.
welcome, heartily welcome: forty kettle Drums, Fifes, Tabrets Tymbrels, dancing
wenches, Hocus Pocusses, and other Anticks past my numbering inobled the
ceremony: the bridge was full of women on both sides, many of them in fair
deportment unmasqued their faces. The first place we alighted at was the
Conna-potshaugh, the Kings Palace, placed at the West side of the Medan or
great Market: there the Noble men kneeled down, and tessalemd, three times
kissing the Kings threshold, and as many times knocking their heads against the
ground in an awful obeisance: Sir Robert Sherley sizedaed also and contented
them; a Coselbash ended the ceremony in a panegyric to this purpose: That the
Fame and excellency of Shaw-Abbas was so great as had attracted a great Prince
and other Gentlemen from the extremest Angle of the world, to see whether fame
had been partial in his magnificence: no wonder, since his radiant beams
spread themselves over all the Universe: that done, some bottles of good Wine
were lavisht out, after which with a continued clamor of the Plebeyans, we
were conducted to a brave house of the Kings, at the South-East end of the
City, through which, a deep broad water had its course into the Sindery.

The fourth day after our being in Spahawn, the English Agent banqueted our
Lord Ambassador, and showed us a rich and hearty welcome: to agrandize it, at
night a Tanck of water was beset with lighted Tapers, artificially uniting the
two contrary Elements; squibs also and other fireworks, that made all the City
gaze and gape with wonder. Next day Hodgenazar was visited at his house in
Ielphea; a Christian he professes himself, but (I must be bold to tell him)
his house is furnished with such beastly pictures, as no way relish of honest or
Christian invention: amongst our other cates, we had a roasted pig, a meat to
Jew and Persian infinitely offensive: the Wine flagons and Bowls here, were of
purest gold. I desire to speak a little of these Armenians, that the rest of
our Travailes may be woven with more ease and fewer mixtures.

These Armenians are called also Ielphelyns from the City they dwell in here,
named from their Metropole near Ararat. In habit they differ not from the
Persians, but live in equal freedom: they profess Christ, and account Saint
George their Patron, from whom some think Georgia takes name, and not from
(...), Husbandmen; they and the Georgians are habited alike: this is their
greatest difference, that the Georgians excel in war, the Armenians in
merchandise: this Image may well represent them both.

A Georgian man and woman.


They both are honored by the memory of twenty thousand Martyrs in the last
persecution, Sapores tyrannising then ore Persia: the Country derives her name
from Armenus a Thessalian ( Iasons kinsman)* It is divided into major and
minor: the greater is confind by Tartary to the North, by Media and Assyria to
the South: the West and East with the Euxin and Caspian seas: It includes
Colchis, Albania, Georgia, Iberia, etc. obscured in other barbarous names, as
Zuria, Goweria, Mengrellia, Turq'mania, Cara-culia. Gurgee, Haloen, and
Sarlochya (from Gog and Magog,) and to which place, the ten Tribes were brought
by Salmanasser the Assyrian.

They have two Patriarchs or Protomists; one at Jerusalem; the other at Syna in
Arabia; sometimes they reside at Sis near Tharsus or at Ecmeazin near Rhivan,
or Ervan in Shervan. Antioch their old Sea they dare not challenge. They have
the three first general Counsels in great honor, study the Latin tongue,
(rare in Asia); they have twelve titular Bishops, three hundred some say;
poor, but no way despicable. They have the old and new Testaments in their
mother tongue; the Letany also, part of which, is every Lords day read and
expounded in the Churches: they administer the Lords Supper in both kinds,
Bread and Wine; and deny a real presence; they allow but our two Sacraments:
Baptism they celebrate after the Eutichyan sort, as Iacobus (father of the
Iacobites) and Johannes Philipponus Anno Dom. 550 mis-taught them: the proselit
gentiles or Mohumedans in the forehead with a burning cross, others they
baptize with two fingers, and sign the Infant with the cross, as glorying in
that hyerogliphick the Jews and Mussulmen esteem so ignominiously of: are also
great lovers of Tradition: they pray not for the dead, imagining that till the
general day of doom they are without joy or torture. Five Sabbaths in every
year they abstain from flesh, fish, cheese, and butter; in memory of those
five Ages, wherein their barbarous forefathers used to immolate their children
unto the old red Dragon: all wednesdayes and fridayes also in the year except
from Easter to Ascension they fast precisely: and no other Christians are such
strict Lent-observers: for they refrain their wives that time; and from flesh,
fish, milk, eggs, butter; those forty days feeding only upon oil, bread,
honey, water, dates, cowcumbers, melons, herbs, and the like. At other times
they eat hogs flesh. Before the three great Festivalls, they fast twelve days:
they marry betimes at nine or twelve years: the Layety are permitted to wed
twice the Ecclesiastiques but once: trigamy to all is hateful. The Presbitry
are much honored. Images in their Churches they detest, but at home have
pictures of Venus and Priapus. The cross they regard, but worship not, believe
not purgatory* their Temples are but meanly beautiful. Obedience and respect
to the better and elder sort is much practisd. They punish theft and adultery
severely. In some things they are but refind Idolaters: as in some burialls,
they lead about the Church an unspotted Lamb with much solemnity; they then
sacrifice, divide and give each there a bitt to eat; as a Simbol, or
superstitious bond, obliging one another in love and charity: to me it seems
they derive this custom from that of the Hebrews, who used to divide a calfe,
as Moses records in 15. Genesis 9. and as Jeremy notes in the 34 Chapter 18.19.
verses. On good Friday they represent the passion and burial of our Savior:
during which, they weep and ingeminate their ejaculations. On Easter they
intimate the resurrection by a representative body, using all that morning the
old salute of joy; He is risen indeed: an Angelical note they call it. That
day they celebrate with great Feasts, the Mahomitans nor Jews not daring to
mingle among them; The King allows them that privilege. They fast upon the
Nativity of our Savior. The Jesuits labor to knit them into Rome; but in
vain: they stand much upon their Antiquity, and name two hundred grave and
learned Bishops since their conversion, many of which were noble Martyrs or
witnesses: the report of an envious Doeg that they had submitted to Rome,
agnising the Pope their head, made Abbas storm and not to be pacified, till a
thousand of them were made headless: upon which the rest implore help and
revenge from the Turk, raising a bloody scean of ensuing Troubles. Some say
that Lodovic Grangier a Jesuit lately crossed the black sea into Mengrellia,
where Threbis-chawn entreated him gently and by his charity they are much
purged from superstition: which if so, I wonder that his name is of no more
fame amongst them.

I fear I have made too large a parenthesis. Let us therefore to Spahawn
again, the Metropolis of the Persian Monarchy; yea the greatest and best built
City throughout the Orient.

Et quo te carmine dicam. Must Babells lofty Towers submit to thee
Tauris, Perse-polis and Nynivee?
Shushan, Arsacia, and Nabarca, fall
Before thy seat and power Provincial?
Had that ambitious Nymrod thought on this,
Cambyses or the proud Semyramis,
With all those princely Rulers which did sway
The Eastern Scepters, when thou did obey:
It would have queld their pride and let them know,
All humane Actions have both ebb and flow.
The greatest Monarchs cannot conquer Fate,
Time does by turns advance and subjugate.
Now royal Abbas rules, Spahawn must rise.
(Where Kings affect, there most men cast their eyes,
There flock the people:) it is his power not thine
Which has eclipst their light, to make thee shine.
Then use thy Fortune so, that none from thence
May wish thy fall, or grudge thy eminence.
SPAWHAWN, (at this day the Persian Metropolis) is in Artick elevation 32
degrees 39 minutes; in longitude 86 degrees 30 minutes: differing from Don
Garcias account, whose height exceeded not 31 degrees 30 minutes. In whose
description if I seem prolix, impute it to my desire to give thee every thing
useful and observable. And in the first place, in regard some suppose her
(like Agra) a start-up Town, we will trace her in her variations as far as
my poor reading will well afford it us.

That it was Echatan (as Niger thinks) is ridiculous to imagine: two thousand
three hundred year ago it was called Dura; but whether in that Dura the
haughty Assyrian erected his golden Colosse, I find it not. Hecatompylos is
the next name it had; recorded by Apollodorus, Polibius, Ptolomy, and Pliny,
lib. 6. c. 8. so denominated from her hundred gates; whereby we may imagine her
in those days great and stately; and though in Alexanders conquest Curtius
name her not, it seems she then varied into that Greekish nomenclation: and of
this name we have a story, that Demetrius Nycanor ( Sotors son) thirsting
after Syria and Jerusalem, was (upon his treacherous killing Antiochus,
Alexanders son, to make the conquest easier) affronted by Tryphon Lieftenant
of Syria, and forced to fly to Arbaces the Persian King for succor, who being
acquainted with his unnatural ambition, not only denied him the law of
hospitality, but sent him prisoner to Hecatompylon, where he was fettered; till
upon submission and promise of more obedience he was releast, and by Arbaces
reseated in his own Dominions.

After that, Nymzamaena, or half the world: (an Hyperbole borrowed from Rome,
Epitomen Vniversi:) by Ben Jonas who was here Anno Hegirae 540. of our Lord
1160) Ashbahan or Acspachan; by Mandevil our countriman (three hundred and
forty years ago) Saphaon; and at this day is called Spawhawn (or as they
Sibboleth, Sphawhawn) and by most writers differently spelled, Spaha, Spachen,
Acbaban, Aspachan, Izpaan, Spahan, and Hispahan, the errors springing from
diversity of Idioms. From whence the name Spawhawn derives it self, is not
known unto the Natives (I asked it them) how then shall we get intelligence?
it is a thing for certainty impossible, yet will I venture a conjecture that it
is either that old Town Spada, where Eunuchs were first gelded, or from a
compound of Aspa (a horse) and Chawna (a house, or stable, or the like)
Spawhawn per Apheresin and Syncopen euphonically contracted; the rather
conjectured, in that the Hypodrome (the body of the great Mydan) was an old
famous place, for view of horses: if that content not. I must ingeniously
confess, I think this City was never named Hecatompylon: such a one I know
there was famoused in many Authors: but by observing the position 37 degrees 50
minutes in Ptolomy, I take Coom or Cazbyn to be the relict of it: the rather,
in that Ptolomy, Pliny, and Strabo in their Geography, place Aspa in Parthia,
in 36 degrees.; a name from whence Aspahawn may credibly have been deduced:
besides, the lat. is more agreeable: or peradventure from Aspadana which they
place in 33 degrees. Spawhawns latitude.

First, speak we what she has been for grandeur in older times, and with that
we will couple our present observation. If I exceed, excuse it, prestat de
Carthagine tacere, quam pauca dicere. A. D. 645. of the Heg. 25, by command of
Omar then Calyph of Mecca, Siet-ben-Abivakez with a few troops of victorious
Sarazens attempts to pluck violently from Yezdgirds head the then tottering
Diadem of Persia, and at the third pull (having twice overthrown him) effected
it, the glorious command of that Monarchy then eclipsing: which done, this Ben
Abivakez sacks his two best Towns Elmedin in Chaldea (built Anno Domini 520,
by Kozrao, son to Kobodes, and yet the Alcoran says it sprung out of hell)
and Spahawn in Parthia. Also we may memorise her from Tangrolipix (a Turqueman,
and Lord of the Zelzuccian Family, of whom the Ottomans) who in the year 1030.
of the Hegira 410. ( Edward the Confessor ruling England, Gruffyth ap Llewellyn
Wales,) was entreated by Mahomet then Prince of Persia to aid him against
Pysastris an incroaching Babylonian, which Tangrolipix did and prospered in.
After that, he helped him against the invading Indyan, and in recompense of his
good services, the Turque desires leave to pass Araxis to visit his
countrymen, betwixt the two seas the Hyrcan and Euxine; and by jealous Mahomet
denied and so enraged, that lurking awhile in the Carmanian Desert, the Persian
gulf was at his pleasure. But (vexing to be so confined) marches against the
King, and at Shyraz beats his twenty thousand darstardly soldiers; and after
that, opposes 60000, then also victorious; whereby Mahomet fled, and with two
much haste to get into Spahawn, fell from's horse, and broke his neck, the
Turks then subjecting Parthya.

Rached-bila also, son of Almoster-sha was slain by Mazud, Anno 1130. of the
Heg. 510 and buried in Spahawn: which few for many, shall speak her antiquity
in the name she is now triumphant in.

Speak we now of the magnificence: we have told you how the story of
ben-Abivakez a thousand years ago, calls her a great City, but gives us no
better description, Ben-Ionas (who says he saw it four hundred seventy six
years ago) affoords her twelve miles compass, rich, and populous. Mandevel,
A.D. 1300 (which is above 300 years since) says that in his time she was a
noble City. A. D. 1474, Joseph Barbarus was here ( Vsan Cassan reigning) and
he describes Spahawn to be a great and famous City, peopled with 1500000
souls, the Town and Suburbs ten miles in compass. Rabbi Benjamin and
Contarenus the Venetian Ambass. 80 year ago, relate that then she had 20
Italian miles in circuit, and Lemius the Portuguise sent by Albuquerq to
Sha-Ismael, An. Dom. 1513. reports her glorious.

I shall now more largely, and truly acquaint you with her present standing.
Spawhawn, Metropolis of the Persian Monarchy, is seated in the Parthian
Territory now called Ayrack, and as Umbelic to that spacious body at this day
awed by the Persian Scepter: from the Persian gulf removed a hundred seventie
nine farsangs, (of English miles five hundred thirty seven,) from the Caspian
sea a hundred and twenty farsangs (three hundred and sixty miles;) from Shyraz
two hundred twenty two miles, from Babylon four hundred and fifty, from
Candahor eight hundred and seventie, from Cazbyn 270. In compass at this day
nine English miles, Circuit.
including seventy thousand houses, and of souls above two hundred thousand,
composed (besides Natives) of English, Duch, Portuguiz', Pole, Muscovit,
Indian, Arabian, Armenian, Georgian, Turk, Jew, and others, drawn thither by
the magnetic power of gain and novelty: many things here are memorable; which
for order sake I will present you thus divided. The Mydan, Mosques, Hummums,
Gates, Palaces, Gardens, Monuments, and Ielphey the City adjoining.

Let me lead you into the Mydan, into the which ere I can bring you, River.
we pass over a well built Bridge of stone, supported by five and thirty
pillars, through which the Syndery (or Zindaren) from the Acroceraunian
Mountains streams gently; spreading in rainie seasons here welnigh so broad
as the Thames at London, but nothing so navigable; in Summer her Channells
being discovered. The Mydan or great Market, is without doubt the most
spacious, Mydan.
pleasant, and Aromatic Market in the Universe; a thousand paces from North to
South, the other way above two hundred, resembling our Exchange, or the place
Royal in Paris, but six times larger: the building is of Brick, well made, and
in delightful manner fabricated; the whole Mydan jointly continued: the inside
is full of shops, each shop full of ware, archt above (and in a Cupolo) atop
tarraswise framed, and with plaster (like that of Paris) cemented. This Mydan
being the noblest part, is so placed in the heart of this triumphant City. The
Kings Palace (or Chonna-Potshaugh) conjoynes the West side of the Mydan,
possessing a large quantity backwards, but juts not to the street further than
the other buildings, nor to the street side gives any magnifick front or state,
her best bravery being in the trim, pargetted and painted with blew and gold,
in mosaic or antic sort, interlac't with posies of Arabic, either savoring
of ostentation (they deifie their Kings) or for instruction from the Alcoran;
within, the rooms are archt, enlightened by curious trellizes, the roof
imbost above with red, white, blew, and gold, the sides with sports and painted
Images; the ground spread with rich and curious carpets of silk and gold,
without other furniture. Tarrassed above, garnisht with a Pharoe over-topping
many Mosques, and excellent for view and breathing. The wilderness behind, is
filled with ayery Citizens, priviledg'd from hurt or affrights, and for which
they return their thankful notes in a more swift melodious consort, than if
they were in the exactest vollyere in the Universe.

The North I Will in the Medan, shows eight or nine spacious archt rooms, hung
with Lamps and latten Candlesticks, which being lighted, gives a curious
splendour. Thither the Potshaw and others go to see pastimes of tumbling,
dancing girls, and painted Catamites, that damned sin being tolerated by the
Alcoran. The furthest end North is appropriate for Mynts; the first day silver,
gold the second, next day brass. Not far thence are victualling shops,
wherein, to feed the helpful belly, after the busy eye and painful feet are
satiated.

Before the Kings door, and within the Hippodrome, lie unmounted one and thirty
Demicannons of brass, and twelve iron Culverins, brought hither (by some late
overthrow they gave the Portugal or Turk) from Ormus or Babylon. Opposite to
this Palace is a fair Mosque, but that at the South end (of all others) most
excellent; the outside stone, not formed to the Cross (the hyerogliphic of our
salvation) as ours be; but round, either from the Talmud, figuring out
Aeternity, or from the Alcaba in Mecca, the shape whereof was revealed to
Abraham from heaven, pattern'd from that, Adam (says their Alcoran) reard in
Paradise: within it is distinguished into Isles, the walls lined 15 geometrick foot
high from the sole with white well polisht Marble; without pews or seats: in
center is a stately Tanck; and at the portall another, octanguler, filled with
cristall streams which is first forced to glide round the inside the Medan
through a stone channel six foot deep, and six in breadth, which after a
pleasant drilling murmur, flows into this Tanck (or watery Magazeen) whence it
is sucked out by subterranean passages into many private houses and gardens.
Within the Medan the shops be uniforme, the trades are no where severed, but
united. Some be of Mercers, of Lapidaries some, and most of them of gums,
drugs, and spices; so sweet, so delicate, as not till then, could I see the
Poet sung well.

We sucked the Aromatic air of Persia.
Auras madentes Persicorum Aromatum.
Take the outside of this brave Fabric thus presented.

Hippo dromos
The Mydan or great Merkitt in Spahawne.

A. is a Mosque South.

B. is an archt way to the North.

C. is the kings house.

D. is a Mosque East.



Mosques.
The other Mosques (called here Dear' and Zunae) are orbicular for shape; for
sight, low and indifferently pleasant: the materials are Sunburned Bricks,
varnisht, and beautified with painted posies; few are without their Tancks (or
cesterns of holy water) wherein all Musselmen wash their hands, arms, eyes,
(having formerly bathed their face, ears, breast, feet,) as an operative work
to purge sin, and confer devotion: their other Church ceremonies I will
contract in the latter end of this book, under Title of their religion.

Hummums.
The Hummums or Sudatories in this City are many and very beautiful; quadrated
some, but most be globous. The stone is white, polisht and durable: the windows
are large without, crossed, and to the inner side, made narrow; the glass is
thick, anneald and darkning; the top or covering, round; and tyld with a
counterfeit Turquoise, perfect blew, and very fresh and lasting: The inside of
these hot houses are divided into many cells or concamerations, some for
delight, others for sweating in, all for use; of pure stone all, all paved with
jetty Marble: men use them commonly in the mornings, women toward night; the
price is small, but so generally used as makes the gain abundant; it is the
Catholicon against all diseases, colds, Catarrhs, phlegm, aches, agues,
Luesvenerea etc. the women's being there, is known by a linen cloth displayed
at the door, set there (as a warning piece) by the jealous Eunuchs. The City
is ovall, each house delighted by large Cypress gardens: Walls.
the wall is of no force against the confounding vomit of the flaming Cannon;
it is of use against horse, and shock of Lances; some parapets and bulwarks it
has, of more imitation than use; the Persian magnanimity ever choosing to dye
rather than be enclosed or seiged. It has a dozen Portresses, of which, four
are shut up. Gouldest, Chaly, Mergh, and Cherbaugh, made th'entrance of a
royal garden. The eight are these, Hazena-bawt (opening toward Shyraz and the
gulf) De-cridest (to Babylon and Ardaveil.) Tockzy (to Cashan, Casbyn and
Tabryz.) Kerroen (to Yezd and Cawrestan) Lamboen (to Hamadan.) Sheydack Madayan
(opens to Candahor and Indya.) Yowbara and Dalwaet.

Palaces.
The Palaces are few, the Kings house in the Medan; that where we were lodged,
belonging to the King, but made ready for our Lord Ambassador: Conna
Meloyembeg, Tamas-coolibeg and Haram Beguna are all I saw, worth remembering:
the first, is low, painted without, guilt within, well watered and enclosed with
fragrant gardens. The last, a Seralio, famous for precious treasure and as
valuable beauties, of which (being dangerous to inquire or view) we will
speak in silence; the Castle is very large, well walled and deeply moated:
armed with some brazen pieces, but better defended by a troop of lean faced,
beardlesse, memberlesse Eunuchs, who like so many angry Sagittaries guard their
Ladies. The battlements are pleasant to look on, but no doubt the Horyzontall
plain which is easily discovered from thirty rising Turrets there, yields most
pleasure.

Gardens.
The gardens challenge our attention; than which for grandeur and fragor, no
City in Asia out-vies her. It incloses so many, that at some distance from the
City, you would judge it a Forest; so sweet, you would call it Paradize: all
whose excellencies we will join in one at the South-West end of Spawhawn,
Nazer-jareeb by name, a garden famoused deservedly over all this Monarchy.

If you go from the Medan, you pass by Cherbaugh, through an even delicate
street two miles long at the least, most part of the way walled on both sides,
bestrew'd with Moholls or Summer houses, but more remarkable in that abundance
of green, broad, spreading, Chenore trees, yielding shade, and incomparable
order and beauty; the garden (or rather fruit Forest) of Nazerjareeb is
circled with a stately wall about three miles in compass, entered by three
gates strong and elegantly shaped. From North to South it gave me a thausand
paces, from East to West seven hundred, from one end to the other easily
discovered, by reason a fair open Ally (like that in Fountain b'leau) runs
along in parellell, distinguished into nine Ascents, each surmounting other a
large foot, each distance smooth and even. In center, is a spacious Tanck, made
into twelve equal sides, each side or square is five foot, filled, and round set
with pipes of lead which (after the Italick sort) spouts out the liquid element
in variety of conceits and postures; that sort of pastime continuing thence to
the North gate, where is raised a pile of pleasure, antickly garnisht without;
within, divided into four or six chambers; the lower, is set out with Tancks
of rich white Marble, and fumes out a cool breese, by quaffing up so much
chrystaline water as makes it bubble thither by a constreyned motion, cut by
incredible toil through the Coronian Mountain.

The higher rooms are garnisht with variety of landskips, and represents their
way of sporting, hawking, fishing, riding, shooting, wrestling, courting, and
other fancies; the roof or seeling is inricht with beaten gold, imbost with
azure. But, what seemd to me most excellent, was the view we enjoyed from her
Tarrasses, which affoorded us a dainty prospect of most part of the City;
which, (save at Rustans Tomb, upon a hill two miles thence) elsewhere cannot
be obtained. This garden is replenisht with trees of all sorts; for medicine,
for shade, for fruit: all so green, so sweet, so pleasant, as may well be
termed a compendium of sense-ravishing delights, or King Abbas his Paradise.

Monuments should come now to our description: Monuments
but I found few to feed my eyes upon. Rustans Tomb must be one (two miles from
Spahawn) behind the Garden we last spoke of: a Tomb scarce discerned by shape,
but by the Gowers Cabala preserved from Oblivion. To see it, we foot it to the
very top of an Imperious Mount, where is only a hollow Cave, whether cut by Art
or Nature scarce discernable. His grave is here, his Image, at a place near
Shyraz (from his gigantive shape engraven of old in a black-marble precipitious
mountain) Noctae or Nogdi Rustan, a brave Cavalier such time as Artaxerxes
(Queen Hesters husband) wore that Diadem. A.D. 3500. but envy (the heir of
perdition) so burnt in the wrathful heart of his unnatural brother Shawgad,
that when Rustan was hot in chase, he fell into a dreadful pit, covered with
boughs as if it had hatched no danger, but in prosecuting his hate was also
slain by a Dart Rustan flung up to retaliate him. Such was the end of valiant
Rustan, of whom the Gowers (the old Persians) fable more than we of Bellyanis
or Ogero the Dane.

Near which, and nearer the City is Darius (or rather Xerxes) mount: a rising
hillock, and whence, Xerxes viewd the innumerable Army he had in that large
Plain, weeping, upon a meditation that in so few years none should be living;
a Notion true, and sooner than he predicted; for what by Themistocles ashore,
and Leonidas at sea, at Salamys and Thermopilae, his huge Army melted away,
and quickly became numerous.

Not far thence, ride we to the Acroceraunian hills (I mean not those of
Epire known to Ptolomy) hard and lofty. Through which, bold daring Abbas is
forcing passage, though he effect it not under twenty years, and by
th'incessant toil of 40000 (sometimes 200000) men, to invite a sweet river to
Spahawn, that runs contentedly to it self fifty miles thence, and is by this
I believe effected: which when it is, may well compare with that old wonder,
intended by vainglorious Nero 'twixt Ostia and Avernus, now called Licola.

Within Spahawn I found none, save that Column or Pillar of heads of men and
beasts, erected as a Trophy of the Kings oath, and as a Monument of the peoples
levity. At the base it is twenty foot round and threescore high or there-abouts,
for (to my shame I confess it) I forgot to measure it. The occasion this, of
erecting it.

Anno 1500. Heg. 880. such time as Tamas shaw ruled Persia, and Guinza added to
the luster of that Diadem: this City (surfeiting with luxury, for Vbi uber,
ibi tuber, says Apuleius) refused not only to contribute reasonably to the
Kings occasions (at that time troubled with Turk and Tattar) but most
audatiously with stood his desired entrance; a rebellion so insufferable as
made him swear a revenge scarce to be paralleld. With fury he assaults, in
rage enters, firing a great part and in all hostile severity pillaging each
house; and to conclude, regarding neither the outcries of old men, weak women,
nor innocent children, in two days be made headless 300000 of those late
Spahawnians, and (from Tamberlan's rigid example at Damascus) erects a Trophy
(this pillar) of their heads, as a memorial of their baseness: En, quo
discordia cives perduxit miseros. Another follows.

Abbas, by hasty death of Father and elder Brother (impatient of corrivalship)
Nulla fides regni socijs, omnisque potestas
Impatiens consortis erit.
No faith in fellow rulers, power or state
Admit of consort to participate.
lops off all such branches as might eclipse the splendor of his crown, by
power or Title, speeding to Spahawn to make known his possession by such
ceremonies as befitted him. The Citizens in stead of meeting him, send him a
choking message reviving the cruelty done Hemyr Hamze Mirzey his brother, and
old Mahomet, which so exasperates Abbas that by his fathers soul, the seven
refulgent Orbs, by Bismilla and Mahomet he vows their payment. They bid him
do his worst; he besieges them; they regard it not; they expel his fury with
equal force, and for a months space hold together and do like men. Yet in
the end victuals grow short and he diverts the river; so as many steal away,
choosing rather to die by hazard than endure a famine: Abbas takes his time and
enters it, killing for two hours, men, women, and children, commanding a
pillar to be advanced of the deads of all the Rebels, which had been done had
not the Mufti (in imitation of Aurelian, who when he took Thyana (having sworn
The Pillar of Heads: in Spa^^awne.
the death of them all) made all the dogs be hanged up) in commiseration
feigned a vision from their Prophet, that (so the pillar were raised of heads)
no matter though beasts heads did it; Abbas pardons them: and forthwith a
general massacre of all kind of beasts insued, the Innocent suffering for the
Nocent, and of whose heads and those men's already slain, this Monument of
merciless mercy was reared, outbraving for height all the Mosques within
Spahawn, though now grown ruinous. Such another is in Sumachy twixt Erez and
Derbent.

Ielphey is the last part we proposed concerning this great City: the site
resembles Pera to Constantinople, or Southwark to London, the river Syndery
interposing. It Is called a Suburb as be Gower-abaut, Abbas-ebaut, Chanzabaut,
Azenabaut, and Cheigh-Saban. Though indeed they are peopled with men of one
religion, admitting very little mixture. Ielphy is governed by a peculiar
Podestate an Armenian Prince, Hodge Nazar by name, indeed a Christian Merchant:
he and his enjoy freedom of conscience, but for money matters are at the
disposition of the avaritious King. In Ielphea (named from another of that name
in Armenia (old Ariaramnes I believe, mentioned by Tortelius) the people are
numbered ten thousand, in Azenabaut four thousand families. Ielphe is by some
writ Golfa and Chiulfa, but I think I have better hit our Dialect. The
Jelphelyns are habited like the Persians, but differ in face; most of these and
the Georgians having brighter hair, and more modest eyes than the Mahomitans.
They are generally Merchants, and to say truly, but Factors for the King, who
exacts an account at their death, and inherits their posessions. They profess
Christianity taught them erroniously by Iacobus the Syrian Monothelite. They
have two Protomists, one here in Ielphey, the other resides sometimes at Sib
near Tharsus, other-times at Ecmeasin not far from Rivan or Ervan. Their
religion I have already spoken of.

Gowerabaut is another Suburb, named from the Gowers that people it; nick-nam'd
from their Idolatry, being Relicts of the ancient Persians, and such as at this
day be the Persees in Indya. The Persians account not of them, partly from
their title to the Country, partly from their industry ashaming the Persians
in their idleness. They adored the Sun (called Mythra) a representator of a
more powerful Diety; their Flamens a sort of Platonists, acknowledging many
creatures to be most excellent, but no way comparable to God the Creator, the
exact center of all perfection, Pulchrum coelum, pulchra terra, sed pulchrior
qui fecit ista, etc. Howbeit they have fallen from that, and at this day deifie
an elementall fire, which like the vestalls never extinguishes, Zertoost their
Lawgiver in his Zundavastaw above two thousand years ago (they say)
commanding them. Their An Old Inhabitant of Persia.
marriages are such as we have spoken of at Surat among the banished Persees
now; their burials differ. The Indyan Gowers or Persees expose the dead
carcasses to the Suns rage till he have eaten them, but these put them in the
hollow of a sacred Tree, standing upright, supported by the bole, till Magic
observation release them, that if the Vultur pick out his right eye first, he
is in Paradise; if the left, a Cacodaemon vexes him; they feast or fast hereby,
as joy or sorrow is occasioned. These people are most of them mechanics and
husbandmen: few of them either Scholars, Soldats, or Soldagars (as they term
their Merchants:) their habit varies but little from the common mode, save that
their headpeece is fashioned to the garb of Hyrcania. The women show their
faces (a thing very observable) their apparel is tinctured with yellow
(resembling the burnisht imbrodery of the Sun) a flame-coloured scarf
hanging loose behind them, many of them whether out of zeal or poverty (I know
not) use neither shoes nor sandalls. The farewell to these Gowers shall
terminate our description of Spawhawn; this only remembered, that the
Portuguize Friars have two houses here, of the rules of Carmel and Augustine;
their Chapel is guilt and furnished with Organs, Altars, Crucifixes, Images,
etc. with which, they hope to convert men to the Papacy: but Armenians love no
Innovation, and the Persians in their zeal contemn Images; yet, they serve
for espialls, to send Intelligences to Goa and Christendom.

We entered Spahawn the tenth of April, and on May day departed thence for the
Court, then at Asharaff in Mozendram about four hundred English miles distant
North.

Our first nights journey was to Reegue (or Reig) an hours riding from
Spahawne. Thence-forward we made (by reason of the intolerable heat) pale
Cynthia and Arcturus our night guides, all day refreshing in the
Carravans-raws, good resting places if gnats forbid it not. From Reigue we
traveled to Sardahan sixteen English miles, and next nght we made Whomg our
Manzeil being seven and twenty miles from Sardahan. Next night to Towgebawt a
house and garden of the Kings, for beauty add sweetness comparable to any
other in Parthya; the more observable, being seated in a barren cursed sandy
soil, champaigne, and terrible to inhabit in. But The blushing Rose grows
here! the Violet
And Parthyan Myrtle in choice order set!
Hic rosa purpureo crescit rubicunda color
Et Viole omne genus hic est, and Parthyca mirtus?
for five hundred paces it every way gives a series of all sorts of Persian
fruits and flowers, Pomgranads, Peaches, Apricocks, Plums, Apples, Pears,
Cherries, Chestnuts, Damask, red and white Roses, and other flowers innumerable,
fructified by a crystal rivolet, intermixed with many delicate natural and
artificial Grottoes, Labyrinths, Meanders, and Volliers, with Sudatories or
Hummums of good stone, paved with choice white Marble; the Mohull or Summer
Lodge bragging of a dozen chambers, delicate in view, rich in gold imbosments,
and proud in th'Architect, all safeguarded from sand and stealth, by a
defensive wall that hinders (save in one rising hillock in midst of the six
descents) the affrighting sight of the circumvolving Wilderness.

Who calls himself a Traveller, must not imagine pleasure his Object, it is
pain and misery must entertain him oftnest. Otherwise, I could have lulled
my self in this last Paradise: but on we must and try the difference.

From Tawgebagh we got next night to Bawt six farsangs or 18 miles distant,
nothing memorable, save an old Castle in the way, which, by Cynthia's
palenesse, we could hardly discover. From Bawt we got by break of day to
Obigarmy, both of them houses of the Kings, who has at every twelve miles end a
several Lodge betwixt Spawhawn and the Caspian Sea like these, and wherein our
Ambassador had the honor to repose. And now we are past the danger; let me
tell it you. Most part of the last night we crossed a miserable inhospitable
sandy Desert, ten long miles broad, in length a hundred: where we beheld
mountains of loose sand, accumulated by the winds fury in such heaps as upon
any great wind the tract is lost, and passengers (too often) involved and stifled
by that impetuous merciless Tyrant, yea Camels, Horses, Mules, or other
beasts, though strong, swift and steady, perish without mercy: Albeit the King
(to do as much as may be for prevention) has raised at every 3 miles end a
Castle, but by the unstable foundation, is in March and September in despite
of their best props yearly peece-meale torn asunder, without any remains of
their late standing. This our last nights travel was thirty miles. Next night
we rode one and twenty miles to Suffedaw, an old rotten weather-beaten Inn or
Carravans-raw, and placed in part of an unsociable Desert. Our next nights
lodging was at Syacow ten farsangs (or parassangs as Pliny calls them) thirty
miles English, notable in her Carravans-raw, built from the ground of good free
stone, white and polisht, and was the first building of that material I saw in
eight hundred miles riding; a word of our last nights journey. The most part of
the night we rode upon a causey broad enough for ten horse abreast, built by
incredible labor and expense over a most dreadful Desert, eeven and
affoording a plain Horizon of boggy loose ground, covered a top, a yards depth
with pure salt, as white as snow; a miserable passage, for if either the wind
force the salt abroad like dust, or that by any accident Horse or Camel
mistake the way, the quaggy bogg upholds them not, but suffers them to sinck
past all recoverie; a passage more feared, from some forlorn hopes that
pillage passengers; God be blessed, we escaped this, but not another, little
less formidable; for we had no sooner past the salt Desert, but of necessity
we must climb over and about hills, so high and glomerating, as if Olympus had
been cut out into Dedalian labyrinths. From Syacow we rode next night 22
miles, most part was over other salt vast Deserts wherein thousands have
perished, and would yet, did not a like large deep grounded causey secure the
passage: And here we pitched our Tents, old god Terminus in this place limitting
Parthya from further branching North, from whose high tops look we back and
memorize her that was once Mistress of Asya, and formidable to the Roman
Emperors. In the Scythick tongue she means a stranger, (as Justin in his
twelfth book) given by the rude Tartar, as to us the name Welsh, by the
barbarous Saxon. The Parthyan Diadem was once garnisht with two and twenty
Kingdoms, encircling most part of Asya. From which luster she fell; but after
long eclipse, by virtue of the Sophyan stem, has recovered a great part of
her former bravery. It Is now called Hyerac, sirnam'd Agemy, to distinguish it
from that including Babylon. Her old Shires were Rhagaea, Apamea, Tapira,
Choama, Araciana, Semina, and Mizia; her mountains, Orontes, Abicoronii,
Mardoranii, and Parchoatri; not eight hundred miles in circuit, hilly and
barren, yet breeding men both wise and valiant.

Next night ( Diana running cheerfully through her Zodiac) we rode eighteen
long miles to Gezz a pretty Lodge belonging to the King: the greater part of
this nights journey was through the bottoms of transected Taurus, whose
stupendous forehead wets it self in the ayery middle region: the fretum or
lane is abut forty yards broad, even below, and bestrew'd with pibbles; either
side is walled with an amazing hill, higher than to reach up at twice shooting,
and for eight miles so continues, agreeing with the relation Pliny and Solinus
make of it: a prodigious passage, whether by Art or Nature questionable: I
allude it unto Nature (Gods handmaid.) But if it be the same which Pliny
calls Caspiae portae; Bertius, Caspiarum Claustra; Strabo, and Ptolomy, Pilae
Caspiae, Mediae vel Zagriae; and Zarzaeae by Dio. Siculus; I then grant
Semyramys (who did what she could to eternize her name) effected it, and from
her was called Pilae Semyramidae, as Niger has it. Howbeit, the Persians
appropriate it to Mortys-Ally; who with his slicing Shamsheer for the ease of
his people made it; a sword after their Cabala a hundred cubits long; and
wherewith at one blow he beheaded ten (or as some say, a hundred) thousand
Christians: of no credit, in that Pliny (ere Mortis-Ally was horn) thus writes
of it, Ruptura est Montis longitudine octo mill: pass: angustissima, etc. But
though they ratify their story of Ally with an oath, from me they get no
other belief concerning it than this. Hanc fabulam longi temporis mendacia
finxit.

Of more certainty is this, a Persian in our company told me. That a dozen
years ago, a valiant thief with five hundred horse and three hundred Muskets
defended this narrow road against all passengers; none passing nor re-passing
without Tribute. The King of Larry-Ioon, and other mountaneers frowned at his
sawsinesse, and threatened his banishment; but such storms made good music to
his ears: Abbas grows choleric to be so bearded by an ordinary fellow, and
scorns to honor his overthrow by an Army: for knowing he had many Cavalleers
about him, he doubted not by their courages to fetter him: he moves it and
proposes a reward: but they had heard the thief was of incomparable fortitude
and dexterity; so as by long silence Abbas finds their fear, and grows pale
at it: yet ere he could give his rage a vent, a bold Armenian under-takes it:
the King embraces him, and breaths fresh courage into the hardy Christian, who
excellently mounted, singles out the gladded thief, that doubted not to master
so fair a beast with small opposall. It was his custom to give good play;
usually commanding his company to look on, if one or less than five entered the
strait; such high confidence had he in his valor and dexterity; in short space
they met, but parlee in Mars his language; the Armenian (in all points fitted
for a stern encounter) followed his blows with such skill and fury, that
after long fight and much bloodshed on either party, upon close he made death
a passage: a victory so irksome to his men (whose lives depended on his safety)
that like robbed Bears they fell upon the victor Armenian, who had doubtless
there expired, had not an Ambush of many brave Coosel-bashaes broke out and
relieved him; by whose sudden assault the wretched thieves were quickly
sacrifiz'd unto their Master. The Christian returns to Court crowned with a
glorious Laurel. Abbas adds to his luster and gives him a brave command, so
insupportable to the weak soul of this too-strong Champion, that to content
the King and ground his standing, he renyes his profession, though an Ocean of
tears shed by his beloved countrymen sought to wast him from the Alcoran. But
see the end of such Apostasy. Albeit the King had cause to hug him in his
bosom, so excellent and fortunate proved he against the Tartarrs; yet jealosie
(rather divine vengeance) so stung old Abbas that without any trial or
acquainting any man with his reason, he commands Lolla-beg to cut his head
off, such time as he was singing a lullaby to his good fortune.

Our next nights manzeil was at Halvary (eighteen miles from Gezz) a well
built Town it is, and pleasantly seated, the earth being mellowed by a sweet
rivolet, that purls from the tops of Taurus, from whose virtue the ground is
richly appareld in green, and requites the painful husbandman with a happy
acknoledgement of Olives, Walnuts, Rice, Wheat, and Wood in great abundance:
bidding a sad farewell to that healthy Village, the next night we rode 20 miles
to Periscow i.e. a broken Mountain: a Town sometimes honored with the Kings
residence; not that the beauty of his house (but ordinary) allures him, choice
hawking, Phesants and other game more delighting him here than any other part
of Parthia. The Pole is here elevated six and thirty degrees: the Town is
refresht with chrystallin water, sweet and advantageous to the earth and her
inhabitants: it is built upon the brow of a high (well woodded) divided hill,
whose top has been crowned with a vast Castle, but now by age or war (the
canckerwormes of all temporaries) is moath-eaten, her ribbs only appear,
expressing desolation and famine. One Mahummed commands the Town, and keeps
the sword and skale, but is I fear dame Astreas corrupted servant: no marvel
if in a discontented humor she has left the earth, in Persia (especially in
Periscow) Justice is so odly balanced. At our entrance into this Town, (to
extort a bribe from the Ambassador) he hanged one Persian, cut off another
nose, and mutilated a third man, to show his authority more than otherwise;
their fault was, for stealing a trifle of two shillings value from a footman
serving the English Agent: another was ready to be trust up, but a message was
sent to my Lord Ambassador, that if he pleased to beg his life it should be
granted him: my Lord Ambassador very gladly ransomed him with somewhat more
than a mere complement. Complaint was also made against a Farmour for
thrashing a whore against her will; Monsieur Radamanth bids geld him, and to
hang his stones at her ears as two pendants, the gulf of Persia afforded none
so precious: the poor wrench humbly beseecht him to spare his useful parts,
so did his astonished wife, so as after much mediation of friends and thirty
pounds fine, upon promise to grind in his own mill ever after, all is hushed,
and each part satisfied. But each man cried out, a severe Censor is this
Daraguod. I read that the barbarous Gauls had such a custom, si furaverit
quod valet 40 denar. aut moechabitur, vel castretur etc. But here many times
they have such tricks to encompasse money. Well may they therefore clamor out.

Gold forfeits faith, perverts the poor man's right.
Gold makes the Law a slave, where shame wants sight.
Auro pulsa fides, auro vaenalia Iura,
Aurum lex sequitur, mox sine lege pudor.
After two days repose in Periscow, we jogd on; the Court then being little
more than a hundred miles from us. Our first nights journey from Periscow, was
to Gheer, four and twenty long miles, and tedious: some part was over terrible
hills, other part through whistling dales; in both which we were so
weather-beaten with a raging storm of wind and hail bred in Tartary, and
forced over the Caspian sea (which from hence if the season had permitted we
might have seen) that it not only took away our sight and hearing, but
threatened our brains; for in despite of our best skill and closing one with
another, it separated us; insomuch as we had hardly recovered our companies,
had not the melodious noise of the braying Mules, and jingling of the Cammells
bells revoked, yea untwisted us out of these Caspian or Zagrian straits;
through which, when neither Sun, nor Moon, nor Star befriends, whosoever
hereafter travel, let them (if they would prevent precipitious falls) borrow
Theseus his thread, or be content to wander in endless labyrinths. From Gheer
we rode next night four and twenty miles, to a small Village whose name I
have infortunatly lost: the Frogs (the Bul-bulls or Philomels of this marrish
place) it may be were the causers of it, assembled in such troops, and
chirping such loathsome tunes, that we wished Jupiter had been to give them
another King: for The prutling Frogg (thinking his language good)
Croakes fruitfully in his beloved mud.
Garrula limosis rana.
coaxat aquis.
To Aliavarr, one and twenty miles from the Town of Frogs we rode next night: a
very sweet and pleasant place in water, wood, and store of Phesants; a bird in
these Hyrcanian Towns, and near the river Phasis in Mengrellya ( Cholcos of
old) originally breeding: Jason and his Argonauts first made them known to
Greece, when hence he forced their Sheep, bearing fleeces of gold, or
gold-meriting fleeces. Next night we got to Necaw, five and twenty miles from
Alliavar, observable in the Kings house, and that the common Mansions and
Churches here, differ not in shape from ours of the poorer sort in England.
Next night we got into Asharaff; a City upon the Mare Caspium. The Emperor
of Persia was here, and had long expected the Ambassador; unwilling to remove
hence, till he came, that he might see the extent of his Empire, and lest we
should report in Europe that there was no grass (nor grace) in Persia. The
Sultan of the Town and fifty Coselbashaes brought us into Asharaff, and
ushered us to our lodging; I may say us, for the ceremony befitted not so great
a person as an Ambassador.

ASHARAFF (or Ahasuraff, I dare not say from Ahasuerus) is 2 long miles from
the Caspian Sea. It is seated low, and many salt Marshes circumvolve her; is
but meanly watered; no other but a small spring trickling from the Taurisian
Mountains drils in two branches through it, the broader of which is not five
yards over. The ground is reasonable fat, but incultivated: the greater part of
her Inhabitants ploughing in campo martio. I judge two thousand Families live
in this Town, and no doubt increases daily, the King having but of late
affected this place, his Palace but newly finished, and Farrabant the Hyrcan
Metropolis but five miles West removed hence, where the seat Royal has been
kept for many Ages. Abassebaut also, two miles hence, surpasses for a curious
Summer house, excells all his other houses for a delicate view, Imagery,
Hummum, Waterworks, and a Forest stored with game of all sorts: it I say,
attracts the King, who (where ever he stays long) makes great Cities of small
Villages. The Buzzar here is but ordinary; the Mosques are not to be admired,
the Kings Palace is vast, and notable only in her Gardens: the building
itself is confusedly divided into three or four Mohols or banqueting houses,
great and gorgeously painted; which, were they united might better delight the
eye, and cause the Architect to be commended. I will speak more of it at the
Ambassadors audience.

The pole Artick is here elevated eight and thirty degrees, seventeene minutes;
it is due North from Spahawn, as we observed in our starlight travel, (for
the days are raging hot, and not to be traveled in or jeasted with) Arcturus
was ever just before us: from Ormus to this place are a thousand English miles:
from Spahawn, three hundred and fifty, or there-abouts; as reckoned.

The Ambassador has Audience.
But before I give you a survay of Hircania, let me present an essay of my Lord
Ambassadors audience and entertainment. After four days rest, the King (or
Emperor, Potshaw they call him) was pleased, without long warning to assign
him his day of audience. It was the five and twentieth of May, our Sabbath, and
the fag-end of their Ramazen or Lent; advantageous to the Pot-shaugh, for it
spared him the charge of a royal Banquet. My Lord Ambassador had Sir Sobert
Sherley in his company, and seven or eight other English Gentlemen, his
followers: good reason it was some Sultan or other should have convoyed and
showed him the way; (the Court being a quarter of a mile distant from our
house) but it seems they wanted breeding, or, that some other mystery was in
it: for, no other than a footman from Mahomet-Ally-beg proffered a complement,
every way so course that the Ambassador had no patience to digest it, save by
equal contempt to inculcate in the Persian mode, and send him thanklesse back
again. To the Court at length we got, no noise, no admirers, saw we there
neither; by which we presumed, the Town knew not of our going thither, which I
wonder at, since Abbas of all sorts of honors counted to have strangers at his
Court, the highest. At our alighting, an ordinary Officer bad us Hosh-galdom
and ushered us into a little Court du guard, that stood in the center of a
spacious Court: in it was no other furniture save a few Persian Carpets spread
about a pretty white marble Tanck or Pond filled with water: here we all
stayed, and for two hours space junketted upon Pelo and wine, nothing so good
in taste as the material they were served in, the flaggons, cups, dishes,
plates and covers, being of pure beaten gold; thence, we were led by many
Sultans, through a spacious and fragrant Garden which was curious to the eye,
and delicate to the smell; to another Summer house, rich in gold imbosments and
painting; but far more excellent in a free and royal prospect; for from the
Tarrasses we viewed the Caspian Sea one way, and another way the tops of
Taurus. The ground chambers were large, quadrangular, archt and richly gilded
above and ont her sides; below, spread with most valuable Carpets of silk and
gold: in center were Tancks full of crystallin water (an element of no mean
account in these torrid habitations;) round about the Tancks were placed (
pomparum fercula) Goblets, Flagons, Cesternes, and other Standards of pure
massy gold, some of which were filled with Perfumes, other some with
Rosewater, with Wine some, and others with choicest flowers: and after we had
rested so long as we might at full feed our hungry eyes with that food of
ostentation, we were brought thence into another square large upper Chamber,
where the roof was formed into an Artificial Element, many golden Planets
attracting the wandering eye to help their motion. The ground was covered with
richer Carpets than the other were, the Tanck was larger, the materia more rich
in Iaspar, and porphyr; the silver purling stream was forced up into another
Region, yet seemed to bubble wantonly here as in her proper center: this sea of
rich stone, so deep and so capatious seemed an Ocean rather, where the spoils
of shipwracks were conjured out to please the appetite of Mydas or god Mammon:
so much gold, in vessels, for use and ostentation, being set for us to look
upon, that some Merchants there, adjudg'd it worth twenty millions of pounds
sterlin: another watery Magazeen there was, circled with a wall of gold and
richest Iemms: no flagons, cups, nor other there, but what were very thick and
covered with Rubies, Diamonds, Pearls, Emralds, Turquoises, Iacinths, etc. The
Chamber was gallery wise, the seeling garnisht with Poetique fancies, gold, and
choicest colors; all which seemed to strive whether Art or Nature should be to
a judicious eye more valuable: one John a Dutchman, who had long served the
King celebrated his skill, to the astonishment of the Persians and his own
advantage: the ground in this room also was over-layd with such Carpets as
befitted the Monarch of Persia: round all the room were placed tacit Mirzaes,
Chawns, Sultans, and Beglerbegs, above threescore; who like so many inanimate
Statues sat crosse-legg'd; and joined their bumms to the ground, their backs to
the wall, their eyes to a constant object; not daring to speak one to another,
sneeze, cough, spet, or the like, it being held in the Potshaws presence a
sin of too great presumption; In breach of any them fearing his spleen, who
(as Caesar told Metellus) could by the fulgur of his eye dart them dead, sooner
then speak the word to have them killed: the Ganimed Boys in vests of gold,
rich bespangled Turbants and choice sandalls, their curled hairs dangling
about their shoulders, rolling eyes, and vermillion cheeks, with Flagons of
most glorious metal, went up and down, and proffered the delight of Bacchus
to such would relish it. At the upper end (and surmounting the rest, so much as
two or three white silken shags would elevate) sat the Pot-shaw or Emperor of
Persia, Abbas; more beloved at home, more famous abroad, more formidable to his
Enemies, than any of his predicessours. His Grandeur was this, (circled with
such a world of wealth) to cloth himself that day in a plain red callico
coat quilted with cotton: as if he should have said, we might see his dignity
consisted in his parts and prudence, not (furtivis coloribus) to steal respect
by borrowed colors or rich embroderies: crosse-leg'd he sat: his Shash or
Turbant was white and bungie; his waist was girded with a thong of leather, the
scaberd of his sword was red, the hilt of gold, the blade formed like a
hemi-cicle, and doubtless well tempered: the Courtiers (Regis ad exemplum)
were but ordinarily attired. My Lord Ambassador by his Interpretor (or
Callimachee as the Persians name it) quickly acquainted Shaw Abbas why he had
undertaken so great a journey; to congratulate his good success against the
common enemy of Christendom, the Turk; to agrandize the traffic of raw silk,
and other Persian staple merchandises; to see Sir Robert Sherley purge his
honor from those scandalous imputations Nogdi-Ally-beg his late Ambassador had
blemished him with; and, that perpetual amity might be continued 'twixt the two
famous Monarks of Great Brittayn and Persia.

The Pot-shaugh rose up; and in the Turkish Tongue gave him a gracious answer.
To the first, that the Turks were a base people compared with the generous
minds and virtue of the Persians; in fifteen battles he had given them ample
proof of their magnanimity, and that no people in the world were to him so
odious and offensive. He wished unity amongst all Christian Princes, the
Ottomans grounding their conquests merely from their discord: which if
otherwise, they would readily retreat to Tartary. Concerning Trade, the King of
Great Brittayn, should if he so pleased have yearly ten thousand bales of silk
delivered him at Ormus every January, and for payment would accept of so many
thousand Clothes as would equal in value his raw silks; which as he knew the
silk was a far greater quantity then he could use in his own Dominions, so
were the clothes to him; but he would hazard the venting them by his Merchants,
to serve the Tartars, Arabs, Georgians, and Muscovians. And by this, neither we
nor he should have any need to traffic or correspond with Turkey. It would
infinitely redound to his honor and content; for hereby he shoul'd disappoynt
the grand Seignior of his yearly customs which he is forct to pay, when his
carravans go to Aleppo or other parts of Turkey to deliver the silk, to the
Venetian, Genoan, French, or other European Merchants; and an unexpressable
torment and vexation to his heart and soul it must needs be, to see the whole
band of Ianizaryes maintained merely out of those his customs. What was this?
but to cherish thorns to prick his eyes, or to make the swords of his
inveterate Enemies sharp and fitted for his destruction. Concerning Sherley he
had been long of his acquaintance and done more for him, than any of his native
subjects; that if Nog-dibeg had laid aspersions unjustly on him, he should have
decent satisfaction. It argued indeed Nogdibeg was guilty of some heinous
crime, in that he rather choose to kill himself, than stand to his purgation
from so impartial a Justice: in some sort he presaged my rigor, for if he had
come, by my head (an oath of no small force) I had cut him in as many pieces as
there are days in a year, and burnt them in the open market with stinking
dogs turds. But touching a perpetual league of true friendship, with the
Monarch of Great Brittayne your Master, I embrace it most heartily and wish
them accursed that go about to eclipse it. And you are truly welcome (speaking
to my Lord Ambassador) that have done me that honor, none of my famous
Predicessors ever had before me: for as you are the first Ambassador ever came
hither out of your Nation, so I account your Master the first of the
worshippers of Jesus, and of you in a higher respect than any other
Ambassadors: which said, Abbas sat down again. And whereas all Mahomitans
sizeda, or knock their heads against the ground and kiss his foot or garment;
most friendly he pulled our Ambassador down, seated him close to his side,
smiling to see he could not sit (after the Asiatique sort) crosse-legd: and
calling for a bowl of Wine, drunk his Masters health, at which the Ambassador
uncoverd his head; and to complement beyond all expectation, the Pot-shaugh
pulled of his Turbant; by discovering his bald head symbolizing his Affection:
and after an hours merriment departed. But by what means the current of the
Kings good will became diverted afterward I cannot divine. I could afterward
perceive that Mahomitan Princes are terrible crafty or mysteriously
politicious: for from that day till we got Cazbyn, neither was our Ambassador
feasted at Court, neither saw he the King, nor did any other Sultan invite, or
come to visit him: we partly found the cause, Mahomet-Allybeg was by bribery
made our enemy; a Persian lately advanced from a base beginning, and for his
neat faculty in diving into all men's doings, acquainting the Potshaw who
grumble, who are contented; by such his parasitick facetiousnesse has ingrost
his favor from all others, insomuch as all things pass through this impure
conveighance; for whom he loves the King honors, such as he hates the King
crushes all to pieces. So that to have his good opinion, each great man
out-vies others by gifts and such lincks of corrupt esteem, insomuch that his
Annual commings in, are bruited sevenscore thousand pounds sterling. And well
may be, since Myter-beg (the overseer of the Kings Harams or Seralios) has a
hundred thousand pound yearly, if it be true, some here assured me. Sors nostra
humilior! poor Tamer-begs house at the North end of the Town imprisond us
twelve long days and nights, (so long the Court stayed, after we got thither;)
where the Sun darted his outrageous beams so full upon us, that no part of
the burning Zone could broile more than did Asharaffe at that present: but the
Sun did not more torment us all the day time, than those innumerable swarms
of Gnats, Mus-ke-toes, and such like excrements, stung and pesterd us each
night; they biting us, we thrashing them like mad folks. Notwithstanding, some
better use I desire to make of this time, than in spider-catching: and in the
first place commemorate we the Kings justice, (Tyranny I may rather call it)
for which, he is famoused above all other Mahomitan Emperors: that by view of
others miseries, ours may appear but real flea-bitings.

A poor distressed wretch, upon some business bestowed a long and tedious
pilgrimage from Cabull in India to this miserable place; where ere he knew how
the success would be, rested his weary limbs upon a field carpet, chosing to
refresh himself rather upon the cool grass than be tormented by the
merciless vermin within the Town: but poor man he fell a malo in pejus, for
snorting in a climacterick hour, the same time the King set forth to hunt and
many Nobles after him, his pamperd jade winded and startled at him, the King
examines not the cause but sent an eternal Arrow of sleep into the poor man's
heart, jeasting as ( Iphicrates did when he slew his sleepy Sentinel) I did
the man no wrong, I found him sleeping, and asleep I left him: a comfortless
complement: poor wretch! happy only in this, Aeneae magni dextra cecidit! the
Courtiers also (as the Negroes in Manicongo do, who when their Captain receives
a hurt by war or accident, sympathize by voluntary mayming themselves in the
like part) to applaud his justice, made him their common mark; killing him a
hundred times over, if so many lives could have been forfeited: but how highly
soever they extol their King, I prefer those ancient pagans before him, who
out of Natures poetry could sing, Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa
est. A Soldats wife (or concubin if you please to call her) having fed too
high, in a lustful bravado petitiond the King for help, her good man proving
too weak to conquer her: a dangerous impudence! the King finds it to reflect
upon himself, (old at that time, and Master of four thousand Concubines) he
promises her a present satisfaction: he calls his Physicians, and when
Phlebotomy was held too mean a remedy, they give an Assinego an ophiat
lustful potion, which inrages the beast, who by a forced connection, basely
glutted her; but in the end banished her life also. A needy soldier, draws up
a catalogue of his good services and closes it in want, humbly entreating
favor and some stipend from his god of war for such and such good services.
In bello non bis peccatur: for, for his sauciness he is almost drubd (with
many terrible bastinadoes on the soles of his feet) to death; and (imitating
Pyso the cruel Judge in Seneca, lib. 1. c. 16.) examines who it was that writ
it: the Clarke apologizes, the King quarrels at his scurvie writing; and that
he should never write worse, makes his hand to be cut off; giving the poor
wretch just cause to ingeminate: Oh! quam vellem nescirem literas.

Two needy knaves were brought into the Divan, and condemned for stealing: many
grievous tants the Pot-shaw leveld at them, assuring them they deserved death
for daring to come so near his Court, so lousie and so ragged: they confess
they therefore stole, to wrap themselves in better clothing. Abbas is not
satisfied with any reason: he commands two new vests be brought and to
apparel them; but winding sheets had been more proper; for the executioner
forthwith dragged them away, and upon two sticks most cruelly staked them upon
their fundaments. Such, and such other was his inhumane pastime during our stay
at the Caspian sea, enough on such a subject; by the foot of Hercules the whole
body is discerned: for if I should sum up his variety of tortures; his men,
men-eating hags of hell; his caniball hounds, his Capigi and their death
twanging bowstrings, his ripping men's guts and the like; what could be the
effect but an odious remembrance: and such is the hard-heartednesse of
Mahomitans, a wicked people for cruel inventions: the tender mercies of the
wicked are cruelties: a good man is merciful to his beast; but nor beast nor
men, are here commiserated. And, albeit nothing be more commendable in Princes
than Justice, (for it is that that makes them gods) yet clemency is no less
honorable. Tully a heathen could affirm it, in his oration to Caesar for the
life of Lygarius: Thy clemency (O Caesar) is most excellent, yea more
honorable than thy other virtues: Fortune has made thee great, Nature
advanced thee higher in thy inclination unto mercy. Nor can they well be
separated. A Prince (exalted above others in dignity and Title) is tied to an
impartial way, neither hating nor fearing any, but rewarding and punishing as
cause requires; without which, contempt or confusion follows. But to these
of Abbas I cannot give the glorious Attribute of Justice: since, if the
punishment exceed the fault, it then degenerates into cruelty: a vice, odious
to God, (the Father and fountain of mercy:) to men, by imitating their
deformities; conceiting any Act, though never so unnatural (if molded after
such a pattern) good and commendable. And heathen Potentates swerving from the
rule of divine Justice, pamper the corrupt habit and disposition of their
minds, out of a monstrous appetite and opinion that they are above all law, and
may every way inebriate their lust, by sportfull tyranny: such were the
inhumane games in the Roman Amphytheators: such was the barbarism, Xerxes (as
Xenophon notes) practiced on Masistes his brother, and other Satrapaes; such in
Dejoces (father to Phraortes) who utterly exterminated the Persian generosity:
such in most Mahumedans at this day governing: I cannot choose but add the
miserable Tragedy of his son, the memory whereof is recent through most of
Asia.

Abbas, by diverse Paramours had diverse children; many of which he educated
with great cost, care, and experience. Of most hope, fame, and virtue; where
Ismael, Sophy-mirza, Codobanda-Sultan, and Emangoly; four brave young Princes;
the two first, begot on Gordina daughter of Simon-cawn; the later two, of
Martha daughter of Scander-mirza: both Georgians, both Christians: the first
Lady was brought thence by Kurchiki-cawn; the other by Shaw-Tamas-Coolibeg;
both Persians, both favorites: all of them so dear to Abbas, that it seemed
he then had got the Elixar of earthly happiness: his wives were so
incomparably beautiful; his favorites so exactly faithful; his sons so
lively the characters of his person, policy and courage: reciprocally joying
the aged King, and overjoying the warlike Persians. But it is commonly observed
that as the most excellent things fade, perish, and alter soonest: so this
admirable candor and perfection in these youthful Princes quickly vanished,
Saturn acting it. Ismael (when by reason of his innate delight in Arms and
many quick signs of magnanimity, the Asiatick world gazed and admired him) in
a black infernal cloud of poison went down to an untimely grave at nineteen,
in the Meridian of his splendour. Soffy-mirza, dogd by a like adverse destiny,
though elevated at first for revealing a conspiracy, was in the end, at equal
years thrown down and crushed to death, after the dumb Capigi had got a
hateful victory, mere jealosie in the King commanding it. Emanguly, ere his
popular applause could hatch his ruin, upon conference with a witch that he
saw (by the Almuten of his nativity) short life attended him, grows fearful
of his Syres inconstancy, and in a deep disconsolate melancholy evaporates his
sad spirits, leaving the expectation of hazard and sovereignty to Codobanda
Sultan, surnamed Soffee, who (made wise by his brothers miseries) so exquisitly
behaved himself, in duty to his King, in a pleasing distance to the people;
that Abbas doates, the people celebrate, and an uncontrollable good Fortune
seems to dandle him, Affability, bounty, loyalty, courage, and experience in
Arms, at home, abroad, the Persian Monarchy, Turk, Arab, Mogul, and Tartar,
admiring, fearing, and commending him in several Eulogies and acclamations:
his own, left nothing unsaid or uninvented that might honor him; his enemies
without giving their thoughts the lie, could not but idolize him: who for all
that, (not like our common spirits, efflated by every vulgar breath, upon every
act, deifie themselves, and conceit all great additions of honor under their
merits) stood immovable, sorry he grew so popular; modestly chiding them for
flattery, condemned himself of hypocrisy by suffering his victories to be so
gilded, since what he had or did was but a reflex of his Fathers virtue, which
he doubted might suffer an eclipse by his accumulations. Oh! how execrable is
this marrow fretting scab of jealousy and envy? it converts that reason which
only makes us Men, without any regard of justice, into brutishness; yea to
exceed in cruelty the most unreasonable, most violent creatures! Is not Abbas a
King, a Father? does clemency belong to any attribute so properly? Is not
Soffee-Sultan-mirza a Prince, his son? on whom can he more justly confer
his love? in whom should virtue rather dwell? where can there be a better
center? poor Prince! the path he treads to add luster to his Fathers Diadem,
to do his Country good, to be accounted commendable; betrays his steps, and
intices him to an affrighting precipice: the more he labors to delight his
Father, it serves as fuel to an unjust jealousy; the more he dignifies his
countries honor, the more applause the people crown him with; and Abbas
fears his popularity: yea so far cherishes dishonorable thoughts, so much
degenerates from paternall piety, that without all pity or regard of justice
(which makes Kings more beautiful and glorious than when circled with a
Tyrants sparkling Diadem) he ruminates his speedy destruction. During these
his cabinet machinations, the harmless Prince brandishes his steel in proud
Arabia, but after many conquests, himself becomes captivated. An Arabian
Princess of good report, great beauty (in such bodies usually are impaled the
fairest souls) and other excellent indowments fettered him: but by his bravery
and worth quickly redeemed himself and vanquished her. Such magic has love,
such magnetic power is in virtue. By this Lady he had (in few years) two
children, Soffy and Fatyma: no less loved by their Sire, than beloved, doated
on by the Grandsyre Abbas; a strange affection, to distinguish so unnaturally;
to separate where nature had so strongly joined, to hate the graft, and have
the fruit endeared to him. But that his hate might flow more currantly and
less suspected, he looks one way and shoots another; seeks to inrage by
abusing him he loved most dearly, Magar an Arab, the Princes Tutor, a sober,
faithful, and valiant servant. Abbas calls for him, and in leiu of applause or
rewarding him for his sons noble education, he lends him a stern frown,
accuses him of pride, and charges him that he had bewitched the Prince with
base ambition. Magar sees not the venom prepared for him; and therefore in an
humble, but confident excuse, seeks to quiet him; but the better he
apologuiz'd in his own behalf, and the clearer he made the Mirzaes loyalty
appear, the more he exasperates the King, the higher his rage inflamed: so
that first he amazes him with a volley of rigorous defamations, and in that
maze gives the sign, a dreadful sign: for forthwith the Capigies break out
and strangle him. An unparaleld barbarism! an act so unbeseeming that famous
King, as amongst the common sort to this day it is not credited: but, Fames
brazen shrill-mouth'd Trump sounds it abroad, and ere long the Prince (then in
action against the Tartar) has notice of his Syres injustice: he leaves the
Camp, and after many signalls of sorrow, beseeches the King he may know the
reason of it: who flashes him this thundering reason, for thy rebellion; he
calls heaven to witness his integrity and obedience, but Abbas provokes him
further, to entrap and have some color to satisfy the world in his
destruction. The Prince madded with heat and passion, imagines he saw Magar a
strangling; and in that ecstasy unsheaths his sword, vowing to rescue him: the
King sorrows not at his distraction, but at this advantage (upon some fair
terms disarming him) calls him into another room, and (pretending he was not
very well) goes out, commanding seven big-bon'd villainies, deaf and dumb,
through a trap door to issue upon him, armed with bloody minds and deadly
bow-strings: their habit and weapons bewray their cruelty, they needed no other
interpretors: the Prince admires the cause, and if oratory or other submissive
signs of entreaty could have gotten remorse or delay from these hellhounds,
but till he knew the ground of this unnatural project, he had affoorded it:
but, assured they were inexorable, with an incomparable rage and suddenness he
flies upon them, now one, then another receiving such horrid blows, that (ere
they could fasten on him, or ensnare him with their ghastly twanging
bowstrings) he sent three of them to the Devil; and long time defended
himself, offending those bloodhounds with admirable courage and dexterity,
insomuch that had he mastered any weapon, he had doubtless saved himself;
but wanting it, his breath failed, and longer his valor could not nourish him,
for, facile est vincere non repugnantem: so that at last they fastened their
noozes on him, who now was as a dead man; for all which, the villains had
triumphed in his further tortures, had not the King prevented it, commanding
them to pinnion him, and (before he could recover his senses) to draw a
flaming steel before his eyes, and so to blind him; forbidding him the sight of
what he loved ever after; wife, babes, friends, soldiers, or Magars carcass:
And by this impiety, Asia lost her fairest jewel, Persia her Crown of honor,
and Mars his darling.

The loss of so brave a Prince is quickly rumord: All Persia mourns, and in
many threnodies sing his farewell: his Army swells with passion, but seeing no
remedy, by a forced silence murmur their imprecations: the Prince, when he
perceived his undoing (the eye of reason lent him such a sight) falls frantic;
he curses his birth, his fame, his loyalty, his cruel parent; and by many
contumatious threats, vows his destruction: but vana sine viribus ira; he
finds his revenge impossible; but at that conceit roares hidiously, and is not
to be comforted, till Suliman-mirza, Curchiki-cawn and other his kinsmen and
quondam favorits, flockt about him, and by their miserable examples dictated
patience; for none there but in some measure had swollen big with the Kings
infusion in their times, and by like jealousy were crushed down, mutilated,
and damnd to perpetual imprisonment. In those discontented times, Abbas kept
his Orb, moving like another Saturn: now he imagines his Crown fixed closely to
his head, his seat steady, every way free from storms and other accidental
causes that might disturb his quiet: he swum hourly in an ocean of delight,
and relisht it: but nothing so much enchanted him, as young Fatyma; no other
Siren was melodious in song, or delicate in feature, save pretty Fatyma; if any
stood in fear, he is pacified by Fatyma; Court and Kingdom admired his love,
but joyed at it; for by this Lady they found a way to expel his rage, and how
to pleasure him; the prisoners also by this Fatyma got some livelihood; for
want of which, they were often times welnigh famished; none (but she) daring to
mediate: and thus by this good infant gained they what formerly they pined for,
food and comfort. But what joy finds the blinded Prince, since he cannot
participate: revenge delights him more, that word as music pleases the
infernal fancy of this melancholy Mirza, not caring how detestable, so Abbas
suffered. The Devil inspires new rage, and blows the coals of (more than
cruel) assassination: for albeit he loved Fatima, yet hearing how his Father
doated on her, that begets his hate, yea hatches the innocents confusion. Oh!
in him behold the savage and transcendent cruelty of cursed man: revenge had
plunged him headlong into a whirle-poole of unnatural barbarism; insomuch, as
when the pious child came (in an unluckie hour) to bring him comfort, and by
all symptoms of duty to expatiate her obedience; the wretch graspes her, and in
a lymphatick fury whirles her neck about, unable to untwist her self from his
strong and wrathful hands, miserable Fatima expiring by her hellish Father:
and in her, the joy of parents, delight of Abbas, candor of Persia, and comfort
of the distressed, vanishing. The amazed Princess his wife cries out his sight
deceived him, that it was Fatyma, little dreaming that he therefore martyred
her, because Fatyma. And, as if that had not been enough, (to prevent the King
of a successor) hearing young Soffees voice, dolorously crying out for Fatima,
wingd with rage he gropes for him, but by the Princesses interposing, the boy
escapt, or else had lost (what he now victoriously enjoyes) the Monarchy of
Persia. When Abbas heard her Tragedy, he grows so outragiously passionate,
that many feared he would become his own executioner. But, when he had
drencht his sorrow in a sea of salt tears, he moderates his spleen, and
revives upon hopes of punishment, and vows to retaliate him in the height of
cruelty: but, receives so terrible a reply from the distracted Prince, who had
returned a million of dismal curses, that he is stupefied with amazement: And
to end the Catastrophe, after he had tired out two days with much impatience,
the third, he put a period to his loathed life, by quaffing up a cup of deadly
poison: the King showing needless mercy in his solemn burial. The sad
Princess mewed her self up from sight of man; but since her sons coming to
the Crown, whether he have made her sociable or no I know not: Abbas dyed
just at our departure. Let us now to another subject, and in a brief
description survey the pleasures of Hyrcania, which we have partly relished,
and are now enclosed in.

HYRCANIA (whether denominated from her fruitfulness in Goats, or from Harcoon
in the Scythic tongue importing solitariness, or from Hadora as Montanus
called her, I dare not determine;) is now called Mozendram (a derivative I
think from Mandagarsis in Ptolomy) and Kabonkara: by some (whose fancies I
approve not of) this Province is called Karizath, Corca, Girgia, Caspia,
Steana, Casson, and Diurgument, relatives merely, of invention; the North is
limited by the Caspian sea, the East with Sagathy or Bactria, the South with
Mount Taurus, the West with Medya and Armenia. Hyrcania is most part (a great
part we traveled) woody and champaign; watered with many sweet and spacious
(but not navigable) rivers; such be Araxis, (descending says Ptolomy from
Sacapen or Saducen) Cyrus, Obsel, Connack, Mazaeras, Bundama, Hydero, (from the
Deserts of Lop) Aragus, (falsely said to descend from the Molossians) and
others, which from the Taurisian Mountains stream violently, and after they
have mellowed the humyd earth in many divided branches, wander into the Mare
Caspium: at this day it abounds with many sorts of beasts, birds, fruits, fish,
and villages: Sheep, Buffoloes, Camells, Asses, Goats, Horses, Cowes,
Antilopes, red and fallow Deer; with Silkwormes also, and Phesants, Partrich,
Quail, Woodcock, Pelican, Heron, Pouts, Thrush, Hens, Philomels; and in
fruits of most sorts; with fishes also, as Trowt, Pike, Carp, Sturgeon, Conger,
Lamprey, Tuneys, Gudgeon, Thornback, Cockles, Oysters, Mussells, Crabs,
Limpits, Dog-fish, and Cackrell; most of these the Caspian sea affoorded us:
and (which we will sequestere from others) with Lions, Wolves, Wild-catts,
Bores, Scorpions, and Tigers, supposed to nurse the people, as sung the Poet
Them with their duggs the Hyrcan Tygres fed.
Hyrcanaeque admorunt ubera Tygres,
Gnatts, Flies, and Snakes (to our sad remembrances) in insufficient numbers.
Towns of old were, Talebrota, Sarramanna, Adrapsa, Sorba, Asmurna, Tapen,
Carta, and Mauzoca; lost by protract of consuming time, or from new names as
new Inhabitants have succeeded here; at this day are these, Farrabaut,
Asharaff, Periscow, Omoall, Barfrushdea Chacoporo, Caban, Baezd, Darabgier,
Gengee, Shamaky, Erez, Bachu, Byldith, and Derbent; flourishing with people,
famoused by trade, and admired in her plenty.

The Hircanians are but lately civilized, no longer than since Shaw-Abbas in
despite of their resistance came amongst them: but how may we credit the
Persians (for 'twas they that told it us) in that at this day, they excel the
Persians, for husbandry, trade in raw silks, and other employments; such as has
made them rich, and famous; yea happy, till the Persian Soldiers intermingled
and sucked their honey from them: The Hyrcan language is understood by every
Persian. Their habit resembles the Irish troozes: upon their heads they wear
Piramidall caps of cloth lined with delicate sheeps wool: the vulgar Hyrcanian
take thus represented.

An Hyrcanyan.


They are generally affable, merry, curious in rarities, and nothing jealous
aftet the manner of other Mahomitans: we must not believe the merry reports the
Persians told us of their virgin courtesies: of old, they thought to have forbad
the valiant Greek desired entrance, by twisting one tree to another, (as did
our Abbat of St. Albons against the Normans) but he that had diffected
Gordions knot (though mystical,) with equal policy subjugated these
Hyrcanians.

Upon Whitson-monday we left Asharaff; the King at that same time journeyed
into Medya to Casbyn: our Travells were different, he went by Periscow, but
sent us by Larry-Ioon, that we might have the better view of those his richest
Provinces: this night we lay in Farrabaut, a City five miles distant from
Asharaff, late spoken of.

FARRABAVT (or rather Farrag-baut, from King Farrag-zed ( baut is garden, Zed
is son,) successor to Shezyr son of Iezan Zeddah, and predecessor to
Tezdgird the Hyrcanian King slain by the Romans in the year of our Lord God
595. five and twenty years before the hegira or banishment of Mahomet) is not
unlikely to be that old Amarusa noted by Ptolomy: and the same City per
paranomasiam (if opinion delude me not) which Vlughbeg and Teixera call
Strabatt and Estrabaut. The situation of Farabatt is low, in a marrish and
insalubrious plain; whereby it sucks in the salt fumes and cold fomes the
Caspian sea (a little mile, North) evomerates. It Is watered by a fresh stream,
forty paces broad; which arising in mount Taurus, bubbles down, and at this
Town incorporates with the briny Caspian: in place of solyd walls, it is ingirt
with liquid moats or trenches, planted with willowes and other trees, which
give both shade and ornament: the houses differ from the common mode of Persia;
they be without Tarrasses or flat tops, and resemble ours in England rather, in
shape, in windows, and in tyling; the whole Town brags of three thousand
families; of most Note, are the two Buzzarrs, equally spacious, neat and
beautiful; many choice and fragrant Gardens also condecorate her, which
together make a combined beauty though seeming separate: but, more notable than
the rest, is a sumptuous Palace of the Emperors; at the North side of the
City, whose balconyes view, whose Gardens extend to the Mare Caspium. It has
two large Courts (comparable to Fountain bleaus) either of which express an
elaborat Art in the skillful gardener; paild they are in many shapes, the
ground is forced into pretty knots, the spreading Elms, Chenores, and Sicamores
surrounding and commixing so pleasantly, so artificially, that from each
chamber the prospect is amiable, the eye and smell contending who should surfeit
soonest of variety. The house is low; but each chamber, high and capacious;
rich in work, commendable in uniformity; we could not enter with our shoes on
(a common Assiatick trick at meals and hours of devotion; the Romans also
used it, as Terence in his Heautont: Accurrunt servi soleas detrahunt, etc.)
some are square, some gallery-wise, but all are arched: three were especially
rich and lovely; whose sides were set with Mirrors or Looking-glasses; and
whose tops or seeling, were gloriously imbost with flaming gold; the casements
were of large square Muscovian glass, cemented with gold; the ground was
overspread with crimson velvet, some stuffed with Down; others with matteresses
of azure colored velvet; coverd with Calzoons of bodkin or cloth of beaten
gold: and in Winter the Pot-shaugh sleeps either in sheets of costly Sables,
or of delicate shagg or sheep wool of Corasan: in those gallaries of Mirrors
the King has sundry representations of venereous gambolls, his Concubines
studying by amorous postures to illure his favor, to glut his fancy: the other
chambers are richly furnished, the walls varnisht and painted in oil, but by an
uncivil pencil, the genius of some goatish Apelles; such Lavaltoes of the
Persian Jupiter are there, such immodest postures of men and women, nay of
Paederastyes, as makes the modest eye swell with shame, the curious smell wind
nothing from those artificial flowers, save loathsome invention. Let us go
cent the Caspyan air, and taste the unruly waves, compared with the quiet
houses, sweet and wholesome. The first object are those prams or ships, wherein
the Moscovite sails down Volga (70 mouthed Volga, issuing from the
Hyperborean and Rhyphaean hills) and from Astra-can (in six and forty degrees)
cross over the Caspian sea, and at this Port or Demir-cape (in 40 degrees 20
minutes) ride at anchor, till they have loaded away raw silks, exchanged for
Sables, usually in March, in July returning; with a good wind they cross the
sea in 8 days, though by adverse storms Sir Anthony Sherley was fourscore:
these vessels (resembling our old Corraghs, recorded by Caesar and Lucan) are
without ordinance, the Sea is free of Pirates: they are sowed with hemp and cord
(made of the husk of Cocoes,) and have little iron work; the Mariners are as
meanly furnist with skill or use of Compass. Here also we saw many Canoos, of
one piece of wood hewd out of some grown Oak ( Hyrcania has store, yet little
used) capable to receive eight men in fair weather without much danger.

The Caspian Sea (called by the Persians Deriob-Mozendram, by the Arabs as all
other Ponds, Bobar corsun) is brackish, and very turbulent, yet landlock on
every side; the Hyrcanian, Armenian Russ, and Tartar circumvolving her: nor has
she commerce with any other sea, except it be subterranean with the Euxine.
They are three hundred miles asunder, yet may admit so vast an intercourse, if
we consider the like (though not so much) in other places: as in Zioberis,
which springs from Taurus, and after thirty miles concealment under ground,
again discovers it self and commixing with Rhodago, in one stream, wander
into the Caspian; great Alexander at Aristotle's request made trial by two
Oxen, who confirmed it: as also in Niger an Afrique river, and others in other
places. Some vent or other it has questionless, otherwise it would overflow or
putrify; for it receives many great and navigable rivers, as Volga, Araxis,
Cyrus, Connack, Obsel, Rhodago, Mazaeras, Hydero, Aragus, Phasis, Ilment,
Sirto, Chesel, Oxus, Edel, Rha, (some call Volga so) Iehun, Habyn, etc. by many
ostiums swelling her womb or concave channel. It has three thousand English
miles compass: map of the Caspian Sea and its environs from Farrabat to
Astra-can or from N. to S. are six hundred miles: from East to West, above
seven hundred; in some sort Ovall: made dangerous by many syrtes and rocks;
made happy in abundance of watery Inhabiters: Porpice, Conger, Sturgeon,
Caveare (the roe of Sturgeon cut and salted) Goodgion, Thornback, Turbut,
Cackrell, Skate, Soles, and shellfish innumerable. Nicanor the Syrian Anno
Mundi 3666, made a vain attempt to bring the Euxin and this Sea into one, to
make it sociable and navigable; but had such issue joynd to his cost and
pains, as Sesostris, Xerxes, Alexander, Nero, Lucyus, and other Monsters of
the world had in that and other their impossibilities.

Four days we spent in easy journeys upon this remote shore; the first
night we got to Chacoporo, a big Town; twelve long miles West from Farrabat,
and upon which, the sea oftentimes beats outragiously: a river, a stones cast
over refreshes her, but (if they told us the truth) is not always potable; for
one month every year it tastes brackish. Next night we got to Barfrush de, a
great Town; well peopled, enriched with silk-wormes, wood, and excellent
water; and therefore they may the better forbear wine; for the law here
forbids the use of it, under a grievous penalty. This place is from Chacoporo
12 miles, many of the men here delight in Archery, and have long been famous'd
in that manly exercise.

-- the Yew
Into Ithyrean Bows is made to bow.
Ithyreos taxi curvantur
in arcus.
Hyrcania is a continued Forest, and of all the trees I saw, none exceeded the
Mulberies, for numberless numbers, none more notable for use; ten, yea thirty
miles spreading in them: the berries if white, refresht our bellies, the color
our eyes, the leaves our observation. In every Village and Cottage we might
behold sheds filled with industrious people, and enriching silkworms, seaming
the seminary of that valuable Fly, so accounted of through all the world, so
advantageous to the Persian Emperor; who from hence (besides those many rich
Carpets of silk and gold, silk, silk and silver yearly woven for their own
uses) extracts an annual quantity of raw silk, seven thousand six hundred
Batmans (or bales I think) exported through Turkey into Europe, to his great
benefit. The silk-worme (as in quality, so in diversity of shape) varies from
other worms: her first generation arising from a small round black sperme
(like Gunpowder or Musturd-seed) which by moderate heat increases to an inch,
assuming (at first) the shape of a palmer worm, from which resemblance in six
months she two times changes: her common food are leaves and boughs of trees;
but of all other, the white Mulbery most delights her, strewed daily all over
their sheds, kept sweet, and warm, and cleanly. Having satiated their useful
appetites, they forthwith become enemy to idleness, surcease their creeping,
and with their excretiated virtue intwine themselves, in some sort making their
lawne both winding sheet and Sepulcher. The silk co-operates with such colors
as be laid before them, white, yellow, green, and sandy. And albeit they be
involved, yet are they visible to the eye, such is the transparency of their
excrement. Their exterior part, is a pale gold commixt with lemon, rough and
hayry. The interior more hard and form ovated, the better to inhume th'included
Fly. Whose task being ended, the silken cods or balls are straightway spread
before Apolloes corruscant rays, by whose radiant candor the distressed worm
is broyld to death; not unlike a glorious miser faelicitating his death, so it
be in contemplation of his rich idolatry. And by this expansion the silk
becomes much finer and purer, than if she were suffered from her own notion
to issue forth and break her habitacle: After this the silk cods are thrown
into a large caldron, filled with water, and made meanly hot; then, with a
penetrated cane the people stir the^ about, at once drawing the slimy silk
from as many as his instrument can lay hold upon, or convene in advantage;
lastly with a wheel they are turned round; it attracts the silk, and leaves
(nothing worth the getting) indivellicated. But that they afford honey, yield
wax, build nests, and are a sort of spyder, Aristotle, and Pliny may conjecture
so, but experience derides their supposition. By this time we are got to Omoall
a City as well known as any other in Mozendram.

OMOALL, (of old, Zarama I imagine) is thought to be that Naborca or Naborea,
where the Oracle of dreams was so much famoused. It is built under the North
side of the imperious Mountain Taurus; of such Grandeur, that three thousand
Families inhabit in her, of several countries and languages, Armenians,
Georgeans, Hyrcans, Persians, Jews, Curdies, and Muscovians, who make a Babel
of seven tongues amongst them. The place is fruitful, and blessed in present
prosperity and antic greatness, the ruins completing the report of her
being once Metropolis; the houses at this day are not builded in the meanest
fashion, glorying above the rest, in an old but strong and stately Castle,
second to none about her; which, besides the well composed Architecture
(affoording no small pleasure to the eye) is observable in a deep trench filled
with water, of good defense against the pilfering and rodomantadoes of the
adjoining Taurisians: commendable also in some sweet gardens useful and
delectable: within the Town and near the Castle, is a famous Mosque, honored
by four hundred and four and forty Princes and Prophets of that Kingdom
intombed there, whose Sepulchers raise admiration in the beholders; that
especially of Mere Agowmadeen is famous, to whose shrine are daily offered
serious devotion. As I entered, I found twenty reverent and well apparelled
Arabians in a round, close by the Princes Dormitory, with each an Arabic
Alcoran before him; out of which, with great modesty and good music they
chanted a doleful requiem to his ghost; in which they were so serious, that
notwithstanding I came suddenly amongst them, and in such a habit as others
admired, they sung on and in a Dorick sweetness continued till they had
finished that their Threnody; which ended, they arose and bad me heartily
welcome, readily poynting out the rarities of their Temple. Thence, I went to
the river side (over which upon a Bridge we rode the night before) hoping to
shade my self (from outrageous Phaeton) under some Poplars there abounding;
but quickly left the place again: for 7 or eight beauteous (but not bashful)
Damosells (like so many Dorids) sprung suddenly out from the water, to admire
my clothes, never regarding they were naked; some my hat, my hair others,
other-some thought my spurs an antic. I wondered no less at their immodesty,
and left them with a frown, dictating their base carriage and my impatience.
And till by inquiry I saw it came from a greedy novelty, I thought them
Layesians: but it seemed I erred; for when the men (such time as Phoebus mounts
in his meridian) go to sleep, the women then enjoy the river and cool their
heat, in both kinds too much abounding there. Their habit is only a smock of
transparent lawne, wrought at hands, neck, and skirt, with an imbroydery of
silk and gold; the men are clothed like the other Hyrcanians. From Omoall we
traveled to Larry-Iohn or Ioon; (I cannot tell if that Ionaca in Ptolomy)
thirty miles thence; at which place the Kingdom of Hyrcania takes end and
Mount Taurus, or Taur-achow beginning. Taurus (says Dion. Alexan.) Totius
Orbis terrarum maximus, sic dictus quod instar Tauri elato capite incedit, etc.
But Eustathius thus, Veteres omnia grandia and robusta Tauros vocavere, etc.

Our journey lay sometimes through inhospitable straits, other times over most
stupendous hills; the breadth from one side to another about fifty English
miles, from Omoall to Damoan; the length fifteen hundred: towering in a hedge
of hills from Armenia to the furthest part of Indya: and after two days
painful climbing got so high, that we might see the middle region under us,
and we involved in chill exhalations. Taurus, Mons omnium maximus, says
Aristotle; yet the sublime height did not disaminate us, as did the danger of
descending, the path was so uneven and craggy; yea, the rocks so unskilfully
cut out for a passage; that great heed must be taken in the treading or a
terrible precipice into a bottomless lake indangers us; in one hill for three
miles together the way was carved (by some unskilful workman) in the mid-part
of a most horrible aspiring perpendicular Mountain, the lane in some places a
yard, in some but half a yard in breadth, so as if by accident two horsemen
meet, I could not see how both could have safe passage, nor is it higher than
ones head if mounted; a wretched passage! for whiles I was sometimes looking at
the wonderful height above us, and anon casting my sight downwards into that
dark Abisse, a rock bending ill-favoredly into the narrow way struck me such a
blow, as for a great while I was astonished, and happily delivered from a
downfall; a rock, demanding an uncivell tribute from all careless passengers.
At length we got safe out of that formidable path of death into the broad and
lofty Mountains, from whence the lying Greeks beheld Prometheus (son of
Iapeth by Asia his wife and brother to Atlas) cheyned to these rocks, his heart
gnawed by a Vultur, for daring (though Pallas helped him up) to steal
celestial flames from Apollo's Chariot wheels, to inspire life into his
Images. The mythology is this, from these high Mountains Prometheus first
studied and observed the firmamentall motion, the acronicall rising and setting
of the Stars and other bodies celestial, the causes of Meteors, eclipses, and
other hidden rarities of nature.

Hence Pyrrha's stones are fabled, Saturn's reign,
The birds of Taurus, Promeths theevish vein.
Hinc lapides Pyrrhae jactos, Saturnia regna,
Caucasiasque refert volucres, furtumque Promethei.
Hence also let us view (from this highest Tarrasse of the world) North East,
and fix our dim sight upon Corason. Corazon I take for that, old writers
entitled Coraxi in Pliny, Corziana in Procopius; Corasphy in Ptolomy; Chorasmia
in Athaeneus, vicinating the Seres (part of Sogdiana the one, of Aria the
other) famous in silk and delicate wool, by Lucan memorized.

Quid Nemora Aethyopum molli canentia lana,
Velleraque ut foliis despectant tenua Seres.
What Aethiops woods made white with tendrest wool,
Or Seres leaves, which scorns soft fleece to pull.
Tzetza thus in their commendations. Seres atque Tochares (the first seat of
the Turks or Turqu'stans) gentes prope Iudiam, texturas pulcherrimas texentes
omnium, and quae praeciosiores antiquis temporibus Iberes occidentales (now
Georgia) and Coraxi (now Corazon) similiter texturas pulcherrimas lana
operianur, etc. Nunc autem abuteus ut multi, dixeram illud ex Thebis, ex
Sericis non ignarus ut alli, etc. Whereby it seems though silk in the Latin
is from the Seres, yet they had it from the Iberians, and they from Egypt; so
likewise now Hyrcania is most excellent. Sydonius Apollinarius also thus:
Assyrius gemmas Ser vellera, thura, Sabaeus.
Assure yields gems, wool Seres, Saby fumes.


Corazon (included twixt 36 and 40 degrees) is divided into three large
Provinces. Hery, Farghan, and Tocharistan, (i.e. Aria, Paropamisa, Tocharia)
all at this day adding luster to the Persian Diadem. Of Hery and Farghan I have
elsewhere spoken.

Tocharistan or Turquestan is a member of the Ouzbeg-Tartar in 40 degrees,
adjoining Gaznehen and S'marcand. Towns of note there, are Tuz (in 38 degrees,
the birthplace of Nazarradyn the great Mathematician, and Commentator upon
Euclyde) Nishapore, Sarkas, Gelack, etc. extending from this part of Taurus to
the river Nycaphtac, of old called Oxus, the Terminus to the ambitious
Persians; subdivided into many Toparchies, the Camae, Camaecae, Alizonii,
Basilei, Vrgi, etc. buried at this day in oblivion, or wrapped up in other
Nomenclations. Maurenahar, part of Sogdiana has the river Iehun on the South, (
Gihon or Gychon) and Korazon with Gaznehen to the South East; and to the West
the Mare Caspium; it is a part of Tartary, spacious, populous, but barren,
mountainous; the people affecting rape and idleness. Some make it a part of
Turquestan (a remnant of those, Alexander shut up) and from whom are sprung
those Caterpillars of the world, the Turks, the offspring of Hagar, and though
to us but lately known, yet to old Geographors the name Torc was familiar,
repeated by Rabbi Benjamin-ben Jonas in his Itinerary, who notes that the
captive Jews brought hither by Salmanasser, associated with the Torqs near
Nyshabur, by Ptolomy Nisibi, by others the mountains of Nisebon; Hayton also
commemorates them and Vlughbeghius. Towns of account are, Buchar and
Seonargant, ( Maracanda in Arrhyan, Samrachatan in Chalcondiles, Paracanda in
Strabo, Sarmagana in Ptolomy.) ( Bokar and Samarchand) the birth places of
Avicen (called Honain-Ali-ben-sein) borne Anno Heg. 370, a famous scholar, in
ninety books of Physics, Chymicks, and Philosophy helping others: and of
Tamerlan borne Anno Heg. 760. Balk, Thalan, Arzan, Kaz, Sychamest, etc.
inhabited by a Scythic people then and now removing too and fro in Tents; a
warlike race, but illiterate and blockish; great Idolators, carving the Devil
in many ugly postures; very ceremonious, abstaing from bread, drink, wine, but
to raw flesh of horse and man, had a terrible appetite.

An Ouz-beg man.


And if we were to give every hill and Province their old nomenclations from
Armenia to Indya, it would savor of presumption and prolixity; the quest is so
obscure, so ship-wrackt in the gulf of dim oblivion, Heniochus (in Mengrellia)
Gordiaei, or Ghibel-Noae in Haiton (in Iberia,) Niphates, Moschici (from
Mesech, and whence of Moscovite,) Pariaedri, Coraxici, and Baris (in Armenia:)
and those rabble of uncertain Incolae: the Massagets, Taburaei, Suaebi,
Bomaraei, Alinorsi, Cadusii, Comari, Sagazini, Caerasini, Pratitae, Paredoni,
Cythaeni, Marucaei, Harmatatrophi, Mandradani, Sariphi, Turquemanni, Bochari,
Gaznehi, and other Provinces, all of them comprised in these four Ararat,
Caucasus, Taurus, and Imaus, at this day new-named Arar, Adozar, Taur, and
Kopizath.

Nam hoc scito probe neque te lateat,
Vt Abasgi and Alani, and Sacae and Dacae,
Rhos atque Soromatae, and qui proprie Scythae,
Et quicunque finitima gens flatibus Boreae,
Communiter denominantur Scythae, Scytharum nomine.
But more useful to our intellect, is the long time famous'd Mountain Albors,
near this place; infamous in the Pyree^ or Temple of Idolatrous Fire, which
has never gone out for fifty Ages. Strabo in his fifteen and Procopius in his
second book of the wars and jarrs in Persia remember it: Ben-Ionas also, a
vagabond Jew records it. Within the Fane (round and low) is an Altar elevated
five steps from the ground: before this Altar is a Trench or ditch, wherein the
Fyre-god is placed; a fire not as is other elementall fire, fed by
cumbustibles; but of that, Prometheus stole from Don-Phoebus Cart-wheeles, or
which Zertoost their Lawgiver stole from heaven, (a cabala of equal truth,
and choose you which likes you best) and is, no doubt in imitation of the Jewish
fire which Moses commanded should never be extinguished or profaned, 6 Levit.
13, the Devil ever frameing his worship (to make it better accounted of) after
the best pattern. In this Tophet, they commonly immolated their little
children, and sometimes men of more years than discretion, thinking by this
voluntary to purchase an (iron) crown, of (hellish) martyrdom. After he had
vowed himself to be a sacrifice, his friends in great troops, and with no
less joy flockt about him; clapping him on the shoulders with this greeting.
Hayle, blessed man! When? when will thou burn thy impure carcass, to have it
purged and made glorious in Paradize? he appoints a day, and they prepare
toward the ceremony: the time being come, they assemble at his gate; and he
issues crowned with garlands; they mount him upon a Mule, (for after he has
vowed, he must no more honor the profane earth with his footsteps) the Iesop
annoints him with a hallowed oil, and after many loving farewells, he
incinerates in flame to ashes. Ere his children depart, or music cease
roaring, the Priest having consulted with the Devil, tells them their duty;
bids them sanctify themselves, and provide a costly banquet against such a
day, when their fathers ghost means to visit them: they leap for joy, and think
each hour a day till the time accomplishes. At last old Satan comes, that
subtle liar, and in their fathers shape or phantasme, enters amongst them, and
at some distance deludes their eyes, and readily satisfies their curiosities;
they inquire how Paradize contents him; he replies, by prospect it is a garden
of such delights as are ineffable, but as yet cannot possess it. They ask
why? he tells them, because his will is unperformed; they ask who he left it
with, the Priest produces it: the tenor is of one note, his goods must be
divided into three, the Altar one, the Priests another, his children a third:
without which spell the ghost affrights them ever after. The Gowers in many
parts of Persia are of this religion; the Persees also in Indya. Upon these
Mountains they fable, that Pischyton ( Guztasps eldest son, who in Jacobs
days governed Persia) lives here and thirty Immorall Chyrons, who by a grant
of Zertoost (the fire-bringer) are to abide here till Doomsday, and if any
steal in by chance, they likewise may become immortal. No doubt, but Abbas
attempted it. Here also, upon Quequits high hill are some relics of the
furious Gyantesse Lamasaque, and of Arneost her husband, a Giant of monstrous
shape and proportion: I have forgotten how many score of cubits he was high,
but armed he was (if you will believe the Persians) with two horns as big as
the tusks of an Elephant; his eyes were terrible big, his tail like to a Cows,
but in fight as powerful as was that club of Hercules: This great theife and
his wife were both slain by Saint Ham-sha Honcoir such another soldier as was
Saint Romayn at Rohan. But leaving these ignes fatui, let me draw your eyes to
our ensuing journeys: After many laborious steps we got to a Village called
Ryna, twelve miles short of Damoan; where we beheld a Castle, so built upon
the best advantages of Art and Nature, that it seems impregnable: above, it
wants no ground fitted for ease and war, sweet gardens filled with fruits and
flowers, made happy in a rivolet of pure water springing there, and thence
delightfully streaming in many oblique meanders into the bottom.

In this place, five and twenty year ago, lived one Meleck Bahaman, Late
conquest of Mount-Taurus.
who like a second Pluto commanded many hills and dales in Gelack and Taurus; a
King, albeit confined to the middle region, most commonly forced with great
cost and care to uphold his dignity against Tartar and Persian his great cost
and quarrelsome neighbors: yet such was his good fortune, policy, valor, and
mutual love twixt him and his subjects, that though often invaded, he stood
secure, yea, lived to hear the ruin of many, his late enemies; his only aim
tending to preserve what his predecessors had justly made him heir unto, and
that his gray hayres might go in peace to an eternal dormitory. Thus thought
Bahaman, and added his endeavors to complete his thoughts. But Abbas the
ambitious Persian, returning from the conquest of Mozendram (forcing
Shalley-mirza son of King Abdalla-cawn to become his pentioner) looks up upon
Taurus which seemed to threaten his undaunted heart, and vows to be no longer
bearded by that mountanous King, taking his Motto out of Tacitus, id aequius
quod validius; charging him also that from his lofty dwelling he peered into
his two Kingdoms Medya and Mozendram, by that advantage ransacking his Towns,
robbing his Carravans, illuring his worms, anticipating his progress to the
Caspian Sea, and diverting many rivers into other sources; which springing upon
Taurus, streamed gallantly into Hyrcania and Shervan, without whose
felicitating, those Provinces became barren and barbarous. Meleck Bahaman
readily answers Abbas, and finds his drift, comparing him to that fable of the
Wolf who drinking at the springhead, quarrelled with the silly Lamb for
troubling his draught by quenching his flagrant thirst at the stream below.
Whiles Abbas in an impatient delay resolves to try the chance of war,
appointing Methiculibeg with an army of Coosel-bashawes to perfect his
designs, and not to descend thence without victory.

It could not be so secretly intended, but aged Bahaman has intelligence of his
immediate purposes. At first it troubled him, in that his gray hairs were more
propense to ease than tumult. Yet, lest his subjects from his example might be
discouraged, he throws away his dull thoughts, and as a common father provides
for safety, in arms and victuals furnishing his large Cittadell for many
years siege, yea, omitting nothing that might entitle him a careful and
expert Soldier. In each defensive place he plants a Garrison, and makes every
part naked and comfortless where the Enemy might march, that in nothing he
might be advantageous to the Persian. That done, he mews himself, his Queen,
two sons, and ten thousand able men in his defended Castle, not fearing any
thing they could attempt against him. The Persian general with thirty thousand
men mount upwards and at their first ascent, find the way so tedious, made more
dangerous by many dismal showers of Darts and stones thundering on them, that
they grumbled at such stratagems, and would needs tumble down again, till
Methiculibeg by many promises of reward, and exposing his own head in the
front of danger drew them up, and after some petty skirmishes, incampt himself
before this Castle; where he was told, the King and victory was included. When
they had long viewd this inaccessible fortress, they half dispaired of
subduing it. Such was the height of that Castle, and such the perpendicular
ascent, two excellent defenses Art and Nature had inricht it with. Some
Attempts he made, invalidable; to shoot their Arrows at it, was one with
aiming at the Moon. Small shot they had and many Lances, but of small force
to batter rocks; so that after many tedious bravadoes (wherein the Persian had
stones for payment) the General, finding force not valuable, turns
Matchiavillian. He summons them above to parlee with him; which granted, he
assaults them with many protestations of truce and friendship. And that he
might the better shadow truth, presents the aged King with choice Tulipants,
Shamsheers, Pearls, and other gilded baits, mean enough to angle for a
Kingdom, entreating him to descend and taste a banquet: solemnly swearing by
Mortus Ally, the head of Shaw Abbas, by Paradise, by eight transparent Orbs,
and other panym attestations, that he should have royal quarter, come and go
as pleased him; no other reason inducing his invitation, than a hearty good
will he bore him, and hopes of agreement upon parlee. The peaceful King,
unused to deceit and wars rotten stratagems, swallows the tempting hook, and
is credulous they had no perfidy. His wife and sons dissuade, adding fresh
examples of their hypocrisy. But neither those nor the tears his men shed to
beg his stay, vowing their constancy to the last man, could divert his
destiny: but down he goes and finds the Crocodile below ready to embrace him
with tears of joy: but after a short banquet, gives him an iron bed; regarding
neither vow, honor, nor engagement. Bahaman too late repents his dotage. The
Pagan General thinks all his own now, and therefore sends his son a message
of entreaty upon a Spears point, that if they wished their fathers safety, an
end of war, truce with Abbas, and new Grandeur to their fortunes, they should
come down; all which by obstinacy would be forfeited and denied them, yea
prove a basis of perpetual trouble, and a common monumentall shame unto
posterity.

Nature, enriches man with reason; Time, with knowledge and experience. Hence,
the two gallant youths, regardlesse of the rodomantadoes of the fastidious
Pagan, commix discretion and policy, throw down this choking answer, They
would believe he was an honest man and condescend to any reason, so the King
might have his liberty to come up again; otherwise he might count them Idiots,
the villainy and perjury to their father being so fresh amongst them: from
equal reason, they might demand the Castle and Crown, as them by whom those
things subsisted; other satisfaction they would not give so vile a miscreant,
this excepted, That the King of Persia's ill-grounded ambition would never
prosper; that though of long time he had politely avoided the Epithet of a
Tyrant, this would rub afresh his former injustice, yea anatomize him so
clearly, that all Asya would account him odious: that all the world might tax
him of dishonorable avarice, who commanding over many fruitful Provinces,
could not rest contented, without subjugating a Nation never wronging him; a
King whose Ante-cessors had for more ages governed Larry-Iohn, than Izmaels
posterity had done Persia; a Country so cold and barren, that of more than
Title he could not any way better himself: an unholy ostentation.

Sua retinere privatae Domus, de alienis certare regia laus est, says Tacitus;
private men do well to think their own enough, great ones think all too little
for their ambition. Abbas must not be circumscribed, the General remembers it.
So that retorting him this lawless title, Ius mihi objectas, accincto gladio?
without more plea; invites them, from their consolidated cloud, to view their
Fathers head off: they resolutely bid him do as pleased him, and to call to
mind, murder is inexpiable in their Alcoran. Methiculibeg has torn his foxes
skin with overstreching it, seeing this device prove air, and knows no way now
to blow them up, himself is so finely undermined. But giving his rage a vent,
in heat of fury he again assaulted them, they retaliate his hate with such
dexterity that many Cooselbashes expired their last, and so many others were
bruised, that they begun a common mutiny, protesting to return whiles
possible, upbrayding the General, that he knew not how to use a victory, that
Bahaman was theirs, Mount Taurus theirs, and doubted not, but they would do
homage if the Shaw would so honor him, that with more credit and gain they
could oppose the Turk or Indyan. The General is plunged into a deadly Dylemma.
If he could infuse patience and make them stay, he knew not how to mount the
Castle; if he returned without full conquest, he knew his head should off;
Ferrat-cawn, Oliverdi-cawn, Kurchichy-cawn, and other brave Captains for like
faults, being that year beheaded. He machinates at length another trial; he
releases Bahaman, upon his knees beseeches pardon: vowing he used this seeming
discourtesie, but to try his excellent temper; that his leave to go back was
granted him, either to go or stay as pleased him; that Abbas his Master had
sent for him, and that he should depart more joyfully, could he but be so happy
to see his sons, whom for valor and policy he admired above all mortal
creatures, that if any Articles and Truce might reciprocally be signed to, oh!
what content it would afford, and fetter him in a thousand slavish
engagements. Bahaman, is over-joyed at this Siren, never did music to his dull
ears sound more melodiously; some Magic spell sure had infatuated him; he
believes the Persian, and gives a Sardonick smile to think how blessed he was in
this atonement: he dictates a pathetick letter, and is permitted to show his
joy at a distance to his sons. A nefarious messenger delivers it and
bewitches the well-nigh distracted Princes with such piscashes and presents of
worth, that accepting them, and joying at the easy Articles, they consult and
(fearing to irritate so Potent a neighbor to further mischief, the Queen
also provoking them down, contrary to the soldiers who presaged by many
submissive diswasions their ruin) down they go, relying on the perfidy of the
General; who sounds for joy, and carries them to their endeared Father, twixt
whom was showed love and obedience in the height of both; the General presents
them a solemn banquet, but death attended them. For when these three were
blessing their good destiny, smiling in a mutual consent of love, the General
gives the sign, and at one instant three Coosel-bashes standing by, with their
slicing Semiters whipped off their heads, all three at one moment made immortal;
and ere this villainy was spread abroad, by virtue of their seals, they made
the men above descend and yield the Castle, some receiving mercy, some
destruction. By that detested policy yoaking in slavery, this late thought
indomitable Nation; such was the miserable end of Meleq' Bahaman and two
hopeful Princes, forgetful of wars subtleties: and how Aladeule their
neighbor King of Anti-Taurus for playing fast and loose with Selim first
Emperor of Turqs, by equal credulity gave a like issue to his life and
Kingdom. Opposite to this Castle is erected the Sepulcher of Bahamans beloved
Queen, in the highway as we passed: it is of four equilateralls, elevated
eight yards high; the material is of stone, well squared and plaster'd with
white, very apparent and comely.

A long mile from this Sepulcher and higher up into the Air, is the high peak
of Damoan (by Strabo in his 11. lib. called Iasonia,) whose top (shaped like a
Pyramid) surmounts all the other parts of Taurus; up which defatigating hill we
crambled with no small difficulty, and from whence we could discover the
Caspian Sea, eightscore long miles distant thence; it is above composed of
sulphur, which causes it to sparkle each night like Aetna; a pleasant object to
the eye, but is so offensive to the smell, that it requires a nosegay of
Garlic in the ascending; hence, most part of Persia and Chaldaea has their
brimstone: the reason why we rode up was out of curiosity, to see the baths so
generally resorted to, so excellently famous. Three are incircled with strong
stone-walls and two are open. The first are for those of quality, the other in
common: and hither in August, people flock apace from remote parts, decrepit
and diseased in mighty multitudes.

How are we tossed by Fortune? when we keep
At Sea, we see the wonders of the deep,
And tremble at the danger, where we dive
Under the hideous waves. When we arrive
On land, we think us happy; But ere long
We must to work again and climb the strong
And craggy Mountains reaching up to Heaven,
Each down-cast look is death, each way uneven
Dants our thick-panting hearts; lest if we miss
One step, we headlong fall the precipisse.
The top (like fierce Vesuvim) Sulphur spits;
The midway wholesome Baths, which cute all fits
Of agues, aches, palsy, and the stone,
All epileptick fumes; as if alone
Nature had chose this place, to plant in these
The Art of Galen and Hypocrates.
Now, whether this hill take denomination from Damoan, five farsangs thence, or
the Town from it I cannot argue; but from the signification a Second
plantation, the Jews have a Cabala that Noah's Ark rested here; Noah's Ark.
not only from the super-eminency of the hill, but Vines and Zone fitting a
seminary better than any part of the Armenian mountains. Besides, this hill
where Taurus rises up higher than elsewhere, is part of Paropamisa, and where
Becanus places the Ark, denying that Ararat is in Armenia, though Hayton to
make it be believed, calls it Aremnoe^. But how improbable so ere that be, this
seems more congruous, that at this Town of Damoan and mountains about it,
the Idolatrous Tribes removed by Salmanasser, were here seated; those
especially of Dan, Zebulon, Assure, and Nepthaly; the other of Ruben, Gad, and
half Manasses, by Tiglath Pillesar about Lar, Iaarown, and other parts of
Chusistan. For albeit Ptolomy makes Gozana (in his 6. lib. 18. chap.) a branch
of Oxus, in above 40 degrees: and at Hara, and Hala, and Ghabor Cities of
Medya, near the river Gozan sacred story says they were placed by the
Assyrian; it cannot be that Gozan mixes with Oxus, since no part of Medya is
within three hundred miles of it. Gozan then is in Medya; and seeing that
Araxis waters Armenia from Ararat, and runs into the West side of the Caspian
sea; this river here of a great breadth streaming from Taurus both into Medya
and Hyrcania (cut in many small rivolets by the people to draw her many ways)
must needs be Gozan, and the Jews inhabiting here for many ages confirm my
conjecture, saying also that they were brought hither captives, and here have
rested during many overtures and changes of the Persian Monarchy.

East of Damoans high peak is a Town called Nova, in it a hundred families. A
young man (son to Hodge-Suare the Persian Merchant that dyed in London, Anno
Domini 1625, and brother to Mahomet, whom we buried at sea) hearing of our
passing by, accompanied with all his loving kindred, came to invite us to his
home; he was apparelled in a long robe of cloth of gold, his head was wreathed
with a huge Shash or Tulipant of silk and gold, he bestowed a banquet and
hearty welcome, with an invitation of longer time: but after mutual thanks and
ceremony, we returned a long farewell, and thence hastened toward Damoan:
where, as we descended a steep hill, we past by a large black Tent, stuffed
with above thirty antic women, and as many men; I thought they had been
solemnizing their Taurilia and Boalia, but it proved a wedding; the bride was
of ten years, the groom of thirty; she a Venus, he a Vulcan: many bride-maids
came out to admire at us, we staid awhile no less wondering at them: their
faces, hands, and feet were painted in diverse forms of birds, beasts, castles,
and flowers, resembling our predecessors in Britain in Caesar's time; their
legs were chained with voluntary fetters of brass and silver, which in their
Morisco Pastoral made them appear more excellent in that sport than any
description of the Arcadian Sheepheardesses; we gave them a a small offering
and so left them, that night making Damoan our Manzeil or Lodging.

Damoan, (whether the relict of Ghabor or Halah is incertaine; but by the Jews
(in these parts called Iehuds) their long captivity and abode here, seems to
be one of them) is a Town well known unto the Persians; some write it Damawan,
but erroneously. The North Pole is elevated at this place, six and thirty
degrees, twenty minutes; longitude 88. It is included by the skirt of Taurus,
in the Kaboncharion Province (part of Ghelack) and the limit of Medya, North; a
Town pretty well watered, a branch of Gozan refreshes her: peopled most part
with Jews, who in this place are two hundred Families: The Buzzar is built
aloft, and scarce worth the climbing to, except it be to buy wine and fruit,
which is had here in plenty and at easy prices. Two days we stayed in Domoan
to recreat our wearied bodies; on the thirteenth of June we departed thence,
and that day rode to Bomaheem, five and twenty miles from Damoan.

And now we are in Medya, a word of her; it takes name either from Medeus son
to Jason and Medaea, th'infortunate daughter of King Aeta; or from Madai third
son of Iaphet son of Noah: on the North it has mount Taurus; has Parthia
South; confined by Bactria to the East; West by Armenia and Assyria. Media was
anciently divided into two (as Trogus, Adephius, Strabo, and others witness,)
Atropatia, ( Tropataena in Ptolomy, Atropataena in Pliny, from Atropatus one of
Alexanders men) and Azarka or Sheervan i. e. milky Plain.

At this day it is sub-divided into Gheylan ( Gheylae in Ptolomy, Caddufia in
Pliny) Deylan, Vaaz-pracan, and Thezican, those are Atropatia; in which we
might include part of Armenia. Sheirvan has Aderbayon, Harran, Sultavia, and
Tabriztan. A rich and puissant Country it was in the worlds Infancy; but
whether by the consuming hand of war or Gods justice, in revenge of so many
holy Christians Chozroe massacred, I cannot say; this I can, that it is a
barren and miserable soil, compared with the Phoenix of Isles great Britain,
who in her self exceeds the best compacted pleasures of these Asiatique
Provinces. It has been fruitful you may say, if Pope Pius the second had good
information out of Strabo. lib. 11. an Hippobotos or horse pasture here
nourishing fifty thousand breeders; but little grass is to be found at this
day over most part of the Persian Monarchy; as you may see, if you please to
journey thither. But in stead of them, as many Camells abound here in sandy
Deserts, and crop the boughs of trees or shrubs such as they meet with: a
beast, albeit generally known, yet may have a small memorial. The Dromodarie
and it are of one descent, but vary according to the Country they breed in:
in Bactria (where of old were reckoned a thousand Cities) and Persia they have
but one gib or bunch, the Arabian is doubled. The males in one month every
year burn with too much heat, and grow foaming frantic toward copulation,
yet in that distraction cannot be brought to commit incest, nor will they go
any whither without their consort: the females are not so choleric; they
couple backward, go great ten months, commonly have but one young one at one
birth, which they suckle two years apart from company, not loosing their milk
till a second conception: They live threescore years, labor much, feed
little; refrain drink three days, but then quench their thirst immeasurably:
their milk is cordial, their flesh rank and lean, yet in Asia preferred
before Beef, Veale, Pork, in that Mahomet's Alcaron or Ozmon's Parady,
licentiats it.

This Kingdom was first conquered by Semeramys; some say by her simple husband
Nynus, Anno mundi 1900. Ninus was son of Belus (deified by names of Bell,
Baal, and Jupiter Babylonicus;) son of Nymrod (called Mars by some, by others
Saturn) sixth son of Cush, Chams eldest son, the cursed brat of Noah: or
thus, Noah had Cham, father of Cush (begot some say in the Ark) father of
Nymrod who begat Baladan, father to Berodac predecessor to Nabuchadnezar,
father of Evel-Merodach, father of Bel-shazzer, who (as Daniel foretold) was
the last of that Assyrian pedigree, Darius Medus supplanting him, Anno M. 3426.
by some called Cyaxares secundus, whose daughter and heir was married to Cyrus
the Fortunate, who by slaughter of Astiages became sole Monarch of Persia.
Since when, it has groaned under twenty changes, but we will not speak them
here; for by this time we are housed in Tyroan.

TYROAN, by her continued greatness and Antiquity seems to be that Rhazunda,
mentioned by Strabo and Ptolomy. It is seated in the midst of a fair large
Plain; which albeit it be environed with hills of stupendous height in most
parts at good distance, yet some ways it affoords a delicate Horizon. The air
here is fresh and sweet in the morning and toward Sunset, but in the Suns
perpendicular glances, we found it hot and raging: the houses are of white
bricks, hardened in the Sun; above three thousand houses are numbered in
Tyroan; of which, the Dukes and Buzzar are the fairest and most observable; yet
neither so excellent as to beget wonder: the Market is divided, some part
thereof is open and some arched: a sweet rivolet plays wantonly in two
streams through the Town, fertilitating the Groves and Gardens, who for such
a favor return a thankful Tribute to the Gardener: adjoining the City, the
King has a spacious Garden, succinct with a great Towering wall of mud, as much
in circuit as is the City: The house wherein we lodged overtopped all the
other, and from whose highest Tarrasse (early one morn) I took a dainty
prospect both of Town and Country; every house top was spread with Carpets,
whereon each night slept the Master of the house and his Seralio; some (I
easily perceived) had three, some six women about them, wrapped in linen; the
curiosity (or rashness rather) might have cost me dearly, the penalty being
no less than to shoot an Arrow into his brains that dares to do it. The
Carravans lodge here, exceeds the Mosque; the men in this Town are proud, the
women lovely, both are curious in novelties; but the jealousy of the men
confines the temper of the weaker sexes; yet by that little they adventured at,
we might see, Vetitis rebus gliscit voluntas. One Zenal-chan is the Sultan of
this City, a man of no worth in our opinion: he had been Ambassador from
Shaw-Abbas to Rodulph the second, German Emperor; but his late employment, his
favor with Abbas, his wealth, his vexation for Nogdi-beg his Cozen; made him
so proud, so discourteous, that albeit the Ambassador sent to visit him, he
returned no thanks, he took no notice of his being there. The pole Artick is
elevated in Tyroan, thirty five degrees, forty minutes: fourscore in
longitude. From Tyroan we rode to a Village called Charah, a base inhospitable
place; it affoorded us no sustenance, but torment, so much as the scalding
sands and frying Sun could operate, as in too great measure we had experience
of: From hence to Taurys is two days riding. The Carravans-raw is thus shaped.

Carravan-raw


TAVRYS, the late Median Metropolis takes name from that prodigious mountain
Taurus, under which it is builded. The Turk and Perse call it Taberyz; in the
worlds adolescencie 'twas known by other names; of Achmetha as I read in Ezra;
after that, of Echatana spoken of in the Apocrypha; of Amatha also as
Cortestan; and Cordina, others have called her; by analogy some have placed
her in Syria, from a City Egbatan, converted into Epiphania, by Antiochus. The
primier founder of this noble City is Arphaxad as we find in Iudiths History:
Anno Domini 3290. some say Dejoces, predicessor to that valiant Phraortes, who
flourisht in the year of the world 3300, the sixth Dynast of Medya after
Arbaces, who begun it from Adam 3146. It was agrandiz'd (not built, as Pliny
dreamt of) by Seluchus, 300 years after; who at that time begun to build
Seleucya 200 pharsangs thence, to eclipse the pride of mighty Babylon. Such
time as she was called Ecbaton, she was far greater than at this present. It
was fifteen Italian miles about (says Strabo.) The walls were strong and
stately, seventy cubits high and fifty broad, beautified with many lofty
Turrets and battlements: within, were numbered many great and excellent
Palaces; that which Daniel built (the Mausoleum afterward of the Median
Kings) was most magnificent, and which remained undemolisht in Josephus his
time, and some whiles after: That, built by Darius was no less memorable: most
part whereof was of Cedar wood, the roof studded and plaited with burnisht
gold; of both which nothing now remains save memory and ashes. I can hardly
say memory, since it is become a question whether Tauryz be old Ecbatan; and
whether it be in Media or no. If to be under Baronta, ( Diodorus, Polybius, and
Ptolomy call it Orontes,) if to be in 36 degrees 50 minutes, if to have the
ruins of Tobyas his grave, if to be the burial place of Kings, if to be the
Metropolis time out of mind, if to be the City from Jerusalem N. E. four
hundred forsangs can make it Ecbatan; or if the authority of Ananias, Petrus de
la valle, Leunclavius, Teixera, and of Ortelius will serve, let it then be
Ecbatan and in Medya. Ptolomy's conceit of Tabryz (mistaken in the Tau, a Gamma
printed erroniously for it) to be in Assyria, by Cedrenus in Armenia, by
Chalcondyles in Persia, by Niger in Pers-Armenia, or by Paulus Venetus in
Parthya; what were these conjectures but from the Monarchique Arch-Titles, as
Assyrian, Armenian, or Parthyan as they swayed then; and chiefly from the
mistake, how Armenia is divided; part of Armenia major extending South of
Araxis into Atropatia, a part of Medya; and from whence the name Pers-Armeniae
is compounded: for by Abulfeda, Vlughbeg, and others, the latitude of Taurys
complies with Ecbatan.

At this day Tabryz is great, and well peopled: traded to from far, albeit it
keeps a Garrison. It is compast with a mud wall, five miles about: the houses
are flat a top: their material Sunne-dried Bricks: the Buzzar large, the
Gardens lovely: that to the South-East planted by King Tamas was famous, but
the Turks horses have lately grazed there. It wants water in the greatest
measure, yet of that is not wholly destitute. What it lacks in that, fire and
flame supplies it; the Sun, wars rage, and civil broils having more than
sufficiently parched her. To pass by the mutations of the Empire, the Turks
first passage six hundred years since, Tamberlayns rage and the like, remember
we those two deadly factions the Envicaydarlai and Namidlai for three hundred
years persecuting one another with implacable wrath, drawing into their
quarrel nine other Provinces, who grew so hateful amongst themselves, that
not only this City but Medya and Armenia were thereby half depopulated: the
Gibelyns nor Roses outmatched them. They made an easy entrance to any invader.
Selym the grand Signieur first espies it, and to become an eyesore to Tamas
son of Izmael their inveterate Adversary, sends a Bashaw who ransackt it
Anno Dom. 1514. Heg. 894. without much resistance. And Anno 1530. Solomon
seconded it with so much fury, that it flamed many days, the insatiate Turks
pillaging without mercy, and turning topsie-turvie all they met with, and into
a Chaos those elaborat walks and gardens Shaw-Tahmas so much gloried in. It
revived again, and again is made prostrate to Ebrahim Bassa's luxury, sent
by Solomon at the villainous instigation of Vlemus a Persian Traitor, and
brother in law to the King. At which time Anno 1534. Heg. 914. the greedy
Turks new ransackt it. But Anno Dom. 1585. Heg. 965. it groaned under most
affliction, when Ozman the wrathful Bassa and slave to Amurat the third,
subdued it, and perpetrated all sorts of hostile cruelty: till thirty years
after, by that incomparable Pagan Prince Emyr-hamze-myrza elder brother to Shaw
Abbas it was regained, rebuilt and fortified against the future insolence of
those Barbarians. Taurys is distant from Cazbyn seven days easy journey; from
the Mare Caspium as many; from Araz six; from Derbent eight, from Spahawn
seventeene, from Shyraz thirty, from Ormus fifty, and from Babylon thirty.

Next night we made our Manzeill at Sangurrabaut, a Town consisting of an
hundred Cottages. In this place we buried a civil Gentleman, Mr. Welflit our
comrade, under a broad spreading Chenoar tree, and fixed a brazen scrole over
him, which spoke his Name and Nation.

Mors tua non careat fletu; linquamus amicis
Maerorem ut celebrent funera cum lachrymis.
We have deplored thy death: th'insuing years
Thy kin shall pay thee Tribute with their tears.
Next night we slept in the open fields under a bespangled Canopie the
Firmament; and next in Shaw-De, i.e. the Kings Town, his Purgatory rather; if
a conspiracy of loose and scalding sand, the burning Sun, and filthy Cottages
can make one: the houses there, differ nothing in shape nor closeness from
Ovens; the people all day bake themselves in them; a people so discourteous,
that our misery nothing afflicted them; from that hateful Town we hasted,
and next night got into Casbyn.

CAZBYN, (or Kazvyn after the lisp of Persia) is that same City known to the
ancient Topo-graphers by name of Arsacia, from Arsaces the valiant Persian Anno
Mundi 3720. from whom the ensuing Kings were styled Arsacidae; two hundred and
fifty years before the th'incarnation of our Savior Christ: and is accounted
the first that made Medya an Empire, in despite of proud Seleuchus son to the
great Monarch of Syria, Antiochus surnamed Theos. By command of Nycanor it was
afterward called Europus, and lost that name too when it bended under the next
conquest. It is likely this was that Rages (a City in Medya as appears in
Tobit) whither the Angel went from Ecbatan to receive the ten Talents (of our
money two thousand pounds) Tobias was to have from Gabael son to Gabrias his
kinsman. I am not ignorant, that some imagine Edissa in Mesopotamia to be it;
but that is most unlikely, for then what business had they from Ninivy to go
to Ecbatan (in the way no doubt, or not far deviat to Rages) a contrary way
leading to Edissa twixt Tigris and Euphrates: besides, it is said in the
Apocrypha, that Rages was in Medya, Edissa is not; and no part of Medya is
nearer than a thousand miles from the holy City, but Edissa not five hundred.
Whence the word Cazbyn is fetched I could not learn; I suppose from Cowz-van
i.e. a vale of barley; as Sheir-van a plain of milk, etc. or from King Cazvan
as they call Acembeg the Armenian; or that it is the relict of Casbira, an old
City in Strabo placed here: for if I should deduce it from Chazbi as the 70
Interpreters translate it in Genesis 38.5. it would relish of too much antiquity.
The signification of Exile is unknown by interpretation or occasion to the
inhabitants, except the broacher of that conceit had recourse to the idiom of
the old Parthians. The North pole is in this famous City elevated 36 degrees. and
15 min. long. 85 degrees 30 minutes: by King Tamas (son of Ismael) made the
Metrolis of this Monarchy, the better to affront the intruding Ottomans; the
Kingdom it stands in, is Medya; the Province Sheirvan, that part called
Deylan: from Tabryz a hundred and eighty miles; from Hamadan (the sepulture of
Queen Ester and Mordecay) a hundred and ten; from Sultany (the residence of six
Sultans) ninety; from Ardavyl (the Seigniory of the Abasians) eighty; from
Gheylan seventy; from Farabaut two hundred; from Samarchand five hundred; from
Ormus eight hundred; from Babylon five hundred; from Jerusalem a thousand; from
Spahawn two hundred and seventy; from Shyraz four hundred and ninety; from
Kandahar five hundred and fifty miles English, or thereupon.

It is at this day for multitude of buildings and inhabitants the chief in
Medya, and equal for other grandeur to any other City in the Persian Empire,
Spawhawn excepted. It is seated in a fair even plain, no hill of note in
thirty miles compass overlooking her; a champaigne yielding grain and grapes,
but little wood saw I growing any where. It has a small stream flowing from
Abonda ( Baronta of old) which gives the thirsty drink; and mellowes the
gardens: from whence by its refreshment and the peoples industry, they have
abundance of fruits and roots and in varieties. I think the reason why we saw
no great rivers in any place, is from their forcing it into many sluices, to
bring it by subterranian passages, to such Towns as have none but by
derivative, in so much, that if Indus, Euphrates, and Ganges were amongst them
(I mean where the Country is most peopled) doubtless they would make them
kiss the sea in five hundred ostiums or branches. Such fruits as I remember,
were Grapes, Orenges, Lymes, Lemons, Pomcytrons, Musk and water Mellons, Plums,
Cherryes, Peaches, Apricocks, Figgs, Gooseberries, Pears, Apples, Pistachoes,
Filberds, Hasel-Nuts, Wallnuts, Almonds, and excellent Pomgranads, Dates, but
such as came from Laristan. Casbyn is circled with a complementall wall, of no
force in any adversity; the compass is about 7 miles; the families are twenty
thousand, people about two hundred thousand, nourisht by the Air, and a few
roots and rice, such diet as best complies with such torrid regions. The
Buzzars here are large and pleasant, but inferior to some about her. The Mydan
is uniform and beautiful, the Kings Palace and Haram are nigh the great
Market, low, of raw-bricks, varnisht after the notion of Paynim painting, in
blew, red, and yellow tinctures, commixt with Arabiq knots and letters, azure
and gold; the windows are spacious, trellized and neatly carved; within, of
usual splendour; near his gate, is a great Tanck or Magazyn of water made at
the common charge at our being here. The Hummums (or sweating places) are many,
resplendent in the azure pargetting and tyling wherewith they are ceruleated;
the vulgar buildings content the inhabitants, but to a busy eye yield small
wonder or amazement: the gardens are best to view and smell to, but compared
with those in Spahawn and Shyraz, prove but ordinary and less fruitful. The
Mosq's, or superstitious houses, are not two thirds so many as John of Persia
computed long ago, above six hundred. Nor those so fastidious in Pyramidall
aspirings, nor curious in Architecture, nor inside glory as in many lesser
Towns obeying Mahomet. I cannot enlarge her praises, save that in Spring and
Autumn I believe it may be a temperate and enticing climat: but Summer and
Winter are extreme in contraries; Apollo frying them with his oblique flaming
glances, and Hyems no less benumming them with his icycles.

Here we met the Pot-shaw again, who got into Casbyn two days before us. At
which time, forty Cammells entered laden with Tobacco out of Indya, the owners
and drivers being ignorant that any such prohibition had gone out, to forbid
the using it; (the King sometimes commanding and restrayning three or four
times every year, to show his Monarchic power, and as the humor takes him,)
an ill spirit directed them, for Mamet-Ally-beg the pernicious Favorite
(wanting his piscash it seems, exasperates Abbas, and he forthwith pays the
men unwelcome wages; commanding an Officer to crop off their ears, and to
benose them; offering to his angry Justice, the forty Cammells burden of
Tutoon or Tobacco, by making a great deep hole the pipe, which being inflamed,
in a black vapor gave the Citizens gratis two whole days and nights infernal
incense. Let me give you somewhat to memorise Casbyn, wherein have been acted
many Tragic scenes, in their times very terrible.

Mahomet the purblind King of Persia and Sire to Shaw-Abbas, of himself was
peaceable and merciful; but could rest never the quieter for such a temper.
Morad the third, and son to Selym that arch-Atheist, and Emperor of Turq's
(who called himself God of the Earth, and commander of the whole World)
squinted still upon the Eastern Monarchs, and found none a greater eyesore
and rub to his conquests than Mahomet and Persia: many attempts he made to
subject it, but of no force, the happy influence of destiny so safeguarded it,
Nature it self labored to oppugn that rebel of Nature.

But let us first look back to see what storms were raised, what incantations
engendered, ere he could make the tottering Dyadem sit close; Tamas-Shaw (son
to Ismael-Sophy the Jews reputed Messiah, till by the just hand of God, they
found him crueller than Tytus) by a Georgian Lady (they are the rarest in the
Orient) had twelve sons, Mahomet, Ismael, Aydar-cawn, Solomon, Emangoly,
Mamut-Ally, Mustapha, Ally-cawn, Amet-cawn, Ebrahym, Hamze, and Izma-cawn; the
daughters are seldom reckned, yet one of them a Virago, Periacon-Conna by name
played her part, and rather than do as other women, spin or be imprisoned, she
chose to practice Arms, and to revive the infamy, yea in every thing to
imitate Semyramis. King Tamas was scarce dead (hastened some think before his
time) when Ayder his third son took advantage of his brethrens absence:
Mahomet he jeered at, as unworthy the crown by reason of his imperfection; he
could not see to fight, to discern, to govern. Ismael was abroad upon some
employment, and therefore Periacon-Conna encouraging, he graspt the Scepter and
impald his brows with his Fathers Diadem, his brothers right, his own
confusion: for he had not swayed full four days, when Sahamel-cawn (his
insinuating Uncle) most audatiously struck off the crown, and (to add
presumption) made the loss of his head satisfy his too hasty ambition.
Zenall-cawn his friend grumbles at it, but had not power to question him.
Periacon-Conna finding her engagement past to Ayder, shows her self a right
woman in her constancy: for without any revenge of Ayders death or sorrowing to
his grave, she transfers her love to Ismael, who by her foot-post has notice of
his brothers ill-end and favor of the Sultans toward him. Ambition lends him
wings, so that he quickly arrives at Casbyn, and by men of note is joyfully
welcomed, by the monster multitude saluted King. His conscience accuses him of
intrusion, but checks him not to make such a construction as Law and Nature
required from him: he resolves to rule, and to cut off such rubbs as made the
way unsafe to mount upon: his brothers had no title to it, (I mean, none but
Mahomet) yet the name affrights him: 8 innocent Princes were slain to quench
his infernal inflammation, regarding neither grace, his Fathers soul, the
perfume of that name, the name of Tyrant, justice, nor the peoples mutability,
who by that cruelty begun to hate him, and to wish the right heir in his
lawful royalties. Mahomet also begins to stir, if not for the crown, at
least to free himself from his brothers blood-thirstinesse; but he no sooner
practiced to be active, when the people ground their loyalty and affection on
him, and in great troops flock about him, vowing to have him King in Casbyn,
or in the attemp to sacrifice themselves. Whiles Ismael grows odious to God
and Man: for, seeing the vulgar sort and others fall away, in a high contempt
of them, and to ruin all, he confederates with the Turq, intending to betray
the honor of his crown, and to shade himself under their greatness; yea to
vex his own, and to ingratiate the Turks the more, apostatizes, proclaiming
the error of the Persian reformation, crying out that Ally was no body,
compared to Mahomets three successors, and the like frantic impostures; which
how subtlely so ere he cloakt, his tricks deceived him; for one night (a
dismal night to him) his sister weathercock and four enraged Sultans,
Chalyle, Emyr, Mohummed, and Curchy-cawn entered his bedchamber in women's
apparel, where Ismael thinking to cool his lascivious appetite, was by those
Amazons strangled in a cord of silk, foming out his infected spirit, unable to
resist the fury of those conspirators, and disheartened when he saw his sister
one of them. Casbyn was clouded with shame and amazement, but cleares up when
Mahomet enters circled with the refulgent Diadem. Periacon-conna dreams not of
an account: but Mahomet, acquainted with her turbulent and variable nature,
commands Salmasmirza to arrest her with the axe of death, which accordingly he
executes, and sends her Gorgons head, the hair dishevelling upon a spears
point as a symboll of his obedience unto the King: her accomplices upon the
terror of this, posting for their lives into Georgia, some unto Babylon.

Ecce, patrem Nati perimunt, Natosque parents
Matuaque armati coeunt in vulnera fratres.
Thus, children slay their Syres, parents their brood,
Armd brethren brethen wound in deadly fewd.
Amurath the Grand-seignior hears by Vstref-beg (an Armenian Traitor) of
Izmaels catastrophe; in whose revenge (he so colored it, to make Mahomet
neglected) he forages the Persian Territores, ordering Mustapha the Bashaw with
a hundred thousand men to perpetrate their utmost rage, which he greedily
obeyes, till Sultan Tokomac the Persian General affronts him face to face, and
examines him with such fury in the Calderan plains (famous for many memorable
conflicts) that Mustapha is forced thence in despite of his bravadoes, a
shamed that 20000 could not only bandy but beat down his Army, consisting of
five times his number. Six and thirty thousand Turks there breathed their last,
and eight thousand Persians, Anno Domini 1578. Heg. 958, of whose heads the
bragging Turk made a Bulwark, thinking it would be a scar-crow to the Persian;
who retaliated them in a more terrible measure that year, by the valor of
Arez-beg and Emanculy-cawn; thirty thousand other Turks parting with their
heads (as they past the Conac in Hyrcania) to erect a higher Trophy to their
victory; praying Mustapha and his Master to come no more unsent for, lest they
gave them such another harsh welcome: wondering they had so soon forgot, the
famous overthrow King Tamas gave Solomon and Ebrahim-bassa, three and forty
years since, by a handful of Coosel-bashaes (and the assistance of a divine
hand) scattering as wind does clouds, three hundred and fourscore thousand
men. Mustapha gives his reply in a grim look, wishing he could do more than
he was able. But Mahomet is not yet secure, for the Tattars (allied to the
Turk) in revenge upon Mosendram, violate and commit all kinds of rage and
turpitude, hoping when they had joynd with Osman-bassa (left by Mustapha) to
over-runne all Medya without opposall: but they reckned without their host, for
Arez beg with ten thousand gallant Persians surprise the Tattars with such
haste and dexterity, that they routed a great part of the Army, and had
returned crowned with a most happy conquest, had not Abdel-chery the General
used a stratagem, who with some selected companies entering upon the backs of
the half tired Persians, by great clamours made them believe Osman was come;
and by that, turned the fortune of the day, eclipsed by that interposition, and
made to die there in an honorable conquest, the chief Captain Arezbeg,
unhorst, imprisoned, and at Sumachy most basely hanged, to give the terrified
Tattars fresh encouragement.

Sumachy or Shamaky (as some call it) has North latitude 39 degrees: a frontier
Town it is, Medya, Armenia, and Hyrcania, parting there; it was founded by
Shamuc-Zeddaule An. Dom. 990. Heg. 370. and from whom peradventure it was
named. It has four thousand families, the houses are low and little graceful;
seated in a pleasant plain or valley, to the Notth and West, allowing a
delightful prospect. Anno Domini 1566. Heg. 946. her last Native King
Obdolow-cawn dyed, and his son Syrvan-Shaw was forced to inroll himself a
Tributary to Shaw-Abbas. In this Town is a Tower of heads raised by the
insolent Turq's, such as is in Spahawn, and which the old knave Mustapha made
be erected. But to return.

Mahomet Codobanda has quick news of the shameful death Arez-beg had suffered:
He sorrows for the loss of so brave a man, is sick of revenge, and entreats
his courageous son Emyr-Hamze-Mirza, (the wonder of his time) to recompense
that villainy; who most cheerfully with twelve thousand men hasts out of
Casbyn, and in nineteen days presents his men in the face of Abdulchery and
his Tattars, flashing such pannique fear amongst them, that after two hours
fight he rowts his Army, and with much shame and loss forces them away to
seek more shelter: that done, he enters Erez, and massacres the Turkish
Garrisons: Caytas the Bassa he made to imitate Arezbeg in the grizely play of
Death; he recovered also two hundred pieces of Artillery, those very same, his
Grandsire Tamas had lost to the grand Signieur, Solomon: he stays not there,
but hearing where the Tartars had re-incampt, with his speedy Army he
re-encounters them, and cut most of them in pieces, whereby the birds of the
air might more easily prey upon their carcasses. Abdulchery (by fortune of
war) was unhorst by the gallant Prince, and sent captive to Eres where the
Begun or Queen mother lay: during which, Osman and his Turks enter Sumachy
without resistance, but the Persian Prince hasts thither, and with such fury,
that amazed Osman takes the advantage of the night, and stole away, leaving
Sumachy to the Princes mercy; who for her perfidy made a fire of her houses,
and seemed to quench it with blood of the Inhabitants. Returning back to Erez,
he forces his Mother and he youthful Tartar to follow him to Casbyn, where he
was received with Epiciniaes and songs of joy and triumph. Osman in the interim
sculks in Derbent, whither we will take the pains to follow him.

DERBENT is a strong and famous Port Town upon the Caspian sea, viewing from
her lofty Tarrasses the Armenian and Hyrcan Territories, Ararat and the sea:
known to our predecessors by many names, as Alexandria (from the great
Macedonian, who built many Towns, and gave them his name,) Morcosa, Demyrcapi,
and now Derbent; memorable in her best passage from Armenia major, Medya, etc.
into Mosendram, Gheylan, Shervan, Tartary, etc. it is removed one hundred and
twenty miles from Sumachy, from Bildih 180. it elevates the North Pole one and
forty degrees, fifteen minutes; and admits three miles compass and better: is
circled with a strong, high and useful stone wall: the houses, Hummums, and
Churches are but meanly beautiful; such rage, the Prince Emir-Hamze showed
here Anno 1568. Heg. 948. such time as he unkenneld with smoke and flame Osman
Bassa and his Turkish varlets; and made the Inhabitants feel the temper of his
biting sword, the houses the fire of his wrath, an object of his justice, of
their levity and rebellion.

In Derbent, the strong Castle Kastow is most observable, pleasant and every
way advantageous: that wall also which runs thence to Tephlys in Georgia,
built by Alexander the great (upon like occasion Offa drew his ditch to
terminate the valiant Brittans) called also Caucasiae vel Iberiae portae, is
one of the wonders of Asia; but at this day moath-eaten by iron toothed Time
and wars inconsiderate fury: return again.

Abdul-chery and the Queen Mother by this are so linkt in Cupyds chains, that
the Tattar finds himself double fettered: but after much parlee and fight they
took truce and grew so co-united, that the Sultans in Casbyn took notice of
it; but neither regarding her Majesty nor his youth, forgetting also that the
King intended to make him his son in law (no dishonor, being the great Cams
brother) all these neglected, they broke in, at such an unluckie time as they
were acting some inchastity; a sight so odious to the jealous Sultans, that
they first made him an Eunuch, and after that slew them both; concluding so,
Anno Heg. 958. the end and tryumphs of the Praecopensian Tartar.

After some stay in Cazbeen, our Ambassador to swiften his dispatch, visited
the Load-starre of Persia, the grand Favorite Mahomet Ally-beg; who entertained
him with a lofty look, and wished him to trust his secrets to his Cabinet,
wherein the mysteries of the whole state was locked, the King showing himself
unwilling to be further troubled. The Ambassador might in any other place than
Persia have returned him the Lie; but perceiving no remedy, and desiring to
haste home, imparted so much as he saw necessary. Touching Sir Robert
Sherley, he was to expect no other satisfaction; his enemy was dead, and at
the Caspian sea the King had sufficiently honored him: but to speak truly, the
Pot-shaugh had then no affection to him, when by reason of his age he was
disabled to do him further service; adding (but out of an Enemies mouth) that
all his Ambassies and messages to the Princes of Christendom were frivolous
and counterfeit: But when our Ambassador objected, he was in person there to
justify his authority, that he had the Kings Letter of credence to testify,
signed and stamped by the Shaugh himself; and that it had been a ridiculous
presumption in Sherley to have dared to contest with Abbas to his face, if he
had been an Impostor; the Favorite had not wherewith to answer, save that so
our Ambassador pleased to lend him that Phirman Sir Robert Sherley had brought
in his defense, he would return it him next day, with his Masters speech
concerning it.

A vexation it must needs be to my Lord Ambassador, to treat in this uncivil
sort by a malicious proxy: necessity forced it. Three days passed, ere
Mahomet-Ally-beg would vouchsafe to return the Letter, or give that
satisfaction he had promised; at length he came and told the Ambassador that
the King had looked upon it, had denied it to be his, and in a great rage had
burnt it; wishing Sir Robert Sherley would depart his Kingdom, because (old,
and as he thought) troublesome. It was in vain to challenge the pragmatique
Pagan in point of honor, nor knew he any recourse by justice to ease himself.
We all were verily persuaded, he never showed it to the King, nor had any way
enquired of him concerning it. The truth is, he had been bribed, but by whom,
is unnecessarie to speak of, it may be we did but conjecture it; yet no doubt,
Abbas was hereby too much defamed; his justice, and discretion, and courage
would have proceeded otherwise: besides, his protestation against Nogdibeg (as
we have noted) and Ebrahym Chan his son, not daring to show himself in
Court, till Synall Chan mediated his peace, (not that he, but his Father had
offended) made it as apparent as the Sun, that there was juggling: the truth
is, Sir Robert Sherley's old age and disability to serve the Persian, made them
slight and cashier his pension; even then when he most expected thanks and
other acknowledgements. But, such is the weak nature of man, especially when
they trust too much upon worldly Princes or any arm of flesh, that God is
angry: for thereby we rely too strongly upon secondarie helps, and contemn in
some sort, Gods gracious providence: hence came those discontents, nay that
arrow of Death that arrested him; the 13 of July (and in less than a fortnight
after our entering Casbyn) he gave this miserable and fickle world an ultimum
vale in his great clymacterick: and (wanting a fitter place of burial) we
intombed him under the threshold of his own house in this City, without much
ceremony. He was brother to two active Gentlemen Sir Anthony and Sir Thomas
Sherleys: a family not needing hyperboles. He was the greatest traveller in
his time, and no man had eaten more salt than he, none had more relisht the
mutabilities of Fortune. He had a heart as free as any man: his patience was
more Philosophical than his Intellect, having small acquaintance with the
Muses: many Cities he saw, many hills climbed over, and tasted of many several
waters; yet Athens, Parnassus, Hippocrene were strangers to him, his Notion
prompted him to other employments: he had tasted of sundry Princes favors: by
Rodulph the second he was created a Palatine of the Empire; and by Pope Paul.
3. an Earl of the sacred Palace of Lateran; from whom he had power to
legitimate the Indians; and from the Persian Monarch had enricht himself by
many meriting services: but obtained least (as Scipio, Caesar, Bellisarius,
etc.) when he best deserved, and most expected it. Rank me with those that
honor him: and in that he wants the gilded trophies and hyeroglyphicks of
honor to illustrate his wretched Sepulcher (his virtue can out-brave those
bubbles of vanity, Facta ducis vivunt: and till some will do it better)
accept this Vltima amoris expressio, from him, who so long traveld with him,
that so much honored him.

After land-sweats, and many a storm by Sea,
This hillock aged Sherleys rest must be.
He well had viewed Arms, men, and fashions strange
In diverse Lands. Desire so makes us range.
But turning course, whilst the Persian Tyrant he
With well dispatched charge, hoped glad would be;
See Fortunes scorn! under this Door he lies,
Who living, had no place to rest his eyes.
With what sad thoughts, man's mind long hopes do twine,
Learn by another loss, but not by thine.
Post exant latos terraeque marisque laboree,
Parvula Sherleyum nunc tenet urna senem.
Arma, viros, habitus, diversas nomine gentes
Contemplans, placuit sic novitatis Amor.
Deinde retro relegens cursu^ ma^data Tyranno
Vndique Persarum, dum placitura refert.
Ludibrium fati! tegitur sub limine tecti,
Viventi nullus cui modo limes erat.
Quam deplorandis spes long as inchoat ausis
Men's hominum; exemplo sed sine disce tuo.
Nor can it seem impertinent, if I add somewhat to the deserving Memory of his
Wife, that thrice worthy and undaunted Lady, Teresia; to this day constant to
our company. The Country she first drew breath in, is Cyrcashia, that which
Pomp. Mela called Sargacia; upon Palus Maeotis (adjoining Georgia) and 'twixt
the black and Caspian seas. Her birth was Christian; her degree Noble: by
accident she was mewd in the Haram of Persia, (10000 more he never sees:) was
of no kin to the King, but by his benevolence bestowed on this man she so long
lived with, she so much cherished.

At what time her beloved Lord lay dead, and she half dead through a long
dissentery, to comfort her (after the fashion of Persia) one John a Dutch man,
a Jew, a Painter; regarding neither her sex, her faith, her melancholy;
complots with Mamet-Ally-beg to undo her, by pretending a deep engagement her
husband was in to one Crole a Flemmin, and (knowing he was dead) bad her ask
him if it were not true; if he denied it, it should be forfeited. She might
have paid them by like Sophistry, that if he would affirm it, she would pay
it them. But, they haste to the Cawsee or Justice to attach her goods, and a
faithful honest Gentleman of our company has quick notice of it, Mr. Robert
Hedges by name, who hastens to her house and persuades her to make quick
conveyance: at which, the amazed Lady tears the Satin quilt she lay upon, and
with her feeble hands shows that pathetique virtue a stronger could not well
have bettered; and taking thence a Cabinet, some Jewels and rich Jems,
entreats that worthy Gentleman to safeguard them, till the danger was gone: he
readily obeyes, and is no sooner out of doors, when John the Boor enters with
supercilious looks, attended by some Pagan Sergeants, who (without much talk to
her, or pity to her distress) rifled about, broke-ope her Chests, and carried
away what was valuable or vendible; some rich Vests, costly Tarbants, and a
Dagger of great price; but finding no Jewels (such they had seen him wear,
and the Oestrich Feather also, which they had wooried in their Ostrich
appetite) they grew madded with shame, and made her Horses, Camells, and Asses
bear them company, not caring if the Lady starved. The Gentleman, so soon as
the sky was clear, returned, and besides his words of comfort, gladded her
heart in delivering her her Jewels again, of double value by that conquest:
without which good hap, I am persuaded her other fortune reached not to fifty
pound: a small revenue for so brave a Lady; and especially useful is money in
those uncharitable Regions, where women are made slaves to libidinous Pagans:
but God provided better for her, and (beyond our expectation) has placed her in
Rome, where I hear she now most happily enjoyes her self.

Like discontents, long conflict with flames of Adversity, and fourteen days
consuming of a deadly flux (it may be eating too much fruit, or sucking in too
much chil air on Taurus caused it) brought that religious Gentleman Sir
Dodmore Cotton the Ambassador, in the vigor of his age, to an immortal home:
the 23 of July (14 days after Sir Sobert Sherley) he bad us Adieu; our duty
commanding us to see him buried in the best sort we could. A dormitory we
obtained in Cazbyn amongst the Armenian graves, who also with their Priests
assisted the holy ceremony: his horse (which was led before) had a black
velvet Saddle on his back: his Coffin we covered with a crimson satin quilt
(black they account not of) lyned with purple Taffata; upon the horse were
laid, his Bible, Sword, and Hatt: Mr. Hedges, Mr. Stodoart, Mr. Emmery, Mr.
Molam, Dick th'Interpreter, and such others of his followers as were healthy,
attended the Corpse; and Doctor Goch a reverent Gentleman, buried him: where he
rests peaceably till the resurrection: And, although his singular virtue and
memory cannot perish (evehit ad Aethera virtus) yet I wish with all my heart,
he had a Monument; some more eminent memorial. He was I assure you, vivum
omnis virtutis exemplar; and I wish I could better express my love, than by
decking his hearse with this impolisht Epicaedium.

Lo! Noble Cotton far from home has found
A resting place in the Assyrian ground.
His countries Love, his Duty to his King
So far, a willing heart from home did bring.
Harden thy tenderness; no danger fear:
The way to heaven alike is every where.
En! procul a patriis situs est Cottonius oris,
Anglus in Assyria contmulatus humo.
prestitit haec Patriae, jussisque potentibus almi
Principis, obsequiis officiosus amor.
Excute mollitiem, quicunque pericula lentus
Causaris, Coelo par fit ubique via.
We have small joy to stay here any longer: three Ambassadors we have buried:
and though the Pot-shaugh seem to pity us (for as an assurance of his kind
respect, he sent each of us, two long coats or vests of cloth of gold) yet, he
may call himself a miserable man that hangs his welfare upon the smiles of
Persia. We are ready to be gone, but cannot go till Mahomet-Ally-beg blow us
away; and we danced long attendance ere he would give us a Phirman for our safe
travel, and that Letter we desired from the Persian King to our most gracious
Sovereign. At length we got it, wrapped up in a piece of cloth of gold, fastened
with a silken string, and sealed with a stamp of Arabic letters, after the mode
of Asia.

Our Phirman or Pasport of safety, sealed with a stamp of letters in Inck, take
thus interpreted.
THe high and mighty Star, whose Head is covered with the Sun; whose Motion
is comparable to the highest Fyrmament; whose Imperial Majesty is come from
Asharaph, and has dispatched the Lord Ambassador of the English King, etc. The
Command of the great King is this; That his Followers be conducted from our
Palace of Casbyn to Saway, and by the Daraguod of Saway to the City of Coom,
and by the Sultan of Coom to the City of Cashan, etc. Through all my
Territories, fail not my command. I also command them a safe and peaceable
travel.

From Casbyn POT-SHAVV ABBAS.
August. An. Dom. 1628. Asfendermed-maw. Hegira. 1008.

So, after thirty days stay in Cazbyn, about the midst of July we departed.
But ere we go far, let us bid farewell to Mahomet-Ally-beg our small friend;
and according to his worth let others know him. His birthplace is Parthia (from
Parah to fructify,) his Almuten was calculated, the aspects found happy; If
from a Costermonger to be next the King may be called happy: and in him the
matchavillyan motto was approved, a dram of good fortune is better than a pound
of virtue. In that happy minute of all minutes, Abbas by accident cast his eye
upon him; a magic infusion it had it seems, for from the Apple-basket, he is
roab'd in gold, and quickly made the Magnet of Persia; his yearly revenue at
our being there, I heard by many men estimated a hundred and forty thousand
pounds sterlin: and well may be, not any Mirza, Cawn, Sultan, nor Beglerbeg
that depended upon the Pot-shaughs smiles, but in an awful complement, made
him their Anchor by some annual piscash, bribe, or other: his presence was
very comely, and taking; of a sweet countenance, made amiable by many
complementall smiles: he is of a big full body; large eyes and nose; and huge
mustachoes: was at this time aged forty, a third part of which he had been
Fortunes minion. But no sooner was old Abbas by bold death struck from the
helm of Persia; and young Soffy his Grand-sonne made the royal Stear-man, but
his supercilious glances grew humbled, yea, his dazeling splendour (eclipst in
the setting of his Master) becomes quickly darkened: his late pride and avarice
heaped all men's contempt upon him, in so much as none now but dares to brand
him with becoming Epethites; yea, his estate so vast that it threatened to
press him to eternal confusion. Of all others, the Shyrazian Dynast darted him
frowns of death; but (non semper feriet, quodcunque minabitur arcus) a black
mist of unexpected destruction fuming from young Soffees brows (of the right
pedigree) sends poor Emangoly to an untimely grave, and the Beglerbeg his
gallant son to bear him company: neither to be descended of loyal and
Princely Syres; to have Abbas his oath of safety; to be Protector of Persia
during the nonage of the Infant King; to have famoused the crown by many
heroic services; nor to be Emangoly-cawn, could repel the deadly shaft of
jealosie: but in the Meridian of his course and glory, in the extreme of his
hopes, and when so long a farewell was least thought on; he and his are hewed
down; prophesied of by that Satyric Poet. Ad generum Cereris sine caede and
vulnere pauci discendunt Tyranni, his great pride, his infamous cruelty at
Ormus and Arabia, crying out for justice against him. Whiles Mahomet-Ally-beg
shakes off his rags of discontent, and a fresh ingratiates himself; at this
day moving in a sphere of content and purest metal. A word of Shaugh-Abbas
also.

Abbas the Persian Emperor, was of low stature, (a Giant in policy) his aspect
quick, his eyes small and flaming, and without any palpebrae or hair over
them: he had a low forehead; a high and hawked nose; a sharp chin; and after
the mode of Persia, beardlesse; his mustachoes were exceeding long, and thick,
and turned downwards. He was born in the year of Mahomet 938, King of Hery 50
years, Emperor of Persia etc 43; dyed aged 70; in the year of our account
1628, of their Era 1008, in Cazbeen. His heart, his bowels, his carcass,
were parted and buried in Ally-Mosched (near Cufa,) in Cazbyn, in Ardaveel, at
Coom some say, few know the certainty.

(...) Abbas King of Persia


The Eastern Monarchs at this day continue the custom of their ancient
predicessors; who from time to time delighted more in Epethites of virtue, than
in any Titles of Kingdoms or Provinces. They accounted it an effeminate
vainglory to stuff their letters, or when they sent their Ambassadors abroad
to foreign Potentates to guild their greatness by accumulation of Names: and
in which respect, the German Emperor got little in that late Letter he sent to
Abbas, the beginning of which was so filled with Titles and members of his
Empire, that after he had heard half a dozen of them read, he had no patience
to stay the reading of the rest, but departed in anger; as finding those no way
material to his business. Instead of them, these Persian Kings, and other
great ones of Asia, exceed (with no less prolixity) in adorning their Letters
and dispatches with hyperboles of their resemblance to the Sun; their
affinity to the Stars: and with the sweetest and rarest of fruits, flowers,
gems, etc. As also of wise, famous, sweet, victorious, merciful, just,
beautiful, courageous, etc. Howbeit, the Titles of the Persian Monarch may be
these:

1 Pharsy, 2 Arac, 3 Shervan, 4 Sablestan, 5 Candahor, 6 Tocharistan, 7 Erey, 8
Zagathai, 9 Mozendram, 10 Turquestan, 11 Syr^ian, 12 Phargan, 13 Thalecan, 14
Maurenahar, 15 Kalsistan, 16 Sigistan, 17 Maqueron, 18 Istigiaz, 19 Kyrman, 20
Laristan, 21 Synde, 22 Armussa, 23 Larr, 24 Iaziry, 25 Chusistan, 26 Ajaman, 27
Diarbeck, 28 Gorge 29 Armeny, 30 Karkash, 31 Vaspracan, 32 Aramnoh, 33 Adozar,
34 ^owrachow, 35 Iarvall, 36 Deriob-korasan, 37 Deriob-Farsee, 38 Phrat, 39
Diglan, 40 Arass, 41 Synde.
ABBAS Emperor or Pot-shaw of 1 Persia, 2 Parthia, 3 Media, 4 Bactria, 5
Ortispana, 6 Chorasan, 7 and Harya; King over the Ouzbeg 8 Tattar, 9 Hyrcania,
10 Draconia, 11 Evergeta, 12 Parmenia, 13 Hydaspia, 14 Sogdiana, 15 Paropamisa,
16 Drangiana, 17 Aracbosia, 18 Mergiana, 19 Carmania, 20 Gedrosia, and as far
as the stately river 21 Indus. Sultan of 22 Ormus, 23 Chorra, 24 Arabia, 25
Susiana, 26 Chaldaea, 27 Mesopotamia, 28 Georgia, 29 Armenia, 30 Iberia, 31
Mengrellia. Mirza or Prince of the Imperious Mountains of 32 Ararat, 33 Taurus,
34 Caucasus, and 35 Periardo. Commander of all creatures from the 36 Caspian
Sea, to the 37 Gulf of Persia: Lord of the four rivers of Paradize, 38
Euphrates, 39 Tigris, 40 Araxis and 41 Indus: Of true descent from King
Mortis-Ally: Governor of all Sultans, Emperor of Mussulmen; Bud of honor,
Myrrour of virtue, Rose of delight, etc.

And although to the modest reader a great deal of Ostentation may appear in
these blustering Titles and Epithites, yet will they seem as nothing if we
parallel them with the Kings of old, and at this day in other places. That of
Cyrus may be excused; recorded by Ezra. An Mun.. 3419. The Lord God of Heaven,
has given me all the Kingdoms of the earth. Domitian (like Pharaoh, proudly
scoffing, who is the Lord?) in all his proclamations begun thus: I am your Lord
God Domitian, (the God of Flies:) Caligula wrote himself, Deus opt. max. and
Jupiter Latialis. If he could have satisfied his Atheism with the title of an
earthly God or of Jove, Menander and Tzetza had defended him, saying from
Homer, Rex est viva Dei imago in terris, and Reges omnes olim vocarunt Jove's.
Sapores son to Misdates the Persian Monark, Anno Domini 315, began his letter
to godly Constantius the Emperor in this sort (as is in lib. 17. Marcellini) I
Sapores, King of Kings, equal to the Stars, and brother to the Sun and
Moon. Cozrhoes also ( Ormisdaes son) in the year of grace 620 (the first of
the Mahomitan account) scorning those of Deus terrhenus, or of homo a Deo
secundus, blows himself up in this swelling proem to Moritius the unhappy
Emperor: I Chozroe! great King of Kings, Lord of Lords, Ruler of Nations,
Prince of peace, salvation of men; among gods, a man good and ever; among men,
a God most glorious: the great Conqueror, arising with the Sun, giving luster
to the night, a Hero in descent: from which affected pride, the idolatrous
slaves begun to worship him, and to clamor out Tu es nostra salus, and in te
credimus: and hence the Poet to illustrate his Bees sings thus of them.

Preterea Regem non sic Aegyptus and ingens
Lydia, nec populi Parthorum, aut Medus Hydaspes
Observant, etc.
Egypt nor Lydia do their Kings obey
Nor Medes nor Parthians half so much as they.
From their Examples other Pagans in these our times arrogate no less
supereminency in Titles. Solomon T'saccus (that wrathful Turq', thus entitled
his wormsmeat) King of Kings (of slaves he should say) Lord of Lords, most
huge Emperor of Constable. and Trepiz. Ruler of Europe, Afriq, and Asia: Commander
of the Ocean (of a few rotten boats he meant) Conqueror of Assyria, Arabia,
etc. And Amurat his Grandson thus, God of the Earth, Captain of the Universe,
most sacred Angel, Mohumets beloved, etc. At length the homebred Chyna cries
roast-meat but the other day sending his silly Ambassador to Abbas with a witty
Epistle, thus directed, To his slave, the Sophy of Persia, th'undanted Emperor
of the whole world (a well read man) sends greeting: Neither the Ambassadors
bragges that his Master had six hundred great Cities, two thousand walled
Towns, a thousand impregnable Castles, sixty millions of slaves, and a hundred
and twenty thousand millions of crowns yearly revenue, could make his King
admired, or privilege himself from durty welcome, the haughty Persian
spurning him back again, to assure his Master they neither believed him to be
The beauty of the whole Earth, nor (as he also writes himself) heir apparent
to the glorious Sun. His next neighbor and he are at odds for Title, the
Tattar I mean (vulgarly the great Cham) a Came indeed in his mistaken
genealogy: for forgetting that his great Grandsyre Cingis Cham was a
blacksmith, he proclaims himself Sun to the highest God, and quintessence of
the purest spirit: and thence is engendered that frantic custom of his, every
day after dinner to have his Herald by sound of Trumpet, echo out to all other
Kings and Potentates of the World, that he has dined, and they have leave to
go to dinner: a notable favor if they have not dyn'd before him: what think
you of the Peguan Monark, of him of Mattacala, and Manicongo, that nourish so
good a conceit of their radiant beauty and Majesty, that Ambassadors and others
are commanded (when they have business) to creep like worms, and to hide their
faces, and grovell on the ground, lest their eyes be forfeited in daring to
gaze on so much luster: or of that brave Monomotaphan, that seldom goes abroad
or shows himself, in compassion to his people, lest they should be struck
blind in eying him, a curtain reverberats the beams that issue from his face
of glory; they are permitted to use their ears to admire his champs when he
eat, and the gulps when he drinks, but they pay soundly for it, at every gulp
and cough the coughs sometimes you think of purpose) they shout for joy and by
continued clamours not only revive Stentor but make the whole City ring again.
Alas good Prester-Iohn (the Neguz they call him) ostentation tickles thee; have
thou never read Saint Cypian ad Quir. In nullo gloriandum est, nam nostrum
nihil est: for want of such helps thou deck'st thy Myter with fifteen
provincial Titles, and that thou art the head of the Church; the favorite of
God, the pillar of Faith; issued from Solomon, David Indah, and Abraham; Syons
prop, extract from the Virgins hand, son of Saint Peter and Saint Paul by the
spirit, of Nahu by the flesh; in these more vagrant, than thy other restless
motions: and in vain do thou seclude thy self from view of man by a thin
lawne, since in thy welling impostumes thy Portraict is discovered; a Canker
spreading North (...) after the other way, to that other kind of Christian, by
name Inanowich a tyrannick Muscovite, whose Coronation Anno Domini 1584 was
celebrated with wonderful magnificence, besides his furrs loading himself two
and thirty bubbles ostentation. Welfare Aurelius, Saladyn, and Tamberlane,
Heroes as great, as victorious, and as terrible to the world as any of these
monsters we have named; who all their lives detested flattery, blushed at their
praises, and thought themselves unworthy any fastidous Epethites, at their
burialls causing their wynding-sheet to be displayed as an Epitome of all they
merited; and this a high and often proclaimed, Pulvis and Vmbra sumus, fumus,
fuimus, etc.

We left Cazbyn at ten at night, thereby avoiding Sol's too much warmth; and at
his first discovery from the Antipodes, got into Perissophoon; a small Town,
but memorable in the sweet cool water we had there to quench our thirst with;
an Element more useful than fire, in Sunburned Asia. Our next Manzeil was at
Asaph, at Begun our next, observable in a royal Carvans-raw or Hospital of
charity, erected at the cost and care of Tahamas late King of Persia: and did
the water (too brackish and unhealthy there) but correspond with other
delights, it might better merit commendation. To Saway we got next night, a
Town both great and fruitful; but that it is the ruin of old Tygranocerta
(as Bonacciolus guesses at) I shall never credit: that it was Messabatha, or
Artacana I more easily believe it. The Pole is here raised 35 degrees, 7
minutes; a City I may call it: It pleasantly upon a rising hill gives ground to
twelve hundred houses, a sweet rivolet from Baronta refreshing it; from which
and the peoples industry, the thankful earth retributes a Tribute in variety
of choice fruits, and grain, as Wheat, Rice, Barley, Figs, Pomgranads, Olives,
and Honey; the seven, the promised land in the 8 Deuteronomy. 8. is commended for: but
whether it be the relict of Vologocerta built by Vologeses the Parthian I know
not; I am sure of this, no place I ever came in more delighted me for Aeriall
music: of all the Quire the Nightingale twenty together (here called Bulbulls)
clayming the pre-eminence. And after so much melancholy, with Ovid let me chirp
for company.

Scribere me voces avium Phylomela coegit,
Quae cantu cuncta sexuperat volucres.
Duleis amica veni! noctis solatia praestans,
Inter aves eteanim nulla tibi similis,
Tu phylomela potes vocum discrimina mill,
Mill potis vatios ipsa reserit modos.
Nam quamvis aliae volucres modulamina tentent,
Nulla potest modulis aequidare tuis.
Insuper est avium spatiis garrire diurnis,
Tu cantare simul nocte dieque potes.
I must salute the curious Phylomel,
Which all the birds in singing does excel.
Come pretty friend! my solace in the night,
In all the Grove I find no such delight.
A Thousand warbling Notes thy throat displayes,
Which thy sweet music chants as many ways.
The vulgar birds may strive to equal thee,
Yet never can attain like harmony.
Their mirth does last no longer than the day,
But thine does chase the silent night away.
Our next nights travel was over large plains, elevated in many parts by
artificial mounts, cut into many trenches; showing many famous ruins of
passed wars. Notable no doubt in many gallant skirmishes and most memorable
in Luoullus his captivating Methridates that learned King of Pontus; but what
that grand Epicure fortunatly got, Marc' Crassus the most covetous and richest
Roman lost, after his impidus sacrilege at Jerusalem, ravishing thence the
holy relics, and so much treasure as out-valued six Tun of gold, puffed up with
so much wealth, and his victories amongst the Jews, resolves with his fifty
thousand men to forage Persia, but Herodes (son of Methridat the third)
courageously opposes him, cuts his Army in pieces, takes his baggage, and the
avaritious Consul by Spurnia the General is made his prisoner; and to glut his
thirst (divine vengeance so ordering) as Tomyris did to Cyrus, the Parth'
served Crassus so; forcing him to quaffe, health to death, in pouring down his
throat molten gold, and by which Triumph the Romans power was exterminate in
Parthia 53 years before the birth of Christ, yet, long the Romans sorrowed
not, for Mark Antony five years after by his General, affronted them with
better success: the Parthians fight nor flight at that time helped them, their
Prince Pacorus by death disminating them: affrighted in greater measure, when
Phraortes ( Mezentis, some name the parricide) deposed the valiant Orodes from
crown and life, treason (the Devils virtue) perpetrating that, the Romans
could not do by generous conflict. Antony attempts revenge and conquest; but
adverse luck made him thrive in neither. Augustus (in whose reign our blessed
Savior became flesh, and Ianus Temple Was opened) did by treaty what his
predecessors could not do by force; prevailing with Phraortes to veil bonet to
the Romans sparkling Dyadem. But 230 years after, one Artaxerxes a native
Persian, and royally descended, shakes off that loathed servitude, not only
out-braving the Roman, but by a three days fight and victory over Artabanus,
revived the Persian title and name, Parthia for above 500 years formerly
monarchizing. Alexander Severus (from Julius Caesar the 24 Emperor) succeeded
Heliogahalus or Bassianus the lustful, and receives a pragmatick letter from
the new King to re-deliver what anciently adorned the crown of Persia. It
repugn'd the Roman Majesty, and thereupon marches to give an account, but in
careless passing over Euphrates, is so suddenly charged by Artaxerxes, that
he is routed shamefully; his bad luck not ending there, for Maximinus the
Thracian bereaved him of his Empire, the German villains of his life; his
virtuous mother Mammaea ( Origens proselite) associating in his death, as she
had in glory formerly. Licinius Valerianus surnamed Colobus; under-took to rule
the Empire; and took upon him to overruled the rising Persian: but his big
words, nor great Army could not do what a Supreme Judge had decreed otherwise;
for Sapores with an undaunted company denies him entrance, and in the trial
the Romans were miserably defeated, and which was worse, Valerian himself is
imprisoned, and to his dying day (to the astonishment of all proud Tyrants)
made a footstool for Sapores to tread upon, whenever he mounted: the
Justice of Almighty God herein was singularly manifest, by compensating the
cruel Emperor in this odious servitude, for his intolerable pride and rigor
against the innocent Christians, many thousands of whom he martyred, amongst
whom Saint Lawrence cruelly broyled upon a gridiron. But we have wandered too
far in reviving the memory of Parthia: by this we are entered Coom* where we
refresht our scorched and wearied bodies three days: In which time we could
not choose but gather something.

COOM, (in the latitude of 34 degrees 40 minutes) is a City of good note, in
Parthia; placed in the midway 'twixt those two royal Cities, Cazbyn and
Spawhawn. It is situate in an ample and fair sandy plain, and yields every
way an exact horizon. Coom, gives place to no other Town in Persia for
antiquity; the ruins appearing at this day, gain some belief in the
inhabitants, whose common saying is, it was once comparable to Babylon. She has
varied into many several names: the first I meet with is Gauna, it may be
that which some call Guriana; erroniously if so, since Guriana has 37 degrees;
and Coom not 35. Arbacta after that (from Arbaces, who in the year after Adam
3146 tore asunder the Assyrian Dyadem, by overture of that monster Sardanapalus
the thirty sixth Monarch of the world from Ninus) but by Diodore and Ptolomy,
Coama: And by her latitude and antiquity, seems to me to have been
Hecatompylon, rather than Spawhawn, whose old name was Aspa, and from which
she never wholly varied; and at this day (the latitude somewhat differing)
changing no less in the ill pronunciation of diverse men; Coim some call it,
Kom and Kome others: the people there name it Koom. A pleasant, fruitful, and
salubrious place it is, I can assure you: shaken with no great winds, clouded
with no moist foggs, nor so much parcht by flaming Sol, but can find cool
refrigerating breezes breathing favorably each morn and evening to refresh
it. In the Suns ambition it has excellent houses to lenifie his beams, and
umbrellaes in their orchards to shade and taste their delicious fruits in, in
this City infinity abounding, (owing their mellowing to a sweet rivolet, that
streams in a silver current from tke Coronian or Acro-cerawnian hills,) and
grapes also, good and in plenty; excellent Pomgranads, Mellons of both kinds,
Pomcytrons, Apricocks, Plums, Peaches, Pears, Pistachoes, Almonds, Apples,
Quinces, Cherryes, Figs, wall-Nuts, small-Nuts, Berryes, and the best
Wheat-bread in Persia, Gumbazellello excepted: the Peach or Malae Persica is
had here; a fruit and leaf so much resembling man's heart and tongue, that the
Aegyptick Priests dedicated it unto their greatest Goddess Isis as the truest
Hyerogliphick or symbol of unfeigned affection. Coom has two thousand houses,
most of them of more than common structure; well built, well-form'd, well
furnished; the streets are spacious, the Buzzar beautiful, the Mosque is
famous; made venerable, and richly adorned by enshrining the rotten carcass of
once amiable Fatyma, Mortis-Ally's wife, and sole heir to Mahomet the Prophet
of all Moorish Mussulmen. The Temple is round, of epirotiq' form; the Tomb is
raised three yards high, and covered with velvit; the ascent is by three or
four steps of refined silver.

Such time as Tamberlang the victorious Tattar (so I may well style him; since
in eight years he conquered more than the warlike Romans could in eight
hundred) returned laden with spoil and majestic triumph, having hammered the
brazen face of the Turkish bravery An. Dom. 1397, Heg. 777, this poor Coom
parched (among many others) in the insufferable heat of his incensed fury; not
from any eye of rage or envy he darted at him, but from that simple affront
Hoharo-mirza (called also B'heder-cawn) spurred on by jealousy, put upon the
triumphant Tattar; a complement so much mistaken, that loss both of life and
Crown were thereby forfeited, making many men and Towns concomitate his
misery; this place es^ecially (which but for the Ardaveilyan Syet requesting
mercy, and for Fatyma's Sepulcher) had been levelled with the lowly earth,
ploughed up and salted: but in the sable weed she now is apparelled, she may
sigh with melancholy Statius. -- Death is the common friend
to all: for what ere yet begun shall end.
Quicquid habet Ortus finem timet, ibimus omnes
Ibimus. --
From Coom we rode to Zenzen; and thence to Cashan, a gallant City; from Coom
six and thirty miles: the way was easy and plain, but somewhat sandy.

CASHAN, (where the Artique elevation is 34 degrees, 7 minutes: longit. 86
degrees.) is the second Town in Parthya for all sorts of praises; Spawhawn is her
Metropolis, whence she is distant North, sixty English miles; and from Cazbyn
South two hundred and ten, or there-abouts. Whence the name derives it self,
the illiterat Cashanians could not tell; we must therefore search the dim
leaves of Time oblitterated by oblivion. I know not whether it be that old
Ambrodax in many old Authors famoused; the position not name makes me guess
it. I once thought it was Ctesiphon, the best seat of the Arsacidae; but I now
perceive Ptolomy states that Town 'twixt Seleucia and Babylon: more probably
it may be that Tigranocerta recorded by Straho in his Chorography, than that
Saway is it, after Bonacciolus. The name Cashan I imagine is borrowed either
from Cushan, in the Syriack signifying heat or blackness: or from Cassan-Mirza
son to Hocen son of Ally: or from Shaw-Cashan (son to Axan begot by
Tangrolipix Anno Heg. 582 of our account 1202,) subjected by the great Cham: or
(which best pleases me) from Vsan-Cashan the Armenian ( Acen or Cassan-beg some
call him) who in the year of our Lord 1470, of Mahomets hegira or flight from
Mecca 850, vanquished Malaoncres (called Abdulla also) the last of Tamerlangs
Progeny ruling Persia.

Cashan at this day, is a great and lovely City; well seated, well built, well
peopled: over-topt by no hill, unseasoned by no marshes, watered by no great
stream; which augments the heat, chiefly when Sol resides in Cancer: which
rages there in no less violence is Scorpio; not that in the Zodiac; but real
stinging Scorpions, which in great numbers engender here. It is a little
Serpent (a finger long) but of great terror in the sting, inflaming such they
prick with their envenomed Arrow so highly that some die, none avoid madness a
whole day; and as it was said of another Vna eademque manus fert vulnus
opemque: so to such as are stung by Scorpions is no such remedy as by the oil
of Scorpions to be cured.

The Serpents head joined to the wounded part,
Fitly is said to heal the infected smart.
Like Telaphus cured by Achilles dart.
Quae nocuit serpens, fertur caput illius apt
Vulneribus jungi, sanat quae sauciat ipsa.
Vt Larissaea curatus Telaphus hasta.
And from hence grows that much used Persian adage and curse, May a Scorpion
of Cashan sting thee. But which is more remarkable, they say it, we found it
true (some of them creeping into our Ruggs as we slept) they never hurt a
stranger.

Cashan is not less than York or Norwich, above four thousand families are
accounted in her: the houses are fairly built, the streets be large and comely;
the Mosqus and Hummums are curiously painted and ceruleated, with a feigned
Turquoise: the Buzzar is spacious and uniforme; furnished with Silks, Damasks,
rich Carpets, Sattens, and cloth of gold; no part of the Persian Monarchy
shows better, or more variety, nor a people more exactly industrious. The
gardens, and fruits, and corn, are by the eleborat Tymariots made to
fructify, and being cultivated retribute a gainful acknowledgement. The
Carravans-raw in this City is an inimitable (if not so, an unparaleld) Arch
Fabric, by many degrees preceding all Carravans-raws in Persia; for this is
able to lodge the Court of the greatest Potentate in Asia: but built by Abbas
for Travelers to repose in gratis, to show the world he joyed in some act of
charity: the whole building is grounded with Marble, six foot high; the residue
is brick are fied in the Sun, varnisht and colored with knots and fancies of
Arabic characters, in azure, red, and white, in oil, after the common mode of
Persia. It is a perfect quadrant; each angle is from one another two hundred
paces, the whole eight hundred: in the umbelique or mid-part of this spacious
Court is a quadrangular Tanck or Pond filled (by an Aquae-duct) with
chrystallin water: this royal Inn, is also circum-volv'd with such fragrant
and spacious gardens as rather exceed than want to display the founders
magnificence: more, I have not to denotate, save that many several
conjectures, by many several learned men and Antiquaries, have passed, whence
the Magi or wise men came, that presented our blessed Savior with their
offerings, and were without doubt the first fruits, and called of the Gentiles:
and albeit called Magi (or deeply read in Nature) yet no question, they were
illuminated and waited the accomplishment of that Prophecy of Balaam, in 24
Number, 17. There shall come a Star out of Jacob and a Scepter shall rise out of
Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab and destroy the children of Seth.
The Magi of Persia.
They gathered, I say, more from this of their Prophet than any of their own
Astrologick observations. That they were Gentiles is apparent; that they came
from the East undeniable: but from what City or Province, very disputable;
though not very necessary. The word Magus is most proper to Persia; Persia is
East from Bethlehem. And many are of opinion they came from hence or Shushan,
where then flourisht a famous Academy. The people here have such a Tradition,
that hence went those three wise men or Kings, which some say were entombed in
Cullen: but few are of this opinion: Some say they came from Saba or Sheba in
Sabea or Arabia, from Aethiopia, South; deceived in Cush, Aethiops, but first
in Araby. From Babylon some think they came; from Shushan some suppose; from
Ormus some guess, as likely as it was Paradise: from Ceyloon, from Tabropan,
from any place, no matter where; since the sacred penmen have been silent in
it. But if you please to trust a Friar, Friar Odoric of Friuli by name, Cashan
was it. Yet I tie not my belief to such impertinencies. Let me rather busy my
brains in quest of what a Magus was, since Simon Magus made the name odious
and Magical; and under which Title many Witches, Sorcerers, Inchanters, Hydro
and Pyro-mantiques, and other Diaboliques have cloakt their trumperies and
ungodliness. The name Magi therefore was a peculiar Epethite in Persia, in old
times given to such as were learned: such as in other Languages and Nations are
called Idiots, Philosophers, Gymnosophists, Brachmans, Chaldaeans, Druides, and
Bardhs; all of them excellently studious in Natures best parts and virtues.
Magus (says Suidas) is a derivative from Magusaeus, a relative to Magog son of
Iapheth, son of Noah. Peucerus lib. de divinit. thus Prae-erant Magi religioni
Persicae, ut in populo Dei Levitae, studiisque verae Philo-sophiae erant
dediti; nec quisquam rex Persarum poterat esse, qui non antea Magorum
disciplinam scientiamque percepisset etc. Common custom (says St. Hierom)
conceits Magitians to be Inchanters, but falsely, for (says Peter Martyr also)
by the name Magi, were understand wise and honest men: by which restomonialls
we see they were no way to be scandalized, nor such as now adays Impostors
term themselves. They were also thus called, from their laborious scrutinies
and co^templations into hidden causes: for by experience in Astronomy they not
only bettered the theory but practick part, by observing the motion of the
heavens, and influence of the stars; from whence they divined notable events
in Nature, earthquakes, inundations, eclipses, heat, mutations, etc. and also
bettered their agriculture, and alternated the earths unaptnesse to frucifie:
whereby also by a meditation of the wonderful order, Simmetry, and providence
by which each creature was made and governed, they came to magnify the
Creator, the God of Nature. And from their diving into the occult causes of
Nature, were called Magical, though no other than a connection of agents and
patients in Nature, respecting one another; by learned men made to produce such
effects as to such as are ignorant of their causes seem strange and
wonderful, Of such hear Mantuan.

A Persian Mage he called is
Who knows Herbs, Stars and Deities.
All three learnt in Persepolus.
Ille penes Persas Magus est, qui sydera novit,
Qui sciat herbarum vires, cultusque Deorum.
Persepolis facit ista Magos, prudentia triplex.
Leaving these, and Cashan: on the 23 of August, we made Bizdebode our
Manzeil, 18 miles off. Thence we rode to Natane or Taken, where Darius Anno M.
3635. breath his last by the treacherous hands of Bessus the perfidious
Bactrian. The Lodge here as ashamed of such a memory, seems to hide itself
'twixt two lofty hills, from the eye of heaven: but from whose tops we might
discern large vallyes thick sown with Villages, and waterd in many
circum-gyrings. Thirty miles our last nights travel was; and next night we got
to Reig, more than that it was one and twenty miles from Natan, not worth the
memorizing: unless you will accept its distance from Spahawn, nine English
miles or three farsangs. And from Casbyn 260 or thereupon. And where I will
give over a Diary, desiring no longer to defraud thy patience. For to Corranda,
Deacow, Miscarroon, Corryn, Laccary, Corbet, Nazareils, Sabber-cawn, to Buldat
thou come to Bagdat; 130 farsangs distant. Others from Spawhawn go thus, to
Golpichan forty forsangs, to Tossarchan forty, to Mando fifty, Hemmomezter
and Baroe, to Babylon fourteen more, in all 144 leagues, a way more easy but
of greater distance. Of which City, as it was and is, few lines may be
remembered.

BABYLON, in Caldaea (or Keldan as now named) has its denomination from that
memorable confusion of Languages God Almighty ordained to check the insolent
pride of Nymrod and his confederates, intending to raise up such a pile as
should secure them from a second deluge, affrighted by that first Cataclysme
130 years before, and from Adams creation 1788. 2180 years before the
incarnation of our Savior; and admirable it is to consider what multitudes of
men were in the world in seven-score years, increasing from eight persons,
those that issued from the Ark upon Ararat in Armenia. This building was
hastened by five hundred thousand men, in few years raising it from its basis
(which was nine miles about) to above five thousand paces into the sky (whence
Ovid fabled his Giants wars) Affectasseferunt regnum
Coeleste Gyant^s,
Altaque congestos struxisse
ad sydera Montes.
The heavens looked pale with wonder to be behold,
With what attempts and rage Giants bold
Sought to affront the gods, by raising high
Mount upon mount, to inhabit in the sky.
intending no doubt to peep into heaven. But he that sits above, and accounts
the best of man's power and policy but mere weakness and folly, not only
distracted their design, but severed them into seventie Companies, sending
them seventie ways to better employments: from one tongue, the Hebrew (
Goropius dreamt it was Dutch) ordaining seventy other Languages.

But though the Tower of Babel stood for ever unfinished (albeit Alexander the
great by some months labor in vain of 100000 men (made to desist by strange
diseases and affrights) thought to have finished it) the City notwithstanding
swelled to a prodigious greatness: and though Arphaxad (son of Sem son of
Noah) begun to inhabit in this vale of Shynaear, yet Nimrod (son of Cush, or
Jupiter Belus son of Came, or Jupiter Hamon the accursed son of Noah)
wrested it from his other kindred, yea behaved himself so proudly amongst his
brethren, that to gratify his memory they deified him by name of Sudormyn, by
the Romans converted into Saturn. Nimrod lived six and fifty years after the
beginning of Babell; he at last gave way to Death, and was buried I know not
where, some say at this place, some say at Persepolis. Idolatry was soon
hatched in the world; Nimrods successors strove to make their hellish
progenitors earthly gods: for after Ninus his son had erected many Temples to
put his Grandsires Images in, he attracted infinite people to inhabit there; by
whose labors he not only agrandiz'd this City, but by their helps grew to
tyrannize in the world, and to augment his Empire; whence, he is accounted the
first that incroacht on others rights to satiate his ambition: and as he is
named the first Emperor of the earth, so none died so miserably; for his wife
Semiramys detruded him into prison: where she made him die a hateful death,
such as became a monster. The Virago Queen sat confidently at the helm, and
steered through an Ocean of storms and miraculous passages; till burning in
flames of lust, in stead of embraces, hersonne Nynias (thought Amraphel and
Mars) to revenge his Fathers death, slew her: but by that murder became mad;
and in that frenzy marched against King Cancasus ( Iaphets great grandson)
and subdued him: howbeit he himself was so served by Abraham, such time as he
rescued his Nephew Lot, captivated by Arioch, Tydal, and Chedorlaomer.
Semyramis to eternize her memory fought many brave Combats, and returned often
times victorious; she subjected many Kings, subjugated many Provinces, built
many famous Castles, Cities and Gardens; the ruins of some of them are in
Medya, to this hour remaining. We will confine her into Babylon: where she
erected two inimitable Palaces; one, was at the East end, th'orher, at the
West; the first extended thirty, the other sixty furlongs; both were immured
with walls of stupendous height and architecture; but excelling those, she
built another in the heart or center of Babylon, which she dedicated to Cush or
Jupiter Belus; the shape whereof was of four equilateralls or sides; from
every angle were one thousand, in all four thousand paces: 'twas circled with
a thick and towering wall; entered by four gates of polisht brass: in midst,
was elevated a strong and stately Tower, upon which, eight other Towers rose
one upon another, far above the middle region: whence (from a continued
serenity of the sky) the Priests or Caldaean Astrologers precisely marked the
planetary motions (and if possible, to hear their rolling harmony;) for being
above the clouds, they delighted to regard the exact light and magnitude of the
Stars; their heliacall, acronicall, matutine, and vespertine motions, rising
and falling; Apollo's progress, the constellations; aspects, influences, and
the like: and at the top of all, a Turret inricht with three great golden
Images or Statuas, representing Jupiter, Ops, and Juno, i. e. her father in
law, her husband Ninny, and her self; continuing there in divine esteem for
many ages; and whereto (says Herodatus) in way of sacrifice, was yearly
consumed a hundred thousand Talents in franc-incense: till Cyrus An. Mun. 3432.
by drayning Euphrates into other channells, entered this Epitome of the world
and ransackt her bravery.

But I have not spoken all. Semyramis also circled this gallant City with a
wall, which in after ages was called a wonder; some say Nabuchadonozar made it,
but an ancient Poet sings otherwise.

Semyramis built Persian Babylon.
Persarum statuit Babylona Semyramis Vrbem.
The circuit of which Wall was (after Solynus) threescore miles English, or as
he reckons it, four hundred and eighty furlongs. Diodorus Siculus computes
three hundred and sixty five, each day in the year chalenging a furlong.
Quintus Curtius numbers three hundred fifty and eight, differing in his
Arithmetic but seven furlongs. The compass I admire at, but am amazed at the
height and spissitude; two hundred cubits high it was, and fifty cubits thick;
so thick and spacious, that at the top six Chariots might take the air,
driving together abrest, not one before another. Nynus and Semyramis begun it
bravely, yet Nabuchadnezzer and Nytocris his wife (daughter of Aliattes)
beautified it, in a stupid admiration crying out, Is not this great Babel that
I have built? a boast so much offending the sacred Majesty of God, that he
rent the Kingdom from that proud Assyrian, and made him a companion for beasts
and birds, to the astonishment of all such Atheists. Cyrus by one battle at
Borsippa, prostrated it and wreathed his Persian brow with that Monarchic
Dyadem, Anno Mundi 3432, seventeen years after the captivity of Judah and
Israel by Nabuzaradan his Liefetenant; five hundred and fifty two years before
the birth of our Savior: after which, it was often vassaled. Seventy nine
years after, Anno Mundi 3511 Artaxerxes Longimanus ruling Persia, the Prophet
Ezdras went hence to rebuild the Temple at Jerusalem, and thirteen years
after that was seconded by Nehemiah from Shushan. The victorious Macedonian
conquered it, Anno Mun. 3633, at which time (as Aristotle reports) one part of
the City knew not in three days after, that the enemy had entered it: a vast
bigness, but easily credited, if Pausanias in Assyr. say true: Babylon, omnium
quas unquam Sol aspexit Vrbium maxima etc. either (to parallel it with
Jerusalem destroyed by Vespatian) in their solemn sacrifices, in which times
the people multiplied; or rather to fulfill that prophecy, 51 Jeremiah 31, One
Post shall run to meet another to show the King of Babylon, that his City is
taken at one end. But these mutations did not so eclipse her, as Selechus
Nicanor did by envy and policy, Anno Mundi 3645 building a City in the conflux
of Tigris into Euphrates, where Coch first stood and then Alexandriae, new
naming it Seleucya 50 miles thence; 300 stades says Marcellien; and to add
luster to his own by the decay of the other, illured from Babylon six hundred
thousand souls, in small time making that late triumphant Empress of Towns
sit naked and disconsolate; the reward of her incomparable pride and tyranny.
Ieremiahs prophecy in the 50, 51, then being accomplished. The violence done
to me and mine be upon Babylon. Behold I am against thee O thou most proud,
etc. The broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly broken: her high gates shall
be burnt with fire; she shall become a heap, a dwelling place for Dragons! and
it shall be said, how is Babylon become an astonishment, a hissing and a
desolation among all Nations.

Alexander when he took it, inricht his coffers with two hundred thousand
Talents of gold, betrayed by Bagophanes the Eunuch: and here ( Terrarum fatale
malum and sydus iniquum gentibus, as a Critic calls him) Alexander, the worlds
great victor disroab'd himself out of his life (by quaffing too much Ox blood
to Hercules, his emulated Progenitor) Anno Mundi 3647, 337, before the
Incarnation: at the age of 32, having troubled the world 12 years and 8
months: his death foretold him by a Calanus or Bracman. Thus much concerning
Babylon: not that Al-Cayro in Egypt (near old Memphis, in the same place
where Latopolis stood) built by Cambyses the Persian, and new named El-cayro by
Gehoar, Leiftenant to El-Cayn the Kalyph: as I find in the first and eight
books of Leo's History of Afrique: by the Hebrews called Mezraim, by the
Caldees Alcabyr, Myzir by the Arabs, and Massarr by all Armenians.

BAGDAT, (raised out of old Babells ruins;) is in 36 degrees. 20 min. North: in 82
of longitude: built in that part of Meso-potamia the Persians call Yrakein; the
Turks, Diarbec; the Arabs, Iazirey; the Armenians, Meridin. It receives the
name Bagdat, I suppose, from Bag-Deh, i. e. a Lordly City; or from Bawt-dat,
i. e. a Princely garden: some say from Bugiafer the Babylonian Kalyph, who
disburst two millions of gold to reedifie it, after that cruel devastation
made there by Almerick King of Iewry. But long she enjoyed not this glory, for
Chyta a Tartar Prince gives order to Alako his brother to divest her; who
accordingly sacked it with a barbarous rage and greediness, and cruelly
tortured the then Lord or Chalyph Mustaed-zem: but in the year of our Lord
762. Heg. 142. Almansor or Abviapher the Calyph pitied her delapidations, and
taking a precise time, when by a good influence of the heavens it might in
future times be fortunate, he begun to rear her up again, and builded the
Mosq' in that place where one Bagdet an Eremit had made his hermitage, and from
whom it may be 'twas so called: Almansor gave it another name, Medina-Isalem,
i. e. the City of peace; or as Ben-Casen thinks, Deer-Assla, i. e. the Church
of peace. An ill spirit it seems hanted it: for after she begun to breath
anew, and to adorn her head with Majesty, another cold Northern blast benumbed
her; Tangrolipix or Sadoc Lord of the Zelzuccian family and father of the
Ottemans, takes it in despite of the Arab and Persian An. Dom. 1031, Heg. 411,
and forced her to bow under the yoke of miserable bondage. Howbeit, once more
an Arabian Chalyph re-comforts her, Negmeddin-Fidall-ally by name, son to
Emyr-Elmummyn: after whom Addae-daul And Siet Saife-Daddaul did their best to
enlarge her: and to them (according to Acmad-Abu-beker) followed
Almostacer-bilah son to Almoctadi-bila Anno Dom. 1100. Heg. 480. all which
several Calyphs were rich, and liberal, such as spared neither cost nor pain
to redintigrate her bulk and memory. Ismael-Sophy conquered it from Bajazeth:
but Solomon regained it from Sha-Tahamas: from him the Persian King Mahomet
(son to Tamas) wrested it Anno Domini 1566. Heg. 946. by a neat stratagem, he
entered unsuspected in disguize of a Merchant, fifteen hundred other Noble
warriors in like habit driving into Bagdat a Carravan of three thousand
Camells; but upon the watchword, throwing off their gowns, they brandisht
their glittering blades in the eyes of the astonished garrison. The Persians
kept it till the year of our Lord 1605. Heg. 985. when it reverted to Turkish
thraldom; but Abbas could not suffer it, for An. Dom. 1625. Heg. 1005. most
bravely he beat the Turqs thence, and the Tartars from Van in Armenia: and to
this day holds both, though ten times the enraged Turqs have attempted to
recover it. Let us now into the Town. Bagdat, at this day scarce equals
Bristow in bulk or beauty: the circuit may be three miles and better, including
fifteen thousand familes. It is watered by Tigris called Diglat and Dyguilah,
somewhat broader than the Thames, but not so navigable nor gentle: In all this
City is nothing worthy the present observation, save the Bridge, the Mosque,
the Sultans Palace, the Coho house, the Buzzar, and the Gardens. The bridge
resembles that at Rohan in Normandyl; it has a plain and easy passage over 30
long boats, concatenated and made to separate at pleasure. The Mosque is
builded in the West side; large, round, and very pleasantly raised of white
freestone, brought from Mosul (old Ninivy.) The Sultans house adjoynes the
great market; it is large but low: and near it are some brass pieces the
Turks left there against their will: a little Chapel also, Panch-Ally by
name, is note-worthy; memorable in the impression of five fingers, Mortis Ally
by a trick that he had made in the solid stone there. The Coho house is a house
of good fellowship; in the evening many Mussulmen assemble to sip a sort of
Stigian liquour; a black, thick, bitter potion, brewed out of Bunchie or Bunnu
berries; more reputed of, in that it increases Venus, and purges melancholy:
but most of all, from a tradition they have that Mahomet sipt no other sort of
drink, save this which was first invented and brewed by Gabryel: in the Coho
house they also inebriate their brains with Aracc and Tobacco. The Buzzar in
Bagdat is square, and comely. The Gardens are sweet and lovely; all put
together, show no more artificial strength, wealth nor bravery than do many
neighboring and late up-start Towns about her. Twelve miles lower is seen a
gross confused Mount; by some thought the rubbish of Nimrods Tower: slimy
bricks and mortar may be digd out of it. I rather imagine it the ruin of that
monstrous Temple, which was erected by Semyramis in honor of Bell or Jupiter
Belus, Grandfather to Nynus. At some distance it Is better perceived than when
nearer hand; the insensible rising all the way; it may be occasions it: what
more or more properly can I apply, than in our own tongue, what an old Poet
warbled in his idiom.

Miramur periisse homines?
monumenta fatescunt,
Interitus saxis nominibus-
que venit.
Why wonder we that People die? since Monuments decay.
Yea, flinty Stones, with men's great Names, Deaths tyranies obey.
To see old Shushan is neither unworthy our labor, nor out of our way.

SHVSHAN, is every where famoused. It was one of the three royal Palaces, the
Medyan Monarchs so much gloried in; Babylon, Shushan, and Ecbatan: built by
Darius son of Histaspis Anno Mundi 3444. as Pliny has it in his 6 lib. c. 28.
Some say Laomedan built it, such time as Thola judged Israel. Others make Cyrus
Lord of Pisogard (from Pison a branch of Hiddekel or Tigris) to be the
Architect, in memory of his good success obtained in that very place against
Astiages the Median Emperor. It is spoken of in the 1. chapter of Hester: That
there, Ahashuerus An. Mun. 3500. feasted his Liefetenants over a hundred twenty
and seven Provinces, a hundred and eighty days with great cost and triumph.
Nehemiah and Daniel also remember it to be in Elam, Persia: and
notwithstanding the many mutations and miseries it had from many avaritious
Tyrants, yet was it able to smile upon Alexander, when he extracted thence to
pay his Soldats and fill his bags with fifty thousand Talents in Bullyon, and
nine Millions in coined Gold: and well may be, since Cassiodore in his 7. lib.
15. Epist: reports for truth, that Memnon (son to Tithon, and reckned by
some, first founder) so gloried in his work that he cemented the stones with
gold; which made Aristagoras cry out to his men of war, that if they could
but master it, each poor knave there might then compare with Jove for riches
and bravery.

Some wrangle about the name Shushan, and its signification. Athenaeus
interprets it from her plenty in Lillyes; but whence he fetched it I cannot
tell; the Arabic nor Persian have no such meaning: as well I may say from Suzan
or Shuzan in the Persic tongue a needle or a glasse-bottle. But such Synonimaes
may not carry it. I rather believe it is derived from Chus ( Noah's grand-sonne)
Susiana from him called Chusiana, and at this day not much discrepant in the
name they call it by, Chusistan. More probable, in that Chus, Cams son
planted a Colony here, ere he journeyed into Arabia and Aethiopia, (a mistake,
made the Septuagints imagine Nyle one of those four, streaming from Paradise)
his sons also here-abouts inhabiting. Nymrod in Chaldaea. Seba in Arabia.
Havilah in Indya. Raamah in Carmania etc. Let us dow into Shushan.

At this day it is called Valdac, not far from the Gulf: watered by Chozes or
Choaspes; which arising from the Jaaroonian Mountains streams hither very
pleasantly in many meanders circum-giring, and not far from Balsorac (
Doridatis of old) participates with the brackish Gulf of Persia, where also
Euphrates (called Phrat and Almacher) from Libanus some say, from Mount Abas in
Armenia say others: and Tigris (now called Diglat and Hiddechel) from Taurus
(or Pariedrus rather) imbowell themselves. A river of such account which the
Persian Emperors, that no water but Choaspes, no bread but from Assos in
Phrygia, no wine but the Chalyhonian in Syria, no salt but what they had from
Memphis in Aegipt could please their pallats. Daniel calls it Vlai, Pliny,
Eulaeus; an anti-stream glides to Persepolis.

Shushan was in compass 120 stades or furlongs; so Strabo. Policletus numbers
200, above twenty miles English. The wall about it quadrangular. In building,
walls, houses, Temples, and the like, resembling Babylon. From whence Ecbatan
and it had aequidistancie five hundred short miles. Valdac had some form and
beauty, till Moses surnamed Askar ( Omars kinsman) Anno Dom. 641. Heg. 21,
depopulated it. It has now a resemblance of Moful or Ninivie; nothing but
ruins covering her. Of which and other such once noble Cities I may say with
King David, Psalm. 46 Come and behold the works of the Lord, what desolations
he has made in all the earth! And that we are so near the old local place of
Paradise, let me glance a little into it.

PARADISE, or the terrestrial Garden of Eden ( Hogea-del-Holan the Indians
name it) ( Gan-Eden the Hebre was call it) wherein God placed Adam, is much
controverted; and where it was, as much doubted of: some making it an
Allegory, others a local place. Strange it is to confider the variety. Some
say it was in the middle Region of the air, whence they will draw the four
great streams that water Paradise. Some place it in the mountains of the
Moon (in Aethyop whence Nilus springs,) othersome in the circle of the Moon,
some others under the circle, and that thence the four rivers flow gliding
under many large deep Seas, and so into Paradise. Some think the 4 rivers
signify 4 cardinal virtues; the word Paradise, a metaphor of delight; man's
fall, the banishment; the torryd Zone, the fiery sword; and such other
fanatic fancies as made the brainsick Hermians and Seleucians swear there
never was a Paradise: whose phantasmaes I value not, in that the more judicious
affirm there was, varying merely in the place. Some (and those well read)
imagine it was ten miles about, the Province Mesopotamia, the precise place
Eden, to this retaining both name and memory. St. Augustine judges it was in
the happy Arabia. Amongst the Tartars dreams Goropius (in Holland he might
have said.) Under the N. pole thinks Postellus. In Syria, Beroaldus. Upon the
banks of Tygris says Xenophon. Every where, before Adam sinned thinks
Ortelius. Some say it comprehended Meso-potamia, Armenia, Mount Taurus,
incircling Shynaar; holding afterward Selencia and Babylon. Others carry it
further as that it included Nilus and Gangas, a too great limit for a Garden,
six thousand miles distant; Nyle arising from Zair in Afrique, empties it self
into the mid-land Sea; Ganges from Imaus in Scythia, into the Gangetick Sine or
Bengalan Ocean. The Inhabitants in Ceyloon say Paradise was there, and show
Adams footsteps, Eves tears, etc. Some say Aegipt, Syria, and Iudaea: that the
tree of knowledge grew on Mount Calvary, the second Adam suffering in the same
place the first Adam had offended. Some dream it is in a mountain above the
sky, where none are but Enoch and Elias. We can ascend no higher, without
troubling our understandings.

The best is this, That Nyle nor Ganges had no being there: the Septuagints
mistake arising from their suppostion that Pison was Ganges, and Gihon, Nyle.
Mesopotamia no doubt was East from Arabia, where Moses (the Prince and first
that ever wrote History) completed his Pentateuch. And as questionless, the
Garden of Eden was watered with Euphrates and Tygris: who in their several
fluxes, one from Libanus, the other from Ararat or Taurus, part themselves into
four branches; Pison one (streaming to Piso-gard in Persia;) Gibon the other
(commixing with Choaspes) both run into the Gulf, at Balsora, For whereas
it is said, Pison compasses the land of Hevilah, we must not imagine it that
Havilah in Indya, whither Havilah son of Ioctan son of Eber son of Sem
traveled: but that in Susiana or Chusiana, where Havilah son of Chus, son
of Cham, son of Noah planted his Colony; before he descended into Aethiopia or
Afrique. Or if that will not content, we may distend it, to make Mount Taurus a
wall unto it East, and North: and that Euphrates, Tygris, Araxes (or Gozan if
you please) and Indus watered it, a sufficient extendure, and in the
adolescencie of the world fruitful and delicious.

The Author's sickness.
I cannot choose a better place to seat your patience, than here, to make my
self your object. After the death of some noble Gentlemen, my course came
next, though not to die, yet to put my feet into the grave. Whether I had got
cold on Taurus (by sucking in the refrigerating air, denudating my heating
body) or that I played the Epicure too largely on delicate fruits, or that
diversity of Meridians, or so long quaffing variety of waters, I know not: some
or all of these (by Gods divine appointment) overcame me, and forced me into
such a violent diffentery, that in twelve days I had a thousand bloody
stools, and for forty days longer time was ore-charg'd with such cruelty,
that (some can witness) I dare say, never poor man was more enfeebled! I
wanted not the help of the Kings best Physicians, they did me little good: I
took what they prescribed (dry Rice, Pomgranad pills, Barberries, Sloes in
broth, and a hundred other things) and gave them what so ere they craved: so
that it was hard to judge whether my spirits or gold decayed faster. In this
excreame misery I was forced to travel 300 miles, hanging upon a Camel.

Morod that great Aesculapius seeing I would rather die than part with any more
money (for when it was gone, I knew not where to borrow, Merchants were
strangers to me, and I had above sixteen thousand miles home, to go round
Afrique) he limited my life to but five days existence: but he that sits on
high and accounts all humane knowledge, mere folly; in four and twenty hours
after, miraculously proved this famous Oraculizer a complete liar. I had then
attending me an Armenian called Magar and a Hecate of Tartary, to whom I daily
gave for salary eight peace: many Succuby's she implored (fore against my
will) but finding they had no power to bewitch me; whether to accilerate Morods
sentence, or whether to possess my linen and apparel (of which I had good
plenty) I know not, but she resolved to poison me. For, knowing wine was
strictly forbidden me, she presents me in an Agony of thirst, a Violl full of
old strong intoxicating wine, which relisht curiously, and I powered down
without wit or measure: but (as it had been so much ophium) it quickly banished
my vital senses, and put me for four and twenty hours into a deadly trance,
and in that time (had not a friend resisted) I had been buried. But by Gods
great mercy, this desperate Potion recovered me. For after I had disgorg'd
abundantly, I fell into a sound sleep (not having done so a month formerly,
the people admiring such a recovery) so that by benefit of that little rest and
binding quality of the wine, I grew every day better and stronger: but my
desperate Doctresse (whiles my other servant wept over me) like an old Hagg,
opened my Truncks and robbed me of all my linen and some moneys. I would not
pursue her, for then she had died for it. I will therefore say with David 71
Psalm. O! what troubles and adversities have thou showed me? and yet did thou
turn and refresh me, yea and broughtest me from the deeps of the earth again!

Observations concerning the Persian Empire.
HItherto we have been practical: let me now draw your eyes to theorize in
general the several properties and fashions of this great Empire; whose
Monarchs have from the Infancy of Time either swayd the Scepter of the world,
or adorned their brows with a Dyadem of braver luster than any other Kings of
Asia: and first speak we by what several Nomenclations Persia has been
called; than which, no other Kingdom in the Universe has been more variable.

In Nymrods days (that Monster of the world) 'twas called Chusa, Several
names of Pesia.
from Chus son of Cham son of Noah, who removed his Colony thence into
Arabia, and after into Aethyopia or Africa. In Chedorlaomars reign
(contemporary with Abraham) it was named Elam, from Elam son of Sem son of
Noah; and brother (if profane Authors say true) to ( Madai or) Atlas Maurus
sons of Iaphet son of Noah. From him the people were called Elamitae and
Elamae, names much used amongst the Ancients. The next it varied to, is Persia,
whether from Perseus Jove's son by Danae daughter to Acrisius, or from
analogy with the Chaldee tongue, implying a horses hoof, a hooked nose, or a
division, I will not argue. But the Greeks not content with any of them,
entitled it Panchaya and Cephoe^ne; in memory of their Countryman Cepheus
(after King of part of Aethiope) brother of Cadmus, Agenor's famous children.
This same Cepheus was father of Andromeda, wife to Perseus, parents of Perses
the renowned Archer, living in the world before the building of Rome twelve
hundred and seventy years. Gog and Magog some have also named her, and
Magusaea too, but from whence arising needs no interpreter. Such time as
Achemaenes son to Aegeus King of Athens ruled, it got an Achemaenian
denomination, as Lucan, Herodotus, Suidas, Cedrenus, and others have it: after
which race it was new named Arsaca, from Arsaces the Heroic Parthian not long
after the Incarnation, Artea after that, by the Inhabitants importing a noble
Country, and from whence many brave Princes assumed names, as Artaxerxes,
Artabanus, Artaphernes, Artaspes, etc. The Tartars in their overrunning a great
part of Asia named it Chorsoria, as Solynus notes; The Arabians Anno Dom. 598
(such time as Mahomet grew notorious) called it Saracaenia, in memory of their
descent and doctrine. Azaemia some call it: by the Turks (in envy to Siet
Gunet and his decadence from the Alcorannish Doctors) Etnizaria and Agamia:
since when, they have added those of Chuba, Shaw-Izmaelia, Saic-Aideria,
Curasaeniae, and some such, as (proceeding from particular malice) are unworthy
our taking notice of, or to be inserted in the roll of memory.

Let me now give you the effigies of her present standing; which if I fail to
pourtray exactly; I will willingly incur some blame, so you will copy it in a
better posture.

The derivative and several names of Persia I have already drawn: the
Provinces at this day obeying that famous Diadem, and how called I shall first
essay; her bulk next; and then her fashions. Thus rancked: Persia, Parthia,
Medya, Hyrcania, Bactria, Sogdiana, Evergeta, Aria, Drangiana, Margiana,
Paropamisa, Carmania, Gedrosia, Susiana, Arabia, Caldaea, Meso-potamia,
Armenia, Iberia, and Mengrellia, twenty noble Kingdoms of old, (at this day
under the stroke of the Persian Scepter) are thus new named, Parse, Provinces
of Persia how now named.
Arac, Shervan, Mozendram, Sablestan, Maurenahar, Sirgian, Hery, Sigistan,
Stigias, Kalsistan, Carmawn, Laristan, Chusistan, Iaziry, Keldhan, or Ajaman;
Darbeq, Arminy, Carkash, and Vaspracan. The whole Empire is terminated on East,
West, North, and South; with India, Arabia, the Caspian, and Persian Seas. From
Candahor (equi-distant with Oxus in Bactria) to Babylon, East and West, it
stretches four hundred and forty farsangs, Extent of the Empire.
or of English, a thousand three hundred and twenty miles, in seventy days
usually traveled: and from Giulphall (or Ielphy near Van in Georgia) to Cape
Gwader in 25 degrees, the furthest part of Gedrosia or Macron on Indus, North
and South, four hundred ninety and six farsangs, or a thousand four hundred
eighty and eight English miles; in eighty days commonly journeyed: from which
we may compute, the circuit is not less than four thousand miles. The North
and East is most part fruitful in grass, in corn, in fruit; the South and
West (except where rivolets are) sandy, mountanous, sterile, and inhospitable:
the vehement heat scorches the earth and makes it barren; and from whence, the
soil yields no exhalations, the mother of clouds, and consequently wants rain
to madifie: but in stead of it, God has blessed them with frequent breeses.

But how miserable so ere it seems to others, The Kings revenue.
the Persian King makes many happy harvests; filling every year his insatiate
coffers with above three hundred and fifty seven thousand Tomans (a Toman is
five marks sterlin,) in our money, 1190000 pound sterlin: a great revenue, the
more to be admired at, since he extracts it from raw silk, customs and cotton;
not thinking any way mean or dishonorable that brings in money. So thought
Abbas; and thence derived that unkinkly trade of sending into the market, his
daily presents of fruits and flowers (for without some piscash was no saluting
him,) a kind of thrist, His domestic policy.
he not only boasted of (I imagine as Ageslaus did of his polt-foot) but seemed
to complain of the too great nicity of other Kings. And no doubt, if all the
Potentates of the earth were inquired after, none would parallel this late old
Monach of Persia for startagems in good husbandry, (for so, to respect the man,
we had best call it.) He could finely dart his wonder upon such and such a Town
by report or letter confessing his amazement at sight of some great Elephant,
or Tower of gold he heard they had acted: they dare not reason against it, they
know the meaning; and in pure gold get such a present; if rich and heavy, then
it is dainty work, though never so disordered: if otherwise, then no way praised.
Ninety walled Towns are under his command (the Villages are above forty
thousand) none of which escape his policy; for though they practice nothing
less than goldsmiths work and imagery, yet he salutes them with a false
report, desiring to see experimentally, whether fame had not been a niggard in
their elevation: they embrace the complement, and return him in pure gold the
Icon of an Elephant, Cammell, or Dromedary: some a Pegasus, a Cesterne or Bath
some send to gain his love, and some a Babel; or representation of such a
great City as they know will take him, by comparison: considering which, I
less admire that vast treasure of Mammonisme, commonly taken out for
ostentation at the receipt of Ambassadors or Travelers of note; such as in
Mosendram our eyes were glutted with. In war, no Asiatick Prince was master
of more Art or sure experience; at home, his Genius travaili'd with no fewer
fancies, none withou its certain end to agrandise his treasury. A Merchant I
may also call him, having many thousand factors, frugall and skillful under
him, all which he sends through the wide universe with each his stock of
money, or silk, or carpets to make money of: some of them return in three, in
five some, none exceeds seven years to give their account, to the Kings
infinite advantage: if they have loytered, or accidentally lost, and return
mean profits, they had as good behang'd, he is so incredulous and wrathful:
but when they come home multiplied, and with increase, and to his liking, he
rewards them with large thanks, a woman from his Haram, a horse, a sword, a
Tulipant; but after a small repose packs them abroad again, re-assuring them
of his good affection, and that after such a voyage they shall end their motion
in a happy rest, (but seldom does it, till death or diseases force him to it)
that they and theirs shall enjoy such necessary sums as conduce to make them
fortunate; but in event find that old proverb too too true, Pollicitis, dives
quilibete esse potest.

Again, from Indostan, Tartary, and Araby, every year move toward Persia,
many Carravans furnished with rich and rare commodities: as Chyna ware, sattens,
silks, stones, rich Tulipants, etc. of whose approach he has quick notice:
concerning which, either he gives a private command that none shall dare to
traffic with them, by that forcing them to his own prices; or affronts them
upon entering his Dominions with a false alarm, as that the passage further is
long and hard, and dagerous, or that the late darth makes the country incapabde
to entertain them; by such heathen Mathematics so startling them, that rather
than move back to such hazards, or go on to encounter such, or to incur his
hatred; they often times condescend to any mart, sometimes receiving money for
their goods, or by exchange, for what the Persian Emperor can best spare; to
his own, and others, dispersing those new merchandises at stretched rates, yea
at the height of ignoble avarice; and having coin or bullion (to prevent its
pilgrimage into other regions) he molds it into plate of huge assize or the
like, too heavy to go far, work very poor, in value rich and ponderous.
Besides, by that law of Persia, he makes himself heir to all that dye, puts
the young ones to some way of life, war, or merchandise; none daring to call
his title into question: he also expects annual presents from all men of
quality; take notice of one man's offering a year or two before our being in
Persia: the Duke of Sherazz was he that sent it: four hundred sixty and five
thousand florens coined; forty and nine goblets of good gold; seventy two
refined silver, and so much of other valuable rarities, as in all, burdened
three hundred Camells: a gallant present, a sure medicine to expel his
melancholy. But this might all be tolerated, were Astraea any where adored:
but contrarily, abhorred bribery aad corruption in Justice, renders so brave a
Prince too much distempered.

Quid faciant leges ubi sola pecunia regnat?
Aut ubi paupertas vincere nulla potest?
Where money overrules, what good do laws?
Or where the poor is crushed without a cause?
For albeit it is said that the laws of the Medes and Persians never alter, yet
doubtless in so many changes as have happened there, their laws may be
corrupted or altered: At this day they have little written law; somewhat the
law of Nature has dictated: they have no Terms, few Lawyers, no demurs in
Justice: Lex Talionis is much used: and commonly upon complaint, (how difficil
so ere the cause be) the sword decides it before Sunset. The vulgars habit
and disposition next attend us.

The Persians are generally big-limb'd, strong, straight, and proper; the Zone
makes them Olive-coloured; the wine, cheerful; opium, venerious. The people
ascribed.
The women paint; the men love Arms; all love Poetry: the grape inflames their
passion, the law allayes it, example bridles it: they love not rule, the King
is Jupiter in tenris, and by a panbasilay and forced will equals the Duke and
Peasant in his command (diffring them otherwise) the name Colloom or slave
being equally proper and hereditary; and in awlesse bravery he values them as
Agesilaus did Lisander, and from this tenet of dammed Matchiavell drawn from
Phatinus. A Tyrants power decays when he respects
Justice or honesty; for he suspects
His lawless lust produces best effects.
Sceptrorum vis tota perit, si pendere justa
Incipit, evertitque arces respectus honesti;
Libertas scelerum est, quae regna invisa tuetur.
troublesome to one, formidable to the other, to neither convenient, to none
honorable. No part of their body is allowed hair, the upper lip excepted,
which grows very long and thick, they turn it downward; the oil Dowae, but
thrice applied annihilates that excrement ever after. The meaner sort reserve a
lock in mid their head, of double use, Mahomet by that, distinguishing them
from other sectaries; and by help of it the easier to attain Paradize: we
hear it, they surely believe it. Their Habit
Their eyes are black, their foreheads high, their noses hooked; about their
heads they wreath great rowles of Callico, of silk and gold, higher, more
beautiful, and not so bungie as the Turkish Turbants; they call them Shashes,
in past times (especially those worn by Kings) Cydarims or Tyaraes, with us
called Mithers, a little fash or gold fringe hangs down behind, the Arab
taught it them, and serves to distinguish of what quality. The King turns the
contrary side of his Shash forwards, in no other garb diffring from others: in
Triumphs and great days I have seen them circle their Tulipants with ropes of
great orient pearls, with chains of Rubies, Turquoises and other Stones. The
Asiaticks wear no bands, they are the attire of peace (not dwelling there,)
their habit or outside garment is usually of Callico, stitcht with Silk,
quilted with Cotton; the better sort have them of party-colored silks, of
Satin some, of rich gold, and filver chamlets others, and some of bod-kin and
richest cloth of gold, figured: variety in work and colors pleases them beyond
measure, and serve as Emblems of joys in Paradize: black is not known among
them, they call it dismal, a type of hell, and unlunluckinesse. Their sleeves
are straight and long (to vary from their enemies the Turq' who have them wide
and short;) the vest or coat reaches down to their calves, and bears round;
their waists are girt with towells of silk and gold above eight yards long,
those and the Shashes discover (as they transcend and descend in value) the
dignity of those that wear them. The Dukes have them woven with gold, the
Merchants and Cosel-bashes of silver, of silk and wool, men of inferior
quality: next their skin, they wear smocks of cotton, demishirts in length,
for color resembling Scotch plad or Barbars aprons; their breeches are like
the Irish trooze, hose and stockings sowed together: the stocking falls not
always into their shoes, from the anckle down giving to the eye two inches
naked: their shoes are of good leather and well sowed, but have no latchets;
and are of what color you can fanfie: they are commonly sharp at the toe, and
turn upwards; the heels are high and small, and shod with iron, or nales
ingrailed. And this I noted, they do not so much wed themselves to these iron
hemi-cycles for thrift or ease, or lasting; (they seldom journey far, or go
swiftly) as to tread in a venerable path of antiquity. A custom actuated by
their forefathers, and yet observed; either in symbolising with their great
Mahomet, whose ambitious Arms was a Crescent, Diana; his Motto, Cresco: or
else borrowed from the Cygales of the Athenians, or from the Romans who wore
Crescents (or half Moons) upon their shoes as an Ensign of honor, by
Martial and Pancirollus termed Lunati calscei; Lunat anusquam pellis: and by
Statius in his Boscages, primaque patritia clausit vestigia Luna, etc. Over
all, the Persians (especially such as travel) throw short Calzoons or coats of
cloth (without sleeves) furred with fables, foxes, mushwhormaws, squirrills, or
of sheep, not a little estimated; and can (in hottest seasons) endure to wear
short wide stockings of English cloth, whose heels are covered with leather,
and serve sometimes for boots to ride in; howbeit, they want not boots; wide,
well sowed, ill cut, but prevalent in showers. Gloves are of no esteem amongst
them; nor rings of gold; of silver they have many: not that gold is less
valuable (in other things most used) but because Mahomet forsooth had his of
silver; left to Ozman as a legacy, and charmed with many singular properties:
none have their rings of iron, except slaves, and those of baser sort; a
metal they account and call a proper symboll of unnatural slaverie. They
paint their hands into a red or tawnie color, which both cooles the liver, and
in war makes them (they say) victorious: their nails are parti-colored,
white and vermillion; and why so I cannot say, unless in imitation of King
Cyrus; who in augmentation of honor, commanded his Heroes to tincture their
nails and faces with vermillion, serving both to distinguish them from the
vulgar sort, and (as did our warlike Britains) in fight to show more terrible.
Their rings are sometimes set with Agats and letters of Arabic containing
either some spell, their names, or else some fragment of the Alcoran: not one
amongst a thousand warriors knows the benefit or use of letters; the Mullayes
and Clergy ingrosse that Art, who when they write do it kneeling; either that
that posture is easier, or that what they dictate in that sort, is supposed
holy: nor use they goosequills, but reeds or canes of great assize and
thickness; in that they imitate the Ancients: their paper is very glossie and
varie-coloured, well pressed; and the rarer in that their materials are not
rags or skins, but cotton wool, course, and requiring much toil to perfect
it.

Arms.
They seldom go without their swords (shamsheers they call them) formed like a
Crescent, of pure metal, broad, nd sharper than any rasor; nor do they value
them, unless at one blow they can cut in two an Afinego; the hilts are without
ward, of gold, of steel, of wood; the scabbards are well made, of Camells
hide, on solemn days covered with velvit embroydered with gold and stones of
price: they seldom ride abroad without bow and arrow; the quiver and case
wrought and cut ingeniously; the bow is short, and (not unlike a cross bow)
bended; and albeit some think incomparable in mischief to a gun, yet the time
has been they have got with that (as we in France) in many parts of Asia most
memorable battles; as when Crassus lost his life, Valerian and others,
occasioning those dirgees of the Roman Poets, Terga coversi metuenda Parthi:
and Ovid thus, Gens fuit and terris and equis and tuta sagittis, etc. at this
day of no credit in archerie, unless they can in a full carreer cleave an
Orange hanging in a string athwart the Hippo-drome, and (when past the mark)
with another ready arrow as surely hit the rest, turning (in his short stirrips
and Morocco saddle) backwards.

The women (in those parts scarce visible) might pass unspoken of, The women.
I will only glance at them. Their stature is generally low, but straight and
comely; more corpulent than lean, wine and music fattens them; the splen is
curable, where vexation domineeres not: their color is pale, made sanguine by
adulterate comolection; their hair is commonly black and curled: they have
high foreheads, pure skins, black diamond eyes, high noses, arge mouths, thick
lips, round cheeks, fat and painted: honest women have liberty to go abroad to
breath the Air or buy their necessaries, but dare not speak to any man in the
way, nor unvaile their feces. When they follow the Camp or are to journey any
whither they are mounted two and two upon Camells; and sit crosse-legg'd in
cages (or cajuaes as they call them) of wood, covered with cloth to forbid any
A Persian Woman
body the sight of them: their Guardants are lean-fac't Eunuchs, who are so
jealous of them, that as we traveled, 'twas the hazard of our lives not to
fly out of the way as soon as we saw them: or by throwing our selves upon the
ground to cover us with some veil or other, that the Eunuchs might be
satisfied, we durst not view them. Those of the order of Lais are more
sociable; have most freedom and are not worst esteemed of: No question (but to
free themselves from slaverie and rage of jealous husbands) most there would be
whores by profession: Common women.
but with them it is a calling (sir reverence) of too high dignity for all to
mount unto; those therefore that are such, are admitted after long suit, many
friends and much moneys; none dare abuse them: they are company for Kings and
great ones of Mahomets faction: go brave, and richly habilimented: their hair
curling, dishevells often times about their shoulders, sometimes rounded or
plaited in a caul of gold: about their faces and under their chin is hung a
rope of pearl of great value, if not counterfeit: their cheeks are of a
delicate dye, but Art (not Nature) causes it: their noses are set with rings
and jewels of gold imbelisht with rich stones; their ears also have equal
luster. To show they are servants to dame Flora (in her days, a good one) they
illustrate their arms and hands, their legs and feet, with painted flowers
and birds, and in a naked garb dance every limb about them a Persian Antic,
elaboratly making their bells and Cymballs and Timbrells echo their turnings.
Their habit (not unlike themselves) is loose and gaudie, reaching to their
mid-leg; of cloth of gold, of satin some, of tissued stuffs or costly
inbroyderie. This wanton kind of creature is of no religion, except what the
last Monach of Assyria (whose Motto was ede, bibe, lude,) preached to his
Epicures. These look dangerously, drink and stink (of perfumes I mean)
horrible strongly; laugh immeasurably, and covet greedily men's souls, moneys,
and reputation; scorning all honest women, and upbraiding them, with the
Epethites of slaves, rejected, unsociable, melancholy, and unworthie their
speaking to: and it is true at this day what Trogus Pomp. observed long ago
concerning them, Parthi Vxoribus and foeminis non convivia tantum virorum, sed
etiam conspectu inter dicebant etc.

Coat Armor of Persia.
Many other things give themselves note-worthy. In Arms and Armories, fix
therefore your next observation. The Persian Arms of old and at this day are
somewhat doubtful. Zonaras in his first book and nineteenth Chapter out of an
ancient Monument observes, that the Persians bore in old times, Luna, an Eagle
crowned of the Sun, displayed Saturn; continued for many discents their
royal Ensign, till Cyrus made (as in the Empire, in Escheucheon also) an
alteration. Xenophon shall guide you to the view of it. Erat Cyro signum aurea
Aquila in longa hasta suspensa, and nunc etiam id insigne Persarum Regibus
manet, etc. borne till Crassus perished by them, at that time a Sagittarie being
blazoned in their Royal Standard; alluding to their excellent skill in riding,
and hope of good fortune; from whence also that coin of Dariques came
(fifteen shillings of our money) a round piece of gold, Darius the common name
being stamped on one side, a Sagittarie (his coat Armor) on the other side,
memoriz'd by Plutark in the life of Agesilaus, complaining that his ambitious
design of Asia's conquest was prevented by thirty thousand Sagittaries or
Archers; meaning a bribe of so many pieces of gold, which were given to betray
his enterprise. But when Mahomet had ensnared their souls, and yoakt their
necks under Saracenic bondage, the other were rejected as impertinent to this
new conquest, advancing as a Symbol of more excellency and mystery in their
banner, Mercury, a Crescent Luna with this impreza Totum dum impleat orbem:
alluding (both in body and soul) to an universal command; but how unfitly
and meanly borrowed by the French may easily appear to such as go to
Fountain-b'leau, where this heathen device is in every hall iterated. But
Mahomets prediction failed him, when that memorable Saint of Ardaveil, Gunet,
both obliterated many fundamental texts of the Alcoran, and invented a new
Ensign in honor of his successor, viz. Venus, a Lion couchant Sol, the Sun
orient in his face, of the same: minted also in their brass meddalls (and as a
tie of amity) accepted of by the great Mogull, and some other Princes in Indya.
The Cawns, Beglerbegs, Sultans, Agaes, Soldagars, and Coosel-bashes indeed
bear no Arms; not that they are entitled slaves, but from their ignorance in
pedegrees and heraldrie: and in regard no honor there is hereditarie: but this
I can say truly; they are of very humane and noble natures, civil, merciful,
and liberal; yea differ in their ingenuity and love to any Gentleman (that is
a stranger) as much from the Turks and their brazen barbarism, as gold is in
comparison from iron: for the Persians distinguish degrees amongst themselves,
and of other Nations honor high birth and quality in any man, yea and give him
respect agreeable to his meriting, without any inquiry of his religion. Let us
go a little further.

In old times they were Idolaters, such as the Gowers be now, The old Persians.
the Persees a sect in Indya, the Pegouans, etc. but by converse with Greeks
and Romans abolisht their celestial worship, and (as Strabo relates) received
Demonomanie, continued till Mahomet. The transparent Firmament they called
Jupiter, the primum mobile of other gods, him they feared: but, Apollo (the
Son, or Mithra as they termed him) they doated on, and dedicated to him many
gallant Temples, attiring him with many Epethites of honor, health and
gentleness: a good opinion then, and not yet cancelled; as yet memorizing his
image in the stamp and coat Armor of their Emperors. The Moon no doubt had
due respect and adoration amongst them, supposing her espoused to Apollo. Venus
had equal reverence: the Earth also, the Water, Air, and Fire, wanted not the
names of Dieties, especially the Fire and Water. Zertoost their Lawgiver (in
imitation of Moses) charged them to keep a perpetual fire, not to be fed
with common cumbustibles, nor to be kindled or inflamed with profane Air, but
such as came from the beams of that glorious eye of heaven the Sun,
lightning, flints, or the like. The water also by no means was to be corrupted
with dead carcasses, dirt, urine, rags, or what showed sordiditie or
nastinesse. They loved images but indifferently; usually actuating their holy
rites, in groves, in mounts, and conspicuous places. Their marriages were
commonly celebrated in the spring, such time as Phoebus makes the Aequinoctium;
the Bridegroom the first day juncketting on nothing save apples and Camels
marrow, a diet proper for that days festival. Poligamy they liked of, the
King giving the example, and honoring them with most applause and gratuities
who proved Fathers of most children. They seldom saw their Infants till past
four years old, from which age to twenty, they learnt to ride, shoot,
jaculate, and to speak the truth; as also, to fare meanly, lodge hard, to
watch, to till the earth, and to be content with small things. The old men
went plain; the young men's habit was rich, but in nothing so notable as when
their arms and legs were fettered with voluntary lincks and chains of
burnisht gold, whose fulgor they adored from its conformity with the Sun: in
war their attire was steely or mailed work, curiously concatenated, their
breast-plates skald, their Targets of Ox hides, large and round, their cap (or
helmet) was a Tyara of linen multiplicated; their Arms were darts, bows,
swords, and axes; all which in admirable equipage and order, through long
practice they could manage gallantly. Their meals (the great men's tables I
invite you to) were splendid in rich furniture and dishes of gold; but in
meats, very ordinary, and sparing, Bacchus their countriman taught them the
Art of drunkenness ( Noah some imagine him, of whom a modern writer says
boldly. Omnia vero Bacchanalia eorumque ritus a Noae ebrietate originem habent,
etc. followed greedily by these epedemic drunkards, delighted in with no small
redundancie; insomuch that (like the Duch at this day) no matter of moment past
current and with applause save what relisht of Bacchisme; yea, their frequent
consultations and private bargains (we too much ape them) were rarely
ratified, unless negotiated, and consolidated in froath and drunkenness:
Their complements were hearty and not various; to equals, affoording
embraces; to superiors, bowing the head and knee, to this hour continued
without much alteration: the rest I offer not, this in my conceit sufficing to
parallel the modern customs, and to set them off with better luster.

Of the Persians at this day.
The religion of the Persians at this day, I have fitted by it self without
commixture. Speak we of other observations. They are very superstitious, it
may be noted from our adverse fortunes as we traveled; for when we stood at
their mercy to provide us Mules, Camells, and Horses, how hasty soever we
appeared, they took no notice of it, nor cared to set us forward, Their
superstition.
except, by throwing the dyce such a chance happened as they thought fortunate; a
ceremony diduced from the Romans who had their albi and atri dies. In every
mischance also, or in sickness they use sorcery, prescribing charms, cross
characters, letters, anticks, or the like, taken most commonly out of their
Alcoran. Nicromantic studies are much applauded, as profound, and transcending
vulgar capacities, many in those parts make a notable living of it: and few
Siets there but can exorcize.

Force.
In battle they have few tricks or stratagems, yet prosper in an honest
bravery. There are many several rancks and degrees amongst them: four, most
remarkable; Chawns, Coozel-bashes, Agaes, and Cheliby or Coridschey. The
Timarrs or Turqmars are more despicable. In a common muster the Persian King
can easily advance (as appears by roll, and pension,) three hundred thousand
horse, and seventy thousand good musquetoons, Such forces he can march withal,
but seldom exceeds 50000. enough to live together in such barren Countries:
Forces.
to particularize (as some have partly) the Sultans and their Command may
better prove it. Mirza Fetta has under his Regiment fifty sub-Bashaes of note,
each of them commanding three hundred men. His horse troops are thus raised,
Emangoly Chan of Shyraz has under his charge 30000 horse. Dav'd Chawn his
brother; Kaza-can Lord of Sumachy, Assur-chawn Lord of Myreyvan, Zedder Lord of
the Kaddyes and Gusseroft, Magar Sultan of Tabryz, each command 12000 horse.
Soffy-chan Sultan of Bagdat, Akmet Kawn Lord of Miscarroon, Gusseraph-chawn
Sultan of Koom, Zenal-cawn Lord of Tyroan, each his charge of 15000 horse.
Isaac-beg 24000. Ethaman the Vizier 17000. Soffy Koolican 16000. Gosserat-chan
Governor of Arabestan, Perker-cawn Lord of Gorgestan, Hussan-chawn Lord of
Ery, Manwezir-can and Sinall-chawn Lord of Sigestan 10000 each of them. Mahomet
Governor of Genge 8000. Ham-sha-cawn of Dara 7000. Aliculi of Periscow 4000.
Morad of Asharaffe 6000. Badur-can the Darragod 6000, and Dargagoly son to
Gange Ally-can Sultan of Candahor 4000: three hundred and twenty thousand horse
or there-about: wonderful, when I consider the miserable pastures and want of
other provant to encourage their horses with, making chopped straw and a little
barley serve the turn; but by that thin diet find them less apt to diseases
and more courageous.

In peace, they are not always idle; solacing their active bodies in sundry
sorts of warlike exercises. They cannot dance, except as Pirrhus taught the
Epyrots. They love to hunt and chase the Stagg, the Antilope, Gazal, Exercises.
Tiger, Bore, Goat, Hare, Fox, Jackall, Woolfe, and the like, abounding there.
In which pastimes they have singular skill, courage and dexterity; in Bow,
Dart, Scemiter, Gun, and Javelin. Their Harquebuz is longer than ours, but
thinner and not so good for service. They can use that very well, but detest
the trouble of the Cannon, and such field pieces as require carriage. They have
good Greyhounds not unlike the Irish, apt to encounter any Lion. They have
Spaniells also but not so good as their Hawks may challenge. They have many
excellent Eyeries of Eagles, Lannars, Goshawkes, and Hobbies: their best
Falcons are out of Russia and other Scythick Provinces; they fly them at choice
game; commonly at Hares, Jackalls, Partrich, Phesant, Herne, Pelican, Poot,
Estrich, etc. Their Lures, Jesses, Varvills, and Hoods, are richly set with
stones of great price and luster. The vulgar sort delight in Morice dancing,
wrestling, assaulting, bandying, Ram and Cock-fighting; wherein they spend much
time: but value not their money to see Boys dance, or Lavoltoes upon the rope,
wherein they are very excellent.

Their Physicians are great admirers of Nature, Physicians.
and dote so much thereupon, that they make that oft-times the first causer
which indeed is but isntrumental or secundarie: moral men they are, and
humane in language and garb, both which beget esteem and honor from all that
know them: and did not avarice (a vice predominating there, and by occasion of
sickness in me full dearly exemplified) and Magic studies too far sway them,
I could value them above the rest; however as they are, they pass for a
generation useful and exquisite. They have degrees transcending one another in
Title, as their skill and Seniority merits. The Doctors are named Haekeems (it
may be radically from the Hebrew word Hachajim, that is, a life-preserver)
Mulaii in the Arabic. Mountebanks or Imposters are nick-nam'd Shitan-Tabib,
i.e. the Devils Surgeon. They are Masters of much knowledge and ignore not
the Mathematiques. Many Arabic Writers have flourisht in those parts, most of
whose Books they read and practice by, namely Galen, Averroys, Hippocrates,
Alfarabius, Avycenna, Ben-Isaack, Abu-Ally, Mahummed-Abdilla, Ben-Eladib,
Abu-becr, Rhazis, Algazzallys', and Albumazar. In Geography Abul-foeda and
Alphraganus, from whom they better their discourse, and by such Lectures become
admirable. Nor want they the knowledge of herbs, drugs, and gums, the Mydan in
Spahawn abounding in singular variety, and than which, no place in the world
can more aptly be termed a Panacaea, a Catholicon, of herbs, of drugs; a
Magazein against all diseases: having also no less choice of delicious fruits,
rare gums and aromatique odours. This I observed, that to such of us as had
fluxes they gave Sloes, Ryce, Cynomon, Pomgranad, Barbaries; to purge
melancholy, Alloes, Senna, Rhuparb; for phlegm Turbith; for colds and
sweatings, oils of Beaver, of Leopards, of Jackalls, herba maris, our Ladies
Rose, etc. Which I note to show you they have some skill and resembling
Europaean prescriptions. Howbeit, sweating in Sudatories is the Epidemic
Physic there, most used, of least charge and very useful; insomuch that some
Cities have above threescore hummums or baths: some say three hundred.
Phlebotomy is but little used; not that it is bad, not perhaps because Galen
and the other old Naturalists never used it.

They desire rather to tread in an antic path of ignorance, then by any new
invention or wholesome study to wrong the judgments of their predicessors:
because forsooth Eventus varios res nova semper habet. And hence it is (as I
imagine) that they continue their maimed calculations, out of a blind conceit
that antiquity commanded them; for they compute their years only by the Moon,
Lame calculations.
not by that course and motion of the Sun; affirming, that the firmament or
eighth heaven finishes its revolution in two and thirty years; which is false:
his diurnall motion from East to West completing it self in four and twenty
hours; his other from West to East, but one degree in a hundred years; such
is the violence of the first mover. Notwithstanding, it may be they mean the
heaven of Saturn adjoining it, (whose revolution comes near their time)
finishing its journey from West to East in 30 years. And thus, their Lunarie
account is subject to no small error, reckning from the Autumnall Aequinox 12
Moons, the number of days in a whole year 353. Our Solar computation
exceeding theirs twelve days at least, every year; whereby it comes to pass,
that 30 of our years make 31 of theirs; whence, the difference arises 'twixt
us and them in their Era or Hegyrath, and doubtless by protract, will cause
much more confusion.

Such as practice manufactures, are meanly reputed of; but they live oft-times
very plentifully and more securely from the jealous eye of the King than do
many great ones, Inferior sort of Persians.
who often deceive their thoughts that they are happier. Of all others the
Pesants are most miserable; they can call nothing their own, such is the
rapine and pride of the great Begs of the Country; nay, every petrie Cosel-bash
dares domineere over them. Yet upon too much abuse the Causee will yield them
favorable justice.

Generally, the Persians are facetious, harmless in discourse, not very
inquisitive of exotique alterations, seldom transgressing this demand,
Disposition.
if such and such a Country have good wine, fair women, swift horses, and
sharp weapons: choosing rather to fatten themselves by a contented Notion, than
by curious inquisition to perplex their other recreations. Few of them know how
to read, Bellona trayning them up in iron dances; but honor such as have it:
the Churchmen, Clerks, and Santos, attracting them. Some skill they have in
Music; the Dorick and Phrygick, a soft and lofty sort of Consort. But above
all, Poetry lulls them, that Genius seeming properly to delight it self
amongst them. Mimographers I needs must call them, their common Ballads
resounding out the acts of Mars and his Mistress, to which two Saints they vow
their life and best devotion: Elgazzuly, Ibnul Farid, and Elfargani first
taught it them: and how lame so ere the verses are, their graceful chanting
and quavering (after the French air) gives it to the ear, sound and
harmonious. And, albeit the men affect not to dance themselves, yet dancing is
much esteemed there: the Ganimeds and Layesians (wanton Boys and Girls) foot
it most admirably and in order: I may call them Mymallonian dances; the bells,
brass armolets, silver fetters, and the like recording Bacchus. They are in
this practice so elaborate, that each limb and member seems to emulate, yea,
to contend who may express the most taking motion; their hands, eyes, bums,
gesticulating severally, swimming round, and co^forming themselves to a Dorique
stillness, the Ganimeds with incanting voices and extorted bodies simpathizing;
nothing but poesy, mirth, wine, and admiration condominating. But were this
all, 'twere more excusable; for (though each has his several Seralio) these
whores seldom go without their wages: and in a higher degree of perfect
baseness, these Paederasts (by Hellish permission and the Alcurran) affect
those painted, antic roab'd Youths or Catamites in a Sodomitic way (not till
then completing the Roman proverb Persicos odi Puer apparatus;) a vice so
detestable, so damnable, so unnatural as forces hell to show its ugliness
before its season. Hear St. Chrysostom: Cogitato, quam grave illud sit
peccatum, ut quod ipsam Gehennam etiam ante tempus apparere coegerat!

The honest women never show their faces, eclipsing (by a large white sheet,
the note of innocence and chastnesse, which wholly vailes them) those Beauties
which no doubt are not without splendor. No man daring to praise another
wife; such is their irefull jealousy, and such praise commonly dishonours them.

A word of their circumcision, wedding and burialls: Circumcision is so
necessary, that without it none can call himself a Mussulman. Circumcision.
Both men and women use it; the men for Paradise, the women for honors sake,
or Ben-sidi-Ally lies who so paraphrases of it: from nine to fifteen the
Females may; the Males at Izmaels age (whom they imagine was Abraham's best
beloved) are enjoined it; ere twelve hoping he may be able to speak his
Profession. A fee is to be paid amid the ceremony, for want of which, the
poorer sort are seldom cut, as thought unfit to go to Mahumet. The ceremony
differs, Circumcision.
as is the difference of their degree, acted either at home or in the Mosques:
if son to a Mirza, Chawn, Sultan, or Chelaby, it has more pomp than
ordinary; his kindred and friends in braverie and great troops assembling at
the parents house; as a symbol of their joy presenting him with many gifts of
sundry prices, and after small stay mount the Boy upon a rich trapt Courser,
himself gallantly vested, holding in's right hand a sword, in's left his
bridle: two Slaves go on either side, one holding a Lance, the other a
Flambeaux; neither without their Allegories: music is not wanting, it goes
before, the Father next, and as they are in blood the other follow in a just
dependence; the rest promiscuously, without order: the Hodgy attends them at
the entrance into their Mosque, helps him to alight and hallows him. To work
they straightway go: one holds his knee; a second, disroabs him; a third,
holds his hands; others by some trivial conceit strive to win his thoughts, to
extenuate his ensuing torment. The Priest (having muttered his orizons) dilates
the praepuce and in a trice (with his silver scissers) circumcises him, applies
a healing powder of salt, Date-stones, and cotton-wooll; the standers by to joy
his initiation into Mawmetry throw down their Munera Natalitia, and salute him
by that canonick name of Mussulman. If the ceremony be at home, they then
provide a solemn banquet; ere which be done, the Boy enters well attended, is
unclothed before them all and circumciz'd; and in commemoration of such a
benefit (imitating Abraham when Isaac was weaned) continue a feast three days
together; at the end whereof, the child is led about in state, bathed and
purged from all sorts of sins; has a Turbant of white silk put on his head,
and all the way as he returns is saluted with acclamations. But such an
apostat rascal as to swill in luxury the more, or to roabe himselve with some
title or advancement (forgetting that for a base and momentanie applause or
pleasure they disroabe their soul of everlasting happiness, such as runs
parallel with the lines of Eternity) are brought before the Caddi, who upon
his assent leads him into the Mosq' and without much stir is cut and marked
for a Mahomitan (or child of perdition;) which done, that devil incarnate to
witness his rebellion, spurns with his accursed feet the Cross, the
hyerogliphick of our salvation: which in the primitive and purest age was of
such honor amongst the Christians, as not only they used it in baptism, but
upon their foreheads to despite the Jews and Heathens, and to glory in that
thing the more, they so branded them with as a calumny. I hate superstition in
my heart, but that so holy an example should be derided is miserable and to be
pitied. To return; the Renegado in token of more defiance spets thrice at it
(making him believe, Christ never suffered, but Judas did) and then is to exult
in this Battalogue La la, La-illah, Hyllulla, Allough, aybyr, Mahumed
resul-Allough: God is first, and next him is Mahumet; he then elates his finger
as denying a Trinity, and three Mussulmen dart three staves three times toward
heaven, which ere any touch the ground he is new-named, then led slowly upon
an Ass about the City, that every one there may note him for a Denizin, a
Believer and Proselite to Mahumet. But (praised be God) I never heard of any
Europaean Christian who of late times renyed his Faith in Persia.

Their weddings have not much variety to dwell upon; observe therefore that
Poli-gamie is tolerable; Mahomet to excuse his own infirmity, Marriages.
and borrowing it from the Romans, honors such most as have most wives, and
beget most children: to furnish the Emperor with soldiers for defense,
Paradize with Saints, and to resound the meritorious praises of great Mahomet:
the Deruisse an order of begging Friar excepted, who from a transcendent
conceit of their own purity, abhor matrimony, but suppose Sodomy and Natures
blackest villainies no sin, or sins pardonable; producing Mahomet their
prototype or example, who both by precept and custom warranted it: but I have
tied your chaste ears too long to so impure a subject. Such therefore as dare
wed (they need not fear in Asia, the women in those parts never predominate)
they provide a sum of money and buy her good will, her parents being no further
charged than to bathe and purify her. They marry more from report than
knowledge, the friends of either party commonly commending, persuading, and
effecting it. The day appointed being come, the Bride is veiled with a fine
lawne of callico, her arms and hands are only naked: they mount her bravely,
and a great troop of friends and kin accompany her to Church, in the midway
being met with an equal number of friends, all together agrandizing the
ceremony; after a joint assent of him and her, they alight and enter the
Mosque, where the Mulay takes the protest of their good liking; she demanding
three things (as did the Jewish women of old,) bed-right, food, and clothing:
their Fathers also speak themselves contented; the Priest circles them with a
sacred cord, conjoynes their hands, takes a reciprocal oath, and calls Mahomet
to witness: the Caddy inrolls their names, the hour, day, month, and year of
their nuptials, and with an Euge dismisses them. The first day vapors away in
Tobacco, feasts, and other ordinary feastivalls, the men and women being
severed: at night, the Bride enters a stove, and is soundly washed and perfumed,
that her degree may the better appear, and her person be more accepted of:
next night they bathe together, and seven days after; in which time if he
discover her to be no Virgin, she is returned to her parents with no small
dishonor; otherwise is kept till death part them. The Alcoran allows
incestuous marriages, pretending that thereby true love is better contracted,
and longer conserved in families: in case also the man be weary of her, or that
she is barren, he acquaints the Mulay with his distemper, who eases him upon
his giving her a dowry; after which, it may be he will require her again, and
if she agree, are secondly married; yea, five, six, seven times rejecting and
revoking, as hate or lust can stimulate: by that disorder, love vanishing,
jealousy budding, rage advancing, clamours roaring; and by which, many times
the Fathers neither know their own Children, nor they their parents.

Their Burialls revive some ceremonies of old; used amongst Jews and Gentiles:
At his farewell to the world, the next of kin closes his eyes, Burialls.
as did Joseph in the 46 of Genesis: and Telemachus in Ovid, Ille meos oculos
comprimat, ille tuos: they then wash him with clean water (as was Tabitha,
Acts 9.) and carry him to his grave with admirable silence, a gesture
well-becomming Funerals; they lodge the Carcass where none lay formerly:
supposing it a vile part to disturb the dead, whom in the grave they think
sensible of torment: they place his head toward Medyna and (after the old
mode, septem ad Luctum, septem ad convivium) for seven days, his next of kin
watches to keep the evil Angel from his Tomb; during which, he incessantly
warbles out his Elegiac Threnodies, as the last expression of love he can show
him. Other burialls.
Others are thus buried: In the first place, go those of his own blood and
family, next them his slaves and other domestic varlets naked to their waist,
the rest in troozes: who to express their zeal the better, burn and scratch
their arms and breasts, cutting their flesh, and printing circles, (a trick
borrowed from the rebellious Jews, and prohibited by Moses. Levit. 19.28. and
in Deuteronomy. 14.1.) so effectually that the blood trickles out in many places. Next
them are ranckt fifty young Gallants, whose shoulders are made to bear some
texts taken out of the Alcoran; mixing with them selected Eulogies which they
sing and ingeminate. Next these, follow a hundred or two hundred men of note,
each holding the cord that draws the Corpse or Hearse: on every side throng the
multitude; some bearing in their hands Laurel or Cypress boughs, others
Coronets of flowers, fruits, or what best befits the season: some semi-naked
horsemen play along, and often times to demonstrate their love, spare not to
wound themselves: and in the last place go the Preficae or women hired to weep,
to howl, to tear their periwiggs, to smell to onyons (hinc illae Lacrymae)
and to do such impostures as did the antic Romans noted in Livy; and Jews as
Jeremy speaks, 9.17. In this Decorum they march slowly, and with great silence:
but at his Dormitory ululate Lala-Hillulla, there uncloathing, and mundifying
the carcass, his sins thereby also vanishing: they anoint him with odours and
precious unguents, and so wrapped in fine linen they bury him in the earth, and
place his head toward Arabia; his face looking up to heaven (I note it in
regard they put the other sex, their faces downwards,) his arms spread, as
prepared to embrace Mahomet: above him, they fix two stones, at's head and
feet; which in Arabiq' characters ingrav'd and colored, denotates his name,
quality, religion, and time of burial: there they leave him, but give not over
twice every day to come and sing his Requiem, beseeching Mahomet to succor him
against his bad Angels, of whom they nourish this opinion. That so soon as
any Mussulman is inhumed, forthwith Muengar and Quarequar two ougly, Legend of
bad Angels.
huge, black, and furious Devils do assail him; the one being armed with an
iron club, the other with a hook of flaming brass: in that terrible sort they
view the Carcass, and in as imperious sort command him to lift up his head, to
fall prostrate upon his knees, and beg his soul, till then departed: the dead
body revives and entertaines his soul again, and fail not both together to
account their life, and how they have professed Don Mahomet: If it appear his
life was morally good, the two Devils terribly affrighted fly away and give
way to two good Angels (apparreled in pure white silk) to comfort him; to the
day of doom not budging from him, nor seeming weary nor unwilling to protect
him. But in case his life proved bad or repugnant to Mahometry; then without
all pity or respect, the black-fac't Caco-Daemon with the iron club hits him
so pat, so fiercely on the head, as by its fury and force thumps him ten yards
deep into the ground: but there he sleeps not long; for immediately the other
spiteful helhound with the flaming hook pulls him up again: in that horrid
sort tormenting that miserable Mahomitan, till Mahomet calls a general
Parliament; where, in one place of his Alcoran he promises to save them all,
but in another (forgetting his promise it seems) appoints them all to pass
over a narrow Bridge (he calls it the Bridge of judgment) each man carrying
his sins in a bagg behind him; but in passing over, such as have heavy
loads, the bridge breaks, and they all fall into hell; such as have less
weight, into purgatory, etc. as I shall disport you with in his Alcoram.

The Persians at this day, when ere they receive a mandat or other letter from
the King or wherein his name is used, Reverence to their King.
give it no small reverence; they bow their bodies at the receiving it, kiss
it in diverse places, and then open it: Such is their transcendent opinion of
his Majesty, that they repute no less of him, than of old times they did of
their Elementall Gods; they swear usually by his name, Sha-ambashy or
Serry-shaw i.e. by the Kings head, and is of no less force to beget belief
than if they ratified a truth by Serry-Mortis-Ally, i.e. Mortis Alli's head, a
Prophet than whom they think non greater: or by putting a finger to their eye,
and saying chash, the King sees; then (though the story be never so
paradoxicall) if you please, you may believe them: yea, in most conceits they
parallel Abbas with Mahomet; in every prayer desiring his content and increase
of life, though by the loss of theirs it were augmented: By loss of ours, the
Gods increase your life.
De nostris annis tibi Jupiter augeat annos*
acknowledging their happiness from him, and entitling (not without much pride
too) their lives, wives, and estates, by him wholly to be disposed of: they
imagine he knows their thoughts; and when in his presence, never speak,
cough, spit, or look upon him, least the fulgor of his aspect might
peradventure prove no less formidable than the Trisulk of Jupiter: they
register (now, as of old) his acts and apophthegms, in Caedar Tablets, gum'd
with Cynabre, and seldom write his name but in characters of gold, upon paper
of excellent gloss and finenesse, varied into azure, vermillion, yellow, and
other colors; in a word reputing him the true reptesentator of Ally and his
glory, whose perfections they compare to Amber, Nutmegs, Roses, Flowers, and
Odours; Animate Dei Imago in terris, and (with Homer) The best beloved son of
Jove.

We were yet abroad; now let me entertain you in their houses, the cost what
ere it be, you shall be welcome to; if it agree not with your appetite I cannot
help it, the country will afford no better: first satiate your eyes, and note
their furniture, and remember that brave man who by Alcydes foot found out his
monstrous big dimension. A pan, a platter, Diet,
and a carpet is the epitome of all their domestic utensills: their diet is
soon dreft, soon eaten, soon digested, and soon described: their table is
the solid ground, covered with some sort of carpet, over which they spread
pintado cloths; before each man they lay five or six thin cakes of wheat, or
pancakes: every one his spoone also, very memorable wooden spoones; their
handles being well-nigh a yard long, the spoone it self so vast, as my mouth
could seldom master it, though I gaped extremely to welcome it: they seldom
go beyond Pelo, but in that dish express they think a witty invention,
setting before you forty dishes, called by forty names as Pelo, Chelo,
Kishmy-pelo, etc. albeit indeed it differ but thus; all are of ryce, mutton,
and hens boiled together; some have butter, some have none; some have fruit,
some have none; some have turmerack and saffron, some have none; some have
onyons and garlic, some have none; some have almonds and raisins, some have
none; and so ad infinitum: making us also believe they make us gallant cheer
and great variety, though the ingredients be one, diffring only in color or
complement; some coming to the Table as black as a coal, some as white as a
curd; others (that you may know their Cooks are witty) be yellow, green,
blew, red, or as they fancy: and wot you forsooth why Rice is so generally
eaten and so valuable? not that it exceeds wheat or other grain in goodness,
finenesse, roundnesse or the like; but from a most reverent tradition delivered
by their grand Annalist Iacob-ben-siet-Ally, a right Cabalist. And this it is?
On a time, Legend of Rice.
Mahomet being earnest in his prayers was accidentally conveyed into
Paradize, where being very earnest in beholding its rare varieties, at length
he cast his eyes upon the glorious Throne of the Almighty; and (perceiving the
Lord to turn about) fearing he should be severely whipped for such presumption,
blushes for shame, and sweats with terror; but loath to have it seen, wipes off
his brow the precious sweat with his first finger, and threw it out of
Paradise: it was not lost, for, forthwith dividing it self into six drops, all
of them became miraculous creatures: the first drop became a fragrant Rose
(therefore is rose water so much used there, and in honor of the Rose an
Annual feast solemnized:) the second, a grain of Ryce, (a holy grain:) the
other four, four famous Doctors, who (having Pallas for their sister) helped
Mahomet to compile his holy Alcoran. You have not tasted all yet; sallads, a
charrs, and hard eggs, parti-colored; and therefore hard, that their stomach be
not too soon emptied: the mutton there is sweet, but fat only in the tail,
the weight commonly ponderizing above twenty pounds, sometimes the Carcass:
Camel, Goat, and Pheasant are also manducable; the country yields, the Law
allows it: contrary to Beef, Veale, Swines-flesh, Hare, and Buffols,
prohibited by Mahomet, either to collogue with Jews, or that his own pallat
detested them. Camells flesh they sell commonly in the Buzzars roasted upon
scuets or cut in mammocks and carbonadode, three or four spits valuing two
pence. Bad pastery men they are, they put a lamb whole into a kind of oven,
and take it out as black as a cole; they say (I dare not second it) it tastes
curiously; it may be so, but I fear scarce well: well it may be to a famisht
martialist, not so in banquets. The poor are not so voluptuous: they content
themselves with dry ryce, herbs, roots, fruit, lentills, and a meat resembling
thlummery: Dates also preserved in sirrup commixt with butter-milk, is precious
food and physical. But, to memorize their Cheese and Butter will make your
mouths water at it; I ironize: in good earnest the cheese is the worst any ever
tasted of, both that it wants Art and materials: it is dry, and blew, and hard;
ill to the eye, bad to the taste, naught for digestion; of an unsaporie taste,
rough, and in a month shows no moisture: the worst is toward the Gulf; the
best in Mozendram; neither of them praise worthy. Will you taste their butter?
first, Butter.
inquire how they make it: I enquired of some there, they say they sometimes
take what is generated in the Guspans (or sheeps tails) it saves them
churning: others, boil the cream soundly in a raw skinned leather-bag, full of
hayres and unsalted: this sort will keep fresh (sweet I say not) six months, in
that point commendable; but when we drew our knives through it, a thousand
sluts hairs were then discovered, therein abominable; yet they commend it, we
no way condiscended: their liquour may perhaps better delight you; it is fair
water, sugar, rose water, Drink.
and juice of Lemons mixed, called Sherbets or Zerbet, wholesome and potable:
they drink wine (colored like a pale Claret,) Arac or Aquavitae, Tobacco,
(sucked through water (that it inebriate not) by long canes or pipes issuing
from a round vessel,) and above all the rest, Coho or Copha: by Turk and Arab
called Caphe and Cahua: a drink imitating that in the Stigian lake, black,
thick, and better; destrain'd from Bunchy, Bunnu, or Bay berries; wholesome they
say, if hot, for it expells melancholy, purges choler, begets mirth, and an
excellent concoction; but not so much regarded for those good properties, as
from a Romance that it was invented and brewed by Gabriel (what Gab. we despute
not of) to restore the decayed radical moisture of kind hearted Mahomet; who
(as he speaks himself to his inimitable glory) never drunk it, but immediately
by virtue thereof made it a matter of nothing to unhorse forty men, and in
Venus Camp (with more than a Herculean fortitude) to bring under forty women.
Opium (the juice of Poppie) is of epidemick use there also, good if taken
moderatly; bad, nay mortal if beyond measure; they chaw it much, it helps
catarrhs, cowardice, and the epilepsie; strengthens Venus, and which is
admirable, the Foot-posts by continual chawing it, run sleeping day and
night in a constant dream or giddiness, seeing, but not knowing whom they
meet, though well acquainted, and miss not their intended places; by a strange
efficacy expulsing the tedious thoughts of travel, and rarely deceiving the
poor body of its seasonable rest and lodging. I have deviated, this was
discourse at dinner, not yet ended. Meals.
They commonly eat in earth or porceline, not valuing silver (the King by such
an Article of of their Faith, the neatlier attracting it to his own Table;)
they have another reason (very ridiculous,) that Mahomet at his stealing into
hell discovered the Devils at dinner, and served in silver; earthen ware was
holier, and therefore better for all kind of Mussulmen. In feeding they use not
knives, nor count they it luckie to employ but one finger or two; three or
four is enjoined them from tradition. Nor do they cut their bread but break or
rend it: equally fictitious; the story lying thus; that Ozman in his parody
assures them, The Devil ( Shitan they call him) ever diets so: a palinody they
might sing, knew they how Ozman borrowed it from the Jews, who ever used to
break their bread; and from Xenophon, in his description of the Persians: but
they owe all to miracle, deriding History.

At meals they are the merriest men that may be: no people in the world have
better stomachs, drink more, or more affect voracity: yet are harmlesly merry;
a mixture of meat, and drink, and mirth, excellently becoming them: Qui canit
art canit, qui bibit art bibat: and then are joviall in a high degree,
Complement
when women (Curtezans I mean, custom anticipates the honest sort) accompany
them. They admire their breeding (to us they seemed barbarous;) especially when
in an exact complement, out of squallid wantonness they would overcharge their
wide mouths with pelo or other meat, and by an affected laughter take occasion
to exonerate their chaps, and throw the overplus into the dish again whence
first they had it; and as a symbol of entire good will (sir reverence) offer
you, to eat what they had chewed formerly: to make an end, having soak't their
hussinees or water baggs, the wine bottles are then emptied; they sit long and
drink soundly, Drink.
condemning that precept in the Alcoran as an idle toy, a lie invented by Osman
That it is Giants blood, yea, of those we call Theomachi, or who fought against
the Gods; the Turks forbear to drink it from that prohibition: the Persians
laugh them to scorn, and by this have brought them to a favorable opinion of
grapes and wine. But the Persians in this are commendable; they never quarrel
in their cups, yet such usually irritates: nor compel they any to sit longer
than he please (arising without any excuse,) nor drink they one unto another;
a prejudicat conceit it is in any man to think all brains alike in such more than
beastly exercises; a base custom, too much abused in this Age of corruption;
forgetting that Minos an old Heathen strictly forbad it the Cretans, as Plato
warrants in his Dialogues. But these, compared with those of old are without
resemblance. These are homely, those full of excess and braverie. Dyon and
Ctesias assure us that in old times the Persian Monarchs made many feasts,
Feasts.
and usually invited fifteen thousand men; in every entertainment expending
four hundred Talents, amounting in our money to two hundred and forty thousand
crowns: at private feasts when forty or fifty were received and no more (as
Ephipius Olynthius records,) each supper stood him in a hundred Mynaes of gold,
each mina or dina, in our money valuing six and twenty shillings and eight
pence: pretty in that juvenility of time (for we say plures opes nunc sunt,
etc) yet credible when we consider the vast revenue of the Persian Empire in
those days extracting Tribute from many Nations; For, what accrued out of
those twenty Provinces, was not less than forty thousand and five hundred
Attique or Euboick Talents, Crown revenue.
in our sums forty hundred thousand crowns or there abouts: therefore might
they easily lavish out such prodigious expenses. Out of Indya also they yearly
received three hundred and threescore Talents of gold. The crown revenue at
this day is little less, (albeit the jurisdiction royal be not half so
spacious) and amounts to mighty sums: Tahamas Anno Dom. 1560 received eight
millions of crowns, gathered from fifty Sultans who farmed his in-comes;
besides an annual present or tribute of 20000 crowns Leventhibeg a Georgian
Prince, never failed to send him: and 12000 horse the Curdyes 'twixt the two
Seas also eased him of payment: and Abbas at this day from silk, tribute, and
exactions, receives yearly above nine millions: fourteen millions and 280000
florins some say, 357000 Tomans in Persian money, in ours 1190000 pound
sterlin: And though the ground (by a continued flaming of the Sun) be barren in
grass, trees, or the like, yet it hinders not that her womb is rich and
uberous: for besides her store of rarest marble, the earth from her concave
bosom, oft-times discovers many rich mineralls and stones of luster, Jacynths,
Jasper, Myneralls.
Chrysolites, Onix, Turquoises, Serpentine, and Granats: the Pezars and Pearls
(than which no part of the whole world has better) also no less valuable. Of
old, the Persian hills have been famoused for Mines of gold. Plautus in Sticho
remembers it, The Persian hills he may deserve to hold
Which (if the proverb lie not) are of gold.
Mereat Persarum montes, qui
esse aurei perhibentur, etc.
and Varro alluding to their tempting excellencies, thus; The Persian
mountains nor the Lydian state
Our minds from care or zeal can separate.
Non demunt animis curas ac religiones
Persarum montes, non divitis atria Croesi.
But whether they have any now or no I know not. Thus having done with this of
old; record we the coins at this day used: Coins.
the Abbassee is in our money sixteen pence; Larree ten pence; Mamoodee eight
pence; Shahee four pence; Saddee two pence; Bistee two pence; double Cozbeg
one penny; single Cozbeg one half penny; Fluces are ten to a Cozbeg: the gold
coins are Sultanyes, Duraes, etc. but few seen; all but the Cozbegs and
Fluces being pure silver, the other brass, and current all over his Monarchy.

I have elsewhere described the buildings in Persia: a word of their beds and
other customs, Their beds are generally, Cotts of two foot height, Beds.
or four posts strengthened with girthweb; a shagg or yopangee atop; of double
use, serving as an Vmbrella abroad, at home a Coverlet: in Summer their Slaves
attend about them; some to waft and to beget cool air, others to scare away
the Gnats and such like buzzing vermin.

The men account it no small shame to urine standing, but call such dogs rather
than Mussulmen; we believe them: they mundifie their genitors after it, and to
that end have Slaves every where attending them with Ewers of silver to cleanse
pollution: they hate to see men walk: such they think mad; a madder thing to
see them ride tho not a stones-cast journey.

Their horses are of the Arabian breed, bodied like Jennets, Horses.
but far more swift and courageous: they curb their fiery metal with sharp
cutting bitts, a ring of iron also helping them; their bridles are long and
studded with gold: of such metal are their pummells and stirrops; their
saddles are usually of velvet; high and close, like the Morocco sort: the trees
are curiously painted: those they borrow from the Tartar, are hard, and small,
and close; sure, but not so easy. They are generally fat and in good liking,
albeit their fare be mean and slender; a little bagg filled with barley and
chopped straw hung about their heads, is both livery and manger; they strictly
tie them to a proportion, more or less breeding death or diseases. The Mules
are no less valuable; of better service where the passage is sandy, desert or
mountanous. Men use Horses and Asses to ride upon; women never, but upon
Camells; every Camel loaded with two Cages (or Cajuaes as they call them)
holds two women; of wood, coverd with scarlet commonly, low, and not suffering
them to stand upright, but less grievous in that for most part all sorts sit,
and cannot endure long standing: when any man's Haram travels, they are guarded
with leane-fac't Eunuchs without weapons to offend women, but armed with bows
and swords to defend the^ against any bold or curious opposer: upon sight of
any of them, all travelers fly out of the way, albeit they be the best men in
Persia; to make good the custom, and to prevent such mischief as jealousy
draws too often along with it, enflaming there as quickly as in any other part
of Asia: where we will finish our domestic view; and turn our eyes upon other
objects: their Language first; next, their Religion; and (as a farewell) end
all in a compendium of her Emperors.

I will offer you their Alphabet, writ in their own Character: to which if I
add somewhat of their present Language, it may both show thee the affinity it
has with the Saxon in many words (for from the Sacae a people near Mount
Taurus they borrow both Name and Descent;) and peradventure benefit the future
Traveller.

Aleph. ^ bea. ^ tea. ^ sea. ^ Icam. ^ hea. ^ chea. ^ taul. ^ zaul. ^ rea. ^
zea. ^ zean. ^ sheen. ^ saut. ^ zaud. ^ ctea. ^ zcea. ^ me. ^ kine. ^ phea. ^
caufe. ^ coffe. ^ Lom. ^ meam. ^ nuen. ^ wow. ^


Loomealephloy. yea. 1 ^ 2 ^ 3 ^ 4 ^ 5 ^ 6 ^ 7 ^ 8 ^ 9 ^ 10 ^


1 ^ 2 ^ 3 ^ 4 ^ 5 ^ 6 ^ 7 ^ 8 ^ 9 ^ 10 ^


(...)

Cumque superba foret Babylon spolianda trop^oets.

English. Persian GOD VVHoddaw the Sun Afta the Moon Maw a Star Nacosh the
Sky Kabowdas a Cloud Sephyte the Earth Zameen Emperor Pot-shaw King Shaw
Queen or Empress Beggoon Prince Mirza Duke Cawn Marquess Beglerbeg Earl
Sultan Lord Beg Lady Conna Lords son Beg-Zedday Gentleman Awgaw Merchant
Soldager Soldier Cowzel-bash Lord Ambassador Elchee-beg President Visyer Judge
Cauzee or Caddi Justice Darraguod Chancellor Mordaer Constable Calentar
Purveyor Mammandar a Christian Franghee a Moorish believer Mussulman a Jew
Iehewd an Armenian Armenee Persian Farsee Indian Mogull Georgian Gorgee
Sarcashan Carcash Turk Tork A Church Dear a High Priest Mustaed-dini an
Archbishop Kalyph a Priest Mulai a holy man Hodgee a begging Friar Abdall a
Saint Mere a Prophet Emoom a Prophets son Syet and Emoomzedda a holy Father
Padre a Father Bobbaw a Mother Mamma and Madre a Brother Brother a Sister Qhvaar
a Son Zedda a Daughter Daughter a Boy Oglan and Pissar a Girl Daughter a
Maiden Whotoon a Cosen Choul a Friend Memam a Slave Colloom a Servant Marda a
Footman Shooter a Groom Mitar-bashe a Cook Ash-pash a Butler Suffrage a Barbar
Syrtrash a Physician Hackeam a Doctresse Dayah a Mountebanck Shytan-Tabyb a
Scribe Vikeel an Interpretor Callamaehe a speech or lang. Zavoan a Mechanic
Oastad a Man Adam a Woman Zan the Head Serry Hair Mow Eyes Chasin Eyebrows
Browz Nose Bynny Ears Goush Cheeks Row Mustachoes Sibyl Lips Lab Teeth
Dandoon Chyn Chynoser Arm Bozow Breast Sinow Hand Dast Finger Angusht Belly
Shykam Yard Kery Stones Sekym Matrix Cus Thighs Roam Knees Zoanow Foot Poe
Wine Sherap Water Obb Fire Attash Wind Bawd The Sea Deriob a Ship Kishtee a
Boat Kishtee-cowcheck Fish Mohee a Sheep Guspan a Goat Booz Roast Meat Cobbob
Rice Brindg Boiled Rice Pelo Wood Yzom Apples Sib Pomgranads Narr Musk-Melons
Corpoos Water-Melons Hendoon Myrabolans Allilha Dates Wchormaw Almonds Bodoom
Raisons Kishmish Walnuts Gardow Sugar Sucker Small Nuts Pistachoes Sirrup of
Dates Dooshab Pleasant Liquor Sherbet Bezar Pezar a Rose Gull Grapes Angwor
Figs Anger Orange Norenge Lemmons Lemoon Carroway seed Giznees Anny-seed Zera
Nutmeg Goose Cloves Mekut Mace Basbas Cinnamon Dolcheen Spice Filfill Ginger
Gingerfill Pepper Pepperfill Ophium Triack or Therias Rubarbe Rhubarr Onions
Peose Spiknard Sembul-tib Manna Sheer-quest Sena Machyi Poppie Pustie one Year
Yeck Sol one Month Yeck-Maw a Day Rowse to day Amrowse Yesterday Diggrowse to
morrow Subbaw two days hence Past-subbaw Night Shave or Shab Soon Zood Much
Pishaar More Diggar Good Cowbass Bad Baddass Naught Cowb-nees Great Buzzurck
Little Coucheck Small Kam Less Andack Write Binwees Sing Bowhoon Bread Noon
Butter Rogan Cheese Paneer Milk Sheer Sower Milk Moss Vinegar Sirca Rose Water
Gule-ob Honey Dowshabb Salt Namack Water Obb Raine-water Ob-baroon Salt Water
Ob-namack Hot Garmas Cold Sermawas a Book Catobb a Chest San dough a Carpet
Collee a League Farsang half a League Nym-Farsangas a resting place Manzeil a
common Inn Carravans-raw a Nursery Haram a House Conney a place Joy Straw Io
Barley Cow Wheat Gandowm Money Zarr White Sevittas Red Sourck Iron Pholot a
Knife Cord a Sword Shamshere a Gun Tophangh a Glass Shusha Inck Moora kabbas
Silk Abrushumas Lace Chytoon Buttons Dougma a Furre Fust a Dagger Hangier
Spur Mahamis Boots Chagma a Window Pangera a Door Darr a Table Taghtah a
Chair Cursee a Cup Paola a Candle Sham a Candle-stick Shamdom a Bed Mafrush a
Pillow Nazbolish a Quill Callam a Garden Baugh or Bawt a Town De the Devil
Shitan Hell Iehendam Rogue Haramzedday Slave Colloom Whore Cobba Cuckold
Ghyddee Fool Do anna Villain Haram zedda old Whore Moder-Cobba the Kings
Evil Boagma Dog Segg Cat Chat Mule Astor a Goat Buz Cow Gow an Ass Owlock
an Elephant Behad a Nightengall Bulbul Camel Shouter Mule-man Astor-dor
Camell-man Sheuter-dor Horse-keeper Myter a Horse Asp a Saddle Zeen a
Saddle-cloth Zeen-push a Shoe Cosh a Nail Cheat Sheepherd Vloch Bird Quoy
Beef Goust de gow Hen Morgh Hens-Egges Tough-morgh Boyld Poactas Half boyld
Nym-poact Paper Coggesh and Cartas Thread Respun All boyld Hamma-poact Kitchen
Mawdbaugh Old Chonnay New Novas I Thou He Man San O Nothing Hech a highway Raw
a Tree Drake a Turquoise Pheruzay a Pasport Phyrman a Cap or Turba^t Mandeel a
Coat Cabay a Key Cleet a Ring Hanguster a Tower Manor a Needle Suzan a
Looking-glass Dina a Whip Chabuck a Towell Dezmal a Gift Piscash a Platter
Langaree a Plate Nalbachee a Color Raugh a Misbeleever Caffar a Privy Adam
Conney a Close stool Ob-Conney a Cradle Cajua a Glass bottle Shuzan a riding
Coat Bolla-push a hill Achow a Hot-house Hummum a Sweet heart Ionanam Strength
Zoor Full Pooras Strait Tanghea Weak Sanghe nees In health Choggea Sick
Na-choggea Dead Mordass Gone Raftas Here Ingee Above Bolla and hollanda Below
Poin Angry Ianghea Hungry O jam Soap Saboon Broken Shekestas Laden Barkonnas
Lost Gumshottas Found Paydcun Tobacco Tombacoo and Tutoon A Tobacco pipe
Calliown and lula Stop Bast Wash Bushur The Market Buzzar the great Market
Mydan You lie Drugmaguee You say true Rosmaguee Very right Dreustas Near,
far off Nazeecas, duras Bring it higher Bear ingee What say you Chechesas
Go, call him Bro, Awascun He is a sleep Cobbedat He is abroad Swarshudat He
is not within Conney neese He is beheaded Shaw cusht He eats and drinks Mough
whorat Come quickly Zood beaw Go quickly Zood burro Know you, yes, Medanny,
baly Where is he Quo jaas Who, my father Che, pader man I know not Che madannam
Can I tell you Che cunnam Not far off Durneese What say you Chemigwe I drink
to you Esco-sumaw I thank you Bizmilla with all my heart All humderalla Much
good do it Awpheat Give me Biddy Do you love me you Dooz me daree Take away
Verdure You trifle Bazi-mecunne Fill full Pour-kunn Boil the meat
Goust-buppose Stay a while Andac wiest Even so Hamshe Beat him Besome It is day
Rows-hast It is night Shab-hast It is dark Tareekas Say thou Gufta I have
forgot Man Varamashcardam Bravely done Barra colla Brave game Tamas-shaw
English. Persian. A good morrow or God bless you Sir, Sallam-alleekam The like
I wish you Sir, Alleekam-sallam Whether do you go? Quo ja merue? Not far
Dure neese How do you to day? Chaldery Amrooz? Well I praise God Choggee
Shoocoro-Whoddaw Good, I am very glad thereof, Koobas, Whoddaw bashat Where
have you been? Quo ja boodee? Now I am your servant Hali man Merda sumaw
Welcome, Sir, heartily welcome. Hoshmodee, Agaw, Suffowardee Tell me, how you
do? healthie Gufta, chehaldery? choggee Where is your house? at Babylon Quo
jaas chonna sumaw? Bagdat Have you a Wife? Zan daree? Yea truly, fifteen Sir,
Bally, pounsdata beg How old are you? twenty four. Chan sol daree? char-beest
How are you called? Che nom Daree sumaw? My name is called Teredoro, Noma
mannas Teredore Is this the way to Tauris? Even raw have Tabyris? Yea, but how
many leagues thither? Bally, o chan Farsangas untraf? I suppose, it is twenty,
Man medonam, be Is the way good or bad? Raw koob o baddas? Is there good
Wine? Vnjee koob sherabbas? Yea, in the high way. Bally, raw have Whose Garden
is that? Even baugh mally chee? It Is the great Kings, Mally-Pot-shawhas Know you
Cazbeen? Cazbeen medanny? I do Sir, have you seen it? Man bali beg, sumaw
dedee? Why not, I know all Persia, Cheree-na, hamma Farsee dedam, Come hither
good Boy, Ingee bear koob Pissar Give me some Wine, soon Sherap bedee, zood
Fill me but one cup Pourcun yeck paola Then saddle my Horse Asp zeen pushee I
thank you Sir Whoddaw-negaturat It grows dark, I Will sleep Tarreekas, man
mechobed Give me some water, slave Ob be dee, colloom Here Sir, take it Ingee
Agaw, have bedee Much good do it you brother Awpheat bashat-broder What
business have you? Che Corr daree sumaw? Little, but stay a little Coocheck,
andae wist I have some occasions Man corr daram Tell me where is the King?
Gufta? Pot-shaw quo jaas? I believe in Hyrcania, Man medonam Mozendram God
bless you, Wheddaw bashat. Persian. English. Turkish. Yeck One Beer Do, or Dew
Two Ekee Se Three Eweh Char Four Dewrt Panch Five Beash Shesh Six Altee Haft
Seven Yedte Hasht Eight Seckez No Nine Dockoz Dah Ten One Yauzda Eleven
One-beet Dozda Twelve One-ekhe Sezda Thirteen One-ewch Charda, or Chaharda
Fourteen One-dewrt Pounzda Fifteen One-beash Shoonzda Sixteen One-alte Hawda
Seventeene One-yedte Hashda Eighteen One-seckez Nouzda Nineteen One-dockoz
Be Twenty Ygarmy Yec-beest Twenty one Ygarmy beer Dota-beest Twenty two
Ygarmy eckee Se-beest Twenty three Ygarmy ewch. Char-beest Twenty four Ygarmy
dewrt Sounce-beest Twenty five Ygarmy beash Se Thirty Chehel Forty Pangoh Fifty
Phast Sixty Haftat Seventy Hashtat Eighty Navat Ninety Satt One hundred Da
hazatt, or hazar One thousand

The Religion of the Persians.
THE Persian Religion at this day varies not from the Turks in any particle of
the Alcoran; and yet they account one the other Heretics, and are no less
zealous and divided in their profession, than we and the Papalins: a devision
begun Anno Domini 1400, by a Syet of Ardoveil (a City in Media;) the better to
advance the Sophyan Title to the Crown, derived from Mortis Ally their famous
predecessor, cosen and son in law to Mahumet: which Ally, albeit he had just
right to sit as Kalyph at Mecca next to Mahomet, yet in his despite, three
other men stepped up before him; and during their lives kept him in slaverie, and
withstood him. These three, Abuboker, Omer, and Ozman, are by the Turks most
venerably accounted of; but by the Persians (as appears by their cursing them
in a prayer made by Syet Gunet) as impostors, dogs, and heretics; whereby is
sown such mortal hatred betwixt these two potent Monarchs that (to Europs
good) they abominate each other with implacable hatred.

MAHOMET, (son of Abdar a Pagan, and Emma a Jew) was borne at Iathreb (or
Itrarip, Iezrab in Postellus, now Medyna) in Arabia, the year from the
Creation 4544, of Christ our blessed Lord and Savior 574: Justinian at that
time commanding the Roman Empire, and Cozrhoes (father to Hormizda) the
Persians.

His parents being mean and poor, he was forced to serve an apprentiship, and
with much patience served Zayed-ben-Hartah a rich and famous Merchant; who
dying, left his servant so good a legacy, that Mahomet was thought worthy any
woman in Mecca: but by reason of those incessant broils commenc't by Cozrhoe
and inflamed by the Romans, Traffic decayed, and most men danced to the shrill
brazen sound of Bellonaes music; Mahomet amongst the rest serving for pay
first with Heraclius, and then the Persian; not caring much who was victor, so
he was on the safest side, by both their confusion to plot some way or other to
advance himself, both in a terrhen dignity and as a Deity: nor did he err in
his prediction; for what by his great estate and good fortune in the wars, he
soon threw off the quality of a common man, and got a company; yea at length
an Army of so many Tattars and Arabians, that he dared to assault the
infeebled Christians, and became victor; yea, by stratagem (mingling with the
credulous and gladded Persians) upon a watchword cut asunder and confounded
the Persian Army. Which done, he blushed not to extol himself to all his
troops, deciphering the misery of Persia and horror of Roman bondage;
acquainting them also with the great discord amongst Christians; of that
inhumane villainy perpetrated upon Mauritius by Phocas (then Emperor) his
detested servant, and of Pope Boniface's usurpation of the title of Universal
Bishop; contrary to the good will of all the World, and what Pope Gregory the
great had lately branded John the Constantinopolitan Patriack with, as the
Antichrist; in that sixty six good Bishops of Rome from Lynus (seven years
after the passion) to that Pope then teaching, never desired it. That he
himself was ordained from the beginning of the world to eclipse the pride of
that Pope, to instruct the world in a better and more plausible way than either
Moses did the Jews, or Christ the Christians; that he was the Comforter
promised (yet says that he came to give his Law by the sword and not by
miracles) and to advance the Arabians name and dignity above all other
Kingdoms in the Universe. The amazed Savages admire his boldness, and (though
some thought basely of him) most part hoping he could effect his promises,
give credit to him and atttend his revelations.

But ere he could finish his new molded work, the enraged Persian suddenly
steals among them and in memory of their late kindness, retaliates them so
fiercely, that Mahomet (to save his life) posts away, leaving the rest to the
merciless fury of the Persian.

Mahomet with a sad heart arrives safely in Mecca ( Mocura and Munychiates in
old writers, the Arabian Metropolis:) but when he calls to mind his miserable
estate, by this last defeat being cheated of his moneys and men, yea such men
as he had prepared to help forwards his ambition, he consumes in the
meditation, and by his faint-heartednesse and constant vexing had doubtless
made Death his executioner, had not Satan physic him.

Some safer way he intends to take, than in Mars his rugged fields, so full of
cost and bloodshed. And therefore in the first place, to solace his unquiet
spirits and enrich himself, he lays seige to Chodaige or Aediga a woman of
great wealth and worship, by some thought Queen of Corasan; whom after a few
amorous assaults he won, and of her begot three sons and four daughters,
named Ebrahim, Tajeb, and Taher (all three dying young) Fatyma and Zaynab (both
married to Mortis Ally;) Om-Kalthom and Rachya, wives to old Abuboker. Mahomets
stomach grew weak, and one sort of meat begun to loath him, Chodaige was stale,
and others fancied him: he therefore purposed in his Law (then in hatching) to
allow all sorts of carnal liberty: and to encourage them by his example,
solemnly (as Ben Casen a writer of his belief says) espoused Aysce the
beloved child of his son in law Abubocher: a child (though Mahomets wife) I
well may call her, at that time not exceeding six years old; yet so pliable to
the delights of her wanton husband, that he calls her his best beloved, and
dictates a whole chapter to her praises; so that for her affection to him, her
courtesy to others, her witty conceits, her skill in history and language, she
is entitled Mother of the Faithful; and (contrary to his tenet in his
Alcoran) in whose grave (hoping there also to embrace her) Mahomet desired to
be buried, as was by old Abubocher afterward performed

His third wife was Miriam (or Mamrya) of whom he begot Ebrahim Cassen, who at
the age of six months, by the arrow of grim death was directed the inevitable
way of his brethren. Zaynab (the repudiate of Ben-Hartah Mahomets master) was
Mahomets fourth and last wife (concubines he had above a hundred, but in any
Author I find not named) a Lady of singular perfection, and so credulous of his
feigned visions (and that his epilepsie was caused by an Angels glory, often
conferring with him) that by all Mahomitans she is also named a second Mother
of Mussulmen or true believers.

These his bosom friends, and other his bed fellows, together which taught
birds to feed at his ear, and beasts by practice directed, blazond his
holiness, and put all Arabia into a confused wonder: and having by the Devils
prompting, and the help of Sergius an Italian (a neast of uncleanness, a
Monck, a Sabellian, a discontented wretch for missing worldly preferment at
Byzanth,) and of John of Antioch (an infamous Nestorian) finished his Alcoran in
the year of our blessed Lord God 620. and of Mahomets age 46. which so
transported him, that to Mecca he goes, intending to divulge it, and where he
hoped to have it easily credited; but therein his prediction faild him, for so
soon as they perceived his ground of innovation (formerly acquainted with his
birth, breeding, and subtlety they banish him, and but for his wives kindred
had crushed him and his Cockatrice egg, but then in hatching. Mahomet (involud
with more perplexity now than ever) is at his wits end, once resolving to burn
his book and fall to trading: but Sergius moderates, telling him, a design of
so great consequence must needs be attended with persecution and many other
circumstances. The half dead Prophet revives upon this encouragement, and
quickly apprehends this affliction propitious to his memory; so that to Iathreb
he goes, and for two years secludes himself from much company; till having
finished his plot, and commanding the account of all his sectaries to begin from
his late flight out of Mecca, he again adventures, and by bribery, magic, and
other means attracted many followers, and in seven years after is received in
Mecca: from this accursed root branching out so many sects as in short time
infected and shaded all the Orient, in an eclipse of fearful darkness.

Mahomet (whose name Arabically signifies Deceit, and many times Convenient
rebus nomina saepe fuis; affoording also the number 666 the mark of
Antichrist,) having accomplished his desires, and run his race, is summond to
appear before the Lord of all flesh, the God Omnipotent, Omniscient, and Judge
of all men's actions; where (no doubt) he received a just judgment for his
impiety. This was in his great clymacteric 63, of the Hegira 17, and of our
Savior 637, ordaining Ally to succeed him, and his Carcass to be placed in
Aisces grave in Iathrip which per Antonomasiam he new named Medina Talnabi; it
or Mecca, in my opinion, being that Munichyates in Ptolomy; but I rather think
Mecca it, because I read that Medina (or Iathrep) was built Anno Domini 364. by
Aadhuddaule then King of Babylon: and by Osman allegorically called
El-haramain, and by others De-A'salem i.e. a holy place or Town of mercy, none
daring in the garb or language of a soldyer tread East, West, North, or South,
nigher than six one way, twelve, eighteen, and twenty four miles the other;
upon pain of death and eternal displeasure. Speak we now a little of his
fabulous Alcoran, or Sunna, i.e. the Book of truth, or a Legend for the
faithful: stuffed with obsceannesse, lies, miracles, visions, moral and
natural Philosophy; such trash as may powerfully provoke the silliest student
to a height of laughter. The proem this; That it was sent from God by Gabryel
the holy Angel to Mortis Ally; but he mistaking the man, gave it to Mahomet;
whom when God saw replenisht with equal virtue, the Angel was not blamed, but
the gift confirmed and made irrevocable.

The Alcoran.
To begin then; The Alcoran or Bible (by them called Kurrawn and Alesalem i.e.
the law of peace, or Alcacan i.e. Judgment, as it was digested by Ozman
fifteen years after the death of Mahomet) is in volume twice so big as the
Psalms of David; divided into a hundred and fourteen Azoaraes or Chapters,
put by Ozman into a poor kind of rythme, unpleasant to the ear, unless well
ordered: It is not a continued tract of devotion or direction, but of his own
life, the Art of war, the use of peace, Rhetoric, Numbers, the Zodiac, the
Earth, and a mishmash out of Applis (or Aristotle) grossly and confusedly
handled. His mother instructed him in the Jewish Rites or Talmud: and Sergius
in the Gospel: whereby, in the seventy one Azoara of Nohha, and in the tenth
of Iunys, he records the History of Noah and Jonas; and in other chapters, of
Enoch, Abraham, Joseph, Moses, Elias, and David; whose songs called
Zebur-Dahood or the Psalms of David, and the Teurat Moissah or pentateuch of
Moses, he extolls most vehemently. The Ingil also (or Gospel of Saint Luke) he
sets out at large in the fourth Azoara of Anneza, and in the fifth of Almeyda,
naming Christ, the Messiah, Rooth-noor Alloh, and Hazret, i.e. Messiah, the
Spirit or word and light of God, holy Jesus: not omitting his bodily ascension
into heaven in sight of his twelve Apostles, seventy Disciples, and five
hundred men. Yet denies him be to the son of God, but that the Virgin
conceived by smelling to a Rose presented her by Gabriel; and that he was borne
out of her breasts. Also that he was not crucified, but Judas or some other
wicked theife; Christ being separated from them by a cloud that covered him and
came from heaven. And thence it is, the Cross is so rediculous amongst them;
they say also that he was the most holy, chaste, and powerful Saint that ever
converst on earth: and that (in the second Azoara of Albacara in the Alcoran)
Moses and Christ shall save the Jews and Christians at the day of Doom: and
yet in the next chapter of Amram (forgetting what he had said) protests that
no soul shall ever be saved but by his Alcoran, he being sent into the world
to moderate the strictness of the Gospel, as Christ did the severity of the
Law ceremonial; varying also from what in the twelfth Assuratto he commands,
that they should be held in equal repute with the Alcoran; running thus: The
holy and merciful God, first sentt he ceremonial Law, and then the Gospel to
direct all men in the right path, and lastly the Alcoran, a faithful Book, and
for your instruction. No man therefore that is truly religious, dare to
undervalue the old Law and: Gospel, but to practice it no less than what is
commanded in the Alcoran. From whence it is, that they reverence the holy
Sepulcher, visit Saints Tombs, and honor the memory of our Savior; abhorring
the Jews of all creatures. Saint John Baptist also he speaks modestly of, and
of the blessed Virgin with singular reverence: saying in the nineteenth Azoara
to this purpose, Hayle Mary, thou art blessed, yea in purity and holiness
excelling all other women; the meditation of Gods laws was ever in thy heart,
therefore he has selected thee, refined thee, and made thee his happiest
dwelling; thou art full of knowledge and mercy; free from pollution, hatred or
ambition: yea, thou the Virgin Mother of the great Prophet Jesus, art only of
womankind most lovely and perfect in the sight of the Almighty, etc. Which I
name, not that his Book is any way more valuable, (the end considered, which
was his plot for Apostasy) but that the Devil and Sergius who helped him,
could not blaspheame, nor be suffered to derogate from their Majesty; and to
whom we say in the words of our Savior to the Demoniack, hold thy peace; and
ex ore tuo laus sordet. The residue of the Book consists of Heresiarchyes
against our blessed Savior; with Arrius it denies the Divinity; with Sabellius
the Trinity; with Macedonius the holy Ghost proceeding; with Manicheus the
death of Christ; and such like errors as to them and Satan seemed plausible.
In the 32 Azoara, he commands that no man be so impious to question any
particle of his Law, nor to dispute about it; and yet in another chapter
confesses that it is full of lies.

1 Commandment; There is one, and but one great God, and Mahomet is his
Prophet.

Sung every fourth hour both by the Muyezins and Talismanni from the steeple
tops of every Mosque in a clear note, Llala y-lala, Mohummed resullula; and
the Persians by Syet Gunets direction to the honor of their Prophet, Llala
y-lala Mortus Ally vel-hillulla.

2 Comman. It Is neither good nor just that any Mussulman live unmarried; lest
the professors of the Alcoran ( or Mahomet) be thereby diminished.

Whence it arises that Poligamy is tolerated; yea, that such are thought the
most honorable and brave men who super-abound in wives and concubines. The
chaste Prophet Mahomet in the Azoara of Bacara boasts much of his own delight
and singularity therein; and that he had strength at most times to satiate the
lust of forty women. In that chapter of Attahrim he also confesses that he often
had violated his faith and troth; but, it grieved him not, in that he had
received pardon from God; and had to witness it, his good friends Rachel and
Gabryel, two holy Angels.

But who sees not, that in this precept of his (like a polite Machiavillian) he
had respect to the natural disposition of the Arabians, pleased with freedom
and voluptuousness, rather than to any virtue: not caring how, so by any
magic he could yoke them to obedience, and affectation of his Alcoran.

3 Comman. It behooves all Mussulmen to be charitable; and to hate contention.

From this command, issues most good to Travelers; for whereas Innes are not
to be had in heathen countries, stately buildings (called Imarets in Turkey;
Carravans-raws in Persia; Serrays in Indya) are purposedly built and open for
all comers, never questioning their Country, business, nor religion; the
rooms are sweet and well kept, the stables be convenient; and not any is to
pay ought, in that it was founded from the charity of some Mahomitans; who have
been known to spend in one of those common receptories fifteen thousand
pound sterling: such are in Shyraz, Cashan, etc. they also erect Hospitalls for
lame men and diseased: yea, for aged, starved, or hurt birds, beasts, and such
like creatures.

4 Conaman. It behooves all Mussulmen to invocate their Prophet, every day five
times at least, with sobriety: and to attend his coming patiently.

Which, they carefully accomplish; and with such regard that when the Muyezin
is heard to cry aloud from the Mosque they fall to prayer, though then busied
in profane talk, drinking, drabbing, or the like. And in praying, to help
their memory use Beads, stop their ears, and shut their eyes, lest any thing
might divert them in their zealous Orizons; which they actuate in a quiet and
silent murmur, bending, prostrating, and kissing the ground or some relic of
holy earth brought from Medina, the Haram or Alcaba, two holy Chapels in
Mecca, erected (says the Alcoran) by Abraham from the true Idea of that which
Adam built in Paradize; albeit some hold that he stayed there not above a day,
and carried by Angels into heaven at the general Deluge: in every El-fata or
prayer sizedaing or kissing the earth at each Epethite or name of God and
Mahomet: and after they have battologuiz'd Ilalay-lala, they iterate another to
this effect following.

In the name of the good and holy God. Praised be the Sovereign of all worlds,
the only merciful God of Doom': thee we serve, thee we call upon: show us the
best way; that, which thou have revealed to Mahumet; but not that whereby thou
punishest the Ungodly. This also, as I have noted amongst them, being a mere
Tautologie of the names of God and Ma^met. Bizmillah! raugh mawn, a raugh-heam
Allhundill Alley: Etto byatto, almo barakatto, assulwatto, Attayo batto; Leyla,
heessalem, Aleyka, I, Iaanna, nebeen rough meet Wallough heeweeber-catto.
Essa-lamalena, Wallah Ebadulla, hesolaheem Eshaddo. Awla-El aha, El-Allaho,
Eshaddai, Mahummed resull-Allogh. L'alla, Essalamalena Ebadulla Solaheem.
Essalamaleekam Essalamaleeka. Allyhomma Sul-hillulla. Allaw Mohummed don
Wallaw, Wassaleem-chamma Salleata, Alhumderalley, Whoddaw, and said by all
Mahomitans in Arabia, Persia, Indya, Iava, etc.

And though this be the most usual, yet they are not without other set forms
of prayer, compiled by Osman in his Parody, (for, in the 17 Azoara Mahomet
confesses that he could neither read nor write) and by that famous
Almotannabby, who fell in his learned conceits to make his Name more venerable
than Mahomet. Their Elfataes are either for the safety of their Kings, a happy
issue, the welfare of their Country, thanks that they are Mussulmen, Bosarmen,
or true believers, and the like: five times in four and twenty hours praying
(or rather balbutiating) orderly. The hours are, day-breake, noone, three in
the afternoon, sunne-set, and at midnight: recorded by these titles. Ashaera,
Magreb, Adelesher, Kalamath, and Erketh; Arabically thus, Dahour, Lashour,
Mogrub, Sallit and Sabaha L'hair. The first hour, is acted by four Tessalems
or prostrations and two prayers; 2. by ten times kissing the earth and five
El-fataes; 3. hour requires eight grovelings, and four ejaculations; 4. has
five Sizedaes and three orations; and the last hour for a farewell has fifteen
tesselems and eight repetitions: after that hour to day break it is held an
ungodly thing to invocate. The Persians since their reformation, think it
enough to pray thrice in four and twenty hours; at sob, dor, and magareb
Arabic words, and which signify morning, noonee, and night. On the Gynmaa or
Sabbath (by the Persians called Y'owma and D'siuma, by Turks Zuma-g'iuny,
Dumaad by the vulgar Arabs) they assemble in the Mosques (without seats and
bells;) each first washing, then kneeling with his face to Medina, not speaking
one to another, spetting nor coughing: scapes unpardonable.

5. Command. See thou observe yearly a Month Lent, a Byram, etc.

The Lent or Ramdam (called also Ramadan, Ramazan, and Ramulan) begins commonly
at the Suns entrance into Aries, Libra other times, no time certain; and is
an imitation of our Lent, or rather the forty days Moses was in Horeb, and by
some said in memory of Mahomets forty days hiding himself in the Desert,
flying from the rage of Mecca's Inhabitants, and that in that month he
divulged the Alcoran: but most likely (as in the 47 Azora of himself, and 25,
in which he treats of the excellency of the Alfurcan) from his blasphemous lie
that he was so long in the sixth heaven called Alahal, where this
Anthropomorphite says he had the honor to shake hands with the Almighty
(which he says were 70 times colder than Ice;) and that being upon the earth,
to make the people credit him, he commanded the Moon to descend; half of
which he put into his own sleeve, and the other half served as a zone or
girdle to Mortis Ally: and to their like amazement, after so rare a complement
peec't it, and placed it in the same Orb whence first he drew it.

During this Ramdam, all the day long they abstain from all sorts of viands or
refection, he being counted the veriest heretic in the world dare riot it.
But, Don Phoebus is no sooner inveloped with his dark mantle the earths
interposition, and Dame Cynthia arrayed with brightness in their Hemisphere,
then they gormundize and let loose the reins of their unbridled appetite,
Epicurising in all kinds of delights to be invented, or pleasures possible:
Prosper's saying, That to fast from sin, is the best fast; is here
ridiculous. So soon as the nine and twentieth day is past (for though the
Alcoran command forty, yet by those of the late reformation, it was limited to
one Moon) they begin the Byram (as we do Easter) and continue their merriment
and sports till the third day be ended; the two days after the Byram, are
commonly called Chutsi-baaram, and Char-bahram (or Byram.) The last hour of
the last festival many vow a zealous pilgrimage to their Prophets Sepulcher
(not magnetically attracted, nor intombed in an iron coffin as some report, but
laid under a fair marble, polisht and ingraved with Arabique sentences out of
the Elesalem.) But in the way, wallow in all kind of swinish turpitude,
villainy, and lothsomnesse; yet no where persecuted, being palliated with a
Pilgrims coat and hypocritique sanctity.

The Buccarie they solemnize in November or Chodad-maw (by Turks Silcade, by
Arabs Rabiel owl) in commemoration of the Ram sacrificed by Abraham such time
as Izmael (they say) should have been killed.

Many other Festivalls they celebrate. The Oud Hussan, Nowrouz, Imamy,
Caddyer-Ally, Iedt-Ousant, Auwpatsian; the Sophyan, the Roses, Daffadillies,
etc.

The Oud-Hussan is from Hocem or Hussan (soon of Ally) slain with eleven of
his sons by Mavi the Chalyph, Lord of Damascus, and Nephew to Ozman. A
Festival begun by Syet Gunet, followed by Aydar, and commanded by Sha-Izmael,
as a Triumph against the Ben-Humyans, who tho they thought to have extirpt
Ally's root, yet by divine providence St. Azmully brancht secretly, Anno
Hegirae 90. and from him this Siet of Ardoveil, reviver of the Sophian
dignity. For the Syet not only slighted the Turkish opinion of Mahomets
three successors Abubocher and the rest, but cursed all such as honor them;
yea, and four other great Hodgees or Doctors of the Alcoran, contemporarie
friends and helpers of Mahomet; those four (if I be not deceived) whom Mahomet
(in a fear for his presumption beholding God in Paradize) wiped from the sweat
of his brow, and by divine miracle metamorphiz'd into four learned men, thus
named, Achmet Sembelim, Abu-hamet, Melec-zeddah, and Sheck Vaffaim: a tenet so
offensive and exasperating to the Turks, that of late the Muphti condemning an
innocent Persian, swore a great oath, he thought it a better act and a more
meritorious sacrifice to kill one Persian, than seventy Christians. But to our
Story.

All agree that Hussan was slain trecherously by Choose a slave to Mnavi. Mavi
was an Actor, they therefore punish him yearly (though rotten 1000 years
since.) First, framing a deformed Image, his face blackt, his nose pierced with
a Dart, and clad in straw: which done, they hurrie it through the streets in a
hurly-burly of thousands of people, who when they have dragd it enough within
the City, hale it to some rising hill without, where to all men's view they
elevate this (supposed living) Caytiffe. The Caddy bawles out a pathetique
Oration to this purpose, That after much search, Ally had directed them where
to apprehend this Traitor, unworthy the least pity or procrastination: this
being that same villain who slew Hussan and his sons ( Ceresin only escaping:)
that every good man is bound in conscience to curse him, yea to help to torment
him in the vilest manner possible.

In show of joy and assent they unanimously sing Epicinia (a song of victory
and cry aloud, Yough Ally, yea strive to rend the clouds with their ceaselesse
clamours. At a set time they cease roaring, and fire is given to a train of
Gunpowder which sets diverse squibs a fire, and at length dissipates and blows
up the detested Syrian, by a hideous noise making the air echo at his smokie
Funeral. Hussans ghost now sleeps quietly; each Persian commends one another
zeal; haste home, and spend that night in merriment.

The Nowrouz is in imitation of our New-yeares day; but they begin (after the
old manner) in March, such time as Phoebus in his equal shine to either Pole,
makes the Aequinoctium. A festival of jovialitie, for one prayer preying upon
variety of wanton pleasures; the Talismanni piping now to Bacchus, Ceres, and
Madam Venus. For, I have observed, that in many parts for 11 months in the
year we could see very few women, and those veiled; but impossible in the
streets or gardens to converse with any without danger: yet these twelve days
of the Nowrouz all places were full of them, yea their naked faces openly
discovered; frisking in amorous postures, and drawing the eye by a forced
Magique. Gifts also and reciprocal presents are retorted up and down; with
garments of silk and gold, horses, fruits, and piscashes of other sorts;
nothing but riding the great horse, drinking, cock-fighting, fortune-telling,
singing, courting, and the like observed to the last minute of that Festival.

The Imamy has some dependence on the Buckaree. This a Camel, that a Ram; that
for Ismael, this for Mahomet. In November, the Meccan Protomist sends a
sanctified Camel by an adopted son (sometimes natural) who is welcomed to
Spahawn by many thousand Mussulmen, who show th'extream of joy for so holy a
Present. After they have tried and tired their voices, the Hodgee from an
exalted place acquaints them with the cause of his long journey, persuades them
to a thankful remembrance, and blesses them. The zealous multitude without
any respect of men or danger, throng about the Beast, who is no sooner in the
field where Death arrests him, but that they fall upon him, and pluck off his
hairs with an admirable dexterity, keeping them as sanctimonious relics,
praevalent against sudden death (though many die in the assault, and thousands
return maimed) hunger, thirst, poverty, and the like. After which, the
tormented Camel is by the Hodgee again signed for a sacrifice. The
Darroguode, first transfixes his Javelin. The Vizier beheads him, and gives it
the King. The carcass is torn peece-meale by the foole-hardie multitude; so
greedy to obtain this charm of long life and plenty, that immortality and
the place where meat and drink is needless, often praecipitates them.

The Caddier Ally is for Ally's victory over the three old Caytiffs of Mecca
by death (not Ally) conquered; and his joy in heaven: which after some
threnodies many prayers are muttered, songs chanted, and alms bestowed: the
King being at most charge, the greatest honor reflecting him.

The Iedt Ousant is from a Cabala, that Housant was lost in a terrible great
wilderness, where thirst killed him. Nine days they wander up and down
(shaving all that while neither head, nor beard, nor seeming joyful)
incessantly crying out Hussan Hussan in a melancholy note, so long so fiercely,
that many can neither howl longer, nor for a months space recover their
voices.

The tenth day they find an imaginary Hussan, that Nunquemque satis quaesitus
Adonis, whom they echo forth in Stentorian clamors, till they bring him to his
grave; where they let him sleep quietly till the next years zeal fetch him
out ( Semper enim perdunt semper and inveniunt) and force him again to
concomitate their merry devotion.

The Auwptpatsion (or Owdt-baptsion) is from Mahomets baptism by cursed
Sergius: and seems to deride our customs, to make their circumcision
lovelier. A rascal troop of circumcised Mahomitans assemble, and (after the
Darroguod has put a period to his rustic Oration) promiscuously besprinkle one
another faces, then soil their flesh with dirt and filth, the great ones many
times to please the King acting among them; Lastly, they cleanse themselves
with purer water, supposing all contaminated deformity washed off, and their
bodies wholsomer.

The Sophian, is a solemnity of fasting, feasting, and praying for the
prosperity of their King, of the Sophian pedigree.

The feast of Roses and Daffadillies is begun by a Procession of holy men, at
the first budding of those sweet flowers, and for thirty days is celebrated
with all manner of sports, and recreations to be imagined; continued from the
great feasts of the old famous Monarchs of Persia; tents in abundance, men,
women, boys, and girls, with Arms, music, songs, dances, and such as may
revive the Olympic memories.

6 Com. Reverence thy Parents. Which how ill they perform, many Tragic
stories daily inform us of.

7 Com. Cursed be the slayer. This is so well practiced in Persia, that what by
rigor of the Laws, and what from this, one may travel in any place at any
time without all danger; and although, they be generally Martialists and affect
much wine, yet I never saw any quarrel nor strife amongst them.

8 Com. Do so to Others, as thou would Others should do to thee.

From whence they are humane and courteous; but bribery is lately crept amongst
them, and deceit too, too easily discerned.

The Alcorar is a miscellany of other prodigious things. It tracts in the 33,
that Dagial or Shytan, i. e. the Devil, shall be saved by Mahomet: and in the
72 Azoara, that all Elgehenni or infernal ghosts shall after I know not how
many years be freed. The other Azoaraes of his Kurrawn are of Arithmetic,
fights, dangers, truth, falsehood, tyranny, war, peace, prophecy, etc. The 85
Azoara treats of the Zodiac; the 90 of the Sun; the 91, 92, 93, of the Moon,
of night, of morn; the 113, of the Firmament; but is Philosophy of such
coursenesse that I may well say, Discum potius quam Philosophum: for how can it
well be otherwise, since in his 17 Azoara, he confesses that he could neither
read nor write; but that all his learning was super-naturall. In one chapter
he is bold to say, that Solomon was a great Magician, and that he learnt it
from Marot and Arot, two great black Devils: with more reason we may say, that
Mahomet was skild in that infernal wisdom, if half of those miracles be
true he records of himself; one is this: In a great assembly of Arabian
Pagans, he pointed at the Moon with his thumb and long finger; it seems it
knew his mind, for the Moon immediately clove asunder, and in two pieces fell
upon the hill of Mecca, on which he at that time stood: Mahomet with a piece
of his linsey-wolsey coat patcht it and made it whole again; and after it had
also (say the Persians) circumvolved Mortis Ally in way of embrace or
complement, it re-ascended, and from that day became the badge or coat armor
of all Bosarmen. In another, he assures his Proselites, that Mecca, Medina,
and Jerusalem be holy Cities, built by Adam in Paradize, but framed in heaven:
and thence it is, that Jerusalem is by Turks as well as Christians, honored:
four Cities sprung out of hell at the birth of Mahomet (at which, time all
Idols fell, and Lucifer was thrown into hell, so deep into that abisse, as
he was some years ere he could get up again) the names of those devilish
Towns are (as pleases Mahomet to say) Elmedin in Caldea, Antioch in Syria,
Vastat in Egypt, and Eh-beram in Armenia: Places, it seems which had refused
him and his learned Doctrine.

But lend your ears a while and listen to the most serious subject of his
Alcoran. In the 47 Azoara, he records hi^ pilgrimage into the highest heavens;
where he saw rare things, and thence brought a certain description of the
several Spheres, Heavens, Hells, and Paradises: as also of Angels, and
Saints; of judgment, the resurrection, joy and pain, etc. of which I will
afford you a compendium for Mussulmen to believe, for us to laugh at. One eve
(as Mahomet was sporting privately in's chamber at Mecca, with Aysce his young
wife) Gabryel ( Seraphyel the Persians call him, the same that fosterd Mahomet
and Ally three years, and was peradventure such a Malus Genius as haunted
Brutus) in a flash of fire entered their bedchamber, and saluted Mahomet with
this message: Hail thou beloved man! I come to fetch thee: the God whom thou
so zealously worshippest, desires to see thee at his own station. Mahomet
rejoices, and going to mount upon the Angels wings (of which he had seventy
p^ire) is hindered: he asks which way he should take toward heaven, the Angel
shows him a huge Ass, Albarack by name, and bids him mount upon him; which
Mahomet essaying could not do, till he had prayed for him. From Mecca he
posted (in the twinkling of an eye, for Barack at four steps had done it) to
Jerusalem: there, the Angel dismounted him, and took him into his own
protection. In few minutes Mahomet ascended heaven, and was let in by Gabryel
the Porter there. From one heaven to another is a travel of five hundred
years; howbeit, The Heaven
Mahomet glanc't through the seven in a moment. In all which Orbs he saw many
strange things; but first take notice what metal the Orbs are made of. The
first is of refined silver, and wherein all the glittering stars are fixed
with chains of burnisht brass: in this heaven he saw a Cock so great that
standing upon the Moon, his cox-comb reached into the imperial heaven, many
millions of miles altitude: every time that this Cock crowed, all other
Chanticlears upon earth, re-ecchoed him. The second heaven is of gold, such
gold as has been seven times tried in the fire. The third is of pearl; in
this heaven he saw innumerable troops of Saints and Angels; each of them
saluted him by his name, and he prayed for them. Amongst the rest he took
notice of Adam, Enoch, Abraham, Samuel, David, Solomon, etc. all whom he knew
by revelation; and of which, some he taxed, others he commended as occasion
served him. The fourth heaven, is of Smaragd, and where he saw infinite
companies of other Angels who made a mighty noise and incessantly praised God:
and well they might make a noise, for (says Mahomet) every Angel there, was a
thousand times bigger than the globe of the earth; and each had ten thousand
heads; every head, threescore and ten thousand tongues; and every tongue
praised God in seven hundred thousand several languages: amongst them, he
noted one especially, Phatyr, or the Angel of Mercy; a creature of that vast
frame that every step he trod was twelve times more than the distance is twixt
both the Poles. Mahomet inquired of him why he wept so fiercely; the Angel
replied, that it was out of his compassion to see the deplorable estate and
vanity of man. This is that same Angel that has the Holy Quill or pen in
keeping; a pen of orient Pearl; so long, that an excellent Arabian Courser in
five hundred years continual galloping, can hardly reach to the further end
of it: with this pen, God registers all things past, present, and to come; the
Inck he writes with, is pure Light; the Character so misterious, that none but
he and Seraphael can understand it. All the hundred and four holy Books are
written by this Quill; viz. those ten which Adam received; Seth had fifty;
Edris (or Enoch) thirty; and Abraham had the rest: it also writ Moses his Law,
David's Psalms; Christ's Gospel, and Mahomets Alcoran. The fifth heaven was of
Diamonds: where he saw a mighty Angel, and of all others the wisest: he had
as many heads and tongues and voices as any two others had in the inferior
Orb; and had the keeping of that Book, wherein all men in the world have their
names written: he did nothing but turn over the leaves and blot out one name
or another, for by that (as by the arrow of death) they died suddenly. The
sixth was of Turquoisse; the Seventh of Alahal; (some interpret it fire;
others, pure light or breath congealed.) All these circumvove one another like
Pearls or Onyous; but herein is the miracle, they be translucent and yet of
mettalls: a rare Philosophy! above all, is the heaven of heavens, full of light
and silence: immense, and within which, all other bodies are comprised, but it
incomprehended: there Mahomet saw the throne of God, rich beyond expression:
very great also, for it was supported by seven Angels, each of them so
wonderfully great, that a Faulcon if he were to fly a thousand years
incessant flight, could scarce go so far, as is the distance of one eye from
another: about the Throne hung fourteen candles, everlastingly burning: the
length of every of those candles (as Mahomet measured) was from one end to
another as much space as a good horse can ride in five hundred years: there
he saw the Almighty, who bad him welcome, and laid his hand upon Mahomets
face: his hands (says this blasphemous deluder) were a thousand times colder
than Ice: for all which, Mahomet in shame of his own baseness, blushed for
shame, and swet with fear; but with his long finger he swept away the sweat
from his brow, and threw it into Paradise: rare sweat! Each drop (he notes them
to be six) turned into some rare thing or other: one drop into a Rose, another
into a grain of Rice; the other four into four learned men, Ac'met,
Sembelin, Abuhamed, Melec-zed, and Seh-vaffin; After he had sufficiently
instructed himself in many mysteries, and was assured of Gods favor, he
descended with his Alcoran: but how he got it entertained, how notoriously it
has blasted the earth and poisoned most parts and Isles of Asia and Africa;
Angels.
it requires another place, to have it spoken: here only let us note the mad
conceits he fancies of Angels, the last judgment, Paradize, hell, etc. Angels
are either good or bad; both are subject to death: the good, because they
consist of flame, an Element; to sin, because Lucifer an Angel, by ambition
was expulst Paradise. The bad Angels are imprisoned in Dogs, Swyne, Toades,
Wolves, Bears, Tigres, and. After the day of Doom they shall be tormented in
hell some millions of years; but must in the end by virtue of Mahomets law be
delivered.

Day of Doom.
The great and general Judgment is as certain as the day of Death, and will
happen suddenly, such time as all the world is wrapped in a careless security:
the Angels know not the time, till Mahomet point it out by a great and
fearful Duel twixt death and him, whom in the end he makes to fly away; but
by that combat becomes so enraged, that he destroys all living creatures in
the world suddenly; for new arming himself in flaming brass, in each quarter
of the world he sounds his dreadful Trumpet, whose affrighting clangor not
only makes men, beasts, fishies, birds, and like creatures die, but the Angels
also give over living; and lastly, Adriel himself, whom God commanded to
follow the rest in the inevi^a^le path, by wrapping his iron wings about him,
and strangling himself with such a dreadful noise, as is scarce imaginable.

After this ensues a terrible and universal Earthquake, followed by a violent
shower of purling brimstone, which must devour all grass, trees, and
vegitable Creatures; yea the Palaces of the proudest Tyrants: and turn
topsi-turvie, the earth, water, and other elements into a confused lump. Forty
days it must rest in a disordered Chaos; in which time, Almighty God shall
grasp it in his fist, and (beholding it) say to this effect. Where are now the
haughty Princes, the cruel Tyrants, lacivious wantons, and greedy earth-wormes
of the earth? which said; he will for forty days and nights space incessantly
rain down a gentle shower of mercy, and by a gracious breath reduce the world
into a most glorious estate: after that, he will call up Seraphyel, and bid
him take his Trumpet in his hand: the Trumpet is of purest gold, and above five
hundred years travel from one end to another: at the first sound will ensue a
revivification of Angels and Men: at the second, the Angels reassume their
glorious roabs, and men their naked flesh again. Judgment.
Michael the Arch-Angell (perceiving the Tribunal raised upon a high mount in
Iehosaphats vale) he approaches with his mighty balance, and poyses every man
their good and bad deeds in either cale: such whose good deeds out balance
their evil actions, are put upon the right hand, the other on the left: after
that, they are laden with their sins packt up in a satchell and hung about
their necks; in this sort they pass (upon a narrow and weak Bridge) over Hell;
such as have few sins get oversafely; those that be heavy laden break the
Bridge and fall into hell: at the otherside stands Mahomet in the shape of a
Ram, and in his deep and monstrous fleece lodges all his Sectaries, whom after
long travel he brings to some gap or other he finds in Paradise; and skiping
in, disburthens himself, and shakes them out; at that instant assuming new
forms, more lovely, more strong, and every way more excellent; with eyes as
big as the whole earth, and with eyebrows bigger and more beautiful than the
Rainbow. Let the Alcoran tell you what Hell is, and what is Paradise. Hell is
in the Umbelic or navell of the world; circled with a huge thick wall of
attractive Adamant: Hell.
it is entered by 7 gates of flaming brass; divided into many several cells or
dungeons: some are more loathsome and fuller of torment than others be; and
lodge such souls as have more highly sinned: some caves be so deep that in a
thousand years, a millstone cannot find the bottom of it; in whose descent are
sharp swords and pikes placed purposely to cut and torture the souls that move
there: some places be abisse or without any bottom; so full of oil and
brimstone that it is ever flaming, and so terrible, that the Devils howl, and
scritch, and rage there beyond measure: other prisons be full of Toads,
Serpents, and all noisome and horrid creatures imaginable: the damned eat
nothing there save the forbidden fruit; which being in their guts inflames like
sulphur, and makes them roar for anger. Some rivers be full of Crocodiles:
others so cold as makes them gnash and chatter: howbeit, these pains of hell
must not abide for ever, for after each soul has suffered so many thousand of
years as the sins amount unto they have committed, Mahomet will deliver them
(and the Devils also;) first changing their affrighting shapes into shapes
more tolerable, and then bringing them to Alcanzar, (a stream flowing out of
Paradise) they must cool their extreme heat, and wash away their
black-scorcht mummies, and vary into a moist flesh, whiter than the driven
snow, and thence-forth sing Lala hillullaes unto Mahomet. Paradise.
Paradise is a place of as much delight, as Mahomets carnal rapture was able
to imagine: he is incertaine of the local place (it seems he forgot to ask
Gabryell) but supposes it shall be upon the earth after the day of Doom is
past, and all deformity removed: (till then the souls and bodies of men sleep
in their graves, but sensible of joy and torment.) Paradise (says the Alcoran)
is so many miles about as there be moats or atoms in the Sun: It is enclosed
with a wall of ninety times refined gold; ten thousand miles high, and in
thickness about three thousand: It has also seven gates to enter in at (seven
is a mystery;) of Carbuncle or purest Rubie is the first gate; the other six
be of Pearl, of Emrald, of Turquoyse, of Hyacinth, of Smarag'd, and of
Amarist; somewhat reflecting upon the spheres. It is divided into seven
spacious Gardens, and those are sub-divided into seventy times seven several
places of delight; each of them filled with Inhabitants, Music, Wines, and all
sensual pleasures possible: all have cool refreshing rivolets of Crystal,
and trilling over pibbles of sweetest Amber: curious Summer-houses it also has,
shaded with trees, ever fruitful and verdant: in center of that pleasant
fancy, is a tree (a high and spreading tree) higher than all the mountains of
the world, were they heapt one upon another; and so broad that all Paradise is
shaded by it; the trunck or bole of this rare plant is of Diamond; the leaves
be of Ophyrian gold; the boughs of jet: each leaf is wraught into an antic
shape, very delightful; and most admirable in this; on one side is growing in
letters of light, the name of God; on the other side the name of Mahomet. Four
streams gush out of it, in several quartets; they be of purest water, of
milk, of coho, of honey; and empty themselves into Alchansar, whence this
mixture of Nepenthe flows into other parts of Paradise: there are also
Aromatic flowers, such as ravish both eye and smell; birds also or aerie
Quiristers; the meanest of which as far excel our Nightingalls, as they the
Ravens: the air is a compound of sense-ravishing odours: the Mahometans
(Christians, Jews, nor Gentiles, have not such glory) are ever young and
lustful, a hundred times bigger and more frolic than ere was Mahomet: The
women are severed from the men; not that they are kept from them (for Gabriell
never away to let them in) but that by such restraint they may become more
transcendently delightful the women have such visages as Aisce had ( Mahomets
best beloved;) their hairs be threads of gold, their eyes of Diamonds as big as
the Moon: their lips of cherries, their teeth of pearl, their toagues of
rubyes: their cheeks of corrall, their noses of Jasper, their foreheads of
saphyre: round-fac't, sweet, amorous, and merciful: In this Paradise there is
a Table of Diamond, seven hundred thousand days journey long; along which, are
chayres of gold and pearl to feast upon. The he creatures are of Mahomets
favor, such as he had when Gabryell mounted him into heaven: none but are
far brighter than the Sun, with such eyes, eyebrows and ears as are not
fit for a repetition. To end; Gabryel the porter of Paradise has seventy
thousand keys which pertain to his office; every key is seven thousand miles
long; by which you may imagine the doors are no pigmie ones: in a word, had
not Mahomet Confessed he had writ three parts of four, false lies in this his
Legend; we would have concluded him, Notorious. To smile at his conceits is
pleasure, to confute them, a labor needless (though Melancthon has done it:)
for we may say and that very truly, Perfidiam eorum recitasse; superasse est.

Such are the gross fanatic Dogmataes of the Alcoran, credited by most
Asiatique Inhabitants, deluded by the Devil and his disciples above 70 in
several specie and nomenclation: some of which, with heed I have observed; and
here (as the cover of their book) will shut all up in mustring them; but in an
Alphabetique way, lest I affront their Seniorities.

Abdalli, Alambeli, Alfaqui Alfurcani, Anefij, Asaphij, Bedvini, Benefiani,
Bosarmani, Buani. Caddi, Cadaleschi, Calyphi, Calsi, Choggi, Cobtini, Cumerati.
Dephtardarij, Deruissi, Dervislari, Duanni. Emeri, Emawen-zeddi. Fylolli.
Gularchi Hodgei, Huguiemali. Imami. Kalenderi. Leshari. Malahedi, Melichi,
Mendee, Morabiti, Morrabouri, Mudreessi, Mufti, Mulai, Mulevei, Muezini,
Mustadini, Mutevelij, Muzulmanni. Naappi. Ozmanni. Papassi. Ramdani. Santoni,
Seriphi, Shahi, Sophini, Sunni, Syetti. Talismanni, Tecknai, Torlaceni,
Terlaqui. Zaidi, etc.

Their rules are many and masqued under a serious (hypocritique) sanctity. The
Muphti is chief in case of error or division: which, if he fail in, the
Meccan Protomist censures and swayes it. The Caddi, Cadaleshi, and Mustaedini,
are next in ecclesiastic dignity. The Hodgei, Emeri, and Mulai, are Doctors
and expositers. The rest are mendicants, and eat their bread in idleness. The
Fylalli converse most in the Alcoran. The Deruissi are wandering Wolves in
sheep clothing. The Talismanni regard the hours of prayer, by turning the 4
hour'd glass. The Muyezini cry from the tops of Mosques, battologuizing Llala
Hyllula. The Calenderi, Abdalli, and Dervislari be notorious Paederasts, and
dangerous to meet in solitary ways. The Terlaqui and Cobtini pandarize. The
Leshari and Papassi, are fortune tellers and star-gazers. The Sunni, Naappi,
and Tecknai, vow perpetual silence, and assassinate. The Sietti and Imami, often
pull out their eyes having seen Medina. Other of these, pull out their
tongues, that whensoe're they talk they may be credited. The Huquiemali sing
bawdie songs: some for penance go ever naked, and other some in ashes. The
Dooanni are natural fools or madman, but thought divinely inspired. Some as
the Mendeae afflict their bodies by thirst; lashing and wounding themselves;
and in charity without pay, carry burdens or do any labor. Some protest
against flesh, fish, wine and rose water. Some live Eremites never conversing
with men: and some built houses to safeguard birds, and beasts, feed them and
have music to prevent their melancholy. Other-some build Hospitalls, Inns,
Sudatories, Mosques, and like good houses. Some are Poetasters, or
Mimographers. Other-some have seeds and charms to make women fruitful. Some
also scorch their skins in the Sun. But others of more pity and piety oil
their naked bodies, and to allure the poor Flies to pasture, roast themselves
in the burning Sun. These and many other miserable paths they tread, all
leading into Acheron.

To close; This (more crasftie than learned) Lawgiver, perceiving his
Divinity and Philosophy not sure enough to abide opposition or trial,
strengthens it by this stratagem. He commands that none upon pain of torture
and damnation, be so bold to question a syllable of his Alcoran, Suspectaest
Lex (says Tertullian) quae se probari non audet. From whence, few except they
be Ecclesiastiques, trouble themselves to read or study it, hoping by a
reverent ignorance and the Colliars Faith to be saved. But by your favor Sir!
each of us (whom God has blessed and honored with the grace and name of
Christian) may answer you out of Martial.

Decipies alios verbis,
vultuque benigno;
Sed mihi jam notus,
Dissimulator eris.
Others with words and pleasing looks
thou may deceive; but me
Thou shall not so, I know thee a
rank Hypocrite to be.
The Persians have (since Gunet reformed the Alcoran) contracted it into a
lesser volome. Schisms in ehe Alcoran.
They vilify Ozmans labors, and censure him of extreme arrogance. The
Persians also abominate the four great Doctors, who dropped out of Paradise from
the sweat of Mahomets brow, whom also Gunet execrates: these are indeed the
main differences 'twixt Turk and Persian. But let none think that Syetts was
the first Schism amongst them: for Ozman being dead, Ibnul adds more
Commentaries to infeeble Ozmans: and after him, one Ibnu Abel-hasen of Balsora
An. H. 88. a notable subtle man; for by his austere life and eloquence, he not
only nullified the Melchian credit, but Ibnul also in comparison of him was
counted sottish: At his death they Sainted him: but trusting to tradition (for
they could never prevail with Hassen eternize himself by writing) his
Disciples differ in many doctrines; so far, that blows made a party of times
in case of difference: not could they agree in any point, till Elharu-Ibnu-esed
of Babylon did his best in many comments to reconcile them, and make canonical
Elhesin's Paragraphs. It seemed calm a while, but ere long a thunderclap was
heard from Mecca's Territories; anathematizing Elharu-Esed, persecuting him and
all his fautors: and finally, by Meleck-sha's command, not only burnt his
papers, but banished him from converse of all Mussullmen.

King Cazel is persuaded Elharu was an honest man, and at that time being
favorite to his Uncle the great Melec-sha (a Turk and late Victor over Babylon)
makes use of his power, desiring some favor for the late excommunicated men.
Melec storms a while, but Nydam Emull another Courtier of note, seconds Cazel,
and prevails to have the Anefian Sect called home again. Elgaz-zuli a nimble
Mercury undertakes it, and by miraculous conceits agrees them, and fills up
the late made breach; so as now, Mahomet shines gloriously without any show of
eclipse; but an alteration quickly followed: for Saint Azmulli from the Caspian
shore defies all such as thought well of Mahomets three intruding successors.
This seemed a terrible Apostasy, but whiles all Asia were looking
thitherwards, a crack of no less amazement falls West, where Almotannabbi
(aiming to be all or nothing) exalts his own worth, piety and learning above
Mahomets. This seemed intolerable, and his ambitious ends quickly determined;
for they put him to a miserable death.

After this the Clergy and Layety became inebriate with Bacchus and Venerie: it
was thought a foolish thing to affect learning or honesty. Lascivious Poems
was adjudg'd the only delight, and Mahomets Paradise seemed then in being. This
wickedness of theirs is inveighed against by Essebraver Disseraverd a
Bactrian, whose severe Satyrs so stung them that they grew melancholy; till
Ibnull Pharyd sweetened all by his amorous and exact Poesy, defended and
enlarged by Elfargany a witty Epicure who retorts an Apology, applauded by
most, but by some exploded as a busy Cabalist. A Chaos seemed then to cover
them, till Elifarni a grave Historian took upon him to rectify these crooked
postures. Of 72 Sects reducing all to two, the Leshari, and Imami. The first,
Eulogically extolling Mahomet; received in Thrace, Aegipt, Palestyne, and
Syria. The other, Ally: received all over the Persian Monarchy. After all, Syet
Gunet displayes his Ensign, whose divisions if we should here rehearse or
moderate, would prove tedious to you, and to me no less offensive. Non nostrum
inter nos tantas componere lites. Let us therefore pause a while, and make use
of Thesaeus his thread, to untwist us out of these sense-confounding Labyrinths.

The several Kings and Conquests of Persia compendiously remembered.
TO offer you a History of the several changes and wars of this great
Empire, might peradventure in another place prove acceptable; especially, of
the acts and conquests of these late Kings of the Sophyan or Ben-Allyes
pedigree: for to go higher were but to gleane from Xenophon, Curtius, Siculus,
Metasthenes, Agathyas, Eusebius, Cedrenus, Diaconus, Procopius, Trebellius, and
others. Whereas the wars of the late Kings are, to say truth, so meanly and
obscurely handled, that the reporters have too prodigally detracted from the
high courage of the men, and the excellency of their fortunes. Here I am
confined, lest by commixing even an Epitomque of their several victories and
contingencies, this Book which I desire should travel merely upon Geographie,
might grow voluminous. On the other side, to omit them altogether may as justly
tax me of neglect. I will therefore but name them, and reconcile some men's
mistakes in misnaming these antique Kings of Persia.

Cyrus is the first we can deduce a true succession from. For albeit they had
Kings formerly, of which Chederlaomer was one, as we read in Genesis and it may
be the same whom the Persian Histories call Cheyomaraz father of Siamech, to
whom succeeded Owchange, Iamshet, Zoak, Fraydhun, Manucher, Nawder, Afraciab (
Achemenes some think) Bazab, Kaycohad, Salemon, Chozrao, and Lorazpes; yet the
succession from him is most incertaine and doubtless of no grandeur, in that
the Assyrian Monarchy (begun by Nymrod son of Chush, son of Cham, son of
Noah) ecclipsed it, and under whose command it lay for above 1300 years, if
Berosus be not counterfetted: and from Belochus (who deposed Sardanapal the
last Assyrian Emperor of Nymrods race) and Arbaces (the first founder of the
Median, Monarchy, a confederate with Belochus) to Cyrus (who advanced the
Persians to a Monarkique greatness, by subduing Astiages his Grand-sire,
transferd the Empire to the Persian, as formerly the Medes had the Assyrian)
260 years. This change happened in the year, from Adam 3400: after the building
of Rome 287: after the first Olympiad 50: and before the incarnation of our
Savior 567, etc.

Persia made a Monarchy by Cyrus.
Of Cyrus many memorable matters might be offered: but I dare not enter the
Labyrinth lest I wander so far, that I may chance to lose my self and your
patience: this only be remembered, that this is that Cyrus of whom the Prophet
Esaias foretold some hundred years ere he was born; of him also Nabuchadnezzar
prophesied, beginning thus, Ast ubi Medorum jus regni Mulus habebit, etc. That
a Mule should over-runne Lydia (fulfild in Craesus) and subvert the Caldean
Monarchy: the word Mulus had relation to his mixture of blood; his mother
beinga Mede, his Sire a Persian. He married Cassandana, and by her had
Cambyses, that reigned after him. Cyrus after he had ruled thirty years, and
in that time had added to his Empire, Arabia, Mesopotamia, Syria, Capadocia,
Phrygia, Armenia, etc. hoped also to subject Scythia, but near the river Oxus
was slain by Tomyris the Queen of those parts of Zagathaya: but (upon
ransom) his body was delivered and convayed to Pasagard where Alexander found
his Tomb, but not that wealth he thought it had contained. Cambyses ruled the
Persian Monarchy but nine years; of whose reign is little to be said save
that he subdued Aegipt: after which he grew so luxurious and tyrannous, that
all men hated him: his death was imputed to divine Justice, for, at Memphis he
committed sacrilege in the Temple of Apys or Anubys, and broke the neck of
that apish god set there by the idolatrous Egyptians: but at Damascus fell
accidentally upon his own weapon, and dyed by it. At his death seven Noble men
or Magi of Persia severally contended for the Diadem (for smerdis the upstart
King was discovered by wanting his ears to be an impostor;) of which, Darius
surnamed Histaspes (who by the cunning of his Groom made his horse neigh next
morn before the rest) mounted the Throne: and the (...) or delivery of the
Kingdom from the Magi, from that time to Alexanders coming, was annually
celebrated. Darius governed happily 35 years: the last only was unfortunate,
by that overthrow he received at Marathon by Miltiades the noble Athenian. This
is he who so much favored the Jews and Jerusalem: his death was caused by
loss of that battle at Marathon, and that by it he wanted Anthina's fair
daughter. This Darius Histasp I imagine to be the same Gustasp who first by
imposture (as elsewhere I have remembered) made his people fire worshippers. To
Darius succeeded his son Xerxes, by the Persians called Ardxer: an unfortunate
Prince; for howbeit he was in his time the greatest Emperor in the world, and
had a worls of men and wealth to obey his humors: yet what by too much
confidence in them, and contempt of other Princes, he reaped the greatest
dishonor that ever befell any Prince of Persia: for, albeit, he entered Greece
with an army of 1800000 men, yet could he not prevent an overthrow given him at
the straits of Thermophilae by Leonidas the Spartan General, who had not four
thousand men: and by Themistocles the Admiral near to Salamys, was equally
opposed, and his whole Army confounded. Afrer 20 years rule he died, and left
Arta-xerxes his son his inheritor. This Artaxerxes (i.e. a victorious
conqueror) is in Persian story called Ard-xer-Bohaman; and by Arabian writers,
Tama-xerxicas: this is he that married Atossa or Hester the Jew, in which book
he is named Ahasuerus: at the end of forty four years happy government he
died, and Art-axerxes surnamed Muenon in his place was crowned King: (some
insert Darius Nothus before him.) Artaxerxes (son of Artaxerxes and Parisatys
daughter of Cyrus) ruled Persia forty and two years, and at the age of eighty
was buried at Persepolis, Artaxerxes Ochus his son succeeded him: who also
when he had governed cruelly twenty and six years, was hastened (but by an
untimely death) after his Father; Arses ( or Arsamus his son) investing
himself with the Persian roabs of rule and majesty. Of Arses, little can be
said save that he died by the hands of the Eunuch Bagoas his Fathers murderer,
after his Coronation four year: and in his place (by means of Bagoas) Darius
Codomanus, (by Persians called Darab-kowcheck i.e. little Darius) was saluted
King: him Alexander the victorious Greek orethrew, in three great battles, at
Arbela, Amanus, and Granicus: the last, concluded his life and six years
reign, Anno Mundi 3640, Persia subjected by the Greeks.
of the Olympiad 112, of Rome 420, and before the Nativity 333 years or
thereabouts.

Alexander (worthily surnamed Great) two years after died at Babylon,
(foretold by a Calan or Indian Gymnosophist) in the three and thirty of his
age, of his rule twelve years; his heart was transferred to Alexandria, his
corpse interd at Babylon. Alexanders Legacy, bequeathing the succession (not to
his own issue or kin, but) to the Worthiest, made Pyrrha's bones revive
again; discord, and pride, and envy, emulating every of his great Captains,
who by this common Motto, Virtus mihi Numen, and Ensis quern gero, challenged
the Empire, and ceased not to lay claim, till death and wars fury cut them
off; Seleuchus Callynicus son to Antiochus Theos by survivership (after long
storms) seeming to steare in that unruly Ocean: during whose life and fifty
years after, the Greeks awed Persia, Recovered by Arbaces a Parthyan,
till such time as Arbaces an heroyck Parthian broke that yaok of slavery
asunder, and for three and twenty years did what was possible to revive the
more than half dead Persians. To Arbaces succeeded Methridates, who ruled
twenty years, after whom, Pampasius twelve, Pharnaces eight, Methridatus Medus
Thirteen; to whom followed Phraortes, (called by the Perses Pharug-zed)
Artabanus, (called Ard-Bahaman) Methridates 3, and then Herodes, slain by
Phraortes his cruel son. At this time Crassus the rich and famous Roman was
slain and twenty thousand Romans at Carrhas by the Parthians; a foul blemish
to the Romans; till soon after Ventidius ( Mark Anthonies Liefetenant) purged
it by a new victory, in which Pacorus the Kings son was by that valiant Roman
slain: and the Empire acknowledged Augustus Caesar over them; who deposed the
Paricide, and made another Phraortes King in his room. At this time was
ecchoed the golden song Pacem te poscimus omnes: a time most fit to entertain
the Prince of Peace, Christ Jesus our Savior, who as then became flesh, and
dwelt amongst the sons of sinful men.

To Phraortes 2, succeeds these several Dynasts of Pathia; Orodes, or
Daridaeus, Vonones, Tereditates (the last of the Arsacidae) slain
treacherously by Artabanus; to whom these; Bardanis, Goterys, Vonones 2,
Vologeses, Artabnus 2, Pacorus, Chozroes, Phamaspates, Vologeses 2, Velogeses
3, and lastly Artabanus, vanquished by Caracalla, by Macrinus slain: Howbeit in
him the hopes of Persia slept not, but rather joyed at the farewell of that
strange race; Redacted by the Persian.
for upon that advantage (the Empire seeming distracted 'twixt two several
affections) one Artaxerxes ( Chobad before, but to speed the better he assumes
this pleasing name) steps forth, and with a Majestic grace modestly chides his
Countrymen for their sloth and faint-heartednesse; and that now or never the
occasion was offered of reviving their name and redacting the Persian Empire to
her former freedom and luster: the people admire the man, and by his name
doubt not that be was a true Persian; so as with an uoanim assent they crown
his temples with the Dyadem, and resolve under him to dye or to dispell that
cloud of bondage which the Parthian had so long wrapped them in. For three days
the fight continued twixt those two neighbor, the stake was freedom and
Monarchy: at length the Persian has the victory, and Artabanus the Parthyan
King by his death pat this late triumphant Empire into bondage. After that he
vanquished the Roman Emperor Alexander Severus; but in the 15 year of his
reign is himself by imparriall death vanquished. An. Dom. 243 Sapores his
son begun to reign. And here Teixera may be taxed, who assures us that
Artaxerxes late named (or as they call him, Ardkhyrbabba-cawn, i.e. Father and
Lord to men of war,) reigned contemporarie with Caesar Augustus. This same
Sapores is by the Persians called Shaw-Pot; by Teixera, Scbabur; by Schicard,
Xahur-Xabulketaph or Dbul Aktaf: a Prince sufficiently courageous, but basely
cruel. He over-ranne Syria, Cilicia, Mesopotamia, Capadocia, Armenia, etc. but
returned with many curses for his cruelty, and had next year been retaliated
by Gordianus the Roman, had not this Emperor dyed by the hands of Philippus a
rebel, that slew him at Ctesiphon. But which efflated Sapores above the rest
was the rare overthrow he gave two years after to Licinius Vilerianus surnamed
Colobus, Roman Emperor; who after he had inhumanly triumphed ovet St. Lawrence,
and thousands of other Christians whom he made Martyrs or witnesses; in an open
field Sapores vanquished him (betrayed some say by Macrinus his Liefetenant) and
to his dying day made that proud Roman his footstool to mount upon: verifying
the old said Saw, Superbos sequitur ultor a tergo Deus.

After he had tyrannised twenty years he dyed Anno Domini 273, and before the
Hegira or Mussulmanish account 347. To Sapores followed Ormisda ( Cherman-sha,
say the Persians) who at the end of thirteen months dyed, and Vararanes for
three years (till death prevented) succeeded him; to him Narses, ( Tesdgird
say the Persians:) who after sixteen years rule died also, and left to
inherit, his son Vararanes 2 (cognominated Seganese,) by Persians called
Baharan; who in the first quarter followed. the common fate, Narses a stranger
succeeding him. This Narses made bitteer war with the Armenians and
Mesopotamians, at which Galerius stormed; but his being the Roman Emperor could
not dant Narses, nor privilage him from being beaten; yet in the second
conflict is victor: and Narses for grief and shame burns himself; after he
had eight years ruled Persia. Misdates his son reighned seven year after his
fathers death: to whom followed Sapores an Antichristian: for the Romans did
not rage more furiously against the Christians in the lesser Asia, than did
this Tyrant in the great: he was a posthumus, and the crown set upon his
mothers belly, even before his birth acknowledging him their sovereign: he
was the Romans inplacable enemy; by no threats, no bribes, no reasons to be
pacified: he fired Nisibis, not valuing that Bacchus was there borne and
suckled: after which, in his own Dominions he martyrd (as Ecclesiastic
writers report) from the year 337, to 347, above thirty thousand Christian:
for in those days, those eastern parts were most part Christians: the names of
many of those noble Martyrs you have in Sozimen: he also affronted (but with
bad success) Constantius the Roman Emperor, who dyed of grief so soon as
he heard what cruelties Sapor had perpetrated upon the Citisens of Singara,
Bizabda, Aminda, Bombyca, etc. Mopsicrive a Town under mount Taurus in huming
him. No better luck had that malicious Apostat Julian, who when he had done his
worst against the Christians, endeavored the subversion of Persia; but most
strangly he is peirced with a Persian dart in the night and expires with a
tandem vicisti Galilee, and in his place Iovanian with the joyful cry of all
his Camp, Omnes sumus Christiani, was saluted Emperor of the Romans. He could
do but little good against the Persians, and therefore returns toward
Constaninople, but in the way is arrested by grim death, after he had been
but eight months, Emperor. Sapores about that time also sighed out his
affrighted ghost, at the age and reign of seventy one. Anno Mundi 4350 Anno
Domini 380. and Artaxerxes his brother ruled after him; who dyed in the 11
year of his reign. Sapores followed him, after five. Varanes surnamed
Cermizat him, after 10 years: and to him succeeded Yezdgyrd a constant friend
unto the Romans; and (as Socrates Scolast. reports) a Christian: converted by
Maruthas Bishop of Mesopotamia, sent into Persia to that end by Pope Innocent
and Theodosius the Emperor. The Persian Stories say he apostatized; who can
tell the truth of it: this is certain, that in the 20 year of his reign Anno
Dom. 426 he dyed; and that Varanes 4 (or Baharan) inherited his royalties. By
all Writers this Prince is taxed for his perfidie, lust, and cruelty,
especially against the Christians. In their defense Theodorus junior sends
Artaburus with a gallant Annie. Vararanaes diffiding in his own, requests aid
from Alamandurus a Saracen: whose Armies when they met, were so many, that they
covered the earth for many miles with their innumerable numbers. At Babylon
both meet: but ere the battle begun, such a pannique fear struck the Pagans
that they fled amazedly: by land some perished, but Euphrates without any pity
ingulpht 100000 of those miscreants, and by that loss he Persian King is
heart-broken, after he had tyrannized 20 years; and another Vararan 5 of that
name placed in his stead: he took truce with Martianus the Emperor, and
after 17 years left both life and crown: Perozes succeeded him, called Pheruz
by the Persians; a Prince more rash than valiant: in the 20 year of his
reign, the wars of Scythia made an end of him. Valens (or Belax and Ialas)
was then chosen King; he ruled 4 years; to him Cabades, (called also Chobad
and Canades) dethroned by Lambases in the 11 year of his greatness: which
Lambases (or Blases) was also deposed by the Nobles of Persia in the 4 year,
for that he had set forth an Edict, that all women should be used in common:
and Canades is re-established, but at last through his too much curtesy to his
vile brother is made blind, and the other mounts the Throne again. At this
time great wars commenced 'twixt the Roman and Persians; the Persian storming
that at their persuasion Zatus (sonneto Gurgenus King of the Lazarrs, a part of
Colchos or Mengrellya) had received Baptism at Constantinople, Iustyn the
Emperor witnessing for him at the Font. After that this Persian Tyrant had
full gorged himself with the slaughter of many thousands of the Lazarrs and
Armenians, Death summons him to an unwilling account, after 30 years
tumultuous reign: and Cozrhoe his son (they call him Chezir) is solemnly
crowned the Persian King. About this time the Roman Monarchy in the West took
end. Chozrhoe of all the Tyrants of Persia was most wicked and desperate: he
first concluded peace for 110 years with Justinian the Roman Emperor; but
quickly broke it, and to the utmost of his power enraged them: 'twould be
endless to speak his restless motion, his barbarism, his hypocrisy. In mere
malice he put to death his brother Balax and Aspebides his aged Uncle; the
people murmur at him, and to be even with them, he commands them to follow him
into Syria, where he ingages their valor and at Palmyria is beaten soundly;
but so exasperated that he ransacks Barrhosa, Antioch, Selucia, Apamea, and
other parts; in Phoenicia also he gluts his mischief: there he forced
Euphemia a Christian Lady, and of her begot Hormisda who succeeded him: he
also there compelled the chaste Nymnhs of Daphne to offer incense to him, as to
a Deity: and for their kindness ravished them. He consumed the great and
stately Temple dedicated to St. Michael the Arch-Angell: and accounted it no
sacrilege to rob other Churches: he besieged Sergiropolis, but is forced
thence dishonourably: he attempts the spoil of Jerusalem, but hearing that
Bellisarius (in his time the most rich and wretchedly poor of men) was
approaching, he renues his league with the Romans: but purposes not long to
keep it; for next year he forrages Armenia, and Phoenicia. Anno Dom. 556,
Iustyn the Roman Emperor enters Mengrellia, and by death of Nachorages the
Persian General got a happy victory: Cozrhoe next year assauts Edissa, but
fruitlessely; for at Sagarthon, that year the Christians vanquished him: An.
Domini 574, he commands Artabanus (or Adaarmanes) with a great Army to enter
the lesser Asia: accordingly they spoil Syria, and unpeople Antioch: in Iberia
also and Armenia they entered with no less voracity. At this time Armenia
received the Christian Faith; and the Romans have complaints sent them of
Cezrhoes his cruelty. Justin sends Tiberius (elected Caesar) to quiet him. His
Army was great, and consisted of many Nations, French, Italians, Peonians,
Illirians, Misians, Massagets, Isauriaus, etc. toward Armenia he marches to
meet with Cosrhoe: Cesaria (the Cappadocian Metropolis) he soon mastered and
after long toil comes in view of the Enemy. The Persians were strong and
lusty. The signal of battle was no sooner given, but each man in a wrathful
posture hastened to vent their fury. Cosrhoe by a sigh presages his overthrow,
but doubts it more when when Curse a Scythian that led the right wing of the
battle, entered with rare courage into the body of the Pagan Army, and mastred
all the Persian-baggages: but the loss of that fight did not so much grieve
him, as that his Fire-god was fallen into the hands of his scoffing Enemies.
Many night stratagems he invented to recover it, but all to no purpose: so that
seeing it past recoverie, it broke his heart at Ctesiphon, after he had
reigned 48 years: leaving this report behind him, that to the Christians he
was cruel; to the Greeks perfidious; to the Persians lustful and tyrannical.
In his place, his son Hormisda ( Ormous by the Persians he is called) was
crowned Monarch of Persia: Anno Dom. 580, of the world 4550 His eight years
rule was troublesome: For in his 3 year, Mauritius (son in law and Liefetenant
to Tiberius and also Emperor afterward) hammered the face of Persia; he
ranged where he pleased and did what listed him; albeit to prevent it Tama,
Cosrhoe, Adaarman Alamandure, and Theodorique did what they could to hinder
him. Anno Dom. 589 Philippicus with some Roman Legions entered Persia,
especially to comfort the poor Christians who were threatened by the Magicians
to be slain all of them that year by miracle. Cardarigas the Persian General
supposes they were forced thither by a fate uncontroleable: but the event
proved such as in sted of the Christians above 30000 Persians were slain by
the great valor, the great Captains Philippcus, Heraclius, and Vitylian
manifested amongst the superstitious, who depended upon some supernatural
helps so long that Nature no whit defended them. Barames a noble Persian by hap
escaped, but not a second disadventure; for Hormisda grew so madded at his late
overthrow, that he forces Barames to wear women's apparel, and with a
Distaffe in's hand to disport the insulting multitude: but this jeere cost him
dearly, for Barames flies into such parts as loved him, and inceases Byndois a
potent Persian against the King, by whose confederacy they raise so great an
Army, and pass to Shyraz so privately, that ere many knew of their approach
they enter the City and imprison the King; yea that same day crown his son
Chozroes King: the barbarous Traitors executed their wrath upon the Queen and
her children, whom most cruelly they sawed asunder: at which Hormisda expresses
all the simtoms of an enraged man: his son cannot comfort him, because his
beloved wife was irrevocable. Cosrhoes in passion commands some villains to
temper him, whose cruelty proved such as drubd the wretched King to death: an
act so infernally devilish, that all Persia cursed him. Upon their mutterings
he grows tyrannical, but Barames that had mounted him, which the same hand
thinks to pull him down: the King acquainted which his intent, commands this
and that man to raise some force to punish him, but into such hate was he
grown, that none would obey him; whereby, to save his life he flies with
Cesarca his wife to Byzanth, (his Parents dreadful ghosts every where hanting
him:) But by the, Christian Emperor Mauritius and his Empress is with his
Queen and little ones courteously welcomed. After he had reposed a while, the
Emperor assisted him with an Army commanded by Narses and Commentiolus to
re-invest him in his Empire: into Hyeropolis and Martiropolis they easily
entered: at Daraz the Rebel Barames affronted him with an Army of
Scythique-Persians: but such was the courage of the Christians that Barames was
vanquished. Cosrhoes returns the Christian his thanks in tears of joy: and
knowing nothing would better please them than his conformity, he presented
them with a rich Cross, of great value in jems and gold; and returns that
other (which Theodora wife to Justinian had devoted) brought from Antioch by
Chosroe the elder, and dedicates another made at's own charge, circumscribed
with an hypocritick Motto thus beginning, Hanc Crucem ego Chosroes Rex Regum,
etc. misi, etc. Quoniam open Sancti Sergii Martiris honorabilis contra Baramum
iniquissimum adepti sumus, votum fecimus, etc. Nos auream Crucem lapill^
distinctam ad ejus Templum missuros, etc. una cum Cruce quam Instinian Imp. ad
Templum ejus misit, and quam Cosrhoes Rex Regum, etc. filius Cabadi nostri
proavi, etc. advehit, etc. ad Aedem Sancti Sirgii mittendum curavimus, etc. as
you may find at large memorized by Baronius. A Dish of gold also he dedicated
with this inscription, Ego Cosroes Rex Regum, etc. haec in Disco inscribenda
curavimus, non ut spectentur ab hominibus etc. Nay, he went further in his
hypocrisy: he gave out to indeare the Christians (his own hated him) that he
affected to be a Christian: but how politic so ere he was, his Queen Cesarca
found him a dissembler. She (good Lady) to espouse Christ, fled to
Constantinople, and there received baptism most joyfully: Cosrhoes followed
her with 60000 men, and when he saw she was not to be recovered without he
would become a Christian, he also was baptized and all such as followed him; to
the amazement of the Asiatique world: as P. Diaconus has it in his 4 lib. 16
chapter In Victor also and in John Abbot of Biclar, as is extant in his Epistle in
these words, In his ergo temporibus quibus Deus omnipotens prostrato veternosae
heresis veneno, pacem suae restituit Ecclesiae, Imp. Persarum Christi fidem
suscipiens, etc. But of speak of his Apostasy, his cruelty against the
Christians, and other barbarismes he afterward perpetrated, would rather
require a volume than to be confined to so small a narration as I intend to all
of them. For so soon as he heard of the massacre of Mauritius, his wife and
children, by Phocas a Captain in his Army; and of the arrogance of Boniface
the Romish Bishop, who at that time assumed the title of universal Bishop, he
rejects Lilius the Roman Ambass. and Apostatises; yea vows to sacrifice
himself in Mauritius his quarrel, or be revenged on that villainous Phocas: and
thence-forward he revives his Pagan titles; in all his letters and
proclamations beginning thus, Cosrhoes King of Kings, Lord of Lords, Ruler of
princes, Salvation of men, etc. By such his blasphemy he hoped to assure his
own he was once more a Pagan. Anno Dom. 603 with an Army of 100000 men he
entered Syria; there, in Palestine and Phenicia doing all the mischief
imaginable. All the lesser Asia parched in his inflamed fury: he harried the
poor Christians as far as Chalcedon: takes Capessa and Edyssa. Anno Dom. 612
he hears of the untimely deaths of Narses and Phocas his enemies, beheaded by
Heraclius the Emperor. That year also he sacked Apamea, Cesaria, Cappadocia,
etc. but at Antioch is overjoyed with a victory he obtained against the
Christians: This encouraged him to over-runne Palestyne, Jerusalem also, where
he derided Zacharius the Patriarch and transferd the Cross thence to Shyraz
in Persia: he subdued Aegipt also, Alexandriae, and Lybia; and made the blackt
faced Aethiopians admire his frenzy. The Roman Empire had reason to be
affrighted, when they felt his wrath in Anatolia, chiefly in Ancyra the
Galatian Metropolis. It Is reported that in that out-breaking he slew 300000
Christians; agrandiz'd by the Jews who followed him, and paid ready money for
many Christians, whom without mercy they slaughtered. Heraclius sent 70 Roman
Gentlemen to mediate Peace; Saes the Persian General threatens them as spies,
and barbarously beat them back again. Heraclius is so impatient at that high
indignity, as with a good number of men he fought with Saes and gets the
victory: Saes for his payment is by Cosrhoes command flayed alive, and
Sarbaeras made General. Heraclius Winterd in the Pontique Regions, Sarbaras
with a monstrous Army passes through Cilicia, and one Moone-shine night
assailed the Romans whom he thought to have found unprepared: but by that haste
lost 50000 of his men, and gave a brave encouragement to the Christians.
Cosrhoe next year sent Sarnabassa to try his fortunes.

Heraclius requires a truce, but Cosrhoes vows revenge, and never to rest
vexing the Christians. And to that end sends Sathyn into Trepizond, but at
Azotus, Heraeclius affronted him, and had the victory. At Gazacot, Cozrhoes
dares the Roman Emperor with an Army of 50000 Persians: never was battle
better fought nor more doubtfully; but at length the Persians fly away, yea
Cosrhoes upon a swift Arabian Courser posts to Theobatman, hoping there if any
where to find safety. But such was the general hate he had plunged himself
into, that he distrusts that Santuarie. Heraclius resolves to ferrit him, but
Cosrhoes hearing of his approach, thinks it more safe to fly away than look
for help from that helpless Deity. Heraclius when he had thoroughly searched
that idolatrous place and could not find him, is sorry; but rejoices again
that his Deastri were there to execute his wrath on. The people, some he slew,
the rest he banished: the Flamens he sacrificed to their Idol, the Pyree he
incinerated, and made other common fire be commixt with that they boasted they
had from heaven, and together made it consume the whole City into ashes: at
Gazacot also he did the like where was another Pyree infinitely resorted to by
those Idolaters. An abomination taught them by Zertoost in King Gustasps time,
and seems to me either that which Moses forbad the Israelites, that they
should not let their seed (or children) pass through the fire to Moloch (which
some think was a brazen hollow heated Statua) or as the Sepharuites practiced,
of whom it is said, that they burnt their children in the fire to Adrammeleck
and Anammelec, the Gods of Sephervaim, as is in Levit. 18.21. and in the 2
Kings 17.17. and 31. and concerning which Idolatry we read in Lucian, Strabo
lib. 15. Procopius lib. 2. de bello Persico, Agathias lib. 2, etc.

Amongst other things which Heraclius found there in that Temple dedicated to
the Sun, was one Deaster or image of Cosrhoes, which the people worshipped: the
frame was round, resembling heaven; his head was wreathed with the Sun; the
rays spread themselves to the umbelique or navell of the image: on one side
was the Sun again depicted, on the other the Moon and Stars, his brother and
sisters; and under his feet, the Angels with Crowns and Scepters, attending
him: bat albeit the work was rare and the material of refined gold; yet did
the good Emperor throw, it into the fire to incorporate it with his Diety.
Cosrhoes by this had gathered a fresh Army out of Hyrcarnia, and bids
Shae-Rablecca to forage Albania: but they stood so excellently upon their
defense that Rablacca returns till Sarbaras with new forces forced him back;
and much hurt questionless had they done had not Heraclius speedily entered and
rooted them both in one day, yet neither knowing it. Mahomet the Prophet was in
Heracliu's Army till now: and about this time begins the Hegyra or flight of
that false Prophet from Mecca, whose people threatened to kill him for his
innovation and doctrine. Anna Dom. 622 and of the Emperors reign 13, Sarbaras
past his Army over Euphrates of purpose to try the fortune of war with
Heraclius: who so soon as he knew his intent gave him reason to repent his
arrogance: the good Emperor himself discharging his duty so excellently and
with such excellent courage, that Sarbaras upon view of it cried out thus to
Cosma his Companion, O Cosmal see thou with what courage the Emperor fights?
certainly he alone is able to vanquish all our multitudes. That Winter the
Emperor marched to Sebastia, and crossing the river Halys made Paphlagonia his
rendezvous. But Cosrhoe swells with passion, and combines with Lucifer, that by
diabolical Witchcraft he might vex the miserable Christians, against whom he
raged with all sorts of cruelty: and ere he gave a farewell to this world, once
more ventures a battle with the Romans: 150000 men he musters up, and divides
them in three; to Sayn one part, to Serbaras another, to himself the rest:
imagining by some or all of these to do wonders. Sayn with his 50000 went
against the Emperor. Sarbaras with his 50000 marched to Constantinople: and
Cosrhoe stays upon the frontiers. Heraclius divides his also into three; the
one to hasten into Thrace, the other to bestow a Camisado upon Sayns Quarter,
the last he led himself into the Lazic Territories: to which place the
Gazarrs (a sort of Turk) came to serve him: Theodore in small time raised Sayns
Army, his Chrysolocae; assisted by hayle from heaven, so direfully thundering
on them, that all men there, saw that God fought for them. Sayn was a slain in
that battle; but in stead of a decent burial, the Persian Tyrant arrayed his
carcass in rags, persumed him with dogs turds, and slasht his sencesse trunck
into a thousand pieces. That year the Gazarrs (to gratify Heraclius) under
conduct of Ziebit broke through the Caspian straits, and did the Persians much
mischief, and to the Roman Army expressed no small affection. Anno Dom. 626
Sarbaras with infinite troops entered Thrace, pillg'd Calcedon, a town built by
Jason and Argias, much traded to, in view of Bysanth and upon the Bospherus.
After that, they laid siege to Constantinople; and for ten days, incessantly
labored to enter it: but such was the excellent courage of the Christians,
such her natural defense, that the Persians could not prevail; but upon
notice that Heraclius was approaching, they raised their siege and retreated
shamfully. Anno 628. the Roman Emperor entered Armenia, and in a long fought
battle obtained a mervailous great victory. After which, he demolisht
Ctesiphon, and pursued Cosrhoe: who when he heard that Sarbaras had sped but
ill in Thrace, and had re-delivered Caloedon to the Christians, inflamed with
passion he sends a villain an Assassinate to murder him: but by strange hap
the Emperors son had notice of it and acquaints the General; who by this
ingratitude of Cosrhoe begun to raise a dangerous rebellion. Cosrhoes when he
saw things succeeded thus infortunatly, in anguish of soul breathed out his
spirit: a Fever first, and then a Flux so taking him, that after he had reigned
50 years, upon his deathbed he nominated, as King his son Mardesae begot of
Syra his Queen; who ere he could set the Crown on's head, was slain by
Syroes his brother, yea before his fathers face: an act so horryd that Cosrhoe
bitterly curses him; but Syroes (the most bloody viper that ever lived) heaps
greater sins upon his head, by commanding some villains to shoot him to
death: at that instant his loathed soul called to mind his like cruelty to
Hormisda his father, and acknowledged that God was just to his retaliation.

So soon as Heraclius heard of Cosrhoes death, he imagines all his quarrels
ended: that year therefore he traveled to the holy City, and presented
Zacharyas the then Patriarch with the Cross of Christ, found by Saint Helena
(a Brittanish Lady) 3 May 326. and ravished thence by Cosrhoes as I lately
remembered. His triumphant entering thither was the 17 of September 628: the
same year that Boniface published to the world his Catholic Supremacy; and
in which, Mahomet divulged his Alcoran.

Syroes (by Teixerae called Chobad-Xirvihe, in the Tarich or Annal of Time,
Scyrviah) in the sixth year of his reign was slain by Sarbaras. Sarbaras is
by the Persians called Shawryr; by Shicard, Shiribar: in the third month of
his reign he slew Ardohyr ben Xirviah, right heir to the Crown: eight
months after that, is himself slain by Ioen-sha or Shyn-Shaw, Lord of part
of Taurus. The successors to this man are uncertainly delivered. The Roman
Authors from him to the conquest of Mahomet reckon three Kings of Persia. The
Arabs 6. The Persians 5. The Tarich 4. Teishera 7. The Armenians 11. How can I
therefore reconcile them? The most plausible is this. That Ioon-sha at the end
of three months was banished by Tuwan or Turan Doct natural daughter to
Cosrhoe. She had as bad a fate; at the end of sixteen months she was
poisoned and dyed, much lamented: to her followed to Iazan-Zeddahs, by the
Tarich called Ian-ku-kar-connah; by Elmacyn, Gaescan-zedda; who ruled nine
months: to him succeeded Azurmy Doct ( Cosrhoes youngest daughter) who after
sixteen months dyed; and left Shezir (or Kezir) to suceed her: who also at
the end of six weeks was slain by Phorog-Zeddah (or Shyriar as some call him)
who after like time, dyed of poison; and Yesdgyrd followed, who was forthwith
made away by Bornarym, and he by Hormisdas; the last of those 12 vanishing
Turrets, Cosrhoe saw in a perplexed vision one night after he had been
admiring Aristotle. The Period of Pesia's command was now accomplished. Such
time as Hormisda after five years rule (ten some say; others six;) was slain
by Omar the 2 Calyph after Mahomet: at which time viz. Anno 640: and of the
world 4610. and from the year of the Hegira 20. by whose fall, Persia
conquered by Arabians.
Persia after so long glory sets in an Ecliptique cloud, and is fettered and
forced under the iron yoke of Saracenic bondage.

Mahomet (whose life and acts I have already spoken of) was borne in Arabia
petrea, Anno Them. 574. in the year 620 was banished Mecca: and in the year
637. May 3 and at the age of 63 dyed, and was buried in Medina ( Munichiates
formerly) now called Tal-nabi. i.e. the City of Gods Prophet. From him to
Abbas I intend to run over cursarily: and to reject all circumstances.

To Mahomet succeeded Ebubokar, Abdalla Eubochar some name him. In the great
Clymactick year he also dyed; suspected to be poisoned: he sat as King of
Persia and Caliph, but two years. Omar succeeded him. He is called Howmar and
Homer, and was son to Kattab-Faruques, a wealthy Merchant. Ally the Persian
and son in law to Mahomet, was by this restless Kalyph not a little
persecuted in his quarrel: he sacked Bashra an Arabian City, walled by Muslyn;
and as an overflowing turrent, rusht as far as Gabata, monstrously
tyrannizing in Syria and Aegipt; after that he ruins Palestine and Iberia,
and as an unluckie comet blazes in Assyria, where he full gorged his fury. At
Bagdat he intends to meditate, but commands Mavi to sack Damascus, and
encourages other his grand Captains to do their best to propagate the Alcoran
in all Nations. Rustan beg with 15000 horse enters Cusistan, but at the siege
of Escair-Mecron is slain: and in the Armaie Moses sirnam'd Ashar governed.
This wild Arab forced the City, and made Ahawaz, Sabur, Arckan, Cownrestan,
Iaarown, and Laar become Mahomitans, and to enroll themselves Omars
Tributaries. Habu Obed-ben-Masudh also with 13000 horse subjected Irack, walled
Rastack, and of a poor Town made it a brave City, but new-named it Kufa or
Kalufa ophrat, since then the place of Coronation for the Kings of Persia: it is
40 miles from Babylon, and conjoynes Mosqued-Ally the burial place of
Mortis-Ally St. King, and Prophet to the Persians.

Habu-Obed next year subdued Wasit upon Dig lat; a Town agrandiz'd by Abdal
Melq' Anno Dom. 705. Heg. 85. Elsheer he also attempted; but in the trial lost
5000 men, Obed was slain and the Saracens rooted. Omar reanimates his men, and
persuades them that the Elsherians overcame them by Art Magique: which also he
knew how to practice. They hope the best and return to El-sheyr, under the
conduct of Siet-Bep Abi-Vaker, who had such luck through Omars skill, that
Elsbeyr was forced to feel his tortures. At Elcadisia (a frontier Town) he
slew 25000 Persians, and at Galula, Spa-hawn, and Yezd, at several times made
Yezdgirdfly; who had no comfort left him, when he beheld how fortunatly Omar
himself subjected Cusistan, Parc, Carman, and Iraack; and in Maqueroon,
Iaaroon, Aedgan, Deacow, Lar, Shyraz, and Moyoon, had made all men there swear
themselves true Mussulmen. Yesdgird dies, and Hormisda labors to repel the
Saracens; but in vain: an uncontrollable Decree hastened this long slavery and
change of Persia. 15000 men with himself he sacrificed as a farewell endeavor
to his Country. Omar also six months after this battle was slain
trecherously by a varlet; and in the Alcaba in Mecca near to Ebubocar buried.
Ozman (in despite of Ally) succeeded him. Omar sat Kalyph twelve years; ths
man ten, and four months in the Pontificacie. By Hucba his field Marshall he
subdued diverse parts of Afrique, viz. Mumydia, Mauritania, Lybia, and as far as
Carthage. Mavi, Sultan of Damasco, also overran Syria, Egypt, and in a 1000
Gallyfoists transferred such a swarm of Saracens into Cyprus, that upon their
entry they seemed enough to cover it: there they sacked Constantia (or Ceraunia,
a City built by Cyrus) and thence fell upon the Rhodes, where they perpetrated
all possible villainy: and amongst other spoils they dimolisht that Colossus
which was built by Chares of Lyndus, scholar to Lysippus in 12 years. It was
80 cubits high, the thomb as big as a large man, the legs stood on either side
the river, so wide and spacious, that thereunder might sail a large vessel:
in the one hand it held a javelin, which it raised to the East: on its breast
was a mirror, wherein those that dwelt far within the I Will might descry Ships
sailing at a great distance. This wonder of the world, and which cost 300
Talents, Mavi sold to Emisisa a Jew for 200 pounds sterlin: who with the brass
of it loded away 930 Camells. In that I Will he also defaced 100 other Colosses
and of costly Monuments 73000. During this, Heraclius dyed, Anno Domini 640,
after 30 years rule, and in's place Heracl; Constantinus succeeded, who in the
7 month of his Empire was poisoned by Martina his step-Dome, and Heraclionas
her soon advanced: but were forthwith both of them exiled by the people, their
noses and tongues cut out; and Constans saluted Emperor in his place.

Osman by this time had finished his Paraphrase upon the Alcoran, and digested
it into 7 small books, subdivided into 114 chapters. It happened that by some
chance or other he lost a Ring of gold which Mahomet left him, and which was to
descend to every succeeding Calyph; no pains, no magic could recover it: he
conceales the loss, and made one of silver, embowelling a Motto or Symbol, to
this purpose; O Pertinaces, O Poenitentes: from which pattern, all Mahomitans
to this day wear their Rings of silver.

Osman's mind fancies new conquests, and under a pretext of charity; to teach
those purblind Nations the lesson how to attain Paradise. India in those days
was rich and well peopled: to any would undertake the employment he gives a
thousand benediction. Abdall-ben-Emyr accepts the hazards, and with 30000 horse
hasts thitherward; but by new commands from Osman who had considered how long a
business 'twould be to subdue India, he directs his course toward Tartary.
Aria he easily subjugated, Corasan, Maurenahar, Gasuehen; and took the Cities
of Nizabur, Thalecan, and Tocharistan; yea all Dilemon to Balk, and as far as
Iehun and Ardoc would give leave; rivers beyond Oxus. But Osman how victorious
so ere he was abroad, dyed miserably at home of poison; which he sucked
voluntarily, rather than be slain by the enraged multitude: in the 88 year of
his age, of his Calyphship 5 years and 8 months, Anno Domini 655. Heg. 35. and
in his place long-lurking Ally is saluted King and Calyph: whose reign was full
of misery; for Mavi storms at Osmans fall, and with 100000 men enters Arabia
to depose Ally, but in th'incouoter lost 10000 men; howbeit at the second
trial Ally lost the day, his life, his Empire. Of the Egyptians were slain
15000: of Saracens 20000: and by which victory Mavi or Mnavias was re-saluted
King. Mortis-Ally dyed aged 63, and was buried near to Cufe upon Euphrates; at
Mosqued or Massad-Ally, Karb-Ally, some have mis-called it. Mortis-Ally left a
Ring, with which the Persian Kings wed their Kingdom: it is Motto is (say the
Molai) Cord Sincero Deum veneror: by the Persians he is sometimes called
Emir-el memunni, i.e. Prince of the feithfull. By Fatyma ( Mahomets sole child)
he had Ocen (or Hocem) who after few months rule dyed poisoned, An. Dom. 666.
Heg. 46. and was buried at Mosquit-Ally; his Symbol (as says the Iuchasus) was
Solus Deus potens. Mavi soon after Hocens death slew 11 of his children, the
12 escaped Musa Cherisim or Mahomet Mahodin by name, from whom the Kings of
Persia at this day say they are descended. Mavi Lord of the Ben humian family,
when he stated himself in the Empire; sent Susindus his kinsman with huge
forces aginst the Grecians: accordingly Suzindus beseiges Siracuse, and after
that Byzanth: but by Constantine the Roman Emperor is lastly slain and 30000
other rascal Sarazens; that same year the Plague raged so terribly in the
Mahomitan Empire that the like was never formerly: amongst the rest Mavi
expired, aged 77, in his reign of Egypt etc. 24, his Symbol this (as is
reported) Ignosce Precor.

To Mavi followed in the Empire of Persia and as Kalyph, Yhezid or Iezed:
memorable in his vein of Poetry: he it was that put the Alcoran into that bald
rythme, as it is now extant; his venery and riot exasperated
Mutar-Mavia-ben-Abdella, so as at the age of 40 he dyed, having ruled 3
years. Mutar is quickly dethroned by Abdall-ben-Iezid a Ben-humian: some are
of opinion that Ocen and his 11 sons were slain by this Calyph. Marvan (after
he had sat 9 months) dispossesses him, and he by Abdalla again; But both by
Aben or Abdalmelec were both, both of life and Kingdom bereaved. Didacus
dethroned Melec; Oyledore, Didacus; and Solomon by help of Iustinan the
Emperor slew Oyledore: Melec returns from banishment and expulses Sulyman,
and most exactly tortured Mutarrs murderers: the Christians were the worse for
this re-establisliment; for he forraged Syria, Armenia, Thrace; and in the 15
of his Empire dyed, ordeyning Vbyt (called also Vlitus and Evelyd-Miralminus)
in his stead; this Calyph dyed of grief, that his Armies he bad sent into
Spain were rebelled. Zulzimyn succeeded him; and him, Omar-ben-Abdemazed,
deposed by Yezid son to Melec the late Calyph. Ebrahim succeeded him, a
Prince foole-hardy and unfortunate. After his death the Empire was divided
'twixt Gezid and Vvalel; who with all the forces they could make invaded
Europe: thinking it a happy death in striviog to increase their new Religion.
Into Spain went Vvalids Army led by Abdiramo: Gezids part, led by Sha-Rablan
entered France; the first had better fortune than the second: they took Granada
and so rooted themselves that till Ferdinand of late expulst them, they there
inhabited. Those that entered France; (albeit they were encouraged by Endo Duke
of Aquitayne, who hated Charles Martell mortally) were resisted by Martell and
30000 French Gallants ( Endo the West Goth upon better consideration syding
with the Christians) so as after long fight, near Turin a in Peidmont the
Saracens were beaten; and of their numberless company 300000 slain, July 22.
726. as Beda and others at that time living testify: the two Calyphs dyed of
rage when they heard of their misfortunes: Marvan was placed in their stead: in
whose time Hyblin his General purposed to invade Tartary with 100000 men; but
in the way was assailed by Sophy-Salyn, Saint Azmully's son, of descent from
Ally; and Lamnoit the Arakosian, and in that conflict was Hiblyn slain. Marvan
vows revenge, and with 300000 Saracens he affronts Salyn near Spahawn, but is
vanquished and 100000 of his men slain; Marvan from Babylon fled to Mecca, and
thence into Aegipt, but thither also Salyn pursues him; and by his death gave
an end to his inveterate enemies the Ben-Humians, begun by Mavi, by Marvan
finished.

The family of Mortis-Ally or Ben-Abbas in this man begun again to rule the
Scepter of Persia: An. Dom. 750. Heg. 130. Abuballa a while opposed Saint
Azmulli, but in vain, Asmulli at Cufe was made King and Chalyph of Persia. This
man revived Mutar's tenants to the honor of Ally and disgrace of the three
successors of Mahomet: again revived by Siet Gunet of Ardaveil, as hereafter
may be spoken of.

Saint Azmulli being dead, his son Salyn is saluted King. In three years he
also dyed, and Abu-becr (called Bugiaser and Almansor) followed him in his
royalties. An. 758. Heg. 138 he repaired Bagdat. Mahadi-Abibala succeeded him,
by some called Negmedden-Phidul Ally; to whom, Moses or Eladimirza, father of
that Amarumlus the French men prate so much of. In his time viz. 798
Charlemaigne flourished, and this our Isle altered its name from Britain to
England. 'Twixt this Amarumlus (or Aaron King of Persia) and the Christian
Emperor Charles was great friendship: Ambassadors and Presents were sent from
either of them: of which, read Aeginardus his Secretary, This Aaron is thought
to have dyed a Christian. In his time many frantic Scholars in the sight of
thousands of men, threatened to fly, but in the trial from one rock to another
dyed miserably. Aaron after 23 years dyed, and Mahomet his son reigned after
him five years: Abdalla after him; who when he had raged against the
Christians, and troubled the Islands in the mediterran Seas, dyed: and was
succeeded by Mulla-Cawn, who also vexed the Christians, disturbed Italy, and
dared Rome: but he also suddenly vanished and was succeeded by these Kalyphs,
Vvaceck, Almoto, Montacer, Abbas, Mustead zem, (in whose time happened the
greatest Earthquake ever felt in Asia) Almotez, Moctadi-Bila, Anno 875. Heg.
355, Almet-Hamed, Mutazed, Moctifi-Byla, Moctader, Elhaker, Ratsha, Razi-bila,
Muctacsi, Moriah, Tayaha, Kaderkamet, and Mahomet-El-takert i. e. Gods servant;
in whom ended the Chalyphs of the Arabique or Persian Pedigree. For then An.
1030 Heg. 410 came in the Turquemen led by Tangrolipix, first called into
Persia by Mahomet the then Sultan to assist him against the Babilonians: but
(after he had freed him from that danger) desires leave to go into Armenia to
visit his kindred lately seated there, and is denied: an unkindnesse of such
force that Mahomet ere he could appease the enraged Turk, was forced to divest
both life and Kingdom. In him the family of Saint Asmully eclipsed, till
Sha-Ismael dispeld the interposing cloud, and resuscitated the glory of his
Ancestrie. The Boyiaean Kings who begun Anno Heg, 319, and ended Anno Heg, 480.
In the Iuchasin they are chronicled and at Shyras I have already spoken
concerning them.

The successor of Tangrolipix was Ottoman son of Ertrogul the Oguzian, who in
the year 1300 Heg. 680. laid the foundation of the Turkish Empire in Europe
and Asia: The Turks and Tartars conquer Persia.
the Salghucian (of the same extraction) commanded Persia: agrandiz'd by
Togrul-beg, son of Michael, son of Salghucius, son of Didacus a Turq'man.
Togrulbeg, (some say) was slain by treason: his successor was Pharug-zed,
Masuds son; slain by Olo-ben-Aesolan Prince of Gasnehen: to him followed
Ebram-ben-Masud, whose son Masud married the daughter of Melec-sha, King of
Turq'stan. Masud from Coresan entered Persia with a great Army, and near to
Tabryz slew Almostarshed-bila-Caliph, and in another fight Rashed-byla his
son at Hispahawn. To Masud in Gasnehen succeeded Sha-Aesolan, slain by
Babaron-sha his brother, Ar. Heg. 499; to whom followed his son Cosrhao; who
after he had forraged India dyed A.H. 540: and in him took end, the Sabutaque
family.

In those times as Kaliphs of Babylon and part of Persia, were Ghaladuddaul,
whose seventh successor Mustaed-zem was slain by Cingis Chan An. Heg 580;
Almostansor bila Mansor in his place governed Caldea and Persia. Of those
Tartars I have formerly spoken. Descend we therefore to the year of our Lord
1415 Heg. 795. such time as Chara-Mahumed the Turk re-entred Persia. He ruled
three years and left Kara-Issuph to succeed him; who also after three years
dyed at Casbyn, and left six sons. viz. Pir-buda-cawn, Scander-mirza, Ioon
sha, Sha-Mahomet, Abuzedda, and Mirsa-Absall; all which dyed untimely by envy
and one another emulation. Of those seven; Ioon-shi was last; and he also
slain with Acen-Ally his son by Acem-beg: at that time the family of the
Guspan Caraculu or blacksheep ended, and the Guspan Acorlu or white-sheep took
beginning. The first were Turks; the last, Armenians.

The Armenians subdue i^.
Acem beg (otherwise called Vsan-Cassan) conquered Persia An. Dom. 1470. Heg.
850. he subjected Hyrac, Trakeyn, Aderbayon, Kaboncara Mosendram, Carman, and
Cusistan: and after eight years command dyed at Kazbyn in Shervan, and was
solemnly buried. He left behind him seven sons; Ogorlu, Sultan-Kalyl,
Iacob-mirza, Josias, Yssuf, Maczud, and Zenal-beg. O gorlu was poisoned: Kalyl
was slain by Maczud-beg: Josias and Synall were slain in the Turquish wars.
Jacob was murdered by a Whore at Tauriz: and Yssuf dyed of an Impostume. The
seven sons of Vsan Cassan being all dead, the Empire descended upon
Baisangor, Jacobs son: he was deposed by Rustan-beg son to Muczud-beg.
Next year Baisangor returned with many of his Armenian friends, but in the way
dyed. Rustan that year was dethroned by Hagmet beg son of Ogorlu; and he by
Kacem-beg and Hayb-Sultan, two powerful rebels; who also by Alvan-beg were
slain, and in Spahawn all of them buried. Alvan-beg, Baisangor's brother after
he had ruled Persia five years. An. Heg. 878, was vanquished by Ismael his
Aunts son: and two years after, Morad was slain at Spahawn. In him ended
the race of white sheep, who under Acem-beg had conquered Persia. In Ismael
revived Saint Azmully and Mortis-Ally's glory; whose successors at this day
rule Persia. I will very briefly touch some passages of their Reign, that I
may hasten to our other Travells.

Ismael surnamed Sophy was invested Monarch of Persia An. Dom. 1500, Heg. 880.
He drew his pedigree from Mortis-Ally King of Persia, Anno Dom. 750 Heg. 130.
In a descent of 35 Princes, some of them are thus named. Abi-Taleb (or
Abutalip) had Mortis-Ally, Father of Mahomet Mahadyn, from whom Mutar, Saint
Asmully, and Salyn descend: to them, these; Shec-Sophy Eddin-Isaack surnamed
(from his learning and piety) Cutb'b el-eulya, to whom in order are these, Shec
Moses, or Mizra-Sedryddin, Shec-Ally-Shec-Ebrahym, Siet-Gunet, Shec (or Siet)
Aydar, and Shaw-Ismae: Whose Title to the Crown was this. Shec-Sofy such time
as Tamberlane returned from his Turquish Conquests, this Shec was of that
holiness and fame that that great Monarch vouchsaf't not only to visit him at
Ardaveel, but also to express his best affections. He made no other use of
the Tartars favor save to beg the lives of many thousands of miserable
Persians, whom by Hoharo-Mirsa's folly, Tamberlane had marked out for death.
That act added infinitely to the Santo's credit. Tamberlane dyed Anno 1437. Heg.
787, and is buried at Anzar in Cathaya. The Persian Saint lived but three
years after him: of whom I may say, as Horace did of another. Crescit occulto
velut Arbor aevo
Fama Sophyi. --
Syet Gunet his son, by the excellent report his Sire had honored him with,
not only inheriting his fathers repute, but so popularly beloved, that he
suddenly hatches the ambitious thoughts how to dispossess Ioon-Sha of the
Empire. He attempts it diverse ways, but finds none so sure as by making a
Schism in their Religion: he therefore dictates a new Currawn, wherein he
villified and accursed the three successors to Mahomet, and magnified Mortis
Ally: adding this, That he was lineally from him descended. Ioon-Sha espies his
drift and seeks to kill him: But he (doubting no less) avoyds it; and flies
into Armenia, where Vsan Cassan entertained him with all respect possible, and
to make it more apparent bestows his daughter, Martha ( Kadaijon Katun the
(Persians call her upon Despyna daughter, to Calo-Ioannes Emperor of
Trepisond) upon Aydar his son: on whom he begot two sons, Ally-Sha surnamed
Sulyman, and Sha-Ismael. Ally was slain in the Cradle by Prince Iacup their
Uncle, Vsan Cassans son. But Ismael found mercy from Rustan Amansor sent to
murder him: and who lived to revenge his fathers and brothers death upon him.
Aydar in the Annalls of Persia is said to have subjected Trebizonal, and to
have him sat as Emperor 8 months; conquered afterward by Mahomet first
Turquish Emperor. Upon Vsan Cassan's conquest of Persia, he also recovered his
Barony of Ardaveel: but (by the treachery of Iacup) at his besieging Tabriz,
was slain by Pharuc-Issur the then Viceroy of Sultany and Tabriztan.

I have told you that Ismael in revenge of his Fathers murder, and to make
good his claim from Ally, in two battles (wherein he vanquished Alvan and
Morod Kings of Persia) made himself Monarch of that Empire. For upon his
flight into Arzenion he was so welcomed, that in memory of his Grandfires
kindness to them (when he begd their lives of Tamberlane) they all rose in
his defense: namely those great Tribes, the Auxarchiars, Romlu, Sufiah,
Estayalu, Kayridac, Versabli, Shamlu, Zulcaderlu, etc. by whose help he slew
Pharuc Issup, conquered Shervan, at Tabryz beat Alvan, and in himself
established the Empire. In memory of which, and the other he gave Morod that
year near Shyraz, he instituted an order of Coosel-basha's; in them both
memorizing his descent from Mahadyn 12 son of Ocen of Ally, and Mamalucks who
then flourished.

Bajazet the Turk squints at Ismaels greatness, having formerly in his
appetite devoured Persia. But such was Isamel's high courage and virtue, that
he not only resisted the utmost fury of Bajazeth, but also made the Tartars
and Indians tremble at his fortune. The Persians honored him, the Armenians
loved him, but the Jews deified and assured him he was the Messiah they so
long waited for: but Ismaels severity toward them upon that blasphemy, made
them quickly recant, and rather think him a second Vespasian. Ere I go
further, let me speak a word of his surname Sophy.

Ismael at his Coronation proclaimed himself King of Persia name of
Pot-Shaw-Ismael-Sophy. Whence that word Sophy was borrowed, is much
controverted. Whether it be from the Armenian idiom, signifying wool, of which
the Shashes are made that enobled his new order. Whether the name was from
Sophy his Grandsire, or from the Greek word Sophos imposed upon Aydar at his
conquest of Trepizond by the Greeks there, I know not. Since then many have
called the Kings of Persia, Sophy's: but I see no proper reason for it; since
Ismaels son, grand great grand sons Kings of Persia never continued that
name, till this that now reigns, whose name indeed is Soffee, but casual.

Ismael the second of his reign, subjected Shervan and Gheylan; Parc, Hyerac
and Cusistan; Kerman, Macron, and as far as Iasques. Coom Coom was commonly
his Winter rendezvous. The fourth year by Elyas-beg he purposed to infest the
Tartars: but Elias through neglect was vanquished in the way by Ocebeg-Geholy
Lord of Chalat-Pherusky, who at Ismaels approach fortifies his Castle, but is
forced out by flux and famine; he and fifty of his best men slain, and the
rest pardoned. Which done, he hasts back to Yezd, hearing that Mahomet had
besieged it: he quickly raised the siege and burned Mahomet. And after he had
compounded some differences 'twixt himself and Morod-sha, brother to Alvan;
Anno Dom. 1507. Heg. 887, he journeyed to Shyraz where he was solemnly
crowned: but next day put to death 30000 men, such as were either guilty of his
Fathers death, or had taken part with Morod against him. That year he hastened
into Mosendram and repulsed the Tartarrs, albeit he had not above 20000 horse,
and Vluchan and his were above 300000. And to retaliate them he billited his
men that Winter in Taron; but so soon as the weather permitted he entered
Tuzz, intending to spoil Samarchand. But hearing of Sultan Ocen's death, and
that Shac-beg-chawn an Ouz-beg, had usurped the Crown of Corasan; in the
behalf of there injured Princes Ocens sons, he entered Corasan; and in a long
fought battle 'twixt him and the Rhumestans, slew Sha-beg-cawn, 30000 Tattars,
and made Acen-Ally be crowned King; upon condition that at his death it should
hold of the Persian Dyadem. That Summer he passed Oxus, and slew Chamsylba the
Maurenahar King, sacked the strong Castle Ael-kama, depopulated Dargan,
Farghwan, Azfaker, and many other strong holds in T'sogd, Kennough, Gaznehen,
Maurenaher, Rhumestan, Turq'stan, far beyond Balk the Ouz-beghian Metropolis:
and returning, he sacked Tuzz, Sakalkand, Sikamest, etc. sufficiently
retaliating what his own Nation had formerly suffered from the Black-sheep of
that vargant Country: and when he had fully glutted himsefe amongst the
Tartarrs, came joyfully back to Coom, where he was received with all symptoms
of joy possible to be expressed.

Next summer he went into D'arbeg against the Turks, who so soon as they had
heard of Ismaels doings in Tartary entered Bagdat and expressed their utmost
villainy there; calling them Raffadins or Schismatics, and cutting off the
noses and thumbs of many hundred Persians. In their revenge Ismael affronts
them with 50000 horse, and in despite of what Carigy and Ally-Bashaw could do,
upon the bancks of Tygris he gave the Turks an overthow; and that year seconds
it by another he gave the Beglerbeg of Anatolia: whereat Bajazeth storms, but
Ismael to exasperate him took a Swine into his Court, and names it Bajazeth,
madding the Grand-Senior and his Ambassador; but joying the Persians; to see
the excellent courage of their Emperor. At this time also, Tekelles, a
favorite to Ismaels father Aydar, to propagate the Reformation leads 20000 men
into Trepisond; whither the Armenians flockt in such abundance, that that Syet
entered Turquy with 200000 men, as far as Iconium in Lycaonia; where he
vanquished Mahomet and Orcan the 2 youthful Nephews of Bajazeth: Carogozes the
Bassa of Asia also he triumphed over; sacked Cutay, and in the plains of Ancira
put to flight Ally-Bassa and his innumerable company; yea had Ismael taken the
advantage to have backed him, he had proved another Tamberlain: but wanting his
countenance and other necessaries, Ionuses Bassa near to Anti-Taurus conquered
him: and which was no less miserable; that famous Captain doing some violence
to a Carravan he met with by the way, is at this entering Casbyn apprehended,
and by Ismaels command burned. Anno Domini 1511. Heg. 891. Ismael recovered
Bagdat, Barrhyeck-beg the Sultan betraying it and opening a posterne
where-through the Persians entered, Mahomet Bassa being forced to fly to save
his life. That year he entertained Lemius (the Portugal Agent) at Cashan;
who was led into the Army by Mirza Abucaca the field Marshall: the which Lemius
reported to Albuquerq, that Ismael had 350000 Paviilions pitched there, and in
the field 130000 men. That year Bajazeth was poysonned by a Jew, and in his
Place Selym his younger son, made Emperor of Turquy. That year, Morad son to
Sultan Ac'mat, Bajazeths eldest son, fled to Ismael fot safety; and Aladyn
his brother, to Campson Gaurus Sultan of Egypt: where both were welcomed.
Selym prepares to fetch them thence: but Ismael irritates his vexation; and
incourages Morad with 10000 horse (promising to second him by Vstref-oglan with
20000 more) to forage Turquy: accordingly Morad past through Armenia the
less, and in Cappadocia showed himself an adversary. Chendemus with great
forces opposes him: who upon notice of his Uncles approach, fell back to
Vstref, and both of them to Anti-Taurus, where Aladules quietly suffered him to
pass the Mountains into Armenia; whither they knew ere-long the Grand-Senior
would hunt after them. Selym commands his whole forces to follow him into
Persia: Chendemus for diswading him slain; but Ebrahim Bass's advice after
long march into Armenia, he got; where in the Calderan plains was fought 'twixt
the Turk and Persian a most memorable battle: Ismael with 30000 Persians for
16 hours maintaining the fight with Selymus and 300000 Turks; and where (if
the Turquish Artillery bad not disordered and affrighted the Persian horse) the
Persian had gloriously triumphed: but as it was, for one Persian 10 Turks were
slain; and neither of them obtained conquest: the horror of it such, that the
Turkish Annalls call that days fight, The day of Doom. Anno Domini 1515. Heg.
895, Selym returned with new forces into Armenia, but by the way strangled
Aladeules be Mountanous King: Ismael leaves Synal-beg to pursue his conquest of
Mosendram, and with 30000 horse, attended Selym at Tabriz: but Selym diverts
his first thoughts, and at an unexpected hour enters Egypt, and by the
slaughter of the Sultan Campson (betrayed by Cajerbeg Sultan of Aleppo)
conquered it and gave end to that order of Mamalucks which from Sultan Saladyne
who lived Anno Heg. 896. had continued with much fame and excellency:
Tomambeyus sought to have restored it, but Selym made his life the price of it.

Anno Domini 1514. Hegaria 894. Sha-Tamas was born, who succeeded Ismael in the
Empire; in 5 years after, he had also Hel-cawn, Som-Mirza, and Bacram-cawn:
some call them, Elias, Sormiza, and Barhon-cawn. An. Dom. 1520. Salym the
Turkish Emperor dyed, and was succeeded by Solomon. Anno Domini 1525. Heg.
965. Ismael also dyed; in the 40 of his age, and his reign, 20 years.

Ismael's four soones did what they could to ruin the Empire, by one another
ruin: Hel-cawn especially: who to effect it, syded with the Turkish Emperor.
Vlembeg also (who had married their sister) labored it. But albeit Solomon did
his best by his own forces and by their treasons, yet such was his ill luck,
that (excepting Babylon and Tabryz) they got nothing but sad experience: for
Tamas upon notice of the Turkish entry, leaves Kazien Bassa and Corasan (which
he then had beseiged) and hasts to Cashyn: the Turks so soon as they had
rifled Tabryz, retreat; but are so assailed in the rear by Delementhes, still
as they marched, that they could not prevent the loss of 40 Cannon, 3
Sansacks, 800 Janisaries, and of Asaps or common men above 20000: a victory so
plausible. that to this day upon the 3 and 10 of Ardabehish or October, it is
with many signalls of joy solemnized: 4 years after, as Morod had done to
Ismael, so Bajazet Solymans son fled to Tamas; to save his life, willing to
part with his hopes of a Monarchy: his rebellions and injuries to his father
and brother had been many and notable; so as Hassan Bassa comes to Casbyn, and
upon assuring Tamas that Bajazeth came purposely to kill him, that unfortunate
Prince was by that old villain strangled, and his 4 sons also; Homer, Morad,
Selymus, and Mahomet. Solomon next year enters Persia with 150000 men. Tamas
affrighted with their great ordnance, hyres 5000 Portugalls from Ormus and
Indya, who brought 20 Cannon along with them, and by whose helps the Turks were
vanquished. That year Tamas eatf ed the Ouz begs country and returned
victorious: and next into Cabul; whence he thought to have gone to Lahore; but
upon news that Mustapha ( Solymans eldest son and brother to Bajazeth,
lately at Casbyn strangled) was fled from his Father to him from succor, he
returns and welcomes him, willing any way to agrandize discord amonst the
Ottomans. Solomon in person with 80000 men follows him, in every place he
came that loved the Persian, perpetrating all sort of savage cruelty. At Erez,
Tamas fought with Solomon, but with worse success than formerly near Bagdat:
for 1000 Persians were slain, and 20000 Turks; but by their numbers the
Persians were forced to leave the field; which when Mustapha saw, fled to his
Father and beseeches (for Roxalana his Mothers sake) pardon: but it would not
be; his Father forthwith made him to be strangled.

Anno Domini 1576. Heg. 956. King Tamas dyed at Cazbyn, aged 68; having reigned
50 years; and left his eldest son Mahomet to succeed him: he had in all, 12
sons and 3 daughters; Maomet, Ismael, Aydar, Sulyman, Emangoly, Morad,
Mustapha, Ally, Hamed, Ebrahim, Hamze, and Izma cawn. Ismael during his stay at
Cohac complots with Peria-Conconna and Sahamal-can; by whose help he strangled
Aydar, and beheaded 8 other of his brethren: hopeful also to meet with
Mahomet: who being fled to Georgia finds such friends that ere long he returned
with 12000 horse, Curds and Georgians, by whose service, and the valor of
Leventhybeg, he arrives at Spahawn; where he had news of Ismaels death, slain
in his bed by Periaconconna and 4 Sultans, who entered habited like women, An.
Dom. 1577. The same year that Ismael was thus slain, Peria-Concanna was also
made away by Salmas-Mirza, at the command of Mahomet.

Mahomet (called Codobanda by the Turks) had many sons: Ismael, Mustapha,
Mir-can, Guynet, Sophy, etc. Ismael was famisht to death Caykahe Castle near
Tabriz, by means of Massombeg the favorite: the rest of his sons dyed
untimely. He had also 3 sons begot of Ioon-Conna Princess of Heri and
Corassan: Emyr-Hamze mirza, Sultan Aydar, and Abbas. Emyr-hamze-mirza, was the
most famous, active, and, beloved Prince that ever to this day lived in Persia.
When he commanded, they thought nothing impossible: the Turks, the Indyan, the
Arab, and Tartar feared him; with 40000 horse he vanquished 200000 Turks near
Van, and cleared Armenia of those Locusts. After that, with 30000 Persians and
Ouzbeghians he over-threw them at Erez, and obtained a most glorious victory.
Two years after, Anno Domini 1580. Heg. 960 at Bagdat he beat the Turks; at
that time of Persians being slain 10000, but of Turks 70000. Next year, he
opposed the Tartar near to Sumachy and slew 20000 of their men: and that same
month of the Turks led by Mustapha Bassa 100000: but with loss of above 40000
of his own men. An. Dom 1584. Heg. 964. near Van again, he slew above 20000
Turks: and with his own hands slew the Sultan of Caramit, the General; the
Basha of Trebizond, and 5 Sanzacks. At Sancazan the ensuing spring, he also
beat Osman the Basha (who dyed to think of it) and slew above 23000 other
Turks. At Tephlis he vanquished Sycala the famous Basha, and slew 30000 of his
Turks; the Prince losing 9000 Persians: but by that victory regained Tabriz,
Babylon, and all other such places as King Tamas had Anno Domini 1537. Heg.
917, lost to Solomon. Next year he took Derbent from the Turk, and near to
Tephlys with 20000 horse, scattered and slew 80000 Turks: so dismal to
Amurath, that rather than see his face Mustapha by voluntary poison at the age
of 78 gave up the ghost, and Acmat the renouned Ennuch resolved to beg rather
than to see Persia again. But Synon Bassa was so puffed up with his late
conquests (at Cyprus, Malta, and, Egypt) that he threatens his payment; and to
that end with 100000 men he entered Georgia, sacked Tephlys, and in Shervan did
many mischiefs: but plague and famine puisuing him, the Prince of Persia ere
the Tartar could join with Synon bad him battle at Carse in the Turq'men
confines and beat him, but two days after lost 5000 men more, and was forced
back to Trepizond: But at length, what enemies abroad could not effect, at home
his brother Abbas perpetrated by poison: insomuch as in the vigor of his age,
and hopes of further conquest, this gallant Prince goes down not aged 30; and
of such force with purblind Mahomet, that in few days after he expired: An.
Dom. 1585. Heg. 965. after 8 years reign, and at Ardaveel by his father was
some part buried.

Abbas had much ado to quiet the distemper of the Persians, such hate they
bore him for his cruelty. At Casbyn he found most welcome: they had considered
the other two were irrevocable, and that it concerned them to have some expert
man to defend them from the Turk, who almost every day from Tabriz affronted
them. Spahawn indeed paid dearly for her rebellion. The first year of his
reign Amurath the Turkish Emperor sent his Ambassador to Abbas, to command
him (If he desired peace) to send him his son Ismael as a hostage: the
Ambassador had better have stayed at home, for albeit he escaped with his
life, yet he was miserably bastinadoed. Enraged by that message he besieged
Tabriz, and easily forced the Turks thence, as also out of Van and all Armenia:
two years after he beat them out of Balsorac and Bagdat; yea made Dyarbec and
Iaziry too hot for them. By Curchiki-can he subdued Ghey-lan; by
Tamas-coolibeg, Mozendram; by Ferrat-chan, Candahar; and by Lolla-beg and
Emangloy-cawn, Larr, Cusistan, Carman, Macron, and part of Iazirey or Arabia:
yea to this last overthrow at Babylon, he gave successively to Mahomet 3,
Acmat, Osman, Mustapha, and Amurath, all of them Grand Seigniors, above 20
other several over-throwes; most of which the Turks conceal, and thence it is
that we have them not recorded in our Turkish Histories.

About this time, Abbas became enraged against the Georgians: and upon this
occasion.

Scander, lake King of Georgia (a Country confyning palus Meotis, 'twixt the
Euxin and Caspian seas) by a Sarcashi^n Lady had 3 hopeful sons;
Scander-cawn, Thre-beg, and Constandell: all borne Chistians; but for
preferment the two last named became Bosarmen or circumcised. Thre-beg served
the Turk; Constandell, the Persian. Constandell was naturally deforned, but of
such an active spirit, that his bodily imperfections were not noted: yet his
hateful ambition rendered him more than monstrous. It happened that Abbas vowed
some revenge upon the Turk; and to that end gave order to Ally-cawn to trouble
them. Constandell perceives the occasion right to attempt his hellish
resolutions, and therefore after long suit got to be joined in Commission with
the Persian General. Through Georgia they go: where Costandell under a pretext
of Duty visits his sad Parents, who (upon his protest that his Apostasy was
counterfeit) joyfully welcomed him: but forgetting that, and all other ties of
Nature, next night at a solemn banquet caused them to be murdered: and till the
Georgians saluted him by the name of King, perpetrated all sorts of villainies
possible. But how secure soere he stood in his own fancy, the dreadful
Justice of an impartial God retaliated him: the rest of his life proving to
this hellish Assassinate infinitely miserable; for first, near Sumachan,
Cycala's son the Turkish General, wounded him in the arm, and by that
forfeited the victory to the Persian. That same night he was also assaulted in
his tent by his enraged Countrymen; who in his place, (for at the first alarm
he escaped) cut a Catamite in pieces, his accursed bedfellow: and albeit he
so far exasperated the Persian to revenge, that he brought the whole Army
into Georgia, resolving there to act unparellel'd tragedies; yet was he
over-reacht in his stratagems: for upon parlee with the Queen (his late
brothers wife) he was shot to death, at a private signal given by that Amazon
to some Musketeers, ambushed of purpose 'twixt both the Armies. A just
punishment for such a viper.

For can there be a punishment more fit
Than he should die, that first invented it.
-- Nec enim lex justior ulla est
Quam necis artisicis, art petire sua,
But Abbas (glad of all advantages to spoil and conquer) takes the affront as
done in his despite, in that Constandell was his subject and a Mohammedan; and
therefore studies their destruction: but such good reasons Ally-cawn gave him
to the contrary, that he alters his first intents, and seeks by conferring
his best love upon young Temerisk their Infant King to oblige their affection:
and accordingly returned him into Georgia royally attended, yea made him be
crowned King in Georgia, with all ceremony requirable. But long these Halcyon
days endured not; for the Grand Seniors Ambassador at Spahawn labored by all
ways how to separate this their Union; and by deceit effected it: First
wispering in Temerisks ears that Abbas hated him; and then made Abbas believe
that Temerisk was an undoubted creature of the Grand Seniors: so that (upon
Temerisks denial to come to Abbas) he enters Georgia with 30000 horse, where
Lolla-beg, at his Masters command, made fire and sword equally tyrannical.
Temerisk was forced to the Turk, from whom he got such forces, that he
re-entred Georgia, and slew the Persique Garrisons, yea forraged beyond Tephlys
into Medya: which so enraged Abbas that from Mosendram he issued with a greater
Army than formerly, and in Georgia made a more terrible execution: firing their
Churches, houses, and Mulberry-trees; destroying their silk-wormes, and
massacring young and old, without mercy. But so soon as Abbas was gone,
Temerisk re-possessed his desolate Country; and by a stratagem of Morad-cawns,
in some sort requited the Persian: for Morad like another Zopyrus, deformes his
face, flies to Cazbyn, and is welcomed: pretends that Temerisk had so mutilated
him; and that he resolved to betray him to the Persian. Abhas believes him,
and sends 12 famous Dukes and an Army along with him: but being upon the
Georgian Confines, and knowing that the Persians were fearelesse of danger, he
issues at midnight from his own quarter upon them with 500 voluntary Georgians
(whom he had appointed should accidentally proffer their services) with such
hideous clamours, that 11 of those Dukes and 700 men were slain; the rest so
terribly affrighted, that they rather chose to dye any other death than hazard
any more adventures amongst those Christians. Since which, Abbas (by meditation
of his Cosel-bashaws, who are most of them Georgians) has firmed a sure
friendship with the Georgians.

If I should but memorise his several victories against the Tartar, Georgian,
Mogull, and Arabian; It would be enough to make a Book voluminous. But I
promised to weave no circumstances: for if that could have been accepted of, I
had here also spoke his journey and wars of Armenia; and his tragic acts
against his own children: which in regard I have elsewhere glanced at, I have
here pretermitted purposely; this only be remembered; That Sha-Abbas dyed Anno
Domini 1628. Heg. 1008. aged 70, having ruled the Persian Empire 43 years; and
was buried, part at Cazbyn, part at Ardaveel, in the Chapel where are
intombed his famous and warlike Progenitors: And albeit in the infancy of his
reign he had been Tyrannical, yet such was the Majesty of his aspect, his
courage, policy, wisdom, and good fortune in all his wars, that never any
Prince before him was better beloved, and every way by all Symptoms of Duty and
respect, more honored. His Care to administer Justice; his Zeal to Strangers,
whom he ever much regarded, and gave all safety and privileges to; it being
his usual phrase, that Strangers added especially to the luster of his Court,
more than any Domestiq' magnificence; his Labor to increase Commerce with
other Nations; his Encouragement to Soldiers; his Indulgence to Merchants of
his own Nation; and in a word, his great Knowledge in History and Philosophy,
not only made him to be adored by his own, but admired at by Travelers;
especially when with him they compared other Emperors and Princes of Asia, who
suck with delight their native ignorance: and thence it was that Abbas went to
his grave, with such general lamentation as made it known that he was their
Father, Protector, and Emperor.

In his place was Sha-Soffy ( Abbas his Grand-sonne) saluted King; whose
fathers death and his brothers I have elsewhere remembered.

Of Sha-Soffy I will say little, save that since his being King (albeit very
young) he has vanquished the Turks 4 times: albeit twice the Grand-Seignior was
in person to fight with him. Many of his Nobles he has beheaded: but in these
things argues his just descent from Ally: and is as likely as any that reigned
before him, to advance the Monarchy of Persia; and every way to make it rich,
and famous.

To conclude Persia and this second Book, give me leave to do it in this
Epidicticon.

The Epidicticon.
Why do the wyndings of inconstant state
Molest us Weaklings? since the selfsame Fate
Turns Kings and Kingdoms with an equal doom:
Whiles Slaves, too often, possess their Masters room.
So pricking Thistles choke our fairest corn,
And hopeful Oaks the hugging Ivies scorn:
Men are but Men, and be they strong or wise,
All their Designs subject to hazard lies.
Millions of helps cannot support that Crown,
Which Sin erects; Fate justly pulls it down.
Witness fair PERSIA, large and rich of ground,
(The fitter Nurse of war:) In it was found
(Even in those golden times which Poets vant)
Victorius Cyrus; who yet did supplant
His Father. Oh, that men would learn to see
What life were best, not what does please the eye!
But out, alas! when they have drunk of blood,
That bitter potion's sweet: yea even a flood
Of lives food cannot their hot thirst allay,
Till Tomyris that blood with blood repay.
So hapt to Cyrus, whom the insulting Queen
Upbraid with bloodshed; Vengeance is too keen:
For in a bowl of goar, dead drowned lies
His crowned Temples and insatiate eyes:
That King aspired, and for his itching vein,
200000 Subjects there lay slain:
Thus faires it still with thee, proud Persia,
Whose various Native beauties freely may
A strangers love entice. Thy breath is sweet,
Thy Face well made, a Nursery of delight;
Thy breasts not dry of milk, thy arms are strong,
Thy belly fruitful; legs both clean and long;
Thy veins are large; blood pure; quick spirits have:
But for thy back, Oh stay! there lies the wast.
To this fair Symmetrie of outward parts,
The giver great (to engage by great deserts)
Infused has, into thy childrens wit,
Wisdom and courage best to manage it.
Nor wast thou Barbarous, or Indisciplin'd;
For had thy Ear unto its good inclind,
Thy Country Prophetisse foretold thee how
Hell and its wrath by Christ to disavow.
Since which, thy Sages, Kings or more than Kings
(If I mistake thee not!) their Offerings
Unto my Infant God humbly present.
O Faith exceeding almost Faiths extent!
But now this Light of lights on Earth did shine,
See how thy Virtues retrograde decline:
Holy Thaddaeus, (whom Saint Thomas sent
To cure thy King) thy Flamens did present
With hellish torments: and with like foul hands
Simon the Cananyt's good news withstands.
In after times thy Cozrhoe ( Persia) made
A pond of Christian blood: Nor here thou staid
But (in dislike of christ,) The Arabian Theife
Thou choose to be thy unlearned Judge and Chief.
Hence, hence, proceed those gross Impieties,
Which swallowed, greedily delight thine Eyes!
Bloodshed and lust, the foulest out of kind,
Which, my chaste Muse is feared to name: the rind
Thou only keeps of zealous awe: the heart,
Is foul defiled: for so thou learnd'st the Art
Of lust and pride from thy cursed Mahomet,
Whose thoughts unbounded all on Thrones was set.
Nor did his Successors as Prophets live,
But one another murdered; All did grieve
At Neighbors Diadems. The God of Peace
For those thy sins, thy power will sure decrease.
And thou that often have felt a foreign power;
Once more may feel a Scithyc race so sower;
That all the World shall know, how greatest Kings
Are thrall to change, as well as weaker things.
FINIS LIBRI SECUNDI.
THE THIRD BOOK.
Let Us now abroad again: and see what Observations we can make in the Islands
circumjacing Oriental Indya: than which, the world has none richer,
pleasanter, or every way more excellent. To encompasse it, we must to Sea
again; for, without such helps there is but little traveling.

Apr. 13. We took ship at Swalley: when, being three or four leagues off at
Sea, the wind came fair and made the liquid billows swell so advantagiously,
that next day we lost sight of many pretty marittim Towns, at this day owned
by the Portugal: namely Gundavee, Daman, St. John de Vacas, Chowl, Dabul, etc.
most of them subjected by Don Albuquerq' about the year after th'incarnation
of our Savior 1512; Dabul ( Dunga of old) excepted, which yielded to the
mercy of Simon Andradius Governor of Choul; from whom 'twas rapt by the
Decanees, but by that made a Basis of greater calamity. For, Almeyda some few
years after by stratagem recovered and burnt it to the ground: but by command
of the Goan Viceroy 'twas repaired, repopulated, and stood victorious; till
Captain Hall (if I mistake not the man's name) about nine years ago forced
it; and made the insulting Portugal know, how their bravadoes, to the English
were no way formidable.

The South point of DABUL has Artick Elevation 17 degrees. 35 minutes; Dabul.
variation West, 15 degrees 34 minutes. It once obeyed the Monarch of Decan; but
at this day the Lusitanian. It Is seated at the foot of a high, but pleasant
mountain; whence, distills a sweet rivolet, beyond measure useful in those
torryd Clymats: the Road gives reasonable good Anchor^ge. The Town it self is
beautiful to such as view it at distance: the houses are low and thick, and
tarras't at the top; serving both to lenifie the scorching flames of wanton
Phaeton, and to resist the quick and subtle rage of Hyem's icyles: an old
Castle and a few Temples or Monasteries are all she boasts of, the Buzzar or
Forum is but ordinary, the streets narrow are: nor is her mart now notable;
Surat and Cambya to the North; Goa and Calicuth to the South so much eclipsing
her; that she condoles with other her disconsolate neighbors, and acknowledges
a secret destiny and change in Towns as well as other temporaries.

CHOUL (in Ptolmyes days called Comane, if Castaldus guess right) is subject
to like variety: it is removed from the Aequi-noctiall 18 degrees 30 minutes
North: and was ravished from the Imperial Dyadem of Decan (or Decanory) by
Almeyda that ambitious Portugal in the year of our redemption 1507, and in
which (to perpetuate his Conquest) he erected a gallant Fort or Bulwark, and
planted it with Cannon: a Castle also no less fortified; so terrible to the
Indyans, as they have forborne to make them rore, doubting the very clamor may
undo them. The Inhabitants are a few melancholy but lustful Portugalls, and
some peaceful crafty Bannyans: it affoords naught else to be spoken on in this
place. The Expedition bearing up to speak with us, both ships fell foul (to
speak in Neptunes language) or thwart one another houlses; by which mischance
her bolesprit gave our mizzen shrouds a churlish kiss; but by a happy gale
parted without farther inconvenience. After five days sail we were Nadyr to
the Sun, at that instant in our Vertice or Zenyth; his declination then being
just fifteen degrees; and we close by the I Will incyrcling Goa, a gallant City,
the Metropole and seat of the Spanish Viceroy and Archbishop, the City I have
formerly described: haste we therefore to other places. The wind was
favorable a while; but ere long becalmed, whereby the air inflamed, and Sea
gave a fiery reflection; to sweat and live like Salamanders was no novel thing
with us to suffer bravely all mutations; Coelum non animum, was a verified
Motto, and served in general to comfort us. The three and twentieth of April
we got to Mangalore a City obeying the Mallabar, in whose road we found
thirty or forty Frigads of Mallabar men of war, who durst not insult upon
their numbers, but choose rather to avoid, and accordingly all together hoist
sail toward Goa; one only miscarrying, suffering a while the Jonas her Barge
to domineere, but after variable strife by rowing and augmenting canvasse got
away, with some short in her side, and many wounded. That same night we came to
an anchor in Mount Elly or Delyns bay, a Town and Port acknowledging vassalage
to the Mallabar: we rode in nine fadoms, not above three nearer the shore.
Gladly we would have landed, but durst not be too prodigal of our belief;
they seemed willing, we knew them treacherous; but seeing we had discoverd
their villainy, they ventured aboard our ships, they knew us merciful: they
filled their Canoes with Coco's, Mangoes, Jacks, green Pepper, Caravance or
Indyan Pease, Buffalls, Flesh, Henns, Eggs, and other things, sold us not at
very easy prices; but (what principally vexed us) also made us pay for every
tun of water a Ryall or four shillings four pence: and though they hand
plenty of it, yet grudged exceedingly to show us any courtesy in that common
element, in fringing by that their barbarism, the law of Nature and Nations;
one of their own religion (but more moral) shall accuse them.

Ovid, that sweet Roman Poet I mean, who to that end brings in his Goddess
vindicating Natures right, and blaming the Rusticks for their immanity.

Why are these waters stopped? whose use is free;
The Sun and Air dispersed to all we see
Why not those Brooks? I crave community.
Quid prohibetis Aquas? usus communis aquarum est;
Nec Solemn proprium Natura, nec Era fecit
Nec tenues Vndas; in publica munera veni.
And that we have such variety of choice fruits, suffer a little entertainment;
the banquet is seasonable in these paralells: but first perfume the place with
Calambuco wood (a lignum vitae,) and to imitate the Egyptians, place we a
deaths-head, as an object of mortality.

The Bannyans in these parts are as superstitious as any other where, and
arrogate as much vainglorious ceremony in their Funerals: transcending in cost
and curiosity as the Carcass differed ere-while from others in Estate and
Quality: the richer sort have redolent gums, or aromatic odours of Arabia
incendiated or put to flames, wherein the dead body is laid, involved in linen
pure white, sweet, and delicate; or in Taffataes of transparent finenesse: of
all sorts of wood they affect that called Aquila, and the older kind named
Calamba; or Calambuca; trees, rare, sweet, and precious; of admirable height
and evennesse, found commonly in the lofty Mountain of Chaemoys in
Cochyn-chyna; and which, these people sell at excessive rates; both in regard
the Bannians delight to have it in their Obsequies, as that the Japonians so
much value it. They imagine no pillow wholsomer, no thing more efficacious for
health, than that to sleep upon. They extremely hate such as have down or what
their heads may sink into; both, for that it heats the blood, and pertubs the
fancy: you now may view your fruits asore you. I will select the rarest, and
first present a short description: here are fair and juycy Lemons, Pappaes;
Coco's, Bananas, or Plaintains, sweet and delicious: the Orenges may tempt a
taste, Orenges.
they are succulent and dainty, of so curious a relish as affects the eater
beyond measure, and offer the rynd no less pleasant than the juice, both which
seem to have dulcity and acrimony mixed together. The Bannana's is no less
dainty: the tree mounts not high, but spreads in a most graceful posture: the
fruit is long, not unlike a Sossage in shape, in taste most excellent: Plantans
they ripen though you crop them immaturely; and from a dark-greene, mellow
into a flaming yellow: the rynd peeles off very easily; the fruit put into your
mouth, dissolves and yields a most incomparable relish; the Windsor or
Pome-crittien are to it far inferior.

The Jack or Giack grows upon a hyer tree, uneasy to be ascended: Iiack.
the Jack for show and quantity resembles a Pompeon; without; it is a gold
yellow, commixt with veins; within, is soft and tender; full of golden colored
cloves, each full of kernells, not unlike a great French Bean, somewhat more
globous: all of them comprise abone or stone not manducable, except being boyld
the Buffols eat it: the fruit is somewhat unpleasant at first gust, the heat
and rareness causes it: it is glutinous and clammy in the mouth, but of double
benefit in the stomach, being restorative, and good for the back; but of
singular use against that French disease, they brought from the hot wars at
Naples; whither the lustful Spaniard brought it, with his Idol-gold from
ravished Indya.

Ananas.
The Ananas is not inferior to the Jack in bulk, in roundnesse; yet is the
plant or parent it spung from no way equal: it arises from no seed nor sowing,
but from a root like to an Artichoak: at maturity they show themselves, and
affect not above two foot height, the better and with less labor to enrich
the gatherer: without, it is armed with a moystlesse rynd, hard and skalee;
within, is wholesome and pleasant: and though a little seem to satiate the
appetite, yet experience teaches us the stomach covets it, Duroyen.
and admits an easy digestion. The Duroyen somewhat resembles the Jack: the
shape is round, the outside bravery no way parellells the intrinsique virtue:
at first opening it gives a smell not unlike a rotten Onyon, to many seeming
odious and offensive: the meat is whitish, divided into a dozen cells or
partitions, filled with stones as big as Chez-nuts, white and cordial: in
Malacca, and Iava they abound, and are worth the inquiring after: a fruit,
nutritive and dainty; yea, without an hyperbole may well be called, Arecca.
an Epitome of all the best and rarest fruits throughout the Oryent. Arec and
Betele also is here much used. The Arecca tree aspires in height like to a
Caedar, but rather simulates the Palmeto. It is a fuzzy concave substance,
decorated at the very top with plumes, wherein the fruit hangs in clusters:
it is shaped like a Wall-nut and of like bigness; white within, not easily
penetrated; has no taste, smell, nor sapor: they never eat it alone, but wrap
it in a leaf of Betel, and chaw it in many several morsells: some (as I have
noted amongst the Mohelyans) add to it a kind of Lyme of Oyster-shells; all
which together, cures the chollick, removes melancholy, kills worms, helps
Venus, purges the maw, and prevents hunger.

Mount Elly is in 12 degrees. latitude; in 55 degrees. 30 min. longitude; variation 13
degrees. as eminent in precipitious hills as any other part of Indya, and limits
the two rich and populous Kingdoms, Decan and Mallabar. To me it gave this
resemblance, as we rode before it: where ere we weighed anchor, Mount Ely.
Cananore

an unhappy accident happened; and thus: On the five and twentieth day, at the
point of the Bay we saw a Junck of about seventy Tons: fraught with
merchandise, bound for Acheen, a mart Town in the I Will Sumatra: near her
skulkt a Mallabar Pirat, with a full intent to board her when she was off at
Sea; and out of our view, hopeful of a booty: the poor Junck perceiving the
danger, chose rather to put her self into our mercy, than hazard the rapine of
that Frigate; but her fortun was little bettered; for, the (...) boarding her
with her Barge towed her to our Admiral, and (after short consultation) agreed
she was a prize, good and warrantable; riches too often cause causeless
destruction; for doubtless had it bin poor,it had escaped; but the great
store of Cotton, Opium, Onyons, and somewhat under the Cotton (of most value)
made them be adjudged Slaves; eighty able fellows receiving the brand of
hateful villanage. The Ionasses men, not content with so much wealth and
conquest, unworthily and without cause fell upon those disarmed Negroes and
beat them cruelly; a wretched valor to actuate in rage where they knew was no
resistance; but rather than suffer so much insolence, threescore of those
wretches threw themselves headlong into the Sea, desiring rather to expose
their carcasses to such a hazard though thereby their lives were terminated,
than by such cruelty, or a lingering slaverie to be in a perpetual torture: and
albeit it seemed sport to many insolent Sailors, in me I assure you, it bred
compassion, to see so many miserable Infidells throw themselves downright
into hell; at that instant in stead of rest beginning an endless unquietness:
the Canoos from the shore saved some of them; those our Boats saved were not
joyful; seeming more willing to be drowned than be sold to the Bantaneses, who
proffer 50 Ryalls for one man, but show them no mercy to their dying day. That
night we had terrible weather, many furious gusts commixt with thunder, rain
and lightning assaulting us; we admired it, but such as live so near the Sun
say, That weather there is usual. Thence we sailed due South, and that evening
past by Cananor, in view of us: by Montingue, by Onor and Batticala next day;
and then by Mangalor ( Mandagara of old,) Calicut, Cochyn, Crancanore (in 10
degr. 12 minutes) Coulam, Brin John, to Cape Comery, the utmost promontory of
Mallabar, in seven degrees and a half, North; var. 14 degr: by Ptolomy called
Cory; by Strabo, Conomancina; by Pliny, Calasca; Comar by Arrhyan; by other
ancient Cosmographers Calligicum and Calingon: at this day by the Inhabitants,
Tuttan-Cory; where, ere we pass further, we will essay the custom, habit,
and superstition of the Mallabars, with such as mix among them; but differ in
descent, garb, and religion: this serving as our caveat there, and in other
places.

It Is praise to observe a mean; by moving much,
Religious Faith often gets doubtful tuch.
Observare modum laus est; nimiumq, movendos
in dubium trahitur religiosa Fides.
Of Mallabar.
I Account so far Mallabar, as is included 'twixt Cape Comry and twelve
degrees North, near about Batticala; four hundred miles in length, in breadth
no where above a hundred; yet so populous, that the Samoryn or King of Callicut
is at any time able to affront the Narsingan, Decan, or Gulcundan Kings (his
borderers) with 200000 men: his Country is green and full of all delights,
cattle, corn, fruit, cotton, silkwormes, and other merchandises; store of
strong Towns, safe Harbors (not inferior to those at Goa, Choul, Dabul,
Swally, or at Danda-ragea-poree) as Coulam, Cochyn, Calycut, Mangalore, etc.
and to say truth the Ocean it self 40 leagues into the Sea, all along the
Indyan shore is anchorable. But before we go any further, I hold it the best
way to direct your eyes in finding out such exotique places of East Indya and
the adjacent Isles as I intend to speak of, in two Mapps; either of which are
limited by Ganges: that thereby our Travel may be the less difficult to your
inquiry. And first of India intra Gangem.

map of India

Mallabar is subdevided into many Toparchyes, all obeying the Samoreen, a naked
Negro, but as proud as Lucifer; swarthy and tyrannical: the Nayroes are his
Lords; a sort of Mamaluck; they live by the sweat of other men's brows, lust
wholly masters them; they go no whither but are as well armed as if friends and
enemies had no difference. Maffaeus, improperly imagines them a kind of
Braminy, to no sort of people more unlike; the Bramyns being men of peace; the
Nayro, ever quarelling: their arms are clad with Armolets of silver, or
Ivorie; they walk no whither without sword and target; and have such a
superstitious conceit of their own merit and temper above other men, that
wheresoere they meet a vulgar fellow, they clamor Nayro, vibrate and clash
their sword and shield together, and so pass without opposall; but that no
poor man dare look them in the face or come within fifty paces of them,
Thevet, Vertoman, and M. P. Venetus have so reported I know; but either the
customs have altered, or I must call the one a deceitful Monk, and the other
two too credulous Travelers.

The extent of Mallabar I have given you. The people generally are big limbed,
strong, cole black, and wear their hair (more like wool than hair) long,
and curled; about their heads they wreath a small but curious sort of lynnen
wrought with gold and silk: their waist is circled with a piece of Callico,
which makes them modest; from the thigh downward, and from their middle
upwards, are surely naked. The vulgar sort wear about their waist a
parti-colored Plad (like Barbars Aprons) and pinck their skin in many places.
The women (such as credit Mahomet) veil themselves like other Indyans: such as
affect gentilisme covet nakednessce: their greatest ornament and pride is in
their ears and noses; they suppose them most brave, most courtly, who can
tear or dilacerate their ears widest (which they effect by many ponderous
bables they hang there,) and ring their snouts with silver, brass, or Ivorie:
their arms and legs also are chained richly. The Ethnique marriages want not
superstition: where God is not known, the devil invelopes and trains them up
in mystique darkness: one same ceremony is observed by King and Pesant.
Whoever marries, he enjoyes not the first nights embraces with his Bride; a
venerable custom transferres all maydenheads unto the Braminy, who (to show
their obedience to the law) accept the motion and first season her; it betides
happiness ever after: they suppose the ground richer, the crop excellenter,
which receives such holy seed; and promises such future Harvests of
contentedness: no marvel then, to see a Priest enter where he pleases,
discourse when and where he will, the good man joying at their privacie; since
they are in apparition terrhene Idols: But, which is more than mavelous, the
King not knowing whether his children be of his begetting; to make sure work,
conferres the Empire on his sisters issue; assured it seems that she is of
his blood, and they of his by consequence: a very simple Sophistry, grounded
upon custom more than reason.

The men, what they want in Sciences, supply by a surpassing courage and
policy; the Portugals at their first intrenching on their shore, thought them
silly, because unlearned; easy to be overcome, because covered with an
indefensive nakedness: but both conceits deceived them: they found (by sad
experience) Nature had instructed them in their own defense, and that no
Cannon nor iron is so violently dangerous as revenge precipitated, exasperated
by contempt and where fury rages: howbeit, by long wars, they are grown
expert and orderly: yea know how to play with Cannons, have as great store of
Harquebuzes, and are as well acquainted with the force of powder, as we or any
other Nation: in all fights, they also use bow and arrow, darts and targets,
granads and variety of fireworks; of which they have such store, that they
proffered us as much and of what sorts we would, so we returned them money.
Their Country abounds with mineralls and stones of luster: no part is without
abundance of fruits and provision: generally (especially by the Sea) it is woody
and mountanous. We will ashore at Callicut the Metropolis.

CALLICVT (ten leagues from that place we took our prize) is thought to be
that Town Ptolomy calls Canthapis, a City in 23 degrees. an error broacht by
Niger and Bertius. It was above a thousand years ago called Callicaris: was
then known, but now is famous; and had been of more trade and excellence, had
she prosperd against the continual bravadoes of the Portugal: who when they
failed to conquer her, (did with her as Seleuchus did with Babylon) transferred
their trade to other Towns, and diverted her Merchants to other places;
whereby in small time it became half desolate. It declines from the Equator
toward the North Pole, eleven degrees: and from its standing in the burning
Zone must needs be hot, if not sulphurous: the earth is but meanly fruitful
in grass, Apollo eats it up; but, her gardens by industry and help of some
brooks are green, spacious, and redundant in variety of choice fruits. The
City it self is large, but of no beauty: the houses are low, and thick, and
dark: the harbor is a pretty way distant from the Town, and but indifferent to
anchor in: it shows two great Forts, built Anno 1515 by the Portuguise;
unfortified and in a sort raized by the Mallabar; the Samoreen or Emperor in
this place usually abiding: a Prince of great power and awe: black as the
devil, and as treacherous: is also of his religion, and makes him heir to all
his offerings. Many deformed Pagatho's are here worsshipped: they say they adore
not the Idols, but the Deumos they represent, and who sometimes enter and
Oraculize: the Chapel where the grand Caco-Deumo sits is uncovered, and about
three yards high; the wooden entrance is engraven with infernal shapes:
within, their beloved Priapus is imperiously inthroniz'd upon a brazen Mount:
they advance his head with a resplendent Dyadem, from whence issue four great
Rams horns, denotating some especial mystery: his eyes squint, his mouth
opens like a Port-cullice, and from thence branch four monstrous tusks; his
nose is flat; his beard like the Suns rays, of an affrighting aspect; his
hands are like the claws of a Vulture; his thighs and legs, strong and
hayrie; his feet and tail resemble a Monkeys: which put together, renders the
devil wickedly deformed, and the idolaters beyond all measure gross
Demonomists: Other Temples have other Pagods; ugly, all: yet all differ in
invention: some of them are painted or smeered black; others red: some bright;
others devouring souls; hell fictitiously tormenting white ones: These Gods of
theirs are of the old stamp: they seem to threaten and to take notice of men's
offerings: but what They cannot do, their Baalyms effectuate. Each morn, the
Priest (a Jogue) perfumes and washes them: it seems the Devil ever pollutes
and leaves a base smell behind him: he departs not without a benediction;
humbly he prostrates his corpse and has it granted him. Every new Moon they
solemnly sacrifice a live Cock as a Symbol of lust and courage; in themselves
predominating; the Priest is pontifically attyred in pure fine Lawne, armed
with a sharp long silver knife, his arms and legs garnisht after the Morisco
mode with bells, round silver plates and other jangling trifles: after he has
bravely sacrificed the yielding Cock, he fills his hands with Ryce, goes
retrograde, not daring to look on any other object save his Idol; till being
come near an Acherontique lake, he then turns, there embowells his offering,
advancing his hands some set times above his head, and so returns crowned with
applause and blessed in other men's opinions. The Samoryn eats not till it be
first offered, and so acknowledges his food sent him from the Deumo, i. e. by
the devils permission: what he leaves, is not for the poor; the Crows expect
it: good reason too, They think them the Devils serviteurs. The people to this
day retain some commendable customs amongst 'em: they commonly exchange their
Wives one for another, nor seem the women angry at it; Poligamy is
sufferable: but in this they differ from other libidinous Lawgivers; as the men
have many wives, so one woman may here have many husbands: the issue is
bequeathed as she nominates.

COVVLAM is a Town and Province (called Sopatpa in Arrhyan) in 9 degrees
North, and included in the Travanzorian Kingdom. Once it obeyed the Narsingan
Monarch; once the Mallabar; at this day, neither. 200 years ago, the Town
was rich, and great, and populous; traded to by many Indyans, augmented by the
Samoryn, and able to number a hundred thousand inhabitants: of such value was
the situation for trade, security for anchorage, and fidelity of the
Coolamites. But now, whither her glass is run, the period of her excellence
out-runne; or that Callicut first, and then Goa have attracted her custom and
resort, I cannot say; this I may: at this day she is veiled with a sable
habit, desolate and disconsolate; she contemplates the mutability of Times,
and other's disasters; and then comparing them with her own, sees they
conclude in a like Center.

And albeit I have in many places memoriz'd the Bannyans; here also I may name
them, where they swarm in multitudes, and suck in the sweetness of gain, by
an immeasurrble thirst and industry; but ( Sic vos non vobis) it is ravished
from them by Drones, the lawless Moors and Gentiles, who Lord it over them.
Alas! the Bannyan is no swaggerer, no royster: he hates domineering and
fighting, yea will suffer himself to be fleec't by any man, rather than shed
blood by any unhappy contention: they love no tumult, no innovation; but wish
that all men were of their mind; that is to say, courteous in behavior,
temperate in passion, moderate in apparel, abstemious in diet; humble,
merciful, and so innocent, as not to undo the silliest vermin: doubting that
if they should destroy any living thing, thereby they might dispossess their
parents or dear friends of a peaceful Mansion; but by eating such, may
peradventure devour the souls of such as once were dearest to them. Ovids
conceit is partly for them.

-- inque ferinas
Possumus ire domos, Pecudumque in corpora condi,
Corpora quae possunt animas habuisse Parentum
Aut Fratrum, aut autaliquo junctorum faedere nobis
Aut hominum certe!
Lets home, and in bruit Beasts our bodies hide,
Where happily our Parents may abide,
Our Brothers, or some by Alliance tide.
One man or other sure!
And in as many places are Christians, or relicts of that holy profession: for
no doubt the Apostles propagated the glad tidings of salvation to all Nations;
prophesied by the Prophet David, Psalm 19. Their sound is gone into all lands,
and their words into the ends of the world: Mantuan also celebrates it in these
verses.

Sicutaquis, quondam Noe sua misit in orbem
Pignora sedatis, ut Gens humana per omnes
Debita caelituum Patri daret orgy a terras:
Sic sua cum vellet Deus alta in regna reverti,
Discipulos quosdam transmisit ad ultima mundi
Littora; docturos Gentes quo Numina ritu
Sint oranda, quibus Coelum placabile sacris:
As when the Flood ore-spred, old careful Noe
His sons dispersed throughout the world, to show
The Law of God, and sacred rites to pay:
So when our Savior would no longer stay
On earth, a mission of his Scholars he
To the utmost bounds of the earth with Charter free
Does make to instruct the world both how to pray,
And to appease Gods wrath with sacred Lay.
In both Asiaes the Gospel was thoroughly preached: but now the subtlety of
Satan, and that carnal law of Mahomet have infected these soule-sick Nations:
for all which, Christ has his flock there, which though at this time scattered,
yet in due time shall be gathered, and made one blessed company. In Persia are
many thousand Christians; in India a no less multitude; compared indeed to
other Idolaters, but a hand-full: yet that does not discourage them: it is
better go to heaven alone, than to hell with an innumerable multitude: Arnobius
of old times could say Nationibus cunctis nos sumus Christiani. In many
marittim Towns of India, that name is honored. In Meliapore, Narsinga,
Coolan, Gucurran, Curigan, Bipur, Tanor, Battacala, Onor, Cranganor, Goa, and
other places are Christians: yea, in many Indian Isles some are numbered: among
Mahomitans they have freedom of conscience from that Azoara in the Alcoran,
That none are to be diswaded from the religion they sucked from their cradle:
amongst Panyms, from that rule of Nature; Use others, as thou would others
should use thee. The Christians in these parts differ in some things from us
and the Papacy; yet retain many principles of the Orthodox and Catholic
doctrine: Lets enter their Temples. Their Churches are low and but poorly
furnished; their vassalage will reach no further: whether from their
subjection, or that (so the Temples of their bodies be replenisht with virtue)
the excellency of buildings confer not holiness, I know not: neat they are,
and sweetly kept; matted, without seats, and instead of Images have some select
and useful texts of holy Writ obviously writ or painted. They assemble and
haste to Church each Lords day with great alacrity: at their entering they shut
their eyes and contemplate the holiness of the place, the exercise they come
about, and their own unworthiness: as they kneel, they look toward the
Altar or Table, near which the Bishop or Priest is seated, whom they salute
with a low and humble reverence; who returns his blessing by the up-lifting of
his hands and eyes: at a set hour they begin prayers, above two hours seldom
continuing: first they have a short general confession, which they follow the
Priest in, and assent in an unanim Amen: then follows an Exposition of some
part or text of holy Scripture: during which, their attention, dejected looks,
and silence is admirable: they sing an hymn, and at parting out of Church,
re-salute the Minister; who ceases not (till all be gone out) to elate his
hands and bless them. When they are come home they read a chapter in either
Testament, both which they suppose they have incorrupt after the Originalls,
and translated for them by Saint Thomas the Apostle and patron of the Orient:
they have it also in the Chaldy; but none save the Clergy understand it: every
first Sunday in the Month, the Priest reads a Sermon out of an old Homily, writ
(as they say) by the Apostle or some of his Disciples: they Baptize commonly at
the 40 day, if the Parents do no sooner desire it, they first sign the Infant
on the forehead with the Cross, and then wash it all over with water: the
Sacrament of the Lords holy Supper they administer in both kinds; the
Communicants receive it (reverently) kneeling: they observe two days strict
preparation, during which they eat no flesh, revell not, accompany with no
women: in the Church they confess their sins and demerits with great
reluctance: They marry as we do: the Clergy marry but once; the Layety but
twice; widows if they marry before the year be expired (after which their
husbands dyed) are ill reported of, and hazard their joyncture: none (save for
adultery) have license to part till death sever them. In sickness the Priest
is sent for to comfort them, and to give the Eucharist, if it be heartily
desired: that done, they take farewell of their wife, and children, and all
others; and so rid themselves of carnal distractions; which too often hinder the
desired meditation, of the misery of worldlings; and by a holy contemplation of
the ineffable joys of heaven, strive to mitigate the pangs of their disease,
yea the grim aspect of approaching Death; and the survivers rather joy than
mourn as they solemnize his funeral: they first wash, then wrap the Corpse in
clean linen; and a few selected friends concomitate it to the grave, wherein
they place it looking (not East, but) West toward Jerusalem: five days after
that they visit his Family. They feast and fast as we: their Lent or abstinence
from flesh and the like, begins each spring, and is strictly observed forty
days, without banquet or bravery: their year is Soli-genian: our three chief
Feastivalls they celebrate, in July they commemorate the martyrdom of Saint
Thomas: they have many Patriarchs or Protomists, the chief resides at a house
built upon a high mountain, nine miles from Cranganor. Since the Portugalls
traded Indya they have shaven their heads: the Layicks pay Decimae or Tithes
willingly: they affect justice, truth, peace, humility, obedience, etc. and
acknowledge Saint Thomas (some the Eunuch of Arabia, converted by Philip) their
Tutelary Saint, and Patron. They believe no Purgatory.

May 7, we had 8 degrees: and ere Sunne-set darted our eyes upon that high
mountain commonly called Brin John i. e. the Mount of John; and revives the
British Antiquity. Next day we had 7 degrees 30 minutes; variation 14 degrees:
than which, that famous Promontory of East India extends no further toward the
Equator. Next day we sailed by the Maldyvae, Isles memoriz'd by Pyrard de
Laval who lived there, and reports that the King there styles himself Emperor
of thirteen Provinces and 12000 Islands; most and least any King in the world
is owner of. Near these are other Isles, Candu, Nicubar, and Sumbrero by name;
in the view of Zeyloon, and Sumatra: to which place and many other I must guide
your patience.

of Zeyloon.
ZEyloon (or Ceylon,) one of those five Isles Ptolomy calls Barussae, was not
innominate to the Ancients. By Ptolomy, called Panigarensis; and since him (in
Arab. Authors) Sisuara, Tenarisis, and Nanigeris. At this day Zeyloon by us;
Chingall, by the inhabitants: an I Will, spacious, rich, and famous: severed from
the Asiatick continent by a small sea, not forty Leagues over. It is limited
from 8 to 11 degrees. of latit. North; the length is about 70 leagues; breadth 40,
and circuit 250 or thereabouts: an I Will famous in some old conjectures, as that
Paradise was here; and that K. Solomon had hence his obrize gold or gold of
Ophyr; but I believe neither, in regard most writers fix the ruins of the one
in Mesopotamia; and the other rather in Pegu, Iava, and those wealthy places.
The most memorable is this, That Meleck (or Melchior) Pyramal, King of this
Island is thought one of those wisemen (premonisht by that prophesy of Balaam
the Edomite in Number. 24. 17.) that brought (as to a King, a Priest, a Prophet,)
Gold, Frank-insence, and Myrrh, unto our blessed Savior; foretold also by the
Persian Sybill, and by a new made Star guided by the finger of God,
miraculously directed: and who at his return made known the mystery of Gods
Incarnation, for man's redemption; and by his laborious teaching made many
Proselites; some to this day by tradition memorising him, and reteining
somewhat of Christian knowledge, though the greatest part be Apostats; and
drunk with abominable demonomy and superstition. But whether Melchyor returned
(upon Saint Thomas his arrival) and with the other two came into Europe, and
whether those three buried in Cullen be fictitious or no; it is not pertinent
to a Travelers curiosity to insist upon. But this is obvious in History, That
Candaces Noble Eunuch, baptized by Philip, left her service to preach Christ;
whom very fruitfully he made known to many parts of Araby and sundry Isles; as
Socotora, this, and Tabrobane, or Sumatra; as Dorotheus Bishop of Tire, in the
days of the great and godly Constantine witnesses.

The honor of the first Christian European discovery, we owe to Laurentius
son of the brave Almeyda the Portugal General, about the year 1500: not
altering the name from what the Natives named it. Which though Hayton (300
years ago) and Barrius (by many sophisticated Notions borrowed from the
brains of Corsalus and Varryer) will have to be Tabroban; we will grant it so,
when by Epedemick assent, he can prove Peru to be Ophyr.

To speak of the Time present. The I Will is over-runne with stinking weeds of
cursed Heythenisme.

Here, grow those heaps of Errors, which we see
Of all uncleanness and Idolatry.
Hic, errorum cumulus, hic omnis spurcitia
Hic, infoelix populus gaudet Idolatria.
Scarce any Village or Mount without its inanimate Pagod; which being diverse in
shape, are therefore diversified, in that they relish the diverse pallats of
diverse men. Witness that infamous Apis Hanimant, or Apestooth-god, so highly,
so generally resorted to by millions of Indians, till Constantine the late Goan
Viceroy landed 500 men, spoiled Columbo, and took away that simple Idol, and
in his zeal burnt it, refusing 300000 Ducats which the Zeylonians profferd to
redeem that their helpless Pagod. Unwisely refused; in that a crafty Bannyan
produced such another, protesting it the same, was believed by the Jogues the
Priests, thereby exceedingly enriching himself, and joying not a little these
credulous Zelonyans.

They have many other Cacodaemons horrible and ugly. The more deformed the more
exact Idaeas of Devils, and the more venerable. A notable one is that (not
far from Mattacala) conspicuous in its standing, an Idol of great bulk and
Antiquity; Of which, the Singales and Jogues Cronography. That, many years
ago, one Iohna their King nourisht a ridiculous and impious conceit of this
Diabolo, as a foolish and senseless Idol. But lo, the Jogues by the Devils
craft so wrought that upon a solemn day, as Iohna entered, he beheld the Pagod
to breath out fire and fury, his eyes colored with rage, and the Semiter in
his hand wrathfully bent against him; the amazed King cries out for help,
accuses his infidelity, confesses it a perfect Devil, and having well
satisfied for his error, is reconciled, and ever after a zealous Idolater.

The place where this grand Pagotha stands, is invelloped with a cloud of
Arms, and as sedulously guarded. Good reason too. The Time shall come; when
sea, when land, when all
The heavens vast moving regions, burning shall
Consume, and to their ancient Chaos fall.
Esse quoque in Fatis reminiscitur affore tempus
Quo mare, quo Tellus, correptaque regia coeli
Ardeat. Et Mundi moles operosa laborer.
Verily believing, that so soon as this tottering Idol falls, the final
ruin and overture of the whole world by fire or other ways shall immediately
come after.

Upon Columbo's high peake (a place dearly bought by the covetous Portugal)
is also showed and seen (and credited) the vestigiating or footsteps of old
Adam, here (believe them if you can) borne and buried Here also for a little
money and much pains you may see a Lake of sale water (and because salt, upon
so high a hill) said to be no other water, but the very tears which Eve shed a
hundred years together for the murder of righteous Abell. A Cabala, how
strange soever it seem to me and you, yet Friar Oderic of Friuli ( Anno 1300,
a contemporary and fellow Traveller and Figmentor with our Sir John) not only
believes it, but persuades us to a like credulity.

A word now of the soil. It abounds with sundry sorts of aromatique spices;
but in most plenty with Cinnamon; and thence, by Ptolomy and Strabo is called
Cinnamomifera regio. Cynamon.
Cinnamon, is a precious bark. The Tr^ is straigbt and low, the branches no way
ruinous but growing in a com^posture. It resembles the Olive tree in height,
with which it co-operat^s toward perfection. The leaves are not unlike the Bay
and Orange. The blossoms, are exactly white, fragrant, and beautiful. The
fruit is globous, hard, and (by reason of Apollos constant kisses) darkly
colored. It is apparelld with a thick rynd or bark, which, in Summer (when it
may best discover its virgin nakedness) it is disroabed of, and by the churlish
Pesant cut in many small pieces, arefied by th'imbracing Son, and so
gathered. I might here also present you many other rarities this noble I Will
abounds with. Orenges, Dates, Coquos, Ananas, Plantans, and Mastick, which Tom
Coriat will not believe grows any where save in Syo. Elephants, Buffolos,
Cowes, Sheep, Hogs, etc. Smaragd, Rubies, Ambergrice, and the like: But I
rather desire to please thee by naming them. And with this, that all put
together seemed so magical and dazeling in the eyes of the avaritious
Lusitanian, that Almeyda in despite of her united Heptarchy landed here Anno
Dom. 1506, fortified and forced for Emannuel his King a pretty Tribute, an
Annall tax of 250000 pound weight of their best Cinnamon, which Sousa begun to
lode away the third year after. But the King (more rich than crafty) to show
how little he regarded the loss of so much useless barks of Trees, and (I
know no other reason) to set a better edge upon the monstrous appetite of the
lean faced Portugal, invites them to see him walk upon a Tarrass, arrayed in
an imbrodered coat thick powderd with gold, Smaragds, Pearl and Diamond all
together darting out rays of a most wonderful delight and luster: to which
(albeit Phoebus did his best to increase the splendor,) yet (as if that wanted
glory) 500 Flambeauxes were put is flames to make this miserable Prince seem
able to strike men dead with his dazeling glory. But it rather was as Balm to
the heart, and as a Corpo Santo to the devouring admirers. For forthwith,
Silveira built a brave and well-defended Castle there, (under promise to aid
them against the Mallabar) but it was rather to be his Jewel keeper; for in
small time they so pursued the feeble King, that they became Ravishers of what
he had; and by a forced nakedness, learnt him a future better way of politic
braverie.

From Zeloom let us hoise sail for some eminent Ports and marittim parts of
Indya, Lorded by many black but daring Pagans: the Mogull (of whom in the first
part we have treated) who has swallowed up, and incircled within his own
Diadem many great and noble Kingdoms: the rest, being the Decan, Samoreen,(or
Mallabar) Narsingan, Pegu, Syam, and others; of whom we will briefly glance at.
As of the chiefest Isles, vicinating this we last landed at. As Sumatra, the
Iavae, Borneo, Celebes, Moluccoes, Bandae, Amboyna, Phillippinae, etc. And
first, of the coast of Chormandel.

Of Chormandel.
THe coast of Chormandel ( Catigardamna in Ptolomy) stretches from Cape Comryn
under 7 degr. minutes odd North, as far as the great and famous gulf of
Bengala, receiving both the heads of holy Ganges; the Ocean bellowing upon
these well known Towns of Trade, Negapatan, Meliapore (both, famous for
intombing S. Bartholmew and S. Thomas,) Polycat, Armagun, Narsinga, Mestipatan,
Bipilipatan, and other places; where of old the Assacani (whence the
Assassinates) are placed by Strabo, and Narsinga I take to be Magoza.

NEGAPATAN (i.e. a Town upon the river Negay) has 12 degrees. latitude North, odd
minutes; hot and unwholesome, both in regard the wind and raines are for the
better part of the year, high and unseasonable. The Town has good water, and
Fruits well relisht, cooling and nutritive; notwithstanding, the people are
much vexed with Fevers, Fluxes, and other Diseases. The people be blackish,
blockish, and unapt for study or exercise: Heat (which here predominates)
debelitates their appetite, and invites them to too much ease (the Mother of
luxury;) a small, thin, but very fine Shuddery or veil of Lawne is drawn
before their secret parts; their head also has a small wreath, the rest is
exposed to view and weather. They want no gold, stones of value, nor such
things as the Merchant covets; but they prize them as we do Trifles. Any
religion is tolerable: so that some praise Mahomet, some a Dog, others a
Crocodile, and some love senseless Pagods. The Banyan wives here have more
freedom to burn themselves to ashes at the Funeral of their husbands, than
where the Moors have command; so that in this Coast the custom is usual.
Their Marriages require the first place. They are various, the most Novell
being, that a Priest, a Cow, and the two Lovers go together to the water side;
where the Bramyn mutters a prayer of small matter to some purpose; which
finished, in order and Symmetry they linck hands, and have the Cowes tail
commixt as a holy testimony; on all together the Bramin powers his hallowed
Oil, and forces the beast into the river, whereinto she goes willingly, yea
so far till they be to the middle in water; nor returns she, nor do they
disunite, till Neptune fright her: but being on shore, they untie, holding that
conjunction sacred and powerful ever after.

Their Epithalamy is sung, let us hear their Funerals! when Death has cut in
two their Union; she conceits her self a loathed carcass to live after him:
she roabs her tender body with a transparent Lawne; her arms, legs, and
thighs, are fettered with wanton chains of love; her ears, nose, and
fingers, adorned with Pearls and precious stones; one hand holds choice of
flowers; the other a Ball; Embleams of immortal Paradise. She goes attended
with a mighty company; some for love, most for Novelty. The Priest all the way
describes the rare joys she is going to; she grants a modest smile, trips on,
and upon sight of the flame, seems transported beyond measure; she sees the
carcass of her Husband laid upon a pyle of precious wood, and when the fire
begins to embrace him, like a mad Lover she bids Farewell to her Parents,
children, and friends, and willingly incorporates her self with fire; which
quickly makes them one, and nothing; nothing extant save fame, flame, and
ashes. Of which the Poet, thus of old.

Et c^rtamen habent lethi, quae viva s^quatur
conjugium; pudor est non licuisse mori.
Ardent victrices, and praebent pectora flammae;
imponuntque suis ora perusta viris.
They strive to die, and who best speed can make;
They blush, grim Death so slowly to overtake.
The Conquerors burn, their breasts yield to the fire,
And to their husbands their burnt lips aspire.
Some refuse to burn, but are forced to shave and live as Monsters: a
punishment justly given, they were grown so audiciously wanton, that upon any
distaste the liver of their abused husbands could but satisfy their lustful
boldness acted by venom, till by Parliament this course was taken to avoid
the danger.

Gross Idolatry.
Such is the miserable vassalage the old red Dragon cheyns this wretched people
in; who are so far from commiserating their own woe, that they invent many
tragic tricks of devotion to destroy themselves, and to agrandize their
idolatry. They have a massy copper gilded Pagod, mounted upon a triumphant
Chariot moved by eight mighty wheels over-laid with pure gold; the Ascent is
spacious and easy by many steps, on which are placed (upon a solemn day) the
Priests and many sober girls (who to enrich the Devil (poor knave)
prostitute their bodies to the libidinous flame of wicked men: Oh ignis
infernalis luxuria! fond zeal of such besotted Parents, to destinate their
pretty children from a miserable infancy to the old age of hellish devotion:
the procession follows, (not unlike the Thensa used by the superstitious
Romans or that by idolatry of the Danes reported by Ditmarus and Dado their
writers.) happy is that man, rich and poor, great and base; can fasten a hand
to draw the Chariot: yea they account them happiest, who out of a frantic
zeal, temetariously throw their naked bodies in the way; that by the
ponderousness of the Devil and his Chariot, their wretched bodies may be
crushed in pieces, by that thought Martyrs, not knowing that their mortal silly
souls fly into the fry of an endless flame: yea more (infandum) such is the
stupid folly of these men that they persuade their fanatique daughters to
become base strumpets to please their fancy and enrich their Pagods, insomuch,
as it is a great wonder to see so many girls at such immaturity, so impudently
delighted with filthy men.

Quid juvat durum proverare Fatum?
Omnis haec vaga turba libet ad manes
Faci^tque inertivela Cocyto.
What helps it thus to haste your destiny?
In such post-haste since all this wretched fry
Shall with full sail to hell through Cocyt fly.
From Negapatan go we for Meliapore.

MELIAPORE, is a Town on the Coast of Kormandel, elevating the Artick Pole 13
degr. 20 min. both old and famous; first called Calamina, then, Melange,
Meliapore after that, and now S. Thomas, by reason that in this place he
suffered martyrdom.

The Town is at this day small and poor; under Moorish command; and yields
little for Trade, save Cotton ware and such Commodities; howbeit, is exalted in
her memory. This was the last place where the Apostle preached, after he had
converted Persia, Hyrcania, Bactria, Sogdiana, and many parts of Indya, yea and
many Proselites were here, who embraced his soul saving doctrine, and those
not of the basest sort; for Sygamus himself (Emperor of this Coast) was
baptized, and (by his example) other of the Nobles. Howbeit, the Devil so
wrought (by Gods permission) that some apost atizd and enraged the multitude,
so that in a common fury they both suffered, the one was shot to death, the
other brayned, and both crowned with glorious martyrdom, thirty years after
our Saviors passion. And, however Abdias Babylonicus (who writ that after
their deaths they appeared and preached again their former doctrine,) may
seem doubtful, this is certain that in Memory of their cruel ingatitude,
the divine justice has marked their posterities, (as some Jews say the Tribe
of Benjamin are to this day, who of all others were most fierce against our
Savior of the Tribe of David and Judah) so these have one leg as big again in
the calfe as is the other. Notwithstanding the peoples rage, the two noble
Martyrs had each his sepulcher, and to this day was a receptory of many native
and other holy Christians; till about fifty years since, their skulls and
bones were brought a way and (as holy relics) at this day kept in the Virgins
church in Ioa) by command of John 3 of Portugal, who sent Emanuel Frias (guided
by Alphonsus Sousae) to that purpose.

Many strange reports I could give ye out of Spanish reporters, But I am not
enjoined to believe them. What is very observable and with warrant, I may. That
in the year of our Lord God 883 (as Malmsbury, Glor. Wigorn. and others
justify) Syghelmus a devout Bishop of Shirborne in Dorsetshyre encoraged by
Alfred a holy English King traveled to this place in pilgrimage with Alms and
Offerings; yea and returned home in nine years with great joy, rarities and
experience, bought by incredible patience, cost and danger, after which the
place was very famous. I read also, that in the year of our Lord 1277,
Myrangee an Atheist conquered Narsinga and beyond this City, a man full of
rapine and other impiety; yea so basely opinionated of this relic and
Tradition that havihg one year abundance of ryce and other grain, and room
enough to hoord it in, in a contemning way and bravery no place would please
him to put it save the holy Chapel, where prayers were incessantly made by
many religious Christians. They entreat him to refrain, by all submissive
means, but it spurs him on to a greater height of profaneness, yea is
infinitely glad it vexes them, by this supposing himself to be thought a God
(a Devil rather) and to be worshipped. But see Gods power and favor in it;
that night, in an affrighting dream or vision he sees the old Apostle
approaching him in wrathful and discontented way threatening to punish him for
his ungodliness, and with an Iron whip proffers to lash the relenting King,
who suddenly is a waked and as soon beseeching the Christians to pray for him,
helping himself to purge the house of God and satisfying for his sacrilege. A
Miracle not a little joying the sad minded Christians.

Polycat in 14 degrees. Armagun Caleture, Tarnassery and Petipoly are in our way
hence to Narsinga and Meslipotan; but by reason they are but lately become
factoryes of English Merchants, and differ in customs color, and other
things, little from Narsinga: we will pass thence to other descriptions.

Of Narsinga.
NARSlNGA, is a Noble part of India where some would have Chormandell to
terminate, but I like it not. Narsinga is famous all over Asia: confined by
Mallabar, Gulcunda, Bengala ( Baracura of old,) and the Ocean. The King so
rich, that he despises his Neighbors: so powerful in Men, Arms, and
Ammunition; that he values neither Mogul, Decan, Samoryn, nor Peguan. His
Kingdoms are defended by loyal slaves, and many natural advantages; full of
all things requisite, for use, and pleasure: as fair Towns, strong Forts,
pleasant fields, and choicest Mineralls; abounding in rivers, hills, dales,
corn, cattle, fruit, etc. so that with good cause he is reputed as absolute a
Monark as any other in India. The Bannyans swarm like Locusts here; the Bramyns
are no where more reputed of: the Temples indeed in their structures boast of
no great bravery, but are proud within; reteyning many rich and massy Idols,
shaped and commanded by the Devil for his service and their devotion.

BISNAGAR ( Modura of old, Arcati says Castaldus) is the second City in
Narsinga for grandeur and braverie; being circled with a wall of four miles
compass, and as well fortefied: well built, and no less wealthy. Some
Churches it has, remarkable for shape and ornament; but in their gentilisme
base and immodest, yea unworthy the relation. The Port or Haven is good to
anchor in: the City well frequented by European ships and Iunks from Malacca,
Pegu, Cambogia, Cochyu-Chyna, Chyna, Iapan, Phyllippinae, the Moluccae, Borneo,
Iava, Sumatra, Zeiloon, and many parts of India, Arabia, Persia, and like
places.

When any Traveller comes to his Court, he shall have fitting entertainment:
and is many times invited by the King, the better to show his fine clothes,
which to show ourselves thankful we will report to other nations; being thick
set with stones and gems of infinite value and wonderful luster; which when he
is roabed with (for the resemblance they have with the Son, which they worship)
he is adored: his Court is full of Majesty, his guard being a thousand
pensioners: he affects poligamy, and therefore writes himself husband of a
thousand women; many of them having him all his life in such esteem, that at
his Death they make his flaming Grave their consuming Sepulcher.

MESVLIPATAN, commonly pronounced by contraction Mestipatan, is subject to the
Gulcundan King, and removed from the Equinoctial 16 degr. and a half, North;
seated in the skirt of the Bengalan Ocean. The whole province admits a mixture
of several Idolatries; in most parts the Saracius and Bannyans being the
greatest number. Mahomet was blasted among them by a Colony of Persians
conducted hither in the 28 year of the Aegyra and of our account 648 by Abdall
Ben Hemyr a man of no small reckoning with Ozman the then Calyph of Babylon and
Mecca, since when their offspring have here inhabited. The town it self
cannot be famosed either for bulk, beauty, or pleasure. 50 years ago by a
raging mortality and Famine being well nigh depopulated. The streets are few,
and narrow; the houses low and unfurnished; the fields and gardens parcht by
flaming Phaeton, which here rages from March to July; from thence to November
the wind and rain as incessantly disturbing them: so as of twelve months, they
have but four from November to March salubrious and moderate: howbeit by
reason of the English residence here, of late trafficking for callicoes, rice,
and the like, it begins to flourish, and is not to be doubted unless the
unquiet and deceitful humor of the people distaste the English and force
their removal to adjacent places as Armagun and Polycat, where they may sit
down with more ease, less charge and choyser merchandises.

Hence remove your chaste eyes and ears to an unchaste Town, though Casta by
name; a Town infamous in cursed demonomy and wantonness. The Mosques have
Idols in them, showing art in sculpture very commendable, but hateful in the
stinck of their devotion. The common shapes of Pagods here resemble beastly
Priapus and Pan (as is described by Servius in Aegloc 2 Virgil) having great
eyes, flat nose, wide mouth, four great horns, a long beard shaped like
beams or radiance of he Sun, claws for hands, and crooked legd, all over
deformed.

Nil sine Numine is old. Here we see Nil nisi Numen. The Devil pleasing them
in variety and not caring how nor in what shape it be, so he be served. Some
imagins a cow above all creatures worth his adoration. Others regard the Sun,
Moon, Stars, as heavenly souls and helpers: and other some the refreshing
streams, shading trees, and the like; whereby I may fitly parallel them with
what Tacitus speaks of the Celtes our neighbors. Multa simulacra, multum
peregrinae superstitionis vestigim ibi videre liceat. They have many solemn
Festivalls. In some of them they fasten sick or needy-men (made stupid by too
much zeal) to a hook or engine, which being hoist to elevate him with the
Pagod, the blood trickling from his wounded shoulders (excessit medicina modum)
is preserved by the Priest; and at his descent (as a meritorious sacrifice)
dashed against a Tree: and after he has (in most submissive sort) entreated the
devil to accept his offering, returns filled with joy and applause and hopes to
thrive the better ever after. They Offer in the night, first making the streets
bright as day by a multitude of lights, then stuffing their hands and bags with
ryce, they glomerate and wind in dances; in every corner (where a puppit-god
sits) throwing ryce and fruits; but being once out of the magic ring, haste
away; not daring to look back lest the Devil should tear them for this their
gratitude.

They use not common burialls; in that the Carcaffe is placed in a deep cave,
long and narrow; or betwixt two walls built so of purpose; and wherein the
foolish widow immures her self; never after speaking to any, but expecting
death by the arrow of Famine, of all other the most formidable and insufferable.

Their Habits are best part nakedness, the zone excuses clothing. They
delight in fishing, and to sport upon the water, in boats or curricurries thus
shaped.

A Curricurre or boat


Of Malacca.
MALACCA ( Terra aurifera in Josephus:) elevates the Artick Pole 5 degr. from
the Equator. Was known of old by the name of Aurea Chersonesus, and if my aim
deceive me not, the same, Ptolomy in his 7 lib. 2. c. calls Facola, and more
likely to be part of Ophyr, (from such abundance of Gold as hence, in Pegu,
Syam, Borneo and Sumatra is and has ever been ravished, and in that, Ophyr and
Hobab with Havilah their brother, sons of Ioctan here inhabited) rather than
Hispaniola supposed Ophyr by Columbus and Stephanus; Soffala by Ortelius.
Gambra by Artius Montanus; Ormus by Danaeus; or those moon conceits of Peru by
bold faced Goropius; or that Spanish brag of Pineda who threatens those that
will not believe Cadiz was it: for I see this place admits the conjecture
better both from the Port of Ezion-geber in the red Sea, whence by Arabia's
shore and the Indian they might without help of the Adamant or Pole Star
facilitate their voyage; and that this place has of old been denominate the
Land of gold. This old verse of Tzetza points at it.

Insula est Indica quam (Poetae) Auraeam vocant.
Alii vero peninsulam dicunt, sed non Insulam.
Hebraei autem Ophyr Lingua sua vocant.
Habet enim Metalla Auri and Lapides omnifarios.
Excellenter magis vero Prasinum lapidem.
The golden Indian I Will (by Poets sung)
A peninsule some name it, and no I Will.
The Hebrews call it Ophyr in their tongue.
All sorts of stones and mines of gold ere while
Are found there with the choicest Prasine stone.
And Malacca is a Chersonesse or Peninsula; which makes it agree the better
with this description of Ophyr.

The City Malacca is under 5 (some observe 4) degrees North, and obeys the
Monarchy of Syam, ever since Abdalla the honest King thereof was An. 1508. most
inconsideratly beheaded by the Portugal; and that upon Sequeyra's complaint
Albuquerk sacked it, obteining an incredible mass of treasure; 3000 pieces of
great Ordnance, and so much minted coin, that the King of Portugalls part
(being but a fifth) came to 250000 ryalls of 8: a conquest so forceable, that
(notwithstanding the Castle and Garrison left there by the Lusitanian) the Syam
King at his own leisure prostrated it.

The City is above 3 miles long, but very narrow; built in a hemicycle, upon
the banks of a pleasant river, as broad as is the Thames, but not so potable: a
rivolet of sweeter water glides gently through the Town, over which is raised a
Bridge, strong though meanly beautiful: the walls circling her are reasonable
strong; but invalidable against the fiery vomits of the Cannon: the buildings
are generally low and base, and lined with poor furniture, though they want no
gold to buy it with; but being dark and close, it is the less useful: the most
observable are her Fanes, Cypresses, and Gardens; the streets and fields show
many delightful Arbours and choice fruits; amongst which the Duroyen (as
valewable with them as Mines of Gold and Silver, abounding here,) Corn, Sugar,
and some other rarities: the people are naturally hospitable; affected with
music, songs, and strangers: howbeit, impatient and fierce, if exasperated;
jealous, if occasioned, deceitful if too much credited: their language is
epedemic, and serves no less in these parts, than with us the Latin; in other
parts, the Arabic: leave we Synca-pura, and pass to Patania, an easy dyaes
journey thence.

Of Patania.
PATANIA, ( Perimula of old, at this day a well-known City in the Bengalan or
Argaric gulf, and extra Gangem) elevates the Pole Artick, about 7 degrees; and
is situate in midst of those two famous Ports, Malacca and Syam. The
government is Monarchical; the Kings derive themselves from a Gentile King of
Delly; who when he had subdued Patania, left his son Gingee his Prorex here;
and from whom the late Queen and this Prince are truly branched. The Mogull
often threatens to dethrone him; yey he sits close and keeps his own; especially
safeguarded by interposing Ganges, and some small but useful I'lets where he
advantagiously fortefies. The Town is strong, and best defended by 12 pieces
of great brass Ordnance; one of them (a Basilisco) is twenty six foot long,
well proportioned in bore and squaring. Some Temples of Idolatry Patania shows,
furnished with wooden gods for politheisme; but more note-worthy in some antic
Momuments of former Kings.

The people are black, and go with the most part of their bodies naked: they
take great delight in eating of Betle and Opium, and love Areck (or strong
liquor) exceedingly: they usually eat in plates of gold. They frequently speak
three Languages, the Malay, Siam, and that of Chyna: Their writing differs, one
which is the Malay, from the right hand to the left, as the Hebrews; another,
which is the Syam, from the left to the right, as we; a third, which is the
China, right down and bending no way: all three very usual and affected by
the industrious.

They are part Moors, and part Gentiles: the one so worship God; as the other
do Pa-Gods or Idols.

They are hospitable to such strangers as from desire of novely or gain, reside
amongst them: neither do they enquire of what Country they be, what their
Business, nor Religion. The men of note transcend in courtesy; for at any man's
arrival, they blush not to proffer their Daughters or Neeces to be their
bed-fellowes; yea to concomitate them at bed and board during his stay; the
price for such a favor not equalling so high a complement: but that, were it
less; too much in my opinion for such Pandars and base prostitutes. At the end
of the prefixed time the woman returns home well pleased; so far from shame or
loss, that they rather account her honored; and fit for preferment: But it is
dangerous to be wanton elsewhere; jealousy on either side inflaming into rage,
which seldom dies without one or another destruction: I cannot but cry out
upon them, and adjudge them in the civil sorrow of one of their Religion, but
more temperance; who could sigh out, at sight of such absurdities, Oh miserum!
cui peccare liceat. Adultery they punish rigidly; Fornication is more
tolerable. The young women are carelessly frolic, and fearelesly merry; the
married, melancholy and strictly observed: idleness and heat provokes them to
inchastity. The men are also effeminate; yea wallow in all kind of turpitude
and sensuality: their females are often in their sight; the grape commoves them
to wickedness; they delight their gust and pallat with choysest wines, waters,
Rack, Ryce, and fruits, both succulent and restorative; and which make Venus
predominate: but by this their intemperance they abreviate their days; few
exceeding sixty years: an old age, if you contemplate their lust (Deaths best
harbinger,) and the Zone they sweat in; bad, both; both, intemperate.

Of Siam.
SIAM, (called Sobanna formerly; a City and Kingdom so denominated; declining
North from the Aequinoctiall 14 degrees.) is famous for power, wealth, and many
sorts of excellencies: a great part of Pegu, Braama, and Cambogia are tributary
to him; Patania also, Iamohay, Odjea, and many other Territories watered by
Ganges acknowledge him: his power is great, usually warring with 1000 Elephants
and, 200000 men. The Zone is hot, the men black, and in such torrid places,
little clothing is required: a Cambolin of pure lawn of a sad color, trebled
on and about their naked shoulders: some tie a leather skin about their neck;
and (as a badge of devotion) gird their middles with a leathern thong, and hold
a Sumbrero or Umbrella in their hands to lenefie the flaming Sun; but wear no
Sandals, that the scorching sands may so mortify, that the Tallapoi, may be
thought a wonder. They are transcendent Idolaters, carving Gods to worship,
after the shapes of Pan, Priapus, and other gotish fancies, yea and in postures
not to be remembered: they have Groves and Altars also, whereon they offer
flesh, fruits, flowers; and many times when the Tallapoi tells them the Devil
is melancholy, they warble out harmonious music, and do what they can to make
him merry: others (so son as Aurora shows her golden Trammell) run to
their Pagods with a basket of Ryce to be his breakfast, hoping there by to
prosper that day the happier.

The Tallapoi preach every Monday in the Market, and assemble their auditory by
a copper Basin. But though they seem Fryer-mendicants by profession, yet what
by awe (for the very infernal spirits obey their in cantations) and what by
policy (for they contemplate humility externally much) the people have them
in singular estimation: Nor is it diminisht, but agrandiz'd exceedingly by
their prediction of future events, and mervailous knowledge in things past and
present; by Magique and Moral observation, resolving, diswading, applauding,
directing, and pleasing all that come unto them (as to Oracles) from such
enthusiastic Notions as Satan prompts them with, in a word, being.

Of Gods, Interpreters, of Phoebus lays,
The three legd charming Stool, the Claryan Bays,
Planets, Birds, Language, and all old assayes.
-- Interpres Divum; Qui Numina Phoebi
Qui tripodas Clarii lauros, quisydera sentis,
Et Volncrum Linguas and praepetis omnia pennae,
They have been (in foregoing times) wicked Sodomites, a sin so hateful to
nature it self, that it abhorres it; and to deter these catamits, a late
Queen rectrix commanded that all male children should have a Bell of gold (in
it an Adders tongue dried) put though the prepuce, which in small time not only
became not contemptible, but in way of ornament and for music sake few now are
without three or four; so that when they have a mind to marry, he has his
choice of what maid he likes, but beds her not, till the Midwife present a
sleepie ophiated potion, during which, the Bell is loosed from the flesh, and
fastened to the foreskin, which hinders not but titulates; the unguent is
applied; and the cure is perfected. But to see a Virgin here, at virgins
years, is as a black Swan, in regard, in green years they give the too forward
maids a virulent drink; whose virtue (vice rather) is by a strange efficacy to
distend their muliebria so capaciously that Bells and rope ring too too easily:
and which is worst (dull memory compels us write it) the women here are not
ashamed (the better to allure men from sodomitry) to go naked to the middle,
where with a fine tra^sparent cobweb-lawn they are so covered, that by a base
device it is made to open as they go; so that any impure air gives all to men's
immodest viewes, denudating those parts, which every modest eye most scorns;
each honest thought most hates to see and think upon. The Boys paint
themselves with a celestial color from top to toe, and as an augmentation of
beauty, cut, gash, and pinck their naked skins; which in mine (contrarying
their) opinion, rather breeds horror than affectation in any Traveller; the men
affect perfumes, and practice complement.

The soil is but indifferent for grass, or natures Tapisrtry, but in rich
stones, as Dyamonds, Chrysolites, Onix stones Magnets, Bezarrs lignum Aloes,
Benjamin, Cotton; and Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, and the like, most
uberous; and made more by Silverplentifull brought from man Iapan, and
victuals and commodities from other parts, and bought here cheaper than in any
other places: but most memorable in the Cabriz or boodstone he generated; the
mervailous virtue being such (as Osorius tells us) That such time, the
Portuguizes warred against the bold Sumatrans, they descried a Junck or Ship at
Sea; they made to it, and were resisted boording it, by Nahodabeg Captain
their inveterate adversary: but after long and cruel fight they entered among
the naked Indyans, slew such as resisted them, and amongst them Nahodabeg; who
(to their amazement) bled not, albeit they had hackt him in forty places; they
thought it magical, till (having taken from his Arm a bracelet of gold,
wherein set the Cabriz stone) they found the reason, for that was no sooner
removed, but that his blood issued abundantly from each wound he had about
him: doubtless it is a most precious stone, and had it power to expel death
also, it were more than admirable.

Of Pegu.
PEGU, is also a renowned Kingdom of the Oriental Indya ( Lestarum regio, in
old writers) confined by Syam, Ganges, and the Ocean; a Monarchy of far
greater extent and power fifty years ago, till the Syamite plucked forceably
from her Dyadem many brave and wealthy Seigniories: howbeit she is yet
commandresse of many Islands, Monym, Barongo, Nogomello, Duradura, Cocos, etc.

Pegu (by Castaldus supposed that old City Triglipton in Ptolomy) has Artique
elevation 16 degrees 40 minutes: a City walld with good stone, beautified with
many Turrets and parrapets: and to issue out and enter in, shows four fair
Gates, and twelve posternes, prettily built; and made more safe, by that deep
Moat or Trench (filled with Crocodiles) that circumvolves her: the streets are
not many, but large and broad they are and seldom crooking: before every door
(the houses are all low) grows a pleasant tree, whose fruit and wholesome shade
makes them double useful. It is divided into two, the new Town and the old;
the old is most great and best inhabited.

The Varellaes (or Temples) and Sudatories are observable; each Varella
farcinated with ugly (but gilded) Idols: that at Dogonnee is not a little
memorable; for structure and ornament out-braving any other in the Orient: the
wilderness about it and antic superstition might challenge a copious
description; which I forbear, having other things to denotate.

This Kingdom is full of al earthly delights, and blessings of Nature; Gold,
Silver, Lead, and Iron; also Smaragds, Topaz, Rubies, Sapphires, Garnats,
Emralds, Espinells, and Cats-eyes; as also Ryce, Caravances, long Pepper,
Sugar, Benoyn, Musk, Gum-lack, Cotton, Callicoes, and what else a reasonable
man can lust after: But all these if they were centuplied, are not able to make
them truly happy, wanting the true pearl, that which the godly Merchant
bought, though to obtain it he sold all his frail wealth and possessions:
for, albeit the holy Apostle Saint Thomas brought them blessed tidings of
salvation; yet they quickly lost the true light, delighting to this day in
obscure and loathed sins, the Kyacks filled with base Idolatry: insomuch that
father Bomferrus (an old Franciscan) after four tedious years labor to
reduce them to some knowledge of the Church of Rome, came home, desiring rather
(as did S. Anthony) to preach among piggs, than such a swinish generation. The
truth is, they believe they know not what; and Quaenam est ista simplicitas?
neseire quod credas says Hierom against the Luciferians: yet some what (if all
be true he tells us) we gather from his observation: that they believe the
world (consisting of Heaven, Sea, and Earth,) had four Creations; and for
impiety was four times destroyed: by Fire; by Wind, by Water, and by
Earthquakes: each Age or World governed by a several tutelarie Numen or God;
miserable only in this, that he was transitory, and not omnipotent, nor
immortal: they reckon that the last destruction of the world and death of
their last God was thirty thousand years ago; and that in Plato's great year
all shall once more suffer a chaos. They imagine a great Lord omniscient,
omnipotent, and immortal, lives and rules in Heaven; but they do not worship
him, in that Satan tells them, he desires it not: they believe a revivification
of the body after death, and co-union with the soul; and ( Bomferrus believes
it) confess a threefold receptacle of souls departed, Nashac, Nishac, and
Schua; Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory: by which that holy Friar convinces us of
more ignorance than these Pagans: but we believe it never the sooner, since
the Devil is their instructor, yea who dictates their profession.

Their habit is thin and fine; it differs little from that they have in
Industant, and Syam: but in this they vary; they wear no beards; they dye
their teeth black, in that Dogs teeth are white; whom they hate to imitate:
they also cut and pluck their flesh to become braver than other Nations

I have told you the best of Pegu; the worst is also memorable: In less than a
hundred years ago, the Peguan Monark was far more powerful and formidable
than at this present: his Dyadem then sparkled with a gallent luster; twelve
wealthy Kingdoms at that time acknowledged Pegu their Sovereign: Some of
those Provinces are well known to us, as Syam, Auva, Kavelan, Barmaw,
Iangomer, Tangram, Cablan, Lawran, Meliotalk, etc. out of which, he yearly
extracted as tribute-money two Millions of crowns; and had a Million of men to
serve him at all occasions; but this hardly could content him, for by a two
losty conceit of his Monachick greatness; he grew efflated, and to contemn
others as too base to fix his eyes upon; Tyranny succeeded his pride, and
decadence or destruction of his Empire: Tyranny, for the Auvan King when he
found no privilege by being Uncle to the Emperor of Pegu, nor that he was his
loyal subject; he swells with rage, and breaks asunder his silver yoke of
hated servitude: howeit, ere he could ripen his designs, the Peguan has
notice, and so suddenly arrests him, that in amazement he acknowleges his
fault, and begs his mercy: but the Peguan King forthwith beheads him, and (to
terrify others by his example) makes no difference 'twixt nocent and innocent;
his wife, his children, and forty other whom he most respected concomitating
the miserable Auvan King in that sad Tragedy. It was terrible Justice no doubt,
but rather exasperated others to new rebellions; the most incenst and greatest
in power was the Siam King, who seeing his own incertaine standing, (any
occasion breeding jealousy, and the least jealousy bringing death from his
conqueror) he suddenly breaks out, and with all the forces he could make by
money or promises (ere the Peguan was returned from Auva) in short time enters
Pegu, and apparently made known his high rebellion: the Peguan threatens
terrible things, and to effect them opposes the Siamite with an Army of nine
hundred thousand fighting men; but that world of men could not contrary the
decree of a more powerful King; for such was the confused haste he made,
precipitated by fury, such the hate, his cruelty had defamed him with, and
such the affright his uncles Malus Genius (as Caesar's did Brutus) every where
opposed him with, that in three hours fight his monstrous multitude turn
rail and willingly yield themselves a prey to the enraged axe of war, chosing
rather to die, than any way to increase the Paguan's pride; so as the Siamite
triumphs, and the Peguan hastens back to raise more men to try a second
fortune: The Siamite (not willing to engage himself too far) returns; the
Peguan is almost there as soon as he, all the way burning and destroying all
he met with: the Siam King arms himself with the Foxes skin; he refused to
fight, not that he feared, but that he knew an easier way whereby: to assure
his conquest; the Pegu darts many fiery defiances, calls him rebel, coward,
and what not; not dreaming of his stratagems: for ere he could leave his
trenches the swift and mighty river Suhan ( Mean some call it) sweld
desperately, broke ore her bancks, and flasht so violent into the Peguan army,
that for want of boats and others helps, above seven hundred thousand
perished, the rest were as bad as dead; fear and famine so overwhelmed them;
this river every year (like Nilus) overflowes, and supplies their want of
rain; so mellowing the earth as it compares with Egypt for plenty, and with
any other part of Indya for rarities: the next year the King of Pegu seconded
his fight, but was compensated with no better fortune, we may say with worse;
in that his son in this trial by too much valor lost his life, and of
500000 not a third got safe back to Martavan. And which was worse than that, by
these perpetual brawles of war, his coffers were emptied; his Cities
impoverisht by want of trade; and his Kingdom in a sort depopulated by loss
of so many men: these proved not motives of pity to the other late subjected
Territories, but provocatives rather to unsetter themselves (as Siam) had done
from unnatural thraldom; so that the King of Bramaw, the viceroy of Tangu,
and of Rachan (a Province twixt Pegu and Bengala) confederate; and whiles the
King of Pegu was hatching more prodigies at Martavan, they steal into Pegu
with a resolute Army, destroying such as the late famine had spared, but though
they found few people, and less food, yet got they riches incredible; out of
Pegu the City as much treasure as loaded 2000 Camells; and as a period of that
design not only made the wretched King crownlesse, but crowned their conquest
with his life, his wife, and three sons sorrowfully accompaying him: Arrakan
and the other two disagreeing about the spoil, were beaten home by the Bramaan
King; he enjy'd it but a while, the Siamite entering so furiously, that he
also packt home and left Syam the victory; who since then, upon a marriage
twixt one of the royal family of Pegu and his daugther, has quit his claim;
and gives way to have both City and Kingdom brought to such trade and beauty
as it had formerly. But to facilitate our travells, and to point you out the
way the easier, accept an adjoining Map, to that in fol. 300: This describing
India extra Gangem.

map of east Asia

From Pegu to Bengala are 90 leagues: the second Town of note is Martavan
under 15 degrees; and which I guess was that Triglipton, note by Ptolomy,
rather than Pegu as thinks Castaldus, I might tell you of the vanity of this
wealthy Monarch; either when he shows himself in his royal paradrome or in
his loading himself with glittering gems; his head, ears, arms, hands, legs,
and feet, resembling a bespangled firmament; such as may amaze a good sense,
yea dazzle a good eye, and force some men to judge him infinitely rich; but I
behold him otherwise, and think him poor and miserable: Or of his deifying his
Elephants, because milk white, and of greater bulk than usual; I suppose him
worth our description, not that he is unknown in England, but for other things
in him; than his shape, more observable.

Elephant.
The Elephant is for growth and understanding chiefest, of unreasonable
Animalls, so as he has bin a subject of many learned writers, Aristotle,
Plutark Pliny, Strabo, Annian etc. They go two, sometimes three years with
young, and have extreme torment in their labor; their teat is twixt their
fore legs, which the young one easily finds and sucks with egernesse. When they
attain three years, they feed upon Dates, Meal, Milk, Whey, Fruits,
Suger-canes, and Honey: they grow till fifteen, in that time mounting to four
and twenty foot, yet lie down, dance and prove very active. In hot weather or
when lust inflames them, the males grow mad, and past jesting with, their
testicles being in their forehead. Umbragious shades, caves, and rivers please
them. Swine, Serpents, and Mice displease them; cockcrowing does not so afflict
him, as with his Proboscis to encounter the Rhynoceros affects him. The
Persians call him the Symboll of Fidelity; Egyptians, the hierogliphic of
justice; Indians of piety; Siamyts of memory; Arabs of magnanimity; Sumatrans,
the Embleam of providence; Pliny in 8. lib. Not. Hist. gathers them;
Intellectus illi sermonis patrii, imperiorumque, obedientia officiorumque
didicere memoria, amoris and gloriae voluptas, imo vera religio quoque Syderum,
Solisque ac Lunae veneratio etc.

Musk Cat.
The Musk Cat here also convenes and may merit a ca'tagraph: she exceeds the
Castor for bigness; her head is little, eyes clear, a long muzzle, her teeth
sharp, and offensive: her hair is parti-colored, harsh, and bristly; yellow
above, and whiter downwards: her profound pocket is near the genitory, excerpt
sometimes with a spoone or stick; but when out of servitude, of her own accord
parts with it, and by its fragor is often found by the careless passenger.

Having refresht enough upon the main, hoise we sail for the most noble Isles
of the Orient, and vicinating the Cities lately spoken of.

Of Sumatra.
SVMATRA, is that famous I Will, by Aristotle lib. de mundo, and others of old,
called Taprobane; Symunda in 7. lib. Piol. and now by the inhabitors, Salyce or
Salutra; and (provided Iapan be not an I Will) may truly be reputed the third
great I Will in all the Universe: six hundred (some say nine hundred) miles long,
and in breadth two hundred and forty; traded to by Solomon, but unknown to
Alexander, though Megasthenes thinks Onesecritus his servant saild thus far.
One Iambulus an errant Greek is said to have bin here, 200 years before Christ's
nativitie (if D. Sic. say true,) and may be the first discoverer: of a
Christian, Alvaro Telezzo is the first, who An. 1506 to find out gold, saild
whether Aeolus guided: since when, who people of the world have knowledge of it:
It Is Nadyr to the Equinoctial: and now a place, where many petty Kings advance
their Scepters. The most glorious Dyadem incircles the ecliptic brow of that
Tyrant of Acheen. All of them rich in gold and fruits and stones, but miserable
in their Mawmetry and superstiion; most of them so ingulpht in the abisse of
paganism, that they dare adore Cat, Rat, Dog, Devil, or what can be molded
after the representation of an elementary Creature: both Sex go most part
naked; both are courageous, and apt in Bellonaes dances. The soil is good
where rivers fructisie, barren where gold is veined.

Many Towns of value are mediterranean; of which, Manancabo (full of gold) is
not least memorable. But of best note here are Ports and Villages marittimat;
such as be Achecu (by them called Ashey) Peder, Pacem, Daya, Tico, Priaman,
Tykoa (east of Iambee,) Baruzee, Cattatinga, Aru, Daru, and (though last, first
in gold and value) Passaman. The rivers flow with fish, and might prove more
delightful for the Net and Angle, did not those hateful Crocodyles (here more
than in Nilus) frustrate both. This noisome creature is one of the greatest
wonders we meet with, Crocodile.
in that from so small a beginning as an Egg (not much bigger than that of a
Turkey) they increase to 8 or 10 yards in lenght. Their bodies are not longer
than their tails, which is of like use with them, the Proboscis is to the
Elephant: their mouths are very wide, at one gulf able to swallow horse or
man; their teeth are ingrailed; they have no tongue: nor can they move their
upper jaw bone: their bellies are penetrable: backs hardly to be peirced; the
brumall quarter they fast from food: but the rest of the year devour all sort
of prey, with much voracity and gredinesse. No less notable is the Females
burden: sixty days pass ere she lay her eggs, and which be commonly sixty
numbered: sixty days she conceales them: and when she sits, sixty days
consume in hatching: and to agree in one, sixty years is usually the Age of
this detested beast, fish, or Serpent: by Seamen improperly called Alligator,
corrupted from Allergardos, a mixture of Spanish and Alman language: the name
Crocodile is taken a croceo colere, or per Antiphrasin quod crocum timeat. It
is the most obnoxious of all sea monsters, and rightly becomes the Dissemblers
epithet, In quibus est astutia Hyaenae, piet as Crocodili; the Egyptians of
impudency: awed by none save the Ichnenmon, who steals into his belly and
gnawes his guts whiles he opens his chaps to let the little Trochil pick his
teeth, which give it feeding.

Hence, sail we by many small Isles, as Marrah and Lampon in the straits of
Sundy, so named by Ptolo. and from a point and Town in the next great Island. Of
Polygundy also we might speak, but love not to land there, paenitisse juvabit,
such bad luck by malevolent Venus or ill diet had our late plantation, whereby
the Monopoly died with them; out of their graves only springing a new deterring
name, of Kill abundance. But cast we Anchor an ozier ground, and fix our
wandering eyes upon a more delighted object, Iava, an I Will both great, wealthy,
and famous; Insula Iabadiae, Niger ghesses it.

Of Java major.
IAVA the greater, is an I Will nigh the Bengalan Sea, declining seven (some
observe nine) degr. 40 minutes toward the Antartick Pole from the
Equinoctial; and in the 120 degrees of longitude. From East to West it
stretches one hundred and fifty leagues, or of english miles four hundred and
fifty; from North to South nintie leagues, or two hundred and seventie miles:
the midland is for the most part mountainous and ill peopled; the marittim low,
and populous: the first is windy, but conducing to health; the latter marish,
and insalubrious.

It is full of small villages, and inhabitants: the sea coast (by reason of
trade for pepper) has Towns well built, most wealthy, and best defended: upon
the North side, and to the N.E. especially, are Bantam, Palamban, Iackatra (new
named Batavia by the Duch; but formerly Sunda-Calapa by the Inhabitants,)
Iaparra, Tuban, Iortan, Greecy, Chyringin, Serebaya etc.

Bantam is under Antartick declination or latitude, 6 degr. 20 minutes, and of
westerly variation 3 degrees: the biggest City in the Island; ownd by the
Natives, built well nigh two miles long, distinguished into a Buzzar; the
Pengrans Palace, a few streets, and at the furthest end the Cheneses live
together in low built dwellings. Of it self it affords nothing save ryce,
pepper, and cotton woll: though indeed, pepper for the greatest part is brought
hither by the crafty but infinitely industrious Chyney men, who each January
anchor here, and unload their Iuncks or Prawes from Iamby, Borneo, Malacca, and
diversother places; making Bantam their Magazen or Beehive, out of which they
furnish the English and other merchants. These Chyneses are men of peace,
voluptuous, venereous, costly in their sports, great gamesters, and in trading
over subtle for young Christian merchants: oft-times they are so wedded to
dicing, that after they have lost their whole estate, wife and Children are
stak't and parted with; yet in little time by gleaning here and there, he will
be able to redeem them; if not, at the day, they are sold in the market.

The lavan Kings are five, (Viceroys I might better call them;) four of them
are subordinate to the Mattaran's command, who is able to bring unto the field
200000 desperate slaves, black, but valiant: they have small order or policy
in war; yet dare attempt any thing, they are so forward. The climate burns
so fiercely, that little apparel pleases them; most, go most part naked: they
use lances, darts, arrows, and shields; but their sole braverie is in their
crizes; a weapon, commonly two foot long, broad, waved, sharp edgd, and small
pointed; but (against the laws of Nature, and honor) basely poisoned: the
hilt or handle is usually of wood or horn, (some have them of gold, silver,
and Ivory) cut into the crooked shape or figure of a deformed Pagod; yet were
they a thousand times more ugly, these savages would dare to adore them;
especially, in that they ask the Idol on their creast pardon, after they have
perpetrated homycide or such like villainy; a trick used by Jews the eleventh
to the Crucifixe in's hat, to his eternal infamy. But these ^avans are drunck
in their demonomy; they the more earnestly embrace it, by how much their
poisoned natures abhor honesty. They trade in murders, adultery, thests,
rapine, deceit, and all kinds of knaveries: Magique also, and Astrology
delights them: a study their Priests are execellent in, and in which Satan
instructs them; the better to oblige their gratitude, and to worship him as the
Apollo of knowledge; which we inculcate, and abominate, yea say with Isaiah,
Is there any God besides the Lord (Jehovah)? yea, there is no God, we know not
any: Isa. 44.
he makes the diviners mad, he turns the wise men backward, and makes
their knowledge foolish. Let us not learn the way of the heathen, Ier. 10.
they are altogether brutish and foolish; his molten Image is falsehood, and
there is no breath in them: they are vanity, and in the day of account they
shall perish. But in the Lord shall all true believers be justified and shall
glory.

These people know better how to swim than navigate; yet are not ignorant in
sea affairs, nor want they vessels to do mischief in. Their chief delight
is hunting Tygres, Ounces, and such beasts as give chase and resistance; They
know Mahomet in some parts of the I Will, who as an infectious air is sucked by
many people of remote Islands. Friendly they are to English men and delight to
serve them, especially since the Duch forced Iacatra from them, betwixt whom is
such mortal variance that fifteen ryalls (is given by either) as a reward for
each prisoner dead or alive, either people can take nor is there ever hope of
true Amity with Barbarians. The Oran-kays or best sort of people here, are
lasie, sociable, but not to be too much trusted: they suppose themselves
descended from Chyna; in a Iunck 700 years ago forced hither by Tuffon or
tempest. They are proud, and wear their hair pretty long, and about their
crispes wreath a valuable Shash or Tulipant; go naked to to the wast, where
they gird them with a parti-colored plad or mantle, falling no longer than the
knees; and are impatient if any offer to touch their heads. The ordinary food
had here (not at easy rates) is ryce, wheat, pinange, betele, ophium, goats,
eggs, hens, coquos, plaintains, jacks, and rack-a-pee so called (...); which
drunck immoderately, accilerates Death; but temperately, exhilirates the heart,
cures fluxes, kill worms and helps digestion. To conclude.

Whence this great and noble I Will is called Iava, I confess my ignorance. I
dare not say from Iavan ( Iaphets son) grandson of Noah; in that most agree,
he planted Greece. But by reason his own brother Tharsis peopled these parts,
why might he not from his brothers name (to eternize his memory) borrow the
denomination. Nothing else save Pepper presents itself in this I Will, worthy our
nothing: Pepper is sown, Pepper.
and in the growth supported by poles or canes, about which it entwines and
duplicates with many embraces, till by maturity it gets the shape and strength
of a bushy, round, and pleasant tree. The pepper hangs four inches in length,
and one about, in many clusters; each yielding fifty or sixty corns, full,
round and fragrant; the smooth is best accounted of.

The Cotton (more common in Persia and Guzurat) is no less memorable and
useful. The tree is slender, straight, a yard high, and like a bryer; Cotter.
at the top it expands into many several branches; each, charged with many
balls or cods containing the Bumbast or Cotton: the shape is round, and equal
in bigness to a Walnut: at maturity the cod opens, and discloses her treasure;
but being cropped, is put in an entire heap, and with flayles or such like
useful (though churlish) instruments is forced out; and by the enriched owner
cheerfully gathered.

The Malayan Tongue sounds well, and may prove harmony to the ingenious
observer; in these parts no less musical and epedemic, than is (with us, and
others) the Latin, Arabique, and Sclavonian.

English. Malay. A King Rutgee a Nobleman Oran-kay a Lord Kay a Priest Cadda a
Merchant Phetor an Interpreter Iorbissa a Man Oran a Woman Tadon Paran-poan and
a Child Buda a Boy Catsion a Youth Monda a Father Babba a Mother Mamma a
Brother Addal-Ally a Sister Adda-paparas an Uncle Niana a Friend Marty-lowty a
Stranger Oran-Leya a Chirurgian Goething an Iron-Smith Goada An Elephant Catgha
an Ox Cambi. Alomba a Goat Carbow a Sheep Domba a Dog Hangbe a Bird Borron a
Hen Ayam a Duck Bebee a Musk-Cat Catto-Dalgalia a Sow Sabi. Sieleng a Fish Ican
a Water-Pot Laud a Herb Oberbedil. Lancuos a Musk-Nut Palla a Ship Capel.
Iunck a Boat Praw. Paca-sura a Coat Nasse a Needle Naroen a Custom Negry a
Rope Tali a Stone Batu a Ring Chinsim a Wimble Alforees a Shoe Upon a Sword
Ita. Padang a Dagger Cryze a Knife Pieson a Javelin Tomba a Shield Salvack a
Gun Bedyl. Pitsil a barrel of a Gun Sombo-bedyl a Looking-glass Sarmi a
Glass Lora a Lamp Pulita a warm thing Penas a Cap or Turba^t Caya a marriage
maker Coemodo a Command T'suyka a Year Tauwa a Day Aris a Book Nimoda. Kitab a
Bed Bantell a good Day Tabea a Royal of 8 Serpi a Christian Vrangby All
Samoanga The Head Capell. Coar Hair Ramboyet Ears Talinga Eyes Martic
Eye-broowes Alys Nose Irotdon Neck Goulon Lips Lambider Tongue Ilat Teeth Auton
Beard Tianga Back Balacca Shoulder Baon Arm Backeyen Hand Tangan Finger
Iary-laree Belly Penot Blood Darno Privy part Perot T^igh Backy Leg Gula Foot
Bhackhye Toe Ghoumo Fire Api Air Baya Water Eyer Earth Zam the Sea Chay Gold
Maz. Cabo Silver Peca. Salorca Brass Temba Copper Tambagle Lead Tyma Iron
Negle Money Sarfi Scarlet Facca lata-miera Death Mattu Merchandise Bayick
Dimana Melancholy Chinta Silk Sabuck Paper Cartas Quills Cazamp Inck Mangsi a
Book Khytab. Nymoda Wine Aracca Vinegar T'suka Strong Water Pinangha Bread Sagu
Boyld Ryce Braas Fruit Tacat Drink Larnick Sugar Gula Salt Garram, Matary Oil
Nuagia Flesh Lalyer Fish Ivack Crabs Horrae Plates Pienig Pepper Lada. Sihang
Ginger Alia Mace Bengo Cloves Chocho, Sianck Cynomon Cajumayns Aloes Garro
Tamarind Assa Ryce Braas. Parce Nuts Calappen. Palla Sweet Gums Daringo Sweet
Spices Dingyn Plantaines Gardang Cocos Calapa Mustard Sajani Eggs Teloor Woe
Saya Better Parma Great Bazaer Sweet Manys Heavy Brat Strong Cras Needles
Calvenetten Baggs Corni Hard Wax Caju-lacca Friendship Pondarra I Manyr Thou
Pakanera He Itowen We Dep Ye Pachaneras They Itowe She Dya Sunday
Ion-maheet to Day Mari Yesterday Bulmari the other Day Bulmari-dula Early Pagi
Night Malam to Morrow Ysouck What say you Abba-catta Is he not here? Beef?
What Is done? Bigimana? Well done Soosa Where is it? Manauten Bring it back
Combali? Now Bacabaren How much? Barappe itu? Give place Lalan Require it Minta
Regard Nanthy Let pass Ganga Near hand Gila We will go Maree Leave it
Iangemast I have Ada It is found Botonvum It is Dalan I will bring it
Addadizano I see Green I thank you Terimacache I understand not Tan or
tyedae-taw I care Tage I have not Tyeda-da I desire not Tyeda-maw I am sick
Bite-secata To eat Macan To remember Engat To stretch out Dusta To beat one
another Baccalayo To ashame Malon To choose Damare To pay Chiny To give Bering
To buy Bilby To live Iagava To poison Ampo To observe Doduer To be silent Dyem
To gain Menang To destroy Ilan To cover the head Kocodang To arise Passai To
burn Baccar To kill Benue To spin Tuedda To sell Iouwall To do Bretcon To
swear Sempa To help Touloug To us Quia-bota To let blood Bewaeng-darner To
question Betangia To know Kyunall To dye Bantaren Take it Ambell Not good
Tiedae-Bayck Sloth Checo Give thanks Tarima. Casse Farewell Tingal One Satu Two
Dua Three Tiga Four Enpat Five Lyma Six Nam Seven Toufiou Eight De lappan Nine
Sambalan Ten Sapola Eleven Sabalas Twelve Dua-balas Thirteen Tiga balas
Fourteen Enpat-balas Fifteen Lyma balas Sixteen Nam-balas Seventeene
Toufiou-balas Eighteen De lappan-balas Nineteen Sambalam-balas Twenty
Dua-pola Twenty one Dua-pola-satu Twenty two Dua pola-dua Twenty three Dua
pola-tiga Twenty four Dua pola-enpat Twenty five Dua pola-lyma

We must yet to sea, and think us not a little happy, that we land so safely
(...) the Celebes, not out of our way, to our intended places.

Our course from Iava hither, is North-East; from Bantam two hundred leagues or
thereabouts.

Of the Celebes.
CELEBES, by some is called Makasser I Will, from her best City so called: a place
for quantity and quality no way despicable; stretching from the Equator 6
degrees South: ovall formed, two hundred miles long at lest; well peopled, but
with bad people; no place ingendring greater Demonomists, well agreeing with
the old name Ptol. gave them Anthropophagorum regio. Mahomet is not unknown
among them, but by him, a malo in pejus: for though he teach them, there is one
and but one God; yet seeing Jesus Christ is unknown there, what does this
their knowledge, but make them more capable of torment, than if they had been
far more barbarous. From Macasser to Cambyna W. N. W. are four and twenty
leagues; to Nossaseres eighty.

The I Will is fruitful, though under the most frying part of the burning Zone.
The Son yields them day and heat enough; but Night, their complexion: the habit
they wear, differs not from their grandfather Adams, a few fig or plaintan
leaves tide about their middles, being elsewhere naked: the better sort (to
vary from the vulgar) are tulipanted, and shirt their coleblack skins with a
pure white cloth, which does not lenifie the scortching son, but serves for
complementall difference. The women are Gods creatures, but have adulterated
his holy stamp, by not only deforming their face and body, but by that vile
lubricitie, their souls are spotted with. Impudence goes here unmasked: It is
no noveltie for them to open the sack they go in, and entice a stranger to
concomitate; her honesty was lost before, but now she ferries two to Barathrum:
if his body (by that voyage) leak not to death, the Tobacco she proffers him
will operate it; for such is their damned Art in horrid venom, that these
Sirens can sing safety to themselves, and by the same pipe and weed smoke him
to death; a trick they will be perfect in, though the Devil own them for it.
Pythagoras made the wantons of Crotona modest and the men moderate: lam qui
corrigat, alter erit. And which is no less infernal; the men use long canes
or truncks (called Sempitans) out of which they can (and use it) blow a little
pricking quill, which if it draw the lest drop of blood from any part of the
body, it makes him (though the strongest man living) die immediately; some
venoms operate in an hour, others in a moment; the veins and body (by the
virulencie of that poison) corrupting and rotting presently, to any man's
terror and amazement, and fear to live where such abominations predominate.
You cannot choose but think this a hell upon earth, though at our first approach
upon sight of so goodly an Island, we thought it better than Elysium: but
remembering Impia sub dulci melle venena latent: we will away for better places;
the Moluccoes I mean, Ptolomy calls them Syndae, than which, no part of the
Universe gives more delight and varitie of refreshments. But by the way cast
our eyes upon many small Isles and (as we sail due East) upon Baly in 8 degr.
30. min. and on Tymo 10 degr. South 20 min. easterly from the last: both of
them more rich in stones and spices than some greater Isles about them: leave we
also Conio and Serran unspoken of; not that they are unworthy, but because we
have to the Moluccae, in view now, and where we mean to rest a while.

Of the Molucco Jles.
THey are numbered five. Molucco. Gillolo. Ternate. Tidore. and Machan (where
Magellan after his long voyage Anno 1520 lost his life by treachery of these
barbarians.) The English were the first that ever traded to these Isles of any
Christians: and most of them have acknowledged our King their Sovereigne: but
by the Duch it seems our men are now thrust out, as if all India were theirs
by title from the Creation.

Of these Gillolo is greatest; but in Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Ginger, Pepper,
Oil, Aloes, and Honey, all of them alike plentiful. All or most of these,
have the Equinoctial for their Zenyth, and by those diurnall showers, and
breezes which fail them not, and Apolloes commorance, the the fruits ripen
sooner, the earth smells more aromaticall, and the Air seems more nutritive
than in other places. Let us rest a little upon some fruit descriptions.

Cloves.
The Clove tree differs in proportion according to the place it receives vigor
in: some being comparable to the Bay, others to Box or such like trees of
humble stature; it is, most part of the year green and pleasant, having leaves
long and small, distending into many branches: It blossmes early, and becomes
exceeding inconstant in complexion; from a virgin white palliating other
colors: in the morn a pale green, in the meridian a distempered red, and
sleeps in blackness. The Cloves manifest themselves at the utmost end of all
the branches in great plenty; and in their growing evaporate such sense
ravishing odours, as if a compendium of Natures sweetest gums and delicacies
were extracted and here uunited: they are thrice yearly pruined, and gratefully
retort a treble vintage: and though but perfected in 3 years, yet must be
counted an advantage; for Physicians tell us, they are hot and dry in the
third degree, corroborate the stomach, and benefit concoction.

Nutmeg.
The Nutmegg (or great Nut) like those trees most famous for their exellencies,
is not very lofty in its height, scarce so proper as the Cherrie; by some,
resembled to the Peach, with which it varies in form of leaf and grain,
affecting more assize and compass. The Nut is clothed with a defensive husk
like those of baser quality, but at full ripeness disroabs it self, and
discovers her naked purity the Mace, which chastely intwines (with a
vermilliion blush or color) her endeared fruit and sister, both of them
breathing out most pleasing smells and perfumes: the Mace in few days (like
choicest beauties) by Apolloes wanton flames becom's tawny and unlike her
former braverie: yet in that dissent, best pleases the rustic gatherer.

Near the Molucco's, and nearer the Antartique, we see many other Isles, noble
in esteem, and rich in quality: but, for that more than barbarous baseness
our miserable Countrymen suffered by the Dutch, we have no pleasure to stand
upon any thing save recital; such are Amboyna, (placed 'twixt Banda and
Molucso:) Banda, (in 4, degrees 30 minutes, and (from Amboyna 24 leagues:)
Puloway, (from Banda 3 leagues:) Puloreen, (from Puloway W.N.W.) Lantore, (the
greatest of the Isles of Banda:) Batan: Labatacka, Nero, Ticobassa, Cumber,
Salame, and others: all of them, especially Puloway and Puloreen, seeming
continued wildernesses of Nutmegs and Clove-trees, Pepper, Vines, and Olives.
These two last named commerced first with our Merchants, and contracted a
perpetual Amity and Fealty to our King; but in despite of them and us, the
uncivil Dutch (whom for their braving humors here, pride, hate, and bloody
execution of our innocent men at Amboyna and other places in India, I cannot
name with patience) have banished our Merchants, and entitle themselves Lords of
most of Banda Islands, caring neither what right the Tarnatensian nor Banda
Kings have over them.

From these, steer we another course, to Borneo a great and wealthy Island. We
are soon in sight of it, the gale is so prosperous.

Of Borneo.
BORNEO, or insula bonae fortunoe in Ptol. is Nadyr to the Equator; and
resembles an ovall shield; the major part inclining North: Antartick elevation
not mounting above 3 degrees; Artick, to 7 and odd minutes: and owes her first
discovery (by any Christian European) to one de Bren, who in the year of our
blessed Lord 1523. anchored here. It groans at this day, (for the most part)
under Spanish bondage; who in any place where gold or other treasure is to be
had, cease not till they can master it; valewing neither soul nor body of any
Inhabitant, (save for their lust) with the least weight of that too much
soule-confounding creature. But let us consider! Nulla Coelum reparabile gaza.

It has many Villages and people; but the one are poor in their material; the
other more wretched in their infernal Religion, and late taught Idolatry:
both, no way valewable; did not those mines of Gold and Dyamonds, and some
other merchandises; as, Bezarrs, Musk, Amber, Lignum Aloes, Sanguis Draconum,
Wax, Rice, and Rattans or Canes make her most magneticall. Her marittim Towns
and Ports exceed not for number, but Peu and bon. Socodania, (in 1 degrees. 35
minutes South, from Bantam N. E. 160 leagues) and Bemermassin; Little, but
good, if such thou interpret. Safety and Satiety.

We are landed in so good a place, that we will rest our wearied feet awhile,
and entertain your curiosity with a few viands; friends (though simple food)
to infeobled Nature. Bezar, Lignum Aloes, Musk, Civit, Benjamin, and Amber.

Bezar, or (as the Persians call it) Pezar, is of two sorts; generated in
Persia and both the Indyes: the American is worse than be these of Asia and the
Orient. The shape also is various; some resembling a plum, some a Date-stone,
others like Eggs of Doves, some like Cheznuts, and Goats kidneys; all agree in
this, they are blunt ended: they are no less inconstant and diverse in color;
some being red, pale-greene some, other-some of a dark yellow, and some
sky-colored: the last are best, these consisting of many skales (like Unions
and Onions) circumvolving one the other, and in which. Nature has expressed far
more excellency, than Arts best ingenuity or perfection: for, each inferior
skale (not unlike the glorious Orbs inverted) yields fresher beauty, and more
celestial splendour than the former: each skale diminishing and being of more
virtue, as the Bezar is in tenuity or crassitude. Many are counterfeit. They
try them thus, either by pearcing them with hot bodkins; or after they have
wayd them, to steep them in cold water four hours; and if it crack not, it is
not feyned: to know it good, they then, wipe it, and balance it again;
observing, if it weigh never so little above the first weight, it is base and
despicable. Note also, that Borneo Bezars are not half so valewable as
Persia's.

Lignum Aloes, from diversity of Countries, vary in their Nomenclations. The
Javans and Malayans name it, Garroo: Indians and Portuguizes, D' Aquillha, the
Chinae, and Cochinchinae, Calamba: framed of large round sticks, of a cloody
grain, commixt with ashy veins; no less pleasant to the eye, than to the
hand ponderous: the relish or taste proves bitter, in its language telling you,
It would be burned; for, hot coals of Fire no sooner touch it, but it
incendiates, and (to the honor of its own Funeral solemnity) expires and
breaths out an odor so aromatic and comforable, that no other is used by the
Indians, Malayans, Siamites, Peguans; Cambogians, and Borneans, when they
incinerate the Carcasses of their most honored Parents.

Musk, is either yellow, brown, or black: the first is best, last is basest:
the choysest yellow shows a deep Amber complexion (not unlike Spikenard)
clothed with a reasonable moist skin, sweating out some bristly hayres,
without stones, lead, or like adulterate mixtures; of so strong a smell as
seems offensive; but tasted, penetrates a strong brain by its fragor: sweet
spices dead it; and put in the mouth, if it suddenly dissolve, or in the hand
if it be long a melting; those trialls discover it for bad and imperfect.

Civit, is diversified in color also: deep yellow (I have been told) is best,
the worst is white, gerasie and sophisticat: how beit, the new is pale, and
soon after grows yellowish.

Benjamin, by the Malayans called Menyan; by other Indians Benyan: is either
pure clear white, or yellow, streaked or colored; the gum issues from a tree
high, small, and furnished with fruitless branches; the leaves are not unlike
the Olive: Pegu and Siam yields the best; Arabia very good; that from Sumatra,
Priaman and Barrouse, course, and had: better liked of at Iava, than in England.

Amber, is of so many forms; gray, brown, white, black: gray is best; black
is worst; the other two are indifferent. The best sort of gray is pure,
interlac't with ashie veins, not subject to sinck; and got (as Merchants
inform us) in Soffala, Magadoxa, Mombassa, Mosambique, Madagascar Mohelia,
Melinde, other parts of Afrique: found there at uncertain hazards, had at home
at easy charge and less danger: for Gems, I will sum up all in naming their
proper places; and though I borrow the report from Merchants, I never thought
any many Notes or Language less honorable; so thereby they may in a decent
way prove to the reader advantageous. We have Corrall, Amber, Emrald, Calcedon,
Pearl, Onix, Sardonix, Sardis, Bezar, Hematist, and Turquoise from Arabia.
Indostan, and Persia: Pearls, Berills, Sapphires, and Adamants from Zeyloon:
Jasper, Cornelion, Agat, Heliotrope, Jacinth, and Chrysolite from Mallabar,
Narsinga, and Cochin-chyna. Diamonds from Borneo, and Gulkundah: Gold, Silver,
Rubies, Saphyre, Granats, Topaz, Emrald, Smargd, Espinells, Cats-eyes, and
Porcellan, from Pegu, Siam, Bengala, Sumatra, Iapan, and Chyna: enough to make
a poor man rich, and rich men miserable.

Let us now to Sea again, and by a N. N. E. course in few hours view
Mindanao, an I Will (as big as Cicely) branching from 6, to above 9 degrees North.
North of it, and neighboring, are the Phillippinae, so named from King Phillip
2, by Lopez, de Legaspi who first discovered and planted there Anno Domini
1565. Isles for the greatest part namelesse and numberless; all of them wounded
by avaritious men, and branded under Spanish servitude: of these, the best and
greatest in Luconia, under 14 degrees North latitude; from whence in a direct
azumoth West, is Cambogia a rich part of the Asiatique Continent. North of
Luconiae, are Shyma and Shycoca known(by costly neighborhood) to Chyna and
Iapan, as is Corea also; a long narrow peninsule, famous in the site, but
infamous in her Pagan inhabitants; said to be more subtle, cruel, and
indomitable than be the Chyneses.

Of Japan.
IAPAN, unless Mercators fancy be true that it was Aurea Chersonesus, was
questionless unknown to old Geographers: howbeit, the Name Chryse is given it
by Niger; Zipangri, by M. P. Venetus: who would rather feign a name, than that
so great, so noble an I Will should be so long innominate.

The primier discovery we give to Motus, Peshotus, and Zeymorus, banished
Portugals; who in the year 1542. were cast upon this I Will by storm and
accident. Whether it be an I Will or no, is disputable: such as make it one, give
it in length 600, in breadth, 190 miles English: for my part, I hold it
questionable. The most Southerly part is removed from the line 32 degrees. the best
Towns and Ports of strength and trade are Meacco, Ozacca, Tenze, Fyrando,
Fuccate (or Falcate) Sacay, Cratez, Tenkeday, Oringaw, Vosuquis, Machma, etc.
Of these, Meacco (a mediterran City) is called the Metroplis, Surunga next, and
next it Ozacca, honored with the Court sometimes till of late viz. 1615. a
rebellious fire subverted and incinerated not it only, but many other Towns in
that wealthy Province. Meacco is as big as Florence, but not so beautiful:
proud in a sweet and spacious river, in many low, but comely houses; and
memorable in abundance of stately Temples or Fotiquees full of gilded
Mannad'as or Idols; to which (above all other Nations) the Japonians are most
addicted; the Jesuits industries and seminaries there producing small growth;
instead of a happy harvest reaping scorn and catholic apostasre: Neither
their grave aspect, nor subtte sophistry; neither their many miracles there,
nor their collegiat bravery, having that force to make them thought other than
feditious, vainglorious, and avaricious: such is the reward of Hypocrisy; in
show seeming desirous to do others good, in truth aiming at their universality,
gain, and hope of Conquest.

The government is Monarchical: above threescore petty Kings do homage, and
prostrate their massy Coronets to be encircled, and to illustrate the Imperial
Diadem; from whose frown, a punishment and affliction worse than common death
usually is darted: such is his power, his awe; such their vassalage, their
opinion of their Governors. The Country is most part mountanous; but full of
floods, trees, corn, grass, and mineralls: every way presents Villages,
swarming with heithen Inhabitants: the North and East parts of Iapan are less
peopled than the South and West; and those much more savage and barbarous;
cruel, treacherous, idle, lascivious, and awed by no Law, nor any way
industrious. The old Roman way of execution is here usually suffered; they
fasten malefactors to Crosses with four nails; whether in hate to the
Jesuits, or of Antique custom I am not certain; but sure it is, the
punishment is full of torture and ignominious: the Civil Japonians are
vallant, courteous, complementall, and great affectors of novelties; but beyond
measure jealous, crafty, and revengefull, if injured; yea divelish, if
exasperated. They would, but cannot deny themselves descended out of China,
banished upon a heedlesse rebellion six hundred years ago; in memory of which,
they hate one another mortally, no quarter being given to either Nation at any
time, nor cease the Ilanders to rob and piratize the Chyneses at all
advantages; at home also in their prayers abhominating them, and in all
complements and ceremonies varying from one another to expatiate their wrath
and unnatural distempers. In any slight suspect or accusation, the very
children are so jealous of their reputations, that in case you lose a trifle
and say to one of them; syrrah I believe you have stolen it? without any pause
the boy will immediately cut off a joint from one finger or another; and say
Sir, if you say true, I wish my finger may never heal again: murder, theft,
treason, and adultery, are punished with death; either crucified, or beheadded
with a Cuttan; an Indian sword which slices easily.

Towns of note and strength are Ozacca (80 leagues from Bungo) a Port Town of
good note, and near the Sea; strong and beautiful: in nothing more famous nor
observable than in the royal Castle, varnished, tyled, and burnisht over with
flaming gold; rich and majesticall: formed of the best shape, of excellent
stone; the walls, every where twenty foot thick, finely framed, well polisht,
curiously cemented, pleasant, and durable: circled with deep trenches full of
water; and for entrance and defense shows above a dozen iron Gatest, and
drawing Bridges.

It has formerly succored many Kings, and secured them from the pursuit and
heat of Rebels; in this as memorable, 'twas of late years made the prison of
Goja-zamma Prince of Tanzey and eldest Son of Tiquazamma the late victorious
Emperor; whose Father Faxiba-zamma subjected all the petty Princes of Iapan;
and made them by oath and pledge agnise him and his their Sovereigns:
Coja-zamma upon his Fathers sudden death was as suddenly seized upon by
Ogosho-zamma one of the three Protectors, and by him compelled to betroath his
daughter; and for portion was if thrust, and for ever damned to this hateful
Prison. Against Ozacca, on the other side the river is seated Sucay a Town
well traded to by Christians: Edoo is well walled and peopled: 15 leagues
thence is Oringoo a Town affording good refreshment and excellent harboring
or anchorage. Fyrando (300 leagues thence, to coast thither,) is a Chersonesse
and elevates the Artick Pole 33 degrees, 30 minutes: var. East 2 degrees 50
minutes: where and at Fuccate the English had a residence or factory.

Fucate or Fulcate is pretty sweet Town, well watered, and ownes a strong and
defensive Castle or Fortress: a Forest of lofty Pines and spreading
Sycomores for three miles space environs it; with other Groves of force against
the scorching Sun; delightful to the eye, yea more grateful than any other
object: but (which renders them ingrate and basely idolatrous) under those
green trees, and in many small but richly tyl'd Temples or Fotiques, they
adore Pan and Priapus, yea Satan himself in his ugliest resemblances: for
where the Country is most inhabited and garnisht with most variety of trees,
grass, corn, etc. (as, 'twixt Edoo and Suringa) there are erected most
Fotiques, there the people are most idolatrous.

In Meacco are 70 Temples, wherein they number 3333 Chamaetirae or little
gilded Devils, to which they give divine respect: they call them Mannadaes:
But more notable than the rest is that in Meacco; not unlike the Rhodyan
Colossus, huge and wonderful. This was built by Tyco-zamma, and without much
pain and cost was not finished: it is of Oricalke or gilded Copper; its
posture is fitting in a Chair 70 foot high, and 80 broad: his head is capable
to support fifteen men, who may stand together without preasing: his thumb is
forty inches about; and his other limbs proportionable. This is the grand
Pagotha: the other are Dii minores, or of less adoration. No less notable is
the Monument adjoining, in a Cloister within the principal Fotique of Meacco,
where are gallantly interred (but to their ignominy) the ears and noses of
3000 Coreans, a base, theevish people, vicinating and infesting the Japonians.
At Dabys is another Mannada no less infamous and resorted to: this Devil (or
Molech) is of concave copper, vast, thick, and double gilded: its height is
four and twenty foot, and would be more but that they have formed it kneeling,
his buttocks resting upon his legs after the usual mode of the Eastern
Pagans: his arms are safe stretched to the utmost; and at solemn times is
inflamed within, and sacrificed unto by offering him a child, which in's
embraces is fride to death in an infernal torture. But of more note is another
at Tenchedy East thence, where Satan visibly plays th'Impostor. The Fotique
is of rare structure, and daily served by a multitude of hellish Priests or
Bonzees; not admitted to attend there, except they be young, well shaped, and
as strong in venerie as was Hercules, Every new Moon they solemnly betroth unto
the Devil a Damsel, whose Parents account the ceremony happy and
honorable: if any be more fair or singular than another, she is selected, by
the lustful Priests devoted, and brought into the Temple, and placed right
against the Mamada or Idol: the room is first made glorious with Lamps of
burnisht gold, and a preparation by incendiating Lignum vitae, or other gums
and perfumes, such as be curious and costly: by and by the Lamps extinguish by
miracle, and in a gross darkness the Prince of darkness approaches and
abuses her; so she imagines, and the rather credited, in that the Devil
leaves behind him certain scales like those of fishes, an argument of no
phantasma: but, by this hellish conjunction they swell not, unless the Bonzee
second it: Satan is no sooner gone, but she is saluted by the Bonzees, who
ravish her with songs and pleasant music; which ended, she acquaints them
with her fortune, and resolves them in such questions, as she by their
instruction propounded to the Devil, and he had satisfied her in: she issues
with applause, and ever after is reputed holy and honorable: many other things
I could present you from tradition, but I avoid (as much as may be) to insert
incertainties: from hence therefore fail we West and land in Chyna, where
though the travail be difficult, yet suffer me to glean a little, though it
but express my industry and care to offer you the truest Novelties.

Of China.
CHINA, is the most Easterly part of Asia. A Kingdom, both great and wealthy:
famous also, but scarce discovered. Their jealousy and discourtesie to
strangers (they suffer any to enter, none to return,) chiefly causes it.

It is subject to many several names: scarce any two strange people accord in
one Nomenclation: and no wonder, since amongst themselves they affect variety:
the Kings new naming the whole Kingdom at their Coronation, as they fancy it.

Ptolomy long ago called it Sinarum Regio: other Geographers, Seres: the
Moors in Industant, call it Cathayo: the Arabians, T'synin: the Syamites, Cyn:
the Malayans, Tabenzo: the Japonites, Thau, and T'syn: the Tattarrs, Ham:
Alhacen, Tangis: Paulus Venetus, Mangi: the Inhabitants (if Perera, Riccius,
and Trigautius say true) Tamen; and themselves Tamegines. But how various
soever that be; this is not uncertain: that it is a very spacious Monarchy:
for it extends from 17 degrees. to 43, of North Latitude: and to the South, Cantam;
to the North, Pequin; two royal Cities, seem to terminate it. But thus
confined: On the East, it has the Sea of Iapan ( Corea is part of China, no
I Will, but to the North conjoined with the Continent:) On the West, the Deserts
of Industant; On the North, the Tattars: On the South, the Phillipinae Isles;
and the South West adjoyneth to Cochyn-China, and Pegu, with part of Siam. All
agree that it is square; and that from any one side to another is 1500 English
miles: the circuit above 4000. the Country is generally champaign, and
fruitful; full of sweet and navigable rivers; and which are no less inhabited
than the Villages and Cities be: of which, China has no fewer than 600 Cities;
2000 walled Towns; 4000 unwalled; 1000 Castles; and of Villages scarce to be
numbered: and many they had need to be, since they give lodging to above
threescore millions of men and boys, besides women; which be not enrolled. The
whole Empire is divided into fifteen great Provinces: governed by so many
Quon-fu and Lausia; who have their Tutans, and Chyans, or Deputies under them.
Each of those Provinces has a Metropolis: full of people; fairly built; and
very spacious. But every way more excellent than the rest, are these four,
Paquin by some called Pasquin: Nanquin or Nanton: Cantam or Canton: and
Quinsay, by them called Ham-ceu: of which four, at this day Paquin is chief
or Imperial.

PAQVIN elevates the North Pole 41 degr. 15 minutes; and by late Geographers is
accounted that same City which some call Cambalu watered by Polisanga; and
China then must be Cathaya: yea (if Pantoja, and Di Canti say true) the Chyna
Monarch is that same great Came, which M. P. Venetus and Mandevile before him
have famoused. The City Pequin is questionless the most spacious, and best
peopled in Asia, if not in the world: since it has 30 Duch leagues (ninety
English miles) circumference: it includes many stately buildings; and
Mausoleas; 24000 are numbered of the Mandarins Sepulchers; the meanest of
which, is not without beauty: and a no less number of little gilded
Chappells, beside 3800 Temples devoted to Idolatry. It has as many Gates and
Posterns as be days in a year: sixscore Buzzars or Marketplaces: above a
thousand Bridges of stone: and such water as is every where potable. This City
is not above a hundred miles from that mavelous wall, which Crisnagol their
King ( Zaintzon the 117 King some say) built 1000 years ago, to keep out the
invading Tartarr: a wall 1200 miles long; six fathoms high; twelve yards thick;
and such as was seven and twenty years erecting, by a continued labor of
750000 men.

NANQVIN (the second City for grandeur and bravery, till of late,) was the
China Metropolis. It elevates the Artick Pole 32 degr. and is distant from the
Sea 8 leagues or there abouts. The City is 12 leagues about; circled with three
strong walls and ditches: the Kings Palace is glorious and vast; the other
buildings many (for 200000 are reckned) but meanly beautiful: the Temples are
above a thousand: the streets fair; the people industrious: from Paquin
removed East, six hundred miles English: most part of the way is navigable.

CANTAM is at the South end of China, in 17 degrees. a Town both rich and
spacious: our Ships came almost in view of it: from it to Paquin is two months
travel.

QVINZAY or Ham-ceu borders Cochin-China: of old, the greatest, at this day the
most admirable for variety of antic rarities in the Orient.

These be the most noted, but many other great and populous Cities this great
Empire contains: generally of one shape and alike governed: None be without
their Meani or Temples filled with Deastri or Idols. The Country is generally
champaign and fruitful; the husbandmans care and pains make it to fructify
and repay its thanks in various tribute: each Province there is well watered:
and few of those rivers but abound in fish, which the Chyneses not only banquet
on, but on Frogs, Snakes, Rats, Dogs, Hogs, and such food as many other Nations
abhominate: they fish with Cormorants.

The people are Olive colored; more black or white as they vary from the
Aequinoctiall: they wear their hair very long, and fillited; their eyes are
commonly black; their noses little; their eyes small; their beards deformedly
thin; and nails often times as long as their fingers, serving as a mark to
distinguish the Gentry by. The better sort are habited in silk and a slight
sort of satin; the meaner, in black cloth made of cotton: their coats or vests
are long and quilted; made to tie under the left arm after the usual garb of
Asia; their sleeves are also very long, and at the wrist very strait: their
shoes are many times of such stuff as be their coats; and soaled with cloth
or callicoes: some have them richly imbroydered. The greatest variety amongst
them is in their head attire: some knit their hair in cawles of silk, of
horse-hayre some, and some with fillets of gold or silver: others wear high
caps or felts made of fine twigs, round, and commixt with silk of diverse
colors; and other-some an antic sort of hat, high crowned, round, one half
without brim, and tawny colored. The women are commonly modest, and differ not
in apparel; in that a like veil of white linen wholly couers them; showing
nothing but their polt-feet, which from their infancy are straightened; so as to
make them alla mode, many of them are maimed.

They tolerate Polligamy, and Sodomy; yea, what else their lustful idle
natures can dictate to please their effeminacies. They are generally crafty,
proud, lasie, jealous, complementall, and voluptuous. Music, Poetry, Painting,
and Stage-plaies delight them exceedingly: they care not what they spend in
luxury and fireworks: they eat in porcellane; and have their diet in many but
small dishes; their meat minc't, and which they take up with two sticks of bone
or Jvory; but some have their nails so long as may excuse them; for to touch
their mouths or meat with fingers is held absurd and impious: their drinck is
commonly hot, and by its taste and color seems to be such a Coho potion as
they drinck in Persia; they drinck often and little. The Louthya's are served on
the knee, and much regarded; they all sit upon stools and eat on Tables. And
albeit no Nation in the world is more idle and gluttenous; yet are no beggars
to be found there; if he be young and beg, the whip rewards him; if old or
lame, or blind, the Hospital releeves him. Murder they punish with death;
theft and adultery commonly with the strappado: their Justice is severe and
impartial; their prisons, strong; their executions, beheading; or starving
them. The Mandarins are honored; the Chyam's reverenced; the King adored: no
Subject nor Ambassador ever sees or speaks with him, (save his children and
Eunuchs) except by petition. They suffer Ambassadors (or others) to enter China
so they bring presents of value; otherwise they suspect them as spies and no
way honor them. The Chynaes are curious in novelties: and love to see strange
Arts; which they also delightfully practice: few of them but has skill in some
thing; either in tillage, making China dishes or porcellane, to paint, sing, or
play well: the Mathematics they affect, and the civil Laws: they use not
letters but Characters, or Hyerogliphicks, of which they have above 40000: they
write neither to the right hand nor to the left, as the Latin and Hebrews did;
but right down and simmetrically: they write with pencills made of horse
hair, such as they also paint with: their language is most part of
monosyllables: they be generally Poets and Musicians: affected with Rhetoric
and Divination. The Scholars and Merchants in this republique are much more
honored than the Soldiers be: and some reason they have for it, They are so
cowardly, lasie, and tyrannical. No people in the world more honor their King
than do the Chynaes: they suppose him too glorious for them to look upon; they
obey his will in every thing; they fill his Exchequor yearly with above a
hundred millions of crowns; they call him The undaunted Emperor, and great
Lord of the whole World; Son of the Sun; and beauty of the whole Earth.

No people whatsoever, express more filial respect unto their Parents than
the Chyneses do: they obey them at all times, and every where: they do nothing
to displease them: they marry not without their assent: their childrens Names
are at their disposing: they honor them, be they never so mean; releeve
them, be they never so poor; at their death, express all symptoms possible
of their loyalty and duty: and seldom mourn less (in white linen, as did
the Jews) than two or three years; the longer they mourn, they think they
the better express affection.

They arrogate all sorts of excellencies whether in Art or Science, as peculiar
to their Nation: they think their Speech the most sweet and rhetorical of any
in the world: what other people have, they judge deducted and borrowed from
their transcendent Notions. They say they are the most ancient and immixt
people in the Universe; and borrow nothing of any other Nation. They say they
first invented Letters (or Characters,) Guns, Painting, Tillage, and
Navigation: yet in none of these (for all their brags) can they parallel us of
Europe. For their antiquity, I deny not but they may have continued their
plantation and without much mixture (admirable if so, for the Tartarrs and
Siamits have often over-runne them) since the first seminary, begun by Sem in
those parts: yet may others in that point compare with them; I might nominate
the Bryttains: for I regard not their Lies and Histories of such Kings as
reigned, or such Conquests as the Chyneses obtained (long before the birth of
Time) a hundred thousand years ago; unless we qualify it by the example of
the Arcadians, whose year had but ninety days; of the Massagers, who had
fifteen years, or of the Egyptians who had twelve years in one of ours;
following the course of the Moon, and not the revolution of the Sun, nor
regarding the Dies intercalares: an error, most of the Oriental Ethniques are
plunged in. Their letters are not so succinct as ours: their Hieroglyphics
come short of the Egyptians. Their Guns are not so serviceable: they have them
not above a span long; so that they rather resemble Pistols than Guns: nor are
their bore nor squaring so good as ours; so strong, so near, so mathematical.
Their painting is of good colors; but their designing far short of our
invention: they draw the postures filthily, and shadow meanly; which doubtless
in painting makes the perfection. Their husbandry is without Art or Reason: the
grain is good, the soil rich, the Zone moderate; and yet their corn is
neither so various, so good, nor so certain, as be our Harvests. Their
Navigation is lame: they build many ships; but without beauty, or service: nor
have they much skill in sailing, their Logarithms and Mathematick instruments
to take the height of the Sun by failing them: their Compass also is
defective; for they have but eight or twelve points at most to distinguish by:
nor is the Magnet (till of late) acquainted with them: for all which, they say
they see with two eyes; we with one; and that all other people be more than
purblind in sottish ignorance.

They delight excessively in all sorts of games, and voluptuousness: they can
play at chesse, irish, passage, in and in, hazard; and not only play great
games, but when they have lost, care not though they stake their wives and
children; whom if they lose, they part with till they can advance so much money
as they were staked for. They are very hospitable one to another, and have so
sure a faith of the Resurrection that they sometimes lend money to be repayed
them in the world to come. Inter-Iudes, Masqs, Fire-workes, and such devices
wonderfully take them: nor value they what money they expend in such sport, so
their expectation be not deluded. Their houses are meanly built, and as badly
furnished. Their Meani or Temples have no such grandeur, nor beauty, as in a
Country so peaceful, so rich, and amongst a people so studious, so
superstitious, might be challenged: but though their outsides be but ordinary,
yet be they many times lined with excellent good Marble, Prophyre and
Serpentine.

They celebrate their Natalitia or Birth-daies with great solemnity: for
fifteen days they rejoice and play; and each night gormundise upon choice
fruits, wines, and cates, with no small voracity. The New year, which they
begin in March, is no less illustrated: at that time every man reares up his
Pageant, and beautifies his door with paper Arches, and Images, and all the
night long makes them visible by store of Lantherns.

Their Weddings have equal Ceremony: greater or lesser after the quality of the
Deceased. When any Chyna dies, they wash him every where, perfume him next, and
then apparel him: they put his best clothes on, and hate to let his head be
naked: that done, they seat him in his chair, and make him sit as if he were
not dead but living. At a set time his wife enters the room; she first does
him respect, kisses him, and takes her farewell by expressing so much love and
sorrow as is possible: at her departure she takes her lodging, and her children
next enter; where they kneel and kiss his hands, yea sympathise, and strive
to outvie each other in their ejaculations, and such outward notions of sorrow
and piety as is imaginable; beating their breasts, and pouring out tears in
abundance: next to them his kindred do their parts, and then his friends and
other acquaintance: the third day they coffin him, in most precious wood; cover
it with a costly cloth, and over it place his Image: for fifteen days the
corpse rest so; each day having a Table spread with dainty meats, but nightly
the Priests eat it and burn Incense, and offer an expiatory Sacrifice: when
they carry it to the grave (which is neither within any Town nor City) they
have women that do accompany it, purposely hired to howl, to tear their
hair, and to move others to compassion: sometimes upon his coffin they place
diverse pictures of dead men, whom they entreat to show him the best way to
Paradise: that done, his wife and children for some days seclude themselves
from sight of men: and when they go abroad, go dolorously habited: they put
course sackcloth next their skin; have their clothes made long and plain; and
for three years scarce laugh, or seem to joy in any thing: but contrariwise
endeavor to the utmost of their power to agrandise their Duty by a continued
lamentation, abstinence from public feasts, and pastimes: yea in all their
letters, instead of their Names subscribe themselves Such a ones disobedient
and unworthy Child, etc.

But for all this, the Devil has too great a sovereignty over them: most of
their Colleges and Temples expressing by one or other invention, their
infernal wisdom, and familiarity with that old Magician; to whom they devote
many enthusiastic boys, who with their long spread hair, prostrate
themselves before the Mannada or Idol; and suddenly as if some Hag had
terrified them, start up and vibrate their swords, kept there of purpose:
whiles the Idolaters with dejected looks note their antic postures, and cease
not to warble out a soft Doriq' sort of music, not departing till the
vaticinating youths pronounce somewhat, poynting at his Worship and their
Obedience.

But we have saild too far. It Is high time to look homewards. Yet not till we
have bid farewell to Asia: into which when others adventure, let this Motto be
remembered.

Man's heart commands as many ways as Stars find resting places:
Who travels must disguise himself each way with Ianus faces.
Pectoribus mores tot sunt, quot in Orb figurae:
Qui sapit, innumeris moribus aptus erit.
How delightful and how magical the excellencies and riches of the Orient are,
yet Ovid's Nescio qua natale Solum, etc. was my song and blessed me in my
succesfull wishes: so that upon the seventh of June (after long sail, some
storms, and much patience,) we again described land: it bore N.N.W. from us,
but at Tytans first blush the ensuing morning, we were assured it was
Digarroys, a small I Will, about fifty miles about, and in 20 degrees South
latitude: there we anchored not, we knew Moritius was but 90 leagues distant
thence; the course W.N.W. a more hospitable place, and where we expected better
welcome and refreshment.

Digarroys (as Seamen tell us) was first discovered by the Portuguise: but
except some Welsh-man had the honor of naming it, I know not whence called
Dygarroys, for Digarrad in the British dialect fitly complies with it, An I Will
so Desolate: desolate I mean in humane Inhabitants; other things it is Uberous
in, as Wood, (choice and store) Tortoises, Dodos, and other Foul rare and
serviceable. To our view, it gave it self not very high at 6 leag. distance:
and this remember, that at the South-West-end are Syrtes or shoalds long and
very dangerous. By benefit of constant winds, in few hours we arrived at the
Mauritius, a place no way despicable; but rather such as in the Traveling
over, deservedly chalendges my pains, your patience.

The Bay of Mauritius in the North-west side of the I Will.


Of the Mauritius.
MAURITIUS (an I Will situate within the burning Zone, not far from the Tropic
of Capricorn) has twenty degrees, five minutes Antarcick latitude; longitude
from the Meridian of Cape Comoryn, twenty degrees and as many minutes;
variation, four and twenty degrees and nineteen minutes: In what part of the
World, questionable; participating both with America, in respect of that vast
South Ocean; as bending toward the Asiatique Seas, washing India, Iava, and
other Isles; and with Afrique also, if you rank her with that Empress of Isles,
Madagascar, which seems to shadow her, and from whose Eastern banks she is
removed above a hundred leagues or three hundred English miles: But, however
doubtful to which three it appertains; of this I nothing doubt; that, for
variety of Gods temporal blessings no part of the Universe obscures it. I will
not satisfy you by report of others, but by being an eyewitness in part, and
partly expert in the rest, I may without much hyperbolizing, affirm the whole
scarce to be parelleld. It was first discovered by the Portugal; whose
industrious arm and ingenious fancy (ere America was discovcred by Columbus)
brought strange things to pass, and gave Names to many places formerly
innominate. Amongst others, the name Do-Cerne unto this; improperly, if they
allude to that which Pliny names in his 6 lib. cap. 31, for that Cerne of his
is placed near the Gulf of Persia; some be also of this name amongst the
Azores and other places. After that, it varied into other denominats, as
Roderigo; Cygnaea; and now, by the Hollanders, Mauritius: but whither, borrowed
from Grave Maurice, or in memory of a Ship so named, that by age or accident
laid her bones here, I determine not; for, by equal authority and less
presumption I may confer the Nomenclatlon upon some adventurous Cambryan (the
relics of whose most ancient speech and dialect is yet living in many of
these remote and secret quarters of the world,) the word MaurYuisus or bigger
Island; fitly so named, if compared with those other lesser Isles, Dygarrois,
Englands Forest, Dozimo, St. Apollonia, etc: and by a more euphoniacall
concision now Maurisius. But grant it be so called by the Hollanders, yet it
follows not that they have more right to it than the English; for they
themselves know that the English landed there a dozen years, before them: and
no question had new-named it, but that they knew the Portugal had done it
before them. This also remembered, that in the year 1505, when Franciscus
Almeyda, of all the Portugalls the most excellent in conquest and discovery,
subjected many marittim parts of Aegi-symba or South- Afrique, in Quiloa,
Mombazza, Melinde, Mozambyc, etc He reports that there and in some Isles (I
suppose this one,) where he erected Forts and Castles of defense, he found
Crosses and other symbolls of Christianity: whereby (as Osorius in his 4.
lib.) he was sure Christ had been served there, and therefore would not
esteem himself of any of those parts, The first Christian discoverer.

Mauritius is an I Will abounding with all good things requisite for man's use, and
require-able for the Zone it is placed in: the land (especially where it
respects the Sea) is high and mountainous: the shape somewhat round; the
circuit not much above a hundred English miles: the greatest extent is from the
North East to South-West: every where sweet and flourishing. It procreates a
healthie air; the blooming fragrant trees both lenifie the scalding heat such
time as Don-Phoebus wantonizes with the Goat; and fan the gentle Breezes wasted
from the Noto-Zephirus, such time as Sol resides in Cancer. And here I should
set a full point to her commendations, did that ignorant opinion of our
homebred Seniors discourage me, affirming positively that the Torrid Zone was
un-inhabitable: a conceit sometime predominating; but now that mist of error is
dispelled, the veil removed, and experience advanced: we see it yearly, and
plainly, that no place 'twixt the two Poles is more habitable, more young, more
excellent. I grant; the Zone is twice every year subject to the Suns
extremest Candor, that the air enflames, and that clouds do not there so
usually as elsewhere in colder Regions generate: but, two Winters they also
have, they want not clouds; (for, the benevolent heaven daily diffudes a gentle
shower, whereby the earths siccity is mollified and made most uberous,) the
air also is lenified by a constant breez or favonius which breaths sweetly
every day toward Sunset, and so refrigerates, that no distemperature is
perceived, no not when Apollo dimits his perpendicular rays and divests
himself in his most ardent splendor: yea, when the Dog-starre rages, the
people in this Zone find the air salubrious: the ground also in most places is
enricht with delicious sleepe-charming streams, which by their infusion not
only fructify the solid earth, but also by a harmonious progress afford an
unresistable magique to ease and meditation: the infinite store of lofty and
spreading trees, all the year condecorated with such verdant beauty and
fragrancie; their boughs never unapparrelled from their Summer liverie; the
ground ever spread with Natures choicest tapestrie; the sap never exiled into
the melancholy earth by Winters frigiditie; yea, the mirthfull Sun (the
provoker and reviver of decayed Nature) is ever pleased to re-enforce a
continued vigor and activitie; so as an Epitome of all delight and plenty
seem contracted here, and to display it self in her exact content, health,
and braverie, Such as some have fabled of Elysium. Hic, radiunt flores, et
prati viva voluptas herba
Ingenio varista suo, fulgentibus illic
Surgunt structa thoris: hic, mollis panditur
Sollicitum curis non abruptura soporem.
Turba salutantum laras tibi perstrepit aedes.
Hic avium cantus, labentis murmura rivi.
Here, radiant flowers, the Meadows vive delight
Vary their Nature, rising to the sight
In shining Beds: here, spreads the tender Grass
Not breaking careless sleep of the dainty Less.
The attendant Troops make thy large House resound,
But here Birds chirp, Streams murmur on the ground.
And as that body is best compounded which pertakes indifferently of all the
Elements; for either to want or superabound, begets defect: so, to be blessed in
all, this place (humane society excepted) is abortive in none. For, water is
here in plenty; nor is its goodness and sweetness excelled by plenty; but,
as it gently drills it self from the stupendous rocks; so it trickles along
the pleasant valleys, as it were besotted at the delightful murmur it lives
in: in some places it spreads into Meanders, till (too secure in its own
mildness) it commixes, and is ingulpht by that vast and brinie Ocean. It also
abounds in diverse sorts of Trees: some, good for timber; others for food; all
for use. I cannot tell you the half of them, I want names to speak, and Art
to describe them by. There, is store of Box (as they first appear, so I
remember them) whose growth and greenness affoords profit and delight: here is
also great store of Ebony, of all sorts; black, red, white, and yellow: the
tree is high, small and straight, the outside is covered with bark; the
inside lyned with Ebony: black is the best, and good for maay noble uses; for
frames of pictures, Mathematique instruments, Chess' and playing tables,
bowls, etc. so rich, so valuable, that few years pass but either Dutch or
French Ships came to this I Will of purpose to load away with nothing else but
Ebony: than which, no wood is better; than which, no I Will in the world has more,
more sorts, or less chargeable: and if Virgil's conceit may carry it, we may
conclude this I Will a member of East India. -- Sola India nigrum
sert Ebenum. --
-- No where but in India
Black Ebon wood does grow men say.
And as in most things it is plentiful ( Non tellus eadem parit omnia,) so no
one thing in plenty exceeds the wood, which is so thick, that in most parts I
could hardly beget passages. The Palmeto is a remarkable Tree and most
beneficial to Travelers: it is like the Coco or Date in growth, save that her
boughs are large and rounder: the Palmeto is long, and straight, and round,
and soft; without leaf, bough, or branch, save at the very top; and those are
few, and green, and sedgie: under the branch appear certain codded seeds:
both trees (male and female) blossom, but the she is only fruitful; and not
so neither, unless a flowring branch of the male tree be yearly innoculated
or incorporated, that by a commixture of seed the female may fructify; no
miracle in Nature: the leaves serve for many uses; we made them cover our
Tents, to shade us from the Sun and the serenes which fall nightly, and are
dangerous: at the top of the Palmeto tree is a soft pith, in which consists the
soul or vergetative virtue, for being cut out the tree dies; the pith is in
bigness like a small Cabbage, in taste like a Nut, but boyld eats like a
Colli-flory. Of more value is the Palmeto wine; it is must or sweet, pleasant
and nourishing; in color and taste not unlike new Muskadine. It is
intoxicating, but cold in the digestion; it purges and helps obstructions,
kills worms, and let stand two days in the Sun, becomes good vinegar. The
wine is thus gathered: we pierce or cut small holes in three or four trees
that grow together; the sap or liquor effudes presently, and all the holes or
vessels are quickly filled: impatience forbids to bring wooden barrycoes
thither, our bellies were prepared to receive it; by help of a Cane or Quill we
suck and suck again, from one tree to another, two or three trees in less
than an hour repletiating the greediest appetites, though they bowze their
bellies full.

The shape of which and Coco, after my rude way I thus present thee: Their
excellencies I cannot more elegantly express, than Silvester has already
celebrated.

A Coco-tree

A Batt

A Tropique bird

A Palmeto-tree



The Indian I'les most admirable be
In those rare fruits called Coquo's commonly:
The which alone far richer wonder yields
Than all our Groves, Meades, Orchards, Gardens, Feilds!
What, would thou Drink? the wounded leaves drop wine.
Lack'st thou fine Linen? dress the tender rine,
Dress it like flax, spin it, then weave it well:
It shall thy Cambrick and thy Lawne excel.
Long'st thou for Butter? bite the poulpy part.
For, never better came to any Mart.
Do need good Oil? then boult it too and fro,
And passing oil it soon becomes so.
Or Vinegar? to whet thine appetite.
Why, sun it well and it will sharply bite.
Or, wants thou Sugar? steep the same a stownd,
And sweeter Sugar is not to be found.
It Is what you will, or will be what you would:
Should Mydas touch it, sure it would be gould.
And God (all good) to crown our life with Bays,
The earth with plenty, and his name with prays,
Had done enough if he had made no more
But this one plant, so full of choicest store.
Save that the world (where one thing breeds satiety)
Could not be fair, without so great variety.
For indeed, such is the life and pleasure of this Ambrosia, that (I often
noted it) we were no sooner parted from these trees (no not three yards space)
but diverse birds, as Parrats, Kites, Thrushes, etc. and Lizards (here
abounding, and not a little curious in their shape and colors) would speed to
suck the distilling Nectar.

Diverse other Trees here are, various in their shape and nature: one, out of
curiosity I bit and tasted of, but for half an hour it so malignantly wronged
my mouth and lips, as if Vitriol had been imbrued with Sulphur: it procreates
nothing that is green or good, destitute of shade and beauty, wholly naked,
without leaf or flower; the bole or body is soft and penetrable, such as a
Musket bullet can make way thorough though the Tree be of five yards circuit;
the softness of it invited my knife to carve my name in, and which, it as
easily performed, as with a stick you can write in sand; I have no name for it.
Nor for another very frequent there, but by its likeness the same which the
barbarous Africans at Sierra-leon call O'gou, with which they invenome their
Darts and Shafts: the Tree is not high nor bungie; the branches spread to a
great length, and bear many Cods (not unlike the Indian Beans) armed with
many sharp prickles: by such a defense one would think the fruit or kernel
valuable, but it deceived us; the fruit (or kernel hid within those Cods) is
round, scarce so big as a Doves egg; the shell, and color very like a Bezar
stone; hard to crack, but cracked it may be; within, it has a Nut, tasted like
an Acorne, the quality (if not the same) little better than poison. Many other
rare Trees there are; some, like unto Pines; like Ashes, some; some, Box; some
like to Cypresses. The fruits are also variable, some like Pine-Apples, like
Artichoakes some, others like Plums, and Nuts, and Berries: whose several
names or virtues, my small skill in that Theory apprehends not. This I took
notice of, that what the Birds eat not, the Tortoyses do eat; and what the
Tortoyses refuse to eat, the Hoggs devour: so, as by one or other, all is
tasted of. Again, as this noble I Will is prodigal in her water and wood, so
she corresponds in what else a fruitful Parent labors in: not only boasting
in that variety, but in feathered creatures also; yea, in the rareness of that
variety: I will but name some of them; you shall lick them to perfection. The
Dodo comes first to our description: here, and in Dygarrois (and no where else,
that ever I could see or hear of) is generated the Dodo (a Portuguize name it
is, and has reference to her simplenes,) a Bird which for shape and rareness
might be called a Phoenix (were in Arabia:) her body is round and extreme
fat, her slow pace begets that corpulencie; few of them weigh less than fifty
pound: better to the eye than stomach: greasy appetites may perhaps commend
them, but to the indifferently curious, nourishment, but prove offensive. Let Us
take her picture: her visage darts forth melancholy, as sensible of Natures
injury in framing so great and massy a body to be directed by such small and
complementall wings, as are unable to hoise her from the ground, serving only
to prove her a Bird; which otherwise might be doubted of: her head is variously
dressed, the one half hooded with downy blackish feathers; the other, perfectly
naked; of a whitish hue, as if a transparent Lawne had covered it: her bill is
very howked and bends downwards, the thrill or breathing place is in the midst
of it; from which part to the end, the color is a light green mixed with a
pale yellow; her eyes be round and small, and bright as Diamonds; her clothing
is of finest Down, such as you see in Goslins: her train is (like a China
beard) of three or four short feathers; her legs thick, and black, and strong;
her tallons or pounces sharp, her stomach fiery hot, so as stones and iron are
easily digested in it; in that and shape, not a little resembling the Africa
Oestriches: but so much, as for their more certain difference I dare to give
thee (with two others) her representation.

A Catato

A Hen

A Dodo



Here are also sundry other foul, yea birds of highest quality; as Goshawkes,
Hobbies, Lannars; and also Reer-mice or Bats as large as Goshawkes,
Passe-flemingoes, Geese, Powts, Swallows, Kites, Black-birds, Sparrowes,
Robbins, Herons, white and beautiful; in their flesh good, in their feathers
more valewable: Cacatoes, a bird somewhat like a Parrat, but may seem to
borrow his name from (...), he is so fierce, so ravenous, and so indomitable,
Bitters, Hens, and many other; which I forbear to name to avoid impatience:
But I must give the Parrats a peculiar salutation, they made me so admire
their feathers, and are so catholickly beloved and pointed at; Such are their
curious liveries, and such their language, not unaptly thence called (...) a
good Epithiton.

Psittacus, humanas depromit voce loquetas
Atque suo Domino (...) valeque sonat.
The Parrat, humane language knows right well,
And to his Lord, says Save you, and Farewell.
Here are also as great variety of fish, as in any other part of the world, I
thinck: such as we took and tasted of I noted. The Man-atee or Cow-fish was
best and rarest; for taste and shape equally can appose both feeder and
beholder. They use both elements; those very fins which steare them in the Sea,
serve as stilts on shore to creep along, and to support them; their paps also
in their land travels do befriend them: and though a fish, yet differ little
from Veale in taste, save that it is somewhat waterish; the ribs and entralls
resemble a Cows, so do their face, and thence have their denomination: for
doubtless the land has not that creature which the watery citizens resemble
not. This fish is of a great length, and swims but slowly; they affect shoald
waters, and to be near the shore to graze on; Andrew Evans our honest
Captain, struck one of them with a Trident or Fis-gigg, and (here in this Bay)
leapt upon her, wounding her above fifty times with his steletto, but ere he
got the victory, she crushed him by incircling him with her tail, enraged by
sharp pangs of death, so that his conquest was dearly bought; for though at
that present he spat blood without feeling other torture, yet so mortal was
his bruise, that he bade this world farewell, within three weeks after; as in
my description of Saint Helena is remembered. The head of this fish is like an
Elephant (save that the proboscis is wanting:) but to a Cow most liken her: her
eyes are very small; her bulk, about three yards long; and in breadth half so
much: it is famoused for a gentle fish; yea in their love to the visage of a
man, are ranckt with Dolphins: most certain and most valewable is the stone
consolidated in their heads: for, being pounded, put in wine, and drunck
fasting, it is (as are the brains of Sharks, some call them Tuberons) most
sovereign against the stone and colic: questionless of more prise than his
other six great teeth, which yet to him are far more useful.

Give me leave to name what fish we took, 'twill ease my memory: Dolphins,
Bonetates, Albicores, Cavalloes, Whale, Porpice, Grampasse, (or Sus-marinus,)
Mullet, Bream, Tench, Trout, Soles, Flounders, Tortoyses, Eeles, Pikes,
Sharkes, Crabs, Lobsters, Oysters, Crafish, Cuttle-fish, Rock-fish, Limpits,
and a speckled Toad-fish or poison fish, as the Seamen from experience named
it: This came first to net and was eaten too greedily by the heedles Sailers;
an error which cost some their lives, others their senses; a dear rate, a bad
reckning: It is not unlike a Tench, but far more black, meazled, and
deformedly painted. Other strange made Fishes we had there, who met with some
strange stomachs, who in a dangerous curiosity would needs taste them: some of
them had the shape of Hedg-hogs, of Cats some: some were bungy, others bristly
and trianguler; such as Gorraeus calls Lepus marinus, of which and the rest
this caveat may be inserted.

The poisonous Seafish drinck, learn to beware:
Whom the deep Channells of the Seas prepare.
Her Scales have bane, her Oils like purging are.
Disce venenatos Leporis cognoscere potus
Pestiferi, mediis peperit quem fluctibus aequor
Virosi Squammas et purgamenta marini
piscis olei.
The Torpaedo or Cramp-fish came also to our hands, but were amazed (not
knowing that fish but by its quality) when a sudden trembling seized on us; a
device it has to beget liberty; by evaporating a cold breath to stupifie such
as either touch, or hold a thing that touches it: hear Oppian.

Along her stretched guts two branches rise
With fraud (not strength) endued; they patronise
The Fish: whom who so wounds, his joints decay
His blood conjeales, his limbs move not, they say
His powers dissolve, he shakes, and falls away.
At duo se tollunt distenta per Ilia rami,
Qui fraudem pro robore habent, Piscemque tuentur
Quos si quis tractat, perdit per membra vigorem
Sanguine concreto, rigidos nec commovet attus,
Solvuntur subito contracto in corpore vires.
Moreover, this I Will affoords us Goats, Hogs, Beeves, and land Tortoises: so
great, as suffer two men with ease to sit upon them; so strong, as they can
carry them: yea (in Portugal reports,) fifteen men have altogether stood on
one of them: Sailers affect to eat them; but are better meat for Hogs, in my
opinion: they make pretty sport, but are odious food; and so are their Rats,
Bats, and Monkeys: most of which useful and unusefull creatures were first
brought hither (men say) by the Portugal to refresh them in their return from
India, but at this day dare neither anchor there (searing the Eaglish and
Dutch,) nor own their firstlings. The Birds, had here at no charge and little
labor, are Hens, Bats, Herns, etc. The Hens flock together twenty and forty in
a company; if you catch one, take all: the surest way is to show them a red
cloth; that color exasperates their spleen, they show it by flying
out-ragiously at it; and when we struck down one, the residue budgd not one
jot till all were vanquished: they eat like parcht Piggs if you roast them. The
Herons also through a long continued security (ignorant of the deceits of men,
and unused to the villainy of powder) are as easily gotten: we have come in
shot of six, and when we had killd one, the other took not wing but suffered
us to shoot and take them all, one after another; neither knowing nor valuing
danger, but quicken destruction to themselves by a strange condoling their late
dead associates. All sorts of fish are easily taken. The Bats are innumerable,
and admirable in their bigness: Some of them are not less than Gos-haukes:
Seamen case them like Rabbets, but (if my stomach deceive me not) worse meat
cannot be tasted of: a fierce ilfavored carrion it is, ever squeaking, and in
most hidious and offensive noises calling one another: they hang in swarms
upon the boughs of trees, by claws fixed at the extreme part of their wings;
their monkey faces turned downwards.

Tectaque cum silvis celebrant, lucemque perosae
Nocte volant, seroque tenent a vespere Nomen.
Houses and Woods they haunt, hate Day, and game
In Night time, and from twi light have their Name.
Their shapes which I have formerly put upon the Coquos, best speaks 'em.

A day before we parted thence, we took a Fish, an Eagle-fish I imagined it:
the eyes were five quarters asunder: from one fin end to another, were above
four yards: its mouth and teeth resembled a Port-cullice; a long small tail
it had: a creature (take it altogether) rather made to wonder at, than to
juncket on.

depiction of fish A word now of the Soil it self.

The I Will has many good places to anchor in: two are well known; the one, at
the North-West side, which bears the form of a Hemi-cicle, and elevates the
Pole Antartique, 19 degrees, and 30 minutes: the other, at the South-East is
directly opposite, and in 20 degrees, 15 minutes; in longitude from Cape Comryn
the utmost promontory of India, 20 degrees, 20 minutes: and from the Lizard the
extremest part of England, 99. both Bays seem land-lockt, the ground is
oazy, the depth in 5, 10, 15, or 20 fadoms, as the Seaman best affects: No
where dangerous. The Soil it self; is stony and troublesome toward the
shore; howbeit the inland parts are fat, and pleasant, full of shadowing
trees, and drilling rivolets, reciprocally benevolent, equally delightful to
the eye and taste: some few places excepted; which either storming at the
aspiring height of some adjacent Mountains, or efflated in their own noise,
descend so violently that they become Cataracts in their violent and
precipitious fluxes: but, though the ear be angry at it, the other senses
derive much happiness; for hereby the earth is mellowed and made fruitful,
which otherwise would be too full of stones and sand; yet such is the
richness of it, as rather commands us wonder at, than describe it.
Amber-grease is often found flooting about this Island: how generated, whether
in the Whale, or froth of Seas, or other wise, is yet doubted of. Coral, white
and pleasant to look upon, grows here in abunda-ce: but how that stinking weed
Tobacco came thither I know not: whether by Art or Nature questionable. To
conclude, this pleasantest of Asiatick Isles is un-inhabited, unless you please
to entitle Beasts and Birds Inhabitants: those live here without dread of Lion,
Tygre, Wolf, Fox, Dog, or such offensive creatures; and have it upon this
condition, to pay a graceful Tith or Tribute to such ships as famine or foul
weather direct to ride here: a fit place for Sir Thomas Moore to have seated
his Utopia in. But his conceits were forged: this merits the best of people.

If I have stood too long in her description, excuse it in the surpassing
delight I took in it, such as without Circe's spells had a magic force To wish
we dwelt there. But home we must; the wind blew fair, the Sea was calm and
all our company fully refreshed. So, aboard we went, and in three hours sail
lost sight of that Elisium; wishing such an Optic glass as every where would
show it us: but our strong imaginations represent it.

The fifth day we descried land; it bore South-West from us: by its height,
shape, and position, we knew 'twas that our Captains called Englands Forest:
next day we attained it. The name was Anno 1613. imposed by Captain Castleton
Commander of the Pearl (a ship I mean:) some say the errant Potugall first
saw it, and by Seignior Mascarenas from his own name was denominated: yet
other-some go further and call it Pulo-puar, an Indian name, but by whom or
when, darkly writ in the mistique Character of Oblivion. The I Will has above
fifty English miles circuit: the South Pole is elevated in that place, 20
degrees, and 55 minutes, South from the Equator: in longitude from Mauritius 1
degree and a half: (but distant thence, seven and thirty Duch leagues:) and
variation of the Compass 23 degrees: an I Will exceeding lofty, made fying her
aspiring forehead within the middle Region: every where green, and ever
flourishing; pleasantly apparelled in various liveries; especially in store of
trees, branching gallantly, and mounting to a rare sublimity. It had no
Creature in it, save birds; till our Captain landed some Hogs and Goats of
both kinds, that by a happy multiplication and increase the future Passenger
might be releeved and bless the Planter. It wants not water, sweet and
plentiful: the fresh streams are Magazeins of watery Citizens, such as sport
themselves in that liquid Element: 'twere prolixity to name half of them; the
Eeles are notable; many there be, and most weigh thirty pounds; not odious in
their corpulency, for to the taste they render themselves sweet, moist, and
excellent: the birds are many, rare, but most of them such as are spoken of in
the Mauritius.

We must to Sea again, but not without a grateful farewell to those healthy
and well-plac't Islands, prepossest with a felicitated memorial, yea enricht
with so great choice, such plenty of victuals, that the vast and churlish
Ocean became less distasteful to us; contemplating the jocune exercises and
pleasures we were so late possessors of.

In few days (by benefit of propitious winds) we lancht far into the Mare
del Zur, the Antartick constellations more visibly discovering themselves, and
to approach our Zenyth. But, long those happy Favonii continued not: the wind
veered into other (our contrary) quarters; the Sky ore-spread with black and
lowering clouds, the Sea roared and labored in many dreadful tumors,
threatening spite, and no small danger: for seven whole days and nights the
Tempest raged, and forced us all that while to lie by the Lee (to speak Sea
language) no sail but the mizzen daring to oppose, the rest made prostrate to
a senseless fury: howbeit, the old song Venit post multos una serena Dies
revived us, by a continued patience begetting freedom and victory.

For many hundred miles we had nothing bat Sea and Air to feast our sights
with: somewhat bettered by many shoales of fish every where concomitating us,
now and then by too much greediness proffering themselves to the deceitful
bait of the cunning Mariner. In this vacancie, I may remember; Aristotle 2
lib. Meteor is of opinion, that no great blasts of wind blow from the South;
meaning, that the burning Zone is without much rain, and clouds, such as
conduce to exhalation and vapors: or, that before they can exceed the
Tropicks, and enter the temperate Zone, the Suns vehement and continued heat
and rays dispell, annihilate, and make them unforceable. Doubtless he
retracted; for who sees not, that Phoebus in his attractive power (so, the
matter be alike) equally co-operates toward a generation of wind and rain in
his progress unto either Tropic. Experience, the Mistress of Knowledge
taught it us; we found it so: for from the South many gusts and storms
assailed us. Ovid in his 4 lib. de Ponto is of Aristotle's opinion (to be
granted in our Hemispheare.)

Hic oritur Boreas Oraeque, domesticus huic est,
et sumit vires a propiore loco.
At Notus adverso tepidus qui spirat ab Axe
est procul, et rarus, languidiorque venit.
Rough Boreas our Domestique, rules here,
And takes his vigor from a place more near.
But the mild South, from adverse Quarter sent,
Comes far, blows gently, and more impotent.
After threescore and ten days further sail, we came in view of Saint
Helena, (so long were we with fair winds 'twixt that I Will and the Mauritius;)
a very little I Will and strangely founded. The spacious Ocean bellows on every
side so fretfully, as it might fear an inundation, had not the extraordinary
height, but chiefly a Supreme providence (which has set the Sea its bounds)
safe-guarded it. It has no neighbor Isles, neither great nor small; but seems
equally removed from those two famous Ports Rio Grandi and Cape Negro; the one
in Brazelia, the other in Congo: in America the first; in Africa the last: both,
in one elevation, and in the same parallel with Saint Helena: from that in
America, distant above 400 leagues; from this in Africa 300. But let us a
shore, and search what she abounds in.

Of Helena.
SAINT HELENA is an I Will, and was in-nominate till John de Nova gave it one, in
the year after th'incarnation of our Savior Christ 1502: and so named, for
that he discovered it (in this return from India to Lisbon) the third of May;
a day consecrated to the memory of Helena the Empress: She that first found
the Cross, she that was the most religious of Ladies in her time, she that was
mother to the first Christian Emperor, great Constantine: both of them
glorious to the world; Brittans both; both bright Jems of this our Nation.

St. Helena is removed South from the Equator sixteen degrees: has longitude
from the utmost promontory of South Africa, two and twenty degrees: the needle
varies there, five degrees and thirteen minutes From the lands end of England
is distant 1500 leagues, or 4500 English miles: From the Cape of Good hope 580
leagues, or 1740 miles. From Madagascar 1000 leagues, or 3000 miles. From Surat
2200 leagues, or 6600 miles. And from Bantam in Iava 2300 leagues, or 6900
miles, or thereabouts. The I Will has this front in that Bay which takes name from
the Chapel, nigh which we anchored.

St Helena.
To what part of th'inhabited world it appertains, is doubtful; the vast
Aethiopique Ocean so largely circles it. To Afer I imagine (because its nearest
to that Continent,) rather than Vesputius. The I Will is small; it exceeds not
thirty English miles in circumference: excessive high; it wraps its head for
the most part in the clouds, where it opens its wide mouth, and gulps down
sufficient moisture to cool its heat, and fatten it: and but for that affinity
it has with the middle Region which invelops it with a chil-cold Tulipant, the
extreme heat wanton Phaeton darts constantly in that Zone, yea twice every
year perpendicularly upon this I Will when he is Zenith, would doubtless
incinerate, and make the entralls inflame (for it has Sulphur) like another
Vesuvius. The land (I told you) is very high, but not more eminent in its
height, than the Sea (close by the I Will) is admirable in the depth; so deep
that it admits ill anchoring (a place, N.W. from the channel where is riding
at 20 fadoms, excepted;) whereby, Mariners are forced to carry their anchors a
shore, if they would ride securely: and with good cause too; for, by reason of
the abisse, I could hardly discern any flux or reflux, as if we had been
near no land, but rather in the body of the Sea, where neither ebb nor flow
can be discovered: the salt water indeed continually plashes and froaths with
rage to see it self to suddenly resisted; but, the moist breath usually
vapring in or upon the Seas occasions it, and makes it turbulent.

The I Will is hard to be ascended; not that the passage is craggie, but
precipitious: the Sailers Proverb of it is, A man may choose whither he will
break his heart going up, or his neck in coming down; a merry jest, but let
them choose it. Once up, no place yields a more delightful object. It is even
and plain above, swelling no where to a deformed rising; clothed with sweet
grass, long and curious; every where it gives a large prospect and horizon
into the Ocean. The Springs above are sweet, but below are brackish; the reason
is, they participate (in their drilling descent) of the salt hills, through
which it cuts a passage; salt both by their own composition, and the salt
breath the Sea perpetually evaporates. There are but two rivolets in that I Will:
the one bubbles down into the Chapel, the other into the Lemmon Vallyes. They
take their names from a Lemon tree whence it arises, and an old Chapel built
at the very bottom by the Spaniard Anno 1571, and delapidated by the Dutch; a
place once intended for Gods glory, but by malice of rude man made ruinous and
a profane nest of unclean avarice. The ruins of a little Town demolisht
lately show themselves, and serve to testify a like Fate makes men and
Villages dye, Death and destruction makes both mortal and miserable. Some say
the Spanish King subverted it, in that it became an unlawful Magazein of
Sea-mens Traffic, turning and returning out of both the Indyes: thereby losing
his tribute in too apparent measure. It is but lately made sociable: the world
is but beginning there; no Monuments, no Antique rarities are there found. You
see all, if you look upon the shatterd ribs of an old weather beaten Carrique,
and some broken pieces of great Ordnance left there against the Owners good
liking, and serve now in stead of Anchors. The I Will is desolate of reasonable
Inhabitants: Hoggs and Goats dwell there: they agree well-favouredly, and
multiply in mighty numbers; happy in their ease and safety, till ships arrive
there to banish hunger: we got also other good refreshment; Phesants, Powts,
Quails, Henns, Partrich; and (which were as acceptable) diverse sorts of grass
and roots, Wood-sorrell, three-leav'd-grasse, Basil, Parsley, Mints, Spinach,
Fennel, Annys, Radish, Mustard Seed, Tobacco, and some others, which by a
willing hand, directed by an ingenious eye, may soon be gathered: brought
hither, and here sown by Fernandus Lupius an honest Portugal, in the year of
our Lord 1509. whose Countrymen at this day dare hardly land there to over-see
their Seminary, or own their labors; lest the English or Hollander in the
churlish language of a Cannon question them. Anno 1588 Candish our Countryman
landed here in his circum-navigating the earth: I name him in this respect; he
reports, he found here store of Lemmons, Orenges, Pomgranads, Pomcitrons,
Figgs, Dates etc. but now are none of these fruits growing there that I could
see or hear of, a Lemmon tree excepted; to conclude, here we buried in the
old Chapel our honest Captain Andrew Evans: his deaths wound (as I have told
you) was given him by a fish at the Mauritius.

Saint Hellena was a pleasant place, but bad for us to stay too long in: after
six days commorance, we paid our reckning in a hearty Farewell, and by benefit
of a happy gale cut swiftly the yielding billows in a Northwest course;
whereby, on the sixteenth of October we made our selves Nadyr to the Sun, at
that time in his Progress toward the Antartique Tropic: our latitude was 13
degrees. and 13 min: the third day after that we got sight of Ascension I Will, named
so by John de Nova in the year 1502: it is removed South from the Equinoctial
Circle seven degrees, 40 minutes: in circuit it is 30 English miles; from St.
Hellens I Will removed seven hundred and twenty: little in it save wood and water,
observable.

On the seven and twentieth day we crossed under the Equator; whence, to nine
degrees North latitude we were pesterd with continual Tornathes; a variable
weather, composed of loud blasts, stinking showers, and terrible thunders. The
eleventh of November we were parallel to Cape de Verd, and with the GORGADES,
Isles famoused by ancient Poets, who say, that the three Gorgons, Medusa,
Stenia, and Euryale, the daughters of of King Phorcys Neptunes son here
lived, and by the transcendent excellency of their beauties (their yellow
hairs curling like Snakes, and deshevelling about their naked shoulders)
turned the beholders into a stupid admiration, and by Perseus his report of
that their faculty gave Poets some ground whereon to build their fiction.
Leaving those, we steered Westward, and past by many parts of the New found
world (as some men call it) Guiana, Florida, Virginia, Nova Anglia, (parts of
Norumbega) and the gulf of Mexico: where I have seated my self a while, and
will defraud the Reader of some patience, by traveling to find out the first
Discoverer: a Question not a little controverted.

Madoc ap Owen Gwyneth discovered America above three hundred years before
COLUMBUS.
ALbeit I have formerly in a line or two vindicated the honor of our Country,
lost in the greater part by protract of malicious time, and wane of
well-willers to defend it; I desire to speak more largely here, and give you
the ground of my conjecture, That Madoc (son of Owyn Gwyneth) discovered the
Western world now called America, three hundred and odd years before
Columbus: not to detract from that man's worth, but that the truth may prevail,
and the memory of our Heroic Countryman revive; having gaspt too long in
hateful ignorance and oblivion: for, if analogy of language and authority of
good Authors may be credited, it may peradventure be accepted of, yea amongst
Critticks gain entertainment.

In the first place it may be asked whence Madock's resolution came. I answer.
From an innate desire to travel, and to avoid domestique broiles he put that
in action which some old prophetique sayings gave him light and encouraged him
in. It Is very like he had read Plato (for what part of the world has ever more
affected learning than the Britians) who in his Dialogue 'twixt Tymeus and
Cricius, discourses of a great vast I Will, West from the Atlantique Ocean, and
named ATLAS: as bigg as Asia and Africa put together. Some Humination he had
also out of Aristotle and Theophrastus their Books of Rarities writ two
thousand years ago, relating how some Merchants passing through the Straits of
Gibralter, were by tempest driven whither wind and Sea compelled them, so far
West that they finally discried land, but un inhabited: It may be 'twas some of
the Azores: but what ere it was, it proved a Magnet of encouragement to illure
future Ages to discover Westward, and doubtless was a prime cause of finding
out the Western Continent. Hanno also is supposed to have landed there.
Questionlessed he adventured far (far in regard they had no Compass to
return by) into the Atlantique Seas; but which way he sailed is disputable:
West, some say: some say, Southward. Pomponius Mele and Lampridus affirm the
land was South from Carthage he discovered; if South, then no part of the
West Indies: the Canary Isles perhaps, the Atlantiades, the Gorgades, Ascension,
or Saint Helens; who though they carry not the Epithet of Great, yet the
Novelty considered, and the Distance, the word great may be affected. Some (but
I believe them not) carry him to Madagascar: if that, he discovered a great
I Will indeed; But then sure he would have found out the Red Sea (not comparable
to the dangers he had past, in doubling Cape Tormentoso) and made his journey
home, less dangerous. Virgil the best of Latin Poets, from some varicinating
Notion seems to point at it, in the 6. lib. Aenead. where he prophesies vast
extent of Caesar's Dominions. -- Iacet extra sydera Tellus
Extra Anni Solisque vias, ubi coeliser Atlas
Axem humero torquet, Stellis ardentibus aptum.
-- A Land beyond the Stars dothly,
And the Suns way; Atlas that bears the Sky
The fire fit Star-fraught Pole does wheel thereby.
Which though Servius understand of the Sunne-burnt Aethiops; others otherwise
interpret it inconsiderat Laudinus is one of them; who cannot be persuaded that
any part of Aethiopia exceeds the Tropicks: an idle conceit; and which in fol.
15. I have refuted: but see his reason for it, the word extra he moderates to
pene extra, a witty comment. But Donatus parodically takes Solemn pro Die, and
Annum pro Nocte; the Sun for Day, the Year for Night; which granted, Virgil
has neither prophecy nor wonder. The truth is (as Lod. de la Cerda notes) the
Poet means thus, Augustus Caesar should conquer beyond Mount Atlas, a famous
part of Afrique ( Morocco now, of old Mauritania) not included within the
burning Zone, out of which Apollo never wanders, Extra sydera, nimirum Zodiaci;
whence we gather that Virgil meant not of America.

But in a more perfect way, Seneca ( Nero's Master) fore-tells the discovery
(he conceales the place) in his Medaean Tragedy.

-- The Time will one day be
(Guided by providence) whom you shall see
The liquid Ocean to enlarge her bounds
And pay the Earth a tribute of more grounds
In a inplest measure; for the Sea gods then
Shall show new worlds and rarities to men.
Yea; by his leave, who all great acts commands
See Thule less North by far, than other lands.
-- Venient Annis
Secula seris, quibus Oceanus
Vinculd rerum laxet and ingens
Pateat Tellus, Typhisque novos
Detegrat orbs, nec sit terris
Vltima Thule.
Madoc from these lights discerned it: And least any may thinck the man to whon
we erect a Trophy of so great honor, an obscure or illiterate man, not worth a
memory; let us in a line or two speak his descent and quality, and then the
particulars of his vovage.

He was brother to Prince David, sons of that famous Owen Gwynedd Prince of
Wales, who for above thirty years governed wisely, with great courage and good
fortune: his Father was Gruffith ap Conan that did homage for some lands in
England, to William the Conqueror at S. David's: and descended lineally from
King Rodri Mawr (or Roderic the great) glorious in many, conflicts and
victories against the savage Saxon; in those four great battles especially,
at Berthem, Bangelu, Monegid, and Anglesea, in the year from Adam 4820: from
the nativity of our Blessed Savior 846. such time as Burchred King of Mercia,
Athelwolfe King of the West-Saysses, Meiric and other valiant Princes by sad
trial found him fortunate: which suffice to illustrate Madock's quality, every
way exceeding honorable.

It follows why they put to Sea upon discovery. The Annalls of those times (to
this day happily preserved) tell us, That so soon as Owen Gwynedd (or
Venedotia) was dead; the custom of Gavelkind (which has confounded Wales)
became a Subject of implacable hate amongst his sons, Iorwerth (or Edward,
surnamed Dwryndwn, from his broken nose) Howel and David; whose peculiar,
ambition banished all general kinds of love due amongst friends and brethren.
Iorwerth, albeit he was eldest, was held incapable of the Crown in respect of
his lamenesse and other deformities: Howel also was thought unworthy by reason
his Mother was an Irish Lady, with which Nation they had then some difference:
David had least right by law of Nature and Nations, being youngest; howbeit, by
his comely personage, his skill in Arms, but principally by marrying Emma
Plantaginet, sister to King Henry the second, he got the Scepter into his
hands, and swayed it as best liked him: yet the Crown tottered upon his head,
till in a victory against his brethren wherein Hoell was slain, he fitted it
better and fastened it. But a supreme power and Justice would not establish it
against right and reason, for so soon as Llewellyn ( Iorwerths son and right
heir) was capable to grasp it, he drew many of David's men to his party (such
is the vulgars levity) promising them great matters; and aided by Howell ap
Meredith and Conan ap Owen his active kinsmen, David unwillingly descends from
his Princely Seat, and Llewellyn is seated Anno Domini 1194; not without much
bloodshed and distraction of the wisest.

Madoc ap owen Gwyneth perceives the Normans ready to swallow them (for nothing
more destroys a Nation than division:) and that his advice nor propositions of
peace were harkned to, but rather by such good offices made himself the object
of their fury; he thence-forth studies his own preservation, but sees no part
of his native home-glance any happiness, but every where horror and
destruction: his genius therefore prompts him to adventures, yea to have
aboard: in some remote place or other to establish his present state and future
happiness; no show of fear, no improbability in reason, no peradventures any
whit disaminating his well-tempered spirit, to Sea therefore he meant to go and
prepares speedily: for at that instant he saw that Prophetique song penned by
Ambrose Teleyssen a noble Bardh fulfilled; writ in the year 490, such time as
Aurelius Ambrosius, brother to Vther-pen-Dragon arrived here (from Armorica) to
revenge them upon the uncivil Saxons: the Bardh vaticinating that when they
fell to Idolatry, to discord, or to admit strange people among them, that then
the British glory should be Eclipsed.

Eu Nar a folant
Eu hjaith a gadwant
Eu tir a gothlant
and gwyllt Wallia
In Latin this

Vsque laudabunt Dominum createm
Vsque servabunt idioma linguae
Arvaque amittunt sua cuncta
praeter Wallica rura
Whiles Cambrya's issue serve the Lord their maker,
Whiles with no other Language are pertaker,
Whiles so, with glory they their own shall keep,
Whiles other Nations in oblivion sleep.
Teleyssen at the same time and in the same song joynd this other invective,
reproving the pride and avarice of the Clergy, who to despite the Welsh had
given out that Austen the Monck, sent hither by Pope Gregory the great, was
their first Converter; ignorant it seems, or rather wilfully malicious, that
our Countrymen had embraced Christ (long before Austen's time) by the
preaching of Joseph of Arimathea and Simon Zelotes; and thence came that
religious boast, that they excelled all the world for three things, having the
first Christian King, Emperor, and Monastery in the world; Lucius,
Constantine, and Bangor. The Song is this.

Gwae'r offeiriad bid
Nis angreifftia gwyd
ac ny phregetha
Gwae ny cheidw eygail
Ac effyn Vigail
ac ny's areilia
Gwae ny theidw ey ddevaid
Rhae bleidhie, Rhufeniaid
ar^i'ffon g'nwppa
Woe be to that Priest Y-borne
That will not cleanly weed his corn,
and preach his charge among.
Woe be to that Shepherd I say
That will not watch his fould always
as to him does belong.
Woe be to him that does not keep
From Romish Wolves his silly sheep
with staff and weapon strong.
Madoc the rather confirmed his intentions for travel, when he saw such
distraction at home, such apostasy in all callings; also his life every day in
danger: all things therefore being fitted, he put to Sea without bidding his
kindred farewell, least too much love or hate might have withdrawn him. The
year he set forth in, was from Adam 5140. from Christ 1170. the wind and sea
seemed to favor him (Omens of good fortune:) so as, after some patience and
weeks sail due West, he descried land, a land where he found store of good
victuals, sweet water, fresh air, gold, (and which was best) where they were
a good whiles healthful: such, as overwhelmed him with joy, but moderated
when he considered how Almighty God was alike powerful and gracious in all
places: his exile now turned into comfort. In leiw of ingeminating his own
misery, he joys himself, and sees his brothers most unhappy Princes; who so
eagerly emulated one another greatness: a Territory causing it, which
compared which this, God had directed him to, was but as a handful of earth,
and which he had had possession of without opposition or bloodshed. Here Madoc
planted (in Florida or Canada, some part of Mexico) raised some fortifications
for defense, left a hundred and twenty men (I follow the old Copy, in this
Story) and directly by Gods providence (the best compass) and benefit of the
Pole star after long sail arrived safely at home; where, he recounted his
mervailous succesfull voyage, the fruitfulness of the soil, the simplicity of
the Savages, the great wealth abounding there, and facility of Conquest: a
discourse that filled them with joy and admiration; and whereby he drew many
willing minds to return with him. In ten good Barques, loaded with all
necessary provisions they advanced back, and most fortunately re-attained the
same place they hoped for. Great rejoicing was among them at that their
happiness, but no less sorrow followed: for, being come to the Plantation,
they found few of those they left there, living: caused by too much eating, the
indisposition or Novelty of that air arid climate, (which though never so
excellent, yet causes sickness and alteration in new Inhabitants) by some
treachery of the Barbarians. Madoc digested it with a Christian fortitude and
patience, and forthwith bettered the Colony, by help of Eneon and Edwall his
brothers Contriving every thing with so good order, that they were secure from
any Enemy, and had all things conducing to ease, plenty, and contentedness:
they threw away the too indulgent thoughts of their Native homes, by this
reason, that if they died there, they were in the same distance from heaven,
and had as easy a journey thither: what most afflicted them was the breach of
promise, many of their friends had made but not performed. The cause was not in
them, but in the overture of that state turned topsieturvie by the Britain
Princes, and totally by the indiscretion of that unhappy Prince Lluellyn ap
Gryffith, (lately married to Eleoner, daughter of Monteford the bold Earl of
Lecester and Eleoner daughter of King John) which Gruffyth was slain Anno 1282
at Buelht by Franckton an Englishman in an unmanly fashion. So that Madoc and
his Company returned no more, nor did the Welsh sail thither afterward,
whereby one of another in small time were in some sort forgotten and never
remembered.

But although Madoc and his Cambrian crew are dead and their memory
moath-eaten; yet the foot-steeps and relics of their former living there are
to be traced; and such, as deserve to be revived clearly: the language they
left there, the religion they taught the Savages, manifested it; otherwise how
come those many British words (not much altered from the dialect) amongst the
Mexicans? whence had they the use of Beads, of Crucifixes, of Relics etc? all
which the Spaniards (as we tcad in Lopez de Gomera and others) confess they
found amongst the Canibals, and those of Acusano, and Culhuacan at their first
landing in America. Yea, some tradition and reports amongst the Mexicans, that
(about the time that Madoc was there) a strange people came thither in
Corraughs or Ships, who taught them some knowledge of God, and by whose
examples they became more civil and industrious: testified by Columbus,
Franciscus Lopez, Coztezo, Postellus and other Castilians of quality; that of
Fernando Cortez, ( Anno Domini 1519 Ambassador and General for Ferdinand and
Isabell) is also remarkable. In some discourse betwixt him and Mutezuma (second
son of Antzol, and Father of Quabutimoc last King of Mexico,) the Ambassador
observing the Indians to have many ceremonies the Spaniards used, demanded of
the King who first instructed them, who answered Cortez; That many years ago a
strange Nation landed there, a civil people, and from examples of piety they
received them; but how they were called, or whence they came he could not
satisfy him. Another time, in an Oration of thanks which Mutezuma returned
them for some favors, he thus told them. One chief cause of my especial
affection to your Nation is this, I have many times heard my Father say, he
heard his Grandsire seriously affirm (out of a continued tradition) That not
many Descents above him, his Progenitors came thither as strangers by accident,
in company of a Noble man, who abode there a while and then departed, but left
many of his people behind him; and that upon his return, most of those he
left, died: and that from him or some of them they thought they themselves
descended. A speech agreeing with our Narration: and that this people were
Welsh rather than Spaniards, or others, the Records of this voyage writ by many
Bardhs and Genealogists confirm it; memoriz'd also by those learned Poets
Cynwric op Grono and Guten Owen (who lived in Edward the fourths time) and by
Sir Meredith ap Reese a valiant and learned man, living in the year 1477. and
of Madoc in this Eulogie. Madoc wif' mwydic wedd;
Iawngenau Owen was Gwynedd
Ni funnum dyr, fyenaid oedd
Nada Mawr, and y'm oroedd.
Madoc ap Owen was I called;
Strong, tall, and comely, not inthrall'd
With home bred pleasure, but to Fame,
Through Land and Seas I sought the same.
Made more orthodoxall by Welsh names given there to birds, rivers, rocks,
beasts, etc. as Gw'rando (with us and them,) signifying to give ear unto or
hearken: Pen-gwyn, referd by them to a bird that has a white head, and to rocks
of that resemblance: the Isles, Chorrhoeso: the Cape of Bryttain: Gwyndowr,
white-water: bara, bread: Mam, Mother: Tate, Father: dowr, water: pride, time:
Bu or Buch, a Cow: Clugar, a Heathcock: Llynog, a Foxwy, an egg: Calaf, a
quill: Trwyn, a nose: Nef, heaven: and others, Welsh words, and of the same
signification: whereby, in my conceit, none save detracting Opinionatists, can
justly oppose such modest testimonies and proofs of what I wish were generally
allowed of. Nor is it a fantasy of yesterday, many worthy men of late and
ancient times have revived it: such are Cynwrie ap Grono, Meredith ap Rhyce,
Guten Owen, Lloyd, Powell, Pris, Hackluit, Bronghton, Purchase, Davys, etc.
Enough to satisfy the welwillers of truth; too mush foe Zollists and such as
delight in opposition. This, no doubt had it been so deservedly known and
Catholiquely beeeved as it merited; then had not Christopher Columbus (a man in
truth, honorable and idustrious) Americus Vespusius, Magellan, nor others
carried along with them all the honor in so great an enterprise: Nor had Prince
Madoc been defrauded of his memory, nor our Kings of their just right and
Title to the West Indyes (a secret fate as it were miraculously renewing their
claim by Columbus his proffering the discovery and wealth of those Countries
to our King H. 7.) nor then had his Holiness, nor his Catholic Majesty had
that plea nor immediate Interest grounded upon the Genoans discovery, as many
Jesuits and State-politiques have so vehemently, so late disputed for. Far be
it from me or any honest man to detract Columbus, or to derogate from his
deserved glory: It may be his discovery was (as Madocks was) merely from his
own skill, genius, and magnanimity, without knowledge of Madocks former being
there, or of encouragement from old conjectures: his greatest reason I know,
was that so much of the 360 degrees could scarce be Ocean and that he might as
well discover Westward as the Portugalls had done East to the other Indies. But
this I would withal have also granted; That this his voyage was after the
other (of our Countryman) three hundred and two and twenty years; and that
the Spaniards have not so much right to those Countries (I mean of America) as
our King has; so long as they arrogate their claim from a primier discovery.

Columbus was borne at Gugureo (at Nervi some say) not far from Genoa: a man of
a modest nature, studious, and well read in the Mathematiques: and of that,
chiefly in Navigation: His first encouragement of going West upon discovery,
grew (as say the Spaniards) from his perusing an Ephemerides writ by a Spanish
Mariner, who had been forced into the West Indies by tempest, and died at
Columbus his house upon his arrival: this is a Spanish lie, invented merely
to derogate from his worth, and that an Italian should not master so much
glory. Whither Columbus had any illumination from old Poets, or that he had
seen or heard of Madocks journey Westward, who knows: for, what Nation
formerly knew not the acts of Englishmen better than themselves: otherwise,
Polidore Virgil that crafty Monck had not andertooke to illustrate (to his and
our shame) the English Cronologie, nor Verstegan (alias Rowley) dared to make
us all Teutonicks; from both which we suck to many egregious falsehoods.
Columbus armed with much confidence, sends his brother to our King Henry the
seventh, the wisest in his time and most noble, if too much avarice had not
swayed him: whose ill hap it was to slight the Messenger and his Message, from
his incredulous heart and the poverty of Columbus, who in his passage had been
imprisoned by Rescalls, and nakedly (after much entreaty) delivered. Upon the
Kings refusal, he desired the French King to Patronize it, but he (hearing
that King Henry had refused) derided him; who had been for ever discouraged,
had not Ferdinand the Spanish King (after long suit) accepted of the motion,
and trusted him with two hundred men in two small Ships, at the earnest snit of
John Perez de Marchena, at that time Rector of the Monastery of Rabida, a
great Mecenas to industrious men: with which, after threescore dayessaile, much
impatience, and no less stir to quiet the discontented Spaniards, Columbus
descried land, that part called Guanahami, but by Colon new named Saint
Salvador, a part of Mexico, (very near where Madoc had first landed;) a
discovery no less joying them, than as if thereby they had got the Conquest
and Empire of all the world: a Prize so worthy, that from that year 1492 to
this, they have brought home no less gold and silver, than all Europe enjoyed
formerly. Columbus died in the year 1506, in his fourth return out of the
Indyes. But of his sorrows afterward, and of the Spaniards ingratitude to
him; their pride to all the world, and cruelty to the miserable Indyans; thou
mai'st satisfy thy self at large in their own and other Histories.

An. Dam. 1497 Americus Vespucius a Spaniard (before his Voyage into the
Orient) adventures South; where with small toil or study he found land
enough (but part of the Continent formerly discovered) to glut his ambition:
howbeit, as if Colon had done nothing in respect of him, conceiting his
endeavors more transcendently meretorious, he dares to call the whole
Continent (reaching almost from one Pole to another) from his own name,
America: injuriously assumed, and unwisely followed by other Nations; who if
they had given every man his due, had more reason to have called it Madocya,
Nova Brittania, Colonia, or Columba (for to Noah's Dove he may be likened:) but
we see, by Epidemic assent the supercisious Spaniard has got the honor of it:
yea, thrives better than did Bathillus the Poetastor, who thought to have
defranded Virgil of his elaborate Poem; and some there be (yet those not
envious) that wish his reward agreeable: for, they are Furtivi colores
(Americus) you are clothed with. Magellan sails more Southerly than
Vespucius, in the year 1519 through that Fretum or Strait, with good reason
called Magellane. A hundred Others have since that labored in the like
harvest, and reaped several Epethites of honor, memorizing (and not
unworthily) their Names in fresh discoveries of Ports, hills, rivers, rocks,
etc. Only he that most of all deserved it, is diserted, left out, Madoc, who
sleeps in rest, more happy in his lasting quiet than the bubble of
vainglory. Howbeit, such as love his memory cannot pass by such living
monuments of his deservings (of which number I am one) in the Indyes, without
some small Essay of their affections: But I am neither able nor worthy to
speak in such a subject: and therefore wish a better Author, who in a better
method may revive him clearelier. In magnis, voluisse sat est. Let Us homewards
now, for we have too far wandered; tired in a double Travel; of scorching and
intemperate Zones, and of too great presumption in your patience.

Being off at Sea, the beginning of December we got sight of the Azores,
Flemmish or Western Islands, (by so many several names they are called by
several Nations:) but we got not thither without much struggling with adverse
winds, and some tempests. The Flemmings challenge them for theirs, and say, That
a Merchant of Bruges intending Anno 1449 to go for Lysbon, was by force of ill
weather driven upon these Islands; that they peopled, and named them. At this
day, they are commanded by a higher power, the Portugal: they are nine in
number, Tercaera, Saint Michael, Saint George, Saint Mary, Pyco, Fayall,
Graciosa, Flores, and Corvo, all of them included 'twixt 38 and 40 degrees:
Named Azores from the many Ayeries of Goshawks found there. Ortelius (in the
behalf of his own Country) wrests the name from Essorer to dry or wither: the
old one (known to ancient Cosmographers) was Vxiana: the Islands also have
their peculiar denominats; Tercaera, from a threefold partition: Fayall, from
Beach trees: Flores and Corvo, from Flowers and Crows: Pyco, from its
piramidall shape and height. The rest are named from Saints, such as the
Portuguize then thought on. Of these, Tercaera is the greatest, if not the
fruitfullest: it abounds with Oil, Wine, Corn, Oade, Fruits, etc. Her best
Town, is Angra; best Fort, Brazeil; her Haven, bad to anchor in. This I Will is
most famous for a defensive war the Prior Don Antonio, Titulary King of
Portugal, commenc't, and a good while held out against the insatiate Spaniard,
who finally got that and the rest of Don Antonio's Territories; by sword they
forced them, but claimed both by blood and Conquest; as Cunestagio in his Union
of the two Crowns Spain and Portugal, treats of. views of the Azores S.E.
Pyco E S E. Fayall E by N Gratiosa Flores E S E St George Loa: did


Pyco is highest, though not greatest; above five miles (some say) it mounts
into the air, and is so often invelloped with foggs and clouds, that but seldom
her head or peake can be discovered: it exceeds not ten miles circuit, is for
the most part composed of Sulphur; which many times conflagrates; for, within
are some concremated vast Caves, where the air inflames, and from thence
evaporate smoke and flame, and belch out Brimstone: below, are umbragious
shades, and chil-cold rivolets, into which when the vomited fire is forced,
those opposite elements echo forth their discontentments not in silent
murmurs: some of these Isles have tasted adverse fortune; yea, became prostrate
to the English bravery: such time as that valiant Earl of Essex (General and
Admiral of her late Majesty's Forces) to retaliate the Spaniard for his
intentions in 88, arrived here in the year of grace 1597, landed in their
despite, and did what pleased him; he also made Flores and Corvo to curse the
ambition of the Spaniard; Saint Michael also; and out of Villa Franca took
what was valuable; so much as amounted to four hundred thousand Ducats and
upwards: most of which, had eight year formerly yielded to the mercy of that
never to be forgotten Hero, George Earl of Cumberland: Fayall also in the
year after 88 enobled his good fortune and victory; and in the year 1597 was
sacked by Sir Walter Raleigh, whiles Pico became a prey to other Englishmen: ere
we lose sight of these Isles, remember we that the ancient account of the
first Meridian is transferd hither from the Canaryes or fortunate Islands; for,
'twixt Flores and Corvo the Needle feels no Variation, in all other parallels
increasing. From these Isles, by an East course we quickly entered the
Cantabrian Seas, where (when we thought all danger past) a violent storm
threatened us with no small danger, for thrice four and twenty hours
blustering with such rage that we could make no sail, but in despite of Helm
and Misen forced us upon Ushents point in Britany (a marittime part of France,
Armorica of old; but now (in memory of their descent from us) call themselves
Brittans, Brittanauts: ere long the storm abated, and in few watches we
attained sight of our long-lookt for Ithaca: the rather that these Relations
(the issue of youth and haste) might find acceptance from that most noble Lord
the Earl of Pembroke Lord Steward, etc. (now with God,) and my Lord of Powys;
from whose encouragements I affected Travel; whose memory I honor, and whose
love merits my acknowledgement. To conclude, wee-got safe to Plymouth; where
(not without great cause) we gave God thanks for our safeties.

Redituque sou singula gaeudent.
FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL, TABLE: WHEREIN THE NAMES of Men are distinguished by a
different CHARACTER.
A
ABbas, King of Persia, takes Candabor, fol. 81. his rigor at Spahawn 160.
Courtesy to the English Ambass. 171. His severe Justice 171 and 172 His cruelty
to his son, from 173 to 176. be conquers Larry-Ioon 187. and Sheervan 200.
His letter in favor of some English Gentlemen 205, described 206. depected
207. his Titles 208. paralleld with other Monarchs 209. his Revenue 225, 242.
domestique policy, etc 242, 24 K. Abdalla slain by the Portugal 315 Abdul
cawn an Indian Vmbrave enters Decan 76. expulst by stratagem ib is made
Viceroy of Kalpa and Khoor 77 destroys the Coolyes ib. serves Sultan Currown
in the wars of Decan 79. passes Bellagate ib. his son married to the great
Moguls grandchild 81. made General against the Persians ib. and Governor of
Goujurat 84. his Eumuch baffled 85. himself vanquesht by Saffy cawn 87. his
son imprisoned 88, he takes Ioonpore 90. dissension 'twixt him and Radje
Rhyem ib. he is beaten from Elabasa ib. and at Brampore 93 forsakes Currowne
96. is disgraced 103 restored to grace again 107 Abdulcheries Tragickend 202
Abdul-Fazel slains 71 Abubocr succeeds Maomet at Mecca 280. his young daughter
marries Maomet, and he Maomets daughter 252. dies poisoned 280. Accursed by
the late Persian reformation 269 Abulghar 55 Acheen in Sumatra 298.323 Aden
31.110 Ad'smer 60, 61 Aderbayan 56, 57, 192 Aelcama 286 Equator 9 Aethiopia 15
Agamiae 224 Agra 59. the Castle built ib. and 62 described 60.153 Ahasuerus
167, 271 Ahawaz 280 Aladules K. of Anti-Taurus slain 288 Alborrs 186 Albuquerq
108, 121, 114 Alcabam Mecca 135, 280 Alcanzar 266 Alexander the great 129, 181,
201, 216, 218, 220, 271 Alexandria 271 Aliavar 167 Amadavad 61, 62, 77 Amazons
11 Ambass of Persia poisons himself 35 Ambass of England lands in Persia 120
Ambass. of the great Mogul 104 Ambass. to the Persian 77 Ambass. of Chynainto
Persia 209 Ambass. England dies 204 Amber 332 Amboyna 321 Aminda 273 Amnadagar
67 69 79, 82 Amrobant 148 Amurath the grand Seignier invades Persia 200, is
forced thence ib. Anamogery 86 Ancira 277 Angels 264 Angola 910 Amewar 69
Annanas 298 Antipodes 6 Anti-Taurus 137.287 Auzar 57 Anzigui 11 Arabia 110.270
Arabique 111 Aragus flu. 117.180 Ararat 151.185 Araxis 147.177.180.222 Arbaces
270.196.224 Archan 280 Ardaveil 285.292 Arecca 298 Argaric Gulf 315 Aria 281
Armagun 311.313 Armenia whence named 151, how divided 152. their religion ib.
when converted 274 Aro 56 Aru 323 Artaxerxes 271.272.273 Arzan 184 Arzenion 285
Asaph 210 Ascension I Will 355 Asharaff 167.177 Assempore 86 Astiages 270.271
Assepose 148 Astra-can 179.180 Attack 98.100 Atlantiq' Ocean 2 Atlantiades 8.15
Atlas 2.4 Atlas Maurus 223 Atropa^^a 192 Augustus Caesar 271 Avicennaes
birthplace 184 Aurdenagar 76 Author's sickness 222 Aurea Chersonesus 314 333
Auva 319.320 Aydar 286 Aygar 55 Azemia 224 Azfacher 286 Azores Isles 463
B
BAb-mandel 31 Babur great Mogul 69 Babylon 216.224.271.273 Bacteria 192 Bacu
177 Badashan 58.65 Badur's Pilgrimage 58 Baezd 177 Bagdat 218. whence named
219.280.283 Balaam the Edemite 306 Balk 58.184.281.286 Balforac 110.113.290.
Banda 331 Band-Ally 124 Bander- Gumbrown 121 Banges 73.78 Bannians described
38. their religion from 41 to 47. opinion of the soul 122.46.303.304 Bannian
tree 122 Bannaras upon Ganges 89.90 Bannarow 131 Bannasoed 73 Bantam 324 Barag.
111 Barfrush-de 177.181 Barnagasso 30 Baroch 61.82.87.88 Barango 318 Baronta
210 Baruze 323.332 Bashra 280 Bassoweer 84.100 Battacala 299 Baetan 331 Batts
347 Baut 163 Baze-bacow 133.148 Bebey a Lady beats the Mogul 67. poisoned 70
Bedar 70 Behar 76 Bebat fl: 69 Begun 66 69 Belgian Mount 210 Bellaguate 55
Bellizarius 76.79.94 Belochus 274 Belshazzar 270 Bemermassin 193 Bengala 331
Benjamin 63.89.90, 94 99.312 Benomotapa 332 Berar 68. subjected 9 Berry
77.79.82.103 130 Berodach Baladan King of Assure 193 Beyramghano-cawn slain 59
Bezarr 331 E'ildith 177 Bimberry high mountains in Indostant 66.74 Bindamir fl.
134 Binny and Guinea 8 Bipilipatan 309 Biscay 2 Bisnagor 312 Bizabda 273
Bizanth 275.178 Bizdebode 215 Bobbaw-hodgee 132 Bochar 184 Bombyca 273
Bonavista 8 Bonay 101 Booby 11 Borneo 312.314.324.331 Bowbentalow 86 Boyall 148
Brachmans antiquity 40 Brama 316.319.320 Brampore 60.67.70.93.82 Brin-Iohn
299.305 Brodera 86.87.88.107 Buccary 90 Buckor 79 90 Buldat 215 Bullochy eldest
son to Prince Curseroo imprisoned 98. relieved 100. crowned Emperor of
Insdustant 105. murdered at Lahore 107 Bandama fl: 177
C
CAlajate 109 Calamba wood 297 Calderan plains 137.287 Caleture 311 Callamina
310 Callicut 299. described 302 Calpi 69 Campbaleck 56 Cambalu 337 Cambaya
59.61.82.103.108. Cambogiae 312.316.333 Cambyna 329 Cambyses 270 Camelion 23
Campson Gaurus 109 Canaria 3.4 Cananore 299 Candaces Eunuch 306 Candahor 81.
besieged 134. 224.290. Candu 306 Cangra taken 78 Canoo 29 Cantam 336 Can Assem
goes Ambass. from India to Persia 77. bravely entertained ib. Capessa 276 Cape
Comory 108.299.308 Cape of good Hope 12. to 19 Cape de Agvilbas 19 Cape falso
19.14 Cape Roma 21 Caepe Rozelgate 109.113 Cape Verd 8 Cape Palmas 8 Carraculia
152 Carcash 224 Carravans raw depicted 194 Cashan 213 Caspian Sea 180 Caspia
177 Caspian straits 165 Cassimeer conquered 65. described 66.89.78.90 Casson
177 Casta 313 Castle Island 25 Cathaya 337 Cattatingae 323 Caucasus 55.66.185.
Cazbyn 196 Celebes 329 Cesarca Queen of Persia baptiez'd 276 Chacoporo 177.181
Chandis 68.103 Chara 194 Chatighan 90 Chedorlaomar 217.233.269 Chery 69 Chersam
69 Chesel fl: 180 Chilmanor 144.146 Chiulpha 137 China 312.306. pride of their
Kings 209.299 Chiraef 143 Chirigin 324 Choul 34.67, 108.295.296.299. Christians
in Socotorae 31 in Persia 152 in India 304
Chrysoborca 65 Chytor 60.102 Constandel-cawns villainy 290.291 Cingis-cawn his
birth and fortunes 55.56 Cinnamon 308 Civit 332 Cloves 330 Co-Araxes 147
Coat Armor of Persia 230 Cuaspes fl. 222 Cocos 29.318 Colchis 152.167 Columbo
307 Columbus 361 Colume of headsin Spahawn 161 Commeshaw 148 Coome described
212, that it was Hecatompylon, rather than Spahawn. ibid. Conny I Will 12 Congo
352 Conio 330 Corasan 55, 58, 183, 184, 281. Carca fl. 177 Connack 177
Cormandell 65, 308, 312, 345 Corranda 215 Corbet and Corryn ibid Corea 333
Coriats error 132. his grave 35 Corvo 364 Costack 113 Cosumbay 87 Cotton 325
Coughton 132 Cawrestan 125.280 Cowlam 299.303 Cozrhoe King of Persia 192. his
Titles 208 Cozrhoes a Tyrant of Persia breaks faith with the Christians 274.
ravishes a Christian Lady, and the Nymphs of Daphne ib, spoils Armenia ib. is
vanquished by the Christians 275. Cozrhoes King of Persia, a parricide flies to
Bizanth 275. is reseated by means of the Chr. Emp. 276. he and his Court are
baptized ib. he apostatises ib. takes the Cross from Jerusalem 277 is beaten
by the Romans Emp. who burns his Idols ib. his 3 Armies are confounded 278. he
dies desperately 279 Crassus vanquished by the Parthians 211 Cranganor 299
Crater 333 Crocodile 323 Ctesiphon 275.279 Cuface 111 Cumber 331 Cuncam 56.290
Curiate 111 Curroon (youngest son to Sha- Selim late great Mogul) to make his
Nephews incapable of the Crown makes them be christened 75. he changes his
name 79. is made General against the Decans ib. subjects Berar and Chandis 79.
rec. Tribute from the King of Galcunda ib. his ambitious desigues 80. rebels
81. endeavors to rob his Fathers Exchequer, but is frustrated ib. fights with
his fathers Army at Delly ib. is vanquished by Mahobet-cawn 83. flies to Mew at
84. by Assaph. cawns means is pardoned, but rebels again ib. is beat by his
brother Sultan Perwees at Mando, and flies into Decan 88. be forrages Bengala,
Purop, and beyond Ganges 89. escapes a great danger 90. he takes Rantas and
Tzinner ib. is wounded and his army put to flight 91. flies to Potan 92. to
Gulcunda 93. to Decan ib. besieges Brampore 93 flies into Decan 94. hearing
that his father was imprisoned he marches to Asmeer and is banished Agra 99.
expulst Tutta ib. again flies into Decan 102. receives joyfully Mahobet-cawn
105. under whose conduct he speeds to Agray and challenges the Crown 106 by
foul murder obtaines it and alters his Name to Sultan-Sha- Bedin Maomet, etc.
ib. Ambass. salute him ib. plague, famine, and rebellion pursue him 108. his
corronation celebrated by the English at Surat. 108 Curricurre depicted 314
Curseroon or Gushroo son to the great Mogul aims at the Crown 72. is
pardoned but flies away ib. is beaten 73. flies to Labor ib. taken and
imprisoned 74. his miseries 73. looked to by Assaph-cawn and cawn- lehan 78.
murdered 80. much lamented ib. Cuscuzar 148 Cusistan 56.290 Cut-bobbau 132.133
Cyrapolis Cyrus King of Persia 134.270 Cyrus fl: 177.180
D
DAbul 34.67.295.299 Dabys 335 Daeck 77 Damky 35 Damarcana 111 Damiadee fl. 69
D^moan 183. described 192 D^mon 34 67.295 Danda-Radjeporee 108.299 Darghan 286
Darius Medus 193 Darius Nothus and Codomanus 271 Daultabat 76. 88. 93 Dayta 106
Deacow 129.133 Decan 55, 67, 68.70, 299 Decans vanquished by the Mogul 67.
beaten again 76. they recover their losses 93. and beat the Moguls Lescar 103
Debaca 89 Degardoo 133, 148 Delly 58, 60, 68, 99. Delphius 24 Demyr Cape 179
De-Moxalbeg 148 Derbent 177, 196, described 201 Deylan 192 D'hast 55 Dia and
Daru 323 Diarbec 56, 208, 224, 287, 290 Digarroys 23, 341, 343 Dilemon 281
Dilementhes 288 Diu 108 Diul 82 Doab 59 Dodo's 347 Dover 2 Drake 8 Duradura 318
Duroyen 298 Duz-gun 125
E
EAst India 34 Ecbarr, crowned great Mogul 59. conquers Doab ib. goes on a
Rummery or Pilgrimage to Asmeer 61. Subjects Bengala, Kantam-pore, and Patan
63. diverse Kings do him homage 65. he conquers Casmeer 66. and Hassarr 69.
pardons the insolence of his son Sha- Selym 70. afflicted with the death of
his two sons Amurath and Dhaen-sha 67 71. buries his mother 71. beats his
rebellious son 72. unhappily poisoned ib. Ecclissar 102 Ecmeazin 152 Edissa
276 Ehberam in Armenia 262 Elabass built 65.89. besieged 90. Elam 223
Elcandifia 280 Elephant 322 Elmedin in Caldea 262 Elsheer sack by Ben
Abi-Vakez 280 Eltarch 111 Emangoly-cawn Archduke of Shyraz triumphs over Ormus
115. and Lar 126. his Titles 136. Acts 137 pride ib. he feasts the English
Ambassador 139. his revenue ib. visits the Ambass. 140. is beheaded 206
Emir-Hamze-Mirza, son to King Maomet Codabanda, vanquishes both Turks and
Tartars 201. enters Casbyn in triumph ib. his valor and many victories 289 is
poisoned 290 English Ambassador lands in Persia 120. entertained by the Sultan
of Gumbroon 121. feasted at Shyraz 138. gallantly welcomed at Spahawn 150. he
visits the Prince of Armenia 151, has his audience at the Caspian Sea 168.
injured by Maomet Ally-begg 202. discontented ib. at Cazbyn dies, and is
solemnly buried 204 Englands Forest 343.351 Eneon and Edwall sons of Owen
Gwyned, sail with Madoc their brother into Mexico 356 Erez 177 289 Earls of
Cumberland 5, 364 Of Pembroke 364 Of Essex ibid Escar-Mecron 280 Estacher 148
Etamon Dowlet accused by his slave, and disgraced 74 by his daughters high
advancement he is pardoned: restored 75. and buried 80 Etnizaria 224 Euphrates
fl. 56.217.218.221.222.278.282
F
FAlcata 333.335 Farghan 184.286 Farrabaut 177.178 Fatima's Sepulcher 212
Fayall 363 Faza 134 Fettipore 60.62.73.90 Ferro 3 Firando 333 Fitz-Herbert 16
Florida 355 Flores 364 Flying fishes 32 Flemmish Isles 363 Forte-Ventura 5
French K. Charles the great sends Ambassadors into Persia 283 Frons Africae 8
Funerals of the Canarians. 4 Of the Anzigui 11 Of the Soldaniaes 17 Of the
Bannians 45 Of the Persees 53 Of the Gowers 162 Of the Persians 237 Of the
Indians 309 Of the Kormandelians 313 Of the Iapans 335 Of the Chyneses 339
G
GAcheen 125 Gambra, not Ophyr 314 Gandetzin in Decan 70 Ganganna an Indian
Vmbraw sides with Sultan Curroon 84. his deceit deceives him 88. is imprisoned
90. he and his family are put in chains and sent to Agra 91. sorrows the
death of his children 92. exasperates the great Mogul against Mahobet-cawn 95.
is made General of the Queens Army 101. dies and is buried 103 Ganges fl:
59.60.99.222.229.309.316 Gardon-Achow 148 Gassany in Tartary 89 Gazacot 277
Gaznehen 56, 57, 58, 281, 184, 284, 286 Gentfro. 76 Georgian man and woman 151
Georgian Tragedy contracted 290 by stratagem revenge themselves upon the
Persians 291 Ghabor 129 Ghanotts and Ghastanpore 69 Gheer 167 Ghelac 184.192
Ghezz 165 Ghezzimeer 104 Ghillolo 330 Ghylan 192.286.290 Giach a fruit 297 Goa
33.67.299.303 Goga 82 Gomera 3 Gorgades 355 Goujurat 61.90 Gouro 90 Gowers in
Parthia 162.186 Goyeome 131 Gozan 129 Gratiosa 363 Greecy 324 Guadez 224 Guiana
355 Gulcuzda 67.68.70.79.89.93.299.312 Gulf of Arabia 31 Of Bengala 309 Of
Argarica 315 Of Persia 110
Gumbazalello 148, 212 Gumbrown in Persia 120, 121 Gundavee 34, 295 Gunet of
descent from Mortis Ally 284, by Tamberlains respect to him, dares broach his
roformation 268, be marries the K. of Armeniaes daughter 285, conquers
Tripizond, and is murdered ibid Gurgee 152
H
HAbyn fl. 180 Haloen 152 Halvary 166 Hamadan 56, 197 Hambyer 84 Hanimant, the
Apes-tooth-god, burnt 307 Hansot 87 Harran 192 Hassar taken 69, 94 Heaven and
Hell in the Alcoran 263, 265 Hecatompylon, not Spahawn but Coom 154, 212 Hegira
253 Hemoometzar 215 Heraclius the Romans Emp. prosecutes the wars of Persia
276, he vanquishes Cosrhoes and burns his Idols 277, his great courage 278.
reduces the holy Cross to Jerusalem 279, dies, and is succeeded by Constantine
281 Herbert's Mount 14 Hery 184 Hesperidae 8 Hiblin slain 283 Hiero 3
Hieropolis 276 Hispaniola, not Ophyr 314 History of the Mogulls 54 Of the
Persians 269 Hodge-Nazar the Armenian Prince 150 Homayon the great Mogull his
sudden death 59 Hony-shaw 136 Hormisda King of Persia rages against the
Christians, who beat his army 275 disgraces Baramis his General, but looses by
it, ib. in a vision a sees 12 Turrets, and in them the overture of Persia 279
Hydero fl: 177 Hyerac 56.286 Hyrcania whence named 177. habit of the
inhabitants 178
I
IAarown 129.280 Iackatra 324.325 Iackalls 14.124 Iacup, Vsan Cassans son,
envies his brother in laws good fortune 285. gets him murdered and his children
285 one of them miraculously is saved, who kills Iacup in his fathers revenge
ib. Iamahoy 316 Iambee 323.324 Iambulus 323 Iamshet 146 Iangheer rebels
against his father Ecbar 69. is pardoned 70 breaks out again 71. and is
again pardoned ib. crowned great Mogul ib. in danger of conspirators 74.
suffers his grandsonnes to be baptized at Agra 75. marries fair Noor-mahal
ib. curses his son Perwees for losing the conquest of Decan 77. sends
Mahobet-cawn thither, and an Ambass: to Abbas K. of Persia ib. laments the
death of his eldest son Curseroo 80. comforts his sad widow, and entailes the
Crown upon Bullochy his son ib. loses Candahor 81. rejoices at his victory
over his youngest son Curroon 84. captivated by Mahobet-cawn 98. escapes 100.
much troubled at his son Perwees his death 102. receives a famous Tartar
Ambass: 104 dies 105. and is royally buried ib. Iangomar 319 Iapan 312.333
Iaparra 324 Iasques 113.114 Iathryb 110 Iava 312.324.325 Iazirey 290 Idolatry
of the Africans 9.17 Of the Angolases 10 Of the Madagascars 22 Of the Mohelians
28 Of the Banuyans 40 Of the Indians 88 Of the Persees. 48.52 Of the Mallubarrs
302 Of the Gowers 162.186 Of the Persians 251 Of the Cormandelians 309.310 Of
the Zoylonians 306 Of the Siamites 317 Of the Iaponians 333 Of the Narsingans
313 Of the Iavans 325 Of the Chyneses 341
Iehun fl: 180 Ieloor 64 Ielphi 150.151.161 Iengapore 106 Iemina-Bahrim 110
Iemini fl. 59.60.61.71 Jerusalem 211.270.274.277.279 Ilment fl: 180 Imaus 185
Imbum 110 Indus fl: 66.109.222.224 Ioanna 25 Ioonbasser 82.88 Ioonpore 60.61.90
Iortan 324 Irack 280.224 Judgment in the Alcoran 265 Jupiter Babylonicus 193
Jupiter Belus 217 Julian the Apostats death in Persia 273 Izmael-Sophy his
birth and pedigree 284. revenges his fathers death 285 flies into Arzenion ib.
returns and is crowned Persian King 286. mortally hates Turks and Jews 286.
vexes the Tartars ib. chases the Turks 287. recovers Bagdat ib. dies 289. and
is succeeded by Tahamas his son ib,
K
KAblai-cawn 56 Kablan 319 Kaboncara 177 Kabul 58.78.83 Kalpi and Khoor
77.79.90 Kalsistan 224 Kanchri 86 Kandahor 66.224.290 Kapper bemizz 85 Karizath
177 Katighan 90.99 Kavilan 319 Kavise 86 Kazz 184 Kazeron 148 Keldhan 224
Kennaugh 286 Kerman 56.286.290 Kerchy 76.77.94 Kerry 86 Kholeat-pherusky 286
Ketoa-Kotan 55.56 Khoemus 58 King James and King Charles Mounts 16 Kings of
Industant 55 Of Ormus 115 Of Lar 126 Of Shyraz 141 Of Persia 269
Kishmy Castle 113.114 Korasan 56.184.281 Kostac in Moghestan 113.114 Kufe, why
so named 280. the burial place of Mortis-Ally ib. and where the Persian Kings
are crowned ib. and 282
L
LAbatacca 331 Lackary 215 Lacknoon 60.69 Lael-Cooly slain 76 Lael-Sod 84
Lahore 68 La Gomera 3 Lampon 323 Lancerota 3 Lantore 331 Language of the
Savages at the Cape of Good Hope 18 Of the Mohelians 27 Of the Arabians 111 Of
the Persians 245 Of the Malayans 326
La Palma 3 Larr 126.127.128.129.280.290 Larack 113.114.115 Larry-Ioon
165.178.183 Latyr fl. 74 Lawran 319 Lazarrs 274 Laztan-de 125 Leventhibeg
Tribute 242 Lignum Alloes 332 Loore-Bander 108 Lopez, Gonzaloo 8 Luconia 333
M
MAcassar 329 Machan 330 Machma 333 Macron 113.224.286 Madagascar 20, 21, 22,
23 Madaera 3 Madoc ap Owen Gwineth discovers America 355 Magadoxa 23.30.332
Magellan 362 Magi 134 213 Mahobet-cawn is made keeper to Prince Gushroo eldest
son to the Mogul 74. fights with Ranna Radgee 75. is called home ib. goes
General into Decan 77. returns with victory, and is made Governor of
Brampore ib. of Cabul and Banges 78. he defeats Sultan Curroons Army at Delly
83. and at Mando 88. he relieves Elabass and imprisons can. Canna 90.
vanquishes Currown 91. pursues him to Patan 92. in discontent leaves the Army
and goes to Rantampore 95 grieved by Normall the Empress 96 his son in law is
basely abused by Normall ib. the Lescar 97. takes the Mogul and Normahal
prisoners 98. affrights Currown 99. receives great sums from his son, out of
Bengalae ib. sorrows the death of Prince Perwees 102. is persecuted by the
Empress 104. flies to Ranna Radjee ib. is persuaded to serve Currown 105. who
receives him joyfully ib. he marches with Currown to Agra 107 and at his
Coronation is advanced ib. Mahomet-Ally-begs Justice at Cazbyn 198. his
discourse touching Sir Robert Sherley 22. his barbarism to the Lady 204. his
original 206. his great estate and power ibid. Mahomet Codobanda King of
Persia in danger to have bin slain 289. flies into Georgia ib. returns 199.
is crowned King ib. commands his sister to be beheaded 200. the miserable end
of his children 289 Mahomet his birth and breeding 251. serves Heraclius the
Romans Emp. ib. and 278. compiles his Alcoran 252. marries diverse women ib. is
expulst Mecca 253. dies, and at Medina is buried ib. his law 254. his Sectar as
267 Malacca 298.312.314.315.324 Maldivae 306 Mallabar 299 300 Mallabars drowned
299 Malva 55 Manancabo 323 Mandoa 77 82.86 Mandow 82.215 Mangolore 296.299
Mangerelpore 82 Manicongo 9.209 Mannatee 26 Map of Madagascar 21 Of the Persian
Empire 149 Of Hircania 180 Of India intra Gangem 300 Of India extra Gangem 321
Of the Manritius 342
Maqueron 280.290 Mardash 147 Marrah 323 Martavan 320.322 Martiropolis 276
Mascarenas 351 Mattacala 307 Mattaran 324 Maurenahor 55.58.184.224.281.286
Maurenahar King slain 286 Mauritius 342 Mavi Lord of Damascus persecutes Ally
281. over-runnes Egypt and the Rhodes 281. beaten by Ally sends Susindus
against the Christians 282. massacres 11. of Ally's grandsons, and dies of the
plague ib. Mayo 8 Mazaeras fl: 177.180.69 Meacco 333.335 Mecca
110.253.259.262.267.280 Mecpore 69 Media 192 Medapore 82.88.92 Medina Talnabi
110.253.262.267.280 Melec- Amber crowned K. of Decan 67. he fights with the
Mogulls Army ib. expells them by craft 76. by force 93. receives Curroon ib.
gives his men liberty 99 Melec- Bahamans Tragic end 187 Meliapore 309.310
Meliotalck 319 Mengrellia 153.274 Meragah 56 Merent 56 Mesopotamia 222.270
Mesulipatan 89.311.312 Methridates 271 Mewat 84 Meyottey 25 Mexico 359 Midan in
Spahawn 157 Mindano 333 Miscarroon 215 Mocrib-cawn drowned 103 Mogulls pedigree
55. Empire 54. coigne 38. revenue ib. Moffa 118 Mohack 132 Moghestan 113
Mohelia 26 Molthan 90 Moluccoes 312.330.331 Mombassa 30.332 Momodabat 86
Monomotapa 9 Months how severally named 112 Montingue 299 Monym 318 Mouzoon 9
Mortis-Ally marries Fatyma 212. is by Mahomet nominated Calyph 251. put by by
Abubocr 280. persecuted by Omar ib. saluted K. 281. slain by Mavi ib. buried
282. his Emblem ib. Siet Gunet revives him 268. the Kings of Persia at this day
from him descended 265 Mosquet-Ally 111 Mosquet-Zulzimen 148 Mount Taurus
183.185 Mount Taurus conquered 187 Moyechaw 132 Moyeore 149 Moyeown 147
Mozambique 23.24.332 Mozendram 56.177.224.290 Municpore 90 Multhan 90 Muscat
109 Musk-cat 322 Musk 332
N
NAbandycen 148 Nabuchadnezzar 193.217 Nagor 107 Naysarie 82 Nahodabegs rare
bracelet 318 Nancery 52 Nantam 336 Narsinga 299.309.311.312 Narsinga-patan 309
Narvar fl: 87 Nassor Thormet 88.102 Natave 215 Nayro 301 Nazareil 215 Nazivan
56 Necanpore 106 Negapatan 309 Nekaw 167 Nerebede fl: 69 Nero-roade 331 Nicubar
306 Nogomallo 318 Normahalls first husband slain 74. secondly married to the
greas Mogul 75. her hate to Mahobet-cawns son 94. to Mahobet-cawn ib.
imprisoned by Mahobet 98, released ib. fights with Mahobet-cawn 99, scoulds at
Assaph-cawn 101, intercepts Mahobets treasure ib. labors to disgrace his son
103, affrighted at Mahobets journey to Currowne 105, sorrows her husbands
death ib. labors to make her son King 106, vanquished by Sultan Bullochy, and
pordonod ib. her son slain 107, she and her daughter imprisoned by Sultan
Currown ibid. Nossaseres 329 Nova 191 Nowbengan 148 Nutmegs 33 Nycaphtac 184
Nylus fl. 4, 222 Nimrod 134, 193, 216, 269, 270 Nynus 193, 217 Nyriaed 86
Nyshapore 184 Nyzabur 281
O
OB-crawn fl. 69 Obsell fl. 177, 180 Ob-ygarmy 164 Ocem 285 Ocen-beg Gelohy
slain 286 Odjea 92, 361 Ogg 55 Ogorlu 283 Ogtai-cawn 56 O-jone 147 Olympus 4
Omoall 177, 182 Omar or Homer succeeds Abubocr at Mecca 280, he persecutes
Ally, and is slain by treason ib. is accursed by the late Persian reformation
269 Onnepore 82 Onor 299 Ophyr 306, 314 Orders of Mahomitans 267 Orcan 287
Orenges 297 Orfaza 109 Oringaw 333 Orixae 64, 65, 89, 90, 96 Ormus how called
113, when first planted 114, her Kings 115, ruined by the English and Persians
116, 118 Osacca 333 Osman succeeds Homer at Meccae 280, subdues diverse parts of
Africa 281, regulates the Alcoran, and is poisoned ib. accursed by the Persians
289 Osman Bassa vanquished 289 Oudepore 75, 77, 82 Ourmanghel 125 Oxus fl. 180,
184, 270, 286 Ouzbeg Tartar 65, 89, 184, 286
P
PAcem 323 Paddar fl. 69 Palamban 324 Pantado birds 19 Paquin 336, 337
Paradise, the several conjectures about it 221, where placed 222, what the
Persians think of it 266 Parthia 149, 164 Pasagard 270 Patania 315 Patan 65
Pathan 63, 90, 99 Pathang 59, 63, 79, 82 Pedyr 323 Pegu 312, 314, 316, 318, 322
Pengab 55, 69 Pengran of Bantam 324 Penguin 13 Pepper 325 Peria-Conconna
Princess of Persia, her masculin spirit 198, makes Aydar her younger brother
King 199, by her eldest brothers command she is slain 199 Periaw 87 Periscow
166, 177 Perissophoon 210 Persees in India 48, their Idolatry 49 Persia, her
several names 223, subjected by the Assyrians and Medes 270, by the Greeks
271, recovers freedom 272, conquered by the Arabians 280, by the Turks and
Tartars 284, and by the Armenians ib. gets her liberty again 285, and at this
day is victorious 290 Persians depicted 123, 162, 207, 229. described 226,
their habit 227 Arms 228, Coat Armor 230, sup^rstition and forces 233,
exercises ib. Mathematics 234, disposition 235, circumsicion 236, marriages
237, burialls 238, reverence to their Kings 208, 239, Diet ib. 242, revenue of
the Crown ib. myneralls 243, language 245, Religion 251, Monarchs 269,
Idolatry of old 277 Persepolis described 143, ruins depicted 145, 272. Persian
Ambass. poisons himself 35 Persian Court 169 Peru, not Ophyr 314 Perwees son
to the great Mogul, has victory over his brother Currowns army 83. and at
Mando chases him 88. arrives at Elabasse 90. relieves Brampore 93. fights with
Currown 91. wounded, but victorious ibid. falls out with Mahobet-cawn 95. dies
at Brampore 102. lamented by Mahobet and Iangheer ibid. Pesepoly 311 Phasis fl.
167 Pheruzabat 148 Phillippinae Isles 312, 333 Piramall 306 Pilae Caspianae vel
Semeramidis 167 Persides vel Susianae 129 Cancasiae vel Iberiae 201
Plantains 28 Policat 311.313 Poligundy 323 Polisanga fl. 337 Porto Santo 3
Pourmandell 75.77 Prage 65.96 Prester John 30.209. Priaman 323.332 Primero 23,
24 Puloveen and Pulway 331 Pully-Potshaw 132 Purop 65.89 Pyco 363 Pyree of the
Persians 52.186. burnt by Heraclius 277.278 Pyson 222
Q
QVabutimo 360 Quiloa 23 Quinzay 336, 337 Queen of Persia baptized 276 Queen
Nannangalla 28
R
RAbayon 56 Racan or Arrachan 320 Radgee Cottz 74 Radgee Mahal 74.89.92. Radjee
Rana Mardout loses Chyttor 60, submits to Iangheer 77. dies grieved ibid.
Radjee Ranna 102 Radjepore 88.106.107 Rantas 90.74.92 Rantipore 63.96.101.102
Rassanweer 96 Rastack 280 Ravee fl. 67, 69.73 Rea-Sea 31 Rehen 69 Reigue
163.215 Religion of the Socotorans 31 Of the Armenians 152 Of the Christians in
India 304.305
Rha fl. 180 Rhazunda 193 Rhyadago fl. 180 Rhogomana 147 Rhos's 55 Rhumestan
286 Rhyphaean hills 20 Rhyvan 152 Rotas 63 64 Ruc 20 Ru-Friero 117 Rustan 146.
his Tomb 159
S
SAbber-cawn 215 Sabuz 280 Sablestan 224 Saint Azmulli 268.283 Saint George
148.151 Saint Hellena 353 Saint John de Vacas 34.295 Saint Maria 363 Saint
Michael ibid Saint Thoma 31.205.310.318 Sacalkand 286 Sal 8 Salamo 331 Sally 2
Salamander 23 Salmanassar K. of Assure 129.152.184 Salt and sandy Deserts 164
Samarcand 58.184 Samoreen 302.308 Sanball 59.60 Sancazan 289 Sangurrabaut 196
Sapores triumphs over the Roman Emp. 272. rages against the Christians 273
Sarracens conquer Persia 280. and Spain 282. in France 200000 are slain ib.
Sarcash 184 Sardahan 163 Sardanapalus 270 Sarlochia 152 Savages at the Cape of
good Hope described 17.18.19 Saughtar 99 Saway 210 Saxons issued from Persia
244 Scorpions 213 Scyths depicted 185.270 Seleuchus 271 Semiramys
165.193.217.220 Seonargant 99 Serebaya 324 Sergiropolis 274 Serran 320 Sharck 7
Shawmet 56 Sha-Saffee in danger to be slain by his Father 176. crowned K. of
Persia 292 Shervan 192.197 200.224.286.290 Shicoca and Shima 333 Shushan 220
Shyraz 133 Siam 314.316.319. Siavend 75 Sianpere 69 Sierra-Leon 8 Siet Ghunet
269.285 Sigamus slain 311 Sigestan 224 Sighelmus an English Bishop goes
Pilgrim to Saint Thomas his Tomb in India, and returns safely 311 Sinca-pura
315 Sinde fl. 69 Sindery fl. 155 Singara 273 Sir Dodmore Cottons death 204 Sir
Robert Sherley dies 113.120.148.202.203 Sirhenakar 66 Siss'meer 75 Soar 109
Socodania 331 Socotora 30.306 Soffala 23.30.332. not Ophyr 314 Sogdian 66.184
Soldania bay in Aethyopia 13 Solomon 144..146.148.306.323 Sondiva 99 Soor 71
Sophy whence derived 286 Spahawn described from 153 to 163. its antiquity 154.
greatness 155. circuit ib. Marketplace 157. walls 158. pleasures 159.
Aquae-duct 160. misfortunes 170. Suburbs 162.283 Spahawnet 150 Spoots of rain
9 Stork 135 Straits of Sunder 323 Stygias 224 Suffedow 164 Suhan fl. 320
Sultania 192 Sultan Sheriar made Viceroy of Goujuraet 75. heerescues his
Nephews 100. at Lahore expect Normall 101. baffled there 106. is made blind
ibid. and slain 107 Sumacan 291 Sumachy 177.200 Sumatra 312.314.322 Sumbrero
306 Sunda-Calapa 324 Surat 35.36.60 Suznuga 333 Swally road 35.295.299 Syacow
164 Sybella Persica 134 Sycamest 184.286 Sys 152
T
TAbb fl. 128.134 Taproban 306.322 Tabriz 194.289.290 Tabriztan 192 Tahamas
Shaw K. of Persia, his 'twelve sons 198 Tallapoy 316 Tama-Cozrhoe 275 Tamas,
King of Persia bis birth 288. he repells the Turks and Tartarrs out of Persia
ib. dies 289. and is succeeded by Maomet ibid. Tamberlains Conquests and
burial 57. his modesty 59.210.212 Tanda 90 Tanghe-Dolon 125 Tanghu 320 Tangram
319 Tangrolipix aids the Persian 283. subjects that Country 155.213.284 Tappee
fl. 70.87 Tarnasseri 311 Tartangh 147 Tattarrs pride 209. Prince slain
represented 201.185 Tauris 194 Taurus 183 Tawgebaus 163 Temerisk K. of Georgia
his Troubles 291 Tenchedai 333 Teneriffa 3.4 Tenze 333 Tephlis 201.289.290
Tercera 363 Teresia Lady Sherleys adversity and courage in Media 203.204
Ternate and Tidore 330.331 Tesel 102 Thalan 184 Thalican 281 Theobatman 277
Thermopilae 271 Thezican 192 Thonec 91 Thymar 148 Tico 323 Ticoa 323 Ticobassa
331 Tidore 330 Tiglath Pilezar 191.129 Tigranocerta 210 Timore 330 Tiroan 193
Tochares 184.281.286 Tocharistan ibid. Toady 29 Togrulbeg 284 Toman 225 Tom
Coriat 308. his grave 35 Tornathos 7 Torpedo 349 Tortoyses 25 Travanzor 303
Triglipton 318.322 Tropic of Cancer 5.110 Tropic Of Capricorn 11 T'satsa 60
T'seray 86 T'sogd 286 T'senob 74 T'sinner 90 Tuban 324 Turq's son strangled
at Casbyn 288 Turq'stan 184.281.286 Tutta 67.99.102 Tuttan-Cory 299 Tuzz 286
Tygris fl. 56.219.222 T'zecandor 62.72 T'zicary 61.73
V
VAaspracan 162.224 Vaeldac 134.220 Valerian the Roman Emperor used by the
Persian King (...) Van 2^ Vararanes 2^ 273 Vastat in Egypt 62 Versably 285
Vespusius 362 Visiapore 67.68.70.79 Vlacuck-cawn 56 Vlai fl. 134.221 Vlembegs
treason against the Persian 288 Vloches 130 Vnghee 132 Vlogheses 272
Vologocerta 210 Vosuquis 333 Vsan Cassan the Armenian King conquers Persia 284.
his daughter married to a Persian Saint 285 Vshent in Brittany 364 Vstref-Oglan
287 Vvaceek 283
W
WAfitt upon Diglatt fl. 86.280 Welsh 2.13.25.341.360.363 White-Sea 30 Whomg'
163 Whoomghesh 148 Whormoot 125.133 Wight 2 Wihi fl. 69.109 Wives that burn
themselves at their husbands Funerals 309.310 Wine affected by the Persians
242
X
XAbur-Xabulchetaph 272 Xenophon 173 Xerxes invades Grecia 270. is overthrown
at Salamys and Thermopilae 271.181
Y
YEzd 53 Yezde-Kawz 148 Yezd-ghyrd 113.148.272.273.279 Yhezyd 282 Yowmachama
113 Yssuff 284
Z
^oc-cawn 63 Zaed-can, Maobet-can's son is made General against the Tartars
89. Viceroy of Kabul and Bengala 94. his men slain treacherously 101. deposed
from his government, and derided by Normall 104. who falls in love with him ib.
restored to favor 107 Zagathay 270 Zagrian Straits 167 Zanitzon 337 Zama 110
Zamaen 60.74 Zanzibar 30 Zarama 182 Zatus King of the Lazarrs 274 Zayre lacus
222 Zel-Ally 66 Zenal-cawn's discourtesie 193 Zenyth 5.296 Zenzen 213 Zerhind
73 Zertooft 48.162.186.270 Zeyloon 306.312 Ziagrum 108 Zialor 102 Zidim 110
Zieth 110 Ziet Borka 104 Zioberis fl. 180 Zoack 269 Zopirus 291 Zulcaderlu 285
Zulzimyn 282 Zipangri 333 Zyrmol 102.104
FINIS.

