A brefe and a plain declaratyon of the dewty of married folks, gathered out
of the holy scriptures, and set forth in the almayne tongue by Hermon Arcbyshop
of Colayne, which wylled all the housholdes of his flock to have the same in
their bedchambers as a mirror or glass daily to lokein, whereby they might know
and do their duties each unto others, and led a godly, quiet and loving life
togethers, and newly translated into ye English tongue by Hans Dekyn.

Jacob. i.

Se that ye be the doors of the word and not hearers, only disceyuing your
selfs.

Colloss. iij.

Above all things put on love which is the band of perfectnes.

FOr as much as the devil is most redye to make strife where there ought to
be most love: and has with heddy will fulness, concupiscence, and ignorance so
blinded the hearts of those which live under the iocke of matrimonye, that as I
may judge by their fruits there be very few that led their lives therein
according to the laws of Christ. Therefore (my dear and well-beloved Christians
which profes the Gospel) to the intent that you should live therein according
to your professyon and knowledge, I have here brefely and plainly set forth
what it is, and how you ought to lead your lives therein according to the
rules of the holy scryptures, so that your pure and godly life may be a good
example and also make such asshamed as would sclander the holy Gospel, and
professars of the same, ye and that there wunted word (which is mark these
new men by their living) may sound to Gods glory, to the honor of his
most holy word and praise of al them in Christ which do profes the same.

You shall first understand What wedlok is.
that wedlock is an hye and blessed order ordained of God in Paradyse which
has ever been had in great honor and reverence wherein one man and one woman
are coupled and knyt together in one flesh and body in the fear and love of
GOD, by the free, loving, hartye, and good consent of them both, to the
intent that they two may dwell together, as one flesh and body of one will
and mind in all Godlynes, most louyngly to help and comfort one another, to
bring forth children, and to instruct them in the laws of GOD. Also to a
void fornicacyon and all uncleanness, and so in all onestye virtue and Godlynes
to spend their lives in the equal partakynge of all such things as God
shall send them with thanks geuynge.

And because that the wife is in subiectyon to her husband. I will begin
with her and shortelye declare what duty and obedyens she owes unto him by
the commandments of the scriptures.

Saint Paul says, ye wives submyt your own husbands Ephe. 5. The duetye of
ye wife to her huseband.
as to the Lord, for the husband is the wives head as Christ is the head
of the congregation, Therefore as the congregatyon is in subiectyon unto
Christ likewise let wives be in subiectyon to their husbands in all things
so that the wife must be obedyent unto her husband as unto Christ himself,
wheroute it follows that the said obedyens extends not unto any wyckednes
or evil, but unto that which is good, oneste, and comely. In as much as God
delyteth only in goodness and forbyddeth evil every where, it follows also
that the disobediens that a wife shows to her husband dysplayseth God noles,
then when he is dysobeyed himself. For the wife ought to obey her husband in
all points as the congregation to Christ which loves Christ only, and
above all things, she is glad and willing to suffer for Christ's sake, she
does all for the love of him Christ only is her comfort joy and all
togethers, upon Christ is her thought day and night, she longs only after
Christ, for Christ's sake (if it may serve to his glory) she is hartelye well
contented to dye ye she gives over her self hole thereto for Christ's love,
knowing assuredlye that her soul, her honor, body, life, and all that she
has is Christ's own. Thus also must every oneste wife submyt her self, to
playse her husband with all her power and give her self fre lie and willing
to love him and obey him, and never too forsake him till the hour of death.

And forther (says says 3
Peter) Let the wives be in subiectyon to their husbands that even they which
believe not the word may without the word be won by the conuersacyon of the
wives, while they behold your pure conuersacyon couplyd with fear, whose
aparell shall not be outward with brodryd hear and hanging on of gold either
in puttyng on of gorgius apparel, but let the hydman of the heart be
incorrupt with a meke and quiet sprete, which sprete is before God much set
by, for after this manner in the old time did the holy women which trusted in
God tire themselfes, and were obedyente to their husbands, even as Sara obeyed
Abraham: and called him her Lord, whose daughters ye are as long as ye do well.

And Paul unto Tytus speak ^
(says he) that the elder women be in such apparel as becomes holiness, Not
being false accusars, not given to much wine, but that they teach onest
things to make the yo^g weme^ sober minded, to love their husbands, to love
their children, to be discrete, chaste, husewyfelye, good, obedyent unto their
husbands that ye word of GOD be not evil spoken of.

Here may you learn that What a wife ought to be.
a wife ought to be dyscrete, chaste, huswyfelye, shamefaste, good, meke,
pacyent and sober, not light in countynans nor garyshe in apparall, with dyed
or curlyd hear painted nor pasted, but with a comelye grauytye and a sad
behauoure of a constante mind, true tonged and of few words, with such
obedyens in all Godlynes too her husband and head, as it be semes a Christian
to have unto Christ, and to the intent that the husband in like cause may
learn his duty let him harken what Saint Paul says, and take heed that he
turn not his auctorite to tyranny.

Husbands love your wives Ephe. 5. The duty of the husebande to his wife
(says he) as Christ loved the congregation and gave him self for to
sanctifye it, now must you understand that the husebande is the wives head:
as Christ is the head of the congregacyon, and Christ shows to the
congregacyon the same thing that the head shows to the body, for like as
the head seyth and hearyth for the whole body, stodyeth and deui seth for to
preserve it in strength and life, even so does Christ defend, teach and
preserve his congregatyon. For he is the eye heart, wisdom and gide thereof,
so ought husbands (then) to love their wives and be their heads in like
manner to show them like kyndnes, and offer the same fassyon to gyde them and
rule the^ with dyscrecyon for there presaruatyon and not with fors or wylfulnes
to intrete them, and saint Paul says forther, so ought men to love their
wives as their own bodies, he that loves his wife loves ueth him self, for
no man has at any time hated his own flesh, but does noreshe and chereshe
it even as the Lord does the congregacyon. Therefore ought every man most
faruentlye to love his wife equallye with him self in all points, for this is
the measure of mutual love Matrymonyall, that either part have nothing so
dear that they can not be contended to bystowe one upon another, ye and yi^
need should be, they should also not spare their own lives one for another, no
more then Christ did for his congregacyon.

And like as when we repent and believe in ye promise of God in Christ (tho we
were never so poor sinners) are as rich as Christ and all meretes ours, so
is a woman (tho she were never so pore before she was married) as rich as her
husband, for all that he has is hyrs, ye his own body and has power over
it as says Saint Paul.

And if it so chance that you Cor. vii
find not your wife so perfect in all points as you would or as your self,
yet must you not despise her, nor be bitter nor cruel unto her for her
fautes, but gentelye and louynglye seek to amend and win her. For like as
Christ thought no scorn of his church, despised her not, neither forsook
her for her uncleanness and sins, so should no Christen man spurn at his wife
nor set light by her because that sometime she feleth, offends, or goyth not
right, but even as Christ norisheth and techeth his church so ought every
oneste husebande (also) louyngly and gentlye to inform and instruct his wife.

For in many things (says saint Peter) God has made the men stronger then
the women, not to rage upon them and tobe tyrans unto them, but to help them
and bear their wekenes. Be curtes therefore (says he) and win them to
Christ, and overcome the^ with kyndnes that of love they may obey the ordynans
that GOD made between man and wife. Oh how ashamed be those men to look upon
this text which with vyolens in their fury will intrete their wives, no
beeste so beestelye, for in the most crewelst way is not mete as when the
wife is sad and disquieted, then with spitful words and wanton fashions, so
provoking her to anger. Where it is not the duetye of the husebande, but rather
ashamed to his own head: likewise it is worship for a man to have the fear
of the Lord before his eyes, that he provoke not the plage of vengeance. Let
us therefore have humy lytye in our hearts: For as a wise man looks well to
his own goinges, even so pleasau^te are the words spoken in due season,
which moves the woman in her wrath unto pacyence, whereof Salamo^ says: fear
words Pro. 16 c
are an honey comb, a refresshing of the mind and a health of ye bones, for
it is syldome seen that any beast is found in y^ crewelst rage the male does
never hurt his female, and how unnatural a thing it is for a man to hurt
his own flesh and body, who will vyolentelye revenge him self (ye) on his
foot if it chance to stombele: but will not rather if he have an ill body
cheresh it to make it better.

The strong (says saint ^o. 14.
Paul) ought to bear the frelenes of the weke, let one suffer with another,
bear ye one another burden and so shall ye fulfill the laws of Christ and
above all thing (says Saint 4.
Peter) have feruente love amongeste you, for love covers the multitude of
fautes, so that love in all thing and at all times ought to be the whole doar
and only instrumente to work and frame all things between man and wife.

By all this may ye gether What the husband ought to be.
and learn that the man is the heed, gouernar, rular, and instructar (both
with gentill words and good example) the prouydar, defendar, and whole
comfort of the woman, and owes unto her most faruente love and affectyon
all gentle behauoure all faythfulnes and help, all comfort and kyndnes as to
him self his own flesh and body, so that under God there is no love no
affectyon no frendshyp, no nerenes of kynne, to be compared unto this, nor any
one thing under the sun that pleases God more then man and wife that agree
well togethers, which live in the fear of GOD, and how can that be more
lyuelye expressed, then in that, that Jesus Christ the son of God, and the
holy Christen church and the holy Ecc. 25
body of them both, are set forth for an example or myror of the state of
wedlock or conjugal love, a more holy, a more godly and purer example could
not be showed. Undoutydlye this does plainly show that love matrymonyall is
most hyelye accepted before GOD, and the contrary must needs follow, that
unquietness hatred, strife, brawling, chiding, and frowardenes in marriage does
excedingly displease God, and is clerelye forbidden by saint Paul, where he
says, Ephe. 4
let all bytternes, fyersnes, and wrethe, rourynge, and cursed speaking be put
away from you, be ye curtes and loving one to another and marcyfull
forgeuynge one another even as God for Christ's sake forgave you. Surely it is
an hye and pure love perfect and constante that God requires to be between
married couples, and therefore ought they by all ways, menes, and labor to
get, maynteyne, and increse this exceeding love, and to exchewe, forbere and
cut of all things that might occasyon any part of the contrary. And
undoubtedly there is nothing that longer mayntayneth concord and quyetnes nor
more increseth perfect love in marriage, then sweet and fair words, gentle
and frendelye deeds, and with a loving patyens to take all things to the
best. Frelye to break their minds What mainteineth love and quietness in
marriage Ephe. 5 Gene. 2
togethers and all things to be kept secret, does glad and willing to
amend that is amys, and above all thing not ones one to here ill of another,
for saint Paul warns you, that ye give no place to the backbyters, but take
them as ill wyllars to you both tho that ^e never so nere friends or kin, and
GOD says a man shall for sake father and mother and cleue unto his wife and
they two shall be one flesh, which in like case is meante to the woman. Therefore
ought no creature alive to be in such extymaty on, credyte, fauer and love as
each of you with others. Also to be of a sober and temperate diet does much
forther a good agremente, and where the contrary is, there is much
unquietness. For Salamon asking where is woo, where is strife, where is
braulynge, even amongst those (says he) that be ever at the wine, therefore
it is most comelye for Christyans to be temporate in diet, temporate in
words, temporate in deeds and temporate in all things, so that at all times
ye exchewe all exses and surfeit rage and furye which makes no dyfferens
betwyxte man and beeste, and all other things which may bread any Eccl. 25
part of unquietness. For Salamon says, better is a dry morsel with
quyetnes, then a full house and many sat cattle with strife. Therefore ought
ye to extreme and imbrase this concord and quyetnes as the mentenat and only
vpholder of the whole felyssytye in marriage, which is in gendred of faruente
love, faythfulnes and kyndnes, and mayntayned by the same wherein ye ought
contynuallye to walk in all chastenes and pureness of living which
(assuredlye) shyneth as a most precious thing in the syghte of God, and in the
co^mendacyon of the same says Salamon in the book of wisdom. The
co^mendacion of chastity.
O fair is a chaste generatyon with virtue, for it is with good men, where it
is present men take example there at, and if it goo away yet they desire it,
it is always crowned and holden in honor, and wins the reward of the
undefiled battle, but the multitude of ungodly children are unprofitable, and
the thing that are planted in whoredom shall take no deep rote, nor lay any
fast foundacyon, though they be grene in the branches for a time, yet shall
they be shaken with the wind for they stand not fast, and thoroughe the
vehemencye of the wind they shall be rooted out, for the unprofitable branches
shall be broken, their fruit shall be unprofitable and sower to eat, ye meat for
nothing, and why, all the children of the wicked must bear record of the
wickedness of their fathers and mothers, when they be asked, but to the
ryghteous be over taken with death yet shall he be in rest. Here may you se
how vile filthye and abominable aduoutry, fornycacyon and basterdye is, and
how hye in extymatyon a chaste life is amongeste al good and godly folk and
in specyallye in the syghte of GOD to whom no secret sin is hyde.

And as a chaste loving life That married folk ought to have chastmaners and
co^municatio^.
in marriage is most commendyd, so ought ye to be of chastemaners, to have
chaste talk* and to exchewe all wanton fassyons, vnclenlye communycatyon,
filthy handelynge, and all vnsemelynes, and to be the speakars and very doors
of all virtue and godlynes, for Saint Paul says, be ye folowers of GOD as
dear children and walk in love even as Christ loved you and gave him self
for us an offering and a sacryfyce of (...)ete sauoure to God, so that
fornycacyon and all uncleanness or covetousness be not ones named amongeste you as
becomes saints, neither filthy nor folyshe tawlke, neither gestynge, which
are not comelye, but rather geuyng of thanks for this ye know that
whoremongers either unclean parsons or couytous parsons which is the
woreshypper of Images shall have any enterans in thee Kyngedome of GOD and of
Christ.

Also there ought to be a temporance Ofte^porau^ce in marriage
between man and wife for God has ordained marriage for a remedy or medycyne
to assuage the hete of the burning flesh and for procreatyon, and not
beestelye for to fulfill the whole lusts of the deuelyshe mind and wicked
flesh for tho ye have a promise that the act in marriage is no sin if the man
receive his wife as a gift given to him of God, and the wife her husband in
like case, as ye have a promise that ye sin not when ye eat and drink
measurablye with thanks geuynge, yet if ye take excess or use it beestelye,
vylelye or inordynatelye, your miste^perans make that ill which is good
(being rightly used and that which is clean ye defyle thoroughe your
abusing of it, God has not called you to uncleanness but unto holiness says
saint Paul) and forther These. 4.
(says he) it is the will of God even that you should be holy, and that
every one of you should know how to keep his vessel in holiness and honor and
not in the lusts of concupyscens as do the hethen whyth know not God.

Also saint Paul wylleth you that ye wythdrawe not your Cor. 7.
selfs nor depart not one from another, except it be with the good consent
of both for a time to fast and to pray which fasting and prayer I would to
God were more used then it is, not as Ipocrytes were wont, but as Christyans
ought and are commanded (all most) in every part of the scryptures, for
they that in eating and drinking fulfill the whole lusts of the flesh can
not work after the sprete, and as we daily and hourelye contynuallye sin,
so ought we contynually to pray and call for grace. And in all the whole Bible
you shall not find a more godly example of marriage (which I would to God all
married folks would read) then that of Tobyach and Sara the daughter of
Raguell, which were knytte together in fasting and prayer, and often used the
same living a godly, pure and clean life, for the which they obtained the
blessing of God and saw their chylders children to the fyfte generatyon.
Which children (vndoutydlye) is the hyeste gift and greateste tresure of this
world and mayntynans of the same. For children is the very sure y^
co^meudacio^ of children
band and last knot of love Matrymony all, by the which the parents can
never be clerelye separatyd a sunder, In as much as that which is of them both
can not be divided, seeing both have part in every one. And children are
their parents chief joy comfort and felycite next unto GOD, their stay
and staff and vpholders of their age, and in their children do the parents
leave (in a manner) after their death. For they dye not all togethers that leave
collopes Cor. vii
of their own flesh alive behind them, and by their children (if they be
virtuously and Godly brought up) then is God honored and the commen welthe
auanced, so that the parents and all men fare the better by them. Your
children (most assuredlye) is the very blessing of God for the which ye
ought to give him most hartye thanks, and be contented and with such as he
does send you, be they many or few sons or daughters. For if they be many
he will provide for them if they be faithful. If they be few he may send
you more, and give you more joy of one daughter then of x. sons, therefore
be content with his will for he does all things for the best and knows
what is best* for you, give him most hartye thanks for such as you have and
be dylygent to see them vertuouslye and godly brought up, and in any case
suffer them not to be ydell.

For they that will not work 7 How children ought to be brought up.
(says saint Paul) let them not eat, therefore put them to learn some
honest scyens or craft, whereunto of nature they be most apt. For in that
shall they most proffet, by the which they may get their own living and
serve the commen welthe. And above al thing let them first learn to know God
and his most holy word which is the right pathe and hye way to all virtue and
Godliness, the sure shylde and strong bukelar to defend us from the devil and
all his cruel and crafty assawtes give them daily godly and loving
exhortasyons, suffer no vice to take rote in them, but rebuke them for their
ill and commend them in their well doing.

Provide honestly before hand for all necessary things both for them and all
your household. For says saint Paul to Tymothee, ^
If there be any that provides not for his own and namelye for them of his
household, the same denies the faith and is worse then an infydell.

Of the sparowes may ye The order of y^ house.
karne the order of your householde, for as the cock flies to and fro to
bring all thing to the neste, and as the damme keeps the nest hatcheth and
brings forth her young, so all prouysyon and whatsoever is to be done
without the house belongs to thee man and the woman to take charge within,
to see all things conuenyentelye saved or spente as it ought, to bring for
the and noryshe her children, and to have all the whole doing of her daughters
and women.

Also beiouynge unto your children and be not fyerse nor cruel unto them. For
Saint Col.* 3
Paul says, fathers rate not your children, lest they be of a desperate
mind, but wy(...) dyscrete admonysyons, and with your pure and good example
of living (which is the chefeste persuasyon) led them to all virtue and
Godlynes.

If all parents would vertuouslye bring by their children in the knowledge
and fere of GOD, in the practyse and exarcyse of some honest scyens or craft.
Then should we not see so many ydell as be, so many vacabundes, thieves, and
murderers, so many vycious persons of all degres, nor such ungodliness taygne.
But then should we se every man honestlye get his living prefarring his
neighbors proffyt as his own, then should we see all men rightly do their
dewtyes* then should love and charity spryng, and all godlynes reign, then
should the laws and magystrates be wyllyngelye obeyed, the commen welthe
floreshe, and God rightly honored, for in this point only through the
grace of God consystes the amendment of all the whole world.

Therefore (my dear and well-beloved Chrystyans) seeing that in this blessed
state of matrymonye and Godly householde of husband, wife, and children
consystes (next under GOD) the chefyste and highest felysytye of this world, and
mayntynans of the same, where in the commen welthe is wholly aduansed, and GOD
most hyghelye honored. I exhort you in the name of* Jesus Christ, the
son of the lyuyn(...) God, that you walk worth(...) therein according to the
will of Christ which you profess without faynynge, and that you exchewe all
works and deeds of the flesh, which be these says saint Paul, aduoutrye,
Gala. 5.
fornycation, uncleanness, wantonness, ydolatre, which craft hatred, varyans,
wrath, strife sedicyon, sects envying, murder, drunkenes, gluttony, and such
like, of the which I tell you before as I have told you in times past* that
they which commyt such things shall not inheret the kingdom of God.
Therefore follow ye the sprete and works of the same which be (says saint
Paul) love, joy, peace, long suffrynge, gentylnes, goodness, faythfulnes,
weakness, temporans, and such like, and yet ones again. I exhort you with
the exhortacyon of saint Paul. If there be amongeste Ephe. 2.
you any consolatyon in Christ, If there be any comfortable love, If there be
any feloweshyppe of the sprette, If there be any compassyon of mercy fulfill
you my joy, that ye draw, one way having one love, being of one accord and
of one mind, that nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but that in
meakenes of mind every one exteme other better then them self, and so shall
you led a joyful quiet and godly life in this world and after, through
Jesus Christ come to the life everlasting with GOD the Father to whom be all
honor and glory. Amen.

()

Roma. x. If the rote be hole, the branches shall be hole also.
Imprynted at London in Temestrete by Hughe Syngelton, at the sign of the
dobbel hood, over against the Stylyarde.


