A book of the propreties of Herbs called an herball, whereunto is added the
time yt herbs, Flowers and Seeds should be gathered to be kept the whole year,
with the virtue of ye Herbs when they are stilled. Also a general rule of all
manner of Herbs drawn out of an ancient book of Phisyck by W.C.



De virtutibus herbarum e^ primo de littera.A.
Agnus castus.
This herb Agnus castus that men do call Tutsayne, and other wise Park leaves,
this has leaves somdel red like unto the leaves of Orage, and this herb has
senowes on his leaves as has Plan^ayne, and it has yelowe flowers and bears
black beris and it grows in dry wodes, yt virtue of this herb is, it will
keep men and women chaste For as Discolidion and Placens do say, this herb is
called Agnus castus for ye knowledge and the use of this herb makes men
chaste, and this herb will open the pores of man and let out wicked humou^s and
sprytes of his body, this herb destroys the moisture of man's feed. Also ye
same auctor says that if this be sode^ with Fenel, in Asel it is good to
destroy ye dropsi. Also if this herb be sode^ with smalage, and Sage, in salt
water, and afterward the hinder part of a man's head be well washed ^herwyth
it heleth it and unbinds an evil that is called Lytargy. Also this herb
destroys the foul lust of Lechery and it be dronk^n, or if it be borne a
bout him, therefore sometime they do eat it roasted, because it shall keep them
chaste, for if this herb be eaten raw, it will enge^der head ache. This he^be
is good to defy the hardness and stoppyng of the Mylte. Also a plaster of this
herb is good to do away ache of a man's heed, that is engendered of wicked
humors. This herb is hot and dry in the second degree.

Apium.
This herb Apium, is a herb that me^ do call Smalage, or sta^marche, the
virtue of this herb is this. It will make a man to pysse, and opyn the
stoppinge of the liver, also the sede of the herb hardneth a man's wombes,
and it draws wicked humors of a man's body unto the head and to ye stomach
and the womb, and therefore it noyeth them that have the fallinge evil, and to
women that be with child, for when it draws such humors to the womb and
engenders that be the cause of pestilence, and therefore it is commanded of
leches that women that be with child and they that keep suckynge children
should not eat nor drink of this herb for dred of yt falling evil, for it is
hot and dry, and there be speces thereof, y^ joy is good for cold playsters
tempered with flower, and for scalding, this herb is hot in ye.i. degree

Anetum.
This herb Anetum that men do call Anete otherwise Dyl, this herb has leaves
like to Fenel but the sede is somdel broad as Orage sede is, the virtue of this
herb is thus. It will make a man pysse, also it swageth rumblinge in a man's
womb, and wicked wyndes in the womb, also it distroyeth the vexing, the sede
of this herb bre^t and laid upon a wound it heleth soon and namely if a man
be scalded in his members or on his yard, strowe the powder thereof and it
shall hele, or what manner of evil that rises in a man's yard it shall be hole
in the same manner, a plaster made with the same powder, and shepes talow and
black soap, is good for ye Emaraude this herb is hot and dry in the second
degree.

Apiume risus.
This herb Apiume risus is called Cerfoy or Che^uile, the virtue of this herb
is and it be dronken with wine it shall make a man to pysse well and it
delyuereth a man of ache in the rain and in the bladder, and it be dronken
with wine it lets out and unbinds the wicked wyndes and vnsloppethe the
womb and the liver of all manner wodnes. This herb with holds castyng. Also
a plaster made with this herb tempered with Aisel destroys wild fire and
heleth the Canker and al other wou^des, this herb is one of the Smalaches, and
it is hot and dry.

Absynthium.
This herb is called Wormewode. The virtue of this herb is. It is good to
comfort the her^e and cle^seth the stomach. Balien says that the herb
has.ii. virtues one is laxatyue, and the other is co^stypulatyue. Therefore
Galien says that if this Herb be given to an evil, of the which the matter
is not fully defied, it shall hard the stomach, and let the d^gestion, and if
the matter be ryped, it shall make a man laxayue, and esily put away the matter,
if this herb be drunk with Spyconarde, it swageth the stomach and of the
womb that is engendered of wicked wyndes. Also if this herb be te^pered with
honey it will ease the swellyng in a man's mouth. Also it does away the
black myste in a mann^s eyes and clereth the syghte, and if this herb be
powned with the gal of a Bull and afterward put into a man's eyes, it
puts away all manner impedyme^tes of the syghte.

Arthamesia.
This herb is called Mugworte, the virtue of this herb is this. If a man bear
this herb about him he shall not be weary of trauelynge in his way, also if this
herb be powned with talowe, it heals the sornes of a man's fete and a king
also. And if it be within a house, there shall no wicked spyryte abide. Also if
this herb be stamped and tempered with runnynge water it heals the akynge of
a man's guts and many other euylles, this herb is hot and dry in the
second degree.

Affodylius.
This herb is called Affodyl, The virtue of this herb is that ye leaves ben
good to hele the dropsy, and the leaves of ye flowers begood to be dronken to
hele venim of wicked bestes, also the joyce of this herb and Myrre, and
Saffron tempered together in white wine and a little boiled over the fire and
cleansed thoroughe a clothe is good to hele rinnynge eyes, also the rote of this
herb bre^t to powder, is good to heal sore ears and restore the^ again,
also take an hard cloth yt is roughe and wete it in the joyce of the herb,
and rub the morphewe therewith syttinge against the soon and it shall do
away the morphewe, this herb is hot and dry in the second degree.

Aristologia longa.
This herb men do call it Red mader, the virtue of this herb is thus. It will
unbind the stoppyng of the liver and let pass wicked wyndes that be stopped
with in man's body, also if it be dronken with wine it cleanses and purges al
men of al manner of venym that is in a man's body. Also it cleanses and purges
all manner of dyseases that be roted within and without in the veins, and in
the teath, that been rotten. This herb is hot and dry, and it must be
gathered in herueste, there be two speces thereof.

Aristologia rotunda.
This herb aristologia rotunda men do call it Galingale meke, the virtue of
this herb is thus as Apocras does say, if the said herb be dronken with
hot water then it is medicinable and curable for those men that bestoppped in
the breast, and for the swellynge evil, and for the Podagar, and for the
Cramp^, this herb is hot and dry and it must be gathered in harvest and it
is a spece of the reed Madder.

Abrotanum.
This herb abrotanum me^ call it Sothernewode. The virtue of this herb is
thus, yt if they break the sede and drink it with water it heals me^ that
have been bytten with any venomous beast. Also this herb destroys worms in
a man's womb, also powder of this herb meddled with barley mele unbinds and
breketh hard postumes, also this herb burnt and the ashes medlyd with oil,
it restores there as man lacks here, this herb is hot and dry.

Ameos.
This herb Ameos has leaves like unto Eldren, but they be less and the sede
is like persly sede, the virtue of this herb is thus, if it be tempered with
honye it sle^th worms that be in a man's body, and it vnbindeth the great
stoppynge of winds, and it breketh the stone, and it chafeth a man's stomach
that is cold, it chafeth the liver and the raynes, and it heleth wounds and
the bytynge of venomous bestes, this herb is hot and dry.

Alleluya.
This herb Alleluya men call it wodsore or s^ub worte, this herb has three
leaves of the which two be round a little departed above, and it has a white
flower, but it has no long stalks, and it is wynsore, and it is like.iii.
leued grass the virtue of this herb is thus. If it be roasted in the ashes
in, Reed docke leaves, or in reed worte leaves, it freteth away dead flesh of
A wound, this herb grows much in woods.

Asterion.
This herb Asterion grows among stones and in high places, this herb
shows by night, this herb has yelowe flowers hole and round as a
Kockebel, or else like to Foxegloues, the leaves of this herb be round, and
blewe, and they have the mark of the moon in the myddest, as it were.iii.
leued grass, but ye leaves thereof be more and they be round as a penny, and the
stalk of this herb is reed and this herb seems as it were musk and the
joyce thereof is yelow. And this herb growethe in the new moon without lefe
and every day spryngeth a new lefe to the end of xv. days, and after.xv. days
it loses every day a lefe as the moon waneth, and it spryngeth and waneth as
does the moon, and where y^ it grows there grows great qua^tyte. The
virtue of this herpe is thus, they that eat of the berys or of the herb in
wanynge of the moon when he is in sygno virgins, if he have the falling evil
he shall be hole thereof, or if he bear this herb boute his neck he shall be
helped without doubt, and it has many other good virtues.

Agrimonia.
This herb Agrimonia me^ call it Egrymonye. The virtue of this herb is thus,
and it be eaten the herb and the root grene, it heals the akynge of the
womb. Also if the herb be dried and pou^ned to pouder^ and dronke with water
it is good for the same evil, also the said herb te^pered with Aysell is
good to hele a wound that is hurt with iron, also this herb used in metes is
good to hele the akynge of sores in the mylte and it is good for Treytes.

Auencia.
This auencia is called Auen, the virtue of this herb is thus if it be dried
and powder made thereof with wit wine warmed or else luke warm water and give
it to the^ that has the fevers, and it shall help him much and ease him, also
it heleth wounds and Cankers if it be dronken.

Altea.
This herb is called holy hocke or the wild malowe, the virtue of this herb
is thus, take and stamp it and frye it with shepes talowe and make a plaster
and lay it to a podagar man, and it shall help him within three days by
experymente al auctours do say and affirm that this herb soden with Uineger
and Linsede. and a plaster made thereof and laid to the side of any person, it
departed and helps wicked gatherynges that be engendered in a man's body,
this herb grows in gardens and moist places.

Amarisca.
This herb is colled Dog fenel, or Maithe^, this herb is much like to
Camamyle for it has a white flower as Camamyle, but it stinketh, the virtue
of this herb is good to drink the joyce thereof for to hele the Canker and the
pypes of the Emeraudes, and there be.ii. speces thereof, the one has a white
flower, and the other has a yelowe flower, and it grows in corn.

Auticula muris.
This herb is called Mousere The virtue of this herb is, if it be dronken it
helps the Quinsy, also the joyce is good to hele al manner of wounds.

Apium Emoroidarum.
This herb is called crowfote this herb has leaves departed as it were Ra^mes
fete, this herb has a long stalk in the mids, and grows in watery
places, and has yelowe flowers.

Apium ranarum.
This herb Apium ranarum that men call water crowfote, this herb has yelow
flowers as has crowefote and of the same shape, but the leaves are more
departed, and it has a long stalk, and out of that one stalk grows many
stalks small by the sides, this herb grows in watery places.

Triplex domestica.
This herb Atriplex domestica, men call it Orage, or medolious.

Anabulla.
This h^rbe Anabulla men call Spourge.

Acus demonis.
This herb Acus demonis is an herb that men call Poukenel.

Argentilla.
This herb Argentilla that me^ call Argentyl, this herb has litel leaves
somdele round, and within they be ragged, as it were ye leaves of Eufra^y, and
it growith much among whete, and there be.ii. speces thereof, the more and the
less.

Acus mustela.
This herb Acus mustela is called Groundeswelye, it is good for playsters.

Allium.
This herb Allium is called Garleke, the virtue of this herb is this. It will
unbind all wicked wyndes within a man's body, and it helps a man to make
water, but it noyeth a man's eyes, because of the great byndyng and drinking,
he that has voluptuosly it drinks and destroys the sight, and it
destroys and heleth venim within aman. Also it heleth all cold sores as it
were tryacle. Also it heleth the scabbes and morphewes or bladders in what
manner place they be in a man's body, so that it be well froted therwyth, this
herb is hot and dry.

Amsum.
This herb is called anise, the virtue of this herb is this, it unbinds the
stoppyng of the liver, and of wicked wyndes, and of great humors and
encloseth the milte, also it stereth a man to make water and to sweet, also
this herb makes a man's womb laxatyue if it be to hard and the sede must
be parched or roasted in all manner medecynes, that it will work the rather, this
herb is hot and dry.

Hic incipit litiera.B.
Et primo de Bethonia.
BEtyn men do call this herb, ye virtue of this ^erbe is this, if it be
stamped and tha^ laid to a wound in ye head that is smiten with a stroke it
shall heal the wound fair, and draw out the broken bones if there be any as
leches do say, also if a man's eyes do ache, take the water or the joyce
thereof, and it shall amend them greatly. Take Betin and stamp him and temper
him with water or with wine warmed and drink it.x. days and it shall destroy
any web in the eyes of any person. Also if your eyes be waterye, eat every
day a little betayne, and it shall do the much good, also if you have akynge
ears, take the joyce thereof and temper it with rose water, and warm it a
little and drop it in thy ears and stop them with wolle, and thou shall be
hole. Also if thou do blede much at the nose, ^ake and stamp Betine with salt
and stop thy nose there with and it will staunche. And if thou have sore
tethe, with Uyneger or with Aysel let it sethe well ^yl it be more than half
wasted, than as hot as you may suffer it suppe thereof, and hold it in thy
mouth till it be cold, than spyte, it out and do thus often and thou shall be
hole. Also for the coughe take the joyce or powder of Betyne and medyl it with
honey, and make thereof a lectuary, and use it. ix. days and thou shalt be
hole. And if a man may not hold his meat within him take the same me decyne
and give him.iii. sponeful thereof with a sponefull of water. Also if a man's
yard be swolen or that it be sore, take Beteyne and stamp it with white wine
tempered and it shall be hole. Also if a man be Podagat, take Betayne and, sethe
it well in water and give to him to drink and wasshe his fete there with and
lay the herb about his fete on a clothe, and it will amend him much. Also take
and eat Betayne or powder thereof. and you shall not be dronken that day, all
these medicines have been proved of this herb. It is hot and dry.

Balsaminta.
This herb Balsaminta called horse mynte or water wine or brokemynte, and also
this herb does grow in waterye places, the virtue of this herb is to
comfort a man's stomach and makes a man well to defy his meat. Also y^ ^oyce
and clarifyed honye, and Reed wine boiled together, and it shall do away the
cold fro a man's stomach and wicked wyndes within him, also the joyce or else
the powder of the herb dronken with Red wine hot, makes women that be with
child soon and esely to be delivered of their children, This herb is hot
and dry.

Bl^ta.
This herb Bleta is called Be^es, and there be.ii. speces thereof as
Diascorides says, the one is white and the other black, ye virtue of this
herb is this if ye joyce thereof be put in the nosestrylles of a man it
cleanses a man's head. Also it swageth the akynge of the eyes of every
person, it cleanses the head from nyttes and from other vermyne. Also it
repayreth and amendeth a man's hear of his head also this herb destroieth
botches and ^ils, also Diascorides says, if a man use over much of this herb
y^ it norysheth wicked humors in a man for it is hot.

Borago.
Borago is a common herb, the ver^ue of it is thus. It will cleanse the reed
color of a man. Also this herb is good to destroy the Cardyacle, and the
postumes that be gathered of the black color. Also the water drunk with wine
makes a man glad and merye, this herb is hot and moist.

Bugla.
This herb Bugla is called Brounwort this herb has leaves like a brown
color with a blew flower, and somewhat boistous, the v^rtue of this herb is
thus. It will heal wounds in a man's head, and if this herb be dronken it
heleth and streng^hn^th the bones that be broken in ye man's head this herb
breketh and destroys the rew^ne and the akynge of the head, this herb grows
in woods much and it is hot and dry.

Burneta.
This herb Burneta is called burnet, the herb has blewe flowers as has
Hayhoue, and small ragged leaves like Tan^ye leaves, y^ virtue of this herb is
thus. It will destroy the great humors and laxatyue within a man. Also it
opens the stoppynge within a man's liver, and makes a man to pysse well.
Also it makes one to avoid the yelowe evil. Also a portion of this herb
meddled with honye and white wine helps and unbinds sore stytches of the
rybbes and in the tetes, there be ii. speces thereof the one grows on hills
and ye other in meadows.

Bursa pastoris.
This herb Bursa pastoris is called sheperdes pu^s, this herb has a small
stalk and full of branches and ragged leaves and a white flower, the coddes
thereof be like a purse, the virtue of this herb is thus, drink it with reed
wine, or with milk and it will staunche ye blody menson, it is hot and dry.

Borago siluestris.
This herb Borago siluestrys is like to comen borage, but the leaves be somewhat
smaller and it grows in feldes and in ways.

Billire.
This is called byller, The virtue thereof is good to ripe botches and it is
hot and dry.

Camomilla.
This herb is called Camomyl the virtue of this herb is thus if it be drunk
with wine it will break the stone, and it destroys the yelowe evil. It
helps the akynge and the desease of the liver, if it be strayned it helps
and swageth the sores in ama^nes mouth, it is good for akynge in a man's head
and for the megrym, this herb is hot and dry.

Calamintum.
This herb is called Calamint the virtue of this herb is thus, it destroys
a man's talent, as ypocras says, the be.iii. spyces thereof, one that is
stonye, another that is of the earth, and the.iii. of the water and all they be
hot and dry, it that is wateri makes a man moist, it that is stony makes a
man hole if ye drink it, if he have drunk any venomous drink, this herb
made in a plaster and lay it to a venemes wound it draws out venym soon.
Also who so drink the this herb.iii. days, it shall help him of the yelowe
evil. The other is erthly it is helping for lepery, the joyce of this herb
and it be put into the ears of a man it will slay worms in a man's head and
comfort the stomach, and helps to defy it, and it wythdraweth casting.

Crassula mayor.
This herb is much like unto Orpyn, the virtue of this herb is thus, if it be
laid to a wound by it self it shall hele it without any other help.

Crassula minor.
This herb is called stonchore or Stonecroppe, the leaves of this herb be
su^what like unto Orpin and it grows on houses and walls, the virtue of this
herb is thus it will make a man to cast.

Cicuta.
This herb is called Hemlocke or herb Benet, the virtue of this herb is
thus, the joyce of this herb kepeht maids tetes small, also this herb often
drunk keeps and destroys the great appetyte of lecherye. Also the joyce
tempered with Swynes greece, destroyethe the hot Podagre, and swage the the
great swellynge, for it is cold and dry.

Centaurea mayor.
This is named the more Centory or earth galle, his flowers be yelowe in the
croppe, his virtue is if it be sodden in good wine it will hele the syckenes in
the liver, it draws out wicked humors in the mylt, this has been proved, and
it be soden in water it is good to h^le a wound, if there be a canker and it
be anointed there with it will make it hole, this herb is hot and dry.

Centauria minor.
This he^be is the less Centory, it has.iii. branches coming out of a
round more with a ^eed ^lower. His virtue is this, the powder or joyce thereof
is good, for bitinge of an adder or any venemus beast if it be droken with
wine and the joyce is good to anoynte sores therewith if ye have any venym
within you, powne it small and temper it with Aysell and drink it and you
shall cast out all the venym within you.

Caruo.
This herb is called Caraway this herb has leaves somewhat like to Fenell
with a long stalk, and a round sede more than persly sede. The virtue of this
herb is to destroy wicked wyndes and the coughe and it is good for the
Fre^sye, and for bytynge of venomous beasts. Also this herb meddled is good
for scabbes, and Tetters. Also it restores hear there as it is fallen away,
this herb grows in moist places.

Celidonia.
This herb is called Celondy or Tetterwort, his virtue is as poliminus says
if the birds of ye swalowe be blind, the damme of the birds fetches of this
herb and heals their eyes therwyth, it is good for ye ca^ker in a man's mouth
it is good for the toth ache and to cle^se a man's head, this herb is hot
and dry.

Culamen.
This is called Hertnote, Dylnote, Skycte or holy wort: he has leaves like
Fenell with white flowers and a small stalk it growethe in wodes and meadows,
his virtue is to eat away dead flesh this he^b put to a sore that lacks
hear, it will restore the hear and heal the place.

Colewortes.
This herb is good to cle^se fresshe wou^des, the canker, to norysshe synowes,
and to heal^ sore eyes that be almost syghteles, it encreseth a woman's mylcke
the joyce te^pered with Alume and Asell, it swageth the Leper, and it is good
to keep a man from dronkenes it is hot and dry.

Coliandrum.
This herb is called Colyandrum the virtue of this herb is this, if the joyce
thereof be dronke^ with honey it will slay worms in a man's body, and hardeth a
man's womb, the sede is good to do away the Fevers that come three days,
this herb is hot and dry.

Capillus veneris.
This herb is called maiden here or waterwort. This herb has leaves like unto
fern; but ye leaves be smaller, and it grows on walls and stones and in ye
mids af ye lefe is as it were black here, ye virtue of this herb is this it
will br^ke ye stone, and it be dro^ke^ with wine it dstroyeeth venym and it is
cold and dry.

Crocus.
This herb is called Saffron, the virtue of this herb is thus, it will destroy
all manner of abhomynacyons of man's stomach, and will make a man to sleep, it
is good for many medecynes^ and namely for cokes to color their meat their
with, it grows in gardens, and it is hot and dry.

Centinodium.
This herb is called Sparowe tongue, the virtue of this herb is to break the
stone, and it is hot and dry.

Caprifolium.
This herb is called wodbynd and it has a white flower, ye virtue of this
herb is good to heal Cankered wounds, bladers, and akinge tethe and sores in
the toos of a man^ Also it is good for the swellynge in a man's body that is
venimed, this herb is hot and dry.

Canabaria.
This herb is called wyld he^pe or holy roppe, it is like unto he^pe his
virtue is if a man have the fever frete well his pounce therwyth and he shall be
hole, and it grows in watery places.

Costus.
This is named Cost or less Detyn, his virtue is to heal the sickness of the
breast and of the longes and it will break the postume.

Also it draws out evil humors of a man's head, it is good for a man's
stomach.

Cepe.
Is named an Onion, his virtue is to comfort a man's stomach it purges
somewhat the fleume it nessheth somewhat the womb. Also and it be stamped and
tempered with honye and Aseyll, it is good for the bytyng of a hou^de, Also the
joyce te^pered with woman's milk is good to hele the akynge of eres, Also the
joyce tempered with any lycoure is good to drink for any man that has lost
his speech. Also the joyce put in ye nosethrylles breketh out the wicked rewme
and ye stoypyng of a man's head.

Columbina.
This is named Columbyne, his virtue is good for him yt has the quynsy. This
herb must be gathered in August.

Cominum.
This is called Common, the leaves thereof be much like unto Colya^dre, it has
many branches coming out of one stalk, it is strong of savor, his virtue is
to destroy wicked wind and other euilles, in a man's stomach, it helps to
make water, it is hot and dry.

Cardiaca.
This is named Cardyacle, it has leaves like to blind nettels and it has
little coddes with sede, his virtue is good for the falling evil.

Cisara.
This is called a Frence peace, it has leaves and coddes like unto other pees
but y^ leaves be not so great nor so long, and there be.ii. spyces thereof.

Camelon.
This is called a woluisshe thistell or a wild thystell. He has white leaves
great and broad and a reed flower, it grows by ways, the virtue of this herb
is if thou take this herb when the sone is in Capricorn, and the moon be
new: while thou berest it about y^ there shall no myschefe the befall.

Cauda pulli.
This is named Coltes tail, this herb has leaves like to wyld comin, but they
be not stalked like

Cabachis.
This is named French wortes it is hot and dry.

Caulus gallica.
This is named wild Tansy

Caulus agrestis.
This is an herb that men call Gland, or kouratum, the leaves be like unto
plantine but they be not so much, it has a white flower and grows in waters.

Cimbaria.
This herb men do call it Penny worte, this herb has round leaves, if grows
on walls.

Consolida mayor.
This is named Co^fery, it has leaves like to Horshelme, but they be not so
white, there be two speces thereof One with a white flower, the other with a
reed, His virtue is if a man be brosen or broken with in take the rotes of this
herb and toste them in the ashes and let the sick eat thereof fasting.iii.
and he shall be hole. Also it helps to gather broken bones, it is hot and
moist, and it bears black sede.

Consolida minor
This is called daysy or Brousworte, his virtue is if it be stamped and laid
to a botche, it shall hele it and break it, for it is a spyce of the Confery.

Consolida media.
This herb is called Methyn, this herb has long leaves and a little endented
and a white flower and the flower is somewhat like to the Daysy.

Hic incipit lettera D.
Et primo de Dragantia.
DRagaunce or Serpentine this herb is called. The virtue of this herb is this
if it be stamped and droncke^ with wine, it does away all manner of venym.
Also it does away the akynge of eres if they be anointed therewith. Also the
powder thereof blown in a man's nose, shall cle^se a man of the Rewme, and it
is good to destroy the coughe, and to destroy the canker and the fretyng of
wicked winds this herb is hot and moist it must be gathered in June and
July.

Diptanum.
This is called Detander or detayne. The virtue of this herb is thus, if it be
dronken it will deliver a woman of a dead child Also this herb will draw out a
thorn or an iron out of a man's body, it is hot and dry.

Dancus asinius.
This is called Danke, his virtue is to heal the dropsy, and bytyng of
venomous beasts. Also it opens the stoppyng of the liver and of the mylte.
Also it unbinds the womb and makes it laxatiue it is hot and dry.

Dens leonis.
This herb is called Dandelyon, the virtue of this herb is, the More is good
for the fever quotidian.

Dens canis
This is named houndest oath it has leaves like to dandelion but they be less
and the branches be not like and they drop milk.

Daucus creticus.
This herb has leaves like to wild popy, but the leaves be more white, it
has a flower of purple color and it growethe in wheat this herb is hot
and dry.

Dragancia.
This is named Drag^^^^e femell, it has leaves like to Re^^, but it has white
spectes it has an even stalk the length of.ii. cabites, and it berethe (...)
as it ^^re a cluster of Grapes, and they be yelowe it growethe in moist places,
the virtue is if it be stamped, and meddled with Oil and ^ut into the eyes of a
man it shall do away the akynge thereof. Also the more thereof and the more of
the white Onion stamped therewyth and tempered with honi, it heals all
wou^des that the Canker has be risen in. Also who froteth his hands with y^
more, if it be i^ May without doubt he may take adders they shall not venim
him. Also the joyce destroys y^ darkness about a man's eyes, if they be
anointed therewith. Also if the joyce be dronken with wine it destroieth
lechery, and it is moist and cold.

Hi^ ^ncipit littera.E.
Et primo de Enulacampana.
ENulaca^pana is called ^orshelme, the virtue (...) ^his herb is this if a man
have wagginge teth and he eat of this herb, they shall fasten again, it
helps a man to make water if it be dronken it delivers a woman of a dead
child, it is good for the chough it hardeth a ma^s womb it is hot and moist.

Endiuia.
This herb is called endive or southystle, his virtue is if ye joyce thereof be
meddled with hot water and dronken it helps the stoppynge of the mylte and of
the liver. It is good to heal the ^elowe evil and y^ fever tercian. It is
good for hole postumes and for to swage great hetes of the liver and of the
stomach and it is cold and moist.

Eru^a.
This herb is named Skyrwyte, This herb has leaves like to Byllerin but they
be not so long and it has a greatter more, his virtue is the leaves be good to
heal a man's mouth, if it be holden long therein. Also the joyce of this
herb sodden and afterward dro^ken it destroys the black color. Also this
herb often used styrreth a man to lechery and to make water, Also the more
stamped and meddled with oil and honey cleanses aman^es chynne if it be anointed
therewith. Also the joyce thereof dronke^ delyuereth men and women of the coughe,
for it is hot and dry.

Eufrasia.
This herb is called Eufrasy^ it is good for eyes and has a little ragged
lefe.

Ehullus.
This herb is called walwort, it has leaves like to Elder leaves it has a
long stalk, the virtue of this herb is good to destroy the dropsy, scabbes
and ^etters and it draws ^waye wicked humors out of a man, this herb is
hot and dry.

Edera.
This herb is called Iuy, this herb is like to brayn, y^ virtue there of is. If
it be sodden in wine, till it be thycke, and then lay it al hot to a bot^h and
it shall break it. Also if y^ have o^ny aching in the head take ye joyce thereof
and oil of roses and white wine and meddle it together and anoint thyhead
therewith and thou shall be hole thereof.

Edera terrestris.
This is an earth Iuy, it has leaves like to Catmynt but they be not so much,
and has a reddy flower, ye virtue of this is if it be soden in Swynes greece,
it is a good ointment for all manner aches.

Enforbium.
This is called ^lary, this her be has leaves like to Sauge but y^ leaves be
brother and ^ounder, his virtue is if he be put in potage it will make the
flesh tender.

Elleboras albus.
This Pellyter of spain, or lunge worte. This herb has leaves much like to
pedelion, but they be not so much slyt without and it has a flower as it were
a Parsneb, his virtue is if he be put into the nosethrylles of a man, it will
make him to nese. Also it healethe scabbe, the morphewe, and tetters. Also it
purgethe a man of wicked colors of the flewme, and of the Emerodes if he be
laid to ye place that is deseased. Also for the tothe ache it is good if it be
sodden in A sell and keep it as hot as he may suffer in his mouth and it
good to purge a man's stomach and womb. Also the powder thereof put in
grewell shall slay worms and the joyce meddled with milk sleeth flies, it is
hot and dry.

Elleborus niger.
This is called Pedelyon his leaves be much like to lunge wort but they be not
so white, and it has a broad flower and a black rote, his virtue is if it be
made in powder it will destroy and slay rattes and this herb is hot and dry.

Epatica.
This herb is called lyuerwort, his virtue is to destroy and cleanse ye hardness
of ye liver. Also if it be meddled with fresh greece it will hele wou^des and it is
good to hele the fever quartayne.

Erpina
This herb is named Foxgloues.

Ebulus minor.
This is the less Walwort. It is somewhat like to Walwort and the leaves be a
little read.

Hic incipit li^tera.F.
Et primo de Fla^mula.
FLammula is called Sperewort or Launcell it is much like to a spear and in
the crop of the stalk comes many fair and small branches and it has a
white flower and it grows in waters, his virtue is if a man have the fevers
and the pou^ces of him anointed therwyth he shall be hole, and it is good to
break botches and byles and it is hot and dry.

Fumus terre.
This herb is called Fumitory or earth Gall, his virtue is to comfort a manes
stomach. Also it gives a man appetyte to meat and it helps a man to make
water, and it opens the liver, and it clerethe a man's blood. Also if any
drink thereof with whei, it destroieth scabbes, ytches, bladders, and wicked
humors, it is hot and dry,

Fumicretum.
This is called Fumicrete, this herb has is a long stalk, and it has
leaves like to three leued gras and it has ^oddes, his virtue is if it sodde^ in
water it makes a man laxat^ue without any perell and is hot and dry.

Fragra.
This is called Strauberye, the virtue of this herb is good for blered me^.
Also it is good to destroy the web in a man's eyes. Also the joyce of it
meddled with honey and dronken heleth the mylte.

Fabaria mayor.
This herb is called Brock^le^pe, this herb has leaves like unto Be^stede,
and it grows in waters

Fabaria minor.
This is the less Brockelempe it has leaves in manner long and somewhat
round like to myntes This is good to lay to a place that is brosed or to be
wellynge if it be fried with shepes talowe.

Filix.
This herb is named Fern, of his be.iii. speces. The first is Pompody the
second is Osmunde and it grows in dyches and woddes, and it has a great
more, as pynapples, it is good to heal broken bones. The third is Euferne, and
it grows in walls, and Polpody grows in Oaks, it is good to make a man
laxatyue. This fern grows in woods, it is good to heal the Podager. And it
makes synowes strong.

Filipendula.
This herb is called dropwor^ the virtue of it will destroy the wicked wyndes
about a man's liver and his mylte and it is good to destroy the stone, it is
hot and dry.

Feniculum.
This herb is called Fenel or Fenkel, the virtue of this herb is this, if the
sede be dried it is good and comfort the stomach it opens the stoppynge of
the raynes of the blader. Also ye joyce is good to do away the web of the
eyes of a man, and it be dronken with wine, and water, it is good to do a way
all manner of venym. Also the joyce dropped in the eres of a man, it will slay
worms in a man. And also if it be dronken with wine yt will break the dropsye
and al manner swellyng, and keeps him from casting, and if it be dronken with
wine and water, it makes a woman's milk to increase. Also if yt be meddled with
oil it is good to hele a man's yard that is swollen. And this herb is hot
and dry.

Faxinus.
This herb is named Hertwod, his virtue is if he be powned and laid to a
sore, it will heal it.

Feniculus poeticus.
This is called wormesede. It is good to destroy worms in a man's body, this
herb is hot and dry.

Febrifuga.
This named Fetherfoye, his virtue is to comfort a man's stomach it is good to
aswage ye axes cotidian, the cramp, and to temper it that comes of cold
stomakes Also it is good to lay to a sore that is bitten with venomous bests I^
will hele it shortly and it be laid thereto. Also if it be tempered with Aysell
it will do a way the Morphewe. Also if it be stamped and laid to a wound in
the which be broken bones, it shall bring the broken bones together and heal
the^ and the rote thereof is good to stop the blody mension. And this herb is
hot and dry.

Filago.
This herb is called Feldwort or Hoar worte it is a little herb, and it
grows in whete.

Flamenula.
This is called the less Sper^worte, this herb has small leaves like gras,
but it is sharp like a spear and it grows in feldes, his virtue is yt a head
be cut it will heal it anon.

Hic incipit littera.G.
et primo de gratia dei mayor.
GRatia dei mayor, this herb is called the more Gratia dei.

Granum.
This is Gromel or Lyche wale the virtue thereof is good for the stone, and for all euilles in the bladder. This herb is hot and dry.

Genestula.
This herb men do call it Genestre or brom it has leaves like to
Spyngeruell, and it has a yelowe flower his virtue is to knyte bones and
synowes to gyther.

Gencianus.
This herb that me^ do call Felworte or Balmoyne, his virtue is if it be
dronken with water and and honey it helps the swellynge in a man's body, in
his stomach and it is god for venomous beasts, and it delyuereth a woman of a
dead child, it is hot and dry.

Galanga.
This is named Galingale, the virtue of this herb is thus, it comforts the
stomach and makes him well to degeste his meat, and unbinds and lets
out wicked wyndes of a man's body.

Granum solis agrestis.
This is called wyld Gromel, it is somewhat like to other Gromell, but ye sede
thereof is somewhat graye it grows in dyches, and it is good for the stone.

Gladiolus.
This herb is called Gladon, the virtue of it is good to make a man to cast.

Hic incipit littera.H.
Et primo de herba cruciata.
HErba Cruciata is a herb y^ men call Cro^worte this herb has little leaves and
asmal stalk with white flowers, and it is like to a cross, this is good to
heal wounds.

Herba cristofori masculi.
This is called Cristofer, the male it has leaves like to the Crousope, but
they be more whyt and not fully so long, it has yelowe flowers, his virtue
is to heal the Epylence and the frensy.

Herba Cristofori femini.
This is named Cristofer female it has leaves like to herb Peter, but they be
not in all so white and it growethe much by the waters side it has a long
stalk.

Herba walteri.
This is herb walter, it has leaves like to Persly and the leaves be su^what
chycke fat and the^der.

Herba Rob^rti.
This is named herb Robert, it has leaves like to herb Benet and it has
small flowers like to purple color, and it has a strong savor, his virtue
is to hele wou^des, ye powder of it will slay ca^kers.

Herba Martis.
This is called Mortagon. It has leaves like to the capital letter.M. and
some branches has, ix leaves and some.x. and some more.

Hastucaregia.
This is named Wooderoso if the more thereof be stamped and dronken with wine,
it will heal a sore in the mouth. Also ye sede stamped and dronken with strong
Aysell will staunche the Flyx and make the womb hard.

Herb Petri.
This is named the Couslope

Herba Iohannis.
This is called saint Ioha^nes worte the virtue of it is thus, if it be put in
a man's house, there shall come no wicked spirit therein.

Hic incipit littera.I.
Et primo de Iusqbiamus.
IUquiamus is called Henbane, his virtue is good for ye gout, and nam^lye those
yt come of mela^coli. Also the sede thereof and the sede of Humlocke meddled to
gyther and a candell made thereof, or brent upon a tyle stoone, and let the
smoke go up i^to a man's mouth in especial among the teth, and it will slay
worms. Also the rotes be good for the toth ache, Also the joyce thereof is good
for all wounds. Also it swagethe the coughe and the hot postume, and the hot
Podager. Also the sede of this herb should be gathered in ye month of August.
This herb is cold and dry.

Isopus.
This herb is called Isope, his virtue is if a man take the joyce thereof,
and put it in his mouth, it will heal all manner of evils in the mouth. Also it
sleeth worms in a man's womb and makes it nessh Also if it be dro^ken grene
or i^ powder it makes a man well colored it is hot and dry.

Ireos.
This herb is called Save, it has leaves much like unto the flowerdelyce, and
it has a white flower, it growethe in water, the virtue of it is good to heal
the aching of synowes. Also if it be dronken with wine or ale, it will destroy
wicked humors in a man's breast and the coughe. Also it destroys the crampe,
it heals the bytynge of venomous beasts. Also if a woman have a dead child
within her it will deliver her without peril, it is hot and dry.

Iris.
This herb is called Flower-delyce, this is like to an herb that is called
Save, almost in all fetures, but the flower is more ynde blewe, this herb
grows in water and gardyns. It is of the same virtue that Save is of.

Iarus.
This herb is named Cockopyntell this herb has leaves like Mercury, and a
flower like to Dragaunte, and it is bitter and pryckynge upon the tongue, his
virtue is if a man have any swellyng upon the tongue or any swellynge about his
eres, take the herb and sethe it with Tuberosetatibus in wine and oil and
with common and make a plaster thereof and lay it to his ^ares and it will make
him hole. Also take the knobbes of the rote, and dry them and cleanse the^, and
they have virtue to make a man laxatiue if it be constypulatyue. Also if thou
will make thy face white and clear take the powder of the rotes and lay it in
rose water, and set it against the son, till it be consumed, do so twice or
thrice, than rub thy face with the powder or what other place thou will, to
frete away the super^luite of the flesh This herb is hot and dry.

Iasia nigra.
This is called Madefelon or bulwede or knapwede.

Iasia alba.
This is called Golegras or wyld ^ansy, it is good for clensing of a man's
lymmes.

Ipia mayor.
This is named Pympernel, it has leaves like to Cheken meat i^ is good to
heal wounds and to destroy venym and to hele a man of the postume and to
heal sore eyes

Ipia minor.
This herb is called Cheke^ meat.

Ia^metus rusticus.
This herb is called Blewche time or andode or Ka^bowe.

Hic incipit littera.L.
Et primo de herba Lanisticum.
LOuage this herb is called, his virtue is much in the sede the more thereof is
good to bedro^ken with wine to heal a manes stomach, and for other cuylles
within a man, and for to make good deg^sstyon, it is hate and dry.

Lingua ceruina.
This is called Hertis tongue, ye virtue of it is good to ripe a postume and
break it if it be sode^ with oil of Roses and a plaster made thereof and if it
be dronken with wine or ale, it will harden a man's womb and it is hot and
dry.

Lilium.
This is called the Lylie, ye virtue of this is if it be sta^ped with talowe
and oil and a plaster made thereof and laid to a place there as the postume
is, it shall ripe it and make it to break. Also take a great quantyte of the
rotes and the sede of the Docke, and the more of Louache and put al these in
wine, and oil, the space of.ix. days and afterward sethe it and cleanse it,
and do thereto wexe and make thereof an ointment, and that is good to hele the
sore and the hardness of the mylte. Also ye joyce thereof is good to hele the
venym of adders. Also lay the joyce thereof to a wound that is bytten and it
will hele it, also take the rotes and roste them and temper them with oil of
Olyue, and lay it to a place that is brent, and it will heal it. Also this
herb is good for many other things and deseases if it be dronken with ale,
wine or water. Also it heals and comfort much a man's sinowes. The
virtue of this herb is in the Mores, and this herb is hot and dry.

Ligustum.
This herb is called Primrose, this herb is good to potage. Also the joyce
put in a man's nose it will destroy Megrym.

Lingua bouis.
This is called langdebefe the virtue of this herb is good to do away ye read
color of a man. Also if it be dronken it does away the Cardyacle and other
wicked humors in a man's longes. Also the joyce of this herb dro^ken with
hot water, makes a man to have a good mind and good wit, this must be
gathered in June or July, it is hot and dry.

Lingua serpentis mayor.
This is calley Adders tongue, this herb has leaves like to Affodyl, but they
be more grene, and also more sharp in the end, this must be gathered in
Apryll.

Lengua serpents minor.
This is called the less Addertong, this herb has leaves somewhat like to
Pygyll, and it has a yelowe flower and out of the stalk comes many
branuches and it grows in wodes.

Lingua canis
This is is called hundestonge, it is good to destroy the couge and the
possume, and it will type a boche

Lingua hiccina.
This is called Buck^shorn of Swyneskerce this herb has leaves faltred as it
were an Hertes horn, and growethe crepynge by the ground, and it has a
little white flower, it grows in watery places.

Lupinus.
This is called Lupyne, this herb has leaves like to five leued gras, the
Lupine has.vi^ leaves and it has a white flower, and a white seed that is
somewhat like and it bears coddes somewhat like unto Been coddes, the virtue of
this herb is thus, if a man have worms in his womb, take the sed^ and make
mele thereof and the joyce of wormewod and honey and make a cake thereof and eat
it and it vnbyndethe the stopynge of the liver and of the mylt. Also it is good
to destroy ye dropsye. Also take the same mele and the joyce of Arsmerte and
make thereof past and lay it to thy ears and it shall kyl the worms within
them, or if thou make a cake and hete it, it will do the same Also if thou will
take the joyce of Lekes and temper it with the mele and put it in thy eres, it
shall cleanse them fro al wicked humors and stynkyng. Also take the same mele
and temper it with oil and it will break and ripe al manner of postumes, this
herb is hot and dry.

Labrum veneris.
This is called Southystel, the virtue of this herb is this, if a man have a
hot fever, take the joyce thereof and temper it with hot water and let him
drink it and he shall be hole. Also if a man have venym within him, take this
herb and dry it and make powder thereof and do the powder in good wine and let
slym drink it and it will cast up all the venym, it is hot and dry.

Lauendula.
This is called Laue^der, if this be soden in water give that water to a man
that has the palsy and it will hele him, it is hot and dry.

Lactuca.
This herb is called Lettyse or stope worte, the virtue of this herb is thus.
If it be eaten raw, or soden it engenders good blod. Also this herb soden
with a lyttl A^sell and Saffron and than dro^ken, it helps a man that is
stopped in the liver and in the myl^e. Also if a man may not sleep, take the
sede of this herb and stamp it to powder and temper it with woman's milk and
make a plaster thereof on lynte, and lay it to ye temples of thy head, and
thou shalt sleep well, or else drink the powder thereof with milk.

Also take the sede and temper it with oil of Roses, and make a plaster and
lay it to the stomach, and it is good to destroy the hot postume Also drink
the joyce of this herb or powder of the sede for it is good to hele the Flixe.
But who yt uses this herb ouermuche, it will destroy their sight, this herb
is cold and sumwhat moist.

Lactuca siluatica.
This is called wild Lettyse, this herb has leaves like to the thysbell, and
they be sharp and kene and it has a flower of purple colour^ and it grows
in Feldes and in where, This herb is hot and dry.

Lactuca leporina.
This herb is called Harchys^ell this herb has leu^s like to Sowthystell, but
ye leaves be not so endered, it droppeth milk, the virtue of this herb is thus,
if a hare eat of this herb in Somer when he is mad he shall be hole also take
this herb and ley it to a man's side when he slepeth or else yt he know not
thereof, and it will hele him of the fevers.

Lollium.
This herb is called Cockle this herb has virtue if it be dronken with
Raddysshe and a little salt, it is good to hel^ the Canker or other wounds in
peril. Also it is good to comfort the stomach and the liver. Also it will
unbind worms in a man's stomach. Also it helps a man to make water, and it
is good for sore eyes. Also subtumigacion thereof will make a woman to bear her
child without any peril or harm. Also it will assuage the great pains of
akynge of the liver it is hot and dry.

Lapacium rubeum.
This is called the reed Docke, if ye a man take the joyce thereof and hold it
in his mouth, it will aswage the toth ache. Also if a man have the kings evil,
take this herb and seth it in wine and strain it and give him to drink and
he shall be hole if he use it often. Also if a man rub him with the joyce, it does
away evil ytchynges. Also this herb is good to deliver wyndes that be
stopped in a man's stomach balkyng. Also this herb is good to make scabbes
and botches ripe. Also it is good to make a man to have a hard womb, it is
hot and dry.

Linum.
This is called Flex, it is good if a man take the sede thereof and seth it in
water, it makes a man laxatiue, and it is good to make a plaster thereof for
akynge sores. Also there is another spece thereof that is called Custula, it is
named in English dodure, and it grows among Flexe, the virtue of this is
good to purge a man of the color Also if it be taken and a great qua^tyte
thereof sodden in Myrre and oil together, and a plaster made thereof, it is
good for the raynes and for the breast, and for other akynge lymmes.

Lauriola.
This is called Laurel, it will make a man laxatyue and it is good to purge a
man of flewme and of the color, it is good for a man that may not eat, for if
the joyce thereof be put in his eres, or if ye said herb be stamped and a
suppositorye be made thereof and laid on cotton it will hele, it is hot and dry.

Liquiritia.
This is named Lycoryse, the ^oote of this herb is sweet and it moysteth y^
kyndely hete of a man and it is good for the coughe. Also if it be sodden in
water, it will destroy a man's thirst. Also it makes a man's breast, his
throat and his longes, moist and in good te^per. This is cold and moist.

Lappa.
This is called Clote, or Burres

Lappa ameria.
This is called a clote.

:De littera.M.
et primo de Millefolio minore,
Mylfoyle ye less this herb is called. There is no dyfference of kind nor
virtue between milfoly the less, and mylfoly the more, save the more grows in
gardens, and the less in wild place they be both of one strength his virtue
shall be declared in Milfoyle the more following by letter.

Mercurialis.
This is called Mercurye, his virtue is good if a man have aki^ge in his womb,
give him to drink the joyce and he shall be hole, it will cle^se the stomach and
the sede will do the same. Also the joyce tempered with white wine is good to
heal sore eyes, and if a worm or other venym have bytten a man. take the
joyce and warm it, and wasshe it. Also if there be any worms c^open into a
man's ea^es, take ye joyce and warm it and put it into his eres and he shall be
hole This herb is hot and dry.

Menta.
This herb is called Minte, his virtue is if it be often eaten, it will slay
worms in a man's womb Also if a man have botches or other rennynges or
swellynge in his head, take this herb and stamp it and lay it to the sore
and it will hele it. Also if a man's tothe or the flesh of ye tothe ache or
stink, take this herb and sethe it in white wine and in Aylell, and take ye
lycoure and wasshe his mouth therewith, than take the powder of the herb and
tube well his tethe therwyth, and he shall have a sweet smelling mouth Also
take thou this herb and Aisell and make sauce, and it will make the to have a
tale^t to thy mete, also when there shall be given any medecyne to destroy
venym, it will be good to be given with the joyce of this herb, for it has
many virtues and namely for veni^, there be many spyces thereof and it is hot
and dry.

Menta romana.
This is named white Mynt, the virtue thereof is the joyce, it will slay worms
in a man's womb. Also the joyce will slay worms in the nosethrylles of a
man. Also the powder thereof cast in a man's meat, it shall make him well to
defye his meat.

Malua.
This herb is called Malow the virtue of it is good if the leaves be stamped
and laid to a man's stomach it will break a hot postume in the beginning,
or else meddle thy herb with fre^she swynes greece and lay it on a hot tyle and
lay it al hot to the postume and it shall ripe it and break it. Also it is
good to destroy the hardenes of a man's liver and mylte. Also it will make a
man laxatyue, and it is good for playsters, it is cold and moist.

Morell or night shadow.
This herb is cold and dry in ye ii. degree, the leaves, the branches and the
fruit thereof be right good and best when they be grene, they be good for
stoppinge of the Spleen and the liver, and best for the Iandesse to drink the
joyce of it with a little Ruberbe. Also for a postume in the stomach, in the
bowelles or in the liver seth the joyce thereof with barley water and drink it.

Mastyke.
This gu^m is hot and dry, in the second degree It is a gu^me of a tree
growinge in a part of the country of Greece in the latter end of Uere the men
of that country slit the trees and than make the grouude clean about and lay
clothes round about the trees, or some other conninge to keep the gum from
the ground in closing of it, to know which is best to take, the best is
white and clear, the whyt color is next the best and yt is meddled with earth
and su^what da^ke, y^ best mastyke he has virtue of co^strayni^g, co^forti^g
cle^si^g and losing of humors descendynde fro the head above to the eyes and
to the tethe, and for the deseses of the temples made of and ascendynge wind
fro the stomach to the head. Take powder of Mastike, with white sweet wine and
the white of an egg and meddle them well together and ye will ye may put in
frankensence and plaster it to the themples. Also sethe Mastike in water and
drink it and it will comfort well the stomach, and make good dygestyon, and
it comfort and relaxeth ye stomach and put to it Fenel sede, and it puts
out wind out of the stomach Also a plaster made of Mastyke and Bole Armoniake
and the white of an egg and vyneger and lay it on the forke of the stomach or
breast it will co^strayne well the coloryke vanite. Also seth Mastike in rayn
water and drink it with warm water and this medecyne is good for the Flux of ye
womb that comes of a sharp laxe that was taken before to stop him. And
boil Mastyke in rain water, or Rosewater with two or three cloves and drink
it warm and that comfort the vomyte and ye Flux of the womb that comes
of sharpenes and violence of the medecin. Also Mastike must have but little
boylynge for hurtyng of his virtue and it should be given warm, for it
co^strayneth more when that it is given warm, Than when it is over much hot.

Magerum.
This herb is hot and dry in the second degree, the flowers and leaves be
used in medicines, it should be gathered in somer wha^ it flowreth, and dry it
in the shadow, It may be kept a year, it has virtue of confortyng, of
losing, if consumynge, and of clensynge. If the powder of it be drunk in
wine, or else boil the powder of it in wine and it will hete well a stomach.
Also it comfort the degestyon. Also take ye leaves and flowers of margerum
and powne the^ a little and make them hot in a pan, and lay it to the
greuau^ce and it takes away the desease in the stomach that comes of wind.
Also for the rewm in the head, take this herb and bind it warm about thy
head. Also it dries the mother and consumethe the superfluyte of it.

Millefolium mayor, or yarowe.
King Achilles found this her be, and with it he heled his men that were
wounded with iron, for wou^des stamp this herb with swines greece, and plaster
it to the wound and it shall hele it, and the same is good for an ache in ye
breast or side it is good for them that may not pysse, take the joyce of this
herb and vyneger and drink it, and meruelously it helps a wound that has
toke^ cold. Stamp this herb in butter and lay it to the wou^d and it will
heal it well. Also to degest the stomach or that lies there in, take the
joyce of it and meddle it with water and honye and drink it warm. Also for
deseases in the body take the powder and meddle it with wine or with good ale
and drynk it and it helps much. Also it is good for heart breimyng. Also for
the head ache stamp this herb and plaster it to the head. Also for bytyng of
a wood dog, stamp this herb with the graynes of where au^ it heleth it.
Also for him that may not hold his meat, sta^pe this herb with wine and
drink it warm.

Motherworte or Mugworte,
This herb in latyne is called Artemesia, and it is hot and dry in the.iii.
degree, this herb helps a woman to co^ceyue a child, and clen^ethe the
mother and makethe a woman to have her flowers and to destroys the Emeroydes
on this manner, First they must be gathered, the^ take powder of Motherworte
and of Horehounde to gyther and straw it on ye pappes. Also if a child be
dead in the Mothers womb take Motherworte and stamp it small and make a
plaster thereof and lay it to her womb al cold, and with the grace of god she
shall have have deliverance with out perell, It is good for the stone and the
gravel in the raynes of a man or of a woman, if a mon bear this herb upon him
there shall no venomous best grieve him. It is good for the yelowe yaundes and
if it be dronken with wine, for, it comfort the stomach and makethe a man or
woman to have good color.

Maces.
This spyce is hot and dry in the.ii. degree maces be ryndes or husks it
grows about the Nutmegge as ye rind grows about the Hasel mutte, it may
be kept.x. year i^ his virtue it is confortynge, dissoluynge, and consuminge,
the knowledge of fine maces is thus, it should be in color like to fine gold
or else like to gold, that silver is gylt with, the which has a sharp talage
with a bytternes, and it lokethe like to earth, and it is to be refused, for
it has no sharp savor, for a cold stomach that may not defye nor degeste
well, take maces and boil them in wine and drink it, Also a good plaster the
which is best for a feeble stomach, make ^ouder of Mastyke and of maces and
medele them with oil of roses and wexe and make a plaster thereof and lay it
on the stomach of ye seek person. Also to cleanse the brain of superfluous
humors, take a quantyte of Maces and chewe the^ well in thy mouth and hold
them there a while, and that shall lose the fumosite of humors that rise up to
the brains and purge the superfluite of it. Also for feebleness of the stomach
and ye liver of a cold cause and for ye colyke, and for the deseases of the
spyrytuall members, or flewme, boil maces in the joyce of Fenell and in the
end of the boylynge, put in a little wine, than strain it and drink it for
it is the best remedy for the fore said deseases. And for the ache of the
heart, use powder of maces in thy metes and drynkes.

Menta.
This is named ye reed Mynte it is hot and dry in the.ii. degree, and there
be, ii. other myntes, but I mean house mintes, the which properly is said
garden myntes, for that most commonly is in medecines both grene and dry, for
great holsomnes it should be dried in a shadow place, and so it will be kept a
year in great virtue, to dyssolue or lose to co^sum of his proper qualite and
to comfort of his swet savor, for ye stynkyng of the mouth and filthe in the
gu^mes and of the teth wash thy mouth and gummes with vyneger that mintes
besodenin, and after rub him with the powder of myntes or with dry myntes to
provoke the appeti^e, wha^ an impedyment of the stomach that comes of cold
humors being in the mouth of the stomach make a salve of Myntes and vyneger
with a little Synamun and peper and use it well against vomytes that comethe
of feebleness of the stomach or of cold causes. Sethe myntes in Sauge water and
vyneger and dype it to and lay it on the mouth of the stomach with the myntes
that be sodden therein. Also give to the paciente to eat of the same Myntes for
the syncopyne and feebleness in Fevers, and with out fevers, or of medecyne, or
of what cause it be, stamped Myntes with vyneger and a little wine if the
pacyent be without Fever, and if he be with Fever, stamp Myntes with ^ynege^
alone, tha^ make a toste of sower bread and toste it well till it be almost
burnt than put it in that lycoure and let it lie there in till it be well
soked, than put it in to his nose and rub his lyppes, gummes, teth and temples
therwyth and bind it to the pulse veins of his arms. and let the pacyent
eat the moystnes that is left and swalowe it in. For to cleanse the mother,
take the tender croppes of Myntes and seth them in water or wine and plaster
it to the share, and to the raynes against the co^gelyng in a woma^ns breast
take the small stalks of mine eyes and sethe them in wine and oil and plaster
it about ye tetes Also be it known that when any medecyne should be given a
gaynste venym it should be given with the joyce of myntes for myntes have a
manner of strength of drawing out of venym, or else it should be with wine that
myntes has bensodden in, for stopping of the splen and the liver and of the
ways of the vryne of a cold humor and of a hot without Fever, Take the
joyce of myntes alone, or myntes soden in wine, or the joyce of myntes meddled
with honey, and give it to the pacyent. To slay worms in the bellye, take the
joyce of myntes and drink it, and thou shalt be hole Also ye joyce of myntes
flees worms in thy ears. For a tetter take the joyce of myntes and put
thereto brimstone and vynegre and meddle them well together, and anoynte the
tetter therwyth and thou shalt be hole. For a wound in the head, stamp
mintes and lay the^ on the wound. etc. For pain in the side take myntes and
seth them in old wine or ale and with it stamp.xviii. graynes of Peper and
drink it in the night, there be but little dyfference between this mynte and
the romayne mynte, this is the garden mynte.

N. littera
et primo de nux muscata.
NUtmygge is hot and dry in the.ii. degree, ye best grows in ynde and in the
time of his ripinge, it is gathered and.vii. year it may be kept, they that
be plain and heuye after their kind be best to be chosen. Also when they be
broken they fall not to powder, but they have a sweet and sharp sauoure, if
they lack any of these aforesaid, they be not good for medecynes, he has
virtue of comfortynge by his sweet sauoure, or coldness and feebleness of
degestyon of the stomach, take in the morning half a Nutmige or a hole
Nutmegge and eat it. Also for a cold stomach that is feeble of degestyon and
for the liver give him wine that the Nutmegges is boiled in. Also for the same
boil Nutmegges, and Mastyke i^ wine and drink it, this is good for the
deseases in the stomach, and in the bowelles to break in wind. Also in the
recoueryng of a syckenes to comfort the spyrytual me^bres boil Nutmegges and
mastike in wine and drink it. Also take a Nutmeg and smell to it, and it will
comfort the spyrytuall members.

Napo.
This is named Nauewe, it desires ground that is fattye, and sandy, it
growethe best in such ground. The property of the Nauewes is he changes
and turns into rape, and after that it turns into nauewe. The best do
grow in ground well do^ged and turned Also it proves weil in places that
stuble of corn has been in y^ same year. If they grow to thycke pluck some
up here and there, so that the other may prove yt better and those that ye
pluck up set the^ in void places. They should be sown in the end of Iulye
and in Auguste, the best sauored Nauewes be they yt be long and strayghte and
not over great nor branches in the roots, bu^ a straight root, Also of
Nauewes may be made a passing good meat with a little salt and vyneger,
honey and mustarde and with sweet spices and it may be made without spyces
Nauewes be hot in the second degree and they noryshe much, but they be hard of
degestion, they make the flesh soft and wyndy but less wynd than rapes.
Therefore when ye seth them in water, cast that water away, and seth them in
another water and so his hard substance is tempered by that, and so menely
between good and evil they enge^der noryshi^g, for they that be thus sodden be
not hard of degestyon, they make one wyndye, and they make stoppynge of veins
and of poores but yet they be profitable if they be sodden twyse and both the
waters to be cast away, and they to be sodden with the third with fat flesh.

Hic incipit littera.O.
et primo de Olibano.
OLibanum is called Franke^sence, This is hot and dry in the.iii. degree, it
is gum of a tree in Inde, the cleneste is the best Also there be trees of
that kind growyng in Bama^ke, but not so clear nor good, for it is darker of
color, therefore it is to be refused in medecin, it has virtue of
comfortinge by his sweet sauoure Also of closing and co^straynyng for the
tothache that comes of superfluyte of humors of the head and specially by
the veins, make a plaster of powder of fra^kensence with wine and the white
of an egg, meddle them together and plaster them about the templ^s, Also to
stop the ways of the veins above, take Frankensence and chewe it well in
thy mouth and that shall stop and let the flux of humors coming down to
the nosethrilles. Take pills of fra^kense^ce and swalow them down in the
morning, then boil frankensence in wine and at eue^ drink that wha^ thou
go to bed. Also these py^les be good to help the degestyon of the
stomach, and good against sore bolkinges. Also to the confortynge and clensynge
of the Meryce, and helping of conception in y^ receyuynge the fume of
fra^kense^ce bynethe. Also boil powder of it in wine and when it is me^ely
warm dippe a cloth in it and lay it so warm to the share of the pacyent, and
greatly it comfort the Matrice.

Hic incipit littera.P.
Et primo de Pruna.
AL plumines be cold and moist, some be white some be black and some be
read. They that be black and some what hard be the best, they be called
Damsons, and when they be ripe gather the^ and slet them and spring Uyneger
upon them, and so they may be kept^ in a vessel of wood a year, and first
when they be cu^ they must be laid in the son.xv days to dry, these Damsons
have virtue of coldness and clensyng of the inward parts wherefore they be good
in fevers that be sharp and for costyfenes of the belie that comes of drynes
or of Colorike humors dryenge, if it be new give it him to eat, if it be dry
boil it in water and give ye pacyente to drink thereof, this is good for the
Fever tertian, for stoppynge of the liver, for the yaundes and sharp fevers it
soteth the belly, it is good for defaute of appetyte, and for many other
deseases.

Peper.
This is called Peper, it is hot and dry in the.iiii. degree. There be three
manners of Peper. Black white, and long. Diascorydes and Constantyne says
that they be fruits of tres growing in Inde and some say that Peper is made
black with brennynge in the fire for when it is gathered there be a great
multitude of serpe^tes about it, and therefore they put it in the fire to brenne
the serpents yt be about it, the Sarysyns dry it in an oue^ because it shall
not encrese in another land. But of all the Pepers, the black is the best and
the most wholesome. Take peper and put it in to the nosethrylles and it will make
the to nese, and sethe peper and figs in wine and drink it, and it will
cleanse the spyritual members of tough humors, and it is good for the pose that
is taken of cold. Also for the same eat powder of peper with fygges. Also
powder of peper put in a man's meat comfort the degestion of ye stomach
also put long peper i^ a roasted apple and eat it, and it shall comfort the
degestyon. Also powder of Peper will freate away dead flesh or proud
flesh, and long, Peper comforts more tha^ black. Also black Peper has
virtue of losing, comfortynge, and of drawing, i^ cleanses the spyrytual
members of cold flewme and vycyous humors and best when the powder of it is
eaten with fygges for he has great strength of heatinge and comfortynge the
stomach provoking appetyte, but to Sanguyne and Colorike persons, it is not
good to use peper, for it dries and bre^neth blood and it engenders leprye
and other evil syckenes. Plato says that Peper is foul to se in syghte,
with out black, and within with a sharp savor and a sweet odor, littell in
quantyte and much in virtue.

Pympernell.
This herb is good to hele wou^des and to destroy venym, and to hele a
postume and sore eyes.

Pulegium.
This is named Puleol royal it is hot and dry in the.iii. degree In the time
of flowring it should be gathered, and it may be kept in his virtue a year,
when it shall be used in medecynes, take ye leaves with the flowers and strype
them fro the stalk, and it has virtue of losing and consumynge, for ye cold
humors in ye head take powder of it and hete it well in a Skellet, and al hot
bind it to the greuance without any lycoure. Also for a great cold taken in
the head, and for a tough humor or a watery humor make a garg^rysme, sethe
^ulyoll royal and ^rye fygges in a tarte vyneger, and take a good sponful
thereof as hot as ye may suffer it, and hold it in thy mouth till it be
almost cold, than put it out and take as much more, and do so three or.iiii.
times and that shall purge thy head well of flewme. also sethe it in wine and
drink it and it is good for the desease of the stomach and guts, and for
cold causes, or for wind in the stomach. Also it is good for toughe flewme in
the breast, if thou take powder of it, and meddle it with claryfied honey and make
a lectuarye thereof and use to eat thereof, or take the herb thereof and boil
it with wine, honye or water and use to drink thereof. Also for the black
color drink y^ joyce of it, or boil it with wine and thou shall be hole.
Also for a itchynge byle, lay this herb in water, and use to wasshe the
ytchynge therein warm and thou shall be hole. Also for ache take this herb al
grene and stamp it and plaster it to the ache and it will ease it. Also
against the cough boil this herb in wine and drink it luke warm and this will
make one to pysse well. For the desease in the belly stamp this herb with
common and water and lay it hot to the nauel and lightly it shall be hole, for
the diseases in ye liver stamp this herb and temper it with water and vinegar
and drink the joyce thereof, and thou shall be hole. For an ache in ye legs or
arms take the leaves of elders and Pulioll royal of every like much and stamp
them together well and plaster it to the greuannce, and it is good for ye fever
tercian, if thou take the branches of this herb and wrappe it in a good lock
of wolle and give it to the pacyent and let him smell thereto, before the fever
come on him, and that shall do hi^ great ease. For the head ache take this
herb and bind it fast round about thy head and anon it ceasethe the ache.
Also if a woman have a dead child in her womb stamp this herb and give her
to drink with old wine, and she shall be delivered of it, by the grace of God.

For the crampe drink the joyce with vyneger fasting and it will put it away.

Pencedanum vel Feniculus porcinus.
This herb is call maysh Hogs fenel or maiden wede this herb is hot and
dry in the.iii. degree when this herb is gathered for medecynes the root is
better than the herb when the rotes be gathered they may be kept all a year,
it has a purginge virtue, it is good for the strangulyo^ or the flyxe and good
for stoppynge of the spleen and the liver, boil this herb in wine or water
and give it to the pacie^te to drink. Also sethe it in oil and wine and
plaster it to the share and it will help the strangulion or the flix. Also
the same plaster is good for hardness of the splen it molyfieth that. Also
against the cold humors of the spyrytuall members give him to drink water with
barley and this herb sodden to gyther and if it be a fervent cold humor than
sethe the Barley and the herb in wine, and give it to the pacye^te to drink
with Lycoryce.

Petrocilium.
This is called perslye, this is hot and moist in the third degree It
multyplyeth greatelye man's blood and does away the Tysyke, it helps well to
destroy the Fever tertian, it is good for the side and the dropsy, it
comfort the heart and the stomach, and it is good in potage and to stop
chyckens.

Peritorium.
This herb is called peritory and it is hot and dry, ye virtue of this herb
is thus. If a man have an evil stomach or else akynge within him, take this
herb and sethe it in thy potage and eat thereof and thou shall do well. Also
this herb is good to hele one of the stone, if he be bathed with it.

Pastinaca.
This is called a perseneppe, it is hot and moist in the second degree. There
be two manner of persneppes, the one is the Persneppe of the garden, and the
other is the wild persneppe. They be more used to meat tha^ to medecyne his
virtue is to enge^dre thycke blod and much, wherefore it styrreth the lust of
the body if it be much used therefore it is good for ama^ that is newly
recovered out of his great sykenes to use to eat of it a while. Also they be
good to be eaten raw or sodden for y^ mela^coly humors grene and not dry. To
make a serope to stir the lust of the body and for to comfort the,
degestyon take roots of Parsneppes and sethe them well in water, tha^ take
them o^t and cast away the water, and the rotes that be in gobbets, boil the^
again i^ water tha^ put thereto honey well clarifyed and let them boil unto
the thyckenes of honey, and continually styre it, that it cleue not to the
vessel and in the mydle of the boylynge, put in almondes if ye have them, in
the end of the boylynge, put in gynger, galengale, and a little peper and
nutmegges and other sweet sauored spyces. Also Parsneppes may be so wen in
December, Ianuarye, and March, in fat ground deep doluen and lose ground and
best dug, and they be somewhat wyndye. Boil them in two waters but cast
away the first water. Also there is Parseneppes that is somewhat read, the
which may be eaten both raw and soden, and with the^ and Nauewes to gyther
ye may make a very good meat and fair and read in color the which be
sodden as Parsneppes be.

Plantago.
This is called Plantaine, it is cold and dry in the.ii. degree, for head ache
take Plantayne and bynd it about thy neck, and the ache shall go out of thy
head. Also for deseases in the body, sethe this herb in good lycour what ye
will and use to drink it and it shall cleanse the mawe and the other inwardes.
Also for him yt bledeth at the nose give him to drink the joyce of it and it
shall cease lightly. Also if ye body of any man be wexen hard. stamp this herb
with greece and make a plaster of it and lay it on the hardness and lightly it
shall be soft and make it hole. Also for biting of a serpent, take this herb
and drink it with wine. Also for the desease in the mouth take the joyce of
this herb and hold it long in thy mouth and eat the leaves of this he^b for
him that may not well pysse sethe this herb and drink it. Also for a rotten
humor in the breast and about the heart take the joyce of this herb the
wayght of.x. d. and meddle it with honye and give him to eat a sponfull at one
time and that shall purge the breast, for ache in the r^te take this herb with
vyneger and drink it. Also it heleth wounds and cle^seth the fylth out of
wounds. Also it swadgeth ran kelynge and staunchethe the mencyons both with
drink and with playsters made with powder of Armoniake and of sandragoune and
Barley meddled with the white of eggs made in a plaster and laid to ye sore for
the Canker and the pain in the gu^mes, take the joyce thereof and meddle it with
honey and vyneger and powder of Alume and that shall slay the Canker in the
mouth. Also for the fevers, stamp.iii. Rotes of Plantayne, and tempre it with
water and give it him to drink that has the fevers and he shall be hole, for
the Iaundes stamp Pla^tayne and Lettyse together and temper them with vyneger
and make a plaster there of and lay it to thy right side and use it till thou
be hole, and it is good for the bytyng of an adder, drink ye joyce of it and
lay the substance of the herb to the sore, for the same hang the rote of
plantayne about the neck of the pacient and meruelously it helps, for the
potager, and for the disease in y^ synowes sta^pe the leaves of it with a
little salt and plaster it well thereto, and meruelously it helps.

Portum.
This is called a leke, it is hot and dry in the.ii. degree, it desyrethe lou^e
ground and fat and well du^ged in that they shall best profit in hot places
and te^perate. They may be sown in Decembre in temperate places and cold.
They may be sown in January, February and March, when the ground is well
dygged and dyghte, and it may be sown by it self or meddled with other seeds
of herbs in good fat ground well dygged and turned above it with good
do^ge, this sede would be sown somewhat thycke and when they be somewhat spro^g
take up the greatest lekes and plant them in forowes, but take a way none of
their root when ye set the^ in ye forowes, but when ye set them with a dyble,
than cut a way the rotes almost up to the leke head and away the uppermost
of the leaves they may be planted in Iulie, Auguste, September and October, they
be much profitable in March, and in Apryll next following, but in your
plantynge you shall not seek after fate soft ground for menely ground that is
best and that ground that is almost dry is best, there is two manner at
setting of lekes, one is in forowes, as is the manner in Bonony and the forowe
must be fro the other a spanne large, and the lekes mast be set in the forowe
iiii. fyngers bread each fro other, and when ye mnke next forowe cast the
earth on the lekes and tread it down softely with thy foot. The ii. manner is
thus wha^ the ground is well dygged and raked than make holes with a great
dyble and every hole fro other a large spa^ more i^ which the lekes must be set
in, but fyl not thy holes nor put earth on the^ but let the^ be void, iii.
wekes wha^ wedes grow among them pull them up and keep the^ clean fro wedes.
Diverse auctours say that the Lekes that be thus planted be better tha^ any
other, or they may be well planted among great onyons and when the onyons be
taken away, wede the leke and you shall find them fair and good and wha^ ye
pluck up, leave some in a place, and leave some for sede, y^ which sede may be
kept iii. year, and it be hanged up in the hulles, Lekes be best soden,
or.iii. times washed before they be eaten. For a wound take lekes and stamp
them well with honey, and lay it to the wound, and it will heal it, for the
coughe take ye joyce of lekes use to dri^ke it, for y^ same take ye joyce of
lekes and meddle it with womans milk and use to drink it, and it will cleanse
the longes of al vices.

Fracturas sotidat duritiasque relaxat.
vulnusque appositum ceto cu^ sale claudit.

Diretrum.
This is called Pellyter, it is hot and dri in ye.iii. degree, the rote is used
in medecynes, five year he may be kept in his virtue, and know ye well y^ hs
sharpnes is not known, it should be powned and holde^ in ye mouth, He has
virtue of losi^g and drawi^g and of co^sumi^g. To make a gargarisme take
pelleter and fygges and boil the^ i^ vyneger or sweet wine and it will cle^se
y^ brain of superflute of flume also if it be chewed in ye mouth it helps ye
palsy in ye tongue. Also for ye Palsye and podagar sta^pe it and sethe it in
wine and oil and plaster it to the greua^ce this plaster helps much therefore
if thou may have grene peliter sta^pe it and lay it soking i^ wine xv. days,
and after boil it well and put thereto wexe and oil for this is ye best
ointment for all ye foresaid desease

Papauer.
This is called Popy, it is cold and dry, There is two manners of them. The
white Popye is cold and moist and it is good to cause one to sleep. The sede
thereof well gathered may be kept ten year, it has virtue of clensyng. It is
put in medecynes with a determynacyon as the sede may be received of white
popy or black. For to provoke a slepe^ make ye a plaster of each of them or
one of them with woman's milk and the white of an egg and lay it to the
temples. The woman of Salerne gave to young chyldred the popye but they would
give them no black popye for it made them to much heavy. Also for a hot
postume in the beginning and for chafynge of the liver take the sede of white
popye or else the herb of it and stamp it and meddle it with oil of Roses and
plaster it to ye greuau^ce. Also for drynes in fever e^yke, and in other
fevers take and hete oil of vyolet meddled with powder of poppye sede, and
annoynte the small of the back therwyth.

Pollipodium.
This is called pollipodye, it is hot in the.iiii. degree and dry in the
second degree. This Pollypodye is fern that grows upon Oaks or on walls, or
stones but the pollypodye that growethe on oaks is the best. Gather the rotes
of it and lay it a day in the son, chose that is grene, and that which
appears dry when it is broken it is to be refused, he has virtue of
dissoluing of drawyng of purging flewme and specially melancoly, wherefore
communely he is put in boylynge and to sleumatyke and melancolyous hole men, he
is given to preserve their health, and know well that in ye boylynge of
pollypody should be put in some thing to exclude and put out ventuosyte as
Anyse sede fenell sede, or Comin or else al these a foresaid seeds for they
exclud out much wynd and unbind the humors. Also for the E^tidian and for
Ilica passio and to keep a man's health, do thus stamp half an ounce of
polypody or an ounce if ye will have it much laxatyue, than boil it with
Prunes nnd vyolettes in Fenell water or Anyse, in a great quantyte than strain
it and give it the pacyente at morning and evening. Also sta^pe it and sethe
it in water with Fenell sede and with water, and make a broth with a chekin therein
with swet sauored spyces and give ye pacye^t to eat. Also make a drynk thereof
after this manner sta^p it and boil it i^ wine and after put mor wine thereto
and so make up your drink with sweet sauored spyces

Pionium.
This is called Pyony, it is hot and dry in the second degree, so says
Ypocras and Galyen the good philosophers, they say that ye root thereof grows
to diverse medecynes and it will last ten years, and it is cold for the palsy,
dry the rote and drink powder with Caster sodden in wine. Also the same is
good for the Stone. Also if a man be costyue and may not goo to the draught,
take and strowe the powder thereof on Cotton and put it in to his foundement,
and drink ye powder in white wine. Also for a man or woman that has the
falling evil eat it and drink it in wine. Also hang the rote about his
neck and it will save him without doubt within.xv. days. Also it helps
the sores in the mouth. Also if thou sethe it in wine, it helps the spleen.
Also drink Pyony with water and honey and do thereto powder of Colyander and
this is good for the stomach, for the mylte and for gravel in the raynes. Also
it is good for women for diverse deseases, Also sethe it in white wine and give
a woman to drink thereof and it will hele her bledder and make her to piss the
stone, and it will hele her of the Marris. Also Pyony sede when it is black it
makes delyueraunce of the bed of the child in her womb and at every time
when he shall use to drink it, she must drink xv. seeds an time.

Q. Littera.
Et primo de Qui^quefolia.
QUynckfolie is cold and dry i^ ye second degree, this herb is good for ache
in a man's limbs and for ache of ye head, mouth, tongue, and throat, that be
sore, take and sethe this herb in wine and give the pacyent to drink thereof
three days, first and last and he shall be hole. Also stamp it, and drink the
joyce of it in ale and it will cease the akynge and ye gnawynge of a man or
woman. Also if a man blede sore at the nose, give him to drink the joyce of it
with wine, and anoynte his head well with the joyce of this hethe, and anon the
blood shall staunche. For to sle a Canker, seth it in wide and the greece of a
swine and make a plaster thereof and lay it on the Canker and it shall sle it,
Also take powder of quyncke foil and meddle it with honey and there with rub
thy mouth, tongue, and throat, and the chekes within and it will purge it well.
Also for poison and bitynge of a serpente take the joyce of ye Quynckefoyle,
and drink it with wine and merueloslye it resysteth venym.

Hic incipit littera.R.
and first of Rybeworte.
RYbeworte is good for ye fever quartayne, take the joyce of this herb and
drink it two hours before ye think the disease shall come to you and by ye
grace of God it shall go from you.

Rednetle.
Take Read Netels, and sta^pe the^ small and sethe the^ in an earthen pot with
a porcyon of white wine til half be wasted, and give the pacyent to drink
first and last warm, and lay the herbs to the fou^deme^t, as hot as the
pacyent may suffer it, and use this medecyne til he be hole.

Rosa.
This is the red Rose, it is cold in the first degree and dry in the second
degree. Dry roses and grene roses be used in medecynes, and of grene roses be
made many confeccions. Also dry roses be put in medecynes, when a receyte of
roses is made, for they be soon made in powder of roses is made Mell roset,
Sugar roset, syrop of Roses alectuary of Roses, water of Roses and oil of
roses. Mell roset is made thus, take fair purified honey, and new red roses
the white ends of the^ clipped away than choppe them small and put them into
the honey and boil them menely together, to know wha^ it is boiled enough, ye
shall know it by the sweet odoure and the color ruff Five years he may be
kept in his virtue, by the roses he has virtue of co^fortyng, and by the honey
he has virtue of cle^synge. In winter and in somer, it may be given
competently to feeble sick slumatyke melancolye, and Colorike people^ also
Mulsa is made of water and mell roset, and it may be given after the iii. day
yt it comes out of the bath for to cleanse toe stomach of cold humor give him
mel roset with water that fenell sede is boiled in putting therein.iii.
graynes of salt, if the sick may take it this should be the quantyte of roses
and honey. In.vii. pound of honey put a pound of Roses, Sugar roset is made
thus. Take new gathered Roses and stamp them right small with Sugar than put
it in a glass and xxx. days let it stand in the son and stir it well and
meddle it well together and so it may be kept three years in his virtue. The
quantyte of Sugar and Roses should be thus in.iiii. pound of Sugar a pound of
Roses, he has virtue of co^straynynge and comfortyng of the flux in the women.
Take Sugar roset and powder of Mastyke of every one a drame, and meddle the^ well
together and give it to the sick often, than give him rosewater that Mastyke and
cloves be sodden in. Syrope of Roses is made thus, some do take roses dyght, as
it is before said and boil them i^ water, and in the water strayned they put
Sugar and make a syrope thereof, and some do make it better for they put roses
in a vessel having a straight mouth and they put to the roses hot water, and
they let it stand a day and a night and of that water puttyng to it Sugar they
make syrop and some do put more of roses in the foresaid vessel and more of
hot water, and let it stand as is before said and so they make a reed water,
and make thereof a syrope. And some do stamp new Roses and then strain out
the joyce of it and Sugar therwyth they make syrope and this is the best
making of syrope and know it well that syrope made of fresshe and new Roses,
first somewhat meanli they laxe, in ye end they bynd, but syrope made of dry
Roses first and last they bind Syrope of Roses has virtue of comfortynge
and constraynyng against the flux of the womb and the vomyte, give it to him
with rain water or with rose water in a fever. After letting of blod give it
him with cold water. Also the same for the Sincopyne. Oil of roses is made
thus, some boil Roses in oil and keep it. Some do fill a glass with Roses
and oil and they boil it in a caudron full of water and this oil is good,
some stamp fresh roses with oil and they put it in a vessel of glass, and
set it in the son x. days and this oil is good against chafyng of the
liver, if it be anointed therewyth. Also it is good for ye desease in the head
that comes of hete, anoint the forhead and the temples with oil of roses.
The water of Roses has virtue of comfortyng and constraynynge against the
flux of the womb and vomyte. Also give him Rosewater boiled with Mastyke and
cloves it is best against the flux and feebleness of virtue, if it come of a
flux by a sharp medecyne. Also rose water is good for the Syncopyne and the
Cardiacle give it hi^ to drink and spring the water on his face and y^ water
is good for eyes and in oyntme^tes for the face, for it takes away the wemmes
and the superfluyte and strayneth not the skin. Also dry Roses put to the
nose to smell do comfort the brain and the herb and quenches the spyryte.
Also against the flux of the womb of color give him Roses boiled in rain
water. Also a plaster made of roses and the white of an egg and vyneger and
dyp a sponge in it and lay it on the mouth of the stomach against the
syncopyne, give him to drink water that roses have been boiled in, and give him
powder of roses in a rere egg to make oil of roses, take.ii. li. of oil
a.li. and an half of roses and put all in a glass, and put the glass in a
Caud^ron full of water and hang it therein and boil it till the third part be
wasted, and after strain it thorough a linen cloth and keep it for your use,
for this oil is losyng and serves for many things. Some do put rose water in
a glass and they put roses with there dew thereto, and they make it to boil in
water, than they set it in the son till it be reed, and this waier is best,
this has virtue of comfortynge and constraynynge and for the flux of the
womb, and against the vomit.

Rosemary.
This herb is hot and dry, take the flowers and put them in a linen clothe
and so boil them in fair clean water to the half and cool it, and drink it
for it is mouch worth against all euylles in the body. Take the flowers and
make powder thereof and bind it to the right arm in a lynen cloth and it shall
make y^ linght and merry Also eat ye flowers with honey fasting with sower
bread and there shall rise in the none evil swellynges. Also take the flouers
and put them in a cheste among your clothes, or among books and moughtes shall
not hurt the^, boil ye flowers in gotes milk and tha^ let the^ stand al a
night under the air fair covered after y^ give him to drink thereof that has
the tysyke and it shall deliver hi^, boil the leaves in white wine and wassh
thy face therewith thy bearde and thy brows and there shall honorne grow out,
and thou shall have a fair face. Put the leaves under thy beds head and thou
shall be delivered of al euel dremes, Break the leaves small to powder and lay
them on a ca^ker and it shall sle it. Take the leaves and put them into a vessel
of wine and it shall preserve it fro tartnes and euel sauoure, and if thou sell
that wine thou shalt have good luck in the sale. If thou be feeble with
vnkynely sweet, take and boil the leaves in clean water and when the water is
cold, do thereto as much of white wine, and tha^ make therein soppes and eat
well thereof, and thou shall recover appetyde. If thou have the flux byole the
leaves in strong Aysell and bind them in a lynen clothe and bind it to the
womb and anon ye flu^e shall withdraw. If thy legs be blown with the gout,
boil the leaves in water, and than take the leaves and bind them in a lynnen
clothe about thy legs and it shall do the good. Take the leaves and boil the^
^n strong Aysel and bind them in a clothe to thy stomach, and it shall
deliver the of all euylles, If thou have the coughe, drink the water of the
leaves boiled in white wine, and it will heal the Take the rynde of Rosemary
and make powder thereof and drink it for the pose and it shall help the, Take
the tember thereof and bre^ne it to coals and make powder thereof and than put it
in a lynen clothe, and rub thy tethe therewith, and if her be any worms
therein it shall sle the^ and keep thy tethe from euylles. Also make the a box
of the wod and smell to it and it shall preserve thy youth. Also pu^ thereof in
thy doors or in thy house and thou shalt be without danger of adoers and
other venomous serpents. Make the a barell thereof and drink thou of the
drink that stands therein and thou need not to fear no poison that shall hurt
the and if thou set it in thy gardyn keep it honestli for it is much
profitable. Also if a man have lost his smellyng of the air, or else he may
not draw his breath make fire of the wood and take his breath therwyth and give
it hi^ to ease and he shall be hole.

Ruta.
This is called Rewe, this is hot and dry in the.ii. degree, the leaves and the
seeds be used in medecynes ye seeds may be kept ten year and the leaves a year,
he has virtue of purginge, dissoluynge and consumynge, for the head ache take
ye joyce of rewe and hete it and put it into his nosethrylle for it purges out
fleum and clense^th the brain, the joyce soden with wine is good for the same.
For feebleness of sight put Rewe in a pot with ale and let the pacient use to
drink of it. For stoppynge of the splen and liver, the stranguri and the
flux, seth Rue in wine with roots of Fenell, or powder of Rewe, with the
joyce of Fenell, and drink it warm. Also for and ache or fretyng, sta^pe Rewe
with powder of Comin and plaster it to the greuaunce. Also against venym,
drink ye joyce of Rewe. For bytynge of venomous best or worm, plaster Rewe
to ye bytynge. For feebleness of eye sight still water of Rewe, and roses,
together and put thereof in your eyes Also an oyntme^t for sore eyes, sta^pe
Rewe and Fenell together of yche like much by weyghte and meddle the^ with
honey, and Eufrose and it is good oymente for eyes. Take Rewe, Common, and Peper,
of yche like much by weight, and grynde them small to gyther and meddle them
with honey and veneger and it is good for the ache in ye breast and in the
raynes.

Hic incepit liriera. S.
Et primo de Sinapio.
SImapum is called mustarde, it is hot and dry, in the meddle of the.iii.
degree, and not the herb, but the sede, is put in medecynes. Five year he may
be kept in his virtue. He has virtue losing, of drawing, of making thine,
and of consumynge. For the palsy of the tongue take and chewe the sede in your
mouth, and hold it under the tongue and it shall do you good. Also for the
Palsye in other members sethe the sede in wine and lay it to the sore place
and is best in the beginning of the disease. Also take the powder of it, and
put it into your nosethrilles and it will make you to nese and it cleanses the
brain and superfluite flume. Also sethe it in wine and figs and hold it
warm in your mouth till it be al most cold tha^ take as much and do so.v.
or.vi. times a day as much another day and this is good for an old pose of
chough and flumy humor in the the head Also for stopping of the splen and the
liver sethe the sede in water with rotes of Fenel, than strain it and put thereto
honey and give it to the sick to drink. For hardness of the sple^ sethe the
herb of it in wine and plaster it to the greuaunce for to ripe and break a
postume, stamp this herb well with hogs greece and lay it to the postume.
Also for Strangury take the herb of this and sethe it in oil and wine and
plaster it to the greuance, and it will louse it. Also for the Ciaticaand for
other old sores take mustarde sede and the third part of cro^mes of white
bread, and figs, honey, and vinegar, after as the ach of the sore requires
the more of ye fygges and the honey that is there the more sharper is the
strength of the sede, and the more bread and vinegar that is in it, the more
weker is the sede, but I say not yt ye shall put this confection to al sores
but to great and old sores. His virtue if if he be eaten it sharpeth a man's
wit, it cleanses the belly, it breketh the stone it purges the vryne
menstrosite, and comfort the stomach.

Smalage.
Take Smalage sede Rewe sede, Peper and salt and grynde them well together and
tempre the^ with wine and drink it, for it is good for cold and wicked
humors in the stomach and comfort the stomach the liver and the longes, it
is good for wounds. For rankelynge and to cease the brennynge and akinge, and
to bring them to their kind again. Also it is good to drink for the fever
tercian.

Saluia.
Sage is hot in the first degree and dry in the second degree the leaves only
be taken in medecynes both grene and dry, he may be kept a year, there be two
manners of Sages, the garden and ye wild Sage, if thou will have Sage in for
medecynes take ye leaves of garden Sage, for that co^sumeth more and comfort
more tha^ the other does. For the palsy, sethe the leaves of sage i^ wine and
use to dri^ke it. For the same sethe ye leaves i^ wine and plaster it to ye
greuau^ce, also it is good to put in sauce, for the strangury, ye flux, and the
matrice it cleanses, sethe the leaves in water and let the pacient set over it
and receive ye hot fume of it and it shall do him much good. Also it is good
for venym or poison, sethe Sage in ale or wine and use to drink it.iii. days
and thou shall be hole, by ye grace of god. for the stomach drink ye joyce of
sage with water and honye, and it is good to cleanse a man's body to use it
both ripe and grene, it will make a man's body clean, therefore who that
uses to eat of this herb, or drink it, it is marvel that any
inconuenyence should grieve them that use it, If ye have an ytchinge on you,
wasshe it well with ye joyce of this herb and it shall slay ytchyng. Also drink
sage with wine and a litell worm wode and it shall cease the ache under the
sides, the womb and the stomach, it is good for the palsy and dropsy.

Sytureia.
This is called Sauery, it is hot and dry in the.iiii. degree, sethe it in wine
or water, and drink it and it purges the raynes, ye bladder, the
menstruosyte in the bowelles, it purges the longes, and loses great humors
and compellethe and puts him out by the mouth by spytynge, therefore he is
brennynge and styrrethe him that uses lechery, therefore it is forbyde to use
it much in meats. Soke it in vyneger or wine and drink it and it shall make
the have a meke stomach. Also when it flowereth it should be gathered and dried
and powder made thereof. Also take ye powder of sauery and boil it with clarified
honi and use to eat thereof, or boil it in wine, and drink it, and it will
lose coughe flum in ye breast. Also for fretynge in thy belly drink powder of it
in warm wine and thou shall be hole. Also if ye take the less sauery it has
the same virtue and strength that the other Sauery has. Also make grewell
with water and fluwer, and powder of Sauery and eat thereof and that shall
cleanse all ye spiritual members of a man.

Saxfrage.
This is hot and dry in the.iii degree, for the stone, sethe the rote of it in
wine and drink it. Also it is good for the desease of the colyke and the
strangury, and the powder of it be eaten with an egg, it is good for the same.
It may be keep in his virtue.iii. year.

Scabiosa.
This is called Scabias, it is hot and dry in the.iii. degree, to dri it there
is no profit in it, for scabbes take joyce of it, Uyneger and oil, and boil
them to gyther till they we^e thycke, and keep it for it is good for scabbes.
For the Emerawdes sethe them in water, than set over it and take the flume of
it and use it and thou shall be hole, sta^pe it and sethe it wine and that
drink, is good to dystroy humors in the stomach, and drink it every day
fasting with Eurose and thou shall be hole, and thou shall never have the
pestelence bredynge within the while thou do use it. For the lever stamp it
and sethe it in wine and drink it.

Sothernwode.
This herb is good for the coughe and for biting in the belly and in the
breast, and for disease in the bones, and good for the^ that may not well
pysse take the sede of this herb and stamp it and drink it with water, and
it is good for all the aforesaid. Also for the desseases i^ the side, stamp
this herb with Betayne and drink it and it helps well. Also for the bytyng
of a serpent and for venym, sta^pe this herb and drink it with wine, and it is
good. Also for the cold fever stamp this herb with wine and drnycke it and
thou shalt be hole.

Syngrene.
This is cold and moist in the third degree ye joyce of this herb and also
the same herb is right necessary for many deseases, stamp this herb with
greece and plaster it to the desease and maruelously it helps. For desease
and darkness of eyes, stamp this herb and put of the joyce in ye sore eyes
For chafyng of the liver take the joyce of it and vyneger and dip a cloth
therein, and plaster it to the greuaunce. For bytynge or scalding make an
ointment of the joyce of this herb and oil of Roses, and wax, but lay it
not to till after the three first days, but first anoint it with greece and such
other. Also for a disease of a hot cause this herb is good to be laid thereto.

Stycheworte.
This is called Stycheworte or birollo^g this is hot and moist i^ ye first
degree, ye virtue of this herb is, it is good to hele wou^des and sore eis

Scamony.
Scamony is hot and dry in the.iii. degree ye leaves only be best in
medecenes it may be kept a year in his virtue or two for need. For the disease
in the stomach boil leaves of it in wine, and drink it. Also the aforesaid
drink is good for ye belly, and for the strangury, and flux. Also astewe made
with boiling of it i^ water, or wine is good for y^ for said, if it be boiled
in oil and plaster it to ye aforsayd, for it is better.

Seen.
Seen is hot and dry in the.iiii. degree, it grows in y^ other side y^ see
and most about Babylon: the best be the flowers and the branches of it, It is
good for many deseases as the falling evil: for ye Sinacop, for ye splen, for
the Emerawdes, and for the quartayne, syrop made of it boiled in water and
sugar, is good for all the aforesaid. Syrop made with the joyce of Borage is
good for the foresaid. Also D^ascorides commands to make Exmel of the
aforesaid with boylyng of vyneger and honye and it will be good for the
aforsayd, And this herb may be kept ten year.

Selondyne.
This is hot and dry in the.iiii. degree, and Galen says yt it is good for
sore eyes, take ye joyce of selondyne and boil them well together in a pan
and wha^ it is cold anoint the eyes therewith. Take Selo^dine and wring out the
joyce and meddle it with white wine and anoynte thy vysage therewith and it shall
do away frekeles of y^ vysage, ye joyce of selondine and gotes do^g meddled to
gyther small in a mortar, tha^ if you lay it to a ca^ker in a woman's pappe, it
shall sle the ca^ker. Also take ye joyce of selo^dyne and powder of brimstone
and meddle them well together and it will help to do away ye Morphew And sethe
the rote in wine, and wha^ ye pot is taken down let hi^ hold his mouth open
over it yt the breath may go into his body, and that shall slay ye canker in the
mouth, it is good for him yt has dronken venym with his own stale and that
will save him

Sauayne.
This is hot and dry in the second degree, it is good to slay worms in the
womb and to bri^ge the^ out if it be soden in wine and given to the pacye^t to
drink. It is good with butter or grease to make an ointment for ye scabbe that
re^neth to hele it and dry it up, and it is good for the head ache, if it be
stamped and tempered with Uyneger and make a plaster thereof and lay it in the
temples and upon the molde of thy hende.

Scabiose.
This is cold and moist in the ii. degree, stamp it and sethe it in wine and
that drink is good for the liver. And it will destroy wicked humors in the
stomach, and drink it every day fasting with Eurose and thou shall never have
postume bredinge within the as long as thou doste use this medecyne.

Littera.T.
Et primo de Tapsu ba^basto.
This is called Molen, it is cold and dry. It is good for the Emerawdes and it
be sodden in wine and scommed clean. Also it is good to wasshe the greuaunce
therewith, it is good Also for the flux in the belly.

Town cresses.
This herb is hot and dry in the.iii. degree, the sede will endure good five
year. It is good to stau^che the flux and the mencyon, if thou take the sede
and bruise it in a mortar of brase and give the sike to drink thereof three days
every day penny weight at ons with reed wine warmed and i^ those three days he
shall be stau^ched, or else he shall dye, of that evil, it is good for the palsi
and for the male flank, take ye sede and sethe it with wine and do it in a
poket and bind it to the side there as y^ greuaunce is. Also it is good for hi^
yt may not well piss, take yt sede and seth it i^ wine and oil olyue and
bind it to thy share. It is good for a man's fundame^t y^ goes out, if it be
take of cold, tha^ it must be put in again and straw ye powder on the
fundament thy rain with Honye and than strowe the powder above with the powder
of Come^ or powder of Calafyne, for all these be ki^dly for it. Also take the
stalks of town Cresses, and brenne them and there shall no venomous beast ne
worm abide the savor nor smell thereof but he shall dye or fly away

Littera.U.
Et primo de herba Uiole.
VIolet is cold in the first degree, and moist in the second. For blaste in
the eyes, take ye rotes of Uiolettes and stamp them with Myrre and Saffron and
at night lay it to ye sore eyes. Also for wound in the head stamp the leaves
of Uiolettes with honey and vyneger, and plaster it to the wound and it shall
bele it. And for them that may not sleep for syckenes sethe this herb in water
and at eue^ let him soke well his fete in the water to the ancles, when he goes
to bed bind of this herb to his temples and he shall sleep well by ye grace of
God. Take Uiolettes Myrre and Saffron, and make a plaster and lay to the sore
eyes that be swollen and it shall cease akynge and bate the swellynge.

Uua suauis.
This is called the sweet Raysen, it is hot and moist it has virtue of
clensynge, scouring or smothynge. Raysens eaten or boiled in wine is good for
ye cold coughe Sethe them in wine and they be good to plaster on the cold
postume and good for a cold stomach.

Ueruayne.
Ueruayne it hot and dry in the second degree. It is good against al manner of
euyls, of venym if the pacyent drink it and tempered with wine and stamp the
herb and lay it on every manner of bytyng of venymous best, and it will draw
out the venym and save the sore, who yt uses it, it will make good breath and
do a way stink of the mouth. Also who that has ye fever tercya^ take.iii.
rotes, and three croppes of the same herb and stamp them and temper the^ with
fair clean water and give it to the pacyent to dri^ke Also who that has the
fever quartayne, let him take the same drink Also it is good for the stomach,
the liver, and lo^ges. Also take veruayne Betayne, and Saxfrage and of every
of them like much and stamp the^ with wine tempered, and this is good for
them that has the stone. Also they that bear veruayne upon the^ they shall
have love and grace of great masters and they shall grant him his asking of
his asking be good and ryghtfull.

Hic incipit littera.W.
Et primo de Watercresses.
WAter cresses be hot and dri in the second degree seth them in water, by them
self and drink it or sethe it i^ flesh and sup of the broth, and it will
cleanse well the inward members. Also it is good against the Strangulion and
the flyxe of the same.

Wild neppe or wodbynd.
This herb bears a flower like to the Hop, and after the flower he bears a
grene berye, and it has a great rote, the virtue of the herb is most in the
root, it is good for sinowes that be shronken or cut to make them sople and to
have their owen course in their proper kind Go to ye rotofe wild Neppe, that
is like wodbynde and make a hole in the mids of the rote tha tha^ cover it
well again that no air go out nor that no rain go in nor water, powder nor
the son come not to much to it, let it stand so a night and a day, tha^
after that go to it, and thou shall find therein a certain lycour take out that
lycoure with a spone and put it into a clean glass and do so every day as long
as thou find ought in the hole and this must be done in the month of Apryll
or May, than anoynte the sore therewith against the fire than wete a lynen
cloth in the same lycour and lap it about ye sore and it shall be hole in
short space, on warantyse by the grace of God. For the gout a soueraygne
medecyne. Take the rote of wild Neppe, and the rote of ye wild Docke soden by
it self and cut the^ in thyn pieces and pare away the utter ^inde and cut the^
in quarters, tha^ boil the^ in clean water.ii. or.iii. hours, than sta^pe
the^ in a mortar as small as can be, the^ put thereof a quantite of soote of a
chymny, and temper them with y^ milk of a cow, that the herb is of one
color, than take the pysse of a man that is fasting and make a plaster
thereof, and boil it together and as hot as ye may suffer lay it to the
greuaunce a day, and a night and so do nine times, and it shall heal the on
warantyse, by the grace of God.

Wormewode.
This is hot and dry in the second degree, it is good for worms in the womb
if it be stamped, and the joyce wrong out and myngled with sweet milk, and
given to the pacyente to drink, and sethe this herb in wine and make a
plaster to the womb, Make powder of wormwode, Centory, Bettayne, of each
like, much by wayghte and meddle all well together, and the powder will slay
worms in the womb both when it is eaten in potage and dronken. Also for the
mylte that is swollen of a cold matter, sethe it in wine and let the sick
drink thereof, and yt shall heal him, and make a plaster of the substance of
the herb and lay it all hot to thy womb against the greuance. Also temper
wormewode and temper it with vi^eger and with roasted sower bread, ground
therwyth, and with the joyce of Mintes, and the joyce of Plantayne, of ever ych
like much, and frye them well together, than make a plaster and lay it to the
mouth of ye stomach and this shall staunche breking or casting. For worms in
a man's ears be it serpent, or erewyke, take the joyce of wormewode and put
it in the ear. Also for the dropsy seth it in wine and give the sick to
drink at morninge and evening and it shall help him.

The virtues of Waters stylled.
WAter of Wormwode, for ye stomach, liver and the spleen, for worms in the
body, for the Iaundyce, and dru^ckennes, and for the sight.

Water of Sentory, for Appetite for the Liver and the Milt, worms, and
Sauceflewme.

Water of Mugwort, for the matryce.

Water of Dyttayne, for poison, Uenome and Pestylence.

Water of Fumitory, for y^ Morphew, Lepry, Scabbe, Dropsy, liver, Spleen,
Costyfnes and the Matrcie.

Water of Ysope, for the Coughe Lunges, breast, the stomach, for the Pose and
the guts.

Water of Horehou^d, for the Cough, lunges, breast and colica passio.

Water of Bawme, for the Mother, the Matrice liver, and spleen

Water of Calamint, Mugwort, Ysope, Brookmynt, Fumytorye, and Bawme of each a
like much, and of Wormwood, a les part. These are good waters for the
Matrice, and for the reteynyng the flowers.

Water of Calamynt, is good for the stomach.

Water of Plantayne for ye Flixe and hot Dropsye.

Water of Fenel is good for a sweling, and for sore Eyes.

Water of Endyue for the dropsi, liver Iaundice and Stomach.

Water of Borage, for the stomach, Colica passio, and other sickness of the
body.

Water of Saugle, is good for ye Palsye.

Water of Bytayne, is good for the hearing and for all manner of syckenes in
the body, for right as musterd is sauce for most kind of meats: so is Bytayne
to all other herbs.

The time of gathering Seeds Flowers Herbs and Roots.
Seeds should be gathered when they be fully ripe, and the moystnes thereof
so^thyng dried away.

Flowers should be taken when they begin to faule or fade.

Herbs should be gathered when they be full of moystnes, before they begin to
shrynke.

Roots should be gathered when the leaves faule.

Fruits should be gathered and taken at their full greatness before they faule,
and the heuyer, and the sadder, that the fruits be: the better they are. And
those that be great and light: be not so good. And they be better yt be
gathered infaire wether than they be yt be gatherd in foul or Raynye wether.

Herbs that grow in the Feeldes: be better than those that grow in gardeines^
And those yt grow on y^ hills be best. And co^mo^li feeld herbs be smaller
than town herbs.

Many herbs there be that have a special time to be gathered in, in which
time, if they be gathered: they have their virtue in full stre^gthe, more than
they should have, if they were gathered in any other time. Some help,
whensoever they be gathered, and some be naught, if they be not gathered in
their due time Bytayne, shall principall^ be gathered in August, with the seeds
and rotes with ye Iuce. And it shall be dried in the shadow, or in the so^^e, for
need. For medicen, it may be gathered in any time: but ever yt is better y^ is
gathered, without moisture, and before the Son risinge.

Swyne grass, may be gathered when so ever you need.

Camomil, shall be gathered in april

Perytory, should be gathered in June, before the Son rise.

Red Dock, may be gathered when need is. La^gdebefe shall be gathered in June and
July.

Peniwort, shall be gathered in the beginning of winter.

Germander, shall be gathered in Lammas Moon.

Draga^ce, shall be gathered in June and July.

Columbine, shall be gathered in Lammas moon.

Adders tongue, shall be gathered in April.

Pedelion, shall be gathered after ye mid day, when ye list.

Groundsil, shall be gathered after myd day.

Walwort shall be gathered when ye will.

Uiolet shall be gathered in March, and in this month should Sugar Uiolet be
made and Sirup, also Oil of Roses, of Camomyl, of Lillyes, and of Chesboll
heads, yt is called Popy. And Rosemary flo^res, in May.

Centorye when it begins to floryshe.

Organ in the month of June. Calamint in the month of June,

Hearts tongue, in November,

Aristologia rotunda in heruest, and the other in the same time.

Garlycke when ye will, wild Garlycke when it florisheth.

Agnus Castus, when it florisheth.

Gourdes in thend of September or in October, when they be ripe, they should be
dried in such aplace yt the Son may come to them all the day.

Wild Neppe beryes should be gatherd when they be yelowe.

Cucumers should gathered when the Fruit is ripe, and the fruit should be laid
under Uynes, where as ye son has not his full strength, upon it, and in a
moist place that it may rotte, for than should ye sede be good and full of
Kernelles.

Citrull should be gathered when the fruit is ripe and it should be dried, in a
dry place in the son.

Water of Calamynt, should be gathered when it floureth and dried in the shadow,
and it will be good a year and no longer.

Saffron, should be gathered before the Son rise.

Dodour grows among Flax, should be gathered in summer when it begins to
flower, and it may be kept three year.

Drauke should be gathered when it floryshith and should be dried in the
shadow and will last a year.

Elebor, should be gathered in heruest time.

Fenyl, should be gathered in the beginning of Heruest, and a year it may be
kept, and the rotes of fenell, should de gathered in the beginning of the year,
and will endure a year.

Baldemonye, otherwise called Gencyane, should be gathered in the last end of
the year, and may be kept.iiii. years, the Roots of it is used. And for to
know it: one is, it is right bitter, for the less bitter it is, the wors it
is, another is, it is somewhat yelow, and not clean yelow, but sad.

Galyngall yt is called in Phisycke, Syperus, it may be gathered in each time
of ye year. The best time is in the end of Uere, it must be laid.iii. days
in the son, that the moisture thereof rot it not lytely, and then keep it in
the shadow.

Flower Deluce, should gathered in thend of Uere, and dried in the son, and it
will last.ii. year.

Sisalido, is the Root of Philipendula, and that serves to medycen, and
shall be taken out of the earth, in the end of Heruest.

Auence leaves serves more to medicens then the Roots, the virtue of it is
best, whiles it is green, and his virtue is to dissolve, consume and open.

Take Grapes before they be ripe, and wring the youce out of the^, and than
dry them in the Son, and make powder of them. That powder is good to be
used in meats for casttyng y^ comes of Colericke humors and for the Flyxe.

A general rule of all manner of herbs.
IT is a general Rule, that from the eyghte: Kalendes of the month of Aprell:
unto ye month of Iulye, all manner of leaves of herbs be best, and from
the.viii. Kalendes of July unto the.viii. Kalendes of October: the stalks have
most virtue. And from the.viii. Kalendes of October: unto the.viii. kalendes
of Aprell: all manner of Roots of Herbs be in their full strength.

Finis.
Here begins the table of this book.
AGnus castus Apium. Auetum. Apumeresus. Absentium. A^tamasa. Affodillus.
Aristologialou. Aristolegia rot. Abrotinum. Ameos. Alleluya. Asterion.
Agrimonia. Auentia. Altea. Amarisca. Auricula muris Apium emo. Apium canarus
Axtiplex do. Anabula. Acus demonis. Argentila. Acus mustela. Allium. Amusm.
B.
Betonia. Bl^^om^^te Beat. Borago. Bugla. Burneta Bursa pastoris. Borago
sy^ues. Byllyre.
C.
Camamilla. Calamintum. Crassula mayor Crassula minor Citura. Centauriama.
Centaurinmi Cura Celidonia. Culamen. Colewortes. Coliandrum Capillus ^e^e.
Corcus^ Centonodium Caprifolium Canabaria. Costus. Cepe. Columbina. Cominum.
Cardiaca. Cerasa. Camelon. Cauda pulli. Cabochis, Caluus gallica^ Caluus
agrestis. Cimbaria. Consolida mayor Consolida minor. Consolida m^d.
D
Diaptanum. Dragantia ma Dancus arininus. Dens leonis. Dens canis. Dens
creticus. Dragantia fe.
E
Elena campana. Endua. Eruca. Enfrasia. Ebulos Edera. Ederaterrestris.
Euforbium. Elleborus albus Elleborus niger. Epatica. Erpina. Epulus minor
F
Flaminula. Fumus terre. Fumicretum. Fragra. Fabaria magor. Fabaria minor.
Filix. Filipendula. Finiculum. Faxinus. Finiculus poet Febrifuga. Filago.
Flaminula miu^.
G
Gracia die ma. Granum. Genestula. Gencianus Galanga. Granum solis agitu^
Gladiolus.
H
Herba crutiata. Herba Christofory masculi. Herba Christofori femi ni Herba
wal^eri Herba Robarti Herba Marcia. Hastuca regia Herba Petri Herba Johannes.
I
Iusquiamus Isopus Ireos Iris. Iarus Iasia alba Iasia nigra Ipia mayor Ipia
minor Iacenitus rusti.
L
Lanisticum. Langua cecui Liliium. Ligustum Lingua bouis Lingus serpents
mayor. Lingua serpentis mi. Lingua Canis Lingua Hercina Lupinus Labrum veneris
Lauendula, Lactuca Lactuca Siluat Lactuca Lepo Lollium. Laparium rust Linum.
Lauriola. Licorisa. Lappa.
M
Millefol^um Mercurialis. Menta. Menta romana Malua. Morel or nyght-shadowe.
Mastyke. Magerum. Millefolium maor Yarowe. Motherwort or Mogwort. Maces. Meuta
rubea.
N.
Nux muscata. Napus
O
Olibanum.
P
Pruna. Peper. Pinpernella. Pul^gium Peucedanum vel^. Feniculus por
Peorocilium. Peritorium. Pastina^a. Plantago. Porrum. Pireteum. Papauer
Polipodium Pienium.
Q
Quinque foliu^
R
Rybworte. Reed nettell. Rose rube^. Rosemary. Ruta.
S
Sinapium. Smalage. Salua. Statureia. Saxfrage. Scabioso. Sothernewode. Syn
grene Styche worte Scamony, Seen. Selondine, Sauayne. Scabiosa.
T
Tapsu barba. Town cresses.
U
Uyolet. Uua suauis. Ueruayne.
W
Water cresses. Wild neppe. Wormewode.
FINIS.
Imprynted at London in the Fletestrete at the sign of the Rose Garland by me
Wyllyam Copland. for John wight


