THREE PRECIOVS TEARS OF BLOOD, Flowing from the wounded hearts of three great
French Ladies. IN MEMORY, OF THE Virtues, complaint of the loss, and
execration of the murder, of that thrice-worthy Monarch, HENRY the Great. Now
shed again in English.

To three of the most excellent among the excellentest Ladies of this little
world, and of the greatest.

LONDON Printed at Britain Burse for John Budge, and are there to be sold at
his shop. Anno 1611.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE COUNTESS OF DERBIE*
MADAME.
YOUR approved love to that great house which I most honor, and a true love
more grounded upon right kindred of virtue, then of blood, which generally
makes you commendable to all the world, challenges yet a more special duty of
me; besides that good will you vouchsafe to our Nation. I wish I could witness
respect and gratefulness where I owe it, in a better matter, or of mine own;
But since I am not able, and yet will not forslow that duty, I give you that
which has been given me, and with that, the earnest of the earnest service
which most humbly vows to you,

Your Honors Most humble and most to be commanded servant. D

Larme premiere, A LA MEMOIRE ET LOVANGE DE CE FAMEVZ MONARQVF, HENRY le grand.
1
COmme un foudre du Ciel, comme un torrent de Mars,
Ie tonnay, I'etonnay des Hectors auz alarmes,
Ie brauay les destins, and l'horreur des hazars,
Se rendit hommager a l'honneur de mes arms.
2
Ie retiray mes lis d'vn deluge de sang
Qu'vn milion de coeurs enfloit de son carnage,
Qui pensant me noyer auz on des de mon flanc,
Ie noyay leurs desseins auz flots de mon courage.
3
On arma contre moy l'orgueil des Nations,
Mais ce fut l'Ocean qui attaqua Neptune,
Car ces vens orageuz furent des Alcions,
Pour ancrer le vaisseau de ma bonne fortune.
4
En fin ie suffoquay les goziers renaissans,
Et l'Hidre des Francois souz l'amas de mes palms,
Et d'vne douce paiz les Oliuiers croissans,
Ombrageoyent le sejour de mes riuages calmes.
5
Attlas sontint l'Olimpe, and moy cet Universe
Que i'auoy fait courber au faiz de mes Trophies,
Les mons n'etoyent pas tant de leurs neiges couuers,
Que mes cimes etoyent de mes fleurs etoffees.
6
Les poles fremissoyent au bruit de mes combas,
Et ceuz qui sont souz nous se disoyent ma conqueste,
Il ne restoit plus rien de domtable icy bas,
A qui ie n'eusse mis le pied dessus la test.
7
Bref ie ne faisoy plus que prescri^^ ^es loiz,
Mon nom etoit l'obiect des grandeurs de la terre,
Le bon heur me faisoit le Monarque des Roys,
Et mon coeur Martial, le Demon de la guerre.
8
Pour mon dernier triomphe il me faloit les cieuz,
Mais un si cher butin ne s'aquiert par la lame,
Et la lame pourtant du co^p audacieuz
D'vn bras desespere y a port mon ame.
9
Voila tousjours l'acier guide de mon destin,
Icy bas ce fut luy qui forgea mes victoires,
Et puisque les Cesars ont vne mesme fin,
L'acier devoit encor me conquerir ces gloires.
10
Puis qu'en ma pomp i'eus un Ciel de petis Dieuz,
Pour couronner de lis la Iunon de ma couche,
Il ne me restoit plus que le Nectar des Cieuz
Le monde n'ayant plus rien digne de ma bouche.
11
Comme en ce beau sejour l'esprit d'aise transi,
Le Dauphin du grand Dien me donnoit vne palm,
Mon Dauphin recevoit vne Couronne aussi,
Mais la sienne est au cors, and la mienne est en l'ame.
12
Ainsi and Pere and Fills ensemble sont faits Rois,
L'vn pour offrir des voeuz au trone de sa gloire,
L'autre pour appuyer les Arms de ses Loiz,
Et tous deuz pour regner au temple de memoire.
The first tear, IN MEMORY AND PRAISE OF THAT FAMOVS MONARCH, HENRY the Great.
1
LIke thundering Jove, or like all- conquering Mars,
I made great Hectors quake with my alarms,
I brau'd the fates, and in my hardest wars
Made horror self yield honor to my arms.
2
I saved my Lillies from a crimson flood
Of bloody hearts rebellious to my Crown: They thought to drown me quite in
streams of blood,
In streams of courage I their thoughts did drown.
3
The pride of Nations against me was bent,
But like the sea which Neptun's force assayles:
For those loud storms were but Alcions, sent
To fix the anchor of my peaceful sails.
4
Under the weight of my victorious bays
I crushed that Hydra which my France oppressed,
And gave my subjects leave to pass their days
Under the oliue-shades of peace and rest.
5
Attlas, Olimpus; I this world vpheld,
Which I made shrincke under my trophies load:
Snow not so thick lies upon mountains swelled
As Palms, Bays, Lillies, on my high abode.
6
The Poles did ttemble at my conquest's sound,
The Antipodes did fear my victories,
Of all that could be conquered on the ground,
I made my feet above their head to rise.
7
Thus, did I but prescribe the laws to things,
My name their object was that greatest are,
My fortune made me Monarch over Kings,
My martial heart, the Genius of the war.
8
For my last triumph heaven I should have had,
But such a pray's not gotten by the blade,
And yet the blade of an audacious mad
Thither my soul has with a stroke conuaide.
9
Behold, how still the steel does guide my fate,
And here cut out my victories below,
Now since by steel the Cesars end their state,
By steel why should not my last triumphs grow?
10
A heaven of little Gods my pomp enjoyed,
The Lillies of my Iunoes bed which graced;
Only of heavens sweet Nectar I was void,
Earth having nothing worthy of my taste.
11
When to this heavenly rest my sprit did rise,
With palm I was by God's great Dolphin crowned,
My little Dolphin had a crown likewise,
His on his head, mine on my soul was found.
12
Thus both at once are Kings, not for one cause,
The one to pay his vows is throned in glory,
The other to establish arms and laws,
Yet both to reign in times eternal story.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE VICOVNTESSE OF CRANBORNE.
MADAME.
HErein appears both the scantnes of my power, having nothing of mine own to
present whom I respect; And the plenteousnes of my desire, rather borowing of
others then be wanting to the duties of a fervent affection, never so well
witnessed but by giving. But these English verses are already yours by so many
reasons, as without to much wrong I cannot alienate them to another. First,
they be mine, and I yours; Mine I say, by free gift, and there is no better
title for propriety. Then, they be made at my request, and by such a one, whose
worthiness makes him yours indeed, yea, of good use too; where alas I am yours
but in vow and idle thought, without acceptance: I confess it to my shame,
and the further from envy, the nearer to sorrow. Moreover, since the rare life,
and rarest death of so great a King, written by a Man, was tendered to your
Noble Husband; me thought the complaint for his loss, penned by a Woman, could
be no where so well directed as to his dear Wife: Finally, that honor of
womankinde (the more feelingly mourning, because besides the general interest,
she was very near in blood to that deceased Monarch) being a fair, young, and
most excellent Lady, of one of the most ancient and Princely houses, not of
France only, but of all the world, claims to the full as many qualities, in
whomsoever her admirable works must be presented unto. All which finding no
where else in one only subject, together; nor all, so plentifully, nor every
one, in so high a degree; I must needs dedicate them to you, though otherwise
(both by desire, vow and affection to all those you most nearly belong unto,
and to your self) I were not already,

Your Honors Most humble and most to be commanded servant. D

Larme second, COMPLAINTE DE MADAMOYSELLE ANNE DE ROHAN, SVR LA MORT DV GRAND
Roy, HENRY IIII.
1
QVoy? faut-il que HENRY, ce redoute Monarque
Ce domteur des humains, soit domte par la Parque?
Que l'oeil qui vit sa gloire, ores voye sa fin?
Que le notre pour luy incessamment degoute?
Et que si peu de terre, enferme dans son sein
Celuy qui meritoit de la posseder toute?
2
Quoy? faut-il qu' a iamais, nos joys soyent eteintes?
Que nos chants and nos riz soient conuertis en plaintes?
Qu'au lieu de notre Roy, le dueil regne en ces lieuz?
Que la douleur nous poigne, and le regret nous serre?
Que sans fin nos soupirs montent dedans les cieuz?
Que sans espoir nos pleurs descendent sur la terre?
3
Il le faut, on le doit; Et que pouuons-nous render,
Que des pleurs assidus a cete auguste cendre?
Arrousons a iamais son triste marbre blanc:
Non, non, plutost quittons ces inutiles arms;
Mais puis qu'il fut pour nous prodig^e de son sang,
Serions nous bien pour luy, auares de nos larmes?
4
Quand bien nos yeuz seroient conuertis en fontaines,
Ils ne sauroient noyer la moindre de nos peines,
On ^panche des pleurs pour un simple meschef;
Un deuoir trop commun, bien souuent peu s'estime*
Il faut donques mourir auz piez de notre Chef*
Son tombeau soit l'autel, and nos cors la victime.
5
Mais qui pourroit mourir? Les Parques filandieres
Dedaignent de toucher a nos moites paupieres,
Ayans ferme les yeuz du Prince des guerriers,
Atropos de sa proye est par trop glorieuse,
Elle peut bien changer ses Cyprez en Lauriers,
Puis que de ce vainqueur elle est victorieuse.
6
Puis qu'il nous faut encor, and soupirer and viure
Puis que la Parque fuit ceuz qui la veulent suiure,
Viuons donc, en plaignant notre rigoureuz sort,
Notre bon-heur perdu, notre joy rauye,
Lamentons, soupirons, and iusques a la mort,
Temoignons qu'en viuant nous pleurons notre vie.
7
Plaignons, pleurons sans fin cet esprit admirable,
Ce judgment parfait, cet humeur agreeable,
Cet Hercule sans pair, aussi bien que sans peur;
Tant de perfections qu'en louant on soupire,
Qui pouuoient asseruir le monde a sa valeur,
Si sa rare equite n'eut borne son Empire.
8
Regret^ons, soupirons cette sage Prudence,
Cette extreme Bonte, cette rare Vaillance,
Ce coeur qui se pouuoit flechir, and non domter;
Vertus de qui la perte est a nous tant amere,
Et que ie puis plutot admirer que chanter,
Puis qu'a ce grand Achille il faudroit un Homere.
9
Mais parmy ces vertus, par mes verse publiees,
Lairron-nous sa Clemence au rang des oubliees,
Qui seulement auoit le pardon pour objet?
Pardon qui rarement an coeur des Rois se (...):
En parle l'ennemy, non le loyal sujet,
En face le recit qui en a fait l'epreuue.
10
Pourroit-on bien conter le nombre de ses gloires?
Pourroit-on bien nombrer ses insignes victoires?
Non, d'vn si grand discourse le dessein est trop haut:
On doit lover sans fin, ce qu'on ne peut decrire,
Il faut humble se taire, ou parler comme il faut.
Et celuy ne dit rien qui ne peut assez dire.
11
Ce Mars don't les vertus furent jadis sans nombre
Et que null n'egaloit, est egal a vne ombre,
Le fort a ressenty d' Atropos les effors,
Le Vainqueur est gisant dessouz la froide lame,
Et le fer infernal qui luy persa le cors,
Fait qu'vne apre douleur nous perse a iamais l'ame.
12
Iadis pour ses beauz faits, nous eleuions nos testes,
L'ombre de ses lauriers nous gardoit des tempetes,
La fin de ses combas finissoit notre effroy:
Nou-nous prisions tous seuls, nous meprisions les autres
Etans plus glorieuz, d'etre sujets du Roy,
Que si les autres Rois eussent ete les notres.
13
Maintenant notre gloire est a iamais ternie,
Maintenant notre joy est pour iamais finie,
Les Lis sont atterrez, and aue^ques enz:
Dafne baisse ch^tiue en terre son visage,
Et semble par ce geste, humble autant que piteuz,
Ou couronner sa tomb, ou bien luy fair hommage.
14
France, pleure ton Roy qu'vn noir cachot enserre,
Roy florissant en paiz, Victorieuz en guerre,
Qui conseruoit des tiens, les biens, les libertez;
Iette sans fin des cris, and des larmes non feintes
Iusques au bout du monde; Auz lieuz plus ecartez
Ou resonnoient ses faits, fay resonner tes plaintes.
15
Modelle de l'honneur, and l'honneur de la France,
Reine des Lys Francois, parmy tant de souffrance
Votre pleur est sans fin, votre coeur sans confort;
Et le regret cuisant don't votre ame est suiuie
Vous fait aussi souuent souhaiter votre mort,
Que vos vertus nous font desirer votre vie.
16
Las! combien est votre ame an dueil abandonnee,
Quand vou-vous souuenez de l'heureuse iournee
Laquelle innocemment a nos mauz precede;
Et que sur ce beau chef que le noir enuironne,
A si piteusement and si tot succeed
Le dueil a l'ornement, le voile a la Couronne.
17
Mais parmy vos douleurs, parmy tant de miseres
Gardez-vous, gardez-nous ces siz relics cheres,
Gages de votre amor, espoir en nos malheurs;
Etouffez vos soupirs, sechez votre oeil liquide,
Et pour calmer un iour l'orage de nos pleurs,
Soyez de cet Etat le secours and la guide.
18
Belliqueuse Noblesse, un iour si triomphante,
Et par le sort cruel en l'autre, si dolente,
Perdant un si grand Prince, un pere tant humain,
Votre oeil pleure sans fin, and iamais ne sommeille
Quand il vous souuiendra du triste lendemain,
Qui fut de vos malheurs and le iour and la veille.
19
Endossez le harnois, aiguisez vos epees,
Puis les rendez de sang and de Larmes trempees,
Cerchez au cle fer, iusques dedans le flanc
Des secrets inu^nteurs du traitre parricide;
Emplissez l'Ocean des fleuues de leur sang,
Ou mourez* ou vangez la mort de notre Alcide.
20
Reins du double mont, admirable Neuuaine,
Sechez par vos soupirs votre docte fontaine,
Puis l'emplissez de pleurs; afin que les esprits
Qui vont rendans leurs voeu^ an temple de Memoire,
Abreuuez de cete eau, pleurent par leurs ecrits
Le trepas de celuy, don't ils chantoient la gloire.
21
Arrachez vos lauriers, tant aymez de Minerue,
He! pour qui, doctes soeurs, en feriez-vous reserve,
Puis que le Chef n'est plus qui les souloit porter?
Que la mort qui vainc tont, a vaincu l' Invincible?
Ne cessez, cher troupeau, de plaindre and lamenter,
Et pour etre immortel, ne soyez impassible.
22
Mais quoy? pourrions-nous bien vous prescrire des larmes?
Ne vous seruez-vous pas de ces liquides arms,
Pour combatre l'ennuy qui nous accable tous?
De nos extremes mauz, vos regrets sont extremes,
Vous pleurez de pity quand vous songez a nous.
Vous pleurez de douleur en pensant a vou-mesmes.
23
Que les ro^s soient emus, de nos larmes non feintes,
Que les mons and les bois ne resonnent que plaintes,
Que les pleurs des voisins, montrent leur desespoir;
Qu'euz and nous lamentions, par cette piteuse onde,
Nous d' auoir trop peu un, euz de n'auoir pu voir
La Gloire des Francois, le Miracle du monde.
22
Mais quoy? sans fin, sans fruit, nos humides paupieres
Feront-elles color des piteuses riuieres?
Les ans n'en pourront-ils fair arreterle course?
Nos bouches a l'enuy plain dront-elles sans cesse?
Et nos coeurs sang lot ans, seront-ils pour tousiours
Esclaues du malheur, hotes de la tristesse?
25
Ouy, nous plaindrons sans fin; He! quel Scyth^ deny
A des maus infinis, vne plainte infinie?
Montrons d'vn rare Prince un regret non commun,
Ou viuons pour le plaindre, ou mourons pour le suiure,
Soit viuans, soit mourans, temoignons a chacun
Qu'en cessant de pleurer nous cesserons de viure.
The second tear, A COMPLAINT OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LADY ANNE OF ROHAN,
UPON THE DEATH of that great King, HENRY the fourth.
1
MVst great redoubted HENRY, o must he
That awed and tamed men, now be tamed by death?
Must we that saw his glory, his end see?
And spend in showers our tears, in sighs our breath?
O must so little earth hold him, whose merit
Suffis'd, that he the whole earth should inherit?
2
Must all our joys ever extinct remain?
Must mirth and music turn to sad lament?
In place of such a King, must sorrow reign?
Must anguish pearce our souls, grief our hearts rent?
While endless sighs are toward heaven exhaling,
Must hopeles tears still on the earth be falling?
3
They must, they ought; what tribute can we pay
His sacred ashes, but our tears? most fit
To sprinckle the sad marble, wherein they
Repose; No, no, such helples helps let us quit;
Yet since his blood he spared not, us to pleasure,
Shall we spate to spend tears, so poor a treasure?
4
Should our distilling eyes to fountains turn,
Of all our greefs they would not drown the lest;
With tears for each light cause we lightly mourn,
And common things are seldom in request:
Then dye we must, naught else is worth the proffring,
His tomb the Altar, we must be the offering.
5
But who can dye? the spinning destinies
Disdain to touch our moistened eyes, now they
Have closed his, whose great heart did death despise;
Pale Atropos proud of so rich a pray
May bear for Cypres, Bays; a change most glorious,
Since she proves victor of the most victorious.
6
Since we must yet lament, and live; since fate
Attends them least that do pursue it most;
O let us live lamenting our hard state,
Our joy bereft us, and our comfort lost;
Let Us grieve, weep, sigh, this testimony giving
Till death, that we bewail our life in living.
7
Let Us mourn to loose that spirit so admirde,
That perfect judgment, that sweet Noblenes,
That Peerles, Fearles Hercules, inspirde
With more perfections then words can express;
Who would have brought the world in his subjection,
But that his justice bounded his affection.
8
Let Us mourn that that grave wisdom so should end,
That best of goodness, that great valiant mind,
That heart that knew not how to break, though bend;
Dear parts, whose use we had, whose loss we find:
I rather can admire then sing their glory,
Such an Achilles fits an Homers story.
9
But in the throng of virtues mustred here,
Shall his rare Clemency in silence rest,
Which pardon only held for object dear,
Pardon so seldom lodged in Princes breast?
This ask's not his friends, but his foe's expression,
Let them that made proof of it make confession.
10
Who can the number of his acts recount?
His famous victories who can set forth?
Their due discourse does my poor power surmount,
No end of praise where is no end of worth;
Silence should still be kept, or wisely broken,
He speaks naught who speaks not, what should be spoken.
11
That man for his perfections numberles,
Like none alive, is now but like the dead;
The strong has found his strength then deaths strength les,
The Conqueror now conquered lies in lead:
The Infernal steel that pierced without compassion
His royal flesh, has pierced our souls with passion.
12
His acts made us our heads aloft to rear,
His laurels shades did us from tempests shroud,
The end of his fights ended all our fears,
We scorning others of our selves were proud;
Prouder to live in such a Kings subjection,
Then to have subject Kings in our protection.
13
Our glory now we withring dying see,
Now are our joys for ever finished,
Our Flour-de-luces buried, with them we;
Sad Daphne hanging her triumphant head
In humble pitiful respect unto him,
Seems she will crown his tomb, or homage do him.
14
Dear France bewail thy King, thy King of late
Blessed in his peace, victorious in his wars,
Conseruer of thy freedom, goods and state,
Ceaselesse cry out, power out unfeigned tears;
As far as earth has earth for man's remaining,
As far as his name rings, ring out thy playning.
15
Model of honor, honor of our France,
Queen of the Flower-de-luces, in these woes
Your tears are without stop, your sufferance
Without redress; your grief that no end knows
Makes you as often wish your life expired,
As your life for your virtues is desired.
16
Oh! how your soul to grief abandoned lies,
When you but think on that thrice-blessed day
Which harmeles did precede our miseries,
How on that fair head, where you now display
Sad black, you should be seen so quickly turning
A rich crown to a veil, splendour to mourning.
17
But, o amidst your woes, your wounding cares,
Those six dear relics, pledges of your love,
Save for your self, for us, to slack our fears;
So cease to sigh, to weep, and cares remove,
And in those seas of grief better to clear us
From storms of tears, be you our guide to steer us.
18
Warlike Nobility, you that one day,
Triumphant were; the next, by fa^e deprest;
Your King, your Father, your dear Countries stay,
Thus ost, weep still and bar your eyes their rest;
While you remember that black dismal morrow,
The day and eve to the cause of your sorrow.
19
Clap on your armor, whet your swords, and then
Yet moist with tears, steep them in blood of foe^,
Pierce to the hearts of those damned monster-men
From whose invention such destruction flows;
With rivers of their blood The Ocean filling,
Dye or revenge our great Alcides killing.
20
Queens of the forked mount, admired nine,
O with your sighs your learned fountains dry,
Then fill again with tears, that those divine
Spirits that pay their vows to memory,
Tasting those drops, may with tears sing the story
Of his death, of whose life they sung the glory.
21
Tear down your bays, Minervaes sacred boughs,
For whom (wise brood) are they preserved by you?
He Is gone that wont with them beguirt his brows
Whom none could vanquish, death has vanquished now,
Cease not (dear troop) to show in saddest fashion,
Immortal though you be, that you have passion.
22
But shall we dare prescribe your tears their* course?
Do you not make use of those liquid arms
To combat sorrows ouermastring force?
Extreme your greefes are for our extreme harms;
Thinking on us, you tears of pity borrow,
When you think on your selves, tears spring of sorrow.
23
O let your plaints the rocks to pity move,
Let mountains, vallyes, woods resound our cries,
Let neighbors tears their desprat state approve,
Let them and us lament; They, that their eyes
Saw not at all; We, less then we desired
The glory of the French, the worlds admired.
24
But shall our fruitles tears nere cease? shall they
Like rivers from our moist eyes ever flow?
Shall no time their impetuous current stay?
Shall we still strive who lowdest cries can throw?
And shall our throbbing hearts be still remaining
Slaves to mishap, dull sadness intertaining.
25
O I, let us ceaseles wail, what Scithian heart
Can endless plaints to endless woes deny?
For such a King let us act greefes liueliest part,
Let Us live his mourners or his folowers dye;
Living or dying let us not grief diminish,
Till life and grief shall at one instant finish.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LADY CLIFFORD.
MADAME.
I Must needs be faithful to my grounds: Once I remember I chose you all for
my Zodiac, though but four; yet four such, whose light could not be less
worth then for twelve: And wonderful great must that great light be indeed,
whose glorious beams I have seen even from France, even through mine ears,
though mine eyes could not as yet be so happy, as to look upon your faces. I
thank God that according to my wish, there has been so brightfull a starr
since added to your number, and so good an order taken for the filling up of
that want, which then I was bold to mark in that fair circle. No doubt but by
these fortunate conjunctions, there will arise such a quantity of new Planets
upon our Orizon; of worthy Knights (no less then Castor and Pollux) of brave
Lions, of fair Virgins, and other bright shining stars; as too far
exceeding one Zodiac, they shall wander far and wide from this English
heaven through the remote clymes of this world, where your famous name and fame
will shine for ever. In the mean time ioying and wondering at so much light as
there is, let this serve me toward you and to all the world, still for a
witness (though small) of my sincerest zeal (though hitherto but vain and
without fruit) how far I am, or rather would be,

Your Honors Most humble and most to be commanded servant D

Larme troisieme, EN EXECRATION DV MEVRTRE DV GRAND Roy, HENRY, IIII.
1
EXecrable Assas^in don't l'enfer avorta,
Parricide public que Megere alaita,
Horreur de la Nature;
Organe de Satan return desormais
An fons du mesme enfer, hurler a tout Iamais
Pour tell forfaiture.
2
Que la tant de malheurs que vient sur nous versant
Ton sacrilege bras, tant de larmes de sang
Que tu nous fais repandre,
En tes propres tourmens aillent se transformer,
Sans que Iamais serpent se puisse r'animer,,
De ta maudite cendre.
3
Par toi le Monde est veuf d'vn Roy, don't le Soleil
Depuis qu'il fut cree n'a point veu de pareil
Enter les grands and iustes;
Qui de guerre and de Paiz a cultive les ars,
Plus magnifiquement que tous ces vieu^ Cesars,
Qui sont les plus Augustes.
4
ROY, duquel la sagesse a de loin surpass
Tous les chefs couronnez qui l'avoient devance;
Don't la douceur immense
Tousjours accompagna la grave Majeste,
Seul semblable a soi-mesme, en Candeur, en Bonte,
Foi, Valeur and Clemence.
5
Mais tu n'as seul commis cet ^nique forfait,
Le mal, que trop souvent chacun de nou^ a fait,
Et l'impie doctrine,
De vous* qui les sujets des Princes seduisez,
Et sans cesse contr'eus vos couteauz eguisez,
Ont navre sa poitrine.
6
Encor pour augmenter nos extremes douleurs,
Nos immortels regrets* nos excessifs malheurs,
Sont aggravez d'un autre;
Cest qu'a vos attentats trop bon il pardonna,
Que par trop liberal son coeur il vous donna,
Sans qu'il ait eu le votre.
7
Et que d'vn si grand Roy (sous lequel a tremble
De tous les plus grans Rois le pouvoir assemble)
La preciense vie,
Qui rendoit bien-heureus tant and tant de mortels,
Pour seruir de victime a vos sanglans aut^ls,
Nous soit ainsi ravie,
8
RIONE, de qui le ciel tira le rameau d'or,
Ce Prince, es yeuz duquel nous reuoyons encor
L'Image vive and belle
Du grand Roy votre epous, puissiez-vous bien garder
Vos cotez and les siens, des cous que ^ait d^^der
Cette sect cruelle.
9
N'approchant point de vous ces Hydres si hydeus,
Et vos dens, and vos coeurs seront garentis d'eus,
Leur venin si funeste,
N'a pour contre-poison excellent, que le soin
De s'en contre-garder en s'en tenant bien loin
Ainsi que de la peste.
10
TVTRICE du Royaume, and du Roy, qui seruez
De Mere a tous les deus, tous les deus preseruez
De ce mal, sans attendre
Que par un coup troisieme on nous aille egorger,
Et qu'un dernier malheur nous venant saccager
Met l'Etat en cendre.
11
DIEV, qui de notre ROINE as le chef couronne,
Qui de ta main l'as ointe, and qui lui as done
Des graces si parfaites;
Ren sa gloire immortelle, en faisant que nos Rois
Regnent a l'avenir surement par les lois
Que sage elle aura faites.
12
Et comme tu as pu d'invisibles aimans
Convertir en amor d^s diverse Elemens
La discord ancienne;
D'indissolubles noeus ^train les volontez,
Et tous les coeurs Francois envers leurs Magestez,
O^ nous voyons la tienne.
13
Afin qu a ce deuoir tous nos voeus addressez
Iamais en cet Etat nous ne soyons poussez.
De passions contraires;
Mais qu'en notre patrie, aus Spartains ressemblans,
Nous allions en un coeur tous nos coeurs rassemblans
Ainsi que plusieurs freres.
14
Et que tout ce qui rest aujourd'huy de bon sang
Dans cette Monarchy, en un se ramassant
Plus genereuz, ne cesse
(Vangeant d'vn si bon Roy le cher sang repandu)
De mieuz garder son coeur, puis qu'il nous l'a rendu.
En ce fis qu'il nous laisse.
15
Auquel tant de vertus, croissantes a l'envi
Rendront incessamment si fort sujette a lus
La fortune prospere,
Qu'en peu d'ans and par tout sa dextre plantera
Les triomphans lauriers, que sans fin produira
Le tombeau de son Pere.
The third tear, IN EXECRATION OF THE MVRTHER of that great King, HENRY the
fourth.
1
Damned murderer, o ^els abortiue cursed,
Parricide of us all, by ^uries nursed,
Horror of Nature, hence;
Instrument of Satan, forthwith return
To thy first depth, where ever howling mourn
For thy heinous offense.
2
As many plagues as here thy false hand powers
On us, as many tears of blood in showers
As still thou make us spend,
Fall to thy torments there; in such a wise
As from thy cursed ashes never rise
Another such a fend.
3
Thou rob'st the world of such a King, whose pear
For Justice and for power did nere appear
Under the suns fair eye;
Such an Artist as well in peace and war,
Beyond the bruit of those old Cesars, ^arre
Of famous memory.
4
A King whose worth no little does surpas
All their crowned heads, whose reign before his was;
Whose wonderful meeknes,
Went still combined with Royal Majesty,
Like his brave self alone, in purity,
Truth, faith, valor, goodness.
5
Yet this foul part thou actest not alone,
The sins by each to often done,
And that most impious ground
Of you, that subjects hearts from Kings seduce,
Whetting your knives to break that loyal truce,
His royal breast did wound.
6
More to augment our hearts extremely bleeding,
Our never dying sorrows, greefes exceeding,
This added is to ours;
That he, to kind, must your attempts forgive,
By much to kind, his heart to you must give,
Yet never could have yours.
7
That this great King (under whose power did quake
The greatest power the greatest Kings could make)
His life so highly prised;
That life which has so many happy made,
Should on your bloody altars now be laid,
Thus to be sacrificed.
8
Dear Queen, from whom heaven plucked this branch of Gold
Our Prince, in whose eyes yet we fair behold
Those worthy living parts
Of that great King your husband, O protect
Your sides and his, from that so cruel sect,
To expect at these darts.
9
Those Hidraes must not come where you reside,
So shall your teeth and hearts at rest abide,
Their poison will infest*
Without your care, there is no such Antitode
As is to keep your selves always remote
From them as from the pest.
10
Our Kingdom and Kings Guardian, you that serve
As mother to them both, then both preserve
From mischief without staying;
Least by a third stroke we, our state and all,
Unhappily at length to ruin fall
By your to kind delaying.
11
O God, which with thy hand upon her head
Have set her Crown, and thine oil on her shed,
Granting her so great grace;
Make her name live, as she shall be the cause
Our Kings may reign in peace by her wise laws,
When thou bring'st them in place.
12
And as thou have by adamants unknown
Drawn Elements from Enemies to one,
As we see them agree;
So Lord, unite each Frenchmans heart and mind,
That fast their love to their kings they may bind,
In whose face thine we see.
13
That to this end all our endeauours tending,
Our wills may never in this realm be bending
To any factious passion;
But Spartan-like our Country undivided
All our hearts knit may as one heart be guided,
In a brotherly fashion.
14
And that the rest of all our generous blood,
Within this Realm may now become one flood
Not stopping, till we find
Means to revenge our good Kings dear blood shed,
And keep his heart more safe (restored though dead)
In this son left behind.
15
In whom such virtue does already grow,
As it shall make proud fortune stoop and know
Subjection to his worth;
And thus in time his planting hand shall fill
The world with those victorious bays, which still
His fathers tomb brings forth.
FINIS.

